Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbul20
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbul20
North Korean nuclear weapons, 2024
Hans M. Kristensen, Matt Korda, Eliana Johns & Mackenzie Knight
To cite this article: Hans M. Kristensen, Matt Korda, Eliana Johns & Mackenzie Knight (2024)
North Korean nuclear weapons, 2024, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 80:4, 251-271, DOI:
10.1080/00963402.2024.2365013
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2024.2365013
Published online: 14 Jul 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1983
View related articles 
View Crossmark data


NUCLEAR NOTEBOOK
North Korean nuclear weapons, 2024
Hans M. Kristensen, Matt Korda, Eliana Johns and Mackenzie Knight
ABSTRACT
North Korea continues to modernize and grow its nuclear weapons arsenal. In this Nuclear 
Notebook, the authors cautiously estimate that North Korea may have produced enough fissile 
material to hypothetically build up to 90 nuclear warheads, but has likely assembled fewer than 
that—potentially around 50. To deliver the warheads, North Korea is enhancing and diversifying its 
missile force, most recently with new solid-fuel long-range strategic missiles, short-range tactical 
missiles, and sea-based missiles. The Nuclear Notebook is researched and written by the staff of the 
Federation of American Scientists’ Nuclear Information Project: director Hans M. Kristensen, associ -
ate director Matt Korda, research associate Eliana Johns, and program associate Mackenzie Knight. 
To see all previous Nuclear Notebook columns in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists dating back to 
1987, go to https://thebulletin.org/nuclear-notebook/.
KEYWORDS 
North Korea; Nuclear 
Notebook; ballistic missiles; 
intercontinental ballistic 
missiles; nuclear weapons; 
Hwasong
North Korea—also known as the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea, or DPRK—has made significant 
advances over the past two decades in developing its 
nuclear weapons arsenal. Since 2006, North Korea has 
detonated six nuclear devices, updated its nuclear doc -
trine to reflect the irreversible role of nuclear weapons 
for its national security, and continued to introduce 
a variety of new missiles test-flown from new launch 
platforms.
It is widely assumed that North Korea has opera -
tional nuclear warheads for its short- and medium- 
range missiles as well as possibly for its longer-range 
missiles, although the latter capability has not yet been 
publicly demonstrated. There is considerable uncer -
tainty about which of North Korea’s missiles have 
been fielded with an active operational nuclear capabil -
ity. However, it seems clearer from North Korea’s public 
statements and systems-testing that the country intends 
to field an operational nuclear arsenal capable of hold -
ing targets at risk in East Asia, the United States, and 
Europe.
In 2021, Kim Jong-un announced several key strate -
gic goals for North Korea’s nuclear weapons program, 
proposed as a five-year plan. According to Kim’s state -
ment, these goals included: 1) producing “super-sized 
nuclear warheads,” 2) producing smaller and lighter 
nuclear weapons for tactical uses, 3) improving preci -
sion strike and range capabilities, 4) introducing 
“hypersonic gliding flight warheads,” 5) developing 
“solid-fuel engine propelled intercontinental, under -
water, and ground ballistic rockets,” and 6) introducing 
a “nuclear-powered submarine and underwater-launch 
nuclear strategic weapon” (KCNA 2021 ). North Korea 
appears to have made significant progress on these 
goals, and has since introduced more demands includ -
ing the dramatic increase of missile production and 
“cutting edge strategic weapon engines” (Kim 2023 ).
Due to the lack of clarity surrounding North Korea’s 
nuclear program, agencies and officials of the US intel -
ligence community, as well as military commanders and 
independent experts, struggle to assess the program’s 
characteristics and capabilities. As a result, this paper 
relies upon publicly available information and satellite 
imagery about North Korea’s fissile material produc -
tion, nuclear posture, and delivery vehicle development, 
and uses multiple sources of data whenever possible to 
corroborate conclusions. We cautiously estimate that 
North Korea might have produced sufficient fissile 
material to potentially build up to 90 nuclear weapons 
and might have assembled around 50 warheads for 
delivery primarily by medium-range ballistic missiles 
—an increase since our last report in 2022 (Kristensen 
and Korda 2022 ).
Research methodology and confidence
After concluding a safeguards agreement with North 
Korea in 1992, the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) accessed North Korean nuclear facilities 
for the first time to verify North Korea’s nuclear materi -
als declaration. In the years that followed, the IAEA 
periodically visited North Korea to verify compliance 
with this safeguards agreement, along with the Agreed 
Framework and other initiatives, until the inspectors 
CONTACT Hans M. Kristensen 
 hkristensen@fas.org
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS               
2024, VOL. 80, NO. 4, 251–271 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2024.2365013
© 2024 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 

were finally expelled in 2009. In addition, between 2004 
and 2012 North Korea would also occasionally invite 
unofficial expert delegations to observe its nuclear pro -
gram and the suspension of activities at Yongbyon. 
These meticulously documented IAEA inspections and 
special experts’ visits—during which inspectors and 
experts were able to tour and inspect North Korea’s 
nuclear complex—continue to comprise much of the 
foundation for the public’s understanding of North 
Korea’s nuclear weapons arsenal.
North Korea has also historically used its state-run 
media outlets, such as the Korean Central News Agency 
( KCNA ), the Rodong Sinmun newspaper, and Korean 
Central Television , to release videos, images, and state -
ments related to military parades, missile tests, and 
other new weapon developments. Intentionally or not, 
North Korean state media often provides insights into 
key aspects of its nuclear weapons program. However, 
this information is not considered to be fully reliable 
given the many well-documented cases of exaggeration 
and falsification found in previous North Korean pro -
paganda efforts.
Using these resources and other open sources, 
including commercial satellite imagery and publicly 
available reports from the IAEA and the UN Panel of 
Experts on North Korea, analysts at independent orga -
nizations have been able to examine industry networks, 
locate key facilities, and map North Korea’s nuclear fuel 
cycle to generate estimates of fissile material stockpiles 
and production—all of which are key factors in asses -
sing the size, sophistication, and status of North Korea’s 
nuclear arsenal today.
However, confidence in estimates about North 
Korea’s nuclear capacity is slowly decreasing as we 
move further away from the last official and unofficial 
on-site inspections. Without data exchanges or access to 
key sites, experts are forced to rely more on unofficial 
sources and satellite imagery to infer the status of North 
Korea’s arsenal. This presents unique challenges and 
often can lead to a wide range of conclusions about 
North Korea’s fissile material production, weapon 
stockpiles, warhead designs, and other key factors, 
which can even be contradictory in some cases. In the 
sections below, we explain the assumptions used for our 
estimates.
North Korea’s nuclear policy
For decades, North Korea has made numerous state -
ments and signals about its nuclear weapons policy, 
laying out its nuclear doctrine if deterrence fails. Such 
statements have more recently been codified in official 
declaratory policy. In 2013, for example, North 
Korea’s “Law on Consolidating the Position of 
Nuclear Weapons State” suggested a no-first-use pol -
icy, noting that North Korea’s nuclear arsenal would 
only be used “to repel invasion or attack from a hostile 
nuclear weapons state and make retaliatory strikes” 
(KCNA 2013 ). Kim Jong-un officially declared a no- 
first-use policy in 2016 following North Korea’s fourth 
nuclear test.
Since 2016, however, North Korean statements 
and force posture changes have indicated a shift 
away from this no-first-use policy. Just two months 
after the policy was declared, the North Korean gov -
ernment issued a statement that North Korea would 
not be the first to use nuclear weapons “as long as 
the hostile forces for aggression do not encroach 
upon its sovereignty” (KCNA 2016b ). In 2020, Kim 
Jong-un stated that North Korea’s nuclear deterrent 
“will never be used preemptively. But if [. . .] any 
forces infringe upon the security of our state and 
attempt to have recourse to military force against 
us, I will enlist all our most powerful offensive 
strength in advance to punish them” ( 38 North 
2020 ). Such caveats culminated in September 2022 
when North Korea’s parliament codified in law 
North Korea’s right to launch nuclear weapons pre -
emptively (Kim 2022 ). One year later, the North 
Korean government codified under the country’s 
constitution its right to “deter war and protect regio -
nal and global peace by rapidly developing nuclear 
weapons to a higher level” (Soo-Yeon 2023 ).
The abandonment of North Korea’s no-first-use pol -
icy coincides with the country’s recent efforts to develop 
tactical nuclear weapons. Following development and 
demonstration of new long-range strategic nuclear- 
capable missiles, the pursuit of tactical nuclear weapons 
appears intended to provide options for nuclear use 
below the strategic level and strengthen its regional 
deterrence posture (KCNA 2022 ; National Committee 
on North Korea 2021 ). According to two analysts, 
Pyongyang now sees its nuclear weapons as useful not 
only for retaliation against an attack but also for poten -
tially winning a limited conflict (Mount and Sup 2022 ). 
Others have suggested that such a posture might involve 
some degree of pre-delegating nuclear launch authority 
down the chain of command (Narang and Panda 2017 ; 
38 North 2022 ). But North Korea’s nuclear command 
and control system is largely unknown, and it seems 
doubtful that Kim Jong-un would be comfortable with 
handing over control of nuclear weapons to the military: 
In April 2024, North Korea conducted the first drill of 
its “nuclear trigger” system including firing multiple 
launch rocket system (MLRS) rockets with mock war -
heads, reportedly to test “Kim’s ability to maintain 
252
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

command and control over nuclear weapons spread 
across the country in a crisis” (Zwirko 2024 ).
Occasionally, North Korea has explicitly mentioned 
or signaled which targets it would hit with its nuclear 
weapons. These include US military bases in South 
Korea, the Asia-Pacific region, Guam, Hawaii, and the 
continental United States. Knowing that its statements 
and military activities are being closely followed and 
analyzed abroad, in 2013 North Korea published 
a picture of Kim Jung-un and military officials with 
a map in the background apparently showing missile 
tracks to several locations in the United States in what 
was interpreted as a deliberate intent to unnerve the 
United States (Berkowitz, Karklis, and Meko 2017 ; 
Mansourov 2014 ). A 2016 statement by the Supreme 
Command of the Korean People’s Army stated that the 
country would first target South Korea’s Blue House (its 
seat of government), then “the US imperialist aggressor 
forces’ bases for invading [North Korea] in the Asia- 
Pacific region and the US mainland,” in that order 
(KCNA 2016a ). The statement does not explicitly men -
tion nuclear use; however, it is strongly implied that 
nuclear weapons would be used for at least the second 
wave of attacks against targets related to the US-South 
Korean’s conventional invasion force. The January 2021 
report of the 8th Congress of the Workers’ Party of 
Korea noted the goal of “making a preemptive and 
retaliatory nuclear strike by further raising the rate of 
precision good enough to strike and annihilate any 
strategic targets within a range of 15,000 kilometers 
with pinpoint accuracy” (National Committee on 
North Korea 2021 ). In this context, nuclear use (or the 
threat of nuclear use) with shorter- range missiles could 
potentially be in an attempt to “decouple” US military 
support from its regional allies in the Asia-Pacific 
region, by withholding strikes on US homeland targets 
during nuclear attacks on regional targets. Whether 
North Korea’s nuclear posture is advanced enough to 
support such a complex strategy is unknown. In 
response to the arrival of a US B-52 bomber in South 
Korea in October 2023, KCNA reported that US strate -
gic assets deployed in South Korea would be the “first 
targets of destruction” (Yonhap News Agency 2023 ).
North Korea has also threatened to launch nuclear 
weapons in response to more minor provocations, 
including joint US-South Korean military exercises 
(Ellyatt 2016 ). However, despite such occasional inflam -
matory statements, it appears highly likely that North 
Korea—as with other nuclear-armed states—would use 
its nuclear weapons only under extreme circumstances, 
particularly if the continued existence of the North 
Korean state and its political leadership were 
threatened.
North Korea’s nuclear weapons program
Plutonium production operations
The Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research Center, 
located in North Pyongan province, has been called 
the “beating heart” of North Korea’s nuclear weapons 
program. At Yongbyon, North Korea produces pluto -
nium at its five megawatt-electric (MWe) graphite- 
moderated nuclear reactor, which has been operating 
intermittently since 1986. In July 2021, following several 
years of inactivity, the IAEA and independent experts 
detected the discharge of cooling water from the reactor 
and subsequent steam plumes from the reactor’s hall, 
signatures which would be consistent with the reactor 
being operational once again (IAEA 2021 ; Pabian, 
Town, and Liu 2021 ). In April and September 2023, 
satellite imagery indicated that cooling water discharge 
had ceased, suggesting that reactor operations had 
ceased during those times (United Nations 2023 , 
2024 ). This could mean that the reactor was undergoing 
maintenance or that the spent fuel was removed to be 
sent for reprocessing, which could potentially provide 
five to eight kilograms of pure plutonium after separa -
tion (Heinonen et al. 2023 ).
The five megawatt-electric reactor could potentially 
also be used to produce tritium—an element that can be 
used to boost the yield of fission warheads. Some ana -
lysts estimate North Korea could produce up to between 
seven and 12 grams of tritium per year; enough for one 
to three boosted fission bombs depending on the design 
(Yang et al. 2024 ).
In its August 2021 annual report, the IAEA con -
cluded that the Yongbyon complex’s thermal plant— 
which supplies steam to the radiochemical laboratory 
used for plutonium reprocessing—operated for 
approximately five months, from mid-February 2021 
until early July 2021, after a multi-year hiatus (IAEA 
2021 ). The IAEA noted that this timeframe was consis -
tent with the time required to reprocess a complete core 
of irradiated fuel. Emissions from the thermal plant at 
the radiochemical laboratory were observed in July 2022 
along with activity at the radioactive waste storage facil -
ity, which could be a sign of preparations for 
a reprocessing campaign, maintenance, or treatment of 
radioactive waste (Makowsky et al. 2022 ; United 
Nations 2023 ).
Since 2010, North Korea has also been in the process 
of constructing a light-water reactor (LWR) and has 
engaged in moderate activity at the site for nearly 
a decade, including construction of new buildings in 
2021 and 2022 (Heinonen, Makowsky, and Liu 2022 ; 
Makowsky, Heinonen, and Liu 2022a ). Between 2020 
and 2023, the IAEA and the UN Panel of Experts 
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 253

reported several tests of the LWR’s cooling water sys -
tem, suggesting the reactor was being prepared for 
operation (IAEA 2021 ; United Nations 2023 ). Then, in 
October 2023, the IAEA reported increased levels of 
activity that were consistent with the commissioning 
of the LWR (IAEA 2023b ). Further observation of 
a heat signature from the power switchyard and sus -
tained warm water discharge from presumed cooling 
lines in the following months seemed to indicate that 
the reactor may be in its initial operational phase or 
undergoing pre-operational testing (IAEA 2023a ; Park 
and Puccioni 2024 ). Construction around the LWR was 
observed through satellite imagery throughout 2023 
(United Nations 2024 ). Although the LWR appears to 
be designed for civilian electricity production, it also has 
a latent capacity to produce weapons-grade plutonium 
or tritium that could be used for North Korea’s nuclear 
weapons program.
In May 2022, independent analysts from the James 
Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS) 
noted the possible resumption of construction at 
North Korea’s long-dormant 50-MWe reactor, which 
had been paused since 1994 (Lewis, Pollack, and 
Schmerler 2022 ). The analysts concluded that, upon 
completion, the reactor could theoretically produce 
approximately 55 kilograms of plutonium per year, 
enough to potentially produce about a dozen new 
nuclear weapons per year, depending on the design of 
the warhead. However, analysts from the Stimson 
Center’s 38 North project subsequently noted that simi -
lar construction efforts at the 50-MWe site are not 
uncommon, and that the recent trenching activity 
could be intended to service a nearby underground 
facility that is unrelated to the reactor itself 
(Makowsky, Heinonen, and Liu 2022a ). Given these 
uncertainties, it remains unclear whether North Korea 
has indeed restarted construction on the 50-MWe reac -
tor; given the state of the reactor’s apparent disrepair, 
doing so would likely take several years to complete 
(Hecker 2010 ).
Uranium enrichment operations
Assessing the state of North Korea’s uranium enrich -
ment operations is more difficult because the opera -
tional history and locations of several associated 
uranium enrichment facilities are unknown. In addi -
tion, the associated facilities and their production capa -
cities are harder to detect than those used for plutonium 
production, as their signatures are less visible through 
open sources. Much of what is publicly known is based 
on reports from an unofficial delegation that visited 
North Korea’s uranium enrichment facility at 
Yongbyon in 2010. Open-source analysts have also 
relied on satellite imagery and technical geological 
methods to estimate the operation and production capa -
city of North Korea’s known uranium mines, uranium 
mills, and centrifuge facilities (Park et al. 2021 ).
North Korea produces yellowcake—a type of ura -
nium concentrate powder that, once converted and 
enriched, is used in reactor fuel—at the Pyongsan ura -
nium concentration plant (also known as the Nam-chon 
chemical complex) (Bermudez, Cha, and Jun 2021 ). 
Since 2020, analysts have observed ongoing mining, 
milling, and concentration activities including 
expanded tailings piles at the uranium concentration 
plant and the uranium mine collocated at Pyongsan 
(IAEA 2022 ; Makowsky 2023 ; United Nations 2024 ).
North Korea has only one declared uranium enrich -
ment facility—within the Yongbyon nuclear fuel rod 
fabrication plant—which contained 2,000 centrifuges 
when it was first revealed to a visiting delegation of 
experts in 2010. The facility is now estimated to house 
approximately 4,000 centrifuges after satellite imagery 
indicated the uranium enrichment hall at the site nearly 
doubled in size between 2013 and 2014. The enrichment 
facility at Yongbyon was seen operating regularly 
throughout 2021, as plumes of steam were observed 
through satellite imagery as well as the presence of 
what may have been a liquid nitrogen tank trailer on- 
site (United Nations 2021b , 2022 ).
1 
The construction of 
a second, smaller expansion to the uranium enrichment 
hall was originally noted by analysts from CNS in 
September 2021 before it was completed in May 2022. 
This expansion could potentially accommodate 
approximately 1,000 additional centrifuges, which 
could increase the plant’s overall capacity by 25 percent 
(Lewis, Pollack, and Schmerler 2021 ). Ongoing activity 
at the facility can be observed through satellite imagery, 
including the recently completed construction of several 
new buildings in the southernmost section of the site; 
however, the purpose of these buildings remains 
unknown (Makowsky, Liu, and Heinonen 2023 ).
It is widely believed that North Korea has at least one 
additional clandestine centrifuge facility outside of the 
known Yongbyon complex. In May 2018, the 
Washington Post first reported the existence of 
a potential uranium enrichment site at Kangson, just 
outside of Pyongyang, citing work by the Institute for 
Science and International Security (Warrick and 
Mekhennet 2018 ). In 2022, the United Nations Panel 
of Experts listed Kangson as a “suspected clandestine 
uranium enrichment facility” and noted continuous 
vehicular and construction activities since July 2021 
(United Nations 2022 ). However, independent analysis 
has raised doubts about the type of activities conducted 
254
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

at the Kangson complex, suggesting that the site might 
be used to manufacture components for centrifuges 
rather than to enrich uranium ( 38 North 2021 ; 
Heinonen 2020 ). Without more detailed public infor -
mation or access to the site itself, however, it is not 
possible to confirm the purpose of the Kangson site 
nor its potential role in North Korea’s nuclear weapons 
program.
Fissile material and warhead inventory estimates
Because of the prior access to the facilities at Yongbyon, 
analysts have a reasonable understanding of North 
Korea’s plutonium production capabilities. However, 
given the uncertainties about the operations at 
Yongbyon’s uranium enrichment facility and the possi -
ble existence of a second centrifuge facility, it is unclear 
how much highly-enriched uranium (HEU) North 
Korea has produced and how much uranium it might 
divert to military purposes, including for plutonium 
production. Still, this amount is known to be growing 
and it is clear North Korea is investing in the improve -
ment of its fissile material production capabilities.
Throughout the years, many experts have attempted 
to estimate North Korea’s fissile material production, 
with a wide range of results. In April 2021, former Los 
Alamos National Laboratory director, Siegfried Hecker, 
who was given unprecedented access to North Korean 
nuclear facilities over several years, estimated that North 
Korea had a plutonium inventory in the range of 25 to 
48 kilograms and could produce up to six kilograms 
per year at full operation ( 38 North 2021 ). Hecker also 
estimated that North Korea had possibly produced 600 
to 950 kilograms of HEU as of the end of 2020 ( 38 North 
2021 ). An assessment published by the Stockholm 
International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) sug -
gested a wider range of possibly 230 to 1,180 kilograms 
of HEU as of the beginning of 2021 (Kütt, Mian, and 
Podvig 2022 , 426), whereas the International Panel on 
Fissile Materials estimated a slightly smaller range of 
400 to 1,000 kilograms of HEU in 2022 (International 
Panel on Fissile Materials 2022 ). A report by David 
Albright of the Institute for Science and International 
Security suggested that North Korea’s fissile material 
stockpile could range between 56 to 70 kilograms of 
weapon-grade plutonium and between approximately 
1,400 to 2,200 kilograms of HEU as of the end of 2022 
(Albright 2023 ).
A newly-published methodology for modeling North 
Korea’s nuclear fuel cycle uses information gained from 
the prior access provided to IAEA inspectors and inter -
national experts, as well as satellite imagery and open 
sources, to estimate fissile material production under 
different scenarios (Christopher et al. 2023 ). These sce -
narios are built around certain assumptions about 
operational history, facility sophistication, and the exis -
tence of other facilities. Depending on the assumptions 
in the scenarios, as well as accounting for the allocation 
of fissile materials to different fuel cycle activities and 
nuclear tests, the model produces high- and low-range 
estimates of North Korea’s potential plutonium and 
HEU stockpiles.
For the purpose of this notebook, we use this model 
and incorporate three assumptions about North Korea’s 
fissile material production:
(1) Five full plutonium reprocessing campaigns have 
taken place at the radiochemical laboratory since 
2003.
2
(2) North Korea could operate up to 8,000 P2-type 
centrifuges for uranium enrichment, including:
a. Up to 4,000 P2-type centrifuges at North 
Korea’s uranium enrichment facility at 
Yongbyon, with the first 2,000 operating 
between 2003 and 2015 (some of this output 
was low-enriched uranium used for the LWR) 
and an additional 2,000 operating since 2015 
(after the observed expansion to the enrich -
ment hall).
b. An estimated additional 4,000 P2-type centri -
fuges at a second clandestine facility (the loca -
tion of which has yet to be confirmed), which 
we assume has the same size and uses the same 
type of centrifuges as the one at Yongbyon and 
has been operating since sometime between 
2006 and 2010.
(3) North Korea produces very little tritium at its 
five-megawatt-electric reactor, requiring the use 
of enriched uranium, but this is a limited 
capacity.
The size of North Korea’s nuclear stockpile also depends 
on the weapon design and the number and types of 
launchers that can deliver them. Many experts also 
estimate that North Korea may have built a smaller 
number of nuclear weapons than what its stockpile of 
fissile material may suggest. This is because it is unclear 
whether North Korea is prioritizing the development 
and production of higher-yield thermonuclear weapons, 
lower-yield fission-only weapons, boosted single-stage 
weapons, or any combination of these designs. More 
powerful warheads with the high yield demonstrated in 
the single 2017 advanced design test would consume 
more fissile material if based on a composite warhead 
design or would require special hydrogen fuel if based 
on a two-stage thermonuclear design, whereas lower- 
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 255

yield single-stage fission weapon designs would require 
less fissile material. Such assumptions can result in 
contrasting estimates regarding the number of nuclear 
weapons North Korea has procured and how many it 
could assemble in the future.
For example, in 2020, SIPRI researchers Vitaly 
Fedchenko and Robert Kelley published a report in 
Janes Intelligence Review in which they calculated the 
size of North Korea’s arsenal based on fissile material 
stockpile estimates from 2018 (Fedchenko and Kelley 
2020 ). Assuming North Korea would allocate four kilo -
grams of weapon-grade plutonium for single-stage plu -
tonium weapons—which is consistent with 
a Department of Energy statement declassified in 2001 
—12 kilograms of HEU for single-stage uranium-only 
devices, and 40 kilograms of HEU for a thermonuclear 
weapon with a plutonium primary, the Fedchenko- 
Kelley report concluded that if North Korea committed 
its HEU to the production of thermonuclear weapons, 
the country was likely to possess between 10 and 20 
warheads. In 2023, a report from the Institute for 
Science and International Security estimated that 
a plutonium-only weapon would require four kilo -
grams, a composite weapon would contain two kilo -
grams of plutonium with 10 to 15 kilograms of HEU, 
and a thermonuclear device would use 3.5 kilograms of 
plutonium and 80 kilograms of HEU (Albright 2023 ). 
Coupled with different assumptions about North 
Korea’s fissile material stockpiles, as well as the possibi -
lity that its nuclear weapons arsenal contains a mix of 
composite core, thermonuclear, plutonium-only, and 
HEU-only nuclear devices, this resulted in an estimated 
range of 35 to 63 nuclear weapons (Albright 2023 ).
Under the assumptions stated above, we estimate 
North Korea could possess up to 81 kilograms of pluto -
nium and 1,800 kilograms of HEU, which could supply 
North Korea with enough material to potentially build 
up to 90 nuclear weapons (if it assembled 48 HEU-only 
devices and 40 composite weapons by using an esti -
mated 25 kilograms of HEU for the uranium-only 
design, then two kilograms of plutonium and 15 kilo -
grams of HEU for the composite design). The above 
assumptions could also produce a lower estimate of 
North Korea’s fissile material stockpile, of approxi -
mately 66 kilograms of plutonium and 1000 kilograms 
of HEU. These lower-end projections mean that North 
Korea could potentially build up to 20 uranium-only 
design and 33 composite design weapons if using the 
same fissile material allocations, for a possible capacity 
to build up to 53 nuclear weapons.
While North Korea’s warhead design and stockpile 
makeup are unknown, it is possible that most weapons 
would likely be single-stage fission weapons with yields 
possibly between 10 and 20 kilotons of TNT equivalent, 
akin to those demonstrated in the 2013 and 2016 tests, 
and a smaller number would be composite-core single- 
stage warheads with a higher yield. Such an arsenal 
would also be consistent with the understanding that 
North Korea has a limited plutonium supply and prior -
itizes shorter-range nuclear weapons capabilities over 
long-range strategic weapons.
Under these previously stated assumptions, we cau -
tiously assess that North Korea may have produced 
sufficient fissile material for a maximum capacity to 
potentially build up to 90 nuclear weapons, but has 
likely assembled fewer than that—potentially around 
50. Additionally, we estimate that North Korea might 
be capable of adding sufficient fissile material to pro -
duce an additional half-a-dozen nuclear warheads 
per year—enough to potentially produce a total of up 
to approximately 130 weapons by the end of the decade.
Nuclear testing and weaponization
After six nuclear tests—including two with moderate 
yields and one with a high yield—there is no longer 
any doubt that North Korea can build powerful nuclear 
explosive devices designed for different yields. North 
Korea’s latest nuclear test, conducted on September 3, 
2017, had a yield of well over 100 kilotons and demon -
strated that North Korea had managed to design 
a thermonuclear device or at least one that used 
a mixed-fuel (composite) design. Photos published at 
the time of Kim Jong-un standing next to a peanut- 
shaped warhead model described as a “thermonuclear” 
design appeared intended to signal development of 
a two-stage design. Although its visual appearance sug -
gested that it is small and light enough to potentially be 
delivered by ballistic missiles, it is unknown if the dis -
play was a real warhead or a mock-up design. It is also 
possible that North Korea’s reference to a so-called 
“hydrogen” bomb implied the use of tritium to boost 
the efficiency of a single-stage fission device, not a two- 
stage thermonuclear weapon. Such a technology would 
enable North Korea to use less fissile material in each 
bomb and further expand its production capacity (Jones 
2016 ).
3 
However, given tritium’s relatively short half-life 
(12.33 years) and North Korea’s low rate of tritium 
production, the capacity of North Korea to produce 
boosted or thermonuclear weapons appears to be lim -
ited (Yang et al. 2024 ).
In a May 2021 speech, Kim Jong-un stated that North 
Korea had developed what he described as “tactical 
nuclear weapons including new-type tactical rockets.” 
In the future, he stated, it would be necessary to improve 
the technology “and make nuclear weapons smaller and 
256
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

lighter for more tactical uses. This will make it possible 
to develop tactical nuclear weapons to be used as various 
means according to the purposes of operational duty 
and targets of strike in modern warfare” (North Korean 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2021 ). Although the mean -
ing of “tactical” in Kim’s speech is not clear, it appears to 
imply a role that is distinct from “strategic” weapons 
with longer range, and perhaps could be used earlier in 
a conflict.
To further illustrate its pursuit of “tactical” nuclear 
weapons, North Korea in March 2023 released images of 
Kim Jong-un inspecting new, small nuclear warheads 
called the Hwasan-31 and pictured alongside technol -
ogy for mounting the warhead on ballistic missiles (see 
Figure 1 ). Posters in the background also seemed to 
imply the intention to mount this new warhead on 
eight different types of ballistic and cruise missiles, 
including the KN23, KN24, KN25, Hwasal, and Haeil 
(Zwirko 2023a ). The number and size of the warheads in 
the images seemed to imply that North Korea is seeking 
to standardize designs for a lightweight warhead that 
could be fitted atop various kinds of missiles, although 
this will be highly challenging. There is also no way to 
know for sure if these warheads reflect actual designs, if 
they match any of the devices detonated in North 
Korea’s nuclear explosive tests, or if they would require 
substantial modification to be fitted on a missile.
4
Although North Korea has demonstrated signifi -
cantly improved missile capabilities and more powerful 
nuclear tests, some US and South Korean officials have 
occasionally expressed doubt that North Korea actually 
possesses the technology needed for a warhead to func -
tion and survive delivery on a long-range missile. At the 
Eighth Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea in 2021, 
Kim Jong-un discussed the development of multiple 
independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs), 
which would be even more technically challenging 
(KCNA 2021 ). Some analysts estimate that North 
Korea’s satellite launch-vehicle tests in February and 
March 2023 could have been used to validate technolo -
gies for achieving such a MIRV capability (Nouwens 
et al. 2024 ; Panda 2022b ). Employment of short-range 
Figure 1. Different nuclear warhead designs displayed by North Korea. (Credit: Federation of American Scientists).
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 257

warheads would be less difficult, and during a nuclear 
drill of tactical systems in 2023, North Korean state 
media reported the testing of an air-burst test capability, 
confirming the “reliability of the operation of nuclear 
explosion control devices and detonators fitted in 
a nuclear warhead” (Ji 2023 ).
North Korea has conducted all six of its nuclear tests 
at the Punggye-ri test site in North Hamgyong province, 
which consists of a large mountain complex with several 
underground tunnels. North Korea partially disabled 
the complex in May 2018 by destroying three tunnel 
entrances and several nearby buildings; this was done as 
a confidence-building measure in advance of a planned 
meeting between Kim Jong-un and Donald Trump 
(Talmadge 2018 ). However, the underground site itself 
was not destroyed and could therefore be reconstituted 
if necessary.
After an extended period of inactivity, North Korea 
has begun reconstituting the Punggye-ri test site. 
Satellite imagery since March 2022 has revealed the 
construction of new buildings and renovation of older 
ones; movement of lumber, equipment, and personnel; 
new excavation activity; and the creation of a new portal 
into the mountain test site (Bermudez, Cha, and 
Jun 2022 ; Lewis and Schmerler 2022 ; Makowsky, 
Heinonen, and Liu 2022b ; United Nations 2024 ). This 
substantial new construction effort led both US and 
South Korean officials to suggest in 2022 that North 
Korea may be preparing to conduct a seventh under -
ground nuclear test (BBC 2022 ; Kang 2022 ). So far this 
has not happened.
Potential land-based nuclear-capable missiles
Over the past decade, North Korea has developed 
a highly diverse ballistic missile force, including missiles 
in all major range categories. The UN Panel of Experts 
assessed in its 2024 report that North Korea’s ballistic 
missile program has made advancements in the 
past year on performance—including improved maneu -
verability and precision, survivability, and preparedness 
(United Nations 2024 ).
In addition to the uncertainties surrounding North 
Korea’s nuclear warheads (see section “North Korea’s 
nuclear weapons program”), it is unclear how many 
operational delivery vehicles North Korea possesses 
and how many of those would be assigned a nuclear 
mission. Moreover, it is highly challenging to assess 
which of North Korea’s missile systems have been 
deployed and what their operational status is. North 
Korean state media occasionally implies that specific 
systems are operational, but since many of North 
Korea’s missile bases are hidden within mountain 
ranges, it is difficult to verify these statements. Also, 
some of the ballistic missile types North Korea has 
flight-tested or displayed might be research projects 
intended to develop future ballistic missile technology 
and signal such aspirations to its adversaries, rather than 
demonstrations of operational missiles.
To ensure completeness, this section analyzes all of 
North Korea’s known land-based ballistic missiles and 
offers some hypotheses about which missiles are most 
likely to have a nuclear role. The inclusion of a missile in 
this section does not necessarily mean it has or is 
believed to have a nuclear role. (See Table 1 ).
Short-range missiles
For decades, the bulk of North Korea’s missile arsenal 
comprised old liquid-fueled variants of the Soviet-era 
R-17 Scud short-range ballistic missile (SRBM), which 
North Korea received from Egypt in the 1970s and 
subsequently reverse engineered (Pinkston 2008 ). The 
initial North Korean versions of these missiles were 
known as the Hwasong-5 (Scud-B) and Hwasong-6 
(Scud-C). The US Air Force’s National Air and Space 
Intelligence Center lists the missiles’ ranges at 300 and 
500 kilometers, respectively, and estimated in 2021 that 
North Korea had fewer than 100 launchers for the 
combined Hwasong-5 and -6 arsenal (National Air 
and Space Intelligence Center 2020 , 21). Throughout 
the 1980s and 1990s, North Korea iterated on these 
designs to increase their range, eventually developing 
the medium-range Hwasong-7 (Nodong) and 
Hwasong-9 (KN04).
Aside from the Toksa (KN02)—a solid-fueled preci -
sion SRBM based on the Soviet OTR-21 Tochka—all 
North Korean SRBMs were relatively inaccurate and 
used liquid fuel until roughly 2017, when it became 
clear that North Korea sought to increase the accuracy 
and readiness of its nuclear-capable SRBMs.
In 2017, North Korea flight-tested modernized ver -
sions of its Hwasong-5 and Hwasong-6, each of which 
were equipped with maneuverable reentry vehicles 
designed to evade regional missile defense systems like 
the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) 
system, which the United States deploys in South 
Korea (James Martin Center for Nonproliferation 
Studies 2024 ; Panda 2017 ). These modernized missiles 
were designated by the United States as the KN21 and 
KN18, respectively.
Over the past five years, North Korea has prioritized 
the production of a new generation of solid-fuel dual- 
capable missiles and has placed particular emphasis on 
its SRBMs. While liquid-fuel missiles are more efficient 
and can be throttled by slowing the chemical reaction 
258
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

Table 1. North Korea’s potentially nuclear-capable missiles, 2024.*
Class and 
range
North Korean 
designation
a
US 
designation
a
Type
Year first 
displayed Description and status
Land-based missiles
Short-range (<1,000 km range)
Hwasong-5 Scud-B SRBM 1984 Reverse engineered liquid-fuel Scud launched from 4-axle wheeled TEL. In 2020, NASIC estimated 
fewer than 100 Hwasong-5 and − 6 launchers.
Hwasong-6 Scud-C SRBM 1990 Improved Hwasong-5 with longer range launched from 4-axle wheeled TEL. In 2020, NASIC 
estimated fewer than 100 Hwasong-5 and − 6 launchers.
? KN21 SRBM 2017 Upgraded Hwasong-6 variant with separating maneuverable warhead. Status unknown; may have been 
superseded by newer solid-fueled SRBMs.
? KN18 SRBM 2017 Upgraded Hwasong-5 variant with terminal maneuverability. Status unknown; may have been superseded 
by newer solid-fueled SRBMs.
? KN25 SRBM 2019 Solid propellant “super-large” 600 mm MRLS.
Hwasong-11A/Ga/ 
가
b
KN23 SRBM 2018 Next-generation solid-fueled SRBM resembling the USA’s ATACMS system. Successfully flight- 
tested dozens of times from wheeled, tracked, rail-based, underwater, and silo-based 
launchers.
Hwasong-11B/Na/ 
나
KN24 SRBM 2019 Next-generation solid-fueled SRBM resembling Russia’s Iskander-M and South Korea’s Hyunmoo- 
2B systems.
Hwasong-11D/Ra/ 
라
? SRBM 2022 Compact variant of the Hwasong-11A with likely shorter range.
Medium-range (1,000–3,000 km range)
Hwasong-7 Nodong/ 
Rodong
MRBM 1993 Single-stage, liquid-fueled MRBM launched from 5-axle wheeled TEL. In 2020, NASIC estimated 
fewer than 100 Hwasong-7 launchers.
Hwasong-9
c
KN04/Scud-ER MRBM 2016 Single-stage, liquid-fueled, extended-range Scud variant launched from 4-axle wheeled TEL.
Pukguksong-2 KN15 MRBM 2017 Two-stage, solid-fueled MRBM launched from tracked TEL. Land-based version of Pukguksong-1 
SLBM.
Hwasong-12A/Ga/ 가 ? MRBM 2021 Conical maneuverable reentry vehicle carried by a shortened Hwasong-12 booster.
Hwasong-12B/Na/ 
나
d
? MRBM 2021 Wedge-shaped HGV carried by a shortened Hwasong-12 booster. Renamed from Hwasong-8.
Hwasal-1 ? LACM 2021 North Korea’s first operational cruise missile. Flight tested from a wheeled TEL. One variant 
includes a “Ra-3” suffix.
Hwasal-2 ? LACM 2021 LACM with similar design to Hwasal-1 but with an updated propulsion system and longer range.
Intermediate-range (3,000–5,500 km range)
Hwasong-12 KN17 IRBM 2017 Single-stage, liquid-fueled IRBM launched from 6-axle wheeled TEL.
Hwasong-16A/Ga/ 가 
(unconfirmed)
? IRBM 2024 Solid-propellant IRBM with conical maneuverable reentry vehicle (likely to be the same glider as the 
Hwasong-12A).
Hwasong-16B/Na/ 나 ? IRBM 2024 Solid-propellant IRBM with wedge-shaped glide vehicle (likely to be the same glider as the Hwasong-12B).
Intercontinental (5,500+ km range)
Hwasong-14 KN20 ICBM 2017 North Korea’s first operational ICBM. Two-stage, liquid-fueled, launched from 8-axle wheeled TEL.
Hwasong-15 KN22 ICBM 2017 Two-stage, liquid-fueled ICBM launched from 9-axle wheeled TEL.
Hwasong-17
e
KN28 ICBM 2020 Two-stage, liquid-fueled ICBM launched from 11-axle wheeled TEL. Largest ICBM to date, could 
eventually be capable of carrying MIRVs and penetration aids.
Hwasong-18 ? ICBM 2023 Three-stage, solid-fueled ICBM launched from a 9-axle wheeled TEL (same launcher as Hwasong- 
15).
Sea-based missiles
Pukguksong-1 KN11 SLBM 2014 North Korea’s first SLBM, featuring a two-stage, solid-fuel design and a relatively short range 
(approximately 1,250 km).
Pukguksong-3 KN26 SLBM 2017 Improved Pukguksong-1 design with longer range and new fairing.
Pukguksong-4/Sh/ 
ㅅ
f
? SLBM 2020 Similar design with likely wider diameter and reduced length.
Pukguksong-5/Sh/ ㅅ ? SLBM 2021 Similar length as Pukguksong-3 but with new, ogival nose cone; could eventually be capable of carrying 
MIRVs and penetration aids.
Unknown (possibly 
Pukguksong-6)
? SLBM 2022 Name not yet formally announced but appears to be a member of the Pukguksong family of SLBMs. Longer 
than all previous Pukguksong-type missiles, but with similar nose cone to Pukguksong-5.
Hwasong-11/Sh/ ㅅ ? SLBM 2021 Appears to deviate from traditional Pukguksong SLBM design, instead bearing similarities to KN23 SRBM.
Pulhwasal-3–31 ? SLCM 2024 “Strategic” submarine-launched cruise missile capable of flight for more than two hours.
Haeil (−1, −2, −5–23) ? UUV 2023/2024 Three variants of what North Korea describes as a “nuclear-capable underwater attack drone” with the 
purpose of creating radioactive tsunamis. Claimed to have undergone more than 50 shakedown tests 
between 2021 and 2023.
Abbreviations used: ICBM: intercontinental ballistic missile; IRBM: intermediate-range ballistic missile; LACM: land-attack cruise missile; MRBM: medium-range ballistic 
missile; SLBM: submarine-launched ballistic missile; SLCM: sea-launched cruise missile; SRBM: short-range ballistic missile; UUV: unmanned underwater vehicle. 
Notes: 
*The status and capabilities of North Korea’s missiles come with significant uncertainty. The inclusion of missiles in this table does not necessarily mean the 
authors conclude that they are all equipped with nuclear warheads or assigned a nuclear mission. Several may have been intended as prototypes, technology 
demonstrators, or early iterations that have been or will be superseded by newer missiles. Systems that we assess to be operational are highlighted in bold . 
a
For overviews of names and designations for North Korean missiles, see: Matt Korda’s “The More You KN-0w About North Korean Missiles” and “The Hwasong 
That Never Ends” lists on Arms Control Wonk https://www.armscontrolwonk.com/archive/1203680/the-more-you-kn-0w-about-north-korean-missiles/ . 
b
North Korea has recently begun to assign Hangul suffixes to many of its missiles. These suffixes can be considered akin to A, B, C, etc. given their respective 
placements in the Hangul alphabet. For example, North Korea refers to the KN23 as the Hwasong-11 가 (transliterated into English as “Ga”). Because “Ga” is the 
first letter of the Hangul alphabet, this system can be considered as “Hwasong-11A.”
c
The 1,000-km range Scud-ER is sometime called an SRBM, but the US Air Force’s National Air and Space Intelligence Center lists it as an MRBM. 
d
This missile was previously designated the Hwasong-8 by North Korean state media; however, it was renamed between September 2021 and July 2023. 
e
This missile was previously assumed to be designated the Hwasong-16; however, it was revealed at North Korea’s “Self-Defence Exhibition” in October 2021 
that it is called the Hwasong-17. It is unclear which missile—if any—currently holds the Hwasong-16 designation. 
f
One of North Korea’s new suffixes is ㅅ (transliterated into English as “Sh”), which North Korea has recently begun to assign to its newer sea-based missiles. 
According to South Korean navy officials, this is likely because it refers to 수상용 , which means “for use in water.” Source: Kim, Jeongmin. 2021. “FYI: South 
Korean navy chief said before that the consonant “ ㅅ ” in Pukguksong names likely refers to “ 수상용 ,” which means “for use in water.” (i.e. Pukguksong-4 ㅅ , 
and the new 5 ㅅ today).” Tweet, January 14. https://twitter.com/jeongminnkim/status/1349909227960102913 .
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 259

between the fuel and oxidizer as needed, solid-fuel mis -
siles have several distinct military advantages over 
liquid-fuel ones: Solid propellant is safer and not as 
corrosive as liquid propellant, requires less mainte -
nance, and can safely handle off-road transportation 
conditions (Schilling 2016 ). Moreover, solid-fuel mis -
siles are pre-cast and therefore do not require a lengthy 
fueling process prior to launch. This means that in 
a wartime scenario, solid-fuel missiles can simply be 
rolled out of their hiding places and launched within 
minutes—in contrast to liquid-fuel missiles that could 
be vulnerable to a preemptive strike during their pro -
longed fueling process. This vulnerability could be exa -
cerbated by the presence of support vehicles and fuel 
trucks that would not be necessary for solid-fuel missiles 
and make liquid-fuel missiles easier to spot via aerial 
reconnaissance or satellites.
Since 2019, North Korea has successively unveiled 
new types of more accurate, solid-fueled SRBMs with 
indigenous designs that may ultimately replace older 
Hwasong-5s and -6s, as well as their modernized ver -
sions (the KN21 and KN18). These missiles, which 
include the KN23 (Hwasong-11A), KN24 (Hwasong- 
11B), KN25, Hwasong-11C, and Hwasong-11D, have 
collectively been tested approximately 70 times since 
the beginning of 2019 (James Martin Center for 
Nonproliferation Studies 2024 ). These missiles appear 
to bear several similarities to conventional US, South 
Korean, and Russian missiles, such as the ATACMS, 
Hyunmoo-2B, or Iskander SRBMs. North Korea has 
explicitly claimed in official statements that many of 
its solid-fuel SRBMs are nuclear-capable. For example, 
in April 2024, North Korea conducted a “combined 
tactical drill simulating nuclear counterattack,” in 
which they simultaneously launched four KN25 missiles 
“tipped with simulated nuclear warheads” (KCNA 
2024b ). The drill was significant both as an 
apparent test of the KN25’s “tactical” nuclear capability 
and as the first test of North Korea’s “Nuclear Trigger” 
nuclear weapon management system with the KN25 
(Van Diepen 2024 ).
Except for the Hwasong-11C, North Korea has expli -
citly tied all its new-generation solid-fuel SRBMs to its 
nuclear program. North Korea has stated that this variant 
can carry 2.5- and 4.5-metric ton warheads. These are 
much heavier payloads than would be needed for carry -
ing a nuclear weapon and could therefore indicate 
a conventional role ( Voice of Korea 2021a ; KCNA 2024c ).
Some of these SRBMs, including the KN23 and pos -
sibly the KN24, can conduct “pull-up” maneuvers in 
their terminal phase of flight, therefore complicating 
the abilities of North Korean adversaries to track the 
missiles during their descent.
This new generation of solid-fuel SRBMs can appar -
ently be launched from several different types of plat -
forms, including wheeled transporter erector launchers 
(TELs), tracked TELs, silo-based launchers, underwater 
launchers, and rail-based launchers. North Korea has 
also announced its intention to expand the Railway 
Mobile Missile Regiment—created at the Eighth 
Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea in 
January 2021—into a brigade, which could eventually 
consist of nine launchers with 18 missiles ( Voice of 
Korea 2021b ). Given that North Korea has an extensive 
cross-country rail network that frequently travels 
through mountains, rail-mobile launchers would enable 
North Korea to move missiles around the country 
rapidly and increase the survivability of its second- 
strike force.
The sophisticated testing program for these newer 
systems indicates that North Korean missile troops are 
becoming significantly more practiced at conducting 
salvo launches and lowering the time intervals between 
missile launches (Dempsey 2020 ). As an illustration of 
this new capability, in June 2022, North Korea test- 
launched eight SRBMs from multiple different locations 
in less than an hour. This constituted the largest number 
of North Korean ballistic missiles launched on a single 
occasion (Yonhap News Agency 2022 ). In March 2024, 
North Korea conducted another salvo drill, firing six 
KN25 dual-capable SRBMs simultaneously, followed by 
another KN25 to simulate a probable nuclear airburst 
(Van Diepen 2024 ).
Medium- and intermediate-range missiles
North Korea is developing a new generation of med -
ium- and intermediate-range missiles with improved 
accuracy, readiness, and maneuverability. For decades, 
North Korea operated its relatively inaccurate, liquid-
fuel Hwasong-7 (Nodong) and Hwasong-9 (KN04) 
medium-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs). These mis -
siles—carried by five- and four-axle wheeled TELs, 
respectively—were derived from the early-generation 
Hwasong-5 and -6 and had relatively poor accuracy. 
Partially for this reason, some analysts have suggested 
that the Hwasong-7 is one of the most likely missiles to 
have an operational nuclear capability (Albright 2013 ; 
Center for Strategic and International Studies 2021 ; 
James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies 
2006 ).
Between 2010 and 2016, North Korea was also devel -
oping a liquid-fuel intermediate-range ballistic missile 
(IRBM)—the Hwasong-10 (Musudan)—with an esti -
mated range of more than 3,000 kilometers. The missile 
suffered several test failures in 2016, however, and its 
260
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

design was not mirrored in North Korea’s newer gen -
eration of regional missiles—indicating that the missile 
has likely been superseded and is no longer in develop -
ment (James Martin Center for Nonproliferation 
Studies 2024 ).
In 2017, North Korea unveiled two new regional 
ballistic missiles: the Pukguksong-2 (KN15) and the 
Hwasong-12 (KN17). The Pukguksong-2 is a two- 
stage, solid-fuel MRBM carried in a canister on a road- 
mobile caterpillar-type TEL. The missile appears to be 
a modification of the submarine-launched Pukguksong- 
1 (KN11). The first two flight tests in 2017 demonstrated 
a range of up to 1,200 kilometers (Wright 2017b , 2017c ). 
The Hwasong-12 is a single-stage, liquid-fuel, inter -
mediate-range ballistic missile carried on a six-axle 
road-mobile TEL with a detachable firing table. Several 
tests, including one in January 2022 after a nearly five- 
year hiatus, have indicated that the missile could reach 
targets as far as 4,500 kilometers if flown on a normal 
trajectory (Japanese Ministry of Defence 2022a ; Wright 
2017e ).
North Korea appears to be developing two variants of 
the original Hwasong-12 that are significantly more 
maneuverable than the original design. One missile 
carries a wedge-shaped boost-glide vehicle, and another 
missile carries a conical maneuverable reentry vehicle. 
The former system was originally designated by North 
Korean state media as Hwasong-8 but was apparently 
changed to Hwasong-12Na (equivalent to Hwasong- 
12B, as “Na” is the second consonant in the Hangul 
alphabet) between September 2021 and July 2023; The 
new designation was confirmed in July 2023 by an 
image from the Russian Defense Minister’s visit to 
North Korea (Lewis 2023 ). Given this confirmation, 
we can speculate that the missiles with conical reentry 
vehicles tested in January 2022 are “Hwasong-12Ga” 
(equivalent to Hwasong-12A), although this designation 
is unconfirmed. While both gliders appear to be carried 
by modified by Hwasong-12 boosters, they are assessed 
to have shorter ranges than the original Hwasong-12 
IRBM.
North Korean state media reported that the 
Hwasong-12Na was the first North Korean missile to 
use a “fuel ampoule,” which involves placing pre-fueled, 
liquid-fueled missiles in temperature-controlled canis -
ters to facilitate faster launches (DPRK Today 2021 ; Xu 
2021 ). North Korea says it plans to transition all liquid- 
fueled missiles into ampoules (DPRK Today 2021 ).
In 2024, North Korea debuted a solid-fuel IRBM 
capability by revealing two variants of a new two-stage 
missile design, featuring what appeared to be the same 
two types of gliders as those carried by the Hwasong-12. 
Launches of the two variants were conducted in January 
and April 2024. Given that the variant carrying the 
wedge-shaped boost-glide vehicle was confirmed by 
state media as the Hwasong-16Na (equivalent to 
Hwasong-16B), the variant launched in January carry -
ing the conical maneuverable reentry vehicle is likely to 
be the Hwasong-16Ga (equivalent to the Hwasong- 
16A); this would also match the designation pattern 
for the Hwasong-12 (KCNA 2024a ; Van Diepen 2024 ; 
Lewis 2024 ). During the April test, the Hwasong-16B 
demonstrated a pull-up maneuver and lateral maneu -
vering capability. Both tests were reportedly conducted 
at limited speed and range, making it difficult to assess 
whether either glider will be successful at the intermedi -
ate range (Xu 2024 ).
Intercontinental ballistic missiles
The most dramatic of North Korea’s recent develop -
ments has been the display and test launch of large 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), including 
the country’s first solid-fuel ICBM. North Korea has 
revealed several types of missiles in this range category 
over the years, three of which are likely to be currently 
operational: the Hwasong-15, Hwasong-17, and 
Hwasong-18 (see Figure 2 ).
Achieving an ICBM capability to target the US home -
land has long been a strategic goal for North Korea. 
North Korea’s first intercontinental-range missiles 
were the Taepodong-1 (TD01) and Taepodong-2 
(TD02), test flown in 1998 and 2006, respectively. 
However, these missiles were better suited as space 
launch vehicles and were unlikely to realistically func -
tion as nuclear-capable ICBMs. As a result, we assess 
that neither variant is currently operational as a North 
Korean military system.
North Korea next demonstrated its commitment to 
developing an ICBM capability in 2012, when it dis -
played the Hwasong-13 (KN08) during a parade. The 
Hwasong-13 was a three-stage, liquid-fuel ICBM, but it 
was never flight tested. A two-stage version of the 
Hwasong-13 was subsequently displayed at a parade in 
2015 but also was never tested. Given North Korea’s 
development of more sophisticated systems since then, 
we assess that the Hwasong-13 is not currently an 
operational system and the design has likely been super -
seded by the newer designs.
North Korea reached a turning point in 2017 with 
test launches of what would become its first operational 
ICBM theoretically capable of delivering nuclear war -
heads to the continental United States: the Hwasong-14 
(KN20). North Korea conducted the first two test 
launches of the two-stage, liquid-fueled Hwasong-14 in 
July 2017. According to the National Air and Space 
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 261

Intelligence Center and independent analysts, 
the second test demonstrated that the missile could, if 
flown on a normal trajectory, have a range of over 
10,000 kilometers (National Air and Space Intelligence 
Center 2020 , 27; Wright 2017a ). These tests, however, 
did not demonstrate a functioning ICBM reentry vehi -
cle. Notably, North Korea has not paraded the 
Hwasong-14 since 2018 and did not include it at its 
October 2020 and February 2023 military parades that 
featured other ICBMs (NK News 2020 ). Combined with 
its development of newer, more sophisticated systems, 
this leads us to assess that the North Korean military 
does not currently operate the Hwasong-14.
On November 29, 2017, North Korea launched 
a newer ICBM with an even longer range: the 
Hwasong-15 (KN22). The two-stage, liquid-fuel missile 
was launched from a nine-axle transporter erector on 
a highly lofted trajectory to nearly 4,500 kilometers, 
which indicates a maximum range on a normal trajec -
tory with a light payload of approximately 13,000 kilo -
meters, sufficient to potentially target most of the 
United States (Wright 2017c ). The National Air and 
Space Intelligence Center lists the range of the 
Hwasong-15 to be upwards of 12,000 kilometers 
(National Air and Space Intelligence Center 2020 , 29). 
However, it is important to note that heavier payloads—
including nuclear warheads—would significantly 
decrease the missile’s range. Hwasong-15 ICBMs were 
displayed during North Korea’s October 2020 military 
parade (NK News 2020 ), but not in the February 2023 
military parade.
The Hwasong-17 (KN28) ICBM was first displayed at 
the October 2020 parade (Panda 2021 ). The two-stage, 
liquid-fuel missile was shown on an 11-axle TEL, and 
independent analysts assessed that the missile was signif -
icantly larger than other North Korean ICBMs, with 
a diameter possibly ranging between 2.4 and 2.5 meters 
and a length of roughly 24 to 25 meters (Elleman 2020 ; La 
Boon 2020 ; Lewis 2020 ).
On March 24, 2022, North Korea conducted a test 
launch that it claimed was the first test of the Hwasong- 
17. However, an NK News analysis of the launch video 
Figure 2. North Korea’s new generation of intercontinental ballistic missiles. North Korea has demonstrated significant progress over 
the past decade in developing increasingly capable intercontinental ballistic missiles. (Credit: Matt Korda, Federation of American 
Scientists).
262
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

released by North Korea suggested that the missile may 
have been tested on March 16 but failed, and that the 
missile tested may have been a Hwasong-15 instead—an 
assessment confirmed to the Washington Post by an 
unnamed US official (Ye Hee Lee 2022 ; Zwirko 2022 ). 
It appears instead that the first successful test-flight of 
the Hwasong-17 took place on November 18, 2022, 
making the missile the largest road-mobile, liquid- 
propellant missile ever tested (Panda 2022a ). North 
Korea claims to have successfully flight tested the 
Hwasong-17 again in March 2023 (KCNA 2023d ). 
During a February 2023 missile parade, North Korea 
displayed at least 11 Hwasong-17 ICBMs on 11-axle 
TELs (Panda 2023b ).
During the same missile parade, North Korea revealed 
the most significant recent advancement in its ICBM 
capabilities: its first three-stage solid-fuel Hwasong-18 
ICBM. The country demonstrated substantial progress 
on solid rocket motors in December 2022 with its first 
static test of a solid-fuel engine (Johnson 2023 ). State 
media announced that North Korea conducted the first 
successful flight test of the Hwasong-18 on April 13, 2023, 
after which Kim Jong-un said that the missile will “greatly 
reinforce the components of our strategic deterrent, 
rapidly increase the utility of the nuclear counterattack 
posture and innovate the practicality of the offensive 
military strategy” (Zwirko 2023b ).
North Korea conducted a total of three flight tests of 
the Hwasong-18 in 2023, the second and third occurring 
on July 12 and December 18, respectively (Panda 2023a ; 
United Nations 2024 ). The third launch took place over 
three kilometers away from the concrete pad where the 
first two launches were conducted, demonstrating the 
relative mobility of the missile (United Nations 2024 ). 
Three consecutive successful launches and state media’s 
reference to the third launch as a “launching drill of an 
ICBM unit” likely indicate that the Hwasong-18 ICBM 
is in the process of being integrated into the armed 
forces (KCNA 2023a ).
Several US and South Korean officials have stated 
that North Korea has not yet publicly demonstrated an 
operationally functioning reentry vehicle that can pro -
tect a warhead during reentry through the Earth’s atmo -
sphere when delivered at intercontinental range in 
a normal trajectory. However, many experts assess that 
there is no significant barrier to building a working 
reentry vehicle, and that doing so is likely to be within 
North Korea’s growing technological capabilities 
(Hecker 2017 ; Wright 2017h ).
North Korea’s ability to deploy large numbers of 
heavy long-range missiles depends on its ability to pro -
cure or indigenously produce launchers for those mis -
siles. In the past, North Korea has sourced its heavy 
launchers from Russian, Belarusian, and Chinese com -
panies, and imported them under the guise of civilian 
applications (Hanham 2012 ; Schiller 2012 ). In particu -
lar, the Chinese WS51200 lumber truck forms the basis 
for many of North Korea’s TELs.
Recently, North Korea has had apparent significant 
success with its indigenous production of heavy launch -
ers for its longer-range missiles. In October 2020, the 
country displayed a new 11-axle TEL for its new 
Hwasong-17 ICBM, which the UN Panel of Experts sug -
gested was manufactured inside North Korea (United 
Nations 2021a , Annex 10). At least 11 of the launchers 
were visible during North Korea’s February 2023 military 
parade, suggesting a substantial production capability 
(Panda 2023b ). If North Korea can now mass-produce 
heavy launchers for its ICBMs, there would be signifi -
cantly fewer constraints on the number of long-range 
missiles that the country can operate.
At the same time, these types of heavy, wheeled 
launchers would be limited to traveling on high-grade 
roads. For North Korea’s liquid-fueled ICBMs, the 
launchers would also have to travel in a convoy with 
fuel trucks, support vehicles, and possibly a loading 
crane—all of which would make it significantly easier 
for adversarial reconnaissance to spot the systems well 
in advance of launch. (See also Figure 3 ).
Sea-based nuclear-capable missiles
Over the past decade, North Korea has worked to 
develop an increasingly sophisticated sea-based nuclear 
deterrent. Since its first flight test of a nascent submar -
ine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) capability in 2015, 
North Korea has publicly shown nearly 10 different sea- 
launched delivery systems that it has characterized as 
nuclear-capable, including ballistic missiles, cruise mis -
siles, and unmanned underwater vehicles.
Submarine-launched ballistic missiles
The majority of North Korea’s SLBMs are part of the 
Pukguksong family of missiles (also spelled as 
Pukkuksong and Bukkeukseong), or “Polaris.” As of 
mid-2024, at least five versions of Pukguksong missiles 
have been developed, although most of these variants 
have likely not been deployed. Given the iterative 
designs, lack of recent tests, and scarcity of launch plat -
forms, we assess that the earliest variants were likely 
intended to validate key technologies needed to develop 
more sophisticated missiles. North Korea’s family of 
sea-based ballistic missile designs demonstrate progres -
sion toward a deployable missile ( Table 2 ).
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 263

North Korea is clearly iterating upon its SLBM 
design, especially with regards to the airframe length 
and diameter, motor size, and nose cone shape. We 
assess that rather than deploying multiple Pukguksong 
variants, North Korea eventually intends to settle upon 
a standardized SLBM design. As with other North 
Korean missiles, speculations about a multiple reentry 
vehicle capability seem premature at this stage.
North Korea also appears to have developed a “new 
type” of smaller SLBM which appears to bear similar 
characteristics to North Korea’s newer SRBM designs, 
particularly the KN23 (Xu 2021 ). The missile, which 
name has not been officially announced, was revealed 
during North Korea’s “Self-Defence 2021” exhibition in 
October 2021 and flight-tested the following week to 
a range of nearly 600 kilometers. North Korea subse -
quently announced that the test demonstrated the mis -
sile’s “flank mobility and gliding skip mobility” 
(Naenara 2021 ). The same type of missile may have 
also been tested on May 7, 2022; however, it is unclear 
whether the test was successful (Japanese Ministry of 
Defence 2022b ).
The rapid development of North Korea’s sea-based 
missile program has not yet been matched by its devel -
opment of launch platforms. Until late 2023, North 
Korea only had a single submarine that could launch 
ballistic missiles—the Gorae-class (Sinpo) experimental 
submarine with a single launch tube, known as 8.24 
Yongung (Naenara 2021 ). In September 2023 North 
Korea commissioned a redesigned variant of its legacy 
Figure 3. Evolution of North Korea’s missile launchers. (Credit: Federation of American Scientists).
Table 2. North Korea’s evolving sea-based ballistic missiles.
Missile
Date first 
shown
Date of most recent 
flight test Iterative design notes
Pukguksong-1 May 2015 August 2016 North Korea’s first SLBM, featuring a two-stage design, elliptical nose cone, and relatively short 
range (approximately 1,250 kilometers). Later versions included grid fins.
Pukguksong-3 April 2017 October 2019 Incremental improvement on Pukguksong-1, with a similar diameter but longer length, 
implying increased range (maximum range estimated to be between 1,900 and 2,500 
kilometers). Also includes a shorter, blunter fairing.
Pukguksong-4 October 2020 N/A Iterative design with similar fairing and diameter (or possibly slightly wider) to the 
Pukguksong-3, with slightly reduced length. Paraded version included the suffix “ ㅅ ,” 
implying its status as a sea-launched system.
Pukguksong-5 January 2021 N/A Similar design and diameter to Pukguksong-4, but longer with a new, ogival nose cone. 
Paraded version also included the suffix “ ㅅ .”
Pukguksong-6?  
(not confirmed)
April 2022 N/A North Korea’s longest, widest SLBM to date, featuring a similar nose cone design to the 
Pukguksong-5.
Abbreviations used: SLBM: submarine-launched ballistic missile.
264
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

Romeo-class submarine—named the No. 841 Hero Kim 
Kun Ok —that can accommodate up to 10 vertical- 
launch ballistic missiles (four large-diameter missiles 
and six smaller missiles). The submarine is referred to 
by North Korean state media as a “tactical nuclear attack 
submarine,” referring to its ability to launch nuclear- 
capable missiles, rather than to its method of propulsion 
(diesel-electric) (KCNA 2023b ). During the launch of 
the No. 841 Hero Kim Kun Ok , Kim Jong-un noted the 
need to “push forward with the nuclear weaponization 
of the Navy in the future,” indicating that such 
a deployment had not yet taken place (KCNA 2023b ). 
In his speech, Kim Jong-un also announced “the plan to 
convert all existing medium-sized submarines into 
attack submarines equipped with tactical nuclear weap -
ons” (Rodong Sinmun 2023 ). Throughout the first half 
of 2024, satellite imagery indicated that a new construc -
tion campaign to build additional submarines had 
begun (Liu, Makowsky, and Ragnone 2024 ). The addi -
tion of several mobile nuclear-capable sea-based deliv -
ery systems to North Korea’s arsenal would complicate 
efforts to continuously track North Korea’s nuclear 
launchers.
Submarine-launched cruise missiles
North Korea is developing a new submarine-launched 
cruise missile, known as Pulhwasal-3-31. The system 
has been labeled a “strategic cruise missile”—implying 
a nuclear-capable status—and the Korean state media 
press release described the test taking place in the 
context of the “nuclear weaponization of our navy” 
(Rodong Sinmun 2024 ). During a test in January 2024, 
the two missiles reportedly flew for just over two 
hours (Rodong Sinmun 2024 ). Although the 
“Pulhwasal” designation would suggest that the missile 
is part of the same family as North Korea’s land-based 
Hwasal-1 and Hwasal-2 cruise missiles, North Korean 
state media has not yet released high enough resolu -
tion images of the Pulhwasal-3-31 to confirm the 
technical similarities.
Other sea-based weapons
North Korea appears to be developing an underwater 
weapon system, the mission of which has been described 
by North Korean state media as “stealthily infiltrat[ing] 
into operational waters and mak[ing] a super-scale 
radioactive tsunami through [an] underwater explosion 
to destroy naval striker groups and major operational 
ports of the enemy” (KCNA 2023c ). While this descrip -
tion sounds like Russia’s “Poseidon” unmanned under -
water vehicles (UUV), the weapon system itself bears 
significant differences. Notably, it is not nuclear- 
powered, does not travel at high speeds, and likely has 
a much shorter range, therefore limiting its utility to 
a retaliatory weapon rather than a first-strike system.
The system, called “Haeil,” is apparently under con -
tinuous development, and North Korea claims that it 
underwent more than 50 shakedown tests between 2021 
and 2023, with several tests lasting for dozens of hours at 
a time (KCNA 2023c ). There are at least three known 
variants of the Haeil system—Haeil-1, Haeil-2, and 
Haeil-5-23—however, it remains unclear which of 
these, if any, will ultimately be deployed. It is possible 
that all Haeil variants that have been publicly displayed 
are technology demonstrator programs, and that 
a future version will have a different designation.
The Haeil was notably one out of eight delivery 
systems included in a graphic promoting a common 
warhead, known as the “Hwasan-31.” Developing inter -
operable warheads is rife with challenges, however, 
given necessary differences in sizes, shapes, masses, 
centers of gravity, and many other technological factors. 
It therefore seems unlikely that the Haeil UUV would 
carry the exact same warhead as North Korea’s tactical 
SRBMs and strategic cruise missiles.
Land-attack cruise missiles
North Korea appears to be developing a series of land- 
attack cruise missiles (LACMs)—the Hwasal-1 and 
Hwasal-2—that have been tested at least a dozen times 
as of mid-2024. Although North Korea has described 
these LACMs as “strategic weapons,” it has also indi -
cated that the missiles have been deployed with units 
that have been tasked with carrying out tactical nuclear 
strikes (KCNA 2023c ).
Despite the apparent connection to North Korea’s 
nuclear program, it is likely that these missiles also 
have conventional strike roles. In January 2021, for 
example, Kim Jong-un stated that the cruise missiles’ 
conventional warheads are “the most powerful in the 
world” (Rodong Sinmun 2021 ). And, in April 2024, 
North Korea claimed to have tested a “super-large” war -
head for the Hwasal-1 Ra-3 (an apparent variant of the 
Hwasal-1 that may be slightly longer than the original 
design) which, based on Kim Jong-un’s previous state -
ment and the type of test conducted (a flight test eval -
uating the “power” of the warhead), is likely to be 
conventional ( Voice of Korea 2024 ).
North Korean state media has released images of the 
missiles, indicating that they might include a terminal 
guidance system and could be launched from TELs 
carrying five missiles (Xu 2021 ). The Hwasal-2 appears 
to feature a longer air intake than the Hwasal-1.
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 265

Notably, during the first tests, South Korean news 
sources subsequently reported that neither South 
Korea nor the United States was aware of the LACM 
launches until after the announcement in North 
Korean state media (Lee and Park 2021 ). Given that 
these systems are designed to circumvent radars and 
missile defense systems by flying at lower altitudes on 
maneuverable trajectories, they could offer North 
Korea a new and unique capability to attack regional 
targets.
Notes
1. Liquid nitrogen is used as part of the uranium enrich -
ment process, particularly within the context of cold 
trapping uranium hexafluoride.
2. According to the IAEA, five reprocessing campaigns 
have taken place since the 1994 Agreed Framework. 
Each lasted for four to five months in 2003, 2005, 
2009, 2016, and 2021. The steam plant operated for 
a shorter period of around two months in 2018, but 
the duration and timing of activities were indicative of 
waste treatment or maintenance (IAEA 2022 ).
3. For an insightful review of North Korea’s hydrogen 
bomb claim, see Kelley and Hansen ( 2016 ).
4. For assessments of North Korean warhead designs and 
production capacity, see Albright ( 2017 ), Hecker 
( 2017 ), Jones ( 2017 ), and Kelley and Hansen ( 2016 ).
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This research was carried out with generous contributions 
from the New-Land Foundation, the Prospect Hill 
Foundation, Ploughshares Fund, and individual donors.
Notes on contributors
Hans M. Kristensen is the director of the Nuclear Information 
Project with the Federation of American Scientists in 
Washington, DC. His work focuses on researching and writing 
about the status of nuclear weapons and the policies that direct 
them. Kristensen is a coauthor of the world nuclear forces over -
view in the SIPRI Yearbook (Oxford University Press) and 
a frequent adviser to the news media on nuclear weapons policy 
and operations. He has coauthored the Nuclear Notebook since 
2001. Inquiries should be directed to FAS, 1150 18
th 
St NW, Suite 
425, Washington, DC, 20036 USA; email: fas@fas.org.
Matt Korda is the associate director of the Nuclear 
Information Project at the Federation of American 
Scientists, and an associate researcher with the Nuclear 
Disarmament, Arms Control and Non-proliferation 
Programme at the Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute (SIPRI). Previously, he worked for the Arms Control, 
Disarmament, and WMD Non-Proliferation Centre at NATO 
headquarters in Brussels. Korda’s research and open-source 
discoveries about nuclear weapons have made headlines 
across the globe, and his work is regularly used by govern -
ments, policymakers, academics, journalists, and the broader 
public in order to challenge assumptions and improve 
accountability about nuclear arsenals and trends. He received 
his MA in International Peace and Security from the 
Department of War Studies at King’s College London.
Eliana Johns is a research associate for the Nuclear 
Information Project at the Federation of American 
Scientists, where she researches the status and trends of global 
nuclear forces and the role of nuclear weapons. Previously, 
Johns worked as a project associate for DPRK 
Counterproliferation at CRDF Global, focusing on WMD 
nonproliferation initiatives to curb North Korea’s ability to 
gain revenue to build its weapons programs. Johns graduated 
with her bachelor’s in political science with minors in Music 
and Korean from the University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County (UMBC).
Mackenzie Knight is a program associate for Global Risk at 
the Federation of American Scientists where her work focuses 
on the Nuclear Information Project. Before this, Knight was 
a Herbert Scoville Jr. Peace Fellow on the Project. Previously, 
Knight worked as a policy and communications intern at the 
Arms Control Association, as a summer fellow with the James 
Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS), as an 
analyst intern with Shephard Media in London, and most 
recently as a graduate research assistant at CNS while obtain -
ing her master’s degree in Nonproliferation and Terrorism 
Studies from the Middlebury Institute of International Studies 
at Monterey. She received bachelor’s degrees in Middle 
Eastern Languages and Cultures and Policy and Intelligence 
Analysis from Indiana University.
References
38 North . 2020 . “Kim Jong Un’s October 10 Speech: More 
Than Missiles.” October 13. https://www.38north.org/ 
2020/10/kjuspeech101320/ .
38 North . 2021 . “Estimating North Korea’s Nuclear Stockpiles: 
An Interview with Siegfried Hecker.” April 30. https:// 
www.38north.org/2021/04/estimating-north-koreas- 
nuclear-stockpiles-an-interview-with-siegfried-hecker/ .
38 North . 2022 . “North Korea’s Evolving Nuclear Doctrine: 
An Interview with Siegfried Hecker.” May 24. https://www. 
38north.org/2022/05/north-koreas-evolving-nuclear- 
doctrine-an-interview-with-siegfried-hecker/ .
Albright, D. 2013 . “North Korean Miniaturization.” 38 North . 
February 13. http://www.38north.org/2013/02/ 
albright021313/ .
Albright, D. 2017 . “North Korea’s Nuclear Capability: A Fresh 
Look.” April 28. https://isis-online.org/uploads/isis-reports 
/documents/North_Korea_Nuclear_Capability_Estimates_ 
Summary_28Apr2017_Final.pdf .
Albright, D. 2023 . “North Korean Nuclear Weapons Arsenal: 
New Estimates of its Size and Configuration.” Institute for 
Science and International Security . April 10. https://isis- 
online.org/isis-reports/detail/2023-north-korean-nuclear- 
weapons-arsenal-new-estimates/ .
266
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

BBC. 2022 . “North Korea Could Carry Out Nuclear Tests 
‘Any Time,’ Warns US Official .” June 8. https://www.bbc. 
com/news/world-asia-61670661 .
Berkowitz, B., L. Karklis, and T. Meko. 2017 . “What is North 
Korea Trying to Hit?” Washington Post , July 25, 2017. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/world/north- 
korea-targets/ .
Bermudez, J. S., Jr., V. Cha, and J. Jun. 2021 . “Current Status 
of the Pyongsan Uranium Concentrate Plant (Nam-Chon 
Chemical Complex) and January Industrial Mine.” Beyond 
Parallel . November 8. https://beyondparallel.csis.org/cur 
rent-status-of-the-pyongsan-uranium-concentrate-plant- 
nam-chon-chemical-complex-and-january-industrial- 
mine/ .
Bermudez, J. S., Jr., V. Cha, and J. Jun. 2022 . “New Activity at 
Punggye-ri Tunnel No. 4.” Beyond Parallel . June 27. https:// 
beyondparallel.csis.org/new-activity-at-punggye-ri-tunnel- 
no-4 .
Center for Strategic and International Studies. 2021 . 
“Hwasong-7 (Nodong 1).” CSIS Missile Defense Project . 
July 31. https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/no-dong/ .
Christopher, G., H. Wingo, D. Schmerler, and H. Chalmers. 
2023 . “Estimating North Korea’s Nuclear Material 
Inventory.” VERTIC & CNS . Version 1.5. Accessed May 
29, 2024. https://arcg.is/1rvX1T .
Dempsey, J. 2020 . “Assessment of the March 9 KN-25 Test 
Launch.” 38 North , March 10. https://www.38north.org/ 
2020/03/jdempsey031020/ .
Department of Energy. 2001 . “Restricted Data Declassification 
Decisions 1946 to the Present (RDD-7).” U.S. Department 
of Energy Office of Declassification. January 1. https://sgp. 
fas.org/othergov/doe/rdd-7.html .
DPRK Today . 2021 . “Hypersonic Missile Newly Developed by 
Academy of Defence Science Test-Fired.” September 30. 
https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1632978090-364336107/ 
hypersonic-missile-newly-developed-by-academy-of- 
defence-science-test-fired/ .
Elleman, M. 2020 . “Does Size Matter? North Korea’s Newest 
ICBM.” 38 North . October 21. https://www.38north.org/ 
2020/10/melleman102120/ .
Ellyatt, H. 2016 . “North Korea Threatens Nuclear Strike on 
US, SKorea.” CNBC . March 7. https://www.cnbc.com/ 
2016/03/07/north-korea-threatens-to-reduce-us-to-ashes. 
html .
Fedchenko, V., and R. Kelley. 2020 . “New Methodology Offers 
Estimates for North Korean Thermonuclear Stockpile.” 
Janes Intelligence Review , July 30. https://www.janes.com/ 
new-methodology-offers-estimates-for-north-korean- 
thermonuclear-stockpile .
Hanham, M. 2012 . “North Korea’s Procurement Network 
Strikes Again: Examining How Chinese Missile Hardware 
Ended Up in Pyongyang.” Nuclear Threat Initiative . July 
30. https://www.nti.org/analysis/articles/north-koreas- 
procurement-network-strikes-again-examining-how- 
chinese-missile-hardware-ended-pyongyang .
Hecker, S. 2010 . “A Return Trip to North Korea’s Yongbyon 
Nuclear Complex.” NAPSNet Special Report . Nautilus 
Institute . November 22. https://nautilus.org/napsnet/naps 
net-special-reports/a-return-trip-to-north-koreas- 
yongbyon-nuclear-complex/ .
Hecker, S. 2017 . “What We Really Know about North Korea’s 
Nuclear Weapons, and What We don’t Yet Know for Sure.” 
Foreign Affairs , December 4. https://www.foreignaffairs. 
com/articles/north-korea/2017-12-04/what-we-really- 
know-about-north-koreas-nuclear-weapons .
Heinonen, O. 2020 . “New Evidence Suggests Kangson is not 
a Uranium Enrichment Plant.” 38 North , December 18. 
https://www.38north.org/2020/12/kangson201217/ .
Heinonen, O., P. Makowsky, and J. Liu. 2022 . “North Korea’s 
Yongbyon Nuclear Center: In Full Swing.” 38 North , March 
3. https://www.38north.org/2022/03/north-koreas- 
yongbyon-nuclear-center-in-full-swing/ .
Heinonen, O., P. Makowsky, J. Liu, and 38 North. 2023 . 
“Possible Refueling at Yongbyon’s 5 MWe Reactor.” 38 
North . April 26. https://www.38north.org/2023/04/possi 
ble-refueling-at-yongbyons-5-mwe-reactor/ .
IAEA. 2021 . “Application of Safeguards in the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea.” GOV/2021/40-GC(65)/22 , 
International Atomic Energy Agency . August 27. https:// 
www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/gc/gc65-22.pdf .
IAEA. 2022 . “Application of Safeguards in the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea.” GOV/2022/40-GC(66)/16 . 
International Atomic Energy Agency . September 7. https:// 
www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/gc/gc66-16.pdf .
IAEA. 2023a . “IAEA Director General Statement on Recent 
Developments in the DPRK’s Nuclear Programme.” 
International Atomic Energy Agency . December 21. 
https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/pressreleases/iaea- 
director-general-statement-on-recent-developments-in- 
the-dprks-nuclear-programme .
IAEA. 2023b . “IAEA Director General’s Introductory 
Statement to the Board of Governors.” International 
Atomic Energy Agency . November 22. https://www.iaea. 
org/newscenter/statements/iaea-director-generals- 
introductory-statement-to-the-board-of-governors-22- 
november-2023 .
International Panel on Fissile Materials. 2022 . “North Korea.” 
May 2. https://fissilematerials.org/countries/north_korea. 
html .
James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies. 2006 . 
“CNS Special Report on North Korean Ballistic Missile 
Capabilities.” Nautilus Institute , March 22. https://nauti 
lus.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/0623.pdf .
James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies. 2024 . “The 
CNS North Korea Missile Test Database.” Nuclear Threat 
Initiative . April 15. https://www.nti.org/analysis/articles/ 
cns-north-korea-missile-test-database/ .
Japanese Ministry of Defence. 2022a . “Related Information 
such as North Korean Missiles.” January 30. https://www. 
mod.go.jp/j/press/news/2022/01/30b.html .
Japanese Ministry of Defence. 2022b . “Related Information 
such as North Korean Missiles.” May 7. https://www.mod. 
go.jp/j/press/news/2022/05/07b.html .
Ji, D. 2023 . “N. Korea Simulates Nuclear Air Burst to Attack S. 
Korea.” The Korea Herald , March 20. https://www.koreaher 
ald.com/view.php?ud=20230320000600 .
Johnson, J. 2023 . “North Korea Unveils Apparent New ICBM 
in Nighttime Military Parade.” Japan Times , February 9. 
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2023/02/09/asia- 
pacific/north-korea-missile-parade/ .
Jones, G. S. 2016 . “The Implications of North Korea Testing 
a Boosted Nuclear Weapon.” Proliferation Matters , January 
11. https://nebula.wsimg.com/4da1b6db2152b55e 
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 267

fe7334a70fe78781?AccessKeyId= 
40C80D0B51471CD86975&disposition=0&alloworigin=1 .
Jones, G. S. 2017 . “North Korea’s Sixth Nuclear Test: Was it 
a Hydrogen Bomb?” Proliferation Matters , September 18. 
https://nebula.wsimg.com/871aa9ff0e83997ab 
b8e714bb3b0d2be?AccessKeyId= 
40C80D0B51471CD86975&disposition=0&alloworigin=1 .
Kang, B. 2022 . “Park Jin: ‘Only the Decision to Test the North 
Korean Nuclear Test Remains . . . in Case of Provocation, 
South Korea and the United States Will Cooperate and 
Take a Decisive Response’.” Yonhap News Agency , June 
13. https://www.yna.co.kr/view/AKR20220613000251071? 
input=1195m .
KCNA . 2013 . “Law on Consolidating Position of Nuclear 
Weapons State Adopted.” Korean Central News Agency . 
April 1. https://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/ 
news/dprk/2013/dprk-130401-kcna01.htm .
KCNA . 2016a . “Crucial Statement of KPA Supreme 
Command.” Korean Central News Agency , February 23. 
https://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/news/dprk/ 
2016/dprk-160223-kcna01.htm .
KCNA . 2016b . “Success in First H-Bomb Test.” Uriminzokkiri , 
Korean Central News Agency via KCNA Watch , January 7. 
https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1452096913-756239854/ 
success-in-first%C2%A0h-bomb-test/ .
KCNA . 2021 . “On Report Made by Supreme Leader Kim Jong 
Un at 8th Congress of WPK.” Korean Central News Agency 
via KCNA Watch , January 9. https://kcnawatch.org/news 
tream/1610155111-665078257/on-report-made-by- 
supreme-leader-kim-jong-un-at-8th-congress-of-wpk/ .
KCNA . 2022 . “Second-Day Sitting of Third Enlarged Meeting 
of Eighth Central Military Commission of WPK Held.” 
Korean Central News Agency via KCNA Watch . June 23. 
https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1655935577-763672286/ 
second-day-sitting-of-third-enlarged-meeting-of-eighth- 
central-military-commission-of-wpk-held/ .
KCNA . 2023a . “Clear Display of DPRK Strategic Forces’ 
Toughest Retaliation Will and Overwhelming Strength: 
Launch Drill of ICBM Hwasongpho-18 Conducted.” 
Korean Central News Agency , December 19. https://kcna. 
kp/en/article/q/feb7d621d7ebcf48ca25eabab12b35ec.kcmsf .
KCNA . 2023b . “Great Event Heralding Arrival of New Era, 
Turning Point in Bolstering Up Juche-Based Naval Force 
Ceremony of Launching Newly-Built Submarine Held with 
Splendor in Presence of Respected Comrade Kim Jong Un.” 
Korean Central News Agency via KCNA Watch , August 9. 
https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1694124676-336895087/ 
great-event-heralding-arrival-of-new-era-turning-point-in 
-bolstering-up-juche-based-naval-force-ceremony-of- 
launching-newly-built-submarine-held-with-splendor-in- 
presence-of-respected-comrade-kim-jon/ .
KCNA . 2023c . “Important Weapon Test and Firing Drill 
Conducted in DPRK.” Korean Central News Agency via 
KCNA Watch , March 24. https://kcnawatch.org/news 
tream/1679609724-943644822/important-weapon-test-and 
-firing-drill-conducted-in-dprk/ .
KCNA . 2023d . “Demonstration of Toughest Response Posture 
of DPRK’s Strategic Forces—ICBM Hwasongpho-17 
Launched.” Korean Central News Agency via KCNA 
Watch , April. https://kcnawatch.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
sites/5/2023/04/DPRKorea-2023-0401.pdf .
KCNA . 2024a . “DPRK Missile Administration Succeeds in 
Test-Fire of New-Type Intermediate-Range Hypersonic 
Missile.” Korean Central News Agency , April 3. https:// 
kcna.kp/en/article/q/afce7f7dbed19a4ea073506c749987c3. 
kcmsf .
KCNA . 2024b . “Report on Participation of 600 Mm 
Super-Large Multiple Rocket Sub-Units in First 
Combined Tactical Drill Simulating Nuclear 
Counterattack Respected Comrade Kim Jong Un Guides 
Combined Tactical Drill Simulating Nuclear 
Counterattack.” Korean Centrral News Agency via KCNA 
Watch , April 23. https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/ 
1713825123-339837935/report-on-participation-of-600- 
mm-super-large-multiple-rocket-sub-units-in-first- 
combined-tactical-drill-simulating-nuclear-counterattack- 
respected-comrade-kim-jong-un-guides-combined-tactical 
-drill-s/ .
KCNA . 2024c . “Missile Directorate Tests New Tactical 
Missile.” Korean Central News Agency via KCNA Watch , 
July 2. https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1719972206- 
551496092/direccion-general-de-misiles-prueba-el-nuevo- 
misil-balistico-tactico/ .
Kelley, R., and N. Hansen. 2016 . “Trick or Tritium: North 
Korea H-Bomb Claims Examined.” Jane’s Intelligence 
Review . August 9.
Kim, J. 2023 . “Kim Jong Un Tells North Korea Arms Factories 
to Boost Capacity.” Reuters , August 6. https://www.reuters. 
com/world/asia-pacific/north-korea-leader-kim-jong-un- 
gives-field-guidance-major-arms-factories-kcna-2023-08- 
05/ .
Kim, M. 2022 . “North Korea Codifies Right to Launch 
Preemptive Nuclear Strikes.” Washington Post , September 
9. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/09/09/ 
north-korea-nuclear-weapons-kim-jong-un/ .
Kristensen, H. M., and M. Korda. 2022 . “North Korean 
Nuclear Weapons, 2022.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
78 (5): 273–294. https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2022. 
2109341  .
Kütt, M., Z. Mian, and P. Podvig. 2022 . “Global Stocks and 
Production of Fissile Materials, 2021.” Stockholm 
International Peace Research Institute . July, 424–432. 
https://sipri.org/sites/default/files/YB22%2010%20World% 
20Nuclear%20Forces.pdf .
La Boon, D. 2020 . “@davidlaboon: ‘Using the Lawn As a Ref, 
~24m Width. That’ll Put the Diam at ~2.5m Confirming 
Your Suspicion‘.” Twitter , October 10. https://twitter.com/ 
DavidLaBoon/status/1314989032602968064 .
Lee, C., and Y. Park. 2021 . “[Exclusive] ‘Both Pre-and post- 
detection of North Korean Missiles Failed . . . Korea-US 
Intelligence Disaster’.” JoonAng , September 13. https:// 
www.joongang.co.kr/article/25006649#home .
Lewis, J. 2020 . “@armscontrolwonk: My Work, for Better or 
Worse.” Twitter. October 13. https://twitter.com/ 
ArmsControlWonk/status/1316071900552990720 .
Lewis, J. 2023 . “@armscontrolwonk: The North Koreans 
printed the placards in Korean and . . . English . . . for 
a visit from the Defense Minister from . . . Russia.*.” 
Twitter . July 29. https://twitter.com/ArmsControlWonk/ 
status/1685412130223276032 .
Lewis, J. 2024 . “@armscontrolwonk: This Would Imply that 
the ‘Intermediate-Range Solid-Fuel Ballistic Missile’ Tested 
on 15 January (below) is *Probably* the Hwasong-16A 
268
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

but . . ..” Twitter , April 2. https://twitter.com/ 
ArmsControlWonk/status/1775277446381850859 .
Lewis, J., J. Pollack, and D. Schmerler. 2021 . “North Korea 
Expanding Uranium Enrichment Plant at Yongbyon.” 
Arms Control Wonk , September 14. https://www.armscon 
trolwonk.com/archive/1213420/yongbyon-enrichment- 
plant/ .
Lewis, J., J. Pollack, and D. Schmerler. 2022 . “North Korea 
Resuming Construction at the Yongbyon 50 MW(e) 
Reactor.” Arms Control Wonk , May 10. https://www.arms 
controlwonk.com/files/2022/05/50-MWe-Reactor.pdf .
Lewis, J., and D. Schmerler. 2022 . “Changes at Punggye-ri.” 
Arms Control Wonk , March 7. https://www.armscontrol 
wonk.com/archive/1215261/changes-at-punggye-ri/ .
Liu, J., P. Makowsky, and I. Ragnone. 2024 . “Sinpho South 
Shipyard: Indications of New Submarine Construction.” 38 
North , May 8. https://www.38north.org/2024/05/sinpho- 
south-shipyard-indications-of-new-submarine- 
construction/ .
Makowsky, P. 2023 . “Pyongsan Uranium Mines: Mining 
Continues as Older Mines Are Renewed.” 38 North , 
March 7. https://www.38north.org/2023/03/pyongsan- 
uranium-mines-mining-continues-as-older-mines-are- 
renewed/ .
Makowsky, P., O. Heinonen, and J. Liu. 2022a . “North Korea’s 
Yongbyon Nuclear Research Center: Upgrades around the 
Complex.” 38 North , May 24. https://www.38north.org/ 
2022/05/north-koreas-yongbyon-nuclear-research-center- 
site-upgrades-around-the-complex/ .
Makowsky, P., O. Heinonen, and J. Liu. 2022b . “Punggye-ri 
Nuclear Test Site: Work Continues to Restore Tunnel No. 
3.” 38 North , April 28. https://www.38north.org/2022/04/ 
punggye-ri-nuclear-test-site-work-continues-to-restore- 
tunnel-no-3/ .
Makowsky, P., O. Heinonen, J. Liu, and J. Town. 2022 . “North 
Korea’s Yongbyon Nuclear Center: Plutonium Production 
Continues Despite Heavy Rains.” 38 North , July 12. https:// 
www.38north.org/2022/07/north-koreas-yongbyon- 
nuclear-center-plutonium-production-continues-despite- 
heavy-rains/ .
Makowsky, P., J. Liu, and O. Heinonen. 2023 . “Yongbyon 
Nuclear Scientific Research Center: Expansion Work 
Continues.” 38 North , April 28. https://www.38north.org/ 
2023/04/yongbyon-nuclear-scientific-research-center- 
expansion-work-continues/ .
Mansourov, A. 2014 . “Kim Jong Un’s Nuclear Doctrine and 
Strategy: What Everyone Needs to Know.” Nautilus 
Institute , NAPSnet Special Report, December 16. https:// 
nautilus.org/napsnet/napsnet-special-reports/kim-jong- 
uns-nuclear-doctrine-and-strategy-what-everyone-needs- 
to-know/ .
Mount, A., and J. Sup. 2022 . “North Korea’s Tactical Nuclear 
Threshold Is Frightening Low.” Foreign Policy , December 8. 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/12/08/north-korea-tactical 
-nuclear-threat/ .
Naenara. 2021 . “Academy of Defence Science Succeeds in 
Test-Launch of New-type SLBM.” October 20. https://kcna 
watch.org/newstream/1634724068-15952614/academy-of- 
defence-science-succeeds-in-test-launch-of-new-type-slbm/ .
Narang, V., and A. Panda. 2017 . “Command and Control in 
North Korea: What a Nuclear Launch Might Look Like.” 
War on the Rocks , September 15. https://warontherocks. 
com/2017/09/command-and-control-in-north-korea-what 
-a-nuclear-launch-might-look-like/ .
National Air and Space Intelligence Center. 2020 . “Ballistic 
and Cruise Missile Threat (Corrected Version).” July. 
https://media.defense.gov/2021/Jan/11/2002563190/-1/-1/ 
1/2020/20BALLISTIC/20AND/20CRUISE/20MISSILE// 
2020THREAT_FINAL_2OCT_REDUCEDFILE.PDF .
National Committee on North Korea. 2021 . “On Report Made 
by Supreme Leader Kim Jong Un at Eighth Party Congress 
of WPK.” January 9. https://www.ncnk.org/resources/pub 
lications/kju_8th_party_congress_speech_summary.pdf/ 
file_view .
NK News . 2020 . “North Korea Military Parade 2020— 
Livestream & Analysis.” YouTube . October 10. https:// 
www.nknews.org/2020/10/watch-free-livestream-of-north- 
koreas-military-parade-with-expert-commentary/ .
North Korean Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2021 . “Great 
Programme for Struggle Leading Korean-style Socialist 
Construction to Fresh Victory on Report Made by 
Supreme Leader Kim Jong Un at Eighth Congress of 
WPK.” January 9. https://web.archive.org/web/ 
20210207055150/http://www.mfa.gov.kp/en/on-report-at- 
eighth-congress-of-wpk/ .
Nouwens, V., T. Wright, E. Graham, and B. Herzinger. 2024 . 
“Long-range Strike Capabilities in the Asia-Pacific: 
Implications for Regional Stability.” The International 
Institute for Strategic Studies . January. https://www.iiss. 
org/globalassets/media-library—content–migration/files/ 
research-papers/2024/01/iiss_long-range-strike- 
capabilities-in-the-asia-pacific_implications-for-regional- 
stability_012024.pdf .
Pabian, F., J. Town, and J. Liu. 2021 . “North Korea’s 
Yongbyon Nuclear Complex: More Evidence the 5 MWe 
Reactor Appears to Have Restarted.” 38 North , August 30. 
https://www.38north.org/2021/08/north-koreas-yongbyon 
-nuclear-complex-more-evidence-the-5-mwe-reactor- 
appears-to-have-restarted/ .
Panda, A. 2017 . “Introducing the KN21, North Korea’s New 
Take on its Oldest Ballistic Missile.” The Diplomat , 
September 14. https://thediplomat.com/2017/09/introdu 
cing-the-kn21-north-koreas-new-take-on-its-oldest- 
ballistic-missile/ .
Panda, A. 2021 . “@nktpnd: Real good catch by @ColinZwirko: 
North Korea’s very large road-mobile ICBM seen at the end 
of the October 2020 is the *Hwasong-17*, NOT Hwasong- 
16 (KN28 to USIC).” Twitter , October 12. https://twitter. 
com/nktpnd/status/1448073861363290124 .
Panda, A. 2022a . “@nktpnd: The Hwasong-17 is the Largest 
Road-Mobile Liquid-Propellant Missile Ever Designed and 
Tested Anywhere, so the North Koreans set a Record of 
a Sort with this Successful Flight-Test.” Twitter , November 
18. https://twitter.com/nktpnd/status/ 
1593730477449351168 .
Panda, A. 2022b . “Two Unusual Missile Launches Hint at 
a New Security Crisis in North Korea.” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace , March 15. https://car 
negieendowment.org/2022/03/15/two-unusual-missile- 
launches-hint-at-new-security-crisis-in-north-korea-pub 
-86642 .
Panda, A. 2023a . “@nktpnd: North Korean State Media 
Confirms the Second-Ever Flight-Test of the Hwasong-18 
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 269

Solid-Fuel ICBM.” Twitter , July 12. https://twitter.com/ 
nktpnd/status/1679235784191234048 .
Panda, A. 2023b . “@nktpnd: Yeah. At least 10 Hwasong-17s.” 
Twitter , February 8. https://twitter.com/nktpnd/status/ 
1623512675576696833 .
Park, S., T. McNulty, A. Puccioni, and R. C. Ewing. 2021 . 
“Assessing Uranium Ore Processing Activities Using 
Satellite Imagery at Pyongsan in the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea.” Science and Global Security 29 (3): 
111–144. August 18. https://scienceandglobalsecurity.org/ 
archive/sgs29park.pdf .
Park, S., and A. Puccioni. 2024 . “North Korea’s Pursuit of an 
ELWR: Potential Power in Nuclear Ambitions?.” 38 North , 
January 24. https://www.38north.org/2024/01/north- 
koreas-pursuit-of-an-elwr-potential-power-in-nuclear- 
ambitions/ .
Pinkston, D. A. 2008 . “The North Korean Ballistic Missile 
Program.” Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War 
College . February 52. https://web.archive.org/web/ 
20170502065845/http://ssi.armywarcollege.edu/pdffiles/ 
pub842.pdf .
Rodong Sinmun. 2021 . “Great Programme for Struggle 
Leading Korean-style Socialist Construction to Fresh 
Victory on Report Made by Supreme Leader Kim Jong 
Un at Eighth Congress of WPK.” January 10. https://kcna 
watch.org/newstream/1610261416-871234007/great- 
programme-for-struggle-leading-korean-style-socialist- 
construction-to-fresh-victory-on-report-made-by- 
supreme-leader-kim-jong-un-at-eighth-congress-of-wpk/ .
Rodong Sinmun. 2023 . “Respected Comrade Kim Jong-un’s 
Congratulatory Speech at the Launching Ceremony of the 
Newly Built Submarine.” September 9. https://kcnawatch- 
org.translate.goog/newstream/1694119829-235087314/%ea 
%b2%bd%ec%95%a0%ed%95%98%eb%8a%94-%ea%b9% 
80%ec%a0%95%ec%9d%80-%eb%8f%99%ec%a7%80%ea% 
bb%98%ec%84%9c-%ec%83%88%eb%a1%9c-%ea%b1% 
b4%ec%a1%b0%ed%95%9c-%ec%9e%a0%ec%88%98%ed 
%95%a8-%ec%a7%84%ec%88%98/ .
Rodong Sinmun. 2024 . “Respected Comrade Kim Jong Un 
Guides Test-Fire of Submarine-Launched Cruise Missile.” 
January 29. https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1706502717- 
678442344/respected-comrade-kim-jong-un-guides-test- 
fire-of-submarine-launched-strategic-cruise-missile/ .
Schiller, M. 2012 . “Characterizing the North Korean Missile 
Threat.” Rand Corporation , 65. https://www.rand.org/ 
pubs/technical_reports/TR1268.html .
Schilling, J. 2016 . “A Solid but Incremental Improvement in 
North Korea’s Missiles.” 38 North , March 29. https://www. 
38north.org/2016/03/jschilling032916 .
Soo-Yeon, K. 2023 . “(LEAD) N. Korea Stipulates Nuclear 
Force-Building Policy in Constitution.” Yonhap News 
Agency , September 28. https://m-en.yna.co.kr/view/ 
AEN20230928000551315 .
Talmadge, E. 2018 . “N. Korea Demolishes Nuclear Test Site as 
Journalists Watch.” Associated Press , May 24. https:// 
apnews.com/article/journalists-donald-trump-ap-top- 
news-north-korea-international-news- 
b3d007a341db451abc74d45279f0d5c7 .
United Nations. 2021a . “Report by the Panel of Experts 
Established Pursuant to Resolution 1874 (2009).” S/2021/ 
211 , March 2. https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3906140? 
ln=en .
United Nations. 2021b . “Report by the Panel of Experts 
Established Pursuant to Resolution 1874 (2009).” S/2021/ 
777 , September 8. https://www.securitycouncilreport.org/ 
atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D27-4E9C-8CD3-CF6E4FF96FF9 
%7D/S_2021_777_E.pdf .
United Nations. 2022 . “Report by the Panel of Experts 
Established Pursuant to Resolution 1874 (2009).” S/2022/ 
132 , March 1. https://documentsddsny.un.org/doc/ 
UNDOC/GEN/N22/252/09/PDF/N2225209.pdf? 
OpenElement .
United Nations. 2023 . “Report by the Panel of Experts 
Established Pursuant to Resolution 1874 (2009).” S/2023/ 
656 , September 12. https://www.securitycouncilreport.org/ 
atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D27-4E9C-8CD3-CF6E4FF96FF9 
%7D/N2323869.pdf .
United Nations. 2024 . “Report by the Panel of Experts 
Established Pursuant to Resolution 1874 (2009).” S/2024/ 
215 , March 7. https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/ 
n24/032/68/pdf/n2403268.pdf?token= 
l7egbsUPhxLQpF4Fau&fe=true .
Van Diepen, V. H. 2024 . “North Korea Emphasizes Theater 
Strike Missiles in the First Third of 2024.” 38 North , May 1. 
https://www.38north.org/2024/05/north-korea-emphasizes 
-theater-strike-missiles-in-the-first-third-of-2024/ .
Voice of Korea . 2021a . “New-type Tactical Guided Missiles 
test-fired.” March 26. https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/ 
1616706026-838802969/new-type-tactical-guided-missiles- 
test-fired/ .
Voice of Korea . 2021b . “Secretary Pak Jong Chon Guides 
Launching Drill of Railway Mobile Missile Regiment for 
Inspection.” September 16. https://kcnawatch.org/news 
tream/1631739672-562011738/secretary-pak-jong-chon- 
guides-launching-drill-of-railway-mobile-missile-regiment 
-for-inspection/ .
Voice of Korea . 2024 . “General Missile Bureau of DPRK 
Conducts Test of Power of Super-Large Warhead of 
Cruise Missile and Test-Fires New-Type Anti-Aircraft 
Missile.” April 20. https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/ 
1713582262-57625788/general-missile-bureau-of-dprk- 
conducts-test-of-power-of-super-large-warhead-of-cruise- 
missile-and-test-fires-new-type-anti-aircraft-missile/ .
Warrick, J., and S. Mekhennet. 2018 . “Summit Collapse Foils 
Chance to Press North Korea on Suspicious Sites.” The 
Washington Post , May 25. https://www.washingtonpost. 
com/world/national-security/summit-collapse-foils- 
chance-to-press-north-korea-on-suspicious-sites/2018/05/ 
25/d5a14044-602d-11e8-9ee3-49d6d4814c4c_story.html .
Wright, D. 2017a . “North Korean ICBM Appears Able to 
Reach Major US Cities.” Union of Concerned Scientists, 
All Things Nuclear Blog . July 28. http://allthingsnuclear. 
org/dwright/new-north-korean-icbm .
Wright, D. 2017b . “North Korea’s February 12 Missile 
Launch.” Union of Concerned Scientists, All Things 
Nuclear Blog . February 12. http://allthingsnuclear.org/ 
dwright/north-koreas-february-missile-launch .
Wright, D. 2017c . “North Korea’s Longest Missile Test Yet.” 
Union of Concerned Scientists, All Things Nuclear Blog . 
November 28. http://allthingsnuclear.org/dwright/nk- 
longest-missile-test-yet .
Wright, D. 2017d . “North Korea’s May 21 Missile Launch.” 
Union of Concerned Scientists, All Things Nuclear Blog . May 
270
 H. M. KRISTENSEN ET AL.

21. http://allthingsnuclear.org/dwright/north-koreas-may 
-21-missile-launch .
Wright, D. 2017e . “North Korea’s Missile in New Test Would 
Have 4,500 Km Range.” Union of Concerned Scientists, All 
Things Nuclear Blog . May 13. http://allthingsnuclear.org/ 
dwright/north-koreas-missile-in-new-test-would-have 
-4500-km-range .
Wright, D. 2017h . “Reentry of North Korea’s Hwasong-15 
ICBM.” Union of Concerned Scientists, All Things Nuclear 
Blog . December 7. https://allthingsnuclear.org/dwright/ 
reentry-of-hwasong-15/ .
Xu, T. 2021 . “Brief on the Defence Development Exhibition of 
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.” Open Nuclear 
Network , October 18. https://oneearthfuture.org/file/2622/ 
download?token=OSeaZusF .
Xu, T. 2024 . “HGV Unproven at IRBM Ranges: Analysis of 
the April 2 Hwasong-16Na Hypersonic Missile Test.” 38 
North , April 12. https://www.38north.org/2024/04/hgv- 
unproven-at-irbm-ranges-analysis-of-the-april-2-hwa 
song-16na-hypersonic-missile-test/ .
Yang, S., M. Lee, D. Ko, G. Heo, C. Kang, and S. Woo. 2024 . 
“Estimating North Korea’s nuclear capabilities: Insights 
from a study on tritium production in a 5MWe graphite- 
moderated reactor.” Nuclear Engineering and Technology .  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2024.02.026  .
Ye Hee Lee, M. 2022 . “North Korea’s Latest Missile Test May 
Not have been What it Claimed.” Washington Post , March 
29. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/03/28/ 
north-korea-missile-hwasong/ .
Yonhap News Agency. 2022 . “N. Korea Fires 8 short-range 
Ballistic Missiles toward East Sea: S. Korean Military.” June 
5. https://en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20220305000454325? 
input=tw .
Yonhap News Agency. 2023 . “N. Korea warns U.S. strategic 
assets will be ‘1st targets of destruction’.” October 20. 
https://m-en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20231020002100315 .
Zwirko, C. 2022 . “Imagery Casts Doubt over North Korea’s 
Hwasong-17 ICBM Claims.” NK News , March 25. https:// 
www.nknews.org/pro/imagery-casts-doubt-over-north- 
koreas-hwasong-17-icbm-claims/ .
Zwirko, C. 2023a . “@ColinZwirko: Looks Like a Warhead 
Called “Hwasan-31” Being Fitted into the 600mm MLRS 
(KN-25) . . ..” Twitter , March 27. https://x.com/ 
ColinZwirko/status/1640512547223912448 .
Zwirko, C. 2023b . “North Korea Says it Tested ‘Hwasong-18’ 
Solid-Fuel ICBM for First Time.” NK News , April 14. 
https://www.nknews.org/2023/04/north-korea-says-it- 
tested-hwasong-18-solid-fuel-icbm-for-first-time/ .
Zwirko, C. 2024 . “Kim Jong Un Leads Salvo Missile 
Launch in First Test of ‘Nuclear Trigger’ System.” NK 
News , April 23. https://www.nknews.org/2024/04/kim- 
jong-un-leads-first-nuclear-trigger-system-test-with- 
salvo-missile-launch/ .
BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS
 271