Europe & Russia - US Army War College - Publications

A Long, Hard Year: Russia-Ukraine War Lessons Learned 2023
John A. Nagl, Project Director, and Michael T. Hackett, Chief of Staff; Integrated Research Project from the US Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute, School of Strategic Landpower, US Army War College Press; Following the 2024 A Call to Action: Lessons from Ukraine for the Future Force, which explored military lessons learned from the first year of the Russia-Ukraine War, this book examines the changing character of war as the second year of the war unfolded. This year's authors explore the conflict from four different angles: information advantage (intelligence, information operations, and cyber); landpower operations (fires, maneuver, force protection, mission command, and mercenaries); multi-domain operations (air and maritime); and crosscutting themes (diplomacy, sustainment, and innovation and adaptation). The second year witnessed the innovative approaches to combat of the first year—drones, unmanned aerial systems, and electronic-warfare offensive and defensive capabilities—combined with entrenched warfare not seen at the current scale in Europe since World War I. The use of mercenary private military companies like the Wagner Group generated moments of high suspense (with a failed mutiny in July 2023) and led to changes in Russian force structure and tactics. Delays in continued allied support tested the resolve and operational capabilities of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, which nevertheless kept up the fight and held Russia back. Published: 1/12/2026

Weaponizing Environmental Insecurity in Mongolia: A Strategic Framework for US Civil Affairs Engagements to Counterbalance China and Russia
By Colonel Larry A. Wyatt, Dr. Michele Devlin, Dr. José de Arimatéia da Cruz. Weather-induced instability creates schisms adversaries use to expand their soft power. Published: 9/17/2025

Weaponizing Risk: Recalibrating Western Deterrence
Antulio J. Echevarria II; Monograph from the US Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute. This monograph discusses how NATO might better leverage risk to strengthen the alliance's extended deterrence. Published: 7/22/2025

Assessing the Zeitenwende: Implications for Germany, the United States, and Transatlantic Security
John R. Deni and Jeffrey D. Rathke, Editors. The essays in this volume analyze Germany's Zeitenwende, a pivotal shift in security policy triggered by Russia's reinvasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Published: 2/27/2025

Toward a More Effective DoD Contribution to Strategic Competition in the Western Hemisphere
R. Evan Ellis. Published: 2/21/2025

Pretexts for War and the Preinvasion Crisis in Ukraine
Ron Gurantz. The US strategy in the run-up to the invasion of Ukraine appeared to undermine Russian efforts to justify the war. Published: 12/5/2024

China's Strategic Blueprint: Creating a Multipolar World Through 2035
COL Mike Flury, COL Andi Tallman, LTC Troy Johnson, LTC Nick Panepinto, LTC Patrick Ryan. Published: 5/1/2024

The Future Role of Strategic Landpower
Dr. Gregory L. Cantwell, Major Justin M. Magula. Published: 8/29/2023

Coercing Fluently: The Grammar of Coercion in the Twenty-first Century
Dr C. A. Pfaff. Published: 8/3/2022

[Page 1 of 27 - listing continues at source URL]

Source URL: https://publications.armywarcollege.edu/Regional-Issues/Europe-Russia/
