JALLC-UKR Initiative :: JALLC - NATO

The JALLC-UKR Initiative

On 24 February 2022, Russia illegally invaded Ukraine. The JALLC has been contributing to NATO's efforts to support the Ukrainian armed forces, through the JALLC's various activities and products. This included analysis reports, support to development of a national Lessons Learned capability, and Lessons Learned training.  In 2024, it was decided to dedicate JALLC resources to NATO's support to Ukraine by setting up the JALLC-UKR Initiative, intended to be the single point of reference for NATO’s Lessons Learned Information relating to Russia’s war against Ukraine. It is staffed by a dedicated team of JALLC analysts, forming the 
JALLC Ukraine-Russia Lessons Analysis Team
, or JURLAT for short.

The JALLC-UKR Initiative's activities include:

developing 
analysis products
 that help NATO understand the lessons it can learn from Russia’s war against Ukraine,

hosting the 
JALLC-UKR Initiative Information Centre
 on the NATO Lessons Learned Portal (classified system). This information centre allows users to collect and collate relevant Lessons Learned related information on Russia's war against Ukraine, ranging from NATO-produced documents to publicly available reports that provide a wealth of information for users. 

Newsletters
, updating the community on the latest Lessons Learned news regarding NATO's efforts to learn from Russia's war against Ukraine, including useful links and insights on related key issues.

You can read more about these activities on this page.

You can engage with the JALLC-UKR Initiative at 
[email protected]
 on the NATO unclassified and classified systems, or via the JALLC-UKR Information Centre on the classified version of the NLLP.

Watch our short video on the JALLC's report on Operational and Tactical level Observations from Russia's war against Ukraine 

JALLC ANALYSIS REPORTS ON RUSSIA'S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE

The JALLC has produced a body of analysis work in support of NATO's Learning from Russia's war against Ukraine. Below are some of our key reports on specific related topics as well as other interesting related products.

Lessons from the Establishment of NATO Security Assistance and Training for Ukraine (NSATU)

27-02-2026

NATO Security Assistance and Training for Ukraine (NSATU) is a specialized NATO command established in 2024 to coordinate the long-term, predictable, and coherent delivery of security aid and training to Ukraine. Headquartered in Wiesbaden, Germany, it streamlines international support for Ukrainian forces without making NATO a direct party to the conflict. This JALLC study, requested by SHAPE, examines the lessons learned from the establishment of NSATU, with a particular focus on what this experience reveals about NATO’s ability to establish International Military Headquarters (IMHQ) under time-critical and politically sensitive conditions. Rather than assessing operational outcomes, the study focuses on how NSATU was planned, resourced, governed, and implemented—and what should change for NATO to treat IMHQ establishment as a distinct, repeatable capability.

In this factsheet you can read more about the background of the project as well as key findings .

CLICK TO DOWNLOAD A COPY OF THE LESSONS FROM THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NSATU FACTSHEET

Operational and Tactical Level Observations from Russia's war against Ukraine

17-12-2025

Part of the NATO Joint Force Training Centre’s (JFTC) mission is to provide and improve training for NATO forces. Such training should incorporate current experiences and Lessons Learned (LL) from ongoing conflicts and operations. From 2022-2024 the JALLC delivered annual reports to the JFTC presenting operational- and tactical-level observations from Russia’s war against Ukraine. This 2025 edition of the report focuses on what has changed in the war. Topics inculde Manoeuvre, Fires, Command and Control (C2), Intelligence, Information, Logistics and Sustainment, Force Protection, and Civilian-Military Cooperation (CIMIC), as well as topics added at the request of the JFTC covering Uncrewed Systems, Contested Logistics, Evolving Tactics, Special Operations, Multi-Domain Operations (MDO), Emerging and Disruptive Technologies (EDT), and Civilian Security. This broad range of topics made the 2025 edition of the report one of the most comprehensive reviews the JALLC has conducted of available documents, observations, and lessons from Russia's war against Ukraine.

In this factsheet you can read more about the background of the project as well as main findings and some of the key recommendations.

CLICK TO DOWNLOAD A COPY OF THE OPERATIONAL AND TACTICAL LEVEL OBSERVATIONS FROM RUSSIA'S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE FACTSHEET

Observations from Russia's war against Ukraine

12-12-2023

Russia’s war against Ukraine has been closelly observed by every military across the globe, studying to learn lessons that will impact on military plans and technologies for future conflicts. The war also provides an opportunity to incorporate lessons learned into NATO training and exercises. As such, the Joint Force Training Centre (JFTC) requested the JALLC’s assistance to provide observations from the war that could help develop operational dilemmas for the LOYAL LEDA series of exercises that are delivered by the JFTC. In response, the JALLC produced three reports in 2023. The first reported on Ukraine-related entries submitted to the NATO Lessons Learned Portal (NLLP). The second presented the analysis of relevant open-source publications. The final report presented overarching observations from a range of sources including from NATO Nations, NATO HQs, and again, from open-source material.

In this factsheet you can read about the background of the project, as well as get a sense of the key takeaways from the JALLC's body of work in this area.

READ MORE ON THE OBSERVATIONS FROM THE RUSSIA'S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE FACTSHEET

JALLC-UKR Initiative Newsletter

The JALLC-UKR Initiative also publishes a quarterly newsletter. This newsletter aims to provide readers with a comprehensive overview of the latest relevant insights and initiatives related to Lessons Learned from Russia’s war against Ukraine. You can download a copy of the latest edition 
HERE
 which contains the latest from the JALLC-UKR Initiative including the top three must-read reports, what the deputy minister of defence of Ukraine had to say at the NATO Lessons Learned Conference, and what the impact for the Washington Summit will be for Lessons Learned and the Lessons from Russia’s war against Ukraine.

JALLC-UKR Initiative Information Centre

As part of the JALLC-UKR Initiative, the JALLC set up the JALLC-UKR Initiative Information Centre.  Initially only available on the classified version of the NATO Lessons Learned Portal (NLLP), you can now access a limited version of this information centre on the publicly accessible, unclassified version of the NLLP.

The unclassified JALLC-UKR Initiative Information Centre hosts a library of open source reports and related information relevant to NATO’s learning lessons from Russia’s war against Ukraine, providing a one-stop-shop for those looking for useful research material on the topic.

The classified JALLC-UKR Initiative Information Centre allows users to upload and download a more extensive array of related information, contact members of the community of interest, and find relevant events in a dedicated calendar.

You can access the JALLC-UKR Initiative Information Centre through your classified/unclassified NLLP account. Note that classified users will be required register for the JALLC-UKR Initiative community of interest to gain full access.

If you don’t yet have an unclassified NLLP account, click 
HERE
 to go to the NLLP homepage to find out how you can request one.

You can find out more about Allied Command Transformation from this 
informative brochure
 on what the Command does and how it does it.