DENYS YURCHENKO 


All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any 
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
The views expressed in this report are those of the author alone and do not necessarily reflect the position of 
the Foreign Policy Research Institute, a non-partisan organization that seeks to publish well-argued, policy-
oriented articles on American foreign policy and national security priorities.
© 2024 by the Foreign Policy Research Institute
 
July 2024

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CUL TURE 
AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
EURASIA PROGRAM
DENYS YURCHENKO

About the Author
Lieutenant Colonel Denys Yurchenko has a Master of Laws and Master of Military 
Leadership and Security. He serves as a military cooperation officer and specializes 
on NATO - Ukraine cooperation.  He is an honour graduate with Academic Writing 
Award of the Baltic Defence College (Joint Command and General Staff Course) 
and National Defence Academy of Latvia.
Eurasia Program 
The Eurasia Program at the Foreign Policy Research Institute was founded in 
2015 with the aim of examining the political, security, economic, and social trends 
shaping Europe and Eurasia. Our research agenda covers the increasingly tense 
competition roiling the region from several angles. It has a multi-year focus on 
the Baltic Sea, the Black Sea, and Central Asia, emphasizing how geography, 
economics, ideology, and history continue to shape politics and security in these 
regions. The program also publishes analyses of Russian foreign policy, including 
Russia’s role in Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. The Russia Political 
Economy Project, along with the Bear Market Brief, analyzes the linkages between 
Russia’s economy, society, and its political system. The Eurasia Program’s thematic 
initiatives also include the Democracy at Risk rubric, which examines the trends of 
democratization and authoritarian pushback in the region.

Table of Contents 
2 Introduction 
4 What Is Strategic Culture Theory? 
6 Understanding Russian National Identity 
9 Understanding Russian Threat Perceptions 
13 Understanding the Russian Attitude Towards 
Using Force 
16 Why Ukraine? 
20 Conclusions and Recommendations 

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
2
Introduction
The Russian invasion of Ukraine on February 
24, 2022, shocked the world. Currently, 
the Russian-Ukrainian war is the biggest 
European war since the end of World War 
II.1 The full-scale invasion was a continuation 
of unlawful actions in 2014 when Russia 
seized and temporarily occupied Crimea. 
Russia’s actions sparked heated debates 
between realists and liberals while every 
school of international relations tried to 
explain why Russia used force to change 
the internationally recognized borders of 
its neighbor—Ukraine. In September 2014, 
Professor John Mearsheimer published the 
article Why the Ukraine Crisis Is the West’s 
Fault.2 His work tried to explain the causes 
of conflict from an offensive realism point of 
view. 
Mearsheimer defined the core idea of 
offensive realism in The Tragedy of Great 
Power Politics.3 It is as follows: States—
especially great powers—are always thinking 
about how to survive because there is no 
supranational institution to protect them. 
In other words, there is nothing to prevent 
predatory behavior at the international level. 
This anarchic system creates conditions for 
states to seek more power.4 The best way for 
a state to survive is to become a hegemon. 
Although global hegemony is the goal, there 
are powerful forces mitigating any state from 
achieving it, so most great powers strive 
for regional hegemony. Through this lens, 
Russia’s seizure of Crimea and support for 
separatists in Eastern Ukraine was part of its 
attempt at regional hegemony. 
The United States of America is also a 
hegemon and its interest lies in maximizing its 
power, including through the use of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). However, 
Mearsheimer denied such options and 
argued the opposite—that NATO threatened 
Russian spheres of influence and that the 
United States should not provoke Russia in 
Europe. US politicians seem to have followed 
Mearsheimer’s advice—NATO has not 
expanded to the east since the enlargement 
of 2004. In an interview conducted shortly 
before Russia’s 2022 invasion of Ukraine, 
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg 
stated, “We have no plans to deploy NATO 
combat troops to Ukraine . . . we are focusing 
on providing support,” and “there is a 
difference between being a NATO member 
and being a strong and highly valued partner 
as Ukraine.”5 NATO signaled that member 
states did not want to escalate confrontation 
with Russia, but Russia still decided to attack 
Ukraine. Mearsheimer’s realist arguments fail 
to explain Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. This is 
especially true given the Kremlin’s relatively 
sanguine attitude toward NATO membership 
of Finland and Sweden. If, as Mearsheimer 
argues, it really is all about geography and 
territory, the accession of the two new Nordic 
members would represent a grave threat to 
Russia.
In contrast to realism, which understands 
the war between states as a regrettable but 
inevitable feature of international politics, 
liberalism believes conflict is not inevitable. 
Institutional liberalism is a specific form of 
liberalism that emphasizes the importance 
of international and domestic institutions 
and norms in promoting cooperation and 
peace between states. Institutional liberals 
define war as a failure of international 
institutions and norms. They believe wars 
can be prevented by strengthening these 
institutions and promoting international 
cooperation. From this point of view, the 
Russian-Ukrainian war started because the 
United Nations, NATO, and the European 
Union failed to deter Russia. Disputes are 
common in the international order, but most 
do not result in war. Western politicians have 
tried to create a democratic bubble from 
Lisbon to Vladivostok and integrate Russia by 
economic means as much as possible.6 
The core ideas of the realist and liberalist 
sub-theories cannot fully explain the causes 
of the Russian-Ukrainian war, as they do not 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
3
analyze domestic policies. When Western 
scholars try to explain the causes of the war 
in Ukraine, they make the same mistake. 
They analyze Russia using a Western 
approach without giving attention to Russia’s 
unique features. For example, Russian 
leaders believe that negotiations are only 
useful when Russia is weak. Conversely, 
when Russia is strong, it will not waste time 
negotiating with the West. In comparison, 
Western policymakers prefer negotiations to 
find consensus and resolve issues.7 To avoid 
the pitfalls of much of international relations 
theory when applied to Russia, this paper 
uses another approach—strategic culture 
theory. This is a cross-cutting theory that 
draws from both realism and liberalism, as 
well as other theories such as constructivism 
and postcolonialism. According to strategic 
culture theorists, a state’s approach to 
war is shaped by its cultural and historical 
experiences, including geography, religion, 
language, and national identity. These factors 
influence a state’s perception of security 
threats, willingness to use military force, and 
approach to diplomacy and negotiation. It is 
more suitable in this case and can help with 
understanding why the full-scale Russian-
Ukrainian war began in 2022. 
This report is crucial because it provides 
a different explanation for why Russia 
attacked Ukraine in 2022. American scholars 
developed strategic culture as a theoretical 
concept to understand possible behavior in 
using nuclear power by the Soviet Union’s 
leaders. Russia is a successor of the former 
USSR and promotes similar narratives about 
spheres of influence and threats from the 
Western world. The strategic culture theory 
can explain Russian leaders’ beliefs and how 
they understand reality. Russia is the world’s 
biggest country with the most significant 
nuclear arsenal. Nevertheless, Ukrainians 
were able to destroy thousands of military 
vehicles and equipment during the first 
phases of the war and continue to do so. 
However, even after total defeat, Russia can 
recover its military capabilities and try again 
to invade Ukraine, as it has done many times 
Soldiers hold up flares to indicate a landing zone during a joint exercise between the United States and Russia after the end of the 
Cold War. (NATO)

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
4
in the past. If Russia succeeds, it would use 
Ukrainian resources to become stronger and 
could attack one of NATO’s members. So, 
understanding Russian strategic culture can 
help establish new policies and strategies to 
defeat Russia and prevent future conflicts. 
I divide my paper into four parts. The first 
is an introduction, in which I elaborate on 
the importance of the topic and explain 
why strategic culture theory will be used 
instead of more famous sub-theories such as 
offensive realism and institutional liberalism. 
Then I briefly introduce strategic culture 
theory. In the third part, I analyze Russian 
strategic culture. In the end, I sum up and 
provide recommendations. 
What is the Strategic 
Culture Theory? 
Strategic culture theory continues to be 
popular among academic researchers 
after emerging in the 1980s. It argues that 
states make decisions and act in different 
ways because they have different strategic 
preferences that evolved since their creation. 
States and elites have unique political and 
cultural characteristics which influence them. 
On the other hand, ahistorical or objective 
variables such as technology or relative 
material capabilities do not play an important 
role in decision-making and are recognized 
by strategic culture. Different historical 
experiences limit response to changes and 
influence strategic decisions in unique ways.8 
For researchers of this concept, it is important 
to identify and understand the country’s 
rationality of behavior from its perspective. 
Strategic culture theory consists of two 
concepts—strategy and culture. Scholars 
have analyzed them separately for a long 
time. This historical baggage causes 
different interpretations and complicates 
the understanding of the common product: 
strategic culture. Culture, as a term, was 
defined by Ciovanni Andres as coltura in 
1781 to express “the conditions of human 
attainment preserved in writing.”9 Culture, as 
a concept, emerged first in psychology and 
then in sociology, but it was not initially used 
in the domain of politics.10 Centuries before 
the concept of culture emerged in academic 
writing, Sun Tzu and Thucydides wrote that 
some elements which we would call culture 
could impact the strategic decisions of states.
While culture is more about social life, 
the term strategy relates to the military 
sphere. The word originated from the 
ancient Greek term for generalship. It was 
connected for a long time to military forces 
and war. For example, military theorists 
Carl von Clausewitz and Sir Basil Henry 
Liddell Hart defined strategy as “the use 
of engagements for the object of war” and 
“the art of distributing and applying military 
means to fulfill the ends of policy.” A broader 
definition explains strategy as, “coordination 
and direction of all the resources of a nation, 
a band of nations, toward the attainment 
of the political objectives’ sought.” This 
concept is known as the grand strategy.11 
These two different approaches commenced 
academic debates on how to define strategy: 
only through the use of force or through a 
comprehensive approach. 
Nowadays, this issue is even more important 
when there are no strict boundaries between 
war and peace, for example, in the area 
of hybrid threats. NATO’s comprehensive 
approach enumerates four equally 
important instruments of power: diplomatic, 
informational, military, and economic. Using 
this framework, we can say that strategy is 
the bridge that links military capabilities and 
political end states. After understanding the 
complexity of defining culture and strategy, 
we will assume that culture guides the 
strategy. 
The “father” of strategic culture theory is 
Jack Snyder. In 1977, he used this theory to 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
5
explain the difference between the United 
States and the Soviet Union in their use 
of nuclear weapons. At that time, scholars 
described them as rational actors who would 
react to each other’s decisions using nuclear 
weapons in a calculated way. Snyder’s main 
novelty was that American and Soviet elites 
had different perceptions and ideas about 
using force because of specific strategic 
cultures. The Soviet military authority would 
use force in a preemptive, offensive manner, 
and the provenances for this could be found 
in Russian history.12
To analyze Russian strategic culture, it is 
necessary to develop three key areas using 
academic papers, strategic documents, and 
security agreements:
1. Understanding national Russian identity, 
2. Understanding Russian perception of 
where the threat is coming from, 
3. Understanding the attitude of Russia 
toward using force. 
To do this, I will analyze the following 
academic papers and Russian strategic 
documents: the annual Presidential 
Addresses to the Federal Assembly, National 
Security Strategy, Military Doctrine, the 
Concept of the Foreign Policy of the Russian 
Federation 2016 and 2023, and speeches 
of Putin and his articles. Annual speeches of 
Putin to the Federal Assembly are summaries 
of the main achievements and guidance for 
next years. 
The Soviet Ambassador Nikolay Afanassievky announcing that the Soviet Union had dissolved that he now only represented the 
Russian Federation during the the first meeting of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) in 1991. (NATO)

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
6
Two other interesting documents that should 
be analyzed are security agreements that 
Russia proposed to sign with NATO and 
the US, after publishing them on the official 
website of the Russian Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs in December 2021. 
Understanding National 
Russian Identity
There are many articles about Russian 
strategic culture. Many of them appeared 
in 2014 when Russia temporarily occupied 
Crimea and launched the war in Eastern 
Ukraine. However, since the beginning of the 
Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, only 
a few papers have used Russian strategic 
culture to explain the commencement of the 
war. The most comprehensive work is Why 
Russia Attacked Ukraine: Strategic Culture 
and Radicalized Narratives. This article 
identifies two main pillars of Russian strategic 
culture. The first is a feeling of vulnerability, 
particularly concerning interactions with 
“Western countries.” To deal with this issue, 
Russian leaders highlight the importance 
of having strategic depth and buffer zones. 
The second part is Russia’s strong belief 
in the right to be a “great power.” The key 
element here is the right to have a sphere 
of “privileged interests” in the Eurasian 
neighborhood.13 Other scholars, Ivor 
Wiltenburg for example, identify an additional 
element: liberal usage of the armed forces for 
achieving foreign policy objectives. Such an 
approach significantly differs from the West, 
which mostly relies on international security 
and economic organizations.14 
Putin repeats in his speeches that Russia is 
a great power and that the West, especially 
the United States, does not give Russia 
the respect it deserves. In this view, after 
the Cold War, the United States created a 
unipolar world and continued to use NATO to 
maintain its hegemonic status. For centuries, 
leaders of the Russian Empire and the Soviet 
Union emphasized Russia as a great power. 
From Russia’s perspective, the status of great 
power is interlinked with spheres of influence. 
However, after the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, Russian leaders were confronted 
with the fact that Russia was no more than a 
regional “great power” with limited spheres of 
influence. So, the main aim of Russian foreign 
policy is regaining and maintaining great 
power status by reestablishing its former 
spheres of influence.15 Moscow believes 
that Russia is a global state with interests 
everywhere and has a right to be involved in 
all major international issues.16
The main aim of Russian 
foreign policy is regaining 
and maintaining great power 
status by reestablishing its 
former spheres of influence.
Russia’s geographic position has a great 
impact on its strategic culture. Russia is the 
biggest country in the world, and while only 
23 percent of the country is in Europe, almost 
75 percent of the population lives there. This 
makes Europe extremely important for Russia. 
Eugene Rumer and Richard Sokolsky share 
this idea in their comprehensive work about 
Russian strategic culture. They highlight that, 
from the founding of the modern Russian 
state in the sixteenth century, its foreign 
interests were linked to Europe. When 
Peter the Great established an empire, the 
interconnections with Europe increased. 
Russia conducted wars and created alliances 
with different European countries. During the 
Cold War, Europe became the main place for 
confrontation between West and East. So, 
after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia 
wanted to regain its spheres of influence in 
Europe.17 Russian leaders wanted to use the 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
7
to reestablish control over Ukraine and other 
post-Soviet states. 
Despite Europe playing a significant role 
in Russian history, the Kremlin has found 
cooperation with the rest of the continent 
difficult because of the differences in religion, 
culture, brutality, and way of life. Russian 
nobles pretended to be part of the West, 
but they could not eliminate the past. So, 
Russia had difficulty establishing its place in 
the circles of European great powers. The 
main “misunderstanding” appeared in the 
19th century: even though Russia played a 
significant role in destroying Napoleon, it 
was not recognized or seen as the same 
by other powerful states. When Austria, 
France, Prussia, and Great Britain started 
the process of democratization, Russia was 
a gendarme of Europe. Its main aim was to 
destroy internal and external revolutionary 
movements. Despite other monarchies being 
ready to receive this help, as did Austria, 
they continued to believe that Russia was 
too powerful and dangerous. As a result, the 
British-led coalition with France, the Ottoman 
Empire, and Sardinia-Piedmont launched 
the Crimean War with the main aim of not 
allowing Russia to receive more territories 
from the weakening Ottoman Empire. 
These actions of Western countries caused 
the so-called Russophilia movement inside 
Russia. Supporters of these ideas blamed the 
West for double standards and Russophobia. 
Putin has revived these narratives and 
continues to use them. In this view, the West 
has aggressive intentions toward Russia.18 
Russia depends on other great countries’ 
recognition of its great power status and 
often feels it does not receive the recognition 
it deserves. 
Russia’s strategic documents make clear its 
fixation on great power status. For example, 
Article 3 of the Foreign Policy Concept of 
the Russian Federation 2016 (Foreign Policy 
Concept 2016)19 states that one of the main 
objectives is “to consolidate the Russian 
Federation’s position as a center of influence 
in today’s world.” Article 10 of the Strategy of 
National Security of the Russian Federation 
Russian conscripts called up for military service take part in a ceremony marking their departure for garrisons as they gather at the 
Trinity Cathedral in Saint Petersburg, Russia May 23, 2023. REUTERS/Anton Vaganov

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
8
2021 (Strategy of National Security 2021) says 
that the state policy of Russia contributes “to 
strengthen its role as one of the influential 
centers of the modern world.”20 The new 
Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian 
Federation 2023 (Foreign Policy Concept 
2023) goes even further and acknowledges 
that Russia’s thousand years of independent 
statehood and the cultural heritage of the 
preceding era create its special position as a 
unique country-civilization.21 
Russian leaders do not hesitate to take 
actions designed to show that Russia is 
a great power. As mentioned, Russia’s 
perception of its status as a great power 
is linked to spheres of influence. This is 
examined in two other Russian official 
documents: the Agreement on Measures to 
Ensure the Security of the Russian Federation 
and Member States of NATO and the Treaty 
between the United States of America 
and the Russian Federation on Security 
Guarantees.
The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
published drafts of these documents in 
2021 on its official website. Article 4 of the 
Treaty with the United States says, “The 
United States of America shall undertake 
to prevent further eastward expansion of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and 
deny accession to the Alliance to the States 
of the former Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics.”22 Article 6 of the Agreement with 
NATO is written in the same manner, “All 
member States of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization commit themselves to refrain 
from any further enlargement of NATO, 
including the accession of Ukraine as well 
as other States.” Article 4 of this document 
claims, “that parties will not deploy military 
forces on the territory of any of the other 
States in Europe in addition to the forces 
stationed on that territory as of May 27, 
1997.”23 Such proposals identify the Russian 
desire to agree on spheres of influence in 
post-Soviet countries. Also, they show that 
Russian leaders believe that only major states 
have a right to define international relations. 
Russian President Vladimir Putin at the Victory parade, May 9, 2024. (Kremlin.ru/Vyacheslav Prokofiev/TASS)

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
9
All this is evidence of the fact that Russia 
links its status as a great power to spheres 
of influence and recognition by other 
powerful international actors. In the Russian 
view, Western countries do not meet 
Russia’s desires. Russia’s difficulty following 
cooperation and interconnections with 
Western culture has resulted in paranoiac 
ideas. Putin and his circle have identified 
their unique role in the international order—
defenders of traditional values and defenders 
of Russians. 
Understanding Russian 
Threat Perceptions 
Understanding how Russians identify their 
role in the international order, I will analyze 
the threats to Russia. This analysis will not 
separate threats for Russia and Putin’s regime 
as they are fully united and create one 
element. According to Elias Götz and Jørgen 
Staun, whose article explains the strategic 
culture concept, Russian elites fear the state’s 
vulnerability to external attack. They explain 
this issue using four consistent narratives:
1. Russia has a huge borderline, and it is 
difficult to protect the state everywhere 
simultaneously.
2. Russia should have buffer zones and 
strategic depth. This narrative is a result 
of many invasions throughout history. For 
Russians, it is important to control key 
areas and not to allow other great powers 
to control them. It is essential to have 
buffer zones in its spheres of influence.24 
3. The West comprises the main threat 
to Russia. This narrative has resulted 
from history—both Napoleon and 
Hitler invaded and wanted to occupy 
Russia. During the Cold War, the main 
adversaries of the Soviet Union were 
the United States and NATO, reinforcing 
the idea of a Western threat. In this case, 
Russian leaders after the collapse of the 
Soviet Union chose NATO as a potential 
threat. In all strategic documents, NATO 
enlargement was presented as a possible 
threat. After the annexation of Crimea, 
official statements were more aggressive 
and directly accused the West of 
aggressive actions.25 
4. Russian leaders unite external and 
internal threats. For them, “color 
revolutions” are not popular uprisings 
but Western plots conducted against 
neighboring regimes loyal to Russia but 
weak, and put pro-West politicians in their 
places.26 Russian leaders have strongly 
believed that the West deliberately 
toppled pro-Russian governments and 
interfered in Russian spheres of influence. 
They feared the final result would be 
protests and revolution in Russia.27
Despite the Kremlin’s fears, before February 
24, 2022, there was no threat of a color 
revolution in Russia. Then and now, there is 
no opposition movement in the state which 
can overthrow President Vladimir Putin’s 
regime. Analyzing Russian identity and how 
the Russian government views its threats 
suggests looking at links between them. 
Russian officials believe that NATO threatens 
their idea of being a great power with 
spheres of influence. The role of Ukraine is 
another common theme. 
As mentioned, the idea of an aggressive 
West that wanted to defeat and destroy 
Russia developed in the 19th century after 
the total collapse of the Russian Armed 
Forces in the Crimean War. Later, this idea 
was redeveloped and adjusted to the current 
political situation in Russia. George Kennan, 
in his work The Sources of Soviet Conduct, 
wrote that the main aim of the Communists 
who came into power after the Russian 
empire had been destroyed was to secure 
that power. To do so, they focused first on 

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
10
internal enemies and then on external ones. 
For the Russian Communists, the external 
world was aggressive, so they had to change 
the existing international order.28 These 
theses have much in common with current 
Russian threat perceptions. According 
to Soviet decision-makers, there was a 
connection between internal and external 
enemies: Internal opposition could exist 
only as supporters of—and supported by—
hostile capitalism. They were able to portray 
their internal enemies in such a way so long 
as they acknowledged the presence of 
capitalism inside the country. After officially 
destroying the enemy’s ideology within the 
Soviet Union, they needed to maintain the 
idea of the external enemy to justify the 
totalitarian regime and repressions inside the 
state. At that time, one more famous Russian 
narrative was created—the “besieged 
fortress.”29
American scholar Zbigniew Brzezinski 
wrote in 1994 that, after the collapse of the 
Soviet Union, the White House changed 
the grand strategy from containment of 
Soviet enlargement to deep cooperation 
with democratic Russia. The main aim of 
such cooperation was to provide full support 
for Russian President Boris Y eltsin. Russia 
received huge financial support as well as 
political and international recognition. The 
United States even acknowledged the right 
of Russia to interfere in neighboring states. 
According to the US government, this was 
acceptable as the cost of ending the long 
period of confrontation with the Soviet Union. 
However, Russian leaders did not share the 
same optimism in bilateral cooperation. Two-
thirds of the Russian population shared the 
idea that the collapse of the Soviet Union was 
a tragic mistake that should be corrected. 
The Russian imperial impulse was stronger 
than the United States wanted to recognize. 
Brzezinski argued in 1994 that Russian 
desire to control post-Soviet countries would 
cause future tensions with NATO.30 These 
predictions came true. Russia was fully 
opposed to the idea of NATO enlargement to 
the east. In June 1995, the Russian Council 
on Foreign and Defense Policy issued a 
report: “Russia and NATO.” It stated that 
NATO expansion could lead to the “first 
serious crisis in relations between Russia 
and the West since the end of the Cold 
War.” Later, Russia would claim that the West 
used its weakness against it. In the National 
Security Concept of the Russian Federation 
1997 the future enlargement of NATO to the 
east was defined as unacceptable because 
it represented a threat to Russian national 
security.31 Through such statements, Russia 
started to redefine its main adversary. This 
period of Russian strategic culture ended 
when Putin came to power in 1999. Having 
inherited a state that now had the West as its 
main adversary, Putin attempted to meet the 
threat that the adversary allegedly posed.
Having inherited a state that 
now had the West as its main 
adversary, Putin attempted 
to meet the threat that the 
adversary allegedly posed.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Putin 
and other elites chose a sense of grievance 
against Europe and the United States, or 
the so-called Collective West. They did this 
because of their worldview and experience 
during the Cold War. Putin and his circle are 
representatives of the “greatest generation” 
of the Soviet Union. They grew up and 
achieved the highest steps in their careers 
when the state was at the highest point 
of power and controlled a huge European 
empire. They served in the Secret Service 
and armed forces, so they belonged to a 
special class. This allowed them to receive 
benefits affordable to very few people. At 
that time, the West was an adversary for them 
and wanted to destroy the Soviet Union with 
propaganda and promote Western values. 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
11
After the end of the Cold War, for many of 
them, the West continued to be the enemy.32
This second stage of Russian strategic 
culture is characterized by step-to-step 
confrontation with the West. Russia presents 
itself as a victim of an unjust international 
order. The Kremlin accused the United States 
of a desire to build and maintain a unipolar 
world. Additionally, NATO is presented as the 
main destructive element in the European 
security architecture, requiring Russia to 
protect itself. Since the 2000 National 
Security Concept of the Russian Federation, 
NATO has been treated as the main threat.33 
However, after September 11, 2001, Putin 
hoped to build stronger relations with the 
United States based on fighting terrorism. 
Later he expressed interest in joining NATO 
and NATO wanted to give Russia a unique 
status almost equal to that of a member-state. 
After the color revolutions in Georgia and 
Ukraine in 2003 to 2004 and the great desire 
of the United States to expand the Alliance, 
relations started to degrade. Following the 
NATO Summit in Bucharest in 2008, when 
the Alliance declared that Georgia and 
Ukraine would someday become NATO 
members, Russia officially stated that it 
would do everything possible to prevent 
them from joining. “We will do all we can to 
prevent Ukraine’s and Georgia’s accession 
into NATO and to avoid an inevitable serious 
exacerbation of our relations with both the 
Alliance and our neighbors,” Russian Foreign 
Minister Sergey Lavrov told reporters.34 
Seventy-seven percent of the Russian 
population supported such a policy and voted 
that Ukraine in NATO would pose a threat to 
national Russian security interests.35
The Russia-Georgia War, the refusal 
of Western countries to sign security 
agreements, and the revolutions in Arab 
states increased the threat perception in 
Russia. The next pieces of evidence in Putin’s 
eyes were the protests in Russia after the 
election in 2011. He claimed that protesters 
US President George W. Bush and Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili in Tbilisi, May 2005. (Eric Draper/White House/Wikimedia 
Commons)

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
12
were supported and funded by the United 
States.36 In 2014, when former Ukrainian 
President Viktor Yanukovych fled to Russia 
after the Revolution of Dignity, Putin blamed 
the United States more aggressively. After 
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea, Putin 
amped up his rhetoric about the West’s 
alleged aggression. The pieces of evidence 
were economic sanctions, the nonrecognition 
of Crimea as part of Russia, and NATO’s 
new strategy. NATO decided to posture four 
battalions in Poland and the Baltic states in 
a rotation base. Also, the number of military 
exercises conducted by NATO increased. 
The Alliance presented such actions as a 
deterrence measure. Russia saw them as a 
confrontation.37 
In Russia’s view, NATO’s 
enlargement was less a 
military threat than an unjust 
interference in Russia’s 
sphere of influence. 
In the Russian Military Doctrine 2014, Russia 
recognized the buildup of NATO’s power 
potential and its expansion as one of the 
main external military risks that could lead 
to military threats. Another risk related to 
spheres of influence was the establishment 
of pro-Western regimes whose policies 
threatened the interests of the Russian 
Federation in the states contiguous with it, 
including by overthrowing legitimate state 
administration bodies. This bullet directly 
addressed political changes in Ukraine.38 The 
National Security Strategy of 2015 continues 
this rhetoric, stating in Article 12 that Russia’s 
independent policy was opposed by the 
United States and its allies, who wanted to 
regain dominance in the world and were 
attempting to do so using all instruments of 
power except the military. This document 
defines the buildup of the military potential 
of NATO and its expansion as a threat to 
Russian national security (Article 15).39 Article 
61 of the Foreign Policy Concept 2016 said 
that the geopolitical expansion of NATO and 
the refusal of Western countries to create 
a common European security cooperation 
framework created a crisis in the relations 
between Russia and the West. Also, this 
document addresses the spread of Western 
values seen as dangerous for Russian 
society.40 All these documents demonstrate 
Russian leaders’ perception of the Western 
threat.
When the coronavirus pandemic started 
in 2019, Russian discourse became less 
aggressive toward the West and was 
oriented on overcoming the pandemic. 
However, the National Security Strategy in 
2021 continued to promote anti-Western 
narratives and presented Western countries 
as the enemy. In this document, countries 
were labeled as unfriendly states that tried to 
use socioeconomic problems in the Russian 
Federation to destroy its internal unity, 
instigate and radicalize a protest movement, 
support marginal groups, and divide Russian 
society.41 In doing so, the Kremlin claimed 
that protests inside Russia could only be 
conducted by the anti-Russian population and 
funded by the West. This echoed the Soviet 
Union’s persistent claims that opposition was 
funded by capitalist states. Putin repeated 
several times in two addresses on February 
21 and 24, 2022 that the West was a threat to 
Russia. In those circumstances, Russia could 
not allow the further expansion of NATO. The 
Kremlin even justified the commencement 
of the invasion using Article 51 of the UN 
Charter as a right of preemptive self-defense 
against military threats.42
Summarizing Russia’s threat perceptions 
requires paying key attention to the 
West because the role of the West is 
interconnected with other Russian threats. 
In Russia’s view, NATO’s enlargement 
was less a military threat than an unjust 
interference in Russia’s sphere of influence. 
Putin strongly believes that all color 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
13
revolutions were conducted to overthrow 
loyal Russian governments, with the final 
goal of overthrowing Putin’s regime in 
Russia. Russia is an autocratic regime, which 
requires an external enemy for justification 
of the repressions inside the state. The same 
happened when it was the Soviet Union or 
the Russian Empire. Finally, Russian leaders 
and the population believed that Russia was 
a unique civilization that should be protected 
and was constantly under threat of invasion, 
usually from the West. Having outlined 
Russia’s threat perception, I will continue with 
the Russian attitude toward using force. 
Understanding the 
Russian Attitude 
Toward Using Force 
The last feature of Russian strategic culture 
I analyze is its attitude toward the use of 
force in international disputes. This element 
deserves to be analyzed separately because 
the use of force plays a significant role in 
Russian strategic thinking. It is important 
to understand when and why Russia 
prefers military force over negotiations. 
Understanding this provides insight into why 
Russia launched a full-scale invasion against 
Ukraine in 2022.
Anna Antczak writes that militarism is a 
separate element of Russian strategic culture; 
it could be described as a special role of war 
and the armed forces in building national 
identity.43 Wiltenburg points out that Russia 
uses its military force to assert its power as a 
state. Russia’s willingness to use the armed 
forces is connected to presenting itself as a 
great power. He highlights three cases where 
Russia is likely to use military force. First is 
when the probability of external conflict rises, 
as it can decrease national security. Second 
is when Russia takes on responsibility for 
its sphere of influence and provides military 
defense. Third is when Russia can use the 
violation of the Russian diaspora’s rights in its 
neighboring countries or “near abroad” as a 
reason. For Russia, the use of military force is 
a legitimate tool of foreign policy. Even more, 
Russia believes that only great powers have 
the right to act in a such way.44 Evan Kerrane 
develops this idea more: He writes that 
Russian militarism creates a unique element 
of its strategic culture. Russian militarism 
frames how the Kremlin treats the world.45 
Understanding Russia’s apparently brutal 
behavior requires examining the historical 
evolution of the Russian approach to using 
force.
Evolution 
The attitude of Russian leaders toward using 
force is well described by Russian Emperor 
Alexander III who said that Russia had just 
two allies, the army and the navy. Putin 
repeated this quote during one of his public 
meetings.46 Since then, military power has 
played a crucial role in Russia’s strategic 
culture because of Russia’s enormous human 
resources. Soldiers were always available 
and could be easily replaced. Such a situation 
provided Russia with a very cheap tool for 
resolving international disputes.47 Moreover, 
Russia has grown significantly since the 
16th century through conquering territories. 
Such foreign policy required a strong armed 
force. Finally, to conduct such brutal actions 
required an autocratic form of government. 
Russian leaders have long accepted and 
promoted these attitudes toward the use of 
force against other states and Russia’s own 
population. 
During the period of the Soviet Union, the 
state participated in enormous conflicts, the 
largest of which was World War II. But before 
they fought against each other, the Soviet 
Union and Nazi Germany signed the Molotov-
Ribbentrop Pact, a secret protocol. In doing 
so, they divided Europe between them. After 
signing the pact, Nazi Germany invaded 

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
14
Vladimir Putin with President Boris Y eltsin on 31 December 1999, when Y eltsin announced his resignation. (Kremlin.ru/Wikimedia Commons) 
Polish Prime Minister Jerzy Buzek (left) watches his country’s flag rising at NATO Headquarters alongside (left-to-right) Czech Prime Minister Milos Zeman, NATO 
Secretary General Javier Solana and Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban. (NATO) 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
15
Poland, and Soviet troops later joined them 
and occupied the eastern part of that country. 
Later, the Soviet Union occupied the three 
Baltic States and launched a war against 
Finland. These actions show how Soviet 
leaders used force to achieve their strategic 
objectives. After World War II, the so-called 
Cold War began between the United States, 
the Soviet Union, and their allies. 
Putin’s rule has continued the 
long pattern of using force to 
resolve disputes and advance 
Russian interests. 
Putin’s rule has continued the long pattern of 
using force to resolve disputes and advance 
Russian interests. When Putin came to power, 
he pledged a return to stability. His inaugural 
ceremony highlighted the main objective 
of the future regime—Russia would be a 
centralized state with strong armed forces.48 
Putin, as a former KGB officer, clearly 
understood what a huge role military force 
played in presenting Russia as a great power. 
After the NATO operation in Kosovo, Russia 
was presented as a weakened state that 
could not protect its interest in this area. 
The Kosovo campaign convinced Putin that 
the West wanted to destroy Russia. He saw 
building powerful Russian armed forces as 
the only way to prevent it. On January 10 
and April 21, 2000, Putin signed Russia’s 
new National Security Concept and Military 
Doctrine. The concept highlighted that 
military force remained a substantial aspect 
of international relations. In the third chapter, 
it states: “At present, this can be seen in the 
critically low level of operational and military 
training in the Armed Forces of the Russian 
Federation . . . and in the impermissible 
drop in the equipment of the forces with 
modern armaments and military and special 
hardware . . . this leads to a weakening of the 
military security of the Russian Federation 
as a whole.”49 Russia’s Military Doctrine was 
developed in the same manner and promoted 
the need for strong armed forces.50 So, in 
2001 the rebuilding of Russian armed forces 
started. The main aim of the reforms was to 
establish a military force that could impose 
fear inside Russian spheres of influence. 
The Kremlin understood that Russia was not 
capable of creating a block or union similar 
to NATO or the European Union. So, the only 
possible tool for influence was fear. This was 
the point where militarism in Russia became 
stronger.51
The first alarming signal was Putin’s speech 
at the 2007 Munich Conference on Security 
Policy. Putin directly blamed the United States 
for using military force in the international 
area. He blamed NATO and the European 
Union for using force against other countries 
without a UN Security Council resolution. 
Putin also said that Russia would not use 
armed forces without UN approval. However, 
he mentioned Russia’s right to self-defense, 
which would be used as a main argument for 
aggression against Ukraine in 2022.52
In 2008, after the Bucharest Summit where 
NATO announced that Ukraine and Georgia 
would be members of the Alliance, Lavrov 
told the Echo of Moscow radio station that 
“[w]e will do everything possible to prevent 
the accession of Ukraine and Georgia to 
NATO.” And Russia did—it sent troops to 
defeat Georgia four months after the NATO 
announcement. Another reason for Russia’s 
invasion of Georgia was to illustrate that 
Russia was powerful enough to counter 
the West. Russia wanted Western countries 
to conclude that they were incapable of 
contesting Russian power inside its spheres 
of influence.53 After a fast, five-day successful 
war and a weak response from the West, 
Russian leaders were convinced that they 
could achieve more by using brutal military 
force. As a result, Russia continued the 
modernization of its armed forces so it could 
conduct successful military operations abroad 
by using hybrid methods.54 

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
16
Russia, led by Putin, started a huge 
modernization of the armed forces to 
create a powerful military force that could 
help achieve strategic goals—regaining its 
hegemonic position in the region and, if 
possible, the world. After increasing Russia’s 
military power, Putin started to accuse the 
West of launching armed conflicts and 
violating the UN Charter. In doing so, Russia 
began to create the legal basis for further 
conflicts. For the Kremlin, the war against 
Georgia proved the superiority of military 
power over negotiations. It also showed that 
Russia would not be punished if it did the 
same in the future. With this knowledge, Putin 
seized Crimea in 2014 and, eight years later, 
started the biggest war in Europe since the 
end of World War II.
Why Ukraine? 
Russian strategic culture consists of three 
main beliefs. First, Russian leaders and 
society believe that Russia is a great power. 
Second, this great power status is strongly 
connected with the right to have spheres of 
interest, especially in post-Soviet countries. 
Third, Russians present themselves as 
defenders of traditional values and a unique 
civilization. These beliefs led the Kremlin 
to conclude that the Western world, led by 
the United States, was its main adversary 
because it pushed back against Russia’s 
attempt to control the countries of its near 
abroad. The West is also seen as a cultural 
adversary because its values and style of life 
are more popular in the world than Russia’s. 
To oppose these alleged threats, Russia 
needs strong armed forces, and Russian 
leaders have not hesitated to utilize them 
during history. Spheres of influence also have 
another value for Russia as buffer zones. 
In this way, Ukraine plays a special role for 
Russia. Götz writes that there are two reasons 
for this. First, several invasions from the West 
came through Ukraine and Belarus. Second, 
the Kyivan Rus is the motherland of Russian 
civilization.55 Putin and his circle clearly 
understood that the West would not attack 
Russia. Western leaders have demonstrated 
a desire to cooperate with Russia even after 
the 2014 Crimean occupation. They also 
clearly stated that NATO troops would not 
fight in Ukraine. For Russia, the West is an 
ideological enemy, and that alone justifies 
internal repression since Kremlin leaders 
claim the West colludes with groups inside 
Russia to destabilize it. Ukraine’s importance 
is linked to Russia’s status as a great power. 
Brzezinski wrote in late 1994 that Ukrainian 
independence was seen in Moscow as wrong 
and a threat to Russia’s global power status.56
For Russia, the West is an 
ideological enemy, and 
that alone justifies internal 
repression since Kremlin 
leaders claim the West 
colludes with groups inside 
Russia to destabilize it. 
Ukraine is the biggest European country and 
is rich in natural resources. Its capital, Kyiv, 
has long-held ideological meaning for Russia. 
It was where the population of the Kyivan Rus 
was consecrated by Volodymyr the Great in 
988. In his article about the unity of Russians 
and Ukrainians, Putin wrote that these two 
nations and Belarusians spoke one language 
(Old Russian), had economic relations, and 
one religion: the Orthodox faith. Then he 
continued with pseudo-historical facts about 
Ukraine. One sentence said, “Modern Ukraine 
is entirely the product of the Soviet era.”57 
These words explain how Putin understands 
Ukraine. Huge Ukrainian territories were part 
of the Russian empire, several of the main 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
17
battles of World War II occurred in Ukraine, 
and many important factories and plants were 
located in Ukraine during the Soviet period. 
These are only a few reasons why Russians 
resist the idea of Ukrainian independence.58
The tensions between Ukraine and 
Russia appeared just after they received 
independence. In 1991, before the CIS was 
created, Y eltsin wanted to retake Ukraine, but 
he did not have enough power to do so. The 
only solution was to allow Ukraine to become 
independent and engage in revanchism.59 
There were tensions between the two 
countries during the 1990s, but Russia did 
not dare to confront them directly. The issues 
with Crimea and the Black Sea Fleet were 
among the main triggers in Russian foreign 
policy. Russian leaders officially stated that 
Crimea is Russian land, and no one would 
take the Black Sea Fleet away. After a series 
of events, Russia and Ukraine signed a 
Friendship Treaty in 1997. This document 
was the highest point in their cooperation. 
After Putin came into power in 2000, their 
relationship went in another direction.60 
At the beginning of his rule, Putin did not 
oppose Ukraine’s decision to join NATO. In 
2002, he said after the Prague Summit that 
Russia’s interests were not affected by good 
relations of Ukraine with NATO. Six years 
later, he spoke about Ukraine’s membership 
as an unacceptable thing.61 The beginning 
of the 21st century saw a parade of color 
revolutions, as Russian leaders prefer to call 
them. The Ukrainian Orange Revolution in 
2004 was evidence that Ukrainian society 
did not want to be part of the Russian world 
and shared Western values. For Russians, 
that revolution had a different meaning—the 
West orchestrated the protest to overthrow 
a government loyal to Russia in its sphere of 
influence. Russia’s policymakers and political 
analysts claimed that the United States 
used democratization to undermine Russia’s 
international status and claimed that this 
represented a direct threat.62 Considering the 
still-incomplete modernization of the armed 
forces, Putin used other tools to control the 
A protester in Kyiv inserts roses into riot police shields during Ukraine’s Orange Revolution. (Wikimedia Commons/Ukraine Revolution 
Blog)

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
18
Crowds gathered in Kyiv’s Maidan Square, February 2014. (Wikimedia Commons)

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
19
Ukrainian pro-Western government. These 
were gas blackmail, trade wars, and pro-
Russian politicians who stoked fears of a 
NATO invasion. Unfortunately for Ukrainian 
society, Putin achieved his goals and 
managed to keep Ukraine under Russian 
influence. 
The 2013-2014 Revolution 
of Dignity, when Ukrainian 
society opposed the Ukrainian 
state’s turn toward Russia, 
was a volcanic eruption.
The main event that caused Putin to 
conclude that Ukraine was moving out of 
Russia’s orbit was not the 2008 Bucharest 
Summit, rather it was the Revolution of 
Dignity from 2013 to 2014. Putin was 
confident that, after 2008, pro-Russian 
candidates would take the presidential 
post in Ukraine. At that time, the support 
rate of pro-Western President Viktor 
Yushchenko was less than 10 percent. In 
October 2008, 93 percent of Ukrainians 
were dissatisfied with both the political and 
economic situation in their country.63 On the 
other hand, the Revolution of Dignity, when 
Ukrainian society opposed the Ukrainian 
state’s turn toward Russia, was a volcanic 
eruption. At Yanukovych’s request, Putin 
helped the former Ukrainian president 
escape to Russia.64 For Russia, that meant 
that Ukrainians wanted to side with the 
West. The Kremlin saw this as unacceptable 
because it could undermine the internal and 
external prestige of the Russian government 
and provide an example for the Russian 
opposition since it came when memories 
of the 2012 protests in Russia were still 
fresh. Finally, it threatened the main pillar of 
Russian foreign policy—the renovation of the 
former empire. 
Among the reasons Ukraine is important 
for Russia is its geographic position. 
Russian elites and the population have 
shared common ideas about Ukrainian 
independence and its pro-western direction 
as well as unity between the two nations. 
In the history and evolution of cooperation 
between Russia and Ukraine, tensions 
and wars were not uncommon. Finally, the 
Russian attitude toward using force justified 
the occupation of Crimea in 2014. 
Later that year, Russia launched a proxy 
war in Eastern Ukraine and used its armed 
forces to interfere in Ukraine. After 2015, 
when Ukraine signed the Minsk Agreement, 
Russia continued to pressure Ukraine using 
economic and diplomatic instruments. The 
Kremlin interpreted the 2019 election of 
President Vladimir Zelensky as a signal that 
it could control and manipulate Ukraine’s 
leaders. Zelensky’s main promise during the 
election campaign was to stop the conflict. 
For Putin, he was a comedian and not a 
serious opponent. After the withdrawal of 
troops in Zolote in November 2019, the two 
presidents met face to face in Normandy 
Format Summit in December.65 
The two countries became closer; however, 
it did not last. Ukrainian policy became pro-
Western and anti-Russian. In 2020, NATO 
granted Ukraine Enhanced Opportunity 
Partner status. This was a signal that 
Ukrainian policymakers had not given up 
on the idea of joining the Alliance. Also, 
Zelensky started to work against pro-Russian 
oligarchs in Ukraine by blocking their TV 
channels. Viktor Medvedchuk, the most 
famous of them, was a godfather of Putin’s 
daughter. For Putin, this meant a new step in 
escalation.
Russia conducted a large military exercise, 
Zapad-2020, as a rehearsal for a possible 
invasion. In 2021, Russia deployed up to 
100,000 troops near the Ukrainian border. 
The Kremlin began to believe that the West 
had created an anti-Russian Ukraine. These 
actions were seen as a threat to Russian 


FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
20
ideological and strategic objectives to 
control Ukraine and also as a threat from 
the West. Putin repeated the last claim 
in his speeches on February 21 and 24, 
2022. In these speeches, he highlighted 
the importance of Ukraine’s geographical 
position and the threat from the West. 
Russia attacked Ukraine because the 
Kremlin became a hostage to its radicalized 
narratives. The West refused to recognize 
Russia’s insistence on controlling Ukraine’s 
foreign policy choices or Russian tradition 
of using force over instruments of power. 
Ukraine became an object of contention in 
Russian-Western relations. Russia wanted 
Ukraine, but Ukraine refused. On the other 
hand, Ukraine wanted the West, but the 
West refused to accept it fully and quickly.66
Conclusions and 
Recommendations
Strategic culture theory provides an 
alternative view of the state’s rationality to 
that provided by more mainstream theories 
of international relations. This is observed 
clearly when non-Western countries are 
analyzed because they have a different view 
of rationality from that prevalent in the West. 
Western analysts often mistakenly label this 
view irrational, though it is simply based on 
an alternative view of costs and benefits. 
Russia is an especially good example of 
such “irrationality.” Its elites openly proclaim 
unique ways of thinking and behavior in 
international relations. 
Before the aggression against Ukraine, Putin 
and his regime accused the West many 
times of “unfair” actions. They also gave 
direct signals that Ukrainian independence 
was a mistake and its pro-Western direction 
was unacceptable. Knowing that neither 
Ukraine nor the West harbored aggressive 
intentions toward Russia, Ukrainian and 
Western leaders discounted these warnings 
and failed to understand that Russia 
perceived threats differently than they did.
The Kremlin sees Ukraine 
as a Western project, 
denying it agency, which 
is consistent with the 
Russian view that agency is 
reserved for great powers. 
Putting together the three elements of 
Russian strategic culture leads to the 
conclusion that Russia’s desire to be a great 
power is threatened by the West, so Russia 
believes it needs strong armed forces to 
protect itself. The Russian Empire and the 
Soviet Union came to the same conclusion. 
In this case, Russian strategic culture has 
not evolved and changed—it has remained 
consistent for centuries. The short period 
when Russia wanted to be democratic and 
cooperate with the West ended in autocracy 
and confrontation. Russian strategic culture 
leads the Kremlin to prefer military force to 
resolve disputes and thus make war more 
likely. Additionally, Ukraine was not chosen 
accidentally. Russia and Ukraine have had 
enormous conflicts in their history. Ukraine is 
key to Russia’s imperial pretensions. Without 
Ukraine, Russia is a regional major power 
but not a global one. 
Ukrainian independence threatens Russia’s 
pretensions of regional dominance and great 
power status. The Kremlin sees Ukraine 
as a Western project, denying it agency, 
which is consistent with the Russian view 
that agency is reserved for great powers. 
Russian leaders have tried all instruments of 
power to keep Ukraine under their control. 
When these failed, the Kremlin chose to 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
21
occupy the country by attempting a quick 
and successful military intervention. This 
shows that states with different beliefs act 
differently. None of Russia’s disputes with 
Ukraine in 2022 were so intractable that 
negotiation stood no chance of resolving 
them. Instead, Russia chose the brutal path 
of an invasion.
An examination of the Russia-Ukraine 
dispute supports the claim that strategic 
culture theory provides unique explanations 
and is an important addition to the study of 
international relations. Although developed 
during the Cold War to understand the 
Soviet Union, the theory is still valid today. 
There is a solid argument that its utility has 
increased since the end of the Cold War. 
Autocratic regimes 
have created their own 
identities, and their elites 
have different biases and 
experiences. The Western 
desire to create bubbles of 
democracy by integrating 
these autocratic regimes 
using trade was not 
successful.
Autocratic regimes have created their own 
identities, and their elites have different 
biases and experiences. The Western 
desire to create bubbles of democracy by 
integrating these autocratic regimes using 
trade was not successful. Such actions did 
not prevent the Russian-Ukrainian war—the 
biggest war in Europe since the end of World 
War II. To avoid making the same mistakes 
in the future, the strategic culture concept 
should be better integrated into the study of 
international relations and national security 
affairs. Western policymakers and scholars 
should also conduct a more comprehensive 
analysis of Russia, China, Iran, and North 
Korea using the theory. This analysis will 
show where their beliefs and preferences 
differ from those prevalent in the West and 
will impart rationality to decisions it would 
otherwise be tempted to label irrational. 
The strategic culture concept is useful 
for the analysis of not only adversaries, 
but also friendly states and nations. The 
Russian-Ukrainian war showed that only a 
few people in the West understood who 
Ukrainians were. The war awakened many 
in the West to the idea that Ukraine wants 
to be independent country and does not 
belong to Russia’s spheres of influence 
and most Ukrainians did not share the 
same beliefs with Russians. In this case, 
the strategic culture concept can help to 
understand what Ukrainian elites believe, 
how they perceive the threat, and what 
society thinks. 
Future research should also focus on a 
more comprehensive analysis of Russia. 
This report has only briefly touched on the 
issues of different sub-cultures and society, 
but these areas provide fruitful ground for 
more extensive research. This paper has 
focused on Putin’s speeches and addresses 
because he is seen as representing the 
system. However, there are other politicians, 
siloviki, and scientists who can influence 
the decisions. To understand how big or 
small their influence is, it is important to 
analyze their words and actions as well. 
After knowing this, the West and Ukraine can 
develop strategies for the future. 
After two years of this war, it is difficult 
to predict how long it could last. Ukraine 
must develop a new national strategy for a 
prolonged war. One of the key backbones 
of such a strategy is a proper understanding 
of what Russia is. Why does Russia act in 
such a way? What will it do? Surely, Putin’s 
Russia will not give up on this war as it has 
begun a new stage in its history. If Russia 

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
22
gave up on Ukraine, it would mean the end of 
this new Russia. Putin has created controlled 
chaos in Russia and mobilized resources for 
the new Patriotic War. So, Ukrainians must be 
ready for a long confrontation. They should 
remember that NATO and the European 
Union are not the final objectives. They are 
instruments of how Ukraine could become 
prosperous and democratic. Ukraine should 
also rely on itself.
While Ukrainians have two choices—continue 
fighting and stay independent or give up and 
lose statehood for decades—the Western 
world is in a different situation. Western 
leaders and society understood on February 
24, 2022, that Russia started an unlawful war 
that could be transmitted on their territories. 
Putin once said, “Russia’s borders do not end 
anywhere.”67 This is a typical imperial mindset 
and should be evidence that it is impossible 
to stop invaders by allowing them to take 
what they want. History shows the mistakes 
of such thinking. The United States and 
Europe should continue to support Ukraine 
using all available instruments of power and 
resources. Russia will not stop with Ukraine 
if it wins. Modern Russia is a continuation of 
the Soviet Union and the Russian Empire. 
The Western world has managed to deal with 
both of them. 
The West should also help Ukraine build a 
democratic and prosperous state. It was a 
mistake for the West to fail to pay enough 
attention to Ukraine and to consider it as a 
part of Russia’s sphere of influence. This is 
more evidence of how the strategic culture 
concept could be useful for understanding 
other states. Ukraine should be integrated 
into the European Union and NATO. Ukraine 
showed that it is a democratic state, and its 
place is in the European world. This would 
be the best way to prevent future wars in 
Europe and build a peaceful system. The 
United States and Europe should continue 
to learn about Russia and not be naïve about 
its nature. Russia’s leaders and its population 
believe in the use of force and recognize 
negotiations as a sign of weakness.
If Russia chooses the role 
of an outcast, the West 
should be ready to deter it 
and adopt a new strategic 
concept for undermining 
Russia’s capabilities.
Russia follows the Soviet Union’s methods 
in international relations. On the other 
hand, NATO was created in 1949 to deal 
with the Soviet Union’s possible aggression 
and defend allies if necessary. In this case, 
Western countries should remember why this 
organization was created many years ago. 
The positive aspect is that Russia is weaker 
than the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact. 
The states that help Ukraine have a GDP 
twenty-five times larger than Russia and its 
allies. The Western world should fully reject 
the strategy of cooperation with Russia 
and focus on the strategy of containment. 
A similar circumstance was in 1947 when 
Kennan wrote his long telegram explaining 
Russian behavior. 
The possible defeat of Russia will not 
resemble the defeat of Nazi Germany: The 
Allies’ troops will not cross Russian borders. 
This means that even if Russia is defeated, 
it will remain dangerous. Russian strategic 
culture will not change and future Russian 
leaders will utilize the defeat as a justification 
for possible confrontation. If Russia chooses 
the role of an outcast in international 
relations, the West should be ready to deter 
it and adopt a new strategic concept for 
undermining Russia’s capabilities. The United 
States and other Western powers should 
always be ready and not be as naive as they 
were for a long time after the dissolution of 
the Soviet Union. 

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
23
1 Rand Corporation. (2022) Russia’s War in Ukraine: 
Insights from RAND. [Online] Available from: https://
www.rand.org/latest/russia-ukraine.html [Accessed: 9th 
November 2022]. 
2 Mearsheimer, J.J (2014) Why the Ukraine Crisis Is the 
West’s Fault: The Liberal Delusions That Provoked Putin 
Foreign Affairs. 93 (5), pp. 77–89.
3 Mearsheimer, J.J. (2001) The Tragedy of Great Power 
Politics. New Y ork, Norton.
4 Ibid., p. 21.
5 Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. (2022) NATO Says 
It Won’t Send Troops To Ukraine If Russia Invades. 
[Online] Available from: https://www.rferl.org/a/ukraine-
nato-troops-russia-invasion/31678264.html [Accessed: 
5th August 2023].
6 EEAS. (2021) Russia: Speech by High Representative/
Vice-President Josep Borrell at the EP Debate on 
His Visit to Moscow. [Online] Available from: https://
www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/russia-speech-high-
representativevice-president-josep-borrell-ep-debate-
his-visit-moscow_en [Accessed: 12th September 2023].
7 Dumitru M., Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik (SWP). 
(2022) Failing to Deter Russia’s War Against Ukraine: 
The Role of Misperceptions. [Online] Available from: 
https://www.swp-berlin.org/publications/products/
comments/2022C33_WarUkraine_Misperceptions.pdf 
[Accessed 23rd November 2023].
8 Johnston, A.I. (1995) Thinking about Strategic Culture. 
International Security. 19 (4), pp. 32–64. 
9 Anand, V. (2020) Revisiting the Discourse on Strategic 
Culture: An Assessment of the Conceptual Debates. 
Strategic Analysis. 44 (3), pp. 193–207.
10 Ibid., pp. 2–3.
11 Bayliss J., Wirtz, J.J. (2019) Introduction. In: Strategy in 
the Contemporary World. Baylis J., Wirtz, J.J. and Gray, 
C.S. 6th Ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 1–18. 
12 Jefrey, L., Howlett, D. (2019) Strategic Culture. In: 
Strategy in the Contemporary World. Baylis J., Wirtz, J.J. 
and Gray, C.S. 6th Ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
pp. 89–107.
13 Götz E. and Staun J. (2022) Why Russia Attacked 
Ukraine: Strategic Culture and Radicalized Narratives. 
Contemporary Security Policy. 43 (3), pp. 482–497. 
14 Wiltenburg. I. (2020) The Importance of 
Understanding Russian Strategic Culture. Atlantisch 
Perspectief 44 (1), Special Edition: Putin’s Russia, pp. 
7-12.
15 Götz E. and Staun J. (2022) Why Russia Attacked 
Ukraine: Strategic Culture and Radicalized Narratives. 
Contemporary Security Policy. 43 (3), pp. 482–497.
16 NATO Defence College. (2020) Russia’s Emerging 
Global Ambitions. Report.Research Division, p. 50.
17 Rumer, E., Sokolsky, R. Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace. (2020) Etched in Stone: Russian 
Strategic Culture and the Future of Transatlantic 
Security. Report. Washington, DC, p. 36.
18 Rumer, E., Sokolsky, R. Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace. (2020) Etched in Stone: Russian 
Strategic Culture and the Future of Transatlantic 
Security. Report. Washington, DC, p.36.
19 Committee on International Affairs of the State Duma 
of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. 
(2016) Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation 
(Approved by President of the Russian Federation 
Vladimir Putin on November 30, 2016). [Online] 
Available from: https://interkomitet.com/foreign-policy/
basic-documents/foreign-policy-concept-of-the-russian-
federation-approved-by-president-of-the-russian-
federation-vladimir-putin-on-november-30-2016/ 
[Accessed 10th October 2023].
20 Russian Military and Security Research Group. 
(2021) Strategy of the National Security of the Russian 
Federation (Approved by Decree of the President of the 
Russian Federation on July 2, 2021). [Online] Available 
from: https://rusmilsec.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/
nss_rf_2021_eng_.pdf [Accessed: 10th October 2023].
21 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian 
Federation. (2023) The Concept of the Foreign Policy 
of the Russian Federation Approved by Decree of the 
President of the Russian Federation on March 31, 2023). 
[Online] Available from: https://mid.ru/en/foreign_policy/
fundamental_documents/1860586/ [Accessed: 10th 
October 2023].
22 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian 
Federation. (2021) Treaty between The United States 
of America and the Russian Federation on Security 
Guarantees. [Online] Available from: https://mid.ru/ru/
foreign_policy/rso/nato/1790818/?lang=en [Accessed: 
10th October 2023].
23 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian 
Federation. (2021)Agreement on Measures to Ensure 
the Security of The Russian Federation and Member 
States of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. [Online] 
Available from: https://mid.ru/ru/foreign_policy/rso/
nato/1790803/?lang=en. [Accessed 10th October 2023].
24 Götz E. and Staun J. (2022) Why Russia Attacked 
Ukraine: Strategic Culture and Radicalized Narratives. 
Contemporary Security Policy. 43 (3), pp. 482–497.
25 Ibid., p. 484.
26 Ibid., p. 485.
27 Götz E. and Staun J. (2022) Why Russia Attacked 
Ukraine: Strategic Culture and Radicalized Narratives. 
Contemporary Security Policy. 43 (3), pp. 482–497.
28 Kennan, G.F. (1947) The Sources of Soviet Conduct. 
Foreign Affairs 25 (4), pp. 566–582.
29 Ibid. 

FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
24
30 Brzezinski, Z. (1994) The Premature Partnership. 
Foreign Affairs 73 (2), pp. 67–82.
31 Götz, E. (2019) Explaining Russia’s Opposition to 
NATO Enlargement: Strategic Imperatives, Ideas, or 
Domestic Politics? In. Open Door: NATO and Euro-
Atlantic Security after the Cold War Hamilton, D.S, Spohr, 
K. (eds.) Washington DC: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, pp. 481–500. 
32 Rumer, E., Sokolsky, R. Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace. (2020) Etched in Stone: Russian 
Strategic Culture and the Future of Transatlantic 
Security. Report. Washington, DC, p. 36.
33 Zarobny S. and Sałek-Imińska A. (2021) Conditions 
of the Russian Federation’s Strategic Culture and Its 
Impact on Russia’s Foreign Policy. Security Dimensions: 
International & National Studies 35 (35), pp. 65–80.
34 Deutsche Welle. Talking Tough. [Online] Available 
from: https://www.dw.com/en/russia-talks-tough-in-
response-to-natos-eastward-expansion/a-3261078 
[Accessed: 7th April 2024].
35 Interfax. Poll Shows Russians See NATO Membership 
for Ukraine, Georgia as Threat. [Online] Available from: 
https://www.interfax.ru/russia/7061 [Accessed: 7th April 
2024].
36 France 24. Putin accuses US of sparking election 
protests. [Online] Available from: https://www.france24.
com/en/20111208-vladimir-putin-blames-usa-election-
protests-hillary-clinton-fraud-russia [Accessed: 7th April 
2024].
37 Tsygankov, A.P. (2018) The Sources of Russia’s Fear 
of NATO. Communist and Post-Communist Studies 51 
(2), pp. 101–111.
38 Russian Strategic Initiative. (2022) The Military 
Doctrine of the Russian Federation (Approved by the 
President of the Russian Federation on December 25, 
2014). [Online] Available from: https://oe.tradoc.army.
mil/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/RSI-Russian-Military-
Doctrine-Primer-Final-single-page-04282022.pdf 
[Accessed: 10th October 2023]. 
39 IEEE.ES (2016) Strategy of the National Security of 
the Russian Federation (Approved by Decree of the 
President of the Russian Federation on December 31, 
2015). [Online] Available from: https://www.ieee.es/
Galerias/fichero/OtrasPublicaciones/Internacional/2016/
Russian-National-Security-Strategy-31Dec2015.pdf 
[Accessed: 10th October 2023].
40 Committee on International Affairs of the State Duma 
of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. 
(2016) Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation 
(Approved by President of the Russian Federation 
Vladimir Putin on November 30, 2016). [Online] 
Available from: https://interkomitet.com/foreign-policy/
basic-documents/foreign-policy-concept-of-the-russian-
federation-approved-by-president-of-the-russian-
federation-vladimir-putin-on-november-30-2016/ 
[Accessed 10th October 2023].
41 Russian Military and Security Research Group. 
(2021) Strategy of the National Security of the Russian 
Federation (Approved by Decree of the President of the 
Russian Federation on July 2, 2021). [Online] Available 
from: https://rusmilsec.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/
nss_rf_2021_eng_.pdf [Accessed: 10th October 2023].
42 President of Russia (2022) Address by the President 
of the Russian Federation. [Online] Available from: http://
en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/67828 [Accessed: 
10th October 2023]. 
43 Antczak, A. (2018) Russia’s Strategic Culture: 
Prisoner of Imperial History? Athenaeum Polskie Studia 
Politologiczne 60 (4), pp. 223–242.
44 Wiltenburg. I. (2020) The Importance of 
Understanding Russian Strategic Culture. Atlantisch 
Perspectief 44 (1), Special Edition: Putin’s Russia, pp. 
7–12.
45 Kerrane, E. (2022) Moscow’s Strategic Culture: 
Russian Militarism in an Era of Great Power Competition. 
Journal of Advanced Military Studies 2022 no. special, 
pp. 69–87. 
46 TASS. Putin Agrees with Emperor That Russia’s 
Only Allies Are Army and Navy. [Online] Available from: 
https://tass.com/russia/789866?utm_source=google.
com&utm_medium=organic&utm_campaign=google.
com&utm_referrer=google.com. [Accessed: 31th 
October 2023].
47 Antczak, A. (2018) Russia’s Strategic Culture: 
Prisoner of Imperial History? Athenaeum Polskie Studia 
Politologiczne 60 (4), pp. 223–242.
48 Kerrane, E. (2022) Moscow’s Strategic Culture: 
Russian Militarism in an Era of Great Power Competition. 
Journal of Advanced Military Studies 2022 no. special, 
pp. 69–87.
49 Arms Control Association (2000) Russia’s National 
Security Concept (Approved by the President of the 
Russian Federation on January 10, 2000). [Online] 
Available from: https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2000-
01/features/russias-national-security-concept [Accessed: 
15th January 2024].
50 Arms Control Association (2000) Russia’s Military 
Doctrine (Signed by the President of the Russian 
Federation on April 21, 2000). [Online] Available from: 
https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2000-01/features/
russias-national-security-concept [Accessed: 15th 
January 2024].
51 Kerrane, E. (2022) Moscow’s Strategic Culture: 
Russian Militarism in an Era of Great Power Competition. 
Journal of Advanced Military Studies 2022 no. special, 
pp. 69–87.
52 President of Russia. (2007) Speech and the Following 
Discussion at the Munich Conference on Security Policy. 
[Online] Available from: http://en.kremlin.ru/events/

RUSSIAN STRATEGIC CULTURE AND THE WAR IN UKRAINE
25
president/transcripts/copy/24034 [Accessed:  
2nd November 2023].
53 Studzińska, Z. (2015) How Russia, Step by Step, 
Wants to Regain an Imperial Role in the Global and 
European Security System. Connections 14 (4), pp. 
21–42.
54 Kerrane, E. (2022) Moscow’s Strategic Culture: 
Russian Militarism in an Era of Great Power Competition. 
Journal of Advanced Military Studies 2022 no. special, 
pp. 69–87.
55 Götz E. and Staun J. (2022) Why Russia Attacked 
Ukraine: Strategic Culture and Radicalized Narratives. 
Contemporary Security Policy. 43 (3), pp. 482–497.
56 Brzezinski, Z. (1994) The Premature Partnership. 
Foreign Affairs 73 (2), pp. 67–82.
57 President of Russia. (2021) Article by Vladimir Putin 
“On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians” 
[Online] Available from: http://en.kremlin.ru/events/
president/news/66181 [Accessed: 21th December 2023].
58 Kuzio, T., D’Anieri, P., (red.) (2018) The Sources 
of Russia’s Great Power Politics. Ukraine and the 
Challenge to
the European Order. Bristol: E-International Relations.
59 Ibid.
60 Kuzio, T., D’Anieri, P., (red.) (2018) The Sources 
of Russia’s Great Power Politics. Ukraine and the 
Challenge to
the European Order. Bristol: E-International Relations.
61 Studzińska, Z. (2015) How Russia, Step by Step, Wants 
to Regain an Imperial Role in the Global and European 
Security System. Connections 14 (4), pp. 21–42.
62 German, T. (2020) Harnessing Protest Potential: 
Russian Strategic Culture and the Colored Revolutions. 
Contemporary Security Policy 41 (4), pp. 541–563.
63 Wilson Center. (2008) Dissatisfaction and 
Disillusionment in Ukraine: Findings from the 2008 
IFES Public Opinion Survey. |[Online] Available from: 
https://www.wilsoncenter.org/event/dissatisfaction-and-
disillusionment-ukraine-findings-the-2008-ifes-public-
opinion-survey [Accessed: 4th January 2024].
64 BBC News. (2014) Putin: Russia Helped Yanukovych 
to Flee Ukraine. [Online] Available from: https://www.
bbc.com/news/world-europe-29761799 [Accessed: 4th 
January 2024].
65 Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. (2021). OSCE 
Representative: Troop Withdrawal In Eastern Ukraine 
A ‘Big Step Forward. [Online] Available from: https://
www.rferl.org/a/ukrainian-foreign-minister-says-kyiv-
starts-troops-withdrawal-from-zolote/30242188.html 
[Accessed: 21st December 2023].
66 Kuzio, T., D’Anieri, P., (red.) (2018) The Sources 
of Russia’s Great Power Politics. Ukraine and the 
Challenge to the European Order. Bristol: E-International 
Relations.
67 Independent. Vladimir Putin says Russia’s borders 
‘do not end anywhere’. [Online] Available from: https://
www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/putin-
russia-border-do-not-end-anywhere-comments-quote-
eu-us-tensions-a7438686.html [Accessed: 9th April 
2024].

The Bear Market Brief is a project of the Foreign Policy Research Institute’s (FPRI) Eurasia 
Program that brings you news about Russia’s economy, politics, business, and political risk 
environment. 
We’re a team dedicated to making Russia and Eurasia more accessible.
Bear Market Brief features a weekly newsletter and a monthly podcast that strives to be a 
resource for specialists, generalists, and anyone with an interest in the Post-Soviet space. We 
provide a platform for analysis, particularly for emerging area experts and academics, and a 
space for even-handed, fact-based conversations in hopes of improving Russia/Eurasia analysis 
and coverage. 
We’re here to keep you ahead of the curve and spot what most in the English-language media 
aren’t talking about.
Follow along on X @bearmarketbrief and @FPRI
You Might Be Interested In....
Now on 
Subscribe on bearmarketbrief.substack.com or the Substack ioS app

The Foreign Policy Research Institute (FPRI) is 
a nonpartisan Philadelphia-based think tank 
dedicated to strengthening US national security 
and improving American foreign policy.
Established in 1955 by the noted 20th 
century geopolitical strategist, Ambassador 
Robert Strausz-Hupé, FPRI was founded on 
the premise that an informed and educated 
citizenry is essential for the United States 
to understand complex international issues 
and formulate foreign policy. FPRI remains 
committed to this principle and strives to 
inform both policymakers and the general 
public through FPRI research and educational 
programs.
FPRI is a nonpartisan 501(c)(3) non-profit 
organization and takes no institutional positions 
on issues andt conducts no advocacy. The 
organization has six main research programs, 
covering US National Security, the Middle East, 
Eurasia, Europe, Asia, and Africa. Each program 
produces reports, articles, public events, 
and private briefings for policymakers, FPRI 
members, and the general public.
© 2024  by the Foreign Policy Research Institute
FPRI Editorial Team 
Eurasia Program Director 
Maia Otarashvili
Eurasia Head of Research
Robert E. Hamilton 
Editing
Ashley Greenman
Sarahelena Marrapodi 
Layout and Design
Natalia Kopytnik
Cover 
Natalia Kopytnik
Images: Sofiia Gatilova/Reuters, Office 
of the President of Ukraine, Sputnik/
Valery Sharifalin/Reuters, Alexander 
Vilf/Reuters, Petro Zadorozhnyy/State 
Border Guard Service of Ukraine 


FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE 