 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.  
IOP-2023-U-036583-Final 
 
September 2023 
 
Tomorrow’s Technology in Today’s War: The Use of 
AI and Autonomous Technologies in the War in 
Ukraine and Implications for Strategic Stability 
Margarita Konaev 
 


   
 
© 2023 CNA Corporation 
    
 
Abstract 
Since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, artificial intelligence has reportedly been used to analyze different types of data 
to enhance decision-making and inform targeting, to process enemy communications, in facial recognition technology, and 
in cyber defense, to name a few. Drawing on open-source information and scholarly research, this report, authored by 
Margarita Konaev of Georgetown’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology, surveys the use of AI in the war in Ukraine 
and assesses the potential implications of these systems and capabilities for conflict escalation and strategic stability. 
Although AI has played an important role in enhancing battlefield information processing, it is difficult to estimate whether 
these technologies are being used at scale and to what effect. Although in its current form, the use of AI has had a limited 
effect on the risk of escalation, this may change with more extensive deployment, especially of untested systems, which 
highlights the value of confidence building measures to minimize the risk of inadvertent escalation. 
 
This report is part of a series generously funded by a grant from the Carnegie Corporation of New York.  
CNA’s Occasional Paper series is published by CNA, but the opinions expressed are those of the author(s) and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of CNA or the Department of the Navy. 
 
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release: distribution unlimited. 
Administrative or Operational Use 9/12/2023 
 
This work was performed under Specific Authority Contract No. G-19-56503 
 
Cover image: “Lancet kamikaze drone,” https://mil.in.ua/, 16 July 2022. 
 
This document may contain materials protected by the Fair Use guidelines of Section 107 of the Copyright Act, for 
research purposes only. Any such content is copyrighted and not owned by CNA. All rights and credits go directly to 
content’s rightful owner. 
 
Approved by: September 2023 
 
Anya Fink, Research Program Director (Acting) 
Russia Studies Program 
Strategy, Policy, Plans and Programs Division 


      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  i 
 
Contents  
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................... 1 
The Role of AI and Autonomous Technologies on Strategic Stability and Conflict Dynamics
 ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3 
Use of AI and Autonomous Technologies in the War in Ukraine ..................................................... 7 
Drones and loitering munitions ............................................................................................................ 8 
AI for battlefield information processing ........................................................................................ 12 
AI, cyber, and information warfare .................................................................................................... 13 
The Effect of AI and Autonomous Technologies on Strategic Stability and Conflict 
Dynamics.............................................................................................................................................................. 15 
Risk of escalation from conventional war to nuclear conflict ................................................. 15 
Risk of conflict escalation and/or conflict spreading to other countries ........................... 16 
US-Russia Relations and Strategic Stability in the Context of AI and Autonomous 
Technologies ...................................................................................................................................................... 19 
References ................................................................................................................................................... 23 
 

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  ii 
 
This page intentionally left blank. 

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  1   
 
Introduction  
The role of artificial intelligence ( AI) and autonomous systems in the war in Ukraine has 
attracted a great deal of attention in the media and from analysts tracking the use of 
tomorrow’s technology in today’s wars. Ukraine, with help from the United States, other North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) partners, and a wide range of technology companies , is 
leveraging AI to continuously update their understanding of the battlefield, support decision -
making and gain an advantage in intelligence and operations. 1 Less reliable information is 
available about Russia’s use of AI and autonomous technologies. However,  some evidence 
exists claiming that Russian operators have tried using AI to enhance disinformation 
campaigns, while the Russian armed forces are extensively using loitering munitions to attack 
Ukrainian cities and block the Ukrainian military’s counteroffensive.   
Since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, AI has also reportedly been 
deployed aboard drones to collect intelligence, carry out strikes and process enemy battlefield 
communications in facial recognition technology, cyber defense, etc. In recent months, reports 
about AI on the battlefield have converged with the widespread news coverage of the 
breakthroughs in generative AI systems to create an impression that  the technology is 
ubiquitous. A careful assessment of the topic, however, must acknowledge that AI is a relatively 
new technology that has seen few battlefield deployments before the war in Ukraine. The scale 
and nature of AI deployment in this conflict i s therefore unprecedented by default. Still, it is 
difficult to assess whether these applications and capabilities have been used only o n a few 
occasions or widely deployed. It is also impossible to know , based on open-source materials, 
whether and what ty pe of AI and autonomous technologies are being used in classified tasks 
and missions, and to what effect.  
As such, it would be incorrect or at least premature to conclude that either the Ukrainians or 
the Russian forces are employing AI at scale. Rather, it is more likely that the use of AI and 
autonomous technologies in the war in Ukraine has been limited to certain use cases, tasks, 
and conditions. Ukraine has mobilized its impressive community of IT workers and software 
engineers to support the war effort and many if not most of the country’s drone companies and 
other AI startups are working closely with military units on the front lines.
2 However, the more 
advanced capabilities — such as leveraging AI to collect, fuse, analyze,  and exploit different 
 
1 Samuel Bendett, “Roles and Implications of AI in the Russian-Ukrainian Conflict,” Russia Matters, July 20, 2023, 
https://www.russiamatters.org/analysis/roles-and-implications-ai-russian-ukrainian-conflict.  
2 John Hudson and Kostiantyn Khudov, “The War in Ukraine Is Spurring a Revolution in Drone Warfare Using AI,” 
Washington Post, July 26, 2023,  https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/07/26/drones-ai-ukraine-war-
innovation/.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  2   
 
types of commercial and classified data to enhance decision-making and guide targeting—have 
primarily been developed and deployed by US and allied forces positioned outside of Ukraine. 
These advanced capabilities are being enabled by private sector companies that are providing 
Ukraine and its allies with the data, equipment , and technological know -how to fight the 
Russian forces while gaining operational experience and battlefield data to test and refine their 
products.  
Although the war in Ukraine is showing how new technologies are shaping the battlefield in 
real time, it also highlights a longer -term trend of militaries around the world accelera ting 
investment into research and development of AI  and autonomous technologies . Progress in 
these fields promises to reduce risk to deployed forces, minimize the cognitive and physical 
burden on warfighters, and significantly increase the speed of information processing, 
decision-making, and operations, among other advantages. Yet such technological 
breakthroughs and the use of these applications and systems in contested environments may 
also come with risks and costs—from ethical concerns about responsibi lity for the use of lethal 
force to unexpected behavior of brittle and opaque systems.3  
Alongside the technological progress in AI and autonomous technologies, there  is also a fast 
growing body of research dedicated to studying the potential implications of these systems and 
capabilities for international security, strategic stability, and conflict dynamics. Reports about 
the use of AI and autonomous technologies in the war in Ukraine , although far from 
comprehensive, allow us to assess some of the hypoth eses put forth by this literature. With 
that, the remainder of this chapter proceeds in four parts. The first section reviews some of the 
existing arguments about the potential effect of AI and autonomous technologies on strategic 
stability and conflict dynamics. Then, drawing on open-source information, the second section 
offers a brief overview of AI and autonomous technology use in the war in Ukraine. The 
following section considers how the use of AI and autonomous technologies in the war may 
have affected the risk of escalation from conventional war to the use of nuclear weapons and 
conflict spreading to include other parties. The last section assesses how AI and autonomous 
technologies may affect strategic stability between the United States and Russia beyond the 
current Russo-Ukrainian war, focusing specifically on the potential role of confidence building 
measures in minimizing the risk of inadvertent escalation.  
 
3 Tate Nurkin and Margarita Konaev, “Eye to Eye in AI: Developing Artificial Intelligence for National Security and 
Defense,” Atlantic Council, May 20, 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/eye-
to-eye-in-ai/#introduction.    

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  3   
 
The Role  of AI and Autonomous Technologies 
on Strategic Stability and Conflict Dynamics  
Research on technology and international security has outlined various  ways that the 
integration of AI and autonomous technologies into military systems and missions could affect 
strategic stability, nuclear risk, and conflict initiation and escalation. The following discussion 
highlights some of this work but does not offer an exhaustive review of this rapidly expanding 
field of research.  
Building on the literature about how the proliferation of drones could affect international 
security, some scholars have argued that the ability to use uncrewed systems with increasingly 
autonomous capabilities may lead to adventurism or aggression in foreign policy decisions. 4 
Deploying military forces inevitably bears the risk of human and material l osses, economic 
downturn, and societal unrest, any of which can shift public opinion against incumbent leaders 
and possibly lead to their removal from office. The use and even the loss  of aut onomous 
systems, on the other hand, is less politically costly than the loss of human lives. Scholars have 
therefore warned that with this perception that deploying autonomous systems for military 
purposes comes at a lower political cost, leaders may be mo re inclined to initiate conflict. 5 
Others have suggested that this perception of lower political costs may not only make conflicts 
easier to start but also more difficult to end, especially in the context of urban warfare. 6 The 
proliferation of these technologies to more countries and nonstate actors will likely increase 
the risk of conflict and spread instability across the international system.  
Another set of arguments centers on how the use of AI and autonomous technologies could 
increase the risk of intentional, inadvertent, or accidental escalation—whether from a crisis to 
a conflict, or conventional to nuclear confrontation —due to misperceptions, miscalculations , 
or accidents.7 Some arguments have focused more specifically on the connection between  AI 
and nuclear weapons, examining how advances in AI could be exploited across the nuclear 
deterrence architecture —from early warning and intelligence, surveillance, and 
 
4 Michael Zenko, “Reforming US Drone Strike Policies,” Council on Foreign Relations, 2013, 
https://www.cfr.org/report/reforming-us-drone-strike-policies.  
5 Michael Horowitz, Sarah E. Kreps, and Matthew Fuhrmann, “Separating Fact from Fiction in the Debate Over 
Drone Proliferation,” International Security 41, no. 2 (2016), pp. 7–42, 
https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/isec_a_00257.pdf. 
6 Margarita Konaev, “With AI, We’ll See Faster Fights, But Longer Wars,” War on the Rocks, Oct. 29, 2019, 
https://warontherocks.com/2019/10/with-ai-well-see-faster-fights-but-longer-wars/.  
7 Herbert Lin, “Escalation Risks in an Artificial Intelligence—Infused World ,” Artificial Intelligence, China, Russia, 
and the Global Order, edited by Nicholas D. Wright, Air University Press, 2019, pp. 143–
52, http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep19585.25.   

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  4   
 
reconnaissance via command and control to nuclear weapons delivery systems. 8 Today, AI 
technology remains too brittle and vulnerable to attacks for nuclear -armed states to delegate 
nuclear command and control functions, and specifically missile -launch decisions to AI . Yet, 
some scholars have suggested that with improvements in technology, concerns about retaining 
first strike advantage or ensuring retaliation could prompt countries, perhaps particularly 
Russia, to activate fully automated nuclear command and control systems (as the USSR has 
done during the Cold War).9 Aside from command and control, researchers have posited that 
improvements in autonomous systems, specifically in undersea vehicles that can locate and 
shadow adversary submarines, increase the vulnerability of nuclear delivery systems, which 
could in turn undermine strategic stability and deterrence.
10  
An additional area of research investigates destabilizing effects of AI -enabled information 
operations. Propaganda and disinformation campaigns have existed throughout history. But 
until very recently, such efforts have typically involved humans at every stage—to develop and 
generate engaging content, identify and cultivate target audiences, and create the social media 
profiles and channels that will disseminate and amplify manufactured messages. Advances in 
AI and large language models in particular, however, could drive down the costs of generating 
propaganda by automating the process of content creation and the execution of disinformation 
campaigns.
11 This opens the aperture for more and different types of actors to initiate 
disinformation campaigns and also  creates the potential for highly scalable campaigns that 
reach a massive audience. 12 Recent advances in large language models like ChatGPT are also 
making it possible to generate sophisticated and context-specific messages that may resonate 
 
8 Vincent Boulanin, ed. “The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Strategic Stability and Nuclear Risk,” SIPRI, May 
2019, https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2019-05/sipri1905-ai-strategic-stability-nuclear-risk.pdf; James 
Johnson, “AI, Autonomy, and the Risk of Nuclear War,” War on the Rocks, July 29, 2022, 
https://warontherocks.com/2022/07/ai-autonomy-and-the-risk-of-nuclear-war/.  
9 Boulanin, ed. “The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Strategic Stability and Nuclear Risk.” 
10 Jonathan Gates, “Is the SSBN Deterrent Vulnerable to Autonomous Drones?,” RUSI Journal 161, no. 6 (2016), pp. 
28–35, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03071847.2016.1265834; Sylvia Mishra, “Could 
Unmanned Underwater Vehicles Undermine Nuclear Deterrence?,” Strategist, May 8, 2019, 
https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/could-unmanned-underwater-vehicles-undermine-nuclear-deterrence/; Keir 
Lieber and Daryl Press, “The New Era of Counterforce: Technological Change and the Future of Nuclear 
Deterrence,” International Security 41, no. 4 (2017), pp. 9–49.  
11 Katerina Sedova, Christine McNeill, Aurora Johnson, Aditi Joshi, and Ido Wulkan, AI and the Future of 
Disinformation Campaigns, Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Dec. 2021, p. 6, 
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ai-and-the-future-of-disinformation-campaigns/.  
12 Josh Goldstein, Renee DiResta, Girish Sastry, Micah Musser, Matthew Gentzel, and Katerina Sedova, Generative 
Language Models and Automated Influence Operations: Emerging Threats and Potential Mitigations, Stanford 
Internet Observatory, OpenAI, and Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Jan. 11, 
2023, p. 8, https://cdn.openai.com/papers/forecasting-misuse.pdf. 

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  5   
 
more strongly with the intended audience and make influence operations harder to discover 
and take down.13  
AI-enabled deepfake technology is another area  of concern, not only for disinformation and 
propaganda, but also in military and intelligence operations. C ountless potential scenarios 
exist where convincing deepfakes, deployed in opportune moments, could undermine unity 
and cohesion between soldiers on the battlefield, dampen public support for military missions, 
deepen societal divisions, divide allies, lead to loss of trust in democratic institutions, and 
shape the information environment in favor of the aggressor.
14 Efforts to mitigate the spread 
of misleading and false content are already falling behind; even  when disinformation is 
debunked, research shows that false news spread “farther, faster, deeper, and more broadly”  
than accurate reports or corrections issued to repudiate false reports.15 
Finally, there is a burgeoning literature on how progress in AI and autonomous technologies 
could affect cyber operations, which at times considers the potential for escalation. Some 
researchers, for instance, have posited that the integration of AI, or more accurately, machine 
learning-based automation, into cyber operations could potentially “increase the stealthiness 
of cyber operations and enable malicious code to function more independently of human 
operations.”
16 These developments could shield the perpetrators’ identity and make it harder 
to defend against incursions and cyberattacks. The increased difficulty  of attributing 
responsibility for attacks could , in turn, embolden both countries and nonstate actors in the 
cyber realm, potentially leading to intensified cyber conflicts, diplomatic crises, and even 
destabilizing effects in the real world. 
At the same time, scholars have also suggested that AI and autonomous technologies have 
features and potential uses that could decrease the risk of conflict initiation or escalation and 
enhance strategic stability. With regards to conflict initiation, countries rarely start wars unless 
 
13 Ben Buchanan, Andrew Lohn, Micah Musser, and Katerina Sedova, Truth, Lies, and Automation: How Language 
Models Could Change Disinformation, Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May 2021, 
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/truth-lies-and-automation/.  
14 Alina Polyakova, “Weapons of the Weak: Russia and AI-Driven Asymmetric Warfare,” Brookings, Nov. 15, 2018, 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/weapons-of-the-weak-russia-and-ai-driven-asymmetric-warfare/;  
Margarita Konaev and Samuel Bendett, “Russian AI-Enabled Combat: Coming to a City Near You?,” War on the 
Rocks, July 31, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/07/russian-ai-enabled-combat-coming-to-a-city-near-
you/; Daniel L. Byman, Chongyang Gao, Chris Meserole, and V.S. Subrahmanian, Deepfakes and International 
Conflict, Brookings, Jan. 2023, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/FP_20230105_deepfakes_international_conflict.pdf.  
15 Soroush Vosoughi, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral, “The Spread of True and False News Online,” Science, Mar. 9, 2018, 
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aap9559.  
16 Ben Buchanan, John Bansemer, Dakota Cary, Jack Lucas, and Micah Musser, Automating Cyber Attacks, Center for 
Security and Emerging Technology, Nov. 2020, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/automating-cyber-
attacks.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  6   
 
they believe they can win and that the adversary has inferior military capabilities. The adoption 
of AI technologies that increase the speed of decision -making and operations, coupled with 
autonomous functions in weapons systems that augment lethality, can signal military strength 
and effectiveness; such capabilities, in turn, can discourage potential aggressors , especially if 
they do not possess the same capabilities, and bolster deterrence.17  
Deterrence rests on the credible threat of lethal force. With that in mind, some scholars have 
argued that removing humans partially or entirely from the decision to engage targets can 
strengthen deterrence by signaling that reprisal is certain.18 Moreover, greater autonomy and 
AI in un crewed systems vastly expand access and reach in denied, hostile,  and austere 
environments, including for operations into anti -access or area denial environments near 
potential adversaries and contested airspac e. This  could also reinforce deterrence by 
improving situational awareness and strengthening early warning mechanisms.19  
Focusing on escala tion dynamics, others have pointed out that countries are less likely to 
retaliate or escalate in response to a damaged or destroyed autonomous vehicle as opposed to 
an incident where soldiers are injured or killed. 20 Notably, this particular argument stands in 
contrast to the aforementioned proposition that the lower political costs associated with 
deploying and losing autonomous systems can push leaders to take a ggressive foreign policy 
decisions and increase the risk of conflict. The debate about the potential influence of AI and 
autonomous technology on security, stability, and conflict is therefore still ongoing, offering a 
broad range of perspectives that sometimes contradict one another.   
Some experts have argued that because AI is not afflicted by human sentiments such as anger, 
hatred, or fatigue, it is less likely to make emotional or irrational decisions that may lead to 
dangerous or even catastrophic out comes.21 AI applications that expedite intelligence 
processing, improve planning, and enhance situational awareness on the battlefield could also 
 
17 Margarita Konaev, Husanjot Chahal, Ryan Fedasiuk, Tina Huang, and Ilya Rahkovksy, US Military Investments in 
Autonomy and AI: Costs, Benefits, and Strategic Effects, Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Oct. 2020, p. 
17, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/u-s-military-investments-in-autonomy-and-ai-a-strategic-
assessment/.    
18 Michael C. Horowitz, “When Speed Kills: Lethal Autonomous Weapon Systems, Deterrence, and Stability,” 
Journal of Strategic Studies 42, no. 6 (2019), pp. 764–788. 
19 Konaev, Chahal, Fedasiuk, Huang, and Rahkovksy, “US Military Investments in Autonomy and AI: Costs, Benefits, 
and Strategic Effects.”  
20 Michael Horowitz, Sarah E. Kreps, and Matthew Fuhrmann, “Separating Fact from Fiction in the Debate Over 
Drone Proliferation,” International Security 41, no. 2 (2016), pp. 7-42. 
21 Forrest E. Morgan, Benjamin Boudreaux, Andrew J. Lohn, Mary Ashby, Christian Curriden, Kelly Klima, and 
Derek Grossman, Military Applications of Artificial Intelligence: Ethical Concerns in an Uncertain World, RAND, 
2020, p. 34, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR3100/RR3139-
1/RAND_RR3139-1.pdf.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  7   
 
allow for more precise and judicious use of force and help reduce the risk of civilian harm and 
collateral damage, thereby avoiding escalation. 22 Such arguments about the potential of AI -
enabled precision warfare for increasing compliance with the laws of war are of course 
predicated on the assumption that belligerents have the political will to do so to begin with.  
Ultimately, the influence  of AI and autonomous technologies on international security, 
strategic stability , and conflict dynamics is deeply intertwined with other factors—other 
advanced weapons, the nature of political systems where such innovations ta ke place, 
organizational cultures of the militaries that plan to use these technologies, how these 
technologies interact with one another, and many others. Because AI has yet to see extensive 
battlefield deployment, or large -scale adoption across military organizations, its potential 
effects are still debated . The use of AI and autonomous technologies in the war in Ukraine  
provides an opportunity to assess some of the aforementioned hypotheses and glean  initial 
insights into the role of these technologies in modern warfare.   
Use of AI and Autonomous Technologies in 
the War in Ukraine  
Although the use of AI and autonomous technologies in the war in Ukraine—insofar as can be 
discerned from open-source information— has been limited to certain tasks and use cases , it 
has nonetheless been unprecedented in its extent . Both Ukrainian and (to a lesser extent) 
Russian forces have reportedly made use of drones and loitering munitions with autonomous 
functions. Commercial c ompanies have provided Ukraine with AI -enabled technology to 
analyze and fuse different types of classified, commercial,  and open-source data to enhance 
battlefield situational awareness and identify targets, as well as software to  process enemy 
battlefield communications and information. Meanwhile, Russian actors have employed AI to 
enhance information operations and scale disinformation campaigns, albeit to a limited effect.  
The following analysis contains several limitations. For one, the discussion inc ludes several 
examples where it is unclear whether particular systems, platforms, or operations indeed 
relied on AI. This reflects the limitations of publicly available information; the lack of consensus 
over what AI is and is not; the fact that remotely  operated systems are often discussed 
interchangeably with autonomous systems; and the  impossibility to determine the presence 
or absence of AI capabilities without access to the software within a given system. The analysis 
 
22 Larry Lewis and Andrew Ilachinski, Leveraging AI to Mitigate Civilian Harm, Center for Naval Analyses, Feb. 
2022,  https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/trecms/pdf/AD1181578.pdf; Peter Margulies, “The Other Side of Autonomous 
Weapons: Using Artificial Intelligence to Enhance IHL Compliance,” Impact of Emerging Technologies on the Law of 
Armed Conflict, ed. Ronald T.P. Alcala and Eric Talbot Jensen (New York: Oxford 
Academic, 2019), https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190915322.003.0006. 

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  8   
 
also refrains from making inferences about the scale and AI's overall effect on the conduct of 
military operations and other missions. This is because it is difficult to assess whether these 
applications and capabilities have been used on a few occasions or widely deployed, or 
whether and what type of AI and autonomous technologies are being used in classified settings, 
and to what effect. Overall, t he account below is not meant to be an exhaustive review of the 
AI-enabled and autonomous weapons and systems deployed by Russia and Ukraine 
throughout the war. Rather, it samples relevant capabilities used to illustrate the evolving role 
of new and emerging technologies on the battlefield. 
Drones and l oitering munitions  
Uninhabited aerial systems have been used extensively by both Ukraine and R ussia since the 
onset of the war for a broad range of tasks, including intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, 
and strikes. They have been deployed on independent missions and integrated into more 
advanced combined arms operations. Uncrewed aerial vehicles’ (UAV) videos have also been 
used for information operations, showcasing the weapons’ precision and devastating effect on 
various social media platforms. UAVs, including armed UAVs, have been deployed on 
battlefields around the world for d ecades. But in recent years, commercial drone technology 
has evolved significantly while the armed drone market has also expanded to countries like 
Turkey and Iran joining the top ranks of more established drone manufacturers like the United 
States, China, and Israel. These developments, in turn, led to the proliferation of this technology 
to smaller and less advanced militaries and nonstate actors. Although most UAVs today are 
remotely operated, including those used in the war in Ukraine, tracking the evolution in UAV 
operations can provide insights into how more advanced autonomous systems may affect the 
conduct and trajectory of future conflicts.  
Ukraine has used a range of civilian and commercially available drones alongside military 
drones to provide intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance ( ISR) capabilities at the unit 
level, receive information about the locations and movements of Russian troops to inform 
targeting, and  enhance military planning at all levels. According to reports, the Ukrainian 
military drone arsenal includes systems such as Fury, Spectator, Leleka, Punisher, and PD- 1 
drones which have been used for surveillance and reconnaissance.
23  
During the first months of the war, much attention was paid to Ukraine’s use of the Turkish 
Bayraktar TB2 drones—a medium altitude long  endurance UAVs that have a range of up to 300 
kilometers, can fly up to 27 hours, and carry up to four laser -guided munitions. The TB2 is 
remotely operated, but it is advertised as being able to take off, cruise, and land autonomously; 
 
23 Samuel Bendett and Jeffrey Edmonds, Russian Military Autonomy in Ukraine: Four Months In, Center for Naval 
Analyses, July 2022, https://www.cna.org/reports/2022/07/Russian-Military-Autonomy-in-Ukraine-Four-
Months-In.pdf.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  9   
 
although such capabilities may be more akin to an autopilot or preprogrammed automation, 
rather than autonomy and real- time machine decision-making without human control. Some 
experts were initially skeptical about the drone’s potenti al effect considering t hat the  
Bayraktar TB2s are large, low -flying and radio-controlled which makes them relatively easy 
targets for layered air defense systems and electronic warfare capabilities. 24 Yet, TB2s have 
reportedly played an outsized role in destroying Russia’s surface -to-air missiles, hitting 
ammunition depos, targeting supply routes and armed convoys, and even helping sink the  
Moskva, the flagship in Russia’s Black Sea Fleet.25   
The Ukrainian armed forces are also using loitering munitions or kamikaze drones such as the 
Switchblade Tactical, which were  some of the first un crewed aerial systems that the United 
States supplied to Ukraine. The benefit of these smaller, exploding drones is that they are 
portable and can be launched from effectively anywhere, fly above the battlefield, and once 
zeroed in on a target, dive in to hit vehicles or gr oups of soldiers with high levels of precision 
and relatively limited collateral damage.26 The Ukrainian military has also reportedly made use 
of the Polish-made Warmate loitering munitions. Both the US -made Switchblades and Polish 
loitering munitions require humans to decide on a target over a live video feed, although 
according to the Switchblades’ manufacturer, the technology to deploy the weapon 
autonomously already exists today.
27 In addition to the Switchblades, the United States has also 
provided Ukraine with Phoenix Ghost Drones, a new type of loitering munitions whose specific 
capabilities have not been disclosed.28 
 
24 Lauren Kahn, “How Ukraine Is Using Drones Against Russia,” Council on Foreign Relations, Mar. 2, 2022, 
https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/how-ukraine-using-drones-against-russia.  
25 Zachary Kallenborn, Seven (Initial) Drone Warfare Lessons from Ukraine, Modern War Institute, May 12, 2022, 
https://mwi.usma.edu/seven-initial-drone-warfare-lessons-from-ukraine/; Samuel Bendett, “Drones Over 
Ukraine,” In Depth, Apr. 25, 2022, https://www.cna.org/our-media/indepth/2022/04/drones-over-ukraine.  
26 Gerrit De Vynck, Pranshu Verma, and Jonathan Baran, “Exploding ‘Kamikaze’ Drones Are Ushering in a New Era 
of Warfare in Ukraine,” Washington Post, Mar. 24, 2022, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/03/24/loitering-drone-ukraine/; Giulia Carbonaro, “How 
Switchblade Drones Could Turn the Tide of Ukraine War,” Newsweek, Mar. 17, 2022,  
https://www.newsweek.com/switchblade-drones-ukraine-war-russia-1688906; Kris Osborn, “Ukraine’s 
Switchblade Drones Will Be Game Changers for Urban Combat,” National Interest, Mar. 4, 2022, 
https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/ukraine%E2%80%99s-switchblade-drones-will-be-game-changers-
urban-combat-202220. 
27 Frank Bajak and Hanna Arhirova, “Drone Advances in Ukraine Could Bring Dawn of Killer Robots,” Los Angeles 
Times, Jan. 3, 2023, https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2023-01-03/drone-advances-in-ukraine-
dawn-of-killer-robots.  
28 De Vynck, Verma, and Baran, “Exploding ‘Kamikaze’ Drones Are Ushering in a New Era of Warfare in Ukraine;” 
Elias Tousif, “Drone Warfare in Ukraine: Understanding the Landscape,” Stimson, June 30, 2022, 
https://www.stimson.org/2022/drone-warfare-in-ukraine-understanding-the-landscape/.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  10   
 
The fact that Ukraine has been able to use UAVs effectively against higher-value Russian targets 
highlights the failure of Russian air defense systems, especially during the early stages of the 
war, and raises important questions for US military development of counter -UAV concepts, 
technologies, and operations. Despite their importance, the attrition rates of UAVs are 
extremely high. A report from RUSI estimated that around 90 percent of all UAVs used between 
February and July 2022 were destroyed, and “only around a third of UAV missions can be said 
to have been successful.”29 More recent calculations suggest that Ukrainian U AV losses stand 
at about 10,000 per month, as Russian electronic warfare capabilities have notably improved 
from the early months of the war.30    
As previously noted, most UAVs used in the war in Ukraine are remotely operated. That said, 
in July 2022, a Polish news outlet reported that Ukrainian software developers working with 
the Ukrainian military have developed an AI image classifier capable of identifying military 
vehicles hidden in camouflage to be used aboard armed drones. Although the decision to strike 
the identified target still remains in the hands of human operators, the technological 
components aboard these UAV s, including AI -based military object detection and tracking, 
could presumably allow for the use of autonomous weapons, especially in communications -
denied environments.31 In October 2022, a Ukrainian military officer told a Ukrainian news 
agency that his team already conducts fully robotic UAV operations, without human 
involvement, but did not confirm such autonomous operations included strikes and indicated 
that these were a “point phenomena” rather  than common practice. 32 A growing number of 
Ukrainian drone companies are working on AI-powered software that can help drones stay on 
 
29 Mykhaylo Zabrodskyi, Jack Watling, Oleksandr V. Danylyuk, and Nick Reynolds, Preliminary Lessons in 
Conventional Warfighting from Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February-July 2022, RUSI, Nov. 30, 2022, p. 37,  
https://static.rusi.org/359-SR-Ukraine-Preliminary-Lessons-Feb-July-2022-web-final.pdf. 
30 Jack Watling and Nick Reynolds, Meatgrinder: Russian Tactics in the Second Year of Its Invasion of Ukraine, RUSI, 
May 19, 2023, https://static.rusi.org/403-SR-Russian-Tactics-web-final.pdf.  
31 Marcin Wyrwal, “War in Ukraine: How Artificial Intelligence Is Killing Russians,” Onet, July 13, 2022, 
https://www.onet.pl/informacje/onetwiadomosci/rozwiazali-problem-armii-ukrainy-ich-pomysl-okazal-sie-dla-
rosjan-zabojczy/pkzrk0z,79cfc278; Saker UAV, https://saker.airforce/.  
32 Tatiana Urbanska, “Lt. Col. Yuroslav Gonchar: Our Everyday Life Is Like This: A Respected General Graduated, 
Took a High Position, but Did Not Even Master Word on the Computer,” Unian, Oct. 13, 2022, 
https://www.unian.ua/war/aerorozvidka-v-ukrajini-yak-pracyuyut-operatori-droniv-na-viyni-interv-yu-z-
yaroslavom-goncharom-12010002.html; David Hambling, “Will Ukraine Deploy Lethal Autonomous Drones 
Against Russia?,” New Scientist, Nov. 1, 2022, https://www.newscientist.com/article/2344966-will-ukraine-
deploy-lethal-autonomous-drones-against-russia/.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  11   
 
target even if they lose contact with the human operator because of electronic interference 
deployed by Russia.33  
The Russians have also made extensive use of drones, including systems such as Orlan -10, 
Orlan-30, Eleron-3, Takhion, Zastava, and Zala ISR drones, along with helicopter-type models, 
as well as Forpost-R and Orion combat UAVs used for longer-range ISR and combat missions 
and the Shahed-136 drones supplied by Iran.34 Since October 2022, the Russian armed forces 
have increasingly targeted civilian infrastructure with missile and drone strikes, damaging the 
supply of electricity, heating, and water across the country.35 In May 2023, for example, Russia 
launched nearly 60 drones in a single large-scale attack on Kyiv, most being the Iranian Shahed-
136 drones.36   
Russia has also publicized the use of loitering munitions, particularly the KUB -BLA and the 
Lancet. The use of the KUB -BLA raised concerns about deployment of an  “AI-based 
autonomous weapon” because the system was reportedly capable of “real -time recognition 
and classification of detected objects” using AI, or as some have put it, identify targets using 
AI.37 Still, as some reports have noted, “It is unclear if the drone may have operated in this [an 
AI-enabled autonomous] way in Ukraine.” 38 Russian media reported that in June 2022 the 
Russian military also used the Lancet-3 loitering munition to strike Ukrainian positions in the 
Zaporozhnye Region, while Ukrainian channels reported that the Ukrainian armed forces shot 
 
33 John Hudson and Kostiantyn Khudov, “The War in Ukraine Is Spurring a Revolution in Drone Warfare Using AI,” 
Washington Post, July 26, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/07/26/drones-ai-ukraine-war-
innovation/.  
34 Jeffrey Edmonds and Samuel Bendett, Russian Military Autonomy in a Ukraine Conflict, Center for Naval 
Analyses, Feb. 2022, https://www.cna.org/archive/CNA_Files/pdf/russian-military-autonomy-in-a-ukraine-
conflict.pdf.  
35 David L. Stern, “Russia Attacks Kyiv Overnight with Swarm of Self-Denotating Drones,” Washington Post, Dec. 19, 
2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/12/19/kyiv-drones-attack-belarus-putin/. 
36 Susie Blainn and Elise Morton, “Russia Launched ‘Largest Drone Attack’ on Ukrainian Capital Before Kyiv Day; 1 
Killed,” Associated Press, May 28, 2023, https://apnews.com/article/ukraine-kyiv-drone-attack-shahed-russia-
war-57a856f99e8ec9760b78a2b0669b7383.  
37 Zachary Kallenborn, “Russia May Have Used a Killer Robot in Ukraine. Now What?,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, Mar. 15, 2022, https://thebulletin.org/2022/03/russia-may-have-used-a-killer-robot-in-ukraine-now-
what/; Gregory C. Allen, Russia Probably Has Not Used AI-Enabled Weapons in Ukraine, but That Could Change, 
Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 26, 2022, https://www.csis.org/analysis/russia-probably-has-
not-used-ai-enabled-weapons-ukraine-could-change. 
38 Will Knight, “Russia’s Killer Drone in Ukraine Raises Fears About AI in Warfare,” Wired, Mar. 17, 2022, 
https://www.wired.com/story/ai-drones-russia-ukraine/.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  12   
 
down a Lancet system in the Mykolaiv region. 39 More recently, the Lancet drones were also 
reportedly being used extensively to counter Ukraine’s counteroffensive throughout the 
summer of 2023. 40 Previously, t he Lancet was used in Syria in 2021 by Russian special 
operations forces, and according to the system’s manufacturer, Zala-Aero Group, the system is 
able to autonomously locate and strike targets in designated areas—although, once again, it is 
not possible to determine whether it has been employed in such a mode in Ukraine.  
AI for b attlefield information processing  
Advances in AI technology, such as high -fidelity sensing, machine learning, computer vision, 
and natural learning processing, allow systems to collect, collate, and analyze complex data at 
unprecedented speed and volume. AI -enabled speed and greater accuracy in information 
processing can enhance situational awareness and help leaders at all command levels make 
better decisions. Moreover, that AI applications for information processing can free up 
personnel for other tasks is of immediate value for both Ukrainian and Russian forces, as both 
have struggled with manpower shortages throughout the conflict.  
In December 2022, the Washington Post reported that Ukrainian forces and NATO advisors 
outside of the country are using a Palantir tool called MetaConstellation  that aggregates data 
from commercial satellites to create a digital model of the battlefield that can help commanders 
see through the “fog of war.”
41 The larger, more sophisticated system located outside of 
Ukraine uses AI to analyze sensor data to identi fy enemy positions, estimate which weapons 
will be most effective against them, and after each strike, conduct battle damage assessments 
that are then fed back into the digital network to improve the reliability and accuracy of 
predictive models. NATO advi sors can provide this intelligence to Ukrainian commanders on 
the ground to guide military missions. In February 2023, Palantir’s CEO said that the company 
was “responsible for most of the targeting in Ukraine.”
42 Although such statements are difficult 
 
39 “Russia’s Lancet Loitering Munition Downed by Ukraine’s Small Arms Fire,” Defense Express, July 27, 2022,  
https://en.defence-
ua.com/weapon_and_tech/russias_lancet_loitering_munition_downed_by_ukraines_small_arms_fire-3691.html; 
“Russia Hammers Ukrainian Military with Game-Changing Kamikaze Drones in Zaporozhnye Region,” Tass, July 
18, 2022, https://tass.com/politics/1481379.  
40 Reuters, “Lancet: The Russian Kamikaze Drone Blunting Ukraine’s Counteroffensive,” RFE/RL, July 8, 2023, 
https://www.rferl.org/a/lancet-drones-russia-invasion-counteroffensive-kamikaze/32493513.html.  
41 David Ignatius, “How the Algorithm Tipped the Balance in Ukraine,” Washington Post, Dec. 19, 2022, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/12/19/palantir-algorithm-data-ukraine-war/.  
42 Jeffrey Dastin, “Ukraine Is Using Palantir’s Software for ‘Targeting,’ CEO Says,” Reuters, Feb. 1, 2023, 
https://www.reuters.com/technology/ukraine-is-using-palantirs-software-targeting-ceo-says-2023-02-02/.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  13   
 
to verify, it does illustrate that using AI to analyze and fuse data from different types of sources 
directly enhances precision, speed, and lethality.     
The Ukrainian  forces have also proved particularly resourceful in gaining access to 
commercial, off-the-shelf technologies and adapting them for military use. According to news 
reports, Primer, a US-based company, has supplied Ukraine with machine learning solutions 
for parsing out and exploiting intelligence information. Though  reluctant to disclose detail s, 
the company’s representative explained that AI algorithms were being used to capture, 
transcribe, translate, and analyze intercepted Russian military communications transmitted on 
unsecured or nonencrypted channels.43 The use of natural language processing technology to 
analyze military communications exemplifies not only the dual use nature of AI but also the 
relative ease within which some commercial applications can be used for military purposes—
in this case, taking off- the-shelf code and  application programming interfaces that can 
transcribe and translate speech, remove background noise, and other tasks and retraining the 
machine learning models to better recognize military vocabularies, including colloquial terms 
for military vehicles and weapons.44   
Additionally, a t least three Ukrainian government agencies said they  have used facial 
recognition technology provided by C learview AI to identify dead Russian soldiers and 
prisoners of war, or to  verify the identity of travelers across the country amid f ears of spies 
and saboteurs.45 Since the early days of the Russian invasion, the Ukrainian government has 
sought to identify dead Russian soldiers and notify their families as part of a broader effort to 
influence Russian public opinion about the realities and costs of this war. That said, it is hard 
to say if Clearview’s tool can be effective for such a task —facial recognition technology in 
general has problems with accuracy , and battlefield casualties are particularly difficult to 
characterize using such technology given the extent and severity of wartime injuries.  
AI, cyber , and information warfare  
Russian cyber threat activity in the context of the war in Ukraine has focused predominantly 
on Ukrainian targets — seeking to degrade, disrupt , and destroy Ukraine’s military, 
government, and economic functions; attack critical civilian infrastructure, supply chains, and 
 
43 Will Knight, “As Russia Plots Its Next Move, an AI Listens to the Chatter,” Wired, Apr. 4, 2022, 
https://www.wired.com/story/russia-ukraine-war-ai-surveillance/; Jonathan Guyer, “The West Is Testing Out a 
Lot of Shiny New Military Tech in Ukraine,” Vox, Sept. 21, 2022, https://www.vox.com/2022/9/21/23356800/us-
testing-tech-ukraine-russia-war.  
44 Knight, “As Russia Plots Its Next Move, an AI Listens to the Chatter.”  
45 Kashmir Hill, “Facial Recognition Goes to War,” New York Times, Apr. 7, 2022,  
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/07/technology/facial-recognition-ukraine-clearview.html.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  14   
 
logistics hubs; and limit the Ukrainian public’s access to information.46 In a June 2022 report, 
Microsoft disclosed that it detected “Russian network intrusion efforts on 128 organizations in 
42 countries outside Ukraine,” including the United States, Poland, the Baltic countries, 
Denmark, Norway, Finland, Sweden, and Turkey.47 The extent to which Russia’s cyber agencies 
and affiliated nonstate actors are integrating AI into their operations is not well known. It is 
however notable that, according to Microsoft, recent advances in cyber threat intelligence, 
“including the use of artificial intelligence, have made it possible to det ect these attacks more 
effectively,” thereby helping Ukraine withstand a high percentage of destructive Russian 
cyberattacks.
48  
Russian propaganda and influence operations have targeted several audiences: promulgating 
messages in support of the “special operation” to Russian citizens; attempting to discredit the 
Ukrainian leadership and undermine morale among the Ukrainian public; and spreading 
manipulated or false anti -NATO and anti -Ukrainian messages to foreign audiences in the 
United States, Europe, and around the world. Russian information operations have made use 
of AI in several reported incidents. During the first days of the war, Facebook took down a small 
network run by people in Russia and Ukraine (likely the Donbas region) for violating the 
company’s policy against coordinated inauthentic behavior. This network operated fake 
websites posing as independent news entities, publishing claims that amplified Russian 
propaganda and misinformation about the West betraying Ukraine and Ukraine being a failed 
state. They also created fictitious personas, purportedly Kyiv residents, that were active across 
different social media platforms, including Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, YouTube, Telegram, 
and the Russian platforms Odnoklassniki and VK. The accounts li nked to these fictitious 
personas used profile pictures that were likely generated using AI techniques such as 
generative adversarial networks (GAN). The Facebook investigation found links between this 
network and another operation they removed in April 2020 which traced back to individuals 
in Russia and the Donbas region, as well as two media organizations in Crimea, NewsFront and 
SouthFront, that have since been sanctioned by the US government.
49 In another March 2022 
incident, an AI -generated deepfake video of President Zelensky stating that Ukraine would 
 
46 “Cyber Threat Bulletin: Cyber Threat Activity Related to the Russian Invasion of Ukraine,” Canadian Centre for 
Cyber Security, July 14, 2022, https://cyber.gc.ca/sites/default/files/cyber-threat-activity-associated-russian-
invasion-ukraine-e.pdf.  
47 “Defending Ukraine: Early Lessons from the Cyber War,” Microsoft, June 22, 2022, 
https://query.prod.cms.rt.microsoft.com/cms/api/am/binary/RE50KOK.  
48 “Defending Ukraine: Early Lessons from the Cyber War.”  
49 Nathaniel Gleicher and David Agranovich, “Updates on Our Security Work in Ukraine,” Meta, Feb. 27, 2022, 
https://about.fb.com/news/2022/02/security-updates-ukraine/.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  15   
 
surrender to Russia was uploaded on a hacked Ukrainian news website, but it was quickly 
debunked.50  
The Effect  of AI and Autonomous 
Technologies on Strategic Stabili ty and 
Conflict Dynamics  
Assessing the effect  of AI and autonomous technologies on the trajectory and dynamics of 
Russia’s war in Ukraine or strategic stability more broadly is not a straightforward task. Nearly 
all publicly available information about th e deployment of AI capabilities and technologies is 
incomplete. Media reports or statements from public officials rarely provide sufficient 
technical details to decipher the specific capabilities or functions of a given system. Accounts 
of how a particular technology has been used are also quite general, missing important details 
about location, time, conditions, effectiveness, and influence due to concerns about operational 
security, safety of sources, and sharing classified data. Statements from public of ficials or 
company representatives about the capabilities and uses of various AI and autonomous 
systems are rarely independently verified and may be overstating, minimizing, or neglecting 
crucial information for a variety of political, commercial, security , or other reasons. 
Furthermore, at this stage, it is nearly impossible to assess the effect  of AI and autonomous 
technologies on conflict dynamics or strategic stability independently from other factors, 
including other weapons and military systems or oth er forms of foreign technological and 
intelligence assistance provided to Ukraine. With these limitations in mind, this section 
considers how the use of AI and autonomous technologies in the war in Ukraine may have 
affected the risks of escalation from con ventional war to the use of nuclear weapons and 
conflict spreading to include other parties.  
Risk of escalation from conventional war to nuclear conflict 
Since the beginning of Russia’s war in Ukraine, Putin has repeatedly threatened to use nuclear 
weapons. US officials remain concerned that Putin could reach for Russia’s arsenal of 
nonstrategic nuclear weapons if he is losing power, if the Kremlin believes NATO is about to 
directly enter the war, or if Russia’s conventional military collapses, for example , because 
 
50 Alden Wahlstrom, Alice Revelli, Sam Riddell, David Mainor, and Ryan Serabian, “The IO Offensive: Information 
Operations Surrounding the Russian Invasion of Ukraine,” Mandiant, May 19, 2022, 
https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/information-operations-surrounding-ukraine.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  16   
 
Ukraine’s victory grows inevitabl y.51 The threat of nuclear escalation is a particularly 
dangerous element of Russia’s war in Ukraine. However, the use of AI and autonomous 
technologies does not appear to have much of an effect on these dynamics, at least not in any 
of the ways offered by the literature on the topic, as previously outlined in this paper.  
The possibility of nuclear escalation continues to influence decisions about what type of 
advanced weaponry should be provided to Ukraine. 52 This is particularly true in regard to 
NATO’s or more specifically Washington’s reluctance to supply Ukraine with long -range 
missiles that can hit targets inside Russia. Yet, this strategy of restraint has not constrained the 
provision of AI- enabled intelligence and battle management software that is helping the 
Ukrainians target Russian military forces and equipment. Now, if Ukraine defeats Russia on the 
battlefield and the Russian conventional military disintegrates, there is little doubt that 
Western military aid would have played a vital role in that outcome. It would, however, be 
difficult to conclusively claim that it was Western aid specifically in the form of AI that allowed 
the Ukrainians to defeat the Russian military (or even that this defeat led to the Russian 
military’s collapse). As it stands, only a tenuous connection exists between the wartime use of 
AI and the risk of escalation from conventional war to the use of nuclear weapons. 
Risk of conflict escalation and/or conflict spreading to other 
countries  
As previously discussed, scholars have offered a wide range of arguments about the potential 
effect of AI and autonomous technologies on conflict dynamics, including analysis on the 
destabilizing effects of AI-enabled cyber operations and disinformation campaigns. Currently, 
there is not enough information to assess the validity of these hypotheses primarily because it 
is not publicly known whether and to what extent Russia’s cyber agencies and affiliated 
nonstate actors are integrating AI into the ir operations. That said, the evidence surfaced by 
Microsoft indicates that AI has played a more prominent role in buttressing cyber defenses and 
making it possible to detect Russia’s destructive cyberattacks more effectively. How this AI -
enabled defensive advantage may affect cyber conflict and the risk of escalation into a military 
 
51 Julian E. Barnes and David E. Sanger, “Fears of Russian Nuclear Weapons Use Have Diminished, but Could 
Reemerge,” New York Times, Feb. 3, 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/03/us/politics/russia-nuclear-
weapons.html; Julian E. Barnes and David E. Sanger, “C.I.A. Director Airs Concern That Putin Might Turn to Nuclear 
Weapons,” New York Times, Apr. 14, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/14/us/politics/putin-nuclear-
weapons.html.  
52 Janice Gross Stein, “Escalation Management in Ukraine: ‘Learning by Doing’ in Response to the ‘Threat That 
Leaves Something to Chance,’” Texas National Security Review 6, no. 3 (2023), 
https://tnsr.org/2023/06/escalation-management-in-ukraine-learning-by-doing-in-response-to-the-threat-that-
leaves-something-to-chance/#_ftnref7.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  17   
 
confrontation or the spread of conflict to other countries is certainly a question that merits 
further attention.  
Although the majority of Russia’s cyber activity since the onset of the wa r has focused on 
Ukrainian targets, Russian intelligence agencies have also targeted government computer 
networks and other institutions in other countries, including several NATO members. As such, 
it is worth considering the risk that cyberattacks (that d o not rely on AI or autonomous 
capabilities) could lead to conflict escalation, for instance, by drawing other parties into the 
Russo-Ukrainian war. For example, some observers have suggested that Moscow could 
respond to increased Western sanctions or severe setbacks on the battlefield with intensified 
cyberattacks that would in turn be met with a direct military response.
53 Alternatively, 
nonstate affiliated hackers or state -linked cyber proxies could take action not authorized by 
any proper authority, target, or unintentionally harm highly sensitive systems, such as those 
related to critical infrastructure, conventional military systems, and even nuclear command  
and control processes.54  
Thus far, Russian cyberattacks outside of Ukraine have not led to the use of lethal force which 
fits the fact that scholars have come to view cyber conflicts as having the characteristics of an 
intelligence, rather than a military contest.
55 Interestingly, some observers have posited that 
Moscow seems more concerned about the possibility of unintended escalation or widespread 
international effects triggered by cyberattacks. And with the stakes being much higher in 
Ukraine, including the possibility of a direct conflict with NATO, it is possible that “the Kremlin 
may simply not trust its cyber agencies to achieve carefully calibrated effects within a strategy 
of deterrence and escalation.”56 
With respect to the destabilizing effects of AI -enabled disinformation campaigns and the risk 
of escalation, one concern is that Russia’s  malign information operations will stir domestic 
unrest in European countries that have sizable Russian populations and have also taken in 
large numbers of Ukrainian refugees. Generally, it would be difficult to judge the independent 
effect of AI-enabled disinformation operations from those that rely on human labor to generate 
 
53 Jason Healey, “Preventing Cyber Escalation in Ukraine and After,” War on the Rocks, Mar. 9, 2022, 
https://warontherocks.com/2022/03/preventing-cyber-escalation-in-ukraine-and-after/.  
54 Andrew A. Szarejko and John Arquilla, “Accidents and Escalation in a Cyber Age,” War on the Rocks, Dec. 22, 
2021, https://warontherocks.com/2021/12/accidents-and-escalation-in-a-cyber-age/.  
55 Joshua Rovner, “Cyber War as an Intelligence Contest,” War on the Rocks, Sept. 16, 2019, 
https://warontherocks.com/2019/09/cyber-war-as-an-intelligence-contest/.  
56 Jon Bateman, Nick Beecroft, and Gavin Wilde, “What the Russian Invasion Reveals About the Future of Cyber 
Warfare,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Dec. 19, 2022, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2022/12/19/what-russian-invasion-reveals-about-future-of-cyber-warfare-
pub-88667.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  18   
 
and spread manipulated or false narratives. That said, the use of AI -enabled disinformation 
tools in the war in Ukraine has been limited, at least according to open -source reports. A nd 
even in the few publicly reported cases where AI has been deployed, for example in generating 
fake personas on social media or powering deepfakes, the campaign was countered and quickly 
debunked. Therefore, it does not appear that Russian actors have effectively used AI to 
hyperpower their information warfare, which in turn may have caused unrest in other 
countries and escalated the wider conflict. Still, Russian information operations tactics 
continue to evolve, with reports suggesting Russian hackers a re discussing how to use the 
newly released AI-enabled ChatGPT to scale malicious activity.
57  
The war in Ukraine also provides early insights into discussions about escalation due to 
accidents, misuse, and failure of AI- enabled military weapons and system s. For instance, a 
particularly tense incident unfolded on November 16, 2022 when a deadly blast in Poland 
killed two people, heightening concerns about escalation and the conflict spreading to include 
other countries. Shortly after the incident, statement s from NATO Secretary General Jens 
Stoltenberg and Polish sources explained that the explosion was an accident caused by 
Ukrainian air defenses responding to a Russian missile barrage rather than an intentional 
attack by Russia on NATO ally territory.
58  
Specific details about the incident where the errant Ukrainian defensive missile hit Poland, 
including the extent of autonomy embedded in the system or the cause of the misfire, are not 
publicly available. That said, automated and autonomous features have been integrated into 
the critical functions of most air defense systems in order to counter and neutralize incoming 
threats at a speed that humans cannot manage.
59 In the past, there have been several cases 
where air defense systems with automated and auto nomous features brought down civilian 
aircraft— such as the Malaysian Airlines MH17 flight that was shot down by a Russian Buk 
system over Eastern Ukraine in July 2014 — or hit friendly military aircraft —as was the case 
with the Patriot air defense system during the 2003 Iraq war. When such systems fail, it raises 
important questions about meaningful human control of increasingly autonomous systems, the 
challenge of attributing responsibility for accidental launch, and the risk of inadvertent 
escalation due to  accidents or malfunctions. In this latest incident, the friendly relations 
 
57 “ChatGPT Helps Hackers Write Malicious Codes to Steal Your Personal Data,” Business Insider, Jan. 15, 2023, 
https://www.businessinsider.in/tech/news/chatgpt-helps-hackers-write-malicious-codes-to-steal-your-
personal-data/articleshow/97000603.cms.  
58 “Poland and NATO Say Ukrainian Air Defense Likely Caused Deadly Blast,” NBC News, Nov. 16, 2022, 
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/live-blog/russia-ukraine-war-live-updates-poland-missile-putin-nato-
rcna57416.  
59 Ingvild Bode and Tom Watts, Meaningless Human Control: Lessons from Air Defence Systems on Meaningful 
Human Control for the Debate on AWS, Center for War Studies, University of Southern Denmark, Feb. 2021, 
https://dronewars.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/DW-Control-WEB.pdf.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  19   
 
between Ukraine and Poland and shared understanding that Russia was ultimately at fault for 
the broader situation helped avert escalation. In future scenarios, however, there is no  
guarantee diplomacy will prevail, especially between countries hostile to one another or where 
there are no crisis communications channels in place.   
US-Russia Relations and Strategic Stability in 
the Context of AI and Autonomous 
Technologies  
Beyond the current war in Ukraine, how might the integration of AI and autonomous 
technologies into military systems and missions affect strategic stability between the United 
States and Russia? Although trust between the two countries is at a nadir, Washi ngton and 
Moscow still have a shared interest in preventing accidental war and minimizing the risk of 
escalation or conflict triggered by AI accidents or unexpected interactions between adversarial 
autonomous systems.  
Currently, there is little appetite for a blanket ban on military uses of AI. Discussions focused 
on lethal autonomous weapons systems (LAWS) in the Group of Governmental Experts on 
LAWS at the United Nations have yielded little progress toward a legally binding instrument or 
any other type of a document to help regulate the development and use of these technologies. 
In this context, scholars and policymakers have increasingly looked toward confidence 
building measures (CBMs), a broad set of actions that states can take to increase transparency, 
enhance clarity about intentions, avoid misunderstandings, and reduce risks linked to military 
AI.
60  
Several CBMs are applicable to military AI and pertinent to the US -Russia case. Perhaps the 
most effective approach is to constrain  the use of AI in domains of exceptional and possibly 
catastrophic risk, such as nuclear operations.61 Some scholars have suggested that the United 
States, for instance, could propose a multilateral commitment to nuclear command and control 
systems always including a human in  the loop as well as committing to not plac ing nuclear 
weapons on uncrewed platforms where a human will not be present to correct errors or 
 
60 Michael Horowitz and Paul Scharre, AI and International Stability: Risks and Confidence Building Measures, 
Center for a New American Security, Jan. 12, 2021, https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/ai-and-
international-stability-risks-and-confidence-building-measures.  
61 Ioana Puscas, Confidence Building Measures for Artificial Intelligence: A Framing Paper, UNIDIR, 2022, 
https://unidir.org/sites/default/files/2022-12/Confidence-Building_Final.pdf.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  20   
 
override a system in case something went wrong.62 Nuclear-armed states, including China and 
Russia, already have nuc lear command and control practices that include humans working 
alongside automated decision aids to launch nuclear weapons, and there is a general consensus 
that humans should retain control over decisions to use nuclear weapons. It may be possible 
to raise this issue in future strategic stability dialogues with Russia (when such engagements 
recommence). Even if Russia refuses to participate in this CBM, the United States can solidify 
its position as a global leader in AI safety without undermining US nucle ar deterrence by 
advancing such a measure and collaborating with other nuclear -armed states to promote a 
broader multilateral proposal on AI and nuclear weapons. 
As US and Russian militaries incorporate more autonomous functionalities into uncrewed 
systems deployed in contested regions such as the Black Sea or in NATO countries closest to 
Russian borders, accidents, malfunctions, and complicated interactions between these systems 
can further inflame tensions. Information sharing and notification procedures put in place to 
reduce uncertainty around deployments of autonomous and AI -enabled systems can help 
minimize or manage the risk of inadvertent escalation. Drawing on the 1972 US -Soviet 
Incidents at Sea Agreement that created a mechanism for communication a nd information 
sharing about the movement of US and Soviet naval vessels, some scholars have suggested 
creating an international Autonomous Incidents Agreement focused on military applications 
of autonomous systems. Such an agreement could establish broad rules for acceptable 
behavior when deploying AI -enabled and autonomous systems, especially in the air and 
maritime domains, and potentially include a channel for military -to-military communication 
to respond to incidents in real time.
63  
The success of CBMs such as the Autonomous Incident Agreement would of course depend on 
states’ participation and compliance. Moreover, as the historical record of US -Soviet or US -
China relations shows, incidents and skirmishes continue to occur despite the presence of 
numerous CBMs and other more formal agreements for deconfliction of military forces. Yet, it 
is precisely in times of heightened tensions that mechanisms for diluting uncertainty and 
preventing surprise are most needed to help differentiate between normal and unusual 
behavior. Such mechanisms are particularly necessary at this early stage of military AI 
development where there is still a great deal that we are unsure about regarding the real-world 
 
62 Michael C. Horowitz and Lauren Kahn, “Leading in Artificial Intelligence Through Confidence Building 
Measures,” Washington Quarterly 44, no. 4 (2021), pp. 91-106, 10.1080/0163660X.2021.2018794; Lauren Khan, 
“Mending the ‘Broken Arrow:’ Confidence Building Measures at the AI-Nuclear Nexus,” War on the Rocks, Nov. 4, 
2022, https://warontherocks.com/2022/11/mending-the-broken-arrow-confidence-building-measures-at-the-ai-
nuclear-nexus/.  
63 Michael Horowitz and Paul Scharre, “AI and International Stability: Risks and Confidence Building Measures,” 
Center for a New American Security, Jan. 12, 2021.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  21   
 
capabilities of AI -enabled and autonomous systems and how they m ay interact with or 
influence existing military systems, missions, and dynamics.64  
There are other ways to promote information-sharing and communications, including through 
Track II academic- to-academic exchanges that can serve as building blocks for formal 
cooperation between countries in some future point. Discussions and exchanges of ideas 
between academic communities and technical experts from different countries can shed light 
on differences in approaches to AI development as well as surface areas of shared interests in 
AI safety. It may be difficult to imagine such programs gaining much traction amid Russia’s 
brutal war in Ukraine and the intensifying techno -strategic competition between the US and 
China. Yet , exchanges of this nature also took place during the Cold War when relations 
between the United States and the Soviet Union were far from amiable; today, US -based 
scientists and researchers still collaborate extensively with their counterparts in China despite 
the heightened tensions between the two countries.       
The above discussion has focused primarily on the actions that states can take to minimize the 
risk from military AI amid deep distrust and even open hostilities. The war in Ukraine, 
however, has highlighted the vital role that commercial technology companies play in modern 
war, urging us to closely consider their growing effect on conflict dynamics, deterrence, and 
strategic stability. Companies such as SpaceX, Microsoft, Palantir, Planet, Capella Space, Maxar 
Technologies, and many others have provided data, equipment, technological capabilities, and 
other resources to the Ukrainian government, armed forces, and civilians, as well as to US and 
NATO allies working to help Ukraine win.
65 In this case, it appears that moral imperatives, 
business calculations, and geopolitical positions of commercial companies, most of them US -
based or located in the West, are aligned with US national security priorities and strategic 
interests in supporting Ukraine. In future conflicts, however, these prefe rences could diverge 
or even come to a head. Meanwhile, the working relationships between the government and 
industry partners in competitor or adversary countries will also have a bearing on how future 
crises or conflicts may unfold.  
With private technology companies at the forefront of AI innovation and commercial off -the-
shelf technologies increasingly used on the battlefield, now is the time to ensure these actors 
are also involved in international efforts to articulate policy on military autono my and AI or 
implement confidence building measures to reduce the risk of accidental or unintended 
escalation. Finally, although certain types of exchanges between the United States and Russia 
may not be politically feasible at this point, continuing to invest in ways to reduce uncertainty 
 
64 Horowitz and Kahn, “Leading in Artificial Intelligence Through Confidence Building Measures.”  
65 Christine Fox and Emelia S. Probasco, “Big Tech Goes to War: To Help Ukraine, Washington, and Silicon Valley 
Must Work Together,” Foreign Affairs, Oct. 19, 2022, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/big-tech-goes-war.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  22   
 
and avoid misunderstandings around the use of military autonomy and AI will be critical for 
solidifying strategic stability and reducing the risk of catastrophic escalation.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  23   
 
References  
Allen, Gregory C. Russia Probably Has Not Used AI-Enabled Weapons in Ukraine, but That Could Change. 
Center for Strategic and International Studies. May 26, 2022. 
https://www.csis.org/analysis/russia-probably-has-not-used-ai-enabled-weapons-ukraine-
could-change.   
Bajak, Frank, and Hanna Arhirova. “Drone Advances in Ukraine Could Bring Dawn of Killer Robots.” Los 
Angeles Times. Jan. 3, 2023. https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2023-01-
03/drone-advances-in-ukraine-dawn-of-killer-robots.  
Barnes, Julian E., and David E. Sanger. “C.I.A. Director Airs Concern That Putin Might Turn to Nuclear 
Weapons.” New York Times. Apr. 14, 2022. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/14/us/politics/putin-nuclear-weapons.html.  
———. “Fears of Russian Nuclear Weapons Use Have Diminished, but Could Reemerge.” New  York 
Times. Feb. 3, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/03/us/politics/russia -nuclear-
weapons.html.  
Bateman, Jon, Nick Beecroft, and Gavin Wilde. “What the Russian Invasion Reveals About the Future of 
Cyber Warfare.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Dec. 19, 2022. 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2022/12/19/what-russian-invasion-reveals-about-future-
of-cyber-warfare-pub-88667.   
Bendett, Samuel. “Drones Over Ukraine.” In Depth. Apr. 25. https://www.cna.org/our-
media/indepth/2022/04/drones-over-ukraine.   
———. “Roles and Implications of AI in the Russian -Ukrainian Conflict.” Russia Matters. July 20, 2023. 
https://www.russiamatters.org/analysis/roles-and-implications-ai-russian-ukrainian-
conflict.  
Bendett, Samuel, and Jeffrey Edmonds. Russian Military Autonomy in Ukraine: Four Months In . Center 
for Naval Analyses. July 2022. https://www.cna.org/reports/2022/07/Russian-Military-
Autonomy-in-Ukraine-Four-Months-In.pdf.   
Blainn, Susie, and Elise Morton. “Russia Launched ‘Largest Drone Attack’ on Ukrainian Capital Before 
Kyiv Day; 1 Killed.” Associated Press. May 28, 2023. https://apnews.com/article/ukraine-
kyiv-drone-attack-shahed-russia-war-57a856f99e8ec9760b78a2b0669b7383.   
Bode, Ingvild, and Tom Watts. Meaningless Human Control: Lessons from Air Defence Systems on 
Meaningful Human Control for the Debate on AWS. Center for War Studies, University of 
Southern Denmark. Feb. 2021. https://dronewars.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/DW-
Control-WEB.pdf.   
Buchanan, Ben, John Bansemer, Dakota Cary, Jack Lucas, and Micah Musser. Automating Cyber Attacks . 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology. Nov. 2020. 
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/automating-cyber-attacks.   
Buchanan, Ben, Andrew Lohn, Micah Musser, and Katerina Sedova. Truth, Lies, and Automation: How 
Language Models Could Change Disinformation. Center for Security and Emerging Technology. 
May 2021. https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/truth-lies-and-automation/.   
Byman, Daniel L., Chongyang Gao, Chris Meserole, and V.S. Subrahmanian. Deepfakes and International 
Conflict. Brookings. Jan. 2023. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/FP_20230105_deepfakes_international_conflict.pdf .   
Carbonaro, Giulia. “How Switchblade Drones Could Turn the Tide of Ukraine War.” Newsweek. Mar. 17, 
2022. https://www.newsweek.com/switchblade-drones-ukraine-war-russia-1688906.  
“ChatGPT Helps Hackers Write Malicious Codes to Steal Your Personal Data.” Business Insider. Jan. 15, 
2023. https://www.businessinsider.in/tech/news/chatgpt-helps-hackers-write-malicious-
codes-to-steal-your-personal-data/articleshow/97000603.cms.  

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  24   
 
“Cyber Threat Bulletin: Cyber Threat Activity Related to the Russian Invasion of Ukraine.” Canadian 
Centre for Cyber Security. July 14, 2022. https://cyber.gc.ca/sites/default/files/cyber -threat-
activity-associated-russian-invasion-ukraine-e.pdf.   
Dastin, Jeffrey. “Ukraine Is Using Palantir’s Software for ‘Targeting,’ CEO Says.” Reuters. Feb. 1, 2023. 
https://www.reuters.com/technology/ukraine-is-using-palantirs-software-targeting-ceo-
says-2023-02-02/.   
“Defending Ukraine: Early Lessons from the Cyber War.” Microsoft. June 22, 2022. 
https://query.prod.cms.rt.microsoft.com/cms/api/am/binary/RE50KOK.   
Edmonds, Jeffrey, and Samuel Bendett. Russian Military Autonomy in a Ukraine Conflict. Center for 
Naval Analyses. Feb. 2022. https://www.cna.org/archive/CNA_Files/pdf/russian-military-
autonomy-in-a-ukraine-conflict.pdf.   
Fox, Christine, and Emelia S. Probasco. “Big Tech Goes to War: To Help Ukraine, Washington, and 
Silicon Valley Must Work Together.” Foreign Affairs. Oct. 19, 2022. 
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/big-tech-goes-war.  
Gates, Jonathan. “Is the SSBN Deterrent Vulnerable to Autonomous Drones?” RUSI Journal 161, no. 6 
(2016): 28-35. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03071847.2016.1265834 .   
Gleicher, Nathaniel, and David Agranovich. “Updates on Our Security Work in Ukraine.” Meta. Feb. 27, 
2022. https://about.fb.com/news/2022/02/security-updates-ukraine/.   
Goldstein, Josh, Renee DiResta, Girish Sastry, Micah Musser, Matthew Gentzel, and Katerina Sedova.  
Generative Language Models and Automated Influence Operations: Emerging Threats and 
Potential Mitigations. Stanford Internet Observatory, OpenAI, and Georgetown University’s 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology. Jan. 11, 2023. 
https://cdn.openai.com/papers/forecasting-misuse.pdf.   
Guyer, Jonathan. “The West Is Testing Out a Lot of Shiny New Military Tech in Ukraine.” Vox. Sept. 21, 
2022. https://www.vox.com/2022/9/21/23356800/us-testing-tech-ukraine-russia-war.   
Hambling, David. “Will Ukraine Deploy Lethal Autonomous Drones Against Russia?” New Scientist. Nov. 
1, 2022. https://www.newscientist.com/article/2344966-will-ukraine-deploy-lethal-
autonomous-drones-against-russia/.  
Healey, Jason. “Preventing Cyber Escalation in Ukraine and After.” War on the Rocks. Mar. 9, 2022. 
https://warontherocks.com/2022/03/preventing-cyber-escalation-in-ukraine-and-after/.   
Hill, Kashmir. “Facial Recognition Goes to War.” New York Times. Apr. 7, 2022. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/07/technology/facial -recognition-ukraine-
clearview.html.  
Horowitz, Michael, Sarah E. Kreps, and Matthew Fuhrmann. “Separating Fact from Fiction in the Debate 
Over Drone Proliferation.” International Security 41, no. 2 (2016): 7-42. 
https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/isec_a_00257.pdf .   
———. “Separating Fact from Fiction in the Debate Over Drone Proliferation.” International Security 
41, no. 2 (2016): 7-42.  
Horowitz, Michael, and Paul Scharre. AI and International Stability: Risks and Confidence Building 
Measures. Center for a New American Security. Jan. 12, 2021. 
https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/ai-and-international-stability-risks-and-
confidence-building-measures.   
———. “AI and International Stability: Risks and Confidence Building Measures.” Center for a New 
American Security. Jan. 12, 2021.  
Horowitz, Michael C. “When Speed Kills: Lethal Autonomous Weapon Systems, Deterrence, and 
Stability.” Journal of Strategic Studies 42, no. 6 (2019): 764-788.  
Horowitz, Michael C., and Lauren Kahn. “Leading in Artificial Intelligence Through Confidence Building 
Measures.” Washington Quarterly 44, no. 4 (2021): 91-106. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0163660X.2021.2018794.   

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  25   
 
Hudson, John, and Kostiantyn Khudov. “The War in Ukraine Is Spurring a Revolution in Drone Warfare 
Using AI.” Washington Post. July 26, 2023. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/07/26/drones-ai-ukraine-war-innovation/.  
———. “The War in Ukrain e Is Spurring a Revolution in Drone Warfare Using AI.” Washington Post. 
July 26, 2023. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/07/26/drones- ai-ukraine-
war-innovation/.  
Ignatius, David. “How the Algorithm Tipped the Balance in Ukraine.” Washington Post. Dec. 19, 2022. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/12/19/palantir-algorithm-data-ukraine-
war/.  
Johnson, James. “AI, Autonomy, and the Risk of Nuclear War.” War on the Rocks. July 29, 2022. 
https://warontherocks.com/2022/07/ai-autonomy-and-the-risk-of-nuclear-war/.   
Kahn, Lauren. “How Ukraine Is Using Drones Against Russia.” Council on Foreign Relations. Mar. 2, 
2022. https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/how-ukraine-using-drones-against-russia.   
Kallenborn, Zachary. “Russia May Have Used a Killer Robot in Ukraine. Now What?” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists. Mar. 15, 2022. https://thebulletin.org/2022/03/russia-may-have-used-a-
killer-robot-in-ukraine-now-what/.  
———. Seven (Initial) Drone Warfare Lessons from Ukraine. May 12, 2022. 
https://mwi.usma.edu/seven-initial-drone-warfare-lessons-from-ukraine/.   
Khan, Lauren. “Mending the ‘Broken Arrow:’ Confidence Building Measures at the AI-Nuclear Nexus.” 
War on the Rocks. Nov. 4, 2022. https://warontherocks.com/2022/11/mending -the-broken-
arrow-confidence-building-measures-at-the-ai-nuclear-nexus/.   
Knight, Will. “As Russia Plots Its Next Move, an AI Listens to the Chatter.” Wired. Apr. 4, 2022. 
https://www.wired.com/story/russia-ukraine-war-ai-surveillance/.  
———. “Russia’s Killer Drone in Ukraine Raises Fear s About AI in Warfare.” Wired. Mar. 17, 2022. 
https://www.wired.com/story/ai-drones-russia-ukraine/.  
Konaev, Margarita. “With AI, We’ll See Faster Fights, But Longer Wars.” War on the Rocks. Oct. 29, 
2019. https://warontherocks.com/2019/10/with-ai-well-see-faster-fights-but-longer-wars/.   
Konaev, Margarita, and Samuel Bendett. “Russian AI-Enabled Combat: Coming to a City Near You?” War 
on the Rocks. July 31, 2019. https://warontherocks.com/2019/07/russian-ai-enabled-
combat-coming-to-a-city-near-you/.   
Konaev, Margarita, Husanjot Chahal, Ryan Fedasiuk, Tina Huang, and Ilya Rahkovksy. US Military 
Investments in Autonomy and AI: Costs, Benefits, and Strategic Effects . Center for Security and 
Emerging Technology. Oct. 2020. https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/u -s-military-
investments-in-autonomy-and-ai-a-strategic-assessment/.   
Lewis, Larry, and Andrew Ilachinski. Leveraging AI to Mitigate Civilian Harm. Center for Naval 
Analyses. Feb. 2022. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/trecms/pdf/AD1181578.pdf.   
Lieber, Keir, and Daryl Press. “The New Era of Counterforce: Technological Change and the Future of 
Nuclear Deterrence.” International Security 41, no. 4 (2017): 9-49.  
Lin, Herbert. “Escalation Risks in an Artificial Intelligence—Infused World.” In Artificial Intelligence, 
China, Russia, and the Global Order. Edited by Nicholas D. Wright. Air University Press, 2019, 
143-152. http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep19585.25.   
Margulies, Peter. “The Other Side of Autonomous Weapons: Using Artificial Intelligence to Enhance IHL 
Compliance.” In Impact of Emerging Technologies on the Law of Armed Conflict. Edited by 
Ronald T.P. Alcala and Eric Talbot Jensen. New York: Oxford Academic, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190915322.003.0006.   
Mishra, Sylvia. “Could Unmanned Underwater Vehicles Undermine Nuclear Deterrence?” Strategist. 
May 8, 2019. https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/could-unmanned-underwater-vehicles-
undermine-nuclear-deterrence/.  
Morgan, Forrest E., Benjamin Boudreaux, Andrew J. Lohn, Mary Ashby, Christian Curriden, Kelly Klima, 
and Derek Grossman. Military Applications of Artificial Intelligence: Ethical Concerns in an 
Uncertain World. RAND. 2020. 

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  26   
 
https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR3100/RR3139 -
1/RAND_RR3139-1.pdf.   
Nurkin, Tate, and Margarita Konaev. Eye to Eye in AI: Developing Artificial Intelligence for National 
Security and Defense. Atlantic Council. 2022. https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-
research-reports/report/eye-to-eye-in-ai/#introduction.   
Osborn, Kris. “Ukraine’s Switchblade Drones Will Be Game Changers for Urban Combat.” National 
Interest. Mar. 4, 2022. https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/ukraine%E2%80%99s-
switchblade-drones-will-be-game-changers-urban-combat-202220.  
“Poland and NATO Say Ukrainian Air Defense Likely Caused Deadly Blast.” NBC News. Nov. 16, 2022. 
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/live-blog/russia-ukraine-war-live-updates-poland-
missile-putin-nato-rcna57416.   
Polyakova, Alina. “Weapons of the Weak: Russia and AI-Driven Asymmetric Warfare.” Brookings. Nov. 
15, 2018. https://www.brookings.edu/research/weapons-of-the-weak-russia-and-ai-driven-
asymmetric-warfare/.   
Puscas, Ioana. Confidence Building Measures for Artificial Intelligence: A Framing Paper . UNIDIR. 2022. 
https://unidir.org/sites/default/files/2022-12/Confidence-Building_Final.pdf.   
Reuters. “Lancet: The Russian Kamikaze Drone Blunting Ukraine’s Counteroffensive.” RFE/RL. July 8, 
2023. https://www.rferl.org/a/lancet-drones-russia-invasion-counteroffensive-
kamikaze/32493513.html.   
Rovner, Joshua. “Cyber War as an Intelligence Contest.” War on the Rocks. Sept. 16, 2019. 
https://warontherocks.com/2019/09/cyber-war-as-an-intelligence-contest/.   
“Russia Hammers Ukrainian Military with Game-Changing Kamikaze Drones in Zaporozhnye Region.” 
Tass. July 18, 2022. https://tass.com/politics/1481379.   
“Russia’s Lancet Loitering Munition Downed by Ukraine’s Small Arms Fire.” Defense Express. July 27, 
2022. https://en.defence-
ua.com/weapon_and_tech/russias_lancet_loitering_munition_downed_by_ukraines_small_arm
s_fire-3691.html.   
“Saker UAV.” https://saker.airforce/.   
Sedova, Katerina, Christine McNeill, Aurora Johnson, Aditi Joshi, and Ido Wulkan. AI and the Future of 
Disinformation Campaigns. Center for Security and Emerging Technology. Dec. 2021. 
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ai-and-the-future-of-disinformation-campaigns/.   
Stein, Janice Gross. “Escalation Management in Ukraine: ‘Learning by Doing’ in Response to the ‘Threat 
That Leaves Something to Chance'.” Texas National Security Review 6, no. 3 (2023). 
https://tnsr.org/2023/06/escalation-management-in-ukraine-learning-by-doing-in-
response-to-the-threat-that-leaves-something-to-chance/#_ftnref7.   
Stern, David L. “Russia Attacks Kyiv Overnight with Swarm of Self-Denotating Drones.” Washington 
Post. Dec. 19, 2022. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/12/19/kyiv -drones-
attack-belarus-putin/.  
Szarejko, Andrew A., and John Arquilla. “Accidents and Escalation in a Cyber Age.” War on the Rocks. 
Dec. 22, 2021. https://warontherocks.com/2021/12/accidents-and-escalation-in-a-cyber-
age/.   
Tousif, Elias. “Drone Warfare in Ukraine: Understanding the Landscape.” Stimson. June 30, 2022. 
https://www.stimson.org/2022/drone-warfare-in-ukraine-understanding-the-landscape/.   
Urbanska, Tatiana. “Lt. Col. Yuroslav Gonchar: Our Everyday Life Is Like This: A Respected General 
Graduated, Took a High Position, but Did Not Even Master Word on the Computer.” Unian. Oct. 
13, 2022. https://www.unian.ua/war/aerorozvidka-v-ukrajini-yak-pracyuyut-operatori-
droniv-na-viyni-interv-yu-z-yaroslavom-goncharom-12010002.html.   
Vincent Boulanin, ed. The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Strategic Stability and Nuclear Risk . SIPRI. 
2019. https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2019-05/sipri1905-ai-strategic-stability-
nuclear-risk.pdf.   

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  27   
 
Vosoughi, Soroush, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral. “The Spread of True and False News Online.” Science. Mar. 
9, 2018. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aap9559.  
Vynck, Gerrit De, Pranshu Verma, and Jonathan Baran. “Exploding ‘Kamikaze’ Drones Are Ushering in a 
New Era of Warfare in Ukraine.” Washington Post. Mar. 4, 2022. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/03/24/loitering-drone-ukraine/.  
Wahlstrom, Alden, Alice Revelli, Sam Riddell, David Mainor, and Ryan Serabian. “The IO Offensive: 
Information Operations Surrounding the Russian Invasion of Ukraine.” Mandiant. May 19, 
2022. https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/information-operations-surrounding-
ukraine.   
Watling, Jack, and Nick Reynolds. Meatgrinder: Russian Tactics in the Second Year of Its Invasion of 
Ukraine. RUSI. May 19, 2023. https://static.rusi.org/403-SR-Russian-Tactics-web-final.pdf.   
Wyrwal, Marcin. “War in Ukraine: How Artificial Intelligence Is Killing Russians.” Onet. July 13, 2022. 
https://www.onet.pl/informacje/onetwiadomosci/rozwiazali- problem-armii-ukrainy-ich-
pomysl-okazal-sie-dla-rosjan-zabojczy/pkzrk0z,79cfc278.   
Zabrodskyi, Mykhaylo, Jack Watling, Oleksandr V. Danylyuk, and Nick Reynolds . Preliminary Lessons in 
Conventional Warfighting from Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February-July 2022. RUSI. Nov. 30, 
2022. https://static.rusi.org/359-SR-Ukraine-Preliminary-Lessons-Feb-July-2022-web-
final.pdf.   
Zenko, Michael. Reforming US Drone Strike Policies. Council on Foreign Relations. 2013. 
https://www.cfr.org/report/reforming-us-drone-strike-policies.   

      
 
    CNA Occasional Paper  |  28   
 
This page intentionally left blank. 
 

   
 
 
   
 
 
This report was written by CNA’s Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division (SP3). 
SP3 provides strategic and political-military analysis informed by regional expertise to support 
operational and policy-level decision-makers across the Department of the Navy, the Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, the unified combatant commands, the intelligence community, and 
domestic agencies. The division leverages social science researc h methods, field research, 
regional expertise, primary language skills, Track 1.5 partnerships, and policy and operational 
experience to support senior decision-makers. 
 
 
Any copyright in this work is subject to the Government's Unlimited Rights license as defined in DFARS 252.227 -7013 and/or DFARS 252.227 -7014. 
The reproduction of this work for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited. Nongovernmental users may copy and distribute t his document 
noncommercially, in any medium , provided that the copyright notice is reproduced in all copies. Nongovernmental users may not use technical 
measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies they make or distribute. Nongovernmental users m ay not accept 
compensation of any manner in exchange for copies. 
All other rights reserved. The provision of this data and/or source code is without warranties or guarantees to the Recipient  Party by the Supplying 
Party with respect to the intended use of the supplied information. Nor shall the Supplying Party be liable to the Recipient Party for any errors or 
omissions in the supplied information. 
This report may contain hyperlinks to websites and servers maintained by third parties. CNA does not control, evaluate, endorse, or guarantee content 
found in those sites. We do not assume any responsibility or liability for the actions, products, services, and content of tho se sites or the parties that 
operate them. 
  

   
 
IOP-2023-U-036583-Final  
3003 Washington Boulevard, Arlington, VA 22201 
www.cna.org 703-824-2000 
 
   
 
 
 
 
CNA is a not -for-profit research organization that serves the public interest by providing in-
depth analysis and result-oriented solutions to help government leaders choose the best course 
of action in setting policy and managing operations. 
 
