TYLER HACKER
BEYOND PRECISION
MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE  
IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT



BEYOND PRECISION
MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE 
ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
TYLER HACKER
2023

The Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments is an independent, nonpartisan policy 
research institute established to promote innovative thinking and debate about national security 
strategy and investment options. CSBA’s analysis focuses on key questions related to existing and 
emerging threats to U.S. national security, and its goal is to enable policymakers to make informed 
decisions on matters of strategy, security policy, and resource allocation.
ABOUT THE CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND  
BUDGETARY ASSESSMENTS (CSBA)
©2023 Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments. All rights reserved.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Tyler Hacker is a research fellow at the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments. His 
work focuses on long-range strike, future operational concepts, and great power competition. 
Since joining CSBA, he has written on topics including ground-based fires, joint command and 
control, military innovation, and European security. Prior to joining CSBA, Tyler was an analyst at 
the Congressional Research Service, where he conducted research on topics in defense logistics. 
Tyler previously served as a field artillery officer in the United States Army in Germany, where he 
participated in NATO operations and exercises in Poland, Romania, and the Baltic states. He has 
also worked at the U.S. Army War College and the American Enterprise Institute. Tyler holds a 
B.A. in International Studies from Virginia Military Institute and an M.A. in Security Studies from 
Georgetown University.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank Dr. Chris Bassler for his foundational guidance and continued 
support throughout this study. I would also like to thank Dr. Thomas G. Mahnken, Dr. Evan B. 
Montgomery, Dr. Christopher J. Bowie, and several other reviewers for their insightful comments 
on previous drafts of this monograph. Finally, I would like to thank Aidan Greer for his help with 
Chinese-language sources and James Mersol for his editing and publication support. The analysis 
and findings presented here are solely the responsibility of the author. CSBA receives funding from 
a broad and diverse group of contributors, including private foundations, government agencies, and 
corporations. A complete list of these organizations can be found on our website at www.csbaon-
line.org/about/contributors.
Cover Graphic: Created by CSBA.

Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .i
Findings ............................................................. iv
Recommendations ...................................................... vii
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Report Purpose, Scope, and Outline ......................................... 6
CHAPTER 2: PREVIOUS TRENDS IN MUNITIONS CONSUMPTION   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
The Evolution of Precision-Strike ........................................... 10
The Enduring Munitions Problem ........................................... 14
Munitions Trends in Modern Strike Campaigns ................................. 16
Lessons for Great Power Conflict  .......................................... 23
CHAPTER 3: MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS FOR FIVE GREAT POWER CONFLICT SCENARIOS  . . . . . . .27
Envisioning Contemporary Great Power Conflict ................................ 27
Five Great Power Conflict Scenarios in the Indo-Pacific ........................... 31
Key Tradeoffs and Common Requirements .................................... 41
CHAPTER 4: ASSESSING CURRENT MUNITIONS GAPS AND CONSTRAINTS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
The Current U.S. Precision-Guided Munition Portfolio ............................ 47
Major Munitions Gaps .................................................. 51
Constraints on PGM Development, Production, and Procurement .................... 63
CHAPTER 5: FUTURE WEAPON TECHNOLOGIES AND CONCEPTS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .71
Technological Innovations ................................................ 72
Conceptual Innovations ................................................. 87
CHAPTER 6: FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .95
Key Findings ......................................................... 95
Recommendations ..................................................... 98
Final Thoughts ....................................................... 103
APPENDIX A: HISTORICAL STRIKE CAMPAIGN MUNITIONS DATA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .105
APPENDIX B: GREAT POWER CONFLICT SCENARIO DATA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .108
Scenario Data ....................................................... 108
Aimpoint Methodology and Assumptions .................................... 123
APPENDIX C: ATTRIBUTES OF SELECTED CURRENT AND DEVELOPMENTAL PGMS  . . . . . . . . . . . . .127
LIST OF ACRONYMS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .131

FIGURES
FIGURE 1: SUMMARY OF PGM REQUIREMENTS ACROSS FIVE INDO-PACIFIC CONFLICT SCENARIOS 
(INITIAL STRIKES ONLY) .......................................................... ii
FIGURE 2: ACCURACY OF UNGUIDED VERSUS GUIDED MUNITIONS .......................... 11
FIGURE 3: GUIDED MUNITIONS RANGE, SPEED, AND UNIT COST TRENDS ...................... 12
FIGURE 4: EFFECTS OF PGMS ON MUNITIONS EXPENDITURES .............................. 13
FIGURE 5: INCREASING PGM USAGE SINCE 1990 ....................................... 18
FIGURE 6: AIR- AND SEA-DELIVERED MUNITIONS EXPENDED IN DESERT STORM VERSUS IRAQI  
FREEDOM BY RANGE AND COST ................................................... 19
FIGURE 7: EFFECTS OF ACTIVE AND PASSIVE DEFENSES ON MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS FOR A  
FIXED NUMBER OF AIMPOINTS .................................................... 23
FIGURE 8: COMPARISON OF IRAQ AND CHINA BY GEOGRAPHIC AREA ......................... 24
FIGURE 9: PRECISION-STRIKE AT AN INFLECTION POINT .................................. 25
FIGURE 10: MUNITIONS RANGE REQUIREMENTS ACROSS FIVE INDO-PACIFIC CONFLICT SCENARIOS ... 43
FIGURE 11: SUMMARY OF PGM REQUIREMENTS ACROSS FIVE INDO-PACIFIC CONFLICT SCENARIOS 
(INITIAL STRIKES ONLY) ......................................................... 44
FIGURE 12: MUNITION RANGE CATEGORIES FOR THE CURRENT THREAT ENVIRONMENT ........... 49
FIGURE 13: SELECT PGM PROCUREMENT QUANTITIES AND COSTS, FY1998 TO FY2021 ........... 56
FIGURE 14: QUANTITY OF U.S. PGM PROGRAMS BY SPEED ................................ 57
FIGURE 15: COST OF STRIKING A FIXED QUANTITY OF AIMPOINTS USING THE JDAM, GBU-53/B,  
JASSM, AND TLAM ............................................................. 59
FIGURE 16: SELECT PGM PROCUREMENT SPENDING AND QUANTITY BY RANGE, FY1998 TO FY2021 .. 64
FIGURE 17: EXAMPLE MODULAR “MIX-AND-MATCH” MUNITION WITH INTERCHANGEABLE COMPONENTS .. 74
FIGURE 18: MODULAR PROPULSION KITS AND ADDITIONS ................................ 78
FIGURE 19: MULTI-MODE SEEKER FINDING A HIDDEN TARGET .............................. 80
FIGURE 20: COLLABORATIVE MUNITIONS ATTACKING MULTIPLE AIMPOINTS .................... 82
FIGURE 21: EXAMPLE HETEROGENOUS PAYLOADS FOR VARIOUS MISSIONS .................... 86
FIGURE 22: OPTIMIZING MUNITION FORCE PACKAGES ................................... 88
FIGURE 23: COMPLEX SEAD/DEAD TACTICS TO INCREASE MUNITION SURVIVABILITY  
AND EFFECTIVENESS ........................................................... 91
FIGURE 24: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PGM RANGE, SPEED, AND COST ....................... 93
FIGURE 25: SCENARIO 1 AIMPOINTS  .............................................. 111
FIGURE 26: SCENARIO 1 TARGET MAP .............................................. 111
FIGURE 27: SCENARIO 1 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS  .................................. 112
FIGURE 28: SCENARIO 2 AIMPOINTS  .............................................. 114
FIGURE 29: SCENARIO 2 TARGET MAP .............................................. 114
FIGURE 30: SCENARIO 2 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS  .................................. 115

FIGURE 31: SCENARIO 3 AIMPOINTS  .............................................. 117
FIGURE 32: SCENARIO 3 TARGET MAP  ............................................. 117
FIGURE 33: SCENARIO 3 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS  .................................. 118
FIGURE 34: SCENARIO 4 AIMPOINTS  .............................................. 119
FIGURE 35: SCENARIO 4 TARGET MAP  ............................................. 120
FIGURE 36: SCENARIO 4 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS  .................................. 120
FIGURE 37: SCENARIO 5 AIMPOINTS  .............................................. 121
FIGURE 38: SCENARIO 5 TARGET MAP .............................................. 122
FIGURE 39: SCENARIO 5 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS  .................................. 122
FIGURE 40: EXAMPLE AIRBASE AIMPOINT ESTIMATE .................................... 124
FIGURE 41: EXAMPLE HARBOR AIMPOINT ESTIMATE .................................... 125
FIGURE 42: EXAMPLE FIXED POINT TARGET AIMPOINT ESTIMATE ........................... 125
TABLES
TABLE 1: COMPARISON OF POST-COLD WAR U.S. STRIKE CAMPAIGNS ........................ 17
TABLE 2: CURRENT AND DEVELOPMENTAL U.S. PGM PORTFOLIO BY RANGE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .50
TABLE 3: SCENARIO 1 TARGET LIST ................................................ 110
TABLE 4: SCENARIO 2 TARGET LIST ................................................ 113
TABLE 5: SCENARIO 3 TARGET LIST ................................................ 116
TABLE 6: SCENARIO 4 TARGET LIST ................................................ 119
TABLE 7: SCENARIO 5 TARGET LIST ................................................ 121



 www.csbaonline.org i
Executive Summary
Russia’s ongoing war in Ukraine and the West’s efforts to supply weapons to Ukraine have 
revealed the inadequacy of Western munition stocks and the weapon industrial base for the 
enormous demands of contemporary conflict. The provision and consumption of vast quan -
tities of weapons have led to questions about the sufficiency of U.S. and allied inventories of 
more advanced weapons for a conflict with China. The events of the last year have focused 
a spotlight on a seldom prioritized and understudied topic in defense analysis: muni -
tions, especially the precision-guided munitions (PGMs) essential to modern warfighting. 
Despite recent attention devoted to weapons and their industrial base, concerns about the 
inadequacy of U.S. PGM stocks are nothing new. In fact, the U.S. military has encountered 
difficulties meeting its PGM demands in nearly every campaign since their adoption.
Facing the potential of great power conflict in the Indo-Pacific, the United States is currently 
procuring increasing numbers of PGMs and seeking to bolster its munitions industrial base. 
These efforts, however, may not be enough to satisfy the demands of future campaigns, 
particularly protracted conflicts against a near-peer or peer opponent. Many assumptions 
about munitions consumption and the United States’ ability to surge weapons production are 
no longer valid. Procuring greater quantities of PGMs and fortifying their industrial base is 
critical in the long-run, but realistic fiscal, industrial, and political constraints might prevent 
the United States from producing or purchasing weapons at a rate that meets the staggering 
requirements of a near-term conflict. Ultimately, these demands should force the U.S. mili -
tary to think innovatively about precision-strike and seek improved ways of designing, 
producing, and employing the next generation of precision-guided munitions.
This monograph reaches these conclusions by following the evolution of precision-strike and 
exploring the U.S. military’s most urgent munitions requirements for great power conflict. 
Most importantly, it highlights the ways in which the United States might harness innova -
tive technologies and concepts to overcome the capacity and capability shortcomings of its 
current PGM portfolio and expand its munitions industrial base. Our analysis begins with 
an examination of historical strike campaigns and proceeds with a forward-looking assess -
ment of potential conflict scenarios between the United States and China in the Indo-Pacific. 
Three decades of precision-strike operations since the Gulf War have shown that despite the 

ii  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
massive advantage in effectiveness gained with PGMs, the U.S. military has repeatedly run 
its inventories of these weapons alarmingly low in limited campaigns against regional and 
non-state opponents. Even with the current ubiquity of PGMs within the U.S. military, the 
vast geographies, numerous targets, and dense defenses of a great power adversary mean 
that a comprehensive strike campaign would today entail a massive expenditure of PGMs—
one which the U.S. military may struggle to provide.
To determine the extent of these requirements and what sorts of PGMs would be in highest 
demand in such a campaign, this study examines the munitions requirements of five illus -
trative great power conflict scenarios in the Indo-Pacific between the U.S. military and the 
Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA). These scenarios include:
1. A campaign to neutralize a PLA invasion force in the Taiwan Strait;
2. A campaign to neutralize PLA outposts in the South China Sea;
3. A counter-C4ISR campaign against PLA forces;
4. A campaign against PLA conventional bases;
5. And a campaign against PLA force regeneration assets.
Our analysis of these scenarios highlights the immense munition demands of great power 
conflict. Figure 1 summarizes the results of this analysis by showing the range of potential 
quantities of munitions required to strike these campaign target sets using varied assump -
tions about the effectiveness of Chinese defenses and the proportion of targets that must be 
struck to achieve operational objectives.
FIGURE 1: SUMMARY OF PGM REQUIREMENTS ACROSS FIVE INDO-PACIFIC CONFLICT 
SCENARIOS (INITIAL STRIKES ONLY)
Source: The full analysis leading to these figures can be found in Chapter Three. These figures include only initial strikes and do not account for 
additional strikes against recurring targets that are repaired or rebuilt during a campaign.

ii  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org iii
While each scenario favors a different mix of weapons, these figures highlight the existing 
capacity and capability gaps in the current U.S. PGM portfolio. Most notably, the United 
States suffers from a PGM capacity gap with two dimensions: insufficient on-hand invento -
ries and inadequate production capacity.
The United States must have sufficient quantities of PGMs on-hand to support (or deter) 
a rapid, intense conflict or to sustain the opening acts of a prolonged conflict. The degree 
to which recent strike campaigns have stressed U.S. stocks gives reason to doubt the suffi -
ciency of short-range PGM inventories. With long-range and more complex weapons such 
as the Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile, or JASSM, procurement documents reveal 
the inadequacy of current American inventories. The U.S. military purchased only 3,243 
missiles between fiscal years 2010 and 2021. Disregarding the number of JASSMs expended 
during operations in the Middle East, this quantity appears woefully insufficient against the 
requirements displayed in Figure 1. A campaign that strikes a modest portion of targets in 
the South China Sea, our least demanding scenario, could consume over half of these cruise 
missiles depending on stand-off requirements. Given the payload capacity and sortie rates 
of U.S. bombers, the entire inventory of JASSMs could be expended in less than a week of 
sustained long-range strike operations. On-hand inventories of other critical PGMs are simi -
larly inadequate.
Beyond available stocks, the United States’ weapons industrial base would be unable to refill 
PGM inventories at a pace sufficient for continued strike operations. For example, between 
fiscal years 2000 and 2021, the U.S. military procured an average of 209 Tomahawk cruise 
missiles per year. During Iraqi Freedom, however, it expended 802 Tomahawks in 30 days. 
At an average consumption rate of 27 missiles per day, a single year of Tomahawk produc-
tion at existing levels would only supply enough cruise missiles for just over a week of 
sustained strike operations. And as recent demands for Javelin and Stinger missiles have 
revealed, these production rates cannot be quickly scaled in the event of a conflict. 
Several constraints prevent the United States from quickly remedying these gaps, with the 
most urgent barriers being insufficient spending on munitions and a downsized weapons 
industrial base with limited surge capacity. CSBA estimated the Department of Defense’s 
(DoD’s) total request for PGM procurement funding at $5.6 billion in fiscal year 2023—
just 0.72 percent of DoD’s total requested funding and less than 4 percent of all requested 
procurement funding for the Department. 
These developments leave the United States facing both a short- and long-run PGM problem. 
Given these requirements and constraints, the United States will struggle to produce and 
stock sufficient quantities of PGMs for a great power conflict occurring in the next five 
years. Maintaining the United States’ near-term precision-strike advantage will require it to 
increase its funding and procurement of essential PGMs to maximize their production rates 
under current industrial limitations. As U.S. stocks of PGMs grow, DoD should also explore 
ways to expand the capabilities of current weapons, as well as innovative concepts to achieve 
campaign objectives using the current portfolio of precision weapons more effectively.

iv  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Continued spending on weapons and their industrial base over the long-term is essential, 
but a prolonged great power war involving the expenditure of tens or hundreds of thousands 
of munitions will exceed U.S. capacity to buy and produce weapons. Accordingly, the U.S. 
military should rethink how it develops, purchases, and expends PGMs to achieve its aims 
in future campaigns. One answer may be innovative technologies and concepts that advance 
beyond precision—weapons that leverage enhanced features to ease their manufacturing 
requirements, increase their effectiveness, and produce equivalent or greater effects using 
fewer munitions.
This monograph’s analysis and exploration of these technologies and concepts lead to the 
summarized findings and recommendations below, which will begin readying America’s 
PGM inventory for the challenges of future conflicts. Of course, the U.S. military will 
encounter technological, political, and cultural barriers as it attempts to develop and field 
innovative weapons. Nevertheless, precision munitions stand as a long-running advantage 
that the United States can no longer take for granted and shortchange in its preparation for 
the potential of great power conflict in coming years.
Findings
Previous assumptions about munitions production and consumption do not 
apply to contemporary great power conflict.  Three key planning assumptions that 
informed the U.S. military’s current PGM inventory no longer hold and must be reexamined:
1. A conflict between the United States and a great power adversary would be rapid and 
short in duration, allowing the U.S. military to rely on small inventories of advanced 
stand-off munitions. History and an examination of prospective Indo-Pacific conflict 
scenarios indicate that great power conflict is more likely to be protracted and could last 
months or years. Current fighting in the Russia-Ukraine war reinforces this view.
2. PGM production and procurement are less important than platforms because muni -
tions production can rapidly surge to meet the demands of a conflict.  The complexity of 
today’s PGMs and the state of the munitions industrial base mean that the production of 
many PGMs essential to great power conflict cannot be quickly surged. On-hand quanti -
ties may be the only weapons available in the first months of a conflict, depending on the 
munition and the complexity of its supply chain and manufacturing process.
3. The precision-strike advantage by itself will continue to enable the United States to 
dominate its adversaries in a contemporary great power conflict. Although precision 
was sufficient in the regional and limited strike campaigns of the previous 30 years, 
today’s adversaries have spent decades preparing to counter U.S. precision-strike oper -
ations. As a result, the munitions requirements for great power conflict are likely to 
exceed the quantities and capabilities of the current U.S. PGM inventory.

iv  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org v
An examination of munitions requirements for great power conflict reveals 
that the United States has significant capacity and capability gaps in its current 
PGM portfolio. PGM procurement to date has mostly been driven by operational usage 
and unit cost rather than by long-term strategy or analysis. In addition to an overall PGM 
capacity gap that has reappeared throughout campaigns in the Middle East, the U.S. mili -
tary lacks sufficient quantities of weapons with the range and features ideal for conflict in 
the Indo-Pacific. Current PGM stocks are insufficient to provide precision effects in volume 
during a protracted conflict.
Beyond capacity, our examination of potential great power conflict scenarios exposes several 
capability gaps in the U.S. military’s current array of PGMs. Given the current U.S. military 
force structure, which consists of mostly non-penetrating bombers and short-range fighters, 
many existing PGMs suffer from insufficient range and survivability. Most current weapon 
programs are subsonic and rely on external guidance support that increases the demands on 
targeting processes and makes them unsuitable for time-sensitive and mobile targets. The 
U.S. PGM inventory also lacks non-kinetic options and weapons designed to attack hardened 
and deeply buried targets, wide area targets, and airfields.
Even with increased spending on and production of PGMs, the United States 
will likely struggle to maintain adequate quantities of PGMs to execute a 
comprehensive precision-strike campaign against a great power adversary. 
Unlike previous U.S. campaigns against regional opponents, the number of targets, extended 
distances, and density of defenses in a contemporary great power conflict create staggering 
munitions requirements for a comprehensive, protracted campaign. Conducting a campaign 
with a similar target set and depth as that of Desert Storm or Iraqi Freedom would involve 
tens of thousands of targets, many of them mobile, heavily defended, and/or spread 
throughout vast geographic areas. Short of total mobilization, realistic fiscal and industrial 
constraints mean the United States is likely incapable of maintaining PGM stocks adequate 
for such operations.
Simply put, DoD may not be able to quickly spend or produce its way out of its current PGM 
shortcomings in the near-term. Instead, the U.S. military may be forced to rethink how 
it intends to accomplish certain operational objectives in a great power conflict. In addi -
tion to maximizing the production of critical munitions, the U.S. military must develop new 
weapons and concepts suited for fighting today’s great power adversaries.
Precision alone is necessary but insufficient for munitions in a modern great 
power conflict. Future wars will require PGMs with advanced features such as semi-
autonomous and collaborative capabilities, integrated sensors, automatic target recognition, 
loitering capabilities, and heterogenous payloads that include both kinetic and non-kinetic 
effects. Many of these features are not wholly new but are becoming inexpensive and ubiqui -
tous thanks to commercial and government advances in microelectronics and computing.

vi  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
These features offer solutions to the capacity and capability gaps described above. Next-
generation PGMs could reduce total munitions requirements to more feasible levels by 
multiplying the effects of each weapon. Rather than expending numerous PGMs on a single 
target, future technologies and concepts could allow each PGM to affect multiple targets.
Several variables have outsized effects on munitions requirements for great 
power conflict, including the operational objectives, the proportion of targets 
that must be attacked to achieve these objectives, and the effectiveness of 
enemy defenses. The five conflict scenarios explored in this monograph show how a preci -
sion-strike campaign’s operational objectives (and, by corollary, the target set) influence the 
numbers and kinds of PGMs required. Planning assumptions—such as the ability to strike 
mainland targets or dual-use targets and the availability of long-range penetrating strike 
platforms—are particularly key to assessing a scenario’s munitions requirements. These 
assumptions reveal the value of strategic and operational wargaming of munitions mixes in 
addition to more in-depth modeling and simulation.
In addition to objectives and targets, assumptions about the depth of the total target set that 
must be affected are also key determinants of munitions requirements. Sinking a quarter or 
even a half of a Taiwan invasion fleet is a much different munitions problem than attacking 
all three hundred or more vessels. Finally, the effectiveness of enemy defenses at keeping 
delivery platforms at stand-off ranges and intercepting PGMs greatly affects both the quan -
tity of munitions required and the ideal characteristics of those weapons. More effective 
defenses necessitate PGMs and delivery platforms with longer ranges and more advanced 
survivability features, as well as more complex attack concepts.
Conflict duration is a major determinant of munitions requirements and, as 
a result, could influence campaign objectives. This study’s scenario analysis shows 
how rapid and protracted conflicts have different operational objectives and target sets. If a 
conflict is expected to become prolonged, then a limited inventory of weapons may be better 
expended on force regeneration assets instead of more numerous and attritable forces or 
easily repairable basing and infrastructure. In a protracted conflict scenario, the United 
States must consider its long-term advantages and weaknesses relative to a great power 
adversary and utilize its PGMs to reduce that adversary’s long-term comparative advantage. 
Against the People’s Republic of China (PRC), this advantage may be their ability to rapidly 
manufacture and replace munitions and other defense materiel. For this reason, a protracted 
conflict may favor a campaign that targets defense production and sustainment infrastruc -
ture over one that over-emphasizes attrition of enemy forces.
Maintaining the United States’ strike advantage requires more than muni -
tions; it requires improvements along the entire kill chain. Many of the issues 
and constraints outlined in this monograph also apply to ISR assets, targeting processes, 
network infrastructure, and delivery platforms. As the final effector in a kill chain, however, 
munitions are of particular importance and require near-term attention due to long-term 
neglect. The use of large numbers of PGMs also creates unprecedented demands on sensors, 

vi  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org vii
ISR platforms, and staff targeting processes, particularly if PGMs do not possess internal 
sensing and guidance capabilities. Persistent surveillance technologies, AI-assisted data 
processing, and in-depth intelligence preparation of the battlefield may help alleviate these 
demands. Large numbers of networked PGMs with internal sensors also increase demands 
for network bandwidth and robustness.
Recommendations
The United States must prepare its PGM inventories for the potential of protracted great power 
conflict. Given fiscal, industrial, and political constraints, the U.S. military should implement 
a time-phased set of recommendations to address both its near-term and long-run PGM and 
industrial base challenges. The following recommendations, phased by five-year Future Years 
Defense Programs (FYDPs), can help the U.S. military achieve these ends.
Near Term: Recommendations within the FYDP (2023 to 2027)
In the near term, the United States must rapidly increase PGM procurement to bolster its 
preparedness for a conflict in the coming years before it can amass large quantities of crit -
ical PGMs or significantly expand its munitions industrial base. The U.S. military must move 
quickly to maintain the precision-strike advantage of its current force structure in opera -
tions within the “Davidson window.”
Immediately increase munitions funding and procurement to maximize the 
production of critical precision munitions. This monograph’s examination of poten-
tial Indo-Pacific conflict scenarios highlights several essential categories of weapons, 
including anti-ship and anti-air munitions, stand-off munitions to equip non-penetrating 
bombers and tactical aircraft, and intelligent loitering munitions capable of striking moving 
targets. Given current manufacturing capacity, the military services should maximize 
purchases of these weapons within the FYDP to reinforce current stockpiles and prepare 
for a conflict in the near term. PGM procurement quantities should reflect the reality that 
today’s munitions cannot be rapidly surged and must be stocked in quantities sufficient for 
potential conflict scenarios. As this study concludes, it appears that DoD is requesting funds 
for larger quantities of key PGMs, but it remains to be seen how these requests translate into 
increased appropriations, contracts, and deliveries.
Align PGM procurement spending with long-term strategy and analysis 
requirements rather than simply replacing weapons expended in recent oper -
ations. As increased procurement of essential PGMs begins reducing critical near-term 
capability and capacity gaps, the Department must ensure that munitions funding and 
requirements for the remainder of the FYDP are driven by thorough analysis with a long-
term focus. Based on the 2018 and 2022 National Defense Strategies, these changes should 
manifest in more balanced spending between delivery platforms and munitions and between 
short- and long-range weapons.

viii  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Ultimately, DoD must avoid thinking of inexpensive munitions as replacements for exquisite 
weapons, or exquisite long-range PGMs as replacements for high-tech delivery platforms. 
Rather, these systems should complement each other’s capabilities as components of a strike 
package. For instance, advanced aircraft will benefit from long-range munitions that reduce 
their attrition and short-range munitions that increase the volume of effects they can deliver. 
Exquisite munitions will benefit from simpler weapons carrying sensors and decoys to 
augment their effectiveness.1
Incentivize expansion of the weapons industrial base by committing to 
consistent munitions purchases through multi-year procurements, direct 
investments, and other policies that foster a steady demand signal for preci -
sion weapons. Beyond additional spending to maximize active production lines, near-term 
investments must support the expansion of the weapons industrial base beyond the current 
FYDP. Building additional manufacturing capacity will take years, so the United States must 
make adequate purchases and investments in the near term to create additional capacity 
over the next several years. The military services should continue using multi-year procure -
ments and other measures taken in response to the Russia-Ukraine conflict to kick-start 
the industrial base and signal a commitment to sustained munitions spending. The Defense 
Department may also wish to explore direct investment in additional production capacity 
or the maintenance of surge capacity to ensure that weapons manufacturing can be scaled 
to support a prolonged conflict. Finally, DoD should explore other policies to incentivize the 
expansion of the munitions industrial base, such as streamlining foreign military sales and 
export requirements to support foreign buys of U.S. weapons, fostering joint development 
opportunities with allied nations, large lot purchases of common subcomponents, or offering 
tax credits and other incentives for the construction and maintenance of excess capacity.
Bolster the current PGM arsenal with rapidly producible modular kits and 
modifications to operational weapons. While increasing procurement of current PGM 
programs, DoD should expand the capabilities of these weapons using modular kits that 
draw on the success of the Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM) and Paveway guidance 
kits. Glide kits and add-on propulsion systems can be fielded within the FYDP to extend the 
range of many PGMs and better equip non-stealthy platforms for the contested environ -
ments of a Pacific conflict. These kits should rely on mature technologies and be prioritized 
to fill urgent capability and capacity gaps, such as maritime strike, emplacing naval mines, 
and attacking mobile targets. Modular kits can be expanded with inexpensive, proven 
sensors and datalinks to increase their effectiveness in great power conflict. When possible, 
the Department and industry should take advantage of advances in commercial technologies 
related to sensors, networking, and autonomy to augment these kits.
Beyond modular kits for existing payloads, DoD should deploy additional payloads in 
already-fielded munitions. These payloads could include more powerful energetics, 
1 Exquisite munitions are further defined and explored on page 42.

viii  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org ix
non-kinetic effectors, persistent sensors, or policy-compliant area effects that provide 
multiple precision effects within a large target area. Both modular kits and new payloads 
can be fielded on expedited timelines that leverage existing weapon-platform integration. 
Together, they would allow more weapons within the United States’ current precision arsenal 
to service a greater number of targets with increased lethality.
Consider campaigns, operational concepts, and target sets that enable the 
current portfolio of precision weapons to be most effective, particularly in 
a protracted conflict. Creative operational concepts can help reduce total munitions 
requirements in a great power conflict. In the near-term, the U.S. military can reduce the 
number of aimpoints in a strike campaign by targeting essential nodes, utilizing virtual 
attrition concepts, and attacking the fixed elements of mobile target kill chains. Focusing 
attacks on the key elements of adversary kill chains, command networks, and transportation 
and sustainment architectures may accomplish U.S. objectives using smaller quantities of 
munitions. Likewise, striking fixed pieces of mobile target support chains would allow U.S. 
forces to employ GPS-guided munitions, which make up a majority of its current PGM inven -
tory. Until capability gaps can be filled by new munitions, planners must explore innovative 
methods of accomplishing campaign objectives using the current precision arsenal.
Medium-Term: Recommendations for the Next FYDP (2028 to 2032)
By the late 2020s and early 2030s, a steady demand signal driven by near-term investments 
in munitions and their industrial base will expand production capacity for the weapons 
essential to future great power conflict. At that point, the Department should continue to 
shape the growth of the industrial base through requirements for resilient supply chains 
and advanced manufacturing processes. These middle years are key to designing and 
experimenting with new munitions designs that operationalize advanced technologies as 
they mature.
Continue expanding the active and surge capacity of the munitions industrial 
base with a focus on resilient and redundant rather than lean supply chains. 
While maintaining a steady demand signal through continued procurement, the Department 
should implement policies, requirements, and incentives that push weapon manufacturers to 
shift from “just-in-time” to “just-in-case” supply chain models for select programs or compo -
nents. Of course, this shift will reduce efficiency and increase costs, so analysis is key to 
prioritizing resiliency between weapon programs and determining which pieces or compo -
nents of a munition are suited for just-in-case versus just-in-time methods. In determining 
these requirements, the Department should also study the most operational- and cost-effec -
tive balance between maintaining stockpiles and maintaining excess production capacity of 
different munitions. Increased costs will drive DoD to prioritize excess capacity and resil -
iency, making analysis key to ensuring that these expenditures match future requirements.

x  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Implement open architectures and digital engineering into new muni -
tions designs to take advantage of modularity and advanced manufacturing 
methods. Beyond spending more on current PGMs, in the medium term, the U.S. mili -
tary must develop the next generation of weapons that fully utilize advanced technologies 
to enable their rapid development and large-scale production. These weapons should begin 
by leveraging digital engineering and modular architectures to ease their manufacturing 
requirements, expand their supply chains to more commercial producers, and increase their 
operational versatility. Automated production and additive manufacturing can alleviate 
workforce issues and allow future munitions to be affordably produced in large quanti -
ties. Modular and versatile designs fill capacity gaps by reducing procurement tradeoffs, 
increasing weapon upgradeability, and allowing weapons (or components of weapons) to 
be used in a greater number of scenarios. These advancements are already happening on a 
small scale and should be implemented across programs and producers by the late 2020s.
Continue experimenting with and fielding advanced munitions technologies 
to fill current capability gaps. By the mid-2020s, technologies developed in the current 
FYDP should be widely fielded throughout the force. These advancements include exquisite 
and low-cost sensors that free PGMs from reliance on external targeting support and enable 
them to better track and attack mobile targets, collaborative and loitering capabilities that 
allow weapons to work together to attack wide area and elusive targets effectively and effi -
ciently, and area effect payloads that reduce the quantities of munitions required to attack 
large and complex targets. Additionally, hypersonic weapons should be fielded in greater 
numbers as current programs mature and costs are reduced.
In the medium-term, the services should continue experimentation with more advanced 
technologies, including interchangeable “mix-and-match” munitions, advanced propulsion, 
improved automatic target recognition and data collection, non-kinetic effects, and heterog -
enous payloads.
Pursue an affordable mix of exquisite and cheap PGMs to enable “affordable 
precision in mass.” Modular designs, digital engineering, and advanced manufacturing 
techniques can open the door to inexpensive weapons producible at scale. The Department 
should experiment with and pursue PGMs that, in combination with delivery platforms, 
optimally balance features such as range, speed, and cost to ensure adequate quantities can 
be procured for great power conflict. This balance might include developing and procuring 
“second-tier” PGMs with minimum capabilities that are inexpensive enough to be stocked in 
high quantities. In tandem with unmanned munition carriers, these second-tier PGMs could 
enable tactical aircraft such as the F-35 or naval vessels to guide the delivery of an unprec -
edented volume of precision effects. As delivery platforms evolve and more long-range 
penetrating strike platforms are fielded, the Department should actively reassess the balance 
of capability between its platforms and weapons.

x  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org xi
Develop new employment techniques and operational concepts that leverage 
the advanced features of next-generation PGMs. As technologies and weapons 
evolve, the U.S. military must implement innovative concepts that employ these weapons 
most effectively. U.S. forces should utilize heterogenous salvos and complex coordi -
nated attacks from multiple domains to increase munition survivability and effectiveness. 
Underpinning these concepts is the idea that future munitions will be more than just effec -
tors. As components in broader force packages of sensors and delivery platforms, DoD 
must optimize munition force packages to carry out specific missions in the most resource-
efficient manner. To increase the options available and better examine tradeoffs when 
constructing force packages, the services should first develop concepts to address oper -
ational challenges, and then use these concepts to determine priority capabilities and 
requirements. The PGMs of tomorrow will provide their package with more capabilities than 
a short-lasted kinetic effect, and U.S. warfighting concepts must leverage these new capabili -
ties accordingly.
Long-Term: Preparing for Beyond 2033
In the long run, the U.S. military must shape its PGM portfolio around its evolving force 
structure and the need to provide an immense volume of effects against an adversary 
striving to modernize its defenses at an equivalent or faster rate. Maintaining America’s 
strike advantage will require new PGM designs that leverage technologies matured in the 
2020s and are stocked in the quantities necessary for future great power conflict.
Procure a mix of PGMs that complement next-generation platforms as they are 
fielded in the 2030s. The U.S. military’s current force structure, particularly in the air 
domain, is centered around legacy platforms that require stand-off munitions to confront 
the distances and defenses associated with the Indo-Pacific theater. By the 2030s, however, 
fielding significant numbers of long-range, penetrating B-21 bombers may shift the favored 
balance between stand-off and stand-in weapons and increase the volume of short-range 
munitions the U.S. military can deliver in contested environments at reduced costs. Similar 
force structure shifts may occur as the Navy fields unmanned surface and undersea vessels 
or the U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Army deploy stand-in ground forces. Given the continued 
tradeoff between munition range and cost, each change in force structure and posture pres -
ents new opportunities to reexamine the alignment of range and capability between delivery 
platforms, munitions, and other intermediaries.
Concurrently, the Chinese military will continue to modernize and evolve its own force 
structure. The PLA will likely continue pushing its defensive perimeter outward from 
the mainland and may seek to bolster its own long-range strike capacity. The U.S. mili -
tary must continually adjust its weapon-platform pairing and force packages to confront 
these developments.

xii  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Develop and field munitions that utilize advanced technologies to fill long-
running capability gaps, reduce planning tradeoffs, and outpace adversary 
countermeasures. Some of the technologies highlighted throughout this study may not 
be sufficiently mature for operational use until the 2030s. Continued investment in artificial 
intelligence and computing underwrite future progress in stealth, speed, and autonomy that 
will increase PGM survivability and effectiveness. The Department of Defense must fund not 
only the research and development of weapons-related technologies, but also their opera -
tionalization in the next decade. DoD must avoid the development of advanced weapons that 
never become programs of record, such as the Low Cost Autonomous Attack System or the 
Tri-Service Standoff Attack Missile.
Refine employment techniques and operational concepts to utilize advanced 
munitions and future force packages to create the greatest advantage. The 
Department must constantly explore innovative concepts that most effectively employ the 
advanced capabilities of future weapons. As subsequent generations of PGMs are fielded, the 
U.S. military should continually redesign its force packages to create kill chains to address 
the evolving threat. These packages must include not only future delivery platforms and 
weapons, but also future unmanned ISR platforms and intermediaries such as attritable 
UAS and unmanned munitions trucks. Planners should use increasingly capable modeling, 
simulation, and integrated test beds to create force packages that deliver the greatest volume 
of effects on target sets while minimizing risk, attrition, and cost to levels appropriate for 
protracted great power conflict.

xii  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The ongoing conflict in Ukraine has led many Western nations, including the United States, 
to send significant quantities of munitions to support Ukraine’s fight against the Russian 
Federation. Early in the war, the United States transferred up to one-third of its total stock 
of Javelin anti-tank guided missiles and a similarly significant quantity of Stinger missiles—
both of which could take years to replenish. 2 American support continued to flow as the 
conflict progressed beyond its initial stages, with the U.S. Army sending over one million 
155mm artillery shells, a move which has left some officials and analysts concerned about 
the sufficiency of U.S. stocks.3 The Department of Defense (DoD) has remained tight-lipped 
about total transfers of more complex munitions such as the Guided Multiple Launch Rocket 
System (GMLRS). With the Army only purchasing between four and six thousand GMLRS 
per year and a maximum production rate of about 10,000 rockets annually, Ukrainian 
expenditure rates of precision munitions such as GMLRS call into question the adequacy of 
U.S. inventories.4 The munitions stocks of U.S. allies appear to be equally diminished, with 
2 Mark F. Cancian, “Will the United States Run Out of Javelins Before Russia Runs Out of Tanks?,” Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, April 12, 2022, https://www.csis.org/analysis/will-united-states-run-out-javelins-russia-runs-out-
tanks; Jen Judson and Joe Gould, “US Army signs deal to backfill Stingers sent to Ukraine,” Defense News, May 27, 2022, 
https://www.defensenews.com/land/2022/05/27/us-army-signs-deal-to-backfill-stingers-sent-to-ukraine/.
3 Gordon Lubold, Nancy A. Youssef, and Brett Forrest, “U.S. Reaches Deep Into Its Global Ammunition Stockpiles 
to Help Ukraine,” Wall Street Journal , March 16, 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-reaches-deep-into-its-
global-ammunition-stockpiles-to-help-ukraine-8224d985; Mark F. Cancian, “Is the United States Running out of 
Weapons to Send to Ukraine?” Center for Strategic and International Studies , September 16, 2022, https://www.
csis.org/analysis/united-states-running-out-weapons-send-ukraine#:~:text=While%20the%2026%20million%20
rounds,no%20danger%20of%20running%20out.
4 Limited U.S. stocks have been cited as one reason for not providing the longer-range ATACMS (Army Tactical Missile 
System) to Ukraine. Department of Defense, “Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates, Justification Book of Missile 
Procurement, Army,” April 2022, p. 95, https://www.asafm.army.mil/Portals/72/Documents/BudgetMaterial/2023/
Base%20Budget/Procurement/MSLS_ARMY.pdf; Howard Altman, “Are There Enough Guided Rockets For HIMARS 
To Keep Up With Ukraine War Demand?,” The Drive, July 27, 2022, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/are-there-
enough-guided-rockets-for-himars-to-keep-up-with-ukraine-war-demand; and Paul McLeary, Lara Seligman, and 
Alexander Ward, “U.S. Tells Ukraine It Won’t Send Long-Range Missiles Because It Has Few To Spare,” Politico, February 
13, 2023, https://www.politico.com/news/2023/02/13/u-s-wont-send-long-range-missiles-ukraine-00082652.

2  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
some smaller nations left with “a bare minimum” of weapons in reserve. 5 These concerns led 
the Financial Times to declare that the “Ukraine war has exposed the skimpiness of western 
defense stockpiles.”6
These anecdotes have brought the topic of munitions and the munitions industrial base to 
the forefront of the discussion, despite weapons procurement traditionally being overshad -
owed by debates over billion-dollar platforms and “transformational” operational concepts. 
Still, the conflict in Ukraine is limited in scale and intensity compared to previous wars 
of the 20th century. Moreover, the shortages caused by Ukraine are far from an isolated 
incident. Campaigns from the last three decades in Iraq, Kosovo, Libya, and Syria have 
repeatedly exposed Western munitions inventories as deficient, particularly in the precision-
guide munitions (PGMs) so vital to modern warfighting concepts. 7
Past experiences and the potential for great power conflict provoke hard questions about 
future requirements for precision munitions. If these regional and low-intensity conflicts 
stress Western munitions stocks to the extent reported, what would weapon expenditure 
rates and demands look like in a 21st-century great power war between the United States and 
China? As the U.S. military refocuses on the challenges presented by China and the features 
of the Indo-Pacific theater, how extensive are munitions requirements for potential great 
power conflict? Do previous assumptions about munitions consumption and production hold 
true? Will the long-standing U.S. precision-strike advantage hold in a great power war in 
the 2020s?
Defense analysts have widely noted that the United States and its allies need more munitions 
if they are to prepare for great power conflict. 8 In a world of limited resources, however, the 
key question remains: more of what? Moreover, what if more weapons alone are no longer 
sufficient to maintain the United States’ precision-strike advantage in great power conflict? 
5 Quote from Dovilė Šakalienė, a member of the Lithuanian Parliament. The German Ministry of Defense 
also recently described their munitions stocks as “limited.” See Tara Copp, “Weapons Shortages Could 
Mean Hard Calls for Ukraine’s Allies,” The Associated Press , October 23, 2022, https://apnews.com/article/
russia-ukraine-nato-united-states-business-government-and-politics-2cc634e38b50f43cfd1fb9a4e0412c4a.
6 John Paul Rathbone and Steff Chavez, “Military Briefing: Is the West Running Out of Ammunition to Supply 
Ukraine?,” Financial Times , July 11, 2022, https://www.ft.com/content/d413576c-c4d5-4ca6-9050-58f3f8dc3c00.
7 These examples will be fully explored in Chapter Two.
8 For example: Elbridge A. Colby and Alexander B. Gray, “America’s Industrial Base Isn’t Ready for War With China,” 
Wall Street Journal , August 18, 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/americas-industrial-base-isnt-ready-for-
war-with-china-weapons-defense-funding-military-war-conflict-taiwan-supplier-11660833718; Jeff Schogol, 
“The US Military Needs a Lot More Artillery Shells, Rockets, and Missiles for the Next War,” Task & Purpose , 
September 5, 2022, https://taskandpurpose.com/news/military-artillery-shells-rockets-missiles-war-russia-china/; 
Mackenzie Eaglen, “Earth to DoD: The Military Needs More Rockets, Missiles, and Bombs,” American Enterprise 
Institute , September 12, 2022, https://www.aei.org/foreign-and-defense-policy/earth-to-dod-the-military-
needs-more-rockets-missiles-and-bombs/; and Hal Brands, “Ukraine War Shows the US Military Isn’t Ready for 
War With China,” Bloomberg, September 18, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-09-18/
ukraine-war-shows-the-us-military-isn-t-ready-for-war-with-china.

2  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 3
To explore these questions, this study traces the evolution of U.S. precision-strike through 
the campaigns of the previous three decades and then considers munitions requirements 
for potential Indo-Pacific conflict scenarios. These exercises reveal significant capacity and 
capability gaps in America’s current inventory of PGMs. With munitions demands that far 
exceed the limited and regional wars of years past, precision alone may no longer be enough 
to sustain the U.S. military’s strike advantage in the next conflict. The United States may 
need to harness innovative technologies and concepts to increase weapon effectiveness, opti -
mize U.S. PGM stocks for future campaigns, and meet the staggering munitions demands 
of tomorrow’s wars. This monograph aims to explore the magnitude of future munitions 
demands and provide a starting point for considering how next-generation weapons and 
concepts can help the U.S. military deter and, if necessary, win a great power conflict in the 
Indo-Pacific.
The Munitions Analysis Gap
Although the Russia-Ukraine conflict has recently highlighted the significance of massed 
precision fires, weapon requirements and stockpiles remain an understudied facet of 
modern warfare. There are several reasons for this gap, most of which stem from the preem -
inence of platforms over munitions in defense analysis. The U.S. DoD traditionally has an 
institutional bias toward large, expensive platforms. As far back as 1993, the Defense Science 
Board noted that DoD “heavily favors new systems with more emphasis on platforms than 
on architectures for information flow, sensor improvements and weapons programs.”9 This 
preference makes sense, considering the largest investments in the U.S. defense budget have 
historically tended to be exquisite platforms. Because of their implications for force struc -
ture and industry, it follows that these platforms naturally attract the most debate, analysis, 
and political attention.10 In addition, military communities and culture typically center 
around these platforms. From submariners to tankers to fighter pilots, the tendency of these 
communities to focus on their platforms of choice leads to an “attitude [that] overlooks 
the fact that what counts is not what delivers the warhead but that the warhead destroys 
the target.”11
Because of their relegation behind platforms, munitions funding is often sacrificed in the 
name of next-generation platforms. Former Air Force acquisition chief Dr. Will Roper 
explained in 2019 that “Munitions … often become a bill payer in program reviews. 
9 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition & Technology, Report of the Defense Science Board Task 
Force on Tactical Air Warfare  (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, November 1993), p. 7, https://apps.dtic.mil/
dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a275347.pdf.
10 Travis Sharp, Chris Bassler, and Tyler Hacker, “In a Connected Era, We Talk Too Much About Individual Weapons,” 
Defense One , June 8, 2022, https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2022/06/connected-era-we-talk-too-much-about-  
individual-weapons/367898/.
11 Kenneth P. Werrell, Chasing the Silver Bullet: U.S. Air Force Weapons Development from Vietnam to Desert Storm  
(Washington, DC: Smithsonian, 2003), p. 7.

4  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Budgeters think ‘you just buy fewer.’”12 This reflex originates in part from the perception that 
unlike advanced platforms, munitions production can be easily surged during a conflict. As 
the Russia-Ukraine conflict has shown—and this monograph will more fully explore—this 
assumption is dated and inaccurate when discussing modern PGMs. It may take months to 
produce today’s guided munitions and years to expand production lines.
Even so, the outcome of future great power conflict is likely to hinge on the expenditure of 
large quantities of these guided munitions. Policymakers, strategists, analysts, and mili -
tary professionals accept that high-intensity conflict involves more targets, longer ranges, 
and effective adversary defenses and countermeasures. The 2018 National Defense Strategy 
Commission clearly stated these demands:
Nearly any conflict between the United States and its most capable competitors would entail 
significant demand for long-range, high-precision munitions so that U.S. forces can remain 
outside the range of advanced air defenses systems and other anti-access/area-denial capa -
bilities. (Large quantities of shorter-range high-precision munitions will be needed, as well.) 
… Current and planned DOD investments promise some gains in this area, but more must be 
done to ensure a substantial, sustainable, and rapidly scalable supply of preferred weapons 
[emphasis in original].13
CSBA has previously noted the importance of precision-guided munitions for high-inten -
sity conflict in operational concepts and publications such as AirSea Battle and Sustaining 
America’s Precision Strike Advantage .14 Wargames, workshops, and exercises held by CSBA 
consistently reinforce the need for greater emphasis on munitions and their industrial base. 15
Despite this growing demand signal, there has been little public analysis of munition needs 
for great power war that advances beyond the conclusion that the United States needs more 
weapons overall. Much munitions-related analysis remains classified and driven by tactical 
12 Quoted in John A. Tirpak, “Climbing Out of the Munitions Hole,” Air & Space Forces Magazine , March 22, 2019, 
https://www.airandspaceforces.com/article/climbing-out-of-the-munitions-hole/.
13 Commission on the National Defense Strategy for the United States, Providing for the Common Defense: The Assessment 
and Recommendations of the National Defense Strategy Commission (Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace, 
2018), p. 41, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/2018-11/providing-for-the-common-defense.pdf.
14 For example, in AirSea Battle : “Peacetime inventories of precision-guided munitions would be exhausted quickly 
in a high-intensity war against a powerful enemy. The ability to sustain such a war without a prolonged operational 
pause potentially lasting months would require considerable increases in global inventories.” See Jan van Tol with 
Mark Gunzinger, Andrew Krepinevich, and Jim Thomas, AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure Operational Concept  
(Washington, DC, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2010), pp. 45, 46, 91, https://csbaonline.org/
research/publications/airsea-battle-concept; Mark Gunzinger and Bryan Clark, Sustaining America’s Precision 
Strike Advantage  (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2015), https://csbaonline.org/
research/publications/sustaining-americas-precision-strike-advantage.
15 Thomas G. Mahnken, “The US Needs a New Approach to Producing Weapons. Just Look at Ukraine.,” Defense News , 
April 26, 2022, https://www.defensenews.com/opinion/2022/04/26/the-us-needs-a-new-approach-to-producing-  
weapons-just-look-at-ukraine/.

4  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 5
modeling and operational-level campaign analysis. 16 Although specific war plans and exact 
munitions inventory numbers are sensitive in nature, leaving munitions analysis confined 
to the realm of modeling, simulation, and operations research fails to consider the broader 
assumptions that drive these calculations and their implications. This monograph will 
examine modern weapons’ role in strategic decision-making—a point that may be lost when 
munitions analysis is confined to rigid classified modeling for operational scenarios.
Open-source studies that do examine requirements are often limited in scope and focus 
on rapid campaigns and winning the initial “salvo competition” phase of a conflict. 17 Little 
analysis has been devoted to munitions requirements for a protracted great power conflict, 
which, as strategists like Joshua Rovner and Hal Brands have argued, is increasingly 
likely.18 Brands sees prolonged conflict as a likely outcome of great power competition for 
four reasons.19 First, history shows that most great power conflicts were not rapid but lasted 
numerous months or years. Second, attempts to achieve strategic objectives through rapid, 
decisive campaigns often fail, leaving conflicts in an open-ended, protracted state while both 
sides recover and decide how to proceed. In the words of Secretary of the Air Force Frank 
Kendall, “the short war you anticipate might not be the war you get.”20 Third, even if decisive 
operations defeat an adversary quickly, the high stakes of great power conflict make them 
unlikely to simply surrender their aims and terminate the conflict. Instead, great power 
adversaries are likely to continue the conflict via any means available. Finally, the presence 
of nuclear weapons may prolong conflict because they may limit escalation and encourage 
the expenditure of all conventional means to achieve victory. Military leaders have echoed 
16 For an example of open-source modeling of the munitions mix problem, see Robert J. Lempert, Drake Warren, 
Ryan Henry, and Robert W. Button et al., Defense Resource Planning Under Uncertainty: An Application of Robust 
Decision Making to Munitions Mix Planning  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2016), https://www.rand.org/pubs/
research_reports/RR1112.html.
17 Former Deputy Secretary of Defense Robert Work’s third Offset Strategy emphasized winning the “guided munitions 
salvo competition.” See Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Work Elevates Electronic Warfare, Eye On Missile Defense,” Breaking 
Defense, March 17, 2015, https://breakingdefense.com/2015/03/raid-breaker-work-elevates-electronic-warfare-eye-
on-missile-defense/; Mark Gunzinger and Bryan Clark, Winning the Salvo Competition: Rebalancing America’s Air 
and Missile Defenses (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2016), https://csbaonline.org/
research/publications/winning-the-salvo-competition-rebalancing-americas-air-and-missile-defenses.
18 Joshua Rovner, “Two kinds of catastrophe: nuclear escalation and protracted war in Asia,” Journal of Strategic 
Studies  40, no. 5, February 28, 2017, pp. 696–730.
19 Hal Brands, Getting Ready for a Long War with China: Dynamics of Protracted Conflict in the Western Pacific 
(Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute, 2022), https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/getting-ready-
for-a-long-war-with-china-dynamics-of-protracted-conflict-in-the-western-pacific/. Other analysts have echoed Brands’ 
reasoning, see Zamone Perez, “Experts urge US logistics revamp in light of Ukraine war,” Defense News, October 12, 
2022, https://www.defensenews.com/home/2022/10/12/experts-urge-us-logistics-revamp-in-light-of-ukraine-war/.
20 Quoted in Lee Ferran, “Key lessons Air Force’s Kendall would ‘prefer’ China learn from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,” 
Breaking Defense , December 3, 2022, https://breakingdefense.com/2022/12/3-lessons-air-forces-kendall-would-  
prefer-china-learn-from-russias-invasion-of-ukraine/ .

6  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
these concerns when discussing potential conflict scenarios in the Indo-Pacific. 21 Most 
concerningly, People’s Liberation Army (PLA) doctrinal writings show that the Chinese mili -
tary believes that protracted conflict under nuclear overhang is possible, even likely, and is 
preparing accordingly.22
For these reasons, it is imperative that the U.S. military consider conventional munitions 
requirements for prolonged conflicts rather than planning only for the rapid and limited 
campaigns of the last 30 years. These protracted scenarios challenge traditional planning 
assumptions, force a deeper prioritization of munitions expenditures, and demand a recon -
sideration of the role of PGMs in shaping the military’s operational and strategic approach.
Report Purpose, Scope, and Outline
This monograph examines prospective PGM consumption in great power conflict scenarios 
to determine essential munitions capabilities for contemporary war and provide insights 
into how the United States can prepare its portfolio of precision weapons to meet these 
requirements. As an expansion of previous CSBA works on precision-strike, munitions, and 
great power conflict, this study:
• Examines PGM consumption in historical U.S. and allied strike campaigns;
• Explores munitions requirements in several illustrative great power conflict scenarios in 
the Indo-Pacific;
• Assesses the current U.S. PGM portfolio against great power conflict requirements; and
• Identifies technologies and concepts to help close munitions capacity and capability gaps.
To conduct a manageable analysis, this study focuses on conflict scenarios involving the 
People’s Republic of China (PRC) in the Indo-Pacific theater. China remains the U.S. mili-
tary’s preeminent threat, particularly with Russia locked in an ongoing conflict in Ukraine. 
Focusing our assessment on a single adversary and theater allows for uniform analysis 
21 For example, U.S. Army Pacific commander General Charles Flynn stated “Despite any wishful thinking, we can be 
sure that the next war will be very violent, it will be very human, it will be very unpredictable. And so our Pacific 
theatre army is preparing for long war because history has proven that wars are often longer than we expect.” Admiral 
Charles A. Richard, commander of U.S. Strategic Command, recently expressed similar sentiments. Charles Flynn 
quoted in Brendan Nicholson, “U.S. Army Pacific Commander: Next War Will Be Violent, Very Human, Unpredictable 
and Long,” Real Clear Defense , February 21, 2022, https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2022/02/21/us_
army_pacific_commander_next_war_will_be_violent_very_human_unpredictable_and_long_817777.html?mc_
cid=58d0f5dd0e&mc_eid=7cbf43077b; Oliver Parken and Tyler Rogoway, “Extremely Ominous Warning About 
China From US Strategic Command Chief,” The Drive , November 6, 2022, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/
extremely-ominous-warning-about-china-from-us-strategic-command-chief.
22 In its war with Ukraine, Russia has also shown its willingness to engage in protracted conflict. Brands, Getting 
Ready for a Long War with China , p. 9; and Stephen Blank, “Russia Acknowledges a Prolonged War: What Does That 
Mean?,” Real Clear Defense , December 21, 2022, https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2022/12/21/russia_
acknowledges_a_prolonged_war_what_does_that_mean_871367.html?mc_cid=041335c00d&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.

6  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 7
across a broad set of Indo-Pacific scenarios. Our analysis focuses on PGMs because 
guided weapons are central to the American way of war and are likely to comprise the 
majority of weapons expended in any future conflict. This assumption also differentiates 
future scenarios from great power wars of the past, which relied on massive numbers of 
unguided munitions.
This monograph is not intended to produce exact munitions requirements or quanti -
ties. Instead, it is meant to use historical cases and illustrative vignettes to generate broad 
insights into the types of munitions ideal for future campaigns, the depth of stocks needed, 
and the sensitivity of munitions requirements to variables such as campaign objectives, 
conflict duration, and the effectiveness of enemy defenses.
To reach these insights, Chapter Two examines previous U.S. strike campaigns to iden -
tify munitions trends and lessons that may carry over to great power conflict in the 2020s. 
Chapter Three outlines five potential Indo-Pacific conflict scenarios and their munitions 
demands to find common requirements, major variables, and key assumptions from across 
the cases. Chapter Four assesses the current U.S. PGM portfolio against the requirements 
identified in Chapter Three to highlight capacity and capability gaps. It also describes the 
constraints on weapon development, production, and procurement that may prevent the U.S. 
military from spending or producing its way out of its PGM shortcomings. Chapter Five then 
explores technologies, platforms, employment techniques, and operational concepts that 
could help close these capability and capacity gaps. Finally, the monograph concludes with 
key findings and recommendations to improve the readiness of the U.S. PGM portfolio for 
the challenges of future great power conflict.
Our analysis finds that the munitions demands of a war in the Indo-Pacific are likely to 
outpace the United States’ current capacity to produce and procure sufficient numbers of 
PGMs. In the near-term, the United States must increase its focus on munitions procure -
ment and expanding its weapon industrial base. Concurrently, the U.S. military must move 
beyond current approaches to achieving precision and invest in technologies, platforms, and 
concepts that prepare its PGM portfolio and munitions industry for the immense require -
ments of modern warfare. Military planners can reduce these requirements and achieve 
precision in mass by decreasing a campaign’s quantity of aimpoints, increasing the chances 
that weapons reach their targets and have the desired effects, and increasing the number 
of aimpoints each munition can affect. Together, the innovative technologies and concepts 
explored in this monograph provide a range of ways for the U.S. military to affect these vari -
ables and maintain its precision-strike advantage in the wars of the future.

8  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT

8  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 9
CHAPTER 2
Previous Trends in 
Munitions Consumption
Munitions consumption in wars-to-come is often foreshadowed by expenditures in wars of 
the past. A classic example of this notion is the foretelling of World War One artillery shell 
requirements in the Balkan Wars of 1912 to 1913.23 Although artillery shell expenditure 
rates remained relatively consistent through the Franco-Prussian (1870–1871) and Russo-
Japanese (1904–1905) wars, Bulgaria’s average monthly consumption from 1912 to 1913 
was nearly triple that of previous conflicts. The great powers, however, failed to notice this 
change. When the First World War began the following year, France expended more than 
two-thirds of its pre-war stock of artillery shells within the first month of combat. By the end 
of 1914, the French were consuming munitions at more than ten times the rate of previous 
conflicts and three and half times that of Bulgaria during the Balkan Wars. By the end of the 
war, Germany was firing an average of eight million shells per month—more than the entire 
stock of seven million shells France held in inventory at the start of the conflict. 24
These exponential increases in munitions expenditures by the belligerents of World War 
One had significant consequences on the battlefield and in politics more broadly, with the 
infamous “Shell Crisis of 1915” leading to the resignation of British Prime Minister H.H. 
Asquith.25 In the years preceding the war, the leading powers of the time overlooked a 
significant indicator of evolving trends in warfare. With this warning in mind, this chapter 
examines munitions trends in recent strike campaigns in order to glean lessons for future 
23 This anecdote is drawn from David T. Zabecki, “The Dress Rehearsal: Lost Artillery Lessons of the 1912-1913 
Balkan Wars,” Field Artillery , February 1988, https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Z6UrAAAAYAAJ&pg=RA2-
PA22&dq=ammunition+consumption+russo+japanese+war&hl=en&newbks=1&ne
wbks_redir=0&sa=X&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false.
24 Ibid., pp. 22-23.
25 David French, “The Military Background to the ‘Shell’ Crisis of May 1915,” Journal of Strategic Studies  2:2, pp. 
192–205, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01402397908437021.

10  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
great power war. Although the world has not seen widespread conflict between major powers 
since the Second World War, the development, evolution, and ubiquitous usage of preci-
sion-guided munitions (PGMs) since the 1960s offers a prescient look at potential munitions 
requirements for 21st-century great power conflict.
The Evolution of Precision-Strike
Before exploring recent campaigns, two interrelated trends concerning modern muni -
tions expenditures must be highlighted. Since the Second World War, the introduction and 
widespread use of guided munitions has altered the fundamental tradeoffs associated with 
munitions employment. U.S. bombing operations and strike campaigns over the previous 
50 years have seen the maturation of the precision-strike complex, a process thoroughly 
documented in previous CSBA studies. 26 This development has led to two significant trends: 
weapon accuracy becoming independent of engagement range, and tactical effectiveness 
achieved with fewer weapons.
Accuracy Independent of Range, But Not Without Costs
Prior to the advent of guided munitions, an inverse relationship existed between weapon 
employment range and accuracy.27 Due to firing errors and environmental factors affecting 
ballistic flight, accuracy decreased as the range to the target increased. This principle is 
illustrated by traditional artillery munitions (Figure 2), which have a larger circular error 
probable (CEP) as the engagement range increases.28 A longer range entails a longer flight 
time, which adds to the amount of time the projectile is exposed to environmental forces 
that affect its trajectory, such as gravity, weather, air drag, and the rotation of the earth.
26 See, for example: Barry D. Watts, Long-Range Strike: Imperatives, Urgency and Options (Washington, DC: Center 
for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2005), https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2005.04.06-Long-
Range-Strike.pdf; Barry D. Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks: Progress and Prospects  
(Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2007), https://csbaonline.org/uploads/
documents/2007.03.01-Six-Decades-Of-Guided-Weapons.pdf; Barry D. Watts, The Case for Long-Range Strike: 21st 
Century Scenarios  (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2008), https://csbaonline.org/
uploads/documents/2008.12.31-The-Case-for-Long-Range-Strike.pdf; Mark Gunzinger, Sustaining America’s Strategic 
Advantage in Long-Range Strike (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2010), https://
csbaonline.org/research/publications/americas-strategic-advantage-long-range-strike; Barry D. Watts, The Evolution 
of Precision Strike (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2013), https://csbaonline.org/
uploads/documents/Evolution-of-Precision-Strike-final-v15.pdf; and Mark Gunzinger and Bryan Clark, Sustaining 
America’s Precision Strike Advantage (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2015), 
https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/Sustaining-Americas-Precision-Strike-Advantage.pdf.
27 This monograph uses the terms accuracy and precision interchangeably.
28 CEP is a measure of a weapon’s precision. CEP is the radius of a circle, centered on the mean point of impact, within 
which 50 percent of a given salvo is expected to land.

10  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 11
FIGURE 2: ACCURACY OF UNGUIDED VERSUS GUIDED MUNITIONS
Source: Created by CSBA.
Guidance systems begin to ameliorate this problem by correcting deviations from the projec -
tile’s intended flight path. Precision-guidance essentially negates this tradeoff by correcting 
for errors and meteorological effects throughout the munition’s flight to ensure the projectile 
hits its specified aimpoint.29
The ability to strike accurately, regardless of range, has revolutionized warfare—with one 
crucial caveat. Although guided munitions eliminate the tradeoff between range and accu -
racy, their range is still very much related to their procurement cost. Put simply, the longer 
the munition’s range, the more it typically costs.  The employment of precision versus 
unguided munitions thus still entails tradeoffs, but these compromises are now mainly asso -
ciated with cost (resource constraints) rather than operational effectiveness.
The higher cost of long-range guided munitions has several causes. Increased range often 
requires expensive propulsion systems and increased fuel capacity, making these munitions 
comparable to small aircraft and increasing their price accordingly. Munition speed, also 
tied to propulsion, also drives cost. The relationship between range, speed, and procurement 
cost for a handful of modern PGMs is displayed in Figure 3. Additionally, guidance capa -
bility itself creates additional costs for sensors and seekers, electronics, and control surfaces. 
All in all, despite accuracy now being independent of range, a munition’s cost remains 
directly related to range and speed, with guidance systems putting the “icing on the cake” 
of total weapon cost. These factors can be observed in the Gulf War, where although guided 
29 This monograph uses the DoD definition of precision-guided munition: “A guided weapon intended to destroy a point 
target and minimize collateral damage.” See Department of Defense, Joint Publication 3-03: Joint Interdiction , 
September 9, 2016, p. GL-4, https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp3_03.pdf.

12  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
munitions were only 7.6% of total munitions expended, they accounted for 84% of total 
munitions’ costs.30
FIGURE 3: GUIDED MUNITIONS RANGE, SPEED, AND UNIT COST TRENDS
Source: Created by CSBA using data from DoD budget documents from FY1998 to FY2023 and Jane’s database. Unit costs are averages based upon 
FY1998 to FY2023 procurement costs.
Effectiveness Without Mass
Prior to the widespread use of guided munitions, inaccuracy was compensated for with 
volume—firing large numbers of projectiles to increase the likelihood that at least some hit 
the desired aimpoint. Because precision-guidance now removes the error from a weapon’s 
trajectory, however, fewer munitions are needed to attain the same effects. First seen in the 
Vietnam War, this revolution in weapon capability led to, in the words of the Gulf War Air 
Power Survey, a “fundamental rethinking of the means of achieving the destruction goal.” 31
PGMs have significantly reduced the number of munitions required to achieve the same 
effects. The extreme degree of this reduction was also first seen in the Gulf War, where one 
ton of PGMs replaced an estimated 12 to 20 tons of unguided munitions on a tonnage per 
30 GAO/NSIAD-97-134, Operation Desert Storm: Evaluation of the Air Campaign  (Washington, DC: Government 
Accountability Office, June 1997), p. 178, https://www.gao.gov/assets/nsiad-97-134.pdf.
31 Gulf War Air Power Survey, Volume IV: Weapons, Tactics, and Training and Space Operations (Washington, DC: 
Department of Defense, 1993), p. 252, https://media.defense.gov/2010/Sep/27/2001329817/-1/-1/0/AFD-100927-066.pdf.

12  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 13
target kill basis. 32 By utilizing PGMs, a military is able to greatly reduce its total munitions 
requirement for the same target set.
FIGURE 4: EFFECTS OF PGMS ON MUNITIONS EXPENDITURES
Source: Created by CSBA with inspiration from Gunzinger and Clark, Sustaining America’s Precision Strike Advantage.
In short, the post-WWII era has witnessed a shift in focus from massing large quantities of 
unguided weapons to long-range precision-strike, albeit with significant increases in the cost 
of individual munitions. These two trends have several follow-on implications for weapon, 
platform, and basing requirements. The reduction in munitions needed per aimpoint trans -
lates to fewer sorties required to strike a greater number of targets. Fewer sorties per target 
could potentially reduce the total number of platforms required to attack the same target set. 
Moreover, delivery platforms can often attack certain targets from further distances with 
the same level of effectiveness, allowing platforms to remain further from enemy defenses. 
All of these factors have significant effects on theater logistics and sustainment require -
ments. Of course, these trends have become apparent during limited conflicts rather than 
large industrial wars of attrition. It remains to be seen how they apply to modern great 
power conflicts.
32 The Defense Science Board also estimated that one ton of PGMs saved as much as 35 to 40 tons of aviation fuel. Office 
of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition & Technology, Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on 
Tactical Air Warfare (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, November 1993), p. 17, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/
fulltext/u2/a275347.pdf.

14  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
The Enduring Munitions Problem
Ideally, the United States would take advantage of these trends and prepare for future high-
intensity conflict by maintaining a nearly unlimited inventory of varied types of precision 
munitions. However, fiscal, industrial, and logistical constraints force the U.S. military 
to make tradeoffs when considering which PGMs to produce, stock, and maintain. Before 
examining munitions requirements in future scenarios, we must briefly explore how the 
United States currently navigates these weapon tradeoffs and some of the recurring issues 
with this process.
How the U .S . Military Determines Munitions Requirements
The DoD determines the type and quantity of its munitions purchases through the 
Munitions Requirements Process (MRP).33 The Department utilizes illustrative planning 
scenarios identified by the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) in 
conjunction with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and DoD component heads. With 
these scenarios and threat analysis provided by the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 
the military services work with the combatant commanders to develop their munitions 
requirements. The services create two sets of requirements, one unconstrained and another 
constrained. The unconstrained requirements are not limited by projected inventory 
numbers or funding, but may be limited by production capacity or external caps on procure -
ment. The constrained requirement, on the other hand, is limited by projected inventory. 
In other words, the services first create an ideal mix before subjecting it to the realistic 
constraints of budgeting and procurement. This process underscores the enduring chal -
lenge of determining munitions mixes: reconciling ideal requirements with the constraints 
of reality.
The military services, as the leaders of budgeting and programming, are ultimately respon -
sible for squeezing munitions requirements into their Program Objective Memorandums 
(POMs). Although the MRP is intended to ensure the services acquire the optimal mix of 
weapons according to their analysis of the planning scenarios, previous studies have shown 
that the quantity of a munition procured is mostly driven by cost. 34 Regardless of scenario 
or strategy, higher-cost munitions are typically purchased in much smaller quantities than 
inexpensive weapons.35
In determining the unconstrained and constrained requirements, the services depend on 
modeling, simulation, and other analyses of illustrative planning scenarios and operational 
plans. As a result, their outputs rely on certain assumptions about the scenarios, the overall 
33 The MRP is outlined in DoD Instruction (DoDI) 3000.04. Department of Defense, “DoDI 3000.04: DoD Munitions 
Requirements Process,” August 31, 2018, https://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/
dodi/300004p.pdf?ver=2019-02-25-133944-863.
34 DODI 3000.04 defines optimal as the “most favorable or desirable solution depending on factors involved.”
35 Watts, Evolution of Precision Strike , pp. 20–21.

14  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 15
national objectives and strategy, and preconceived munitions employment concepts. As we 
look to future great power competition, we must contemplate how many of these previous 
assumptions might be challenged or no longer applicable.
The Persistent Shortage of PGMs
One consistent failure of the current process, perhaps due to faulty assumptions or inad -
equate funding, is chronically insufficient inventories of PGMs. Despite their effectiveness 
and extensive operational use, the United States and its allies are perennially running their 
PGM stocks low. This trend goes all the way back to the widespread fielding of PGMs in the 
early 1990s, with one post-Gulf War study noting that “The greatest current imbalances in 
capability are in inadequate numbers of precision-guided weapons and associated target 
engagement systems.”36
Despite these warnings, each major strike campaign since has suffered from a dearth 
of precision munitions. During Operation Allied Force in 1997, the Joint Direct Attack 
Munition (JDAM) was still in early production and testing. Insufficient stocks of these 
weapons and other guided munitions such as the Conventional Air-Launched Cruise Missile 
(CALCM) led to increased use of unguided bombs once precision stocks were depleted. 37 
In Operation Enduring Freedom, high consumption and low inventories of JDAMs pushed 
the Pentagon to hurriedly fund the opening of a second JDAM production line. 38 Operation 
Inherent Resolve again saw shortages of specific types of PGMs, leading RAND to call 
existing stockpiles “insufficient” in their official assessment of the air war over Iraq and 
Syria.39 PGM expenditure rates during this campaign led then-Air Force Chief of Staff 
General Mark Welsh to admit “We’re expending munitions faster than we can replenish 
them. … This is a critical need.”40
The munitions stockpiles of many U.S. allies may be in even worse condition. The 2011 
bombing campaign in Libya quickly exposed the inadequacy of European inventories of 
PGMs, with Britain, France, and others unable to independently sustain continuous strike 
36 Even after early PGMs proved effective during the Vietnam War, the U.S. military did not fully embrace their potential 
until years later. Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition & Technology, Report of the Defense Science 
Board Task Force on Tactical Air Warfare  (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, November 1993), introductory 
memorandum, https:/ /apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a275347.pdf.
37 Benjamin S. Lambeth, NATO’s Air War for Kosovo: A Strategic and Operational Assessment  (Santa Monica, CA: 
RAND, 2001), pp. 170-171, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1365/RAND_
MR1365.pdf.
38 Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks , p. 220.
39 Becca Wasser, Stacie L. Pettyjohn, Jeffrey Martini, Alexandra T. Evans et al., The Air War Against the Islamic State: 
The Role of Airpower in Operation Inherent Resolve (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2021), pp. 305-306, https://www.
rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA388-1.html.
40 Quoted in Tom Vanden Brook, “Air Force Burning through Bomb Stockpiles Striking ISIL,” USA Today, December 3, 
2015, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2015/12/03/isil-iraq-syria-hellfire-missiles-drones/76741954/.

16  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
operations due to shortages of laser-guided bombs and other weapons. 41 The current conflict 
in Ukraine has further shown the shallowness of NATO munitions stocks. By mid-March 
2022, Canadian Defense Minister Anita Anand admitted that Canadian weapon inventories 
were “exhausted,” with little more available for transfer to Ukraine. 42 Around the same time, 
Germany made a similar announcement and delayed its donation of Gepard anti-aircraft 
vehicles due to shortages of medium-caliber ammunition. 43 U.K. Defense Minister Ben 
Wallace called the weapons stocks of Western nations “inadequate for the threats we face,” 
and cited a war game in which British forces ran out of munitions in eight days. 44
Munitions Trends in Modern Strike Campaigns
Beyond shortages of PGMs, what other munitions trends have characterized U.S. strike 
campaigns since the maturation of precision-strike operations? How will these trends 
translate to great power conflict in the 2020s? To answer these questions, CSBA compiled 
available munitions data from several post-Cold War U.S. military operations. Displayed in 
Table 1, these figures allow us to compare total munitions expenditures, the proportion of 
guided and unguided weapons, the share of long-range munitions, and the types of targets 
these campaigns prosecuted.
41 Karen DeYoung and Greg Jaffe, “Nato Runs Short on Some Munitions in Libya,” Washington Post, April 15, 2011, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/nato-runs-short-on-some-munitions-in-libya/2011/04/15/AF3O7ElD_
story.html.
42 Nick Taylor-Vaisey, “Sorry Ukraine, We Ran Out of Guns,” Politico, March 17, 2022, https://www.politico.com/
newsletters/ottawa-playbook/2022/03/17/sorry-ukraine-we-ran-out-of-guns-00018052.
43 Ntv.de, “Lambrecht: Lieferungen von Bundeswehr-Waffen ‘erschöpft’,” March 18, 2022, https://www.n-tv.de/politik/
Lambrecht-Lieferungen-von-Bundeswehr-Waffen-erschoepft-article23207612.html; and Sabine Siebold and Sarah 
Marsh, “Tanks, but No Ammo – Germany’s Ukraine Pledges Show Military Muddle,” Reuters, May 25, 2022, https://
www.reuters.com/world/us/tanks-no-ammo-germanys-ukraine-pledges-show-military-muddle-2022-05-25/.
44 Rathbone and Chavez, “Military Briefings: Is The West Running Out of Ammunition to Supply Ukraine?”

16  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 17
TABLE 1: COMPARISON OF POST-COLD WAR U .S . STRIKE CAMPAIGNS
Desert 
Storm
1990 – 1991
Allied Force
1999
Enduring 
Freedom
2001
Iraqi Freedom
2003
Odyssey Dawn
Unified 
Protector (NATO 
combined)
2011
Inherent 
Resolve
2014 – 2019
Length (days) 43 78 176 30 234 ~1,700
Total Sorties 116,000 38,004 ~25,000 47,600 26,500+ 234,000
Average Sorties/
Day 2,500 200 – 1,000 ~100 ~1,600 ~113 ~143
Aimpoints ~40,000
7,600 fixed
3,400 mobile
11,000 total
120 fixed
400+ mobile
520+ total
30,542
19,898 struck - -
Total Munitions 277,165 23,614 17,472 29,199 7,642 115,983
Guided Munitions 17,161
(7.6%)
6,728
(29%)
12,001
(69%)
19,948
(68%)
7,642
(100%) Largely PGMs
Average Guided 
Munitions/Day 399 86 68 665 33 ~68
TLAMs/
CALCMSExpended 332 270 74 955 110 172
SEAD Sorties 4,326 4,538 - - 1,500+ -
HARMs Expended 1,961 1,000+ - 408 - -
Radars Destroyed ~250 / 500 10 / 41 - - - -
SAMs Destroyed
35 / 120 
fixed 
batteries
3 / 25 SA-6 
batteries - -
Presumed by DoD:
11 SA-5 batteries
4 SA-2 batteries
16 SA-3 batteries
Mobile uknown
-
Combat Losses (# 
of aircraft)
38 total 
coalition 2 0 1 1 mechanical 2 mechanical
5 UAS
Sources: See full table in Appendix A for a complete list of sources and notes.
The campaigns in Table 1 vary significantly in their duration, size, and target set. The air 
war conducted during Operation Desert Storm was a comprehensive strike campaign 
carried out over several weeks that attacked Iraqi command and control (C2), integrated air 
defense systems (IADS), and military, communications, and transportation infrastructure. 
The end of the air war saw attacks shift to Iraqi ground forces. In Operation Allied Force, 
most targets were ground force facilities, C2 facilities, and lines of communication (namely 
bridges, rail, and roadways).45 Other key targets in Allied Force included “counter-regime” 
targets and Serb air defenses, many of which were mobile SA-3s and SA-6s. The 2001 air 
war over Afghanistan lasted significantly longer than either Desert Storm or Allied Force, 
but struck fewer targets at a slower rate, many of which were ground forces. Two years later, 
45 Lambeth, NATO’s Air War for Kosovo, pp. 62–63.

18  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Iraqi Freedom was comparatively short and intense, with the majority of sorties apportioned 
to strike Iraqi forces, maintain air supremacy, and suppress Iraqi ballistic missile systems. 46 
Finally, NATO’s campaign in Libya and the fight against ISIS in Iraq and Syria consisted 
of protracted air operations with periods of higher intensity. From these strike campaigns, 
several trends can be identified.
First, each campaign saw the increasing prevalence of guided munitions, with 
more recent campaigns relying almost exclusively on PGMs.  Over time, PGMs 
have gone from exquisite munitions utilized for specific targets or situations to the standard 
strike munitions of the U.S. military. This trend has, in turn, had second- and third-order 
effects on U.S. force structure, doctrine, training, and logistics. As PGMs have become ubiq -
uitous, the majority of platforms are now capable of employing them. Pilots and operators 
are not only trained in their use, but also have years of operational experience doing so. U.S. 
operational concepts and plans—the modern American way of war—now rely on precision-
strike capabilities. Precision has become the standard, and current and future weapons 
inventories should reflect this fact.
FIGURE 5: INCREASING PGM USAGE SINCE 1990
Source: Created by CSBA using data from Table 1. See Appendix A.
46 U.S. Central Command Air Forces, Assessment and Analysis Division, “Operation IRAQI FREEDOM – By The 
Numbers,” April 30, 2003, p. 5, https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/2003/uscentaf_oif_
report_30apr2003.pdf.

18  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 19
Second, long-range and stand-off munitions have made up an increasingly 
large portion of the total munitions expended.  Operations Desert Storm and Iraqi 
Freedom best exemplify this trend because both campaigns occurred in the same geog -
raphy and were short, intense, and comprehensive in scope. Although long-range munitions 
still make up a relatively small share of total munitions consumption, they are increasing 
in proportion. This trend is significant because of the previously identified relationship 
between increased range and increased cost. Figure 6 shows the growing usage of long-range 
munitions and how munitions’ costs in Iraqi Freedom were driven by stand-off weapons 
like the Tomahawk Land Attack Missile (TLAM) and CALCM. Short-range munitions are 
a shrinking slice of the total munitions pie—in both quantity expended and cost. As more 
long-range munitions are needed, fiscal tradeoffs between quantities of long- and short-
range weapons become more pressing.47
FIGURE 6: AIR- AND SEA-DELIVERED MUNITIONS EXPENDED IN DESERT STORM VERSUS 
IRAQI FREEDOM BY RANGE AND COST
Source: Created by CSBA using data from DoD budget documents; GAO/NSIAD-97-134, Operation Desert Storm: Evaluation of the Air Campaign; 
and U.S. Central Command Air Forces, Assessment and Analysis Division, “Operation IRAQI FREEDOM – By The Numbers.”
47 For an exploration of the cost tradeoff between standoff munitions and penetrating bombers carrying short-range 
munitions, see Thomas Hamilton, Comparing the Cost of Penetrating Bombers to Expendable Missiles Over Thirty 
Years: An Initial Look (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2011), https://www.rand.org/pubs/working_papers/WR778.html.

20  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Finally, many of these campaigns featured large munitions expenditures 
on mobile and elusive targets, often without achieving the desired effects.  
This trend can be seen in the varied success of suppression and destruction of enemy air 
defense (SEAD/DEAD) missions between Desert Storm and Allied Force. These operations 
included a similar number of SEAD/DEAD sorties with large numbers of anti-radiation 
missiles expended. In Desert Storm, coalition forces quickly incapacitated Iraq IADS, which 
consisted mostly of fixed radars and missiles controlled by centralized C2 centers. Serb air 
defenses, on the other hand, relied on mobile missile launchers and radars that remained 
concealed and emitted intermittently, making them difficult for allied air forces to target 
and destroy.48 Iraqi SCUD launchers during Desert Storm presented a similar problem, 
despite being in the same flat and uniform terrain as fixed IADS sites. Because of their 
mobility, coalition air strikes were unable to destroy a single launcher, despite SCUD hunting 
consuming “as much as 25 percent of F-15E and LANTIRN equipped F-16 sorties in the 
war.”49 These mobile and elusive targets consumed valuable munitions and resources that 
could have been devoted to other vital missions.
U .S . Adversaries Adapt to These Trends
These munitions trends have not only been noticed by the U.S. military, but have also 
been studied extensively by U.S. adversaries, who have attempted to adapt their forces to 
defeat U.S. operations asymmetrically and capitalize on perceived weaknesses in the preci -
sion-strike complex. These adaptations began after Desert Storm in the Soviet military, 
which worried in the conflict’s aftermath that widespread use of PGMs might “negate the 
traditional measures of military power and have a revolutionary impact on future combined-
arms concepts.”50
The Chinese military drew similar lessons about future warfare from the U.S. campaigns of 
the 1990s and 2000s. PLA scholars credit the Gulf War with spurring a “wholesale recon -
sideration of future warfare” within the Chinese military that ultimately shifted the PLA’s 
focus from mechanized warfare to information warfare. 51 Rather than simply imitating the 
48 Eric Heginbotham, Michael Nixon, Forrest E. Morgan, and Jacob L. Heim et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard: 
Forces, Geography, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 1996-2017  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015), p. 128, https://
www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR392.html.
49 Although no SCUD launchers were destroyed, analysts estimate that these sorties had a virtual attrition  effect by 
discouraging road movement and reducing the number of SCUDs launched by half. Office of the Under Secretary 
of Defense For Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Future 
Strategic Strike Forces  (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, February 2004), p. 6–4, https://dsb.cto.mil/
reports/2000s/ADA421606.pdf; and Gregory Wilson, A Time-Critical Targeting Roadmap (Maxwell Air Force Base, 
AL: Air Command and Staff College, Air University, 2002), pp. 4–5, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA420658.pdf.
50 David M. Glantz in Gilberto Villahermosa, “DESERT STORM: The Soviet View,” Foreign Military Studies Office, Fort 
Leavenworth, KS, May 25, 2005, p. 22, https://community.apan.org/cfs-file/__key/docpreview-s/00-00-00-96-
94/2005_2D00_05_2D00_25-Desert-Storm_2D00_The-Soviet-View-_2800_Villahermosa-and-Glantz_2900_.pdf.
51 M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy since 1949  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2019), pp. 182, 187, 190.

20  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 21
precision-strike complex of the United States, the PLA aimed to counter U.S. offensive oper -
ations with weapons and concepts that exploited U.S. weaknesses and dependencies in an 
asymmetric manner. The resulting strategy has become known as anti-access/area denial 
(A2/AD), which seeks to keep U.S. maritime and airborne strike assets as far from Chinese 
territory as possible. Central to A2/AD is a robust air and missile defense network intended 
to deny the United States the ability to conduct strike campaigns such as those in Table 1. 
The PLA recognized the need for such a system after the Gulf War, with U.S. operations in 
Kosovo and Iraq further reinforcing the PLA’s fears. 52
Beyond denying U.S. delivery platforms the ability to operate within weapons range of the 
mainland, the PLA has sought to mitigate the U.S. precision-strike advantage by vastly 
increasing the number of potential aimpoints confronting U.S. forces and decreasing the 
probability that American munitions reach and have effects on these aimpoints. The PLA 
aims to achieve this through both active and passive defenses, including extensive disper -
sion, redundancy, and camouflage, concealment, and deception (CC&D).53
Active defenses are mainly China’s IADS, which it has rapidly modernized since the 1990s. 54 
Comprised of early warning sensors, airborne interceptors, surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), 
and point defenses, China’s IADS is capable of neutralizing PGMs before they reach their 
targets. At long ranges, airborne interceptors and advanced SAM systems such as the S-300 
and HQ-9 can shoot down cruise missiles and contest U.S. strike aircraft. At shorter ranges, 
point defenses such as close-in weapon systems or non-kinetic weapons can destroy, jam, 
or spoof incoming PGMs.55 With an estimated probability of kill between 40 and 85 percent 
for cruise missiles, systems like the S-300 vastly increase the number of munitions required 
to ensure effects on a given target. 56 Learning from NATO difficulties with SEAD in Kosovo, 
the PLA has focused its modernization efforts on mobile and rapidly employable air defense 
systems of all types. 57 While the United States expended over 1,000 HARM anti-radiation 
52 A study conducted by the PLA’s National Defense University in the wake of the Operation Allied Force “focused on the 
lethality of air strikes in modern warfare and the need for China to develop appropriate countermeasures. … the NDU 
study highlighted the use of short-range and long-range airstrikes, precision strikes, and stealth aircraft.” Fravel, Active 
Defense, p. 224–228; and Heginbotham, Nixon, Morgan, and Heim et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard, p. 97.
53 Gunzinger and Clark, Sustaining America’s Precision Strike Advantage , pp. 13–15.
54 Heginbotham, Nixon, Morgan, and Heim et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard , p. 98.
55 Close-in weapon systems include gatling gun-type systems, short-range SAMs, and self-propelled anti-aircraft 
guns. The PLA possesses all three types of systems, including platforms that combine two or more of these weapons. 
Non-kinetic defenses include electronic warfare jammers and decoys, and may include high-power lasers or 
microwaves in the near future.
56 Ryan Fedasiuk, “S-300P Air and Missile Defense System,” Missile Defense Advocacy Alliance , December 2017, 
https:/ /missiledefenseadvocacy.org/missile-threat-and-proliferation/todays-missile-threat/russia/russia-anti-  
access-area-denial/s-300p-air-and-missile-defense-system/ .
57 Heginbotham, Nixon, Morgan, and Heim et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard , p. 129.

22  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
missiles at approximately 40 Serb mobile SAM launchers in 1999, China is currently esti -
mated to field over 600 mobile long-range SAM launchers.58
Munitions that survive China’s active defenses will then contend with the PLA’s many 
forms of passive defense, with the most visible measure being the thorough hardening of 
PLA basing and infrastructure. Airbases in China’s depths have long included underground 
hangars built into mountainsides, but the PLA also increased its number of hardened 
aircraft shelters (HAS) by around 240 percent between 2000 and 2014, mainly in the 
coastal areas opposite Taiwan. 59 These shelters not only protect Chinese aircraft from many 
PGMs, but also increase munitions consumption through dispersion and deception:
Chinese construction efforts have increased the number of aimpoints by nearly 130 percent 
from 2002 to 2014. In particular, the number of aimpoints that must be struck to disrupt 
Chinese combat operations near Taiwan has significantly increased. … The additional HAS 
also adds a layer of deception, making US and allied planning and targeting more difficult. 
With roughly 200 additional HAS spread over 15 air bases, the PLA can now disperse its 
squadrons more effectively to confuse targeting efforts. 60
Other passive defenses include extensive use of concealment, camouflage, and decoys to 
further expand the number of aimpoints for the PLA’s adversaries. 61 These measures may 
even be employed around non-military facilities and infrastructure. 62
All of these measures combine to exponentially increase U.S. munitions requirements for 
any strike campaign against the Chinese military. Dispersion and CC&D increase the total 
number of targets. Active defenses further increase munitions requirements by reducing 
the probability that munitions survive the flight to their intended targets. Passive defenses 
increase the number of munitions required by decreasing the likelihood that a weapon has 
the desired effects on the target. Figure 7 shows how these factors combine to drive U.S. 
PGM requirements against a great power adversary such as China.
58 U.S. forces only destroyed three Serb TELs. Serb TEL quantities taken from Heginbotham, Nixon, Morgan, and Heim 
et al., The U.S.–China Military Scorecard , p. 128; Chinese TEL quantities taken from The Military Balance: Chapter 
Six: Asia  (London, UK: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2022), p. 261.
59 David Lewton, “The Dragon Pours Concrete,” Air & Space Forces Magazine , November 26, 2014, https://www.
airandspaceforces.com/article/the-dragon-pours-concrete/.
60 Ibid.
61 China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win  (Washington, DC: Defense Intelligence Agency, 2019), 
p. 47, https://www.dia.mil/Portals/110/Images/News/Military_Powers_Publications/China_Military_Power_
FINAL_5MB_20190103.pdf.
62 For example, the PLA has held drills involving balloons carrying radar reflectors around critical infrastructure. 
Emma Helfrich and Tyler Rogoway, “China Is Using Radar Reflector Balloons To Defend Critical Targets From Aerial 
Attack,” The Drive , December 5, 2022, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/china-seen-using-radar-reflector-  
balloons-to-defend-key-targets.

22  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 23
FIGURE 7: EFFECTS OF ACTIVE AND PASSIVE DEFENSES ON MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS 
FOR A FIXED NUMBER OF AIMPOINTS
Source: Created by CSBA. Calculations assume a desired probability of kill of 90% or greater.
Lessons for Great Power Conflict
The capabilities and adaptations of near-peer adversaries like the Chinese PLA differen-
tiate potential great power conflict campaigns from previous U.S. operations analyzed in this 
chapter. Recent campaigns have been mostly limited in nature and were conducted against 
regional powers or non-state actors with limited defenses. Additionally, most munitions data 
centered on weapons delivered by aircraft, with a much smaller number of PGMs delivered by 
maritime or ground forces. Nevertheless, our examination of previous munitions trends and 
adversary reactions leads to several broad insights for contemporary great power conflict. 
First, PGMs will continue to be the preferred munitions for many types of 
targets so long as inventories last.  Guided munitions will continue to be the “go-to” 
weapon of the U.S. military and a centerpiece of the American way of war. These weapons 
offer unprecedented improvements in effectiveness and operational efficiency. The U.S. mili-
tary’s force structure is shaped to fight a war of precision strike, and it tailors its training, 
doctrine, and procurement around these concepts. What remains unclear is whether U.S. 
PGM stocks are sufficient to support this kind of war against a peer competitor. Given 
limited stocks of long-range PGMs, it is likely that any comprehensive or protracted strike 
campaign will also require a large quantity of shorter-range munitions as well. This is 
particularly true for certain wide-area targets and situations where air defenses have 
been temporarily or permanently mitigated. DoD’s report to Congress on the 1999 Kosovo 
campaign summarized this requirement:
The requirement to maintain a mix of weapon capabilities and platforms was highlighted by 
Operation Allied Force. In the final stages of the campaign when the weather had improved 
and the air defense system had been degraded, the availability of a complete mix of weapons 

24  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
maximized the flexibility of strike options against the remaining priority targets. Because 
pilots could now employ direct attack weapons at less risk, less costly legacy weapons were, 
in many cases, as effective (and sometimes more) as more costly preferred weapons against 
such targets as fielded forces, large military storage complexes, and airfields. 63
Second, the potential quantity of complex targets and their geographic spread 
in a great power war is staggering. Air campaigns in Desert Storm and Iraqi Freedom 
incorporated thousands of aimpoints for C2, IADS, basing, ground forces, and military 
infrastructure targets. An equally comprehensive campaign with similar objectives against 
a great power adversary would entail an even more overwhelming number of aimpoints. 
Moreover, many of these targets are mobile, requiring additional resources to find, track, 
and attack. Beyond the sheer quantity of targets, the vast geographies of China and Russia 
complicate any potential strike operations and range requirements for weapon-platform 
pairs.64 As Figure 8 shows, China is more than 22 times the size of Iraq, with the PLA’s 
Eastern Theater Command alone occupying nearly 1.5 times the area of Iraq. 65 Potential 
targets are spread over a greater area and have more places to hide, requiring additional 
sensor capacity to meet targeting requirements. Targets in the depths of China’s interior 
could require munitions with increased range and penetration capability should delivery 
platforms be unable to operate in contested Chinese airspace.
FIGURE 8: COMPARISON OF IRAQ AND CHINA BY GEOGRAPHIC AREA
Source: Created by CSBA using map data courtesy of naturalearthdata.com.
63 Department of Defense, “Report to Congress: Kosovo/Operation Allied Force After-Action Report,” January 31, 2000, 
p. 90, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/PDF/DocumentFile/Documents/2005/Kosovo_013100.pdf.
64 Not all of China and Russia’s expanses are equally populated with military targets. Nevertheless, the scenarios 
examined in Chapter Three will show how targets in the depths of these vast states complicate strike operations and 
munitions requirements.
65 China occupies around 9.6 million square kilometers versus Iraq’s 435,000.

24  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 25
Third, the defenses of great power adversaries will further increase muni -
tions requirements. Figure 7 illustrates how both active and passive defenses will 
multiply the number of aimpoints and expand the number of munitions required for every 
aimpoint. Regardless of the exact effectiveness of enemy defenses, they will certainly add 
to the quantity of munitions required for great power conflict. 66 Of course, the presence of 
these defenses puts U.S. strategy and munitions design—the U.S. precision-strike advantage 
itself—at an inflection point. As shown in Figure 9, the U.S. military can innovate to sustain 
and increase its existing advantage or languish and find its advantage reduced by adver -
sary advancements in coming years. Future innovation could take many forms. The United 
States can reduce munitions requirements by eliminating or mitigating adversary defenses. 
These measures might include first-wave strikes that “kick in the door” by targeting active 
defenses. The United States might also develop countermeasures against adversary defenses 
or build special munitions designed to defeat certain passive defenses and hardening. U.S. 
forces may also be able to drive up adversary costs by using low-cost munitions to absorb 
expensive interceptors. These possibilities will be fully explored in Chapter Five.
FIGURE 9: PRECISION-STRIKE AT AN INFLECTION POINT
Source: Created by CSBA.
Fourth, the intelligence and targeting requirements for great power 
conflict will be unprecedented in both volume and depth.  In addition to muni-
tions and delivery platforms, intelligence collection and processing are vital to a mature 
66 Even if China’s defenses are ultimately found to be ineffective during a conflict, their presence and the uncertainty they 
create is likely to affect the U.S. military’s actions and munitions employment doctrine in the initial phases of conflict.

26  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
precision-strike regime. Beyond simply finding, identifying, and tracking suspected targets, 
most currently fielded PGMs require exact intelligence about target location, type, and 
disposition in order to be employed effectively. Large-scale use of PGMs will drive the need 
for additional intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) assets, as well as the 
capacity to process, analyze, and disseminate this information to strike forces. 67 The DoD’s 
current Joint All-Domain Command and Control (JADC2) efforts seek to create these link -
ages and networks, and the introduction of artificial intelligence (AI) assisted analysis may 
increase future intelligence processing throughput. These functions are outside the scope 
of this study, but we must recognize that munitions are only one link in precision-strike 
kill chains.68
Given these trends and lessons, it is possible that the United States will never 
have enough munitions, sorties, or intelligence to conduct this style of all-
encompassing precision-strike campaign against a great power adversary such 
as China. The U.S. military may struggle to produce the immense volume of precision 
effects required against such a large, dispersed, and heavily defended target set. Sufficient 
massing of PGMs may be impossible due to budgetary and industrial constraints. Even if an 
enormous quantity of PGMs are procured, moving them into theater without creating the 
vulnerable “iron mountain” of previous campaigns would present a massive logistical chal -
lenge, especially in the Indo-Pacific.
…
If the nature of today’s threats leaves the U.S. military challenged to conduct a comprehen -
sive strike campaign in the style of the last three decades, how should the United States 
maintain its precision-strike advantage in contemporary great power conflict? Like the 
Balkan Wars prior to WWI, past strike campaigns serve as a warning that munitions, specif -
ically PGMs, will be a central determinant of future great power conflict. If simply producing 
and buying more PGMs is necessary, but not sufficient to meet demands, then the U.S. 
military must target its investments to capitalize on weapons and concepts tailored to the 
specific demands of great power conflict. The next chapter examines potential war scenarios 
in the Indo-Pacific to identify these demands and explore the optimal array of PGMs for 
great power conflict.
67 Kenneth Werrell notes the paradox that as intelligence-collection capabilities improve, parallel improvements in 
PGMs drive increased intelligence requirements—making targeting efforts seem perpetually inadequate. See Werrell, 
Chasing the Silver Bullet , pp. 277–278.
68 A point made by Barry Watts in The Evolution of Precision Strike , p. 12.

26  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 27
CHAPTER 3
Munitions Requirements 
for Five Great Power 
Conflict Scenarios
With previous limited and regional wars pointing toward unprecedented munitions require -
ments for great power conflict, this chapter explores the kinds of PGMs best suited for 
contemporary war scenarios. To determine these requirements, we outline five poten -
tial conflict scenarios which vary from short to protracted, limited to comprehensive, with 
differing operational objectives. An examination of each scenario and its target set reveals 
insights into the types and quantities of munitions needed to execute these campaigns.
This chapter does not generate specific requirements by weapon type or the exact quantity 
of munitions. Rather, the intent is to use simplified scenarios to highlight the categories of 
munitions and potential volume of weapons required. Most importantly, this chapter shows 
how several key variables and assumptions—including conflict duration, target set, and the 
effectiveness of adversary defenses—greatly affect munitions requirements in contemporary 
great power conflict. In addition to tradeoffs, the chapter closes by highlighting common 
weapon requirements across the five scenarios.
Envisioning Contemporary Great Power Conflict
Basic Assumptions
Our analysis focused on conflict scenarios between American and Chinese forces in the 
2023 to 2025 time period in the Indo-Pacific theater. We examined the near future in order 
to assess munition requirements against current munition procurement and production 
rates. Focusing on a near-term conflict also allowed us to build our potential target lists 
using current government documents and satellite imagery rather than speculative figures.

28  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
We concentrate on conflict with China in the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM) 
area of responsibility for several reasons. First, conflicts involving the PLA would likely be 
the most munitions-intensive campaigns, making them a challenging case for examination. 
Second, focusing on a single great power adversary allows the scenarios to complement each 
other and be layered or combined. Moreover, Russia, the United States’ other great power 
competitor, is currently embroiled in a conflict in Ukraine, making its current and future 
military potential more difficult to accurately assess at this time. Finally, the vast geography 
of the Indo-Pacific presents unique challenges to the U.S. military, whose force structure and 
munitions inventory was largely shaped by Cold War scenarios in central Europe. 69
We excluded the munitions stockpiles of U.S. allies and partners. Although these weapons 
may be invaluable during a conflict, foreign munitions inventories are more difficult to 
assess using open sources. Furthermore, there is inconsistent publicly available data about 
the compatibility of allied weapons with U.S. platforms. Lastly and most importantly, it is 
unclear which allies might join the fight or make their munitions available to U.S. forces 
in the event of a conflict in the Indo-Pacific. In addition, the United States’ industrial base 
manufactures and supplies munitions (or their components) to many of its allies and part -
ners. Though some allies, such as Australia and Japan, have committed to expanding their 
munitions production capacity, they may still rely on the United States for weapons during 
a war.70 Thus, the requirements derived from this analysis, if anything, understate the 
requirements for conflict scenarios in the Indo-Pacific theater.
This chapter does not offer a deep examination of the political causes (“road to war”) or 
broader strategic aims of the conflict scenarios. Rather, the scenarios are driven by more 
concrete operational objectives. At times, political or strategic assumptions and decisions do 
influence munitions requirements, and these factors are stated in the affected scenarios.
Scenario Selection
In order to assess and compare varying munitions requirements, we chose a wide-ranging 
mix of plausible Indo-Pacific conflict scenarios. Each scenario was chosen based not only on 
its plausibility but also on its analytical value. Several other scenarios were considered but 
not included because their requirements were similar to those of another case. 71 In choosing 
69 Eric Edelman, Christopher Bassler, Toshi Yoshihara, and Tyler Hacker, Rings of Fire: A Conventional Missile Strategy 
for a Post-INF Treaty World (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2022), p. 5, https://
csbaonline.org/research/publications/rings-of-fire-a-conventional-missile-strategy-for-a-post-inf-treaty-world.
70 For Australia, see Australian Government, “Australia accelerates Sovereign Guided Weapons manufacturing,” 
accessed February 28, 2023, https://www.globalaustralia.gov.au/news-and-resources/news-items/australia-
accelerates-sovereign-guided-weapons-manufacturing; for Japan, see Jeffrey W. Hornung, “Japan’s Upcoming 
Defense Efforts,” The RAND Blog , December 13, 2022, https://www.rand.org/blog/2022/12/japans-upcoming-
defense-efforts.html.
71 For example, a scenario involving the PLAN in the Indian Ocean might have similar requirements to a Taiwan 
contingency (scenario 1), and a confrontation in the East China Sea might have similar requirements to a conflict in 
the South China Sea (scenario 2).

28  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 29
scenarios, CSBA is not judging the likelihood of conflict or advocating particular strategies, 
objectives, or targets. Instead, we aim to simply envision the kinds of campaigns and targets 
that U.S. military planners might execute in order to draw conclusions about munitions 
usage in contemporary great power conflict. By choosing campaigns with varied durations, 
geographic breadths, and target types, we can identify broad munition requirements in 
each scenario.
The first three cases are intended to be short campaigns that seek to achieve decisive opera -
tional objectives, with the latter two cases exploring the realm of protracted conflict. The 
first two short conflict scenarios cover the most commonly considered U.S.-China contingen -
cies: countering a Chinese amphibious invasion of Taiwan and a fight for control of the South 
China Sea. These scenarios are often used in studies and wargames intended to shape the 
U.S. military’s future force structure and weapons inventory. 72
Although we considered only conventional munitions, our selection of scenarios and their 
operational objectives, particularly protracted scenarios, drew heavily on the literature 
surrounding Cold War nuclear targeting. As outlined in Chapter Two, many recent U.S. 
strike campaigns have been comprehensive, with thousands of targets of all kinds, but 
against regional adversaries with smaller militaries. Nuclear strategy literature, on the 
other hand, explores the merits and risks of attacking great power adversaries through 
different sets of targets with a limited number of weapons. 73 Accordingly, the third through 
fifth cases assess scenarios reflective of this literature: conventional counter-command, 
control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
(C4ISR), a campaign against conventional bases, and a campaign that targets force 
regeneration assets.74
These five scenarios are not meant to be strictly independent of one another. Rather, 
they could be layered or combined in different variations. For example, a counter-C4ISR 
72 These scenarios will likely continue to drive defense analysis, in part because the 2022 National Defense Strategy 
highlights Taiwan and the South China Sea as key elements of strategic competition with the PRC. U.S. Department 
of Defense, “2022 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America,” October 27, 2022, p. 4, https://media.
defense.gov/2022/Oct/27/2003103845/-1/-1/1/2022-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-STRATEGY-NPR-MDR.PDF.
73 See, for example, Lawrence Freedman and Jeffrey Michaels, The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy: New, Updated and 
Completely Revised  (London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).
74 We describe our fourth scenario as a “strike campaign against conventional bases” to avoid confusing it with a 
“conventional counterforce” campaign, which is used by scholars like Caitlin Talmadge to describe a conventional 
attack on Chinese nuclear forces.
Indo-Pacific Great Power Conflict Scenarios
1 . Neutralize Invasion Force in Taiwan Strait
2 . Neutralize South China Sea Outposts
3 . Counter-C4ISR Campaign
4 . Strike Campaign Against Enemy Conventional Bases
5 . Force Regeneration Campaign

30  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
campaign could be combined with strikes to neutralize a PLA invasion force in the Taiwan 
Strait. Similarly, one of the protracted campaigns could be pursued if a rapid campaign does 
not lead to conflict termination. To keep the scenarios independent and complementary, they 
are constructed as vignettes of campaign types rather than fully detailed scenarios.
Methodology
For each chosen scenario, CSBA assembled lists of hypothetical targets that could be 
attacked to achieve the case’s operational objective.75 Data was collected using open sources 
and includes information such as target location and characteristics. These lists are meant 
to include a broad range of targets the U.S. military might consider in a U.S.-China conflict. 
They are not comprehensive but are intended to illustrate the range of target types and loca -
tions essential to their given scenario.
From these target lists, we estimated the total number of aimpoints for different target 
types, such as airfields, ships, harbor facilities, and other military installations and infra -
structure.76 We then calculated the quantity of conventional precision munitions required to 
attack these aimpoints with a 90 percent or higher probability of kill, given varying proba -
bilities that a munition is intercepted during its flight. 77 This probability of intercept, or P(i), 
is a single probability figure meant to account for several statistical variations that could 
result in a munition failing to reach its target or failing to achieve the desired effect: the 
probability of accurate targeting data, the reliability of the munition, the probability a muni -
tion is intercepted by enemy defenses, the probability of hit (accuracy), and the probability 
that the munition has the desired effects. We assume each of these factors to be irrelevant 
except for the probability a munition is intercepted by enemy defenses, which constitutes 
the P(i) value in our calculations. Any of these additional factors, however, would further 
reduce the chance a munition achieves its desired effect and increase this P( i) value. As such, 
our munitions calculations, even at the greatest probability of intercept, are likely conserva -
tive. We calculated munitions requirements at a P(i) of 10, 25, and 50 percent. The result is 
a rough quantity of munitions required to attack each scenario’s target list at varying prob -
abilities of intercept. 
Lastly, we charted these quantities at 100, 75, 50, and 25 percent to show the range in quan -
tity of munitions required to attack varying portions of the total target set. We calculated 
these portions because it is unclear how much of each target set the U.S. military would need 
to strike to accomplish its operational objectives. The munitions requirements for varying 
portions of the total target set allow us to examine requirements using differing assumptions 
75 Complete scenario details, target lists, munitions quantities, and target maps can be found in Appendix B. This 
chapter contains summarized findings and conclusions based on the data and analysis in Appendix B.
76 This monograph uses the term aimpoints to describe desired points of impact (DPIs). Along with scenario details, a 
detailed explanation of aimpoint calculations by target type can be found in Appendix B.
77 The methodology for these calculations was drawn from Morris R. Driels, Weaponeering for the Warfighter  (Reston, 
VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2021).

30  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 31
about how thorough U.S. strikes would need to be to achieve the stated operational objec -
tives. We used these quantity ranges, along with scenario details and the geographic location 
of targets, to draw conclusions about the types and quantities of munitions necessary for 
each great power conflict scenario.
Five Great Power Conflict Scenarios in the Indo-Pacific
Based on these assumptions and CSBA’s analysis, this section provides a summary of 
the major munitions requirements and findings for each scenario. Further scenario data, 
including target lists, aimpoint calculations, and geographic analysis, can be found in 
Appendix B. Appendix B also contains information on the selection and sourcing of targets 
in each case.
Neutralize Invasion Force in Taiwan Strait 
Scenario 1 focuses on neutralizing a PLA invasion force during an attempted assault on 
Taiwan. This scenario is similar to former Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Michele 
Flournoy’s testimony about the U.S. military’s need to “sink 300 military vessels, subma -
rines, and merchant ships within 72 hours” and is the focus of much recent defense 
analysis.78 Former commander of USINDOPACOM Admiral Philip Davidson testified in 2021 
that China could move to invade Taiwan before 2027. The “Davidson window” was further 
shortened by Chief of Naval Operations Michael Gilday, who urged that the U.S. military 
needs to be ready for a Taiwan contingency before 2024.79
A Chinese attempt to invade Taiwan could follow several triggers, including a declaration 
of Taiwanese independence, disputes over island territories, or a military accident in the 
Strait.80 The massing of invasion forces in Chinese ports opposite Taiwan would be detect -
able by U.S. and Taiwanese intelligence.81 The PLA Navy (PLAN) would surge into the waters 
78 Michele A. Flournoy, “Testimony before the House Armed Services Committee Future of Defense Task Force,” 
October 29, 2019, p. 4, https://www.congress.gov/116/meeting/house/110154/witnesses/HHRG-116-AS00-
Wstate-FlournoyM-20191029.pdf; This scenario has been modeled in Mark F. Cancian, Matthew Cancian, and Eric 
Heginbotham, The First Battle of the Next War: Wargaming a Chinese Invasion of Taiwan (Washington, DC: Center 
for Strategic and International Studies, 2023), https://www.csis.org/analysis/first-battle-next-war-wargaming-chinese-
invasion-taiwan; and Jordan Rosza, Improving Standoff Bombing Capacity in the Face of Anti-Access Area Denial 
Threats (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015), pp. 32–42, https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD363.html; 
A Taiwan invasion scenario is also used to assess U.S. PGM stocks in Stacie Pettyjohn and Hannah Dennis, Precision 
and Posture: Defense Spending and the FY23 Budget Request (Washington, DC: Center for New American Security, 
November 2022), https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/precision-and-posture-defense-spending-tre.
79 Demetri Sevastopulo, “US Navy Chief Warns China Could Invade Taiwan before 2024,” Financial Times , October 20, 
2022, https://www.ft.com/content/1740a320-5dcb-4424-bfea-c1f22ecb87f7.
80 David Lague and Maryanne Murray, “T-DAY: The Battle for Taiwan,” Reuters, November 5, 2021, https://www.
reuters.com/investigates/special-report/taiwan-china-wargames/.
81 Much of the narrative and many assumptions in scenario 1 are drawn in part from Ian Easton’s The Chinese Invasion 
Threat. See Ian Easton, The Chinese Invasion Threat: Taiwan’s Defense and America’s Strategy in Asia  (Manchester: 
Eastbridge Books, 2019).

32  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
surrounding Taiwan, possibly to enact a blockade or soften Republic of China (ROC) forces 
with air and missile strikes. Should the United States choose to intervene, it would have a 
narrow window to attack massed invasion forces, potentially as little as one to three days. 82
The essential munitions in this scenario are anti-ship and anti-air missiles. The mobility of 
the vessels and aircraft in this target set necessitates munitions capable of tracking moving 
targets and/or receiving targeting updates in flight. Accurate and timely intelligence is 
necessary to feed these munitions and complete maritime kill chains. Moving ships also put 
a premium on weapon speed in this case, because slower munitions increase the time avail -
able for a target to move during the munition’s flight. U.S. forces could wait for the invasion 
armada to anchor in preparation for disembarking forces and then attack using munitions 
designed for fixed targets, but doing so would shorten the time available for massing muni -
tions in the target area and increase the risk that PLA forces successfully disembark and 
reach their landing areas.
Long-range weapons launched from outside the Strait would require some form of target 
identification and discrimination capability such as command guidance or automatic target 
recognition. The PLAN would likely attempt to protect invasion forces using a large number 
of decoys and countermeasures to distract and absorb U.S. anti-ship weapons. Even without 
dedicated decoys, hundreds of smaller support and landing vessels from the PLA Ground 
Force, Chinese Coast Guard, maritime militia, and civilian merchant fleet would crowd the 
Strait and act as clutter for incoming munitions to distinguish from targets. 83 These factors 
could push the P(i) for certain munitions in this case well above our 50 percent maximum. 
Even with advanced weapons, some U.S. platforms will likely need to approach PLA forces 
82 Easton, The Chinese Invasion Threat , p. 112.
83 Conor M. Kennedy, “Getting There: Chinese Military and Civilian Sealift in a Cross-Strait Invasion,” in Crossing the 
Strait: China’s Military Prepares for War with Taiwan , ed. Joel Wuthnow, Derek Grossman, Phillip C. Saunders, 
Andrew Scobell, and Andrew N.D. Yang (Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, 2022), p. 224–243.
Scenario 1 – Neutralize Invasion Force in Taiwan Strait
•  Operational Objective: Rapidly neutralize PLA invasion force in the Taiwan Strait to prevent 
large-scale amphibious landings on Taiwan.
• Target Set: 
˚ Eastern, Southern, and Northern Theater Navies (invasion escort and screening forces)
· 247 surface combatants and attack submarines
˚ 63 commercial transport ships and ferries
˚ Eastern and Southern Theater Command aviation forces
· Up to 750 fighter aircraft, 250 bombers/attack aircraft, 100+ special-purpose aircraft
• Total Aimpoints: 590+ maritime, 1,050+ aircraft
• PGMs Required to Attack Complete Target Set:
˚ 600 – 2,400+ anti-ship munitions
˚ 1,000 – 4,200+ anti-air or air-to-air munitions

32  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 33
at much closer ranges to effectively employ their weapons.84 U.S. forces could reduce total 
anti-ship missile requirements by attacking Chinese vessels with torpedoes from attack 
submarines, but these undersea forces carry a limited inventory of torpedoes to split 
between undersea and surface targets, would need to be supplemented by attacks from other 
domains, and would suffer attrition over the course of the campaign. 85
A fundamental assumption of this scenario is that strikes on mainland China are prohibited 
because of the risk of further escalation. This restriction could come from U.S. political lead -
ership or could be a condition from coalition partners such as Japan. 86 Although the United 
States may conduct a counter-invasion campaign with or without this restriction, CSBA 
included this assumption to create a point of comparison between this scenario and others 
that emphasize mainland targets. Because U.S. forces are unable to attack PLA A2/AD forces 
on the mainland in this scenario, U.S. delivery platforms would be forced to operate within 
range of many Chinese threats. This restriction would increase the need for penetrating 
delivery platforms or long-range munitions. Given the predominance of legacy, non-stealthy 
platforms in the current U.S. force structure, executing this campaign in the near future 
would favor the use of long-range munitions. In addition to being more costly, these muni-
tions are typically larger and may have to be carried externally on strike aircraft. Externally 
carried munitions limit the ability of low observable aircraft to penetrate and operate in 
contested environments. Stealthy bombers, however, could carry such weapons internally.
Our analysis of Scenario 1 leads to two primary conclusions. First, because of the presence 
of Chinese A2/AD assets on the mainland, either U.S. delivery platforms, munitions, or 
both must be capable of penetrating layered enemy defenses. Furthermore, the possibility 
of encountering PLA combat air patrols (CAPs) and naval forces will require U.S. maritime 
and air forces to balance their offensive payloads with munitions for self-defense. ASCMs 
will compete for space on aircraft pylons, and strike munitions must be balanced with 
surface-to-air missiles in ships’ vertical launch system (VLS) tubes. These constraints will 
further limit the number of munitions the United States can mass in the target area at any 
given time. As a result, a key variable is how close U.S. delivery platforms can operate to the 
Taiwan Strait—a variable that determines the necessary range of munitions and the rate at 
which delivery platforms can sortie, reach weapon launch points, and return and rearm.
Second, this scenario favors a large inventory of high-cost munitions due to target type, 
mobility, and the near-term need for weapons with stand-off ranges to equip non-stealthy 
84 For example, U.S. attack submarines firing torpedoes. See Eric Heginbotham, Michael Nixon, Forrest E. Morgan, and 
Jacob L. Heim et al., The U.S.–China Military Scorecard: Forces, Geography, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 
1996–2017 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015), pp. 207-208, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR392.html.
85 Ibid., 206–214.
86 For an in-depth examination of the mainland strike issue, see John Speed Meyers, Mainland Strikes and the U.S. 
Military Strategy Towards China: Historical Cases, Interviews, and Scenario-Based Survey of American National 
Security Elites  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2019), https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD430.html.

34  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
aircraft. This assessment is consistent with other wargames and studies. 87 Attacking PLA 
maritime and aviation forces in the Strait requires a very different set of munitions than 
attacking these forces on the ground or in port. Adequate stocks of exquisite and tailored 
weapons like stand-off penetrating ASCMs, however, could crowd out investments in muni -
tions for other contingencies. For this reason, the U.S. military should continue exploring 
more cost-effective ways of conducting the maritime strike mission. 88
Neutralize South China Sea Outposts
Scenario 2 features another rapid and limited campaign but in a different geographic area 
and with different types of targets. In the past decade, China has steadily improved and 
expanded its presence in the Paracel and Spratly Islands of the South China Sea through 
dredging and the construction of manmade islands. 89 In the event of a conflict, the United 
States might attack these outposts for several reasons. The facilities and weapons deployed 
on these manmade features allow the PLA to contest maritime and air traffic in the greater 
South China Sea, making the neutralization of these outposts essential for free navigation 
throughout the region. The bases and their airfields and harbors also serve as points from 
which the PLA can project power into the South China Sea and vital maritime chokepoints 
like the Strait of Malacca. Although this scenario would involve the Southern and Eastern 
87 For example, a wargame at the Center for Strategic and International Studies estimated that the U.S. military would 
need between 800 and 1,200 Long Range Anti-Ship Missiles (LRASMs) to blunt an invasion of Taiwan. More recent 
wargames found that “In the three to four weeks of [a Taiwan] conflict, U.S. forces usually expended about 5,000 
long-range precision missiles, primarily JASSMs and LRASMs.” Patrick Tucker and Jacqueline Feldscher, “As China, 
Taiwan Tensions Flare, US Faces Shrinking Window to Deter Conflict,” Defense One , August 8, 2022, https://www.
defenseone.com/threats/2022/08/china-taiwan-tensions-flare-us-faces-shrinking-window-deter-conflict/375514/; 
and Cancian, Cancian, and Heginbotham, The First Battle of the Next War , p. 136.
88 For instance, through programs such as the High Altitude Anti-Submarine Warfare Weapon Capability (HAAWC). See 
Joseph Trevithick, “Navy P-8 Poseidon Can Now Drop Winged Torpedoes In Combat (Updated),” The Drive, November 
22, 2022, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/navy-p-8-poseidon-can-now-drop-winged-torpedos-in-combat.
89 For a detailed analysis of China’s progress, see Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “China Island Tracker,” Center 
for Strategic and International Studies, https://amti.csis.org/island-tracker/china/.
Scenario 2 – Neutralize South China Sea Outposts
•  Operational Objective: Rapidly neutralize PLA outposts in the Paracel and Spratly islands 
to deny the PLA the ability to use these bases and features to project power or challenge 
freedom of navigation.
• Target Set: 
˚ Paracel Islands: major outpost and airfield on Woody Island; 7 smaller outposts
˚ Spratly Islands: major outposts with airfields on Fiery Cross Reef, Mischief Reef, and 
Subi Reef; 4 smaller outposts
• Total Aimpoints: 530+, mostly fixed infrastructure
• PGMs Required to Attack Complete Target Set: 500 – 2,100+

34  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 35
fleets of the PLAN, Chinese surface combatants and aviation forces are not included in this 
scenario because their munitions requirements would be largely similar to those in scenario 
1. Some or all of the targets described in the previous scenario should be added to this case 
to form a realistic assessment.
The munitions required to neutralize these outposts are minimal compared to other 
scenarios because the targets are fixed, close to one other, and are some distance from the 
Chinese mainland. The airfields, harbors, radars, and other military infrastructure on these 
island outposts are fixed targets that can easily be attacked with more common GPS-guided 
munitions. Air defense TELs, radars, and coastal missile units on these features may be 
mobile, but the small size of the islands limits their ability to move and hide. The number of 
munitions required to neutralize these outposts depend largely on how thoroughly the U.S. 
military strikes large area targets like airfields and harbors and if these targets require peri -
odic reattack. Given the limited resources on these artificial islands, it may be more difficult 
for the PLA to quickly repair these bases compared to those on the mainland.
The close proximity of these outposts to one another and the proximity of targets on each 
feature favor the use of weapons capable of providing effects over a large area. For example, 
munitions that can neutralize several sensors or destroy a large number of parked aircraft 
could reduce the total number of weapons required to attack this clustered target set. Closely 
situated targets on these islands are ideal for attack by collaborative munitions.
Although the types of weapons needed to attack PLAN and PLAAF forces in the vicinity of 
these outposts are similar to scenario 1, the increased distance of these island groups from 
mainland China reduces the need for anti-ship and anti-air weapons with the same stand-
off range. The South China Sea would allow U.S. delivery platforms to operate closer to their 
targets, particularly after the limited defenses on the artificial islands are neutralized. At 
that point, the need for stand-off weapons or penetrating platforms would be determined by 
the presence of PLAN and PLAAF assets in the area.
Overall, attacking PLA outposts in the South China Sea presents a less difficult munitions 
problem than other scenarios. This case is more akin to previous regional and limited strike 
campaigns than other great power conflict scenarios, albeit with a strong maritime flavor. Of 
course, this contingency is unlikely to be executed alone and might be combined with one or 
more of the other four campaigns, particularly attacking a portion of the naval and air forces 
described in scenario 1. Even so, this case shows how the location of the target set in the 
Indo-Pacific matters for munitions planners. Campaigns away from the mainland and the 
Taiwan Strait—even only as far as the Paracel Islands—reduce the need for penetrating and 
long-range munitions. The location of these features also increases the number of potential 
basing and deployment locations for sea- and ground-based weapons in the theater.

36  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Counter-C4ISR Campaign
Shifting to cases with mainland targets, Scenario 3 involves a campaign in which the United 
States might try to narrow its focus to a specific type of target. Rather than attempting to destroy 
PLA forces or basing, the U.S. military could aim to “blind” the PLA by attacking its C4ISR infra-
structure.90 A counter-C4ISR campaign could be a response to Chinese attacks on U.S. forces in 
the Indo-Pacific. The United States would attempt to degrade the battle networks necessary for 
PLA A2/AD assets in order to protect U.S. forces in the region from further attacks and enable 
offensive strikes. Reducing the PLA’s ISR capabilities could also force it to hold its rocket and 
missile inventories until they regain connectivity or expend these limited weapons on “shots in 
the dark” without adequate targeting intelligence. Additionally, attacking the sensing, commu-
nications, and C2 infrastructure of a centralized military such as the PLA could induce some 
level of “force paralysis” as PLA leaders attempt to regain connectivity, reestablish situational 
awareness, and make informed decisions about their next moves. In this way, a counter-C4ISR 
campaign could buy additional time for decisionmakers, demonstrate U.S. capabilities, and 
enable the United States to regain the initiative after a Chinese attack.
Of course, attacking certain C4ISR targets carries a risk of escalation, particularly if these 
C4ISR nodes are intertwined with China’s nuclear command, control, and communica-
tions (NC3) architecture. At worst, Beijing might interpret a counter-C4ISR campaign as an 
attempt to decapitate the regime or destroy China’s nuclear deterrence, although recent anal-
ysis suggests that as China builds its nuclear forces and gains a secure strategic deterrent, U.S. 
leaders could be less inhibited from targeting dual-use platforms and infrastructure.91 Should 
the United States want to limit this risk, certain targets in the Beijing region or Central Theater 
Command could be excluded. This change would slightly modify the geography of the target 
set, but the munitions requirements in this scenario remain largely unchanged.
90 Many aspects of this scenario are drawn from the blinding campaign detailed in AirSea Battle . See van Tol with 
Gunzinger, Krepinevich, and Thomas, AirSea Battle , pp. 56–64.
91 Evan Braden Montgomery and Toshi Yoshihara, “The Real Challenge of China’s Nuclear Modernization,” The 
Washington Quarterly  45, no. 4, pp. 45–60, https://bpb-us-e1.wpmucdn.com/blogs.gwu.edu/dist/1/2181/
files/2022/12/MontgomeryYoshihara_TWQ_45-4.pdf.
Scenario 3 – Counter-C4ISR Campaign
•  Operational Objective: Rapidly degrade PLA sensing, communications, and C2 capabilities 
to cause “force paralysis” among units in the Eastern and Southern Theater Commands.
• Target Set: 
˚ Select Central Military Commission (CMC), Theater Command, and Joint headquarters
˚ Counter-space, satellite monitoring, and communications facilities
˚ Over-the-horizon (OTH) radar sites and submarine communication stations
˚ C2 infrastructure at select airfields and naval bases
˚ Communications, radar, and other sensor sites in Eastern and Southern theater commands
• Total Aimpoints: 2,800+
• PGMs Required to Attack Complete Target Set: 2,800 – 10,700+ for initial strikes

36  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 37
A counter-C4ISR campaign would emphasize munitions or platforms capable of deeply 
penetrating enemy territory to destroy vital C4ISR nodes. Many headquarters, space, long-
range sensor, and communication nodes are located in areas with dense, layered defenses. 
Even if early warning sensors along coastal areas or en route to these deep targets are 
disabled, air and missile defenses may still independently target delivery platforms and 
incoming PGMs. With a limited number of penetrating long-range strike platforms in the 
near-term, this scenario favors exquisite long-range weapons, which we refer to as “silver 
bullets.” These silver bullets will need some combination of stealth, speed, or other surviv -
ability features to reach these high-value nodes. Some munitions may also need to be 
capable of destroying hardened or deeply buried targets (HDBTs) such as underground 
command posts or hardened communications facilities, but the demands of these targets 
may require penetrating delivery platforms carrying specialized munitions with short 
ranges. These targets will require a significant intelligence effort before and during the 
conflict to identify, probe, and confirm the locations and significance of specific elements of 
the PLA’s C4ISR architecture.
Still, the sheer number of radar and other early warning sensors in coastal areas necessitates 
a volume of less sophisticated and potentially shorter-range munitions. Depending on the 
quantity of exquisite and stand-off munitions available, some suppression of enemy defenses 
may be required to enable low observable (LO) aircraft to penetrate contested airspace and 
deliver shorter-range munitions. These suppression efforts might not entail the destruction 
of large quantities of missile launchers themselves but could instead focus on keeping TELs 
mobile or hidden and sensors from emitting.92
A counter-C4ISR campaign would also benefit from non-kinetic weapons with area effects. 
Many sensors and nodes are located in coastal areas and clustered around key installations. 
U.S. strike forces could blind certain sensors with non-kinetic payloads in order to attack 
vital headquarters and facilities with kinetic munitions. Non-kinetic weapons with area 
effects would reduce the number of aimpoints, particularly in areas with dense clusters of 
radars and communications arrays. This campaign could also be paired with offensive cyber 
capabilities. If the effects of these weapons are temporary or of limited duration, however, 
then these targets would require reattack and consume additional munitions.
Strike Campaign Against Conventional Bases
Moving beyond C4ISR nodes, Scenario 4 involves attacking PLA air and maritime forces 
and bases in eastern and southern China. Unlike Scenario 1, in which restrictions against 
striking the Chinese mainland necessitate targeting PLA forces in the air and underway at 
sea, this case focuses on destroying PLA forces on the ground and in port. Neutralizing air 
92 Much like in Operation Allied Force, the threat of attack by U.S. SEAD efforts could prevent PLA air defense systems 
from operating effectively. This is an example of virtual attrition , a concept that will be further examined in 
Chapter Five.

38  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
and naval bases in these regions would seriously degrade the PLA’s ability to contest U.S. 
forces operating in the Taiwan Strait, South China Sea, and East China Sea. This contin -
gency more closely reflects a traditional comprehensive strike campaign such as the Desert 
Storm air war, although on a much larger scale.
This scenario focuses on fixed basing, headquarters, and known logistics and air defense 
sites. Attacking the mobile radars and TELs of air defense batteries and ballistic and 
cruise missile forces would greatly increase munitions requirements beyond our estimate. 
Depending on the PLA’s posture at the time of the conflict, these forces could include over 
270 SAM launchers, up to 700 theater-range ballistic missile TELs, and over 120 ground-
launched cruise missile launchers.93 This case also excludes the basing and units of the PLA 
Ground Force (PLAGF) because we do not anticipate a major ground engagement on the 
Chinese mainland. However, these forces could also be added to this scenario to prevent 
their use in an invasion of Taiwan.94
A strike campaign against enemy basing, even limited to air and maritime forces in these 
regions, would require a significant volume of weapons. Desert Storm and Iraqi Freedom 
targeted around 40,000 and 20,000 aimpoints, respectively, in a target area smaller than 
a single Chinese theater command. The munitions required in this case are highly sensitive 
to several variables. First, the effectiveness of PLA air and missile defenses would deter -
mine the quantity of munitions required to attack each aimpoint and could double, triple, 
or even quadruple the total quantity of PGMs required. 95 These defenses would also affect 
93 Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2022: Annual Report to Congress  
(Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2022), p. 167, https://media.defense.gov/2022/Nov/29/2003122279/-1/-
1/1/2022-MILITARY-AND-SECURITY-DEVELOPMENTS-INVOLVING-THE-PEOPLES-REPUBLIC-OF-CHINA.
PDF; and Andrew S. Erickson, Ryan D. Martinson, and Peter A. Dutton, China’s Near Seas Combat Capabilities 
(Newport, RI: Naval War College Press, February 2014), p. 5, https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1010&context=cmsi-red-books.
94 The PLAGF and PLAN Marine Corps have over 50 brigades spread throughout bases in the Eastern and Southern 
Theater Commands. These targets would be unique as mobile maneuver forces and would add thousands of additional 
aimpoints to this scenario. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2022, p. 165.
95 Assuming a probability of intercept between ten and 50 percent. See Figure 36 in Appendix B.
Scenario 4 – Strike Campaign Against Conventional Bases
•  Operational Objective: Neutralize PLA air and maritime bases and A2/AD forces in eastern 
and southern China to enable follow-on operations in vicinity of the Taiwan Strait.
• Target Set:
˚ Major Theater Command headquarters of the PLAN, PLAAF, PLARF
˚ Airfields, naval bases, and rocket brigade bases in eastern and southern China
˚ Long-range air defense sites in eastern and southern China
˚ Key logistics nodes in eastern and southern China
• Total Aimpoints: 5,700+, many recurring targets
• PGMs Required to Attack Complete Target Set: 5,700 – 23,000+ for initial strikes only

38  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 39
the distance at which U.S. strike platforms would be able to launch their munitions and, as a 
result, the stand-off requirements for PGMs.
Second, munitions quantities are dependent on the depth of the target set that must be 
attacked to achieve the case’s operational objective. Our estimate accounts for over 20 naval 
bases and 50 airbases of varying sizes. If the United States can determine which bases are 
crucial to PLA operations in the region, however, it could reduce the number of aimpoints by 
limiting its attacks to these key installations. Conversely, we ignored non-military airports 
in our target set, but PLA dispersal to civil airports would increase the demands of this 
case. This case also assumes that neutralizing these bases involves a combination of cutting 
runways, disabling docks and berths, and striking hangars and aircraft shelters. Focusing 
on just one of these methods could reduce munitions requirements, while seeking more 
comprehensive destruction would increase quantities beyond our estimates. 96
Third, the duration of the conflict plays heavily in this scenario because many of the targets 
would be repaired and require reattack to prevent their use. This variable depends on the 
efficiency of PLA ordnance disposal and engineering assets and the degree of destruc -
tion wrought by initial U.S. strikes. Keeping these airfields and naval bases disabled could 
require reattacks in intervals as short as four to eight hours. 97 In any case, the sheer quan -
tity of targets in this scenario requires munitions that can be massed on complex targets. 
The targets consuming the most munitions in this case are airfields and naval bases, so effi -
ciently disabling these installations is key to determining munitions requirements.
Finally, if finding and destroying ground forces such as air defense TELs and PLARF 
launchers is included in this scenario, munitions requirements quickly balloon and shift 
the focus from fixed to mobile targets. Speed, specialized sensors, and datalinks become 
essential munition attributes. Current stand-off weapons would be less useful against these 
targets because of their mobility. In this case, a campaign against these forces would require 
the addition of many munitions similar to those demanded by scenario 1, albeit with land 
attack weapons with potentially smaller payloads than large anti-ship cruise missiles. 
Force Regeneration Campaign
With a campaign targeting conventional forces and bases requiring an immense quantity of 
munitions, particularly in a protracted conflict, how could the United States avoid the opera -
tional problem of keeping PLA airfields and naval bases shut down for days or weeks? One 
solution could be a campaign that focuses on force regeneration assets and the PLA’s ability 
to sustain its forces.
96 For example, attacking aircraft parked on large aprons or infrastructure distributed in the vicinity of the bases like 
fuel and munitions storage facilities would increase munitions quantities beyond our estimates.
97 This estimate is based off RAND’s modeling of U.S. attacks on Chinese air bases using cruise missiles and freefall 
bombs. See Heginbotham, Nixon, Morgan, and Heim et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard , p. 143.

40  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Scenario 5 is a campaign focused on degrading the PLA’s military capabilities in the long-
term. This campaign could be pursued if a conflict becomes prolonged or devolves into a 
war of attrition. Rather than attacking repairable and recurring targets, this case focuses 
on neutralizing military production and industrial facilities that would be more difficult to 
repair.98 For this reason, such a campaign could lead to a sustained operational pause, nego -
tiation, or conflict termination.
Much like a counter-C4ISR campaign, this case requires munitions or platforms that can 
deeply penetrate heavily defended Chinese territory. The key difference, however, is that 
many weapons in a force regeneration campaign must be capable of destroying large, 
complex targets spread over a wide area, such as factories and shipyards. While a counter-
C4ISR campaign necessitates “silver bullet” PGMs, a force regeneration campaign would 
benefit from stand-off weapons with area effects or penetrating aircraft carrying large 
volumes of shorter-range munitions.
Force regeneration targets are more geographically dispersed throughout China than the 
bases examined in the previous scenario, which were primarily limited to eastern and 
southern China. Unlike military installations, defense production facilities and POL infra -
structure are less likely to be protected by a multitude of point air defenses, reducing the 
need for survivable munitions. 
Finally, unlike a campaign that targets military bases, many of these industrial targets are 
unlikely to require reattacks at short intervals. Production facilities and petroleum infra -
structure could be difficult to repair and may interrupt supplies to PLA forces, particularly 
if kinetic conflict is combined with trade sanctions. 99 A well-executed force regeneration 
campaign could cripple the PLA’s ability to engage in a protracted conflict and could lead to 
negotiations or conflict termination.
98 The military nature of the targets considered in this scenario differentiate it from a campaign that counter-value 
campaign that targets civilian infrastructure, such as that being carried out by Russia in Ukraine. The United States 
has targeted petroleum infrastructure in previous operations. See Mark Thompson, “U.S. Bombing of ISIS Oil 
Facilities Showing Progress,” Time, December 13, 2015, https://time.com/4145903/islamic-state-oil-syria/.
99 The limited attack on Saudi oil facilities by drones in 2019 caused fires that interrupted the supply of an estimated 5.7 
million barrels of oil. BBC, “Saudi Oil Attacks: Images Show Detail of Damage,” September 16, 2019, https://www.bbc.
com/news/world-middle-east-49718975.
Scenario 5 – Force Regeneration Campaign
•  Operational Objective: Degrade the PLA’s ability to sustain and regenerate the forces 
required for a protracted conflict with the United States.
• Target Set:
˚ Defense production facilities such as aerospace factories and shipyards
˚ Defense research and space facilities
˚ Petroleum, oil, and lubricant (POL) infrastructure such as crude oil terminals and refineries
• Total Aimpoints: 6,400+
• PGMs Required to Attack Complete Target Set: 6,400 – 26,000+

40  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 41
Key Tradeoffs and Common Requirements
These five notional campaigns reveal some key differences and similarities in the muni -
tions required for each case. These differences and similarities are notable as either strategic 
choices or low-hanging fruit for munitions planners.
Key Tradeoffs Between Scenarios
The varying target sets and their geographic locations and attributes highlight the need for a 
specific category or type of munition in each case.
These varied focuses are the results of several major variables. Most obviously, the 
geographic location and dispersion of the targets determine the range and 
survivability requirements for platforms and munitions in each case.  Targets 
on China’s periphery do not require the same stand-off range and/or survivability as targets 
deep within the layered defenses of the mainland. This difference is particularly relevant in 
the Indo-Pacific, where the theater’s vast maritime character also limits basing options and 
increases the distance that delivery platforms must travel before releasing their weapons. 
Deeper targets that require munitions to fly through multiple layers of PLA defenses 
increase the chances that a weapon is successfully intercepted and expand the demands 
placed on munitions and platforms.
Accordingly, the target’s location is also a key determinant of the degree to which PLA A2/
AD systems must be suppressed. Deep targets increase the number of mobile A2/
AD platforms that must be targeted in some form, which affects the second 
key variable: the proportion of mobile versus fixed targets.  Mobile targets in 
these cases are often elusive and require specialized munitions and intensive ISR efforts 
to destroy. The sensors and intelligent munitions needed for these targets go well beyond 
the precision provided by many of today’s common GPS-guided PGMs. Thus, the degree to 
which U.S. forces hunt and attack highly-mobile targets to enable a strike campaign is one 
key operational decision for planners concerned with the adequacy of munitions stocks.
A third variable driving munition demands is the proportion of recurring 
targets versus targets requiring a single attack.  While maneuver targets like 
naval vessels or vulnerable targets like SATCOM facilities may only require a single salvo 
Summary of Munitions Focuses in Each Scenario
1 . Neutralize Invasion Force in Taiwan Strait: Long-range ASCMs and anti-air missiles
2 . Neutralize South China Sea Outposts: Short-range munitions with area effects
3 . Counter-C4ISR Campaign: “Silver bullets,” specialized, and non-kinetic munitions
4 .  Campaign Against Conventional Basing: Large volumes of varied munitions for fixed/
mobile targets
5 . Force Regeneration Campaign: Munitions for large, complex targets

42  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
to permanently destroy, recurring targets are either easily repairable, such as cratered 
runways, or require persistent effects, such as sensors affected by temporary non-kinetic 
effects. Using these examples, the need to re-crater runways or continuously blind sensors 
can rapidly multiply the quantity of munitions expended in prolonged scenarios. For this 
reason, pursuing objectives that necessitate the prosecution of a large quantity of recurring 
targets is a second key operational decision for military staffs, particularly when protracted 
conflict is likely.
These variables combine to illustrate the major tradeoff between the five 
scenarios: the quantity of exquisite munitions required versus the need for 
a large volume of simpler munitions. We use the term exquisite to refer to weapons 
with long-range, penetration and survivability features, and advanced sensors and payloads. 
Rapid contingencies like those imagined in scenarios 1 and 3 favor larger stocks of exquisite 
munitions. Protracted conflicts like scenarios 4 and 5 require exquisite munitions but also 
demand an immense volume of effects over a prolonged duration. The range, speed, and cost 
tradeoffs identified in Chapter Two still apply to future great power conflict. Campaign and 
munitions inventory planners must balance these competing demands for survivable plat -
forms and weapons with the ability to mass less complex weapons in volume.
Common Requirements Across Scenarios
Despite the large differences between each case, several commonalities are also apparent 
and could be capitalized on by decision makers seeking to prepare U.S. munitions stocks 
for great power conflict. First, almost every scenario requires a significant quan -
tity of munitions with some degree of stand-off range to avoid putting delivery 
platforms at high risk from A2/AD threats. Direct attack munitions have limited 
uses in the opening stages of a great power conflict.  For weapons fired from naval vessels, 
ranges beyond 400 km allow ships to strike coastal targets while remaining outside the 
range of many Chinese land-based ASCMs. 100 Chinese air and missile defense systems put 
a premium on air-delivered munitions with ranges greater than 200 km, while those with 
ranges around 1,000 km allow tactical aircraft to deliver them from a variety of basing and 
aircraft carrier locations in the Indo-Pacific. In addition to these long-range munitions, 
many of the scenarios require a large quantity of munitions with ranges around or above 50 
km, just adequate to keep delivery platforms from being targeted by point defenses. While 
penetrating aircraft and SEAD efforts may allow delivery platforms to operate in airspace 
contested by long-range SAM systems, avoiding the point defenses of heavily defended 
targets like airfields and headquarters will require these shorter-range “stand-in” munitions 
in large volumes. Therefore, a key tradeoff for campaign planners is the decision to attack 
targets using legacy platforms carrying survivable stand-off munitions or penetrating plat -
forms carrying shorter-range, less complex weapons.
100 Even at 400 km from the Chinese mainland, naval vessels would still be subject to a variety of threats ranging from 
anti-ship ballistic missiles to PLA combat air patrols carrying ASCMs.

42  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 43
Figure 10 overlays each scenario’s targets along with the maximum range launch points for 
stand-in (400 km) and stand-off (1,500 km) weapons. Also shown are the distances from 
these maximum range launch points to U.S. and allied basing in Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, 
Darwin, and Diego Garcia.
FIGURE 10: MUNITIONS RANGE REQUIREMENTS ACROSS FIVE INDO-PACIFIC 
CONFLICT SCENARIOS
Source: Created by CSBA. See Appendix B for target maps and analysis of each scenario.
Each scenario, including those in the Taiwan Strait and South China Sea, involves striking 
targets protected by several layers of air and missile defense. Particularly in cases that attack 
targets on mainland China, the sheer number of mobile area and point defenses makes 
destroying significant numbers of these assets a munitions-intensive objective. With at 
least some of these defenses likely to survive, PGMs in these cases must be 
capable of penetrating PLA air and missile defenses.  Longer-range munitions that 
will spend more time in contested airspace must be more survivable than shorter-range 
weapons with shorter and simpler flight paths. Survivability could come in many forms, 
including speed, stealth, hardening, or other countermeasures, and should be tailored to 
each weapon’s range, flight profile, and intended role.

44  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Third, all scenarios require some degree of capability to attack significant 
quantities of mobile targets, whether they be PLA air and maritime forces or 
mobile air defense and rocket TELs.  Contesting PLA forces away from their fixed bases 
requires munitions with the sensors and data links required to locate, track, and defeat 
moving targets. Even in scenarios with entirely fixed target sets, such as a force regeneration 
campaign, U.S. platforms may have to defend themselves against mobile PLA forces. This 
requirement goes beyond the capabilities of many GPS-guided PGMs and will require muni -
tions capable of more than just precision. Additionally, this requirement puts a premium on 
weapons with onboard sensors that can semi-autonomously complete their own kill chains 
with limited external targeting and intelligence support.
Finally, most of the campaigns feature complex area targets such as airfields, 
naval bases, production facilities, and refineries.  These targets have many 
aimpoints and thus require a volume of PGMs to strike specific vulnerabilities or destroy key 
infrastructure. Efficiently targeting and attacking these facilities is essential to controlling 
munitions requirements. Striking these targets requires exact intelligence about vulnera -
bilities and single points of failure, such as control rooms or power supplies. 101 Alternatively, 
future munitions could be tailored to attack these targets using more efficient methods or 
area effects.
FIGURE 11: SUMMARY OF PGM REQUIREMENTS ACROSS FIVE INDO-PACIFIC CONFLICT 
SCENARIOS (INITIAL STRIKES ONLY)
Source: These figures include only initial strikes and do not account for additional strikes against recurring targets that are repaired or rebuilt 
during a campaign.
101 Such as the target elements identified in Rosza, Improving Standoff Bombing Capacity in the Face of Anti-Access 
Area Denial Threats , p. 42.

44  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 45
…
Clearly, no single “ideal mix” exists across these five scenarios. Each case’s unique objec -
tive and targets lead to a different munitions focus. This exercise shows how determining 
and prioritizing likely scenarios and their parameters in advance is essential to developing 
and procuring the right mix of weapons. Still, the analysis in this chapter further reinforces 
the conclusions of Chapter Two: to succeed in a contemporary great power conflict, the 
United States needs immense quantities of munitions, including both exquisite and intelli -
gent weapons. But procuring large numbers of fast, penetrating stand-off weapons leads to a 
high cost per effect and risks putting the United States on the wrong side of the cost imposi -
tion ratio vis-à-vis China. Preparing for great power conflict might ultimately force the U.S. 
military to find ways to turn the tables by pursuing weapons that flip this ratio. With these 
insights in mind, the following chapter will assess the current U.S. munitions portfolio and 
industrial base against the demands identified in this chapter.

46  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT

46  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 47
CHAPTER 4
Assessing Current Munitions 
Gaps and Constraints
The historical and illustrative analyses of Chapters Two and Three highlighted a range of 
critical munitions requirements for contemporary great power conflict. But how does the 
current U.S. PGM portfolio stack up to these demands? Will stocks of current weapons 
and those fielded in the near future be sufficient for the kinds of scenarios explored in the 
previous chapter?
This chapter seeks to answer these questions by assessing current and developmental 
American PGMs against these requirements. Our evaluation reveals several major capacity 
and capability gaps in the U.S. precision-strike arsenal, along with the most pressing 
constraints on munitions development and production that prevent the United States from 
quickly correcting these gaps.
The Current U.S. Precision-Guided Munition Portfolio
Examining U.S. munitions inventories involves two preliminary steps: selecting the muni -
tions relevant to our analysis and determining how to organize and categorize these 
weapons for comparison. Beginning with selecting relevant munitions, we excluded PGMs 
with limited applicability to our great power conflict scenarios. These programs included 
weapons confined to close ground engagements, such as short-range anti-tank guided 
missiles or artillery shells, and specialty munitions stocked in small quantities or out of 
production.102 Due to the offensive and maritime nature of our scenarios, we also did not 
consider exclusively ground-based SAMs such as the Patriot and Terminal High Altitude 
Area Defense (THAAD) missiles and ballistic missile defense (BMD) weapons such as the 
102 Some examples of munitions excluded for these purposes include: GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast (MOAB, 
produced in small quantities), M982 Excalibur, FGM-148 Javelin, and various small loitering munitions utilized by 
ground forces and Special Operations Command (SOCOM).

48  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
SM-3 missile. We also excluded undersea weapons such as torpedoes and mines, which are 
more difficult to fit into the categories of analysis used below. These munitions would be 
vital in several of our scenarios, however, and represent an opportunity for further study. 103 
Finally, we excluded munitions developed or currently procured only by U.S. allies, such as 
the Joint Strike Missile (JSM).104 Although these weapons may be future purchases or play a 
role in future conflicts, they are not currently programs of the U.S. DoD. These criteria left a 
portfolio of 36 PGMs for examination.
Next, we classified or “bucketed” these munitions into categories for comparison. Traditional 
methods of categorizing and describing weapons, or munitions taxonomies, include range, 
flight profile, target type, or launch platform. As Chapter Three’s analysis illustrated, today’s 
conflict scenarios demand munitions with a multitude of specific attributes beyond “long-
range,” “short-range,” “air-delivered,” or “anti-ship” weapons. These requirements render the 
simplistic single-category taxonomies used in most munitions analyses insufficient. 105
Accordingly, this chapter assesses munitions according to several characteristics. We 
primarily organize munitions by range, because range is a key factor in pairing weapons 
with delivery platforms and assigning these pairs to targets. As Chapter Three showed, 
Indo-Pacific geography and PLA defenses put a premium on long-range, survivable weapon-
platform pairs. We use range descriptors relative to the Chinese threat (shown in Figure 12) 
because the reach of PLA air and missile defenses plays an important role in determining 
viable weapon launch points for U.S. delivery platforms and, in turn, necessary stand-off 
and stand-in munition ranges.106 These range categories are less applicable to air-to-air 
missiles and defensive weapons like SAMs, but help compare the various strike weapons 
vital in our scenarios.
Much of the current U.S. military force structure, which is comprised of legacy, non-pene -
trating platforms, require survivable stand-off munitions to strike targets while remaining 
outside the reach of adversary A2/AD systems. Penetrating platforms, on the other 
hand, can advance further into contested territory to deliver shorter-range, less complex 
103 For a brief discussion of undersea weapons, see Bryan Clark, Peter Haynes, Bryan McGrath, and Craig Hooper 
et al., Restoring American Seapower: A New Fleet Architecture for the United States Navy  (Washington, DC: 
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2017), pp. 89–90, https://csbaonline.org/research/publications/
restoring-american-seapower-a-new-fleet-architecture-for-the-united-states-.
104 This study considers weapons through the fiscal year 2023 DoD budget. The U.S. Air Force has since requested 
procurement funding for the Joint Strike Missile in its fiscal year 2024 budget request.
105 For a thorough exploration of the inadequacy of current munitions taxonomies and an example new taxonomy, see 
Tyler Hacker and Christopher Bassler, “A New Munitions Taxonomy: Categorizing Advanced Weapons for Robust 
Analysis and Artificial Intelligence Assisted Applications” (paper presented at the 16 th NATO Operations Research 
and Analysis Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark, 18 October 2022).
106 Many other analyses utilize the same or similar terms and range buckets. For other examples, see Gunzinger and 
Clark, Sustaining America’s Precision Strike Advantage , pp. 6-7; Mark A. Gunzinger, “Affordable Mass: The Need for 
a Cost-Effective PGM Mix for Great Power Conflict,” Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies , November 2021, p. 4, 
https://mitchellaerospacepower.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/Affordable_Mass_Policy_Paper_31-FINAL.pdf; 
and Pettyjohn and Dennis, Precision and Posture , p. 6.

48  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 49
munitions. This relationship is illustrated in Figure 12. Given the tradeoff between range and 
cost, this allows penetrating platforms to economically deliver larger payloads of short-range 
munitions—a key capability when massing a large quantity of effects is essential. This trade 
between platform and munition range will be further explored below, but is particularly 
important to consider as the United States fields significant numbers of long-range, pene -
trating strike platforms in the 2030s.
FIGURE 12: MUNITION RANGE CATEGORIES FOR THE CURRENT THREAT ENVIRONMENT
Source: Created by CSBA.
These range categories are likely to be relevant to the Indo-Pacific theater for the foresee -
able future, although the PLA will undoubtedly continue to push the range of their A2/AD 
systems as far out from the mainland as possible. Major advancements in PLA capability 
will require an adjustment of these range categories. Beyond range, we examined muni -
tions using the previously identified attributes essential for great power conflict: speed and 
survivability, guidance system, payload, and advanced features like networking, datalinks, 
and autonomous capabilities. We sought to compare weapons across a broad range of charac-
teristics that affect their suitability and employment for contemporary great power conflict.
Combining our selection criteria and categorization yields Table 2, which contains the 
36 current and developmental U.S. PGMs applicable to our analysis, organized by range. 
Weapons still in development are shaded in grey. Appendix C contains a table of all char -
acteristics used to inform this chapter’s analysis. The following assessment of U.S. PGM 
capacity and capability gaps is based on this set of munition programs.

50  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
TABLE 2: CURRENT AND DEVELOPMENTAL U .S . PGM PORTFOLIO BY RANGE
Direct Attack
> 50 km
Stand-In
51 – 400 km
Stand-Off
401 – 1,500 km
Long-Range Strike
1,500+ km
Laser-guided bombs 
(LGB)
RIM-162 ESSM 
(Evolved Sea Sparrow 
Missile)
HACM 
(Hypersonic Attack Cruise 
Missile)
BGM-109 Tomahawk 
(all variants)
JDAM 
(Joint Direct Attack Munition)
GMLRS 
(Guided Multiple Launch 
Rocket System)
AGM-183 ARRW 
(Air-Launched Rapid 
Response Weapon)
AGM-158D JASSM-XR
(Extreme Range)
CBU-105 Sensor Fuzed 
Weapon 
(SFW)
GBU-53/B StormBreaker
HALO
(Hypersonic Air-Launch 
Offensive anti-surface 
warfare)
Long-Range Hypersonic 
Weapon 
(LRHW)
GBU-57A/B Massive 
Ordnance Penetrator 
(MOP)
AGM-154 JSOW 
(Joint Standoff Weapon)
Precision Strike Missile
(PrSM)
Conventional Prompt Strike 
(CPS)
AGM-114 Hellfire GBU-39/B SDB 
(Small Diameter Bomb)
AGM-158C LRASM 
(Long Range Anti-Ship 
Missile)
JAGM 
(Joint Air-to-Ground Missile)
AGM-88E AARGM 
(Advanced Anti-Radiation 
Guided Missile)
ADM-160 MALD 
(Miniature Air-Launched 
Decoy)
AIM-9X Sidewinder GMLRS-ER 
(Extended Range)
AGM-158B JASSM-ER  
(Extended Range)
SiAW 
(Stand-in Attack Weapon)
AGM-88G AARGM-ER  
(Extended Range)
AIM-120D AMRAAM  
(Advanced Medium-Range 
Air-to-Air Missile)
AIM-260 JATM
 (Joint Advanced Tactical 
Missile)
NSM 
(Naval Strike Missile)
RGM/AGM/UGM-84 
Harpoon
SM-6
AGM-84H/K SLAM-ER  
(Standoff Land Attack Missile 
Expanded Response)
MGM-140 ATACMS 
(Army Tactical Missile 
System)
AGM-158A JASSM 
(Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff 
Missile)
SM-2
Source: See Appendix C.

50  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 51
Major Munitions Gaps
An assessment of the munitions listed in Table 2 against the requirements outlined in 
Chapter Three exposes several key capacity and capability gaps in the American arsenal.
Overall Capacity
The most apparent inadequacy revealed by U.S. munitions expenditures over the past three 
decades and our analysis of potential conflict in the Indo-Pacific is that the United States 
does not currently maintain stocks of PGMs sufficient to sustain a protracted great power 
conflict (see figures 13 and 16 in the proceeding pages). How long U.S. PGM stocks would 
last in an Indo-Pacific contingency is dependent on the variables identified in Chapter Three, 
namely conflict objectives, intensity, and the effectiveness of Chinese defenses. Although 
exact munitions inventory quantities are classified, it is clear that if the U.S. military endan -
gered its PGM stocks during low-intensity campaigns like those in Iraq and Syria, it would 
struggle to sustain a prolonged precision-strike campaign against a great power. Scenarios 
that target enemy bases could demand tens of thousands of PGMs for an initial salvo of 
strikes alone. These expenditures would compound rapidly as the conflict continues and 
adversary basing and infrastructure is repaired or replaced. Expanding the conflict beyond 
eastern and southern China or the widespread targeting of mobile forces would only further 
increase the need for immense quantities of PGMs.
Even if the United States procures sufficient weapons to sustain a rapid high-inten -
sity conflict in the Indo-Pacific, it must ensure it has the capacity to maintain reserves of 
PGMs for other contingencies that may arise simultaneously. This requirement is set in 
the 2022 National Defense Strategy, which states, “In a potential conflict with a compet -
itor, the United States would need to be able to deter opportunistic aggression by another 
competitor.”107 Expending conventional munition reserves in one theater risks leaving 
nuclear weapons as the only remaining deterrent against other adversaries. Moreover, muni -
tions stocks and the U.S. industrial base must also sustain the needs of many allies and 
partners that are likely to participate in these conflicts. Therefore, the U.S. weapons indus -
trial base must be robust enough to support U.S. needs in multiple theaters as well as the 
needs of U.S. allies and partners in these theaters.
This PGM capacity gap has two dimensions. First, the United States must have sufficient 
inventories on-hand to support (or deter) a rapid, intense conflict or to sustain the opening 
acts of a prolonged conflict. Of course, should a rapid contingency not lead to conflict termi -
nation, American stocks must support the transition to a prolonged conflict, whether that be 
a matter of weeks or, more likely, months. Weapons must not only be bought, maintained, 
107 2022 National Defense Strategy of the United States  (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2022), p. 12, https://
media.defense.gov/2022/Oct/27/2003103845/-1/-1/1/2022-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-STRATEGY-NPR-MDR.PDF. 

52  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
and upgraded, but must also be stored or prepositioned in locations that enable their 
rapid employment.
The degree to which recent strike campaigns have stressed U.S. stocks gives reason to doubt 
the sufficiency of short-range PGM inventories. With more complex weapons such as the 
JASSM, procurement documents reveal the inadequacy of American inventories. Despite the 
JASSM being the U.S. military’s premier air-launched stand-off cruise missile, it purchased 
only 3,243 missiles between FY2010 and FY2021.108 Disregarding the number of JASSMs 
expended during operations in the Middle East, this quantity appears inadequate when 
compared to the requirements identified in the previous chapter. A campaign that strikes 
a modest portion of targets in the South China Sea, our least demanding scenario, could 
consume over half of these cruise missiles depending on stand-off requirements. Should 
conflict continue or escalate, the U.S. military might find itself running dangerously low 
on these crucial weapons in a matter of days. In terms of bomber sorties, 3,243 JASSMs 
would only fill bomb bays for 135 B-1 or 162 B-52 sorties.109 With other analysis suggesting 
that the U.S. Air Force could realistically generate 30 or fewer bomber sorties per day, this 
inventory of JASSMs could be expended in less than a week of sustained long-range strike 
operations.110 Bringing tactical aircraft into the mix, U.S. fighters conducted an average of 
674 strike sorties per day during Operation Iraqi Freedom. 111 At this rate, even if each fighter 
carried only a single missile per sortie, fighter aircraft could expend all 3,243 JASSMs 
in under five days. An examination of U.S. budget documents paints a similar picture of 
on-hand inventories for other U.S. PGMs as well.
The second component of total munition capacity is production capacity. The United States 
must have the ability to expand its munitions production rates rapidly in the event of a 
protracted great power conflict. Even if enormous munitions stocks were fiscally viable, a 
high-intensity conflict with a duration measured in months is likely to consume hundreds of 
thousands of weapons. For the United States and its adversaries, the conflict will eventually 
shift to a war of production. 
The constraints posed by today’s munitions industrial base and its capacity will be further 
discussed below, but again, historical production rates tell a concerning story. Between 
FY2000 and FY2021, the United States procured an average of 209 Tomahawk cruise 
108 Data gathered from U.S. Air Force budget documents and John R. Hoehn, Precision-Guided Munitions: Background 
and Issues for Congress  (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, June 11, 2021), https://sgp.fas.org/crs/
weapons/R45996.pdf.
109 The B-1B can carry 24 JASSMs and the B-52H can carry 20 JASSMs per sortie. The B-2 can carry 16 JASSMs per sortie.
110 This sortie rate considers total bomber inventory as well as typical mission-capable rates. It excludes the need to keep 
some nuclear-capable bombers supporting nuclear deterrence missions. See Mark Gunzinger, Long-Range Strike: 
Resetting the Balance of Stand-in and Stand-off Forces (Arlington, VA: Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies, 2020), 
p. 17, https:/ /mitchellaerospacepower.org/long-range-strike-resetting-the-balance-of-stand-in-and-stand-off-forces/ .
111 U.S. fighter aircraft executed 20,228 strike sorties over a 30 day period. Robert S. Dudney, “The Gulf War II Air 
Campaign, by the Numbers,” Air Force Magazine , July 2003, p. 37, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/PDF/
MagazineArchive/Magazine%20Documents/2003/July%202003/0703Numbers.pdf.

52  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 53
missiles per year.112 In Iraqi Freedom, the U.S. military expended 802 Tomahawks in 30 
days.113 At an average consumption rate of 27 missiles per day, a single year of Tomahawk 
production at previous levels would only supply enough cruise missiles for just over a week 
of sustained strike operations. Although it is unlikely that operations would continue at this 
intensity for multiple months, repeated Russian missile barrages in Ukraine have high -
lighted the need for numerous periods of high-volume strikes in a single year of protracted 
war.114 As we will explore in the next section and recent demands for Javelin and Stinger 
missiles have revealed, these production rates cannot be quickly scaled in the event of a 
conflict. PGM inventories and surge production capacity must be maintained at the level 
required for great power conflict if the U.S. military is to be prepared for a war in the 
Indo-Pacific.
These inventory and industrial capacity increases will come at a cost. With limited 
resources, long-term strategy and analysis are key to buying the right weapons as the United 
States moves to remedy these gaps. Because capacity will always be limited, the United 
States must also seek new methods of maximizing the effectiveness of its munitions and 
enabling the rapid manufacturing of large quantities of weapons. The U.S. military must 
buy weapons and employ them in ways that allow it to achieve its objectives in an efficient 
manner—ultimately more efficiently than the PLA can defend against these munitions.
Range
Beyond total capacity, the United States’ current portfolio of PGMs and delivery platforms 
lacks the range ideal for the Indo-Pacific theater. The geography of the scenarios examined 
in Chapter Three revealed a need for weapons and platforms with ranges adequate to transit 
the vast distances between theater basing and potential weapon launch points. Because of 
the predominance of non-stealthy, legacy delivery platforms in today’s forces, a campaign in 
the Indo-Pacific demands weapons with ranges well beyond the reaches of Chinese combat 
air patrols and other A2/AD systems, as well as PGMs capable of striking targets deep in 
Chinese territory. In the words of the Defense Science Board, “If the U.S. wishes to be able 
to dissuade, deter, or if necessary, deny such actions [as a blockade of Taiwan or naviga-
tion restrictions in the South China Sea] using military force, it will need the ability to 
112 Based on data in Hoehn, Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress .
113 See Table 2 or Appendix A.
114 U.S. defense officials estimated that Russia fired over 2,100 missiles as of May 10, 2022. Russian forces fired 
additional salvos of up to 75 missiles at a time in October, November, and December 2022. Tara Copp, “Russia has 
Fired Between ’10 and 12’ Hypersonics into Ukraine, Pentagon Says,” Defense One , May 10, 2022, https://www.
defenseone.com/threats/2022/05/russia-has-fired-between-10-and-12-hypersonics-ukraine-pentagon-says/366748/; 
and Andrew E. Kramer, “Russian Missile Barrage Staggers Ukraine’s Air Defenses,” New York Times, December 29, 
2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/29/world/europe/russia-strikes-ukraine.html.

54  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
achieve decisive military [victory] from a range outside of the adversary A2/AD reach.” 115 The 
requirement for survivable combinations of stand-off munitions and penetrating delivery 
platforms will only increase as the PLA fields more advanced SAMs, ASCMs, and anti-
ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs) and expands further into the Indo-Pacific. 116 Every base and 
outpost outside the mainland that hosts A2/AD systems expands the Chinese threat bubble 
and increases the need for long-range munitions and penetrating delivery platforms. 117
Currently, however, the majority of U.S. PGMs in service have ranges well below 400 km, 
with only the Tomahawk reaching beyond 1,500 km. For naval platforms like attack subma -
rines and destroyers, the TLAM has sufficient range and will see its versatility expand 
further with the introduction of a maritime strike capability in future Block V missiles. 118 
Below the TLAM, however, there is a gap in offensive naval weapons with ranges between 
the Tomahawk and the 250 km Harpoon.119 The Harpoon’s short range impedes the Navy’s 
ability to conduct distributed maritime operations by forcing naval commanders to concen -
trate ships to mass fires.120
The ranges of U.S. air-delivered munitions present more distinct limitations. Although long-
range bombers have the endurance to fly from distant bases to weapon launch points near 
mainland China, the majority of the U.S. Air Force’s bomber fleet consists of non-stealthy 
B-52s and B-1s.121 The threat presented by PLA air defenses means these non-stealthy 
bombers still require munitions with stand-off ranges to be effective. As the United States 
fields the B-21, a long-range penetrating bomber, the need for large quantities of stand-off 
115 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Report of the Defense Science 
Board: Study on Countering Anti-access Systems with Longer Range Standoff Capabilities: Assault Breaker 
II (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, June 2018), p. 10, https://dsb.cto.mil/reports/2010s/LRE%20
Executive%20Summary__Final.pdf.
116 For example, the eventual Chinese procurement of systems like the Russian S-500 could increase the threat to U.S. 
delivery platforms by a few hundred kilometers. See Missile Threat , “S-500 Prometheus,” Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, July 1, 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/defsys/s-500-prometheus/.
117 For a look at China’s overseas ambitions, see Toshi Yoshihara and Jack Bianchi, Seizing on Weakness: Allied Strategy 
for Competing with China’s Globalizing Military  (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 
2021), ch. 4–6, https://csbaonline.org/research/publications/seizing-on-weakness-allied-strategy-for-competing-  
with-chinas-globalizing-military.
118 Mallory Shelbourne, “Raytheon Awarded $217M Tomahawk Missiles Contract for Navy, Marines, Army,” USNI News, May 
25, 2022, https://news.usni.org/2022/05/25/raytheon-awarded-217m-tomahawk-missiles-contract-for-navy-marines-army.
119 See Figure 26 in Appendix B for an illustration of this gap in a Taiwan invasion scenario.
120 Dmitry Filipoff, “Fighting DMO: Pt. 2: Anti-Ship Firepower and the Major Limits of the American Naval Arsenal,” 
Center for International Maritime Security , February 27, 2023, https://cimsec.org/fighting-dmo-pt-2-anti-ship-  
firepower-and-the-major-limits-of-the-american-naval-arsenal/. 
121 As of 2020, the U.S. Air Force operated 138 B-52s and B-1s and only 20 penetrating B-2 bombers. Gunzinger, Long-
Range Strike: Resetting the Balance of Stand-in and Stand-off , p. 3.

54  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 55
munitions will be reduced. 122 Long-range penetrating strike platforms like the B-21 will grow 
the need for large volumes of stand-in munitions. Operating from distant bases increases 
sortie transit time and decreases the mass that U.S. strike forces can achieve at any given 
time, which could inherently prolong campaigns intended to be rapid such as countering a 
Taiwan invasion.123 Fighter aircraft require munitions with extended ranges just to reach 
weapon release points from air bases in the Indo-Pacific theater, which are sparse and 
distant in many scenarios. 124 Like its bomber fleet, the U.S. military’s fighter inventory is still 
predominately non-stealthy, further increasing the need for stand-off and long-range muni -
tions in the near term. 
Even with the fielding of larger numbers of penetrating aircraft, such as the F-35 and B-21 
bomber, stand-in and stand-off weapons help planners maximize the capability of low-
observable aircraft. Commander of Air Combat Command (ACC) General Mark Kelly 
explained, “We [take] a lot of bang out of our low-observable force because we push them 
into ranges where everyone [including stealth aircraft] is observable.” 125 Tactical stealth 
aircraft require munitions that fit in their internal weapons bays to maintain their pene -
trating capability, which currently limits them to smaller glide munitions like the Small 
Diameter Bomb series and the JSOW. The fielding of the SiAW and AARGM-ER will help 
remedy this gap, but both possess stand-in ranges.
Ground-based strike munitions are currently the most range deficient. The GMLRS and 
ATACMS are wholly inadequate for remote island launch locations in the Indo-Pacific 
theater.126 The Army’s introduction of the Precision Strike Missile, Mid-Range Capability 
(consisting of the SM-6 and Tomahawk), and the Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon will start 
to close this gap but will be limited in quantity for some years to come.
Beyond the variety of long-range PGMs, the total quantity of long-range munitions avail -
able is also lacking. Figure 13 displays the historic imbalance between the procurement of 
short versus long-range weapons over the previous two decades. Spending on stand-in and 
stand-off munitions has been increasing in recent defense budgets, but at an insufficient 
122 For a deeper exploration of how the B-21’s fielding will affect Air Force capabilities, see Christopher J. Bowie, Air 
Power Metamorphosis: Rethinking Air Force Combat Force Modernization  (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic 
and Budgetary Assessments, 2023), https://csbaonline.org/research/publications/air-power-metamorphosis-  
rethinking-air-force-combat-force-modernization.
123 For a visual depiction of how the Air Force’s capability to provide a volume of effects decreases with the range aircraft 
must fly, see Figure 1-1 in Alternatives for Long-Range Ground-Attack Systems  (Washington, DC: Congressional 
Budget Office, 2006), p. 6, https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/109th-congress-2005-2006/reports/03-31-
strikeforce.pdf.
124 Figures 26, 29, 32, 35, and 38 in Appendix B illustrate these distances for each great power conflict scenario.
125 Quoted in John A. Tirpak, “New Longer-Range Missiles Needed to Preserve Stealth Advantages,” Air & Space Forces 
Magazine, September 23, 2021, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/new-longer-range-missiles-needed-to-  
preserve-stealth-advantages/.
126 For a comparison of U.S., Chinese, and Russian ground-based missile ranges and an analysis of potential launch locations 
for ground-based missiles in the Indo-Pacific, see Edelman, Bassler, Yoshihara, and Hacker, Rings of Fire, p. 11-23.

56  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
rate. The U.S. military simply needs more munitions with ranges beyond those of existing 
direct attack weapons. Many great power conflict scenarios demand not only long-range 
munitions, but also those with stand-in ranges to equip penetrating aircraft. Procurement 
of these stand-in weapons has increased significantly in recent years, but the United States 
requires large quantities of these weapons in order to provide a sufficient volume of effects in 
a modern strike campaign. 127
FIGURE 13: SELECT PGM PROCUREMENT QUANTITIES AND COSTS, FY1998 TO FY2021
Source: Created by CSBA using data from DoD budget documents and Selected Acquisition Reports (SARs) from FY1998 to FY2023.
Survivability
Not only do many current U.S. PGMs lack adequate range for the Indo-Pacific, but they also 
are not survivable against the defenses of a great power adversary. The previous chapter 
illustrated the outsized effect of the probability of intercept on munitions requirements for 
a given target set. Still, a large portion of current U.S. PGMs are freefall, glide, and subsonic 
cruise weapons that can be intercepted by low-cost air defense systems. 128 Many long-range 
American cruise missiles incorporate stealth characteristics, but stealth and speed are only 
two facets of survivability. PGMs must also be hardened against specific capabilities of great 
power adversaries such as electronic warfare and future directed energy (DE) weapons. The 
classification of survivability features and countermeasures prevents us from assessing the 
true survivability of many American weapons, but these features are vital for future PGMs.
127 A variety of studies and officials support a robust mix of stand-in and stand-off weapons, including former Air Force 
Chief of Staff General David Goldfein. See Mark Gunzinger, “Stand In, Standoff,” Air & Space Forces Magazine , July 
1, 2020, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/article/stand-in-standoff/.
128 For example, gun- and cannon-based air defense vehicles such as the Type 95 and Type 09 self-propelled anti-aircraft 
vehicles. Ukraine has reportedly used similar German Gepard vehicles to intercept Russian cruise missiles and 
drones. Dan Parsons, “Ukraine Situation Report: More German Gepard Air Defense Gun Systems On The Way,” The 
Drive, December 2, 2022, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/ukraine-situation-report-more-german-gepard-  
air-defense-gun-systems-on-the-way.

56  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 57
FIGURE 14: QUANTITY OF U .S . PGM PROGRAMS BY SPEED
Source: Created by CSBA. 
Guidance Without External Support
Despite the need to operate in highly contested environments, many of America’s PGMs, 
particularly those with ranges below 400 km, are reliant on some form of external guidance 
to hit their targets accurately. External support includes GPS signals and other space-based 
communications support or laser designation by aircraft or ground forces. These outside 
guidance enablers are vulnerable to interference, particularly in the heavily defended 
environments of modern high-intensity conflict. Moreover, these requirements can place 
delivery platforms at risk as they “paint” targets with laser energy or find targets with their 
sensor pods before utilizing GPS-guided munitions. Even if GPS-guided munitions are 
launched from a distance at pre-assigned coordinates, they still require a significant third-
party targeting effort to determine and refine these aimpoints. The planning efforts needed 
to support such large target sets may overwhelm the U.S. military’s current targeting cycle, 
which struggled to keep up with the demands of limited campaigns like Inherent Resolve. 129
The U.S. military possesses a limited number of munitions capable of completing their own 
kill chains and providing precision effects without outside support. Although many stand-
off and long-range strike weapons carry onboard sensors, most stand-in and direct attack 
PGMs do not. Stand-in munitions with multi-mode sensors and automatic target recogni -
tion, such as the GBU-53/B StormBreaker, are a step in the right direction. Still, much of the 
U.S. arsenal remains incapable of self-guidance, increasing the risk to munitions and their 
129 Stacie L. Pettyjohn and Becca Wasser, “From Forever Wars to Great-Power Wars: Lessons Learned From Operation 
Inherent Resolve,” War on the Rocks, August 20, 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2021/08/from-forever-wars-to-  
great-power-wars-lessons-learned-from-operation-inherent-resolve/.

58  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
delivery platforms, generating enormous targeting support requirements, and limiting the 
use of these weapons against targets of opportunity. 
Munitions for Time Sensitive and Mobile A2/AD Targets
Self-guidance is also an important piece of another existing capability gap: munitions 
that find, track, and attack mobile and elusive A2/AD targets such as air defenses, ASCM 
launchers, and PLA Rocket Force TELs. Despite the difficulties encountered by U.S. forces 
in the Gulf War and Kosovo, the United States’ selection of munitions suitable for this task 
has not changed significantly, and weapons like the AGM-88E AARGM cannot be internally 
carried by penetrating aircraft like the F-35. 130 The number of potential mobile targets in a 
conflict, however, has steadily risen. 
Although mobile and elusive targets are one of the most challenging munitions tasks, 
attacking these targets is ultimately a layered problem, with munitions constituting one 
crucial piece of the kill chain. Mobile targets first require some form of persistent ISR to 
find and track them as they expose themselves. Once detected, a delivery platform must be 
within striking range at the time of target detection. Given the speed with which modern 
mobile targets can tear down and displace, the proximity of the delivery platform is partic -
ularly vital. This requirement lends advantages to penetrating aircraft and persistent 
platforms such as attack submarines and ground-launched fires. The final link in the mobile 
target kill chain is typically the munition, which must deliver its payload before the target 
moves or be capable of tracking the target and striking it on the move. For this reason, these 
munitions benefit from features like high speeds, which reduce flight time, and loitering, 
which allow the weapon to search for and track moving targets. They also require onboard 
sensors to provide this tracking and terminal guidance or features such as datalinks to 
receive targeting updates from external sources. Mobile targets may demand certain kinds 
of sensors, such as active radar seeking or anti-radiation homing. Ultimately, multiple 
types of munitions are capable of performing this mission, but they must be matched and 
integrated with other ISR and delivery elements to create a kill chain (or force packages) 
optimized for mobile and elusive targets.
Ideally, the U.S. PGM arsenal would contain two primary groups of counter-A2/AD muni -
tions: long-range varieties able to “kick in the door” during the opening stages of a conflict, 
and shorter-range weapons that fit into the bays of penetrating aircraft like the F-35. These 
shorter-range PGMs should be inexpensive enough to be employed in volume without 
imposing unaffordable costs.
130 For internal carry, this leaves the F-35 reliant on subsonic glide weapons for attacking these targets. The AARGM-ER 
and SiAW will alleviate this issue, but have not yet been fielded. Joseph Trevithick and Tyler Rogoway, “Navy Orders 
Development of New Air Defense Blasting Missile That Will Fit Inside F-35,” The Drive, June 30, 2019, https://www.
thedrive.com/the-war-zone/17947/navy-orders-development-of-new-air-defense-blasting-missile-that-will-fit-inside-f-35; 
and Joseph Trevithick, “Navy To Test Ground-Launched Version Of New Radar-Busting Missile,” The Drive, February 17, 
2023, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/navy-to-test-ground-launched-version-of-new-radar-busting-missile.

58  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 59
Affordable Mass
PGMs that allow the United States to mass effects while maintaining an acceptable cost 
imposition ratio are another key capability gap in the current U.S. PGM portfolio. Great 
power conflict could require the U.S. military to strike tens of thousands of aimpoints, 
particularly in dense target areas and around complex targets such as airfields, shipyards, 
and production facilities. As shown in Figure 15, many current PGMs are simply too costly 
and exquisite to be employed in volume, particularly in a prolonged conflict. Some direct 
attack weapons, such as the JDAM, are less expensive but lack the range and other features 
ideal for a contingency in the Indo-Pacific. Moreover, the inventories of even simple PGMs 
like the JDAM have been exposed as insufficient by recent operations in the Middle East. 
FIGURE 15: COST OF STRIKING A FIXED QUANTITY OF AIMPOINTS USING THE JDAM, 
GBU-53/B, JASSM, AND TLAM
Source: Created by CSBA. Unit costs are averages based on FY1998 to FY2023 procurement costs.
The U.S. military could pursue affordable precision in mass through several means, some 
of which will be discussed in the next chapter. The fielding of greater numbers of pene -
trating platforms will help enable the affordable massing of PGMs by allowing the use of 
less expensive, shorter-range munitions. The design of future weapons can also help U.S. 
forces achieve precision in mass. The majority of current PGMs are unitary weapons able to 
provide effects on only a single aimpoint. Future PGMs could fill this gap by providing preci -
sion effects on multiple aimpoints, which would decrease munitions requirements and the 
cost per aimpoint. These weapons must balance the advanced features ideal for great power 
conflict (range, speed, survivability, etc.) with the affordability and producibility that allows 
for production, procurement, and expenditure in large volumes.

60  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Low Versatility
The current U.S. PGM inventory lacks flexibility in two important facets: launch platform 
versatility and weapon-target pairing. Many of the weapons in Table 2 can only be delivered 
by platforms in a single domain. The current situation is the natural result of each mili -
tary service developing and buying munitions for its own air, sea, and ground platforms. 
Some joint programs, such as the Common Hypersonic Glide Body, aim to improve the 
versatility of U.S. munitions and their components, but the U.S. military largely lacks muni -
tions employable from a wide variety of launch platforms. Other nations, such as Sweden, 
stock weapons like the RBS-15 ASCM that can be launched from naval ships, aircraft, and 
ground-based coastal defense systems. Russia utilizes the 3M-54 Kalibr cruise missile, 
which includes variants fired by submarines, ships, aircraft, and container-based launchers. 
Certain restrictions like the dimensions of weapons bays and launchers naturally limit 
weapon versatility, but the United States should move toward munitions capable of being 
carried by a wider range of launch platforms. Current efforts to field ground-based launchers 
for the NSM, Tomahawk, and SM-6 are steps in the right direction. It appears that further 
experimentation in this realm is ongoing, with the Navy set to demonstrate a ground-
launched AARGM-ER and the U.S. government providing Ukraine with ground-launched 
Small Diameter Bombs.131
The second area in which U.S. PGMs lack versatility is in weapon-target pairing. Many 
PGMs are designed with a specific mission or target in mind. For example, the Harpoon 
and NSM are optimized for attacking ships, and the AGM-88 HARM was developed to hunt 
enemy radars. These munitions have been modified over decades to increase their versa -
tility, but these new variants are typically separate munitions and not interchangeable with 
their parents.132 The United States lacks stand-off PGMs capable of attacking a wide range of 
targets.133 Like launch platforms, encouraging progress in weapon-target versatility is being 
made with weapons such as the SM-6, an anti-air missile now tested as an anti-ballistic 
missile, anti-ship, and land attack weapon. 134
Increasing the versatility of the U.S. munitions portfolio would go a long way toward easing 
the munitions problem. If a weapon can attack more than one kind of target or be carried 
by a variety of platforms, then it can fulfill multiple requirements and decrease the number 
of tradeoffs and choices that planners must address. Versatility reduces the optimization 
131 Of course, joint programs run the risk of being slowed by the multitude of different service requirements. These 
delays were evident in the development and subsequent cancellation of the AGM-137 Tri-Service Standoff Attack 
Missile (TSSAM). Joseph Trevithick, “Navy To Test Ground-Launched Version Of New Radar-Busting Missile;” and 
Joe Gould, “US pledges longer-range ‘small-diameter bomb’ for Ukraine,” Defense News , February 3, 2023, https://
www.defensenews.com/pentagon/2023/02/03/us-pledges-longer-range-small-diameter-bomb-for-ukraine/.
132 For example, the Harpoon was used a base for the SLAM, and the HARM has evolved into the AARGM.
133 The fielding of the Block V Tomahawk and maritime-strike variants of the PrSM will eventually reduce this gap.
134 David Axe, “The U.S. Navy Finally Has A Universal Missile—And That Means More Firepower For War With China,” 
Forbes, April 29, 2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2021/04/29/the-us-navy-finally-has-a-universal-
missile-and-that-means-more-firepower-for-war-with-china/?sh=725444ac1830.

60  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 61
problem and allows policymakers to assume less risk in preparing for a broad range of 
conflict scenarios. More flexible weapons could also decrease the costs of developing sepa -
rate programs and building and maintaining independent production lines, as well as 
decrease the costs of maintaining separate fleets of specialized munitions that may only be 
employed in particular scenarios. 
Munitions for Specialized Targets
Although versatility is key to solving the current capacity gap, the U.S. inventory lacks 
some specific capabilities demanded by great power conflict. Maintaining small quantities 
of these specialized weapons would lower the risk presented by certain scenarios. Many of 
these specialty munitions could also provide particular effects more efficiently than more 
general PGMs. By stocking a limited number of these weapons, the U.S. military could avoid 
expending large quantities of more generic munitions.
One such group of weapons are those designed for attacking hardened and deeply buried 
targets (HDBTs) such as command posts, headquarters facilities, and communications 
nodes. Current long-range strike munitions struggle to penetrate and destroy these targets 
efficiently.135 “Bunker busting” weapons such as the GBU-57B MOP are heavy direct attack 
weapons that put the limited number of penetrating bombers at risk. The United States 
requires better munitions for attacking these targets, particularly weapons able to be carried 
by a wider range of platforms and, ideally, employed from standoff ranges. 136
Weapons ideal for destroying wide area targets like maneuver forces, production facilities, 
or aircraft parked on runway aprons constitute another capability gap. Unitary precision 
weapons like the JDAM are inadequate for these large targets and certain pinpoint targets. 137 
Relying on large numbers of unitary munitions also increases the demand for delivery plat -
forms with large payloads, which could further stress the limited fleet of U.S. bombers. 
Legacy cluster munitions, traditionally used on many of these targets, are being phased 
out of U.S. inventories.138 Efforts such as the GMLRS Alternative Warhead and the Next 
Generation Area Attack Weapon could fill some of the gap left by older cluster munitions, 
135 This shortfall has long been noted by defense analysts. See, for example, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense 
For Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, “Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Future Strategic 
Strike Forces,” February 2004, p. 6-3, https://dsb.cto.mil/reports/2000s/ADA421606.pdf; and Russell J. Hart, Jr., 
“Defeating Hard and Deeply Buried Targets in 2035,” Air University, Air War College, February 15, 2012, https://apps.
dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1018630.pdf.
136 The need for heavy munitions with large explosive payloads makes attacking these targets difficult with stand-off 
weapons. The next chapter will explore technologies that may reduce the physical challenges of this problem.
137 Very small targets or moving targets may be unaffected by a JDAM which “hits” within its CEP. Wilson, A Time-
Critical Targeting Roadmap pp. 23–24.
138 As of 2017, DoD policy directs the military services to “program for capabilities to replace cluster munitions currently 
in active inventories” and “only procure cluster munitions containing submunitions or submunition warheads that 
do not result in more than one percent unexploded ordnance.” Deputy Secretary of Defense, “DoD Policy on Cluster 
Munitions,” November 30, 2017, p. 2, https://man.fas.org/eprint/cluster.pdf.

62  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
but the U.S. military lacks a replacement for aging weapons like the CBU-105 that are opti -
mized for destroying dispersed armored formations and air defense batteries. 139 As the next 
chapter will explore, technology is quickly making the tradeoff between precision and area 
effects a false choice. The U.S. military should capitalize on new technology to field PGMs 
suitable for defeating area targets.
Finally, the United States lacks weapons dedicated to neutralizing airfields. Though there are 
many ways to disable airbases, the U.S. military has previously “cut” runways using a series 
of craters produced by unitary PGMs. The United States does not currently field a dedi -
cated precision-guided anti-runway munition, and instead relies on direct attack PGMs or 
cruise missiles with delay fuzes to produce craters. 140 Neutralizing runways requires signifi -
cant quantities of these weapons, particularly if these targets require periodic reattack to 
keep disabled. The United States should consider various weapons and concepts that could 
accomplish this task more efficiently from ranges that do not require the delivery platform to 
fly directly over the target. The U.S. military should also consider the value of time-delayed 
weapons to disrupt adversary ordnance removal and repair processes.
Non-Kinetic Options
The only publicly revealed PGMs dedicated to delivering offensive non-kinetic effects are the 
MALD and minimal numbers of the Counter-Electronics High Power Microwave Advanced 
Missile Project (CHAMP).141 It remains unclear what non-kinetic effects other cruise missiles 
and advanced PGMs can produce in addition to their kinetic payloads. Due to their cost and 
power requirements, electronic warfare and other non-kinetic effects have traditionally been 
mostly limited to being employed by delivery platforms like the EA-18G Growler. However, 
many targets in our great power conflict scenarios could be attacked more efficiently (or less 
provocatively) through non-kinetic effects. For example, a blinding campaign that requires 
neutralizing many sensors and networks would benefit from U.S. PGMs that could employ 
non-kinetic effects over a wide area or an extended period.
139 While the CBU-105 disperses BLU-108 submunitions that utilize sensors to seek and attack vehicles using explosively 
formed penetrators, many efforts to replace cluster munitions attempt to provide effects through blast and 
fragmentation. Ryan Pickrell, “The Air Force is testing a new fragmenting alternative to cluster bombs,” Task & Purpose, 
September 3, 2020, https://taskandpurpose.com/news/air-force-blu-136-next-generation-area-attack-weapon- 
cluster-bomb-testing/.
140 The U.S. Air Force has utilized the BLU-107/B Durandal anti-runway bomb in previous conflicts, but this weapon is 
unguided and must be released at low altitudes.
141 The U.S. military is currently testing a potential successor to the CHAMP program called the High-Powered Joint 
Electromagnetic Non-Kinetic Strike (HiJENKS). John Keller, “Air Force deploys B-52 missiles that could disable 
enemy military electronics with high-power microwaves,” Military & Aerospace Electronics , May 17, 2019, https://
www.militaryaerospace.com/rf-analog/article/14033453/air-force-deploys-b52-missiles-that-could-disable-
enemy-military-electronics-with-highpower-microwaves; and Inder Singh Bisht, “USAF, Navy Concluding Five-
Year Microwave Weapon Test,” The Defense Post , July 12, 2022, https://www.thedefensepost.com/2022/07/12/
usaf-navy-microwave-weapon-test/.

62  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 63
Constraints on PGM Development, Production, and Procurement
If the current U.S. arsenal suffers from these capacity and capability gaps, then what are the 
primary barriers to closing these gaps? This section outlines a few of the major constraints 
that future munitions programs must confront.
Budget
The primary constraint limiting the procurement of PGMs for great power conflict is 
budgetary. Estimates of DoD’s total spending on munitions and PGMs vary based on 
the programs and accounts considered. 142 CSBA estimated total DoD spending on PGMs 
by totaling the procurement funding allotted for the programs included in Table 2. The 
Department requested a sum of $5.6 billion across these 36 PGM programs in fiscal year 
2023, down from the $6.5 to $7.2 billion highs of FY2018 to FY2020. DoD’s FY2023 request 
for these PGMs represents just 0.72 percent of DoD’s total requested funding and less than 4 
percent of requested procurement funding. 143
Regardless of exactly how much the U.S. military is spending to buy PGMs, one limita -
tion is clear from DoD’s annual budget requests: munitions spending remains directly tied 
to operational usage rather than long-term strategy or analysis. When the United States 
expends large quantities of PGMs, DoD buys more in the following years to replenish stocks. 
Irrespective of its expectations of future contingencies, however, DoD spending on PGMs 
drops in subsequent years, presumably as stocks are replenished. This trend is illustrated 
in Figure 16, which shows how munitions spending increases in the wake of each conflict 
before falling again. This trend is especially displayed by increased spending on direct attack 
and stand-in munitions from FY2016 to FY2020 to replenish weapons expended during 
Operation Inherent Resolve.
142 For example, DoD’s FY2023 budget request includes $24.7 billion for “missiles & munitions,” which includes 
procurement and research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) funding for small-arms ammunition and 
strategic weapons. The Center for New American Security assessed DoD’s FY2023 request for “key conventional 
PGMs” as $5.7 billion. Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, “Program 
Acquisition Cost by Weapon System, United States Department of Defense Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Request,” April 
2022, p. ix, https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/FY2023/FY2023_weapons.pdf; and 
Pettyjohn and Dennis, Precision and Posture , p. 5.
143 DoD’s FY2023 budget request totaled $773 billion, with just under $146 billion requested for procurement. Figures 
drawn from Table 1-2 in Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), “National Defense Budget Estimates 
for FY 2023,” Department of Defense, July 2022, p. 7, https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/
defbudget/FY2023/FY23_Green_Book.pdf.

64  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 16: SELECT PGM PROCUREMENT SPENDING AND QUANTITY BY RANGE, FY1998 
TO FY2021
Source: Created by CSBA using data from DoD budget documents and SARs from FY1998 to FY2023.
Beyond the cycle of total spending, Figure 16 also highlights the consistent lack of spending 
on stand-off and long-range strike munitions. Instead, operational use has driven spending 
on large quantities of short-range munitions. Maintaining these stocks of direct attack and 
stand-in weapons is important, but procuring a munitions portfolio suited for great power 
conflict will necessitate balancing near-term demands with long-term imperatives for PGMs 
with extended reach.
On top of lacking strategic guidance, munitions funding has historically been a “bill payer” 
that is often sacrificed in the name of other budgetary priorities, especially advanced plat -
forms.144 Neglecting stand-in and stand-off munitions, however, could force America’s 
next-generation aircraft and ships to operate dangerously close to Chinese threats. At worst, 
inadequate weapons stocks could leave even the most advanced platforms stranded without 
PGMs to execute their missions. Rather than viewing them purely as competing fiscal priori -
ties, policymakers must start considering platforms and munitions symbiotically—part of 
a broader force package that is required to accomplish a particular mission. 145 Preparing 
America’s arsenal for great power conflict is not just a matter of increasing spending on 
144 For an example of DoD’s failure to “follow-through” and procure the quantities of munitions it projects purchasing in 
years prior, see Pettyjohn and Dennis, Precision and Posture , p. 13.
145 For a deeper discussion of networked force package analysis and its potential for DoD budgeting, see Sharp, Bassler, 
and Hacker, ”In a Connected Era, We Talk Too Much About Individual Weapons.”

64  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 65
munitions relative to platforms, but ensuring that spending on platforms is proportional to 
spending on a balanced portfolio of weapons to enable their missions. 146
Like many other acquisition programs, the use of continuing resolutions (CRs) by Congress 
is detrimental to procuring sufficient stocks of weapons and their supporting systems. A 
2021 CR put funding for hypersonic weapons and critical programs like the GBU-53/B 
StormBreaker on hold.147 Continuing resolutions have a long history of negative impacts on 
munitions programs and the defense industrial base and are likely to negatively affect future 
weapons initiatives.148
Industrial Base
Funding that cycles with munitions expenditures amplifies the challenge of maintaining 
America’s munitions industrial base—another major constraint on producing adequate 
numbers of weapons for future conflict. Traditionally, defense planners and budgeters 
assumed that munitions production, unlike platforms, could be surged in the event of a 
major conflict. During the Cold War, DoD sometimes funded the maintenance of multiple 
production lines for munitions to ensure surge capacity.149 Under this assumption, cutting 
procurement funding for munitions in favor of platforms was a more reasonable tradeoff. 
This assumption is no longer valid. Modern weapons such as long-range cruise missiles are 
essentially small unpiloted aircraft and are equally complex to produce. Today’s advanced 
munitions are manufactured from thousands of subcomponents with multi-tiered supply 
chains. Nevertheless, assumptions about conflict remaining limited and rapid in the wake of 
the Cold War led to the consolidation of many weapons manufacturers. 150 As defense priori-
ties shifted from resiliency to efficiency, overreliance on just-in-time manufacturing has 
added to the fragility of munitions supply chains. The inability to quickly surge the produc -
tion of modern weapons has been seen in the U.S. response to the Russia-Ukraine conflict. 
Industry is predicting that it may take over a year to increase the production of weapons like 
146 Proportional spending can also be thought of as balancing near- and long-term priorities. See David Alman, 
“Don’t Buy Warships (Yet),” Proceedings , U.S. Naval Institute, June 2022, https://www.usni.org/magazines/
proceedings/2022/june/dont-buy-warships-yet.
147 Joe Gould, Megan Eckstein, and Jen Judson, “Here’s how the new continuing resolution will frustrate 
the Pentagon,” Defense News , October 1, 2021, https://www.defensenews.com/congress/2021/10/01/
heres-how-the-new-continuing-resolution-will-frustrate-the-pentagon/?mc_cid=f5e1af0dd9&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.
148 For a brief overview of the effects of continuing resolutions on national defense, see Mackenzie Eaglen and Rick 
Berger, “1,000 Days of Continuing Resolutions in 10 Years,” American Enterprise Institute , June 10, 2019, https://
www.aei.org/articles/1000-days-continuing-resolutions-10-years/ .
149 Tirpak, “Climbing Out of the Munitions Hole.”
150 Mick Ryan, “The West needs to boost its industrial capacity fast,” Engelsberg Ideas , November 24, 2022, https://
engelsbergideas.com/notebook/the-west-needs-to-boost-its-industrial-capacity-fast/; and John C. Johnson, 
“Military Must Factor in Industry’s Surge Capacity,” National Defense Magazine , September 2, 2021, https://www.
nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2021/9/2/military-must-factor-in-industrys-surge-capacity.

66  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
the Stinger anti-aircraft missile and Javelin anti-tank missile—weapons that are smaller 
and simpler than critical munitions like the JASSM or LRASM. 151
Moreover, the downsizing and consolidation of the industrial base have left a limited 
number of weapons producers. Unlike other aerospace products, the lack of a commercial 
market for munitions creates higher barriers to entry for many high-technology manu -
facturers.152 The inconsistent and conflict-driven demand signal further limits firms from 
committing to weapon development and production because there is no guarantee of 
continued, steady government funding. The remaining munitions manufacturers are limited 
by a reliance on a dwindling number of specialized subcontractors and component suppliers. 
This reliance leads to multiple munitions sharing subcontractors and components. Some 
component industries, such as energetics, are particularly burdened by aging infrastructure, 
outdated business models, and difficulties maintaining a trained workforce. 153
A thorough exploration of the challenges facing the munitions industrial base is worthy of its 
own monograph.154 For the purposes of this study, it stands as major constraint to producing 
a sufficient inventory of PGMs for great power conflict. Even with vast increases in funding, 
the speed at which weapons could be acquired (and the speed at which production capacity 
could be expanded) would be limited by the current munitions industrial base. 155 Most 
importantly, the Pentagon can no longer assume that surge production will fill existing 
capacity gaps or sustain the U.S. military in the event of a prolonged conflict. The munitions 
the United States has on hand at the onset of a conflict are the munitions it will have avail -
able for some time.
Technology
In addition to creating opportunities, technology can at times remain a barrier to muni -
tions development. Chapter Two explored the enduring tradeoffs between range, speed, 
and cost. New propulsion systems, materials, and energetics may ease the degree of these 
151 Ethan Sterenfeld, “Raytheon CEO: Stinger production surge not coming this year,” Inside Defense , April 26, 2022, 
https:/ /insidedefense.com/insider/raytheon-ceo-stinger-production-surge-not-coming-year.
152 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, “State of Competition within the Defense 
Industrial Base,” February 2022, p. 19, https://media.defense.gov/2022/Feb/15/2002939087/-1/-1/1/STATE-OF-
COMPETITION-WITHIN-THE-DEFENSE-INDUSTRIAL-BASE.PDF.
153 For a deeper look at the energetics industrial base and these issues, see Nadia Schadlow, Brady Helwig, Bryan Clark, 
and Timothy A. Walton, Rocket’s Red Glare: Modernizing America’s Energetics Enterprise (Washington, DC: Hudson 
Institute, 2022), https://www.hudson.org/supply-chains/rockets-red-glare-modernizing-americas-energetics-enterprise.
154 For a brief assessment of the munitions industrial base, see Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition 
and Sustainment, “Fiscal Year 2020 Industrial Capabilities Report,” January 2021, pp. 85–87, https://media.defense.
gov/2021/Jan/14/2002565311/-1/-1/0/FY20-INDUSTRIAL-CAPABILITIES-REPORT.PDF. 
155 Marcus Weisgerber, “’Can We Actually Build It?’ Defense Industry Leaders Look Ahead to Uncertain 2023,” Defense 
One, https://www.defenseone.com/business/2022/12/can-we-actually-build-it-defense-industry-leaders-look-ahead-  
uncertain-2023/380725/.

66  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 67
tradeoffs and increase total capability, but there will always be a limit to what technology 
can accomplish.
Munitions may also be limited by adjacent technologies vital to different elements of the 
kill chain, such as battle networks and communications. Taking advantage of the speed 
and capabilities of advanced munitions will require C2 systems that provide commanders 
sufficient situational awareness to quickly integrate and deconflict the delivery of multiple 
munitions across different domains.156
In the words of military historian Kenneth Werrell, “War is a major stimulus for mili -
tary technology. In contrast, the path for new technology in peacetime is long, convoluted, 
and littered with many obstacles that require time, skill, and money to be negotiated 
successfully.”157 In order to prepare for the possibility of great power conflict, DoD must 
strive to advance weapons technology during the present peace. 
Policy and Ethics
At times, the advancement of weapons technology can be inhibited by ethical and polit -
ical concerns that limit the development and implementation of certain capabilities. One 
such concern relates to the use of submunitions, which are traditionally associated with 
indiscriminate cluster munitions. Although modern technology allows for intelligent, 
discriminating submunitions with dud rates below DoD’s 1% threshold, the controversy 
surrounding cluster munitions has created a culture focused on prioritizing precision over 
all other attributes. Despite many nations moving away from traditional cluster munitions, 
China and Russia continue to develop and field cluster munitions for the roles they are best 
suited to perform, such as attacking grounded aircraft. 158 
A second area of ethical concern surrounds the use of autonomy in munitions. Features 
like automatic target recognition (ATR) conjure fears of “killer robots” and other poten -
tially dangerous or unethical uses of artificial intelligence. In previous years, these issues 
have contributed to the cancellation of advanced munitions programs such as the Low Cost 
Autonomous Attack System (LOCAAS). 159 These concerns, however, often suffer from a lack 
of nuanced understanding of technologies like ATR.  Several current U.S. weapon systems 
already make their own final engagement decisions without a human in or on the decision-
156 Operation Inherent Resolve revealed the continuing difficulties of managing battlespace and coordinating fires 
with modern long-range systems. Stacie L. Pettyjohn and Becca Wasser, “From Forever Wars to Great-Power Wars: 
Lessons Learned From Operation Inherent Resolve,” War on the Rocks, August 20, 2021, https://warontherocks.
com/2021/08/from-forever-wars-to-great-power-wars-lessons-learned-from-operation-inherent-resolve/.
157 Werrell, Chasing the Silver Bullet , p. 276.
158 China Aerospace Studies Institute, “Uncovering the Truth Behind the PLA Rocket Force’s August 2021 Missile Launch,” 
p. 4, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/CASI/documents/Research/CASI%20Articles/2021-08-30%20
PLARF%20missile%20test%20Aug%202021.pdf?ver=MfVUtaBGoQb25e0_dH3ZwQ%3D%3D.
159 Robert O. Work, “A Short History of Weapon Systems with Autonomous Functionalities,” Center for a New American 
Security, 2021, https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/resrep32146.4.pdf.

68  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
making loop.160 Policymakers must consider the various types of autonomous munitions and 
how each fit within DoD’s autonomous weapons policy.161 It is possible that many thresh-
olds surrounding the use of autonomous weapons in combat have already been surpassed by 
other nations, and DoD must consider the implications of potential adversaries embracing 
these technologies.162
Myriad political constraints have also affected the operational use of PGMs. History shows 
that restrictions such as specific rules of engagement (ROE) or limitations posed by alliance 
and coalition members often interfere with the use of certain U.S. weapons. Features like 
advanced sensors are of no benefit if ROE or risk-averse leaders do not allow for their usage. 
For instance, requirements that aircrews visually identify artillery targets during Operation 
Allied Force prevented the effective use of AN/TPW-37 Firefinder radars to identify counter-
battery targets.163 In contemporary great power conflicts, leaders will have to make quick 
decisions in fluid and potentially disconnected environments. A munition’s speed or preci -
sion is moot if leaders are not empowered to make rapid engagement decisions. Even with 
political constraints removed, this shift may require a change in U.S. military culture, which 
has operated for two decades in a risk-averse counterinsurgency environment that empha -
sized high-level authorizations.164 Leaders will have to become increasingly comfortable and 
willing to make decisions at lower echelons, delegate authority, and rely on the sophisticated 
capabilities of next-generation munitions.
Organizational and Bureaucratic Interests
The adoption and popularization of advanced munitions can also be held back by the 
cultures of the armed services themselves. Perhaps the best example of this cultural 
intransigence is the Air Force’s initial aversion to early PGMs. 165 Despite the success of the 
laser-guided bomb in Vietnam, post-war Air Force analysis focused on the effects of B-52 
bombing over newly introduced precision capabilities. Rather than embracing the potential 
of PGMs, the service pursued a “smart-jet, dumb-bomb” strategy centered on the accu -
160 For instance, the Family of Scatterable Mines (FASCAM), BLU-108 submunitions, and the Phalanx close-in weapon 
system (CIWS).
161 The Department’s autonomous weapons policy is described in DoD Directive 3000.09. The Department recently 
updated DOD Directive 3000.09 for the first time since 2012. For an analysis of the update, see Paul Scharre, 
“NOTEWORTHY: DoD Autonomous Weapons Policy,” Center for a New American Security , February 6, 2023, 
https://www.cnas.org/press/press-note/noteworthy-dod-autonomous-weapons-policy.
162 Joe Hernandez, “A Military Drone With A Mind Of Its Own Was Used In Combat, U.N. Says,” NPR, June 1, 2021, 
https://www.npr.org/2021/06/01/1002196245/a-u-n-report-suggests-libya-saw-the-first-battlefield-killing-by-  
an-autonomous-d.
163 Alan J. Vick, Richard M. Moore, Bruce R. Pirnie, and John Stillion, Aerospace Operations Against Elusive Ground 
Targets (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2001), p. 23, https://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1398.html.
164 For example, U.S. pilots were hesitant to engage enemy combatants in self-defense without approval from higher 
authority. Pettyjohn and Wasser, “From Forever Wars to Great-Power Wars.”
165 Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks , pp. 190–198. 

68  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 69
racy of the F-16’s bombing computer. Precision munitions ran counter to Air Force culture, 
where PGMs devalued the traditional focus on a pilot’s bombing skills demonstrated on 
the gunnery range. The TLAM faced similar opposition in the Navy, where it overlapped 
the mission of naval aviation and threatened to distract submarines and surface combat -
ants from their primary missions. 166 The Army has also struggled to popularize guided 
munitions, with artillery shells like the laser-guided Copperhead running counter to the 
field artillery’s traditional culture of massed fires. 167 Even with the widespread acceptance 
of precision munitions, the services still bicker and compete over the introduction of new 
strike capabilities. This strife was most recently displayed in the back-and-forth between Air 
Force and Army officials concerning the Army’s pursuit of long-range precision fires systems 
with ranges that, in the view of the Air Force, encroach on the roles and missions of the 
other services.168
…
Clearly, many gaps exist in the U.S. military’s current portfolio of PGMs as it prepares for 
the possibility of great power conflict. In addition to capacity and capability gaps, there are 
several long-running constraints that prevent the Pentagon from quickly and easily spending 
or producing its way out of its current predicament in the near future. Creating a steady 
demand for critical PGMs and reinforcing their industrial base is critical, but DoD must also 
reexamine its view of munitions and explore new solutions for filling existing PGM gaps. 
Each of these gaps represents an opportunity for new technologies and innovative concepts 
to improve America’s current and future PGM arsenal. The next chapter will explore these 
opportunities in depth.
166 John F. Lehman, Command of the Seas  (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2001), p. 169.
167 Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks , pp. 204–213.
168 Theresa Hitchens, “Long-Range All-Domain Prompts Roles & Missions Debate,” Breaking Defense , July 9, 2020, 
https://breakingdefense.com/2020/07/long-range-all-domain-prompts-roles-missions-debate/.

70  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT

70  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 71
CHAPTER 5
Future Weapon Technologies 
and Concepts
The precision-strike revolution altered the fundamental tradeoffs in warfare and dras -
tically reduced the number of munitions required to destroy a target. Looking toward 
contemporary great power conflict, however, our analysis to this point has revealed that 
precision alone may not be enough to maintain the U.S. military’s strike advantage. The 
immense munitions demands of war with a peer or near-peer adversary could run U.S. PGM 
stocks dangerously low, with the industrial base unable to quickly supply the volume of 
weapons needed.
In these scenarios, how can the U.S. military maintain its precision-strike advantage? With 
precision being necessary but insufficient, the answer lies in munitions that advance beyond 
precision: smart weapons that provide enhanced effects, reduce total munitions expendi -
tures, and balance the cost per effect. This chapter outlines technologies and concepts to 
achieve this vision and fill the previously identified capacity and capability gaps in America’s 
PGM arsenal.
Military planners have several means of affecting munitions requirements and easing muni -
tions demands, including:
• Reducing the total number of targets or aimpoints;
• Increasing the chance that weapons reach their targets and have the desired effect;
• And increasing the number of targets and aimpoints each munition can affect.
By embracing weapon technologies and concepts that influence each of these variables, the 
U.S. military can better prepare its PGM arsenal for the next conflict.

72  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Technological Innovations
Technology remains America’s competitive advantage and offers a variety of opportunities 
to improve modern PGMs and reduce munitions requirements. This section explores tech -
nologies the United States could exploit to solve the munitions problem, beginning with a 
weapon’s design and continuing through its production, maintenance, and employment.
Design and Producibility
Meeting the demands of great power conflict begins with ensuring American PGMs are 
designed and produced using 21st-century approaches that allow for rapid testing, iteration, 
and affordable production by a wide sector of the technology and industrial base. 
Digital engineering.  The use of digital engineering techniques allows for rapid design, 
prototyping, and testing of future PGMs. Digital engineering starts with the use of modular 
open architectures in munitions design. Open architectures are one way munitions manu -
facturers can capture and leverage private sector research and development. The Pentagon 
noted in its most recent assessment of American industrial capabilities that the preci -
sion-guided munition market expanded by over 50 percent between 2014 and 2020. 169 By 
utilizing open architectures, DoD can encourage commercial firms to take advantage of this 
growing market and the opportunities presented by the next-generation munitions indus -
trial base. Future PGMs must utilize technology advancements made in the commercial 
sector for small drones, self-driving cars, and the plethora of other experimental technolo -
gies making their way into the consumer market. 170 Open system architectures could help 
close the gap between commercial and military production lines and expand the munitions 
industrial base, particularly for weapon components. Initial efforts such as the Air Force’s 
Weapons Open System Architecture (WOSA) have laid the groundwork for open architec -
tures to be a part of future munitions acquisition programs and increase competition at the 
subcomponent level.171 To effectively implement digital engineering in its weapons programs, 
DoD must work with defense manufacturers to overcome the challenges associated with 
proprietary designs, intellectual property, and systems integration. 172
169 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, “Fiscal Year 2020 Industrial Capabilities 
Report,” p. 87.
170 Bryan Clark and Dan Patt, “Exploit Commercial Electronics To Deter Beijing Before It’s Too Late,” Real Clear Defense , 
December 15, 2022, https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2022/12/15/exploit_commercial_electronics_to_
deter_beijing_before_its_too_late_870352.html?mc_cid=9f2cccb8c7&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.
171 For more on WOSA, see Jonathan Shaver and Leo Rose, “Open System Architecture as Applied to Air-Launched 
Weapons,” Air Force Research Laboratory, October 2019, https://ndiastorage.blob.core.usgovcloudapi.net/
ndia/2019/systems/Wed_22468_Rose.pdf; and Estella Holmes, “New technical standard refines open solution,” 
Air Force Materiel Command Public Affairs,” January 26, 2022, https://www.afrl.af.mil/News/Article/2928547/
new-technical-standard-refines-open-solution/.
172 Tirpak, “Climbing Out of the Munitions Hole.”

72  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 73
Advanced manufacturing techniques.  Digital engineering also supports additive 
manufacturing and other methods of mass-producing complex systems for missiles and 
munitions. Defense manufacturers, including facilities owned by the U.S. government, must 
move from handcrafting weapons to automated production lines that increase efficiency and 
help mitigate recurring workforce issues. 173 Advances in additive manufacturing allow for its 
use to rapidly create components with applications in weapon production, including propul -
sion components and rocket engines.174 The rapid iteration of designs and prototypes enabled 
by digital engineering and additive manufacturing is key to quickly adapting munitions 
to adversary countermeasures (CMs) and developing counter-countermeasures (CCMs). 
Staying ahead in the back-and-forth game between CMs and CCMs is vital for increasing the 
survivability of PGMs and controlling munitions requirements.
Multi-role munitions. Digital engineering and open system architectures are key to 
promoting a second essential design aspect of future munitions—modularity. Defense offi -
cials have praised current efforts to increase the versatility of the SM-6 and Tomahawk as 
positive steps, but future PGMs must be designed from the start with multiple roles and 
domains in mind.175 Multi-role weapons are critical to ensuring the payloads of delivery plat -
forms are balanced between offensive and defensive weaponry. Munitions that can perform 
both functions reduce the mission planning tradeoffs that would otherwise constrain the 
quantity of offensive munitions carried by U.S. air and naval forces.
Modular munition designs with interchangeable components.  Beyond multi-role 
weapons, the U.S. military should develop munitions with increasingly modular features 
that can be swapped in a “mix-and-match” fashion. The success of attachable guidance kits 
such as the Paveway and JDAM series, which augment existing dumb bombs with preci -
sion capability, is a foundation that could be further expanded. Already, efforts exist to 
increase the capability of these bombs with propulsion kits like the Powered JDAM, which 
adds propulsion to a 500 lb. bomb, or the Air Force Research Laboratory’s (AFRL) Quicksink 
project, which modifies JDAMs to attack maritime targets. 176 These efforts are inexpensive 
ways to significantly increase the range, capability, and versatility of existing 
173 For example, much of the U.S. military’s organic industrial base related to munitions production still lacks 
automation, especially in areas that present significant production bottlenecks such as energetics. See Joe Gould, 
“After munition worker deaths, Army floats $16 billion plan to modernize production,” Defense News , September 22, 
2020, https://www.defensenews.com/congress/2020/09/22/after-munition-worker-deaths-army-floats-16-billion-  
plan-to-modernize-production/.
174 See, for example, “Ursa Major delivers its first additively manufactured rocket engine components,” Metal AM, July 18, 
2022, https://www.metal-am.com/ursa-major-delivers-its-first-additively-manufactured-rocket-engine-components/.
175 John Grady, “William Roper: Pentagon Needs to Look Toward Repurposing Technology,” USNI News, October 28, 
2021, https://news.usni.org/2021/10/28/william-roper-pentagon-needs-to-look-toward-repurposing-  
technology?mc_cid=71efadcbbb&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.
176 Tobias Naegele, “Powered JDAM: Boeing’s New Alternative to Cruise Missiles,” Air & Space Forces Magazine, February 28, 
2020, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/power-jdam-boeings-new-alternative-to-cruise-missiles/; and Whitney Wetsig, 
“AFRL technology makes new weapon for sinking ships a reality,” Air Force Research Laboratory Public Affairs, April 28, 
2022, https:/ /www.afrl.af.mil/News/Article/3014096/afrl-technology-makes-new-weapon-for-sinking-ships-a-reality/ .

74  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
general-purpose bombs. One benefit of improving existing families of modular kits such 
as JDAM is their pre-integration with most U.S. delivery platforms and many allied and 
partner platforms.
The next step in modularity is standardized weapon bodies, or “trucks,” that can deliver a 
variety of interchangeable payloads using the same propulsion system and container. The 
ultimate goal is munitions designed to be entirely modular with components and subcompo -
nents that can be traded based on the mission at hand, such as the Army’s Modular Missile 
Technologies (MMT) demonstrator.177
FIGURE 17: EXAMPLE MODULAR “MIX-AND-MATCH” MUNITION WITH 
INTERCHANGEABLE COMPONENTS
 Source: Created by CSBA with inspiration from Christopher S. Lofts, “Modular Missile Technologies (MMT): A Modular Open Architecture 
Approach for Guided Missiles,” U.S. Army Aviation and Missile Research, Development, and Engineering Center, April 2015, p. 4, https://apps.dtic.
mil/sti/pdfs/ADA622336.pdf.
Modular weapons are valuable from both an industrial base and an operational standpoint. 
These weapons facilitate munitions production by allowing changes and updates to be made 
to components independently of each other before being integrated with a larger system 
at minimal cost. Combined with open architectures, modular munitions would allow for 
increased competition around subcomponents and an expansion of the munitions indus -
trial base. Non-defense firms could match their technologies and talents to designing certain 
177 The Navy has also sought to begin work on a Navy Modular Missile (NMM) program. See GovTribe, “Model Based 
Systems Engineering (MBSE) for Navy Modular Missile (NMM) Program, June 4, 2021, https://govtribe.com/
opportunity/federal-contract-opportunity/model-based-systems-engineering-mbse-for-navy-modular-missile-  
nmm-program-n0002421r5424.

74  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 75
pieces of a weapon without delving into the munition-specific components and overall inte -
gration that require traditional weapon manufacturers to have specialized facilities and 
workforces.178 This shift is essential to harnessing the capabilities of commercial firms 
advancing technologies related to unmanned and autonomous systems. If a modular compo -
nent is usable by more than one weapon program (for instance, a multi-mode seeker that 
could be paired with a ground-launched or air-launched weapon body), then paying to main -
tain surge capacity for that component is increasingly justifiable. Moreover, interchangeable 
components would allow munitions to be maintained, upgraded, and adapted to current 
threats without replacing the entire weapon.
In addition to diversifying the munitions industrial base, modularity and interchangeable 
components could increase the operational versatility of future PGMs. Before a mission, 
units could assemble weapons to attack the targets at hand most effectively. Rather than 
stocking weapons for a specific scenario or attempting to stock a mix adequate for multiple 
contingencies, planners could forgo many of these tradeoffs and stock a variety of modular 
components that could be assembled to suit whichever situation arises.
Beyond increasing overall versatility, modularity could also help the U.S. military balance 
versatility with specialization. Modular munitions could fill multiple specific capability gaps 
without purchasing and maintaining separate inventories of weapons over-specialized for 
specific uses. For instance, rather than stocking distinct inventories of weapons designed for 
C4ISR targets and others intended to attack runways and air bases, the U.S. military could 
procure only the specialized payloads for these targets, which could be fitted to a single set 
of modular weapon bodies. This versatility will be especially important as the United States 
fields exquisite and expensive systems like hypersonic munitions. 179 Modularity would allow 
these high-impact but low-density weapons to be effective in a wider range of applications. 180
The United States could also pursue “modularity for export,” with munition pieces inter -
changeable for components that comply with export restrictions and allow for rapid 
transfer to a wider range of allies and partners. 181 These designs could increase interna -
tional demand for U.S. weapons and could also allow foreign firms to design and produce 
their own subcomponents, further increasing competition and diversity in the industrial 
178 John A. Tirpak, “Modular Weapons Could Improve Surge Capacity, Bunch Says in Exit Interview,” Air & Space Forces 
Magazine, June 9, 2022, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/modular-weapons-could-improve-surge-capacity-  
bunch-says-in-farewell-interview/.
179 As part of its Vintage Racer program, DoD has tested a hypersonic munition with modular features and some degree 
of loitering capability. Joseph Trevithick, “Pentagon Has Tested Suicide A Suicide Drone That Gets To Its Target Area 
At Hypersonic Speed,” The Drive , June 8, 2020, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/33934/pentagon-has-  
tested-a-suicide-drone-that-gets-to-its-target-area-at-hypersonic-speed.
180 Already, efforts such as AFRL’s Mayhem program seek to develop hypersonic weapons with modular weapons bays. 
See Briana Reilly, “AFRL indicates intentions to select SDA for ‘Mayhem’ air-breathing hypersonics program,” Inside 
Defense , July 21, 2021, https://insidedefense.com/insider/afrl-indicates-intentions-select-sda-mayhem-air-  
breathing-hypersonics-program%C2%A0.
181 The author would like to thank former CSBA colleague Chris Bassler for his ideas on modularity for export.

76  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
base.182 Increasing the versatility, producibility, and affordability of munitions through 
digital engineering and modularity can help fill capacity and capability gaps and enable 
affordable mass.
Launchers and Delivery Methods
In addition to modular munitions, the United States could also increase the versatility of its 
delivery platforms and their weapon interfaces. 
Delivery platform versatility.  Weapons that can be launched from multiple platforms 
across several domains are key to reducing the tradeoffs munitions planners must confront. 
Expanding the launch options for the SM-6 and Tomahawk missiles is set to increase the 
flexibility of forces in the Indo-Pacific. Near-term efforts such as the container-launched 
AARGM-ER or ground-launched Small Diameter Bomb could further increase the usability 
of standard munitions by multiple delivery platforms. 183 Rather than the military services 
buying separate munitions designed only for their platforms, munitions shareable by 
multiple platforms across the services could decrease munitions costs and simplify theater 
logistics. Modularity is key to ensuring weapons are compatible with a variety of delivery 
platforms and satisfy the demands of multiple services.
Standardized launchers, mounts, and interfaces.  As a stepping stone to general 
modularity, standardized launchers and weapon mounts could enable platforms in multiple 
domains to deliver the same munition. On the software side, universal interfaces like the 
Air Force’s Universal Armaments Interface (UAI) speed weapon and aircraft software inte -
gration.184 These efforts could be expanded across services, platforms, weapons, and with 
key allies and partners. 185 Like software interfaces, standardized launchers and mounts 
can also increase weapon compatibility with a variety of platforms. Current programs like 
the Common Launch Tube (CLT) and JAGM Quad Launcher (JQL) illustrate how stan-
dard mounts can enable platforms in multiple domains to seamlessly employ the same 
182 Of course, such modularity might also reduce the control the United States has over the capability it transfers to its 
allies and partners. Modularity for export may be better suited for certain close allies such as the United Kingdom, 
Australia, and Japan.
183 See Joseph Trevithick, “Land-Based Strike Version of Navy’s Long-Range Air Defense Blasting Missile Breaks Cover,” 
The Drive , May 21, 2021, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/40733/land-based-strike-version-of-navys-
long-range-air-defense-blasting-missile-breaks-cover; and Saab, “Flexible, Precise and Reliable – The Versatile 
Long Range Solution That Has It All,” September 22, 2022, https://www.saab.com/newsroom/stories/2019/march/
flexible-precise-and-reliable--the-versatile-long-range-solution-that-has-it-all.
184 For more information on UAI, see Jim Byrd and Oren Edwards, “Standard Weapon Interfaces: The Path to a Universal 
Armament Interface,” Defense Standardization Program Journal , July/September, 2005, pp. 21–27, https://www.
dsp.dla.mil/Portals/26/Documents/Publications/Journal/050701-DSPJ.pdf.
185 Such as NATO’s UAI program. See Julan Hale, “NATO Project May Provide Allied Air Forces with ‘Plug and Play’ 
Precision Munitions,” Atlantic Council , January 22, 2014, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/natosource/
nato-project-may-provide-allied-air-forces-with-plug-and-play-precision-munitions/.

76  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 77
munitions.186 Utilizing standardized mounts and software interfaces further increases 
mission versatility and ensures that future platforms, such as attritable UAS, will be capable 
of delivering a range of PGMs without extensive modification of the weapon or the platform.
Propulsion
Although the tradeoff between range, speed, and cost remains, advances in propulsion can 
reduce the degree of this tradeoff, fill range capability gaps, and increase the survivability of 
munitions in contested environments.
Advanced propulsion technologies.  Innovative designs such as rotating detonation 
engines offer increased range and speed in smaller, more efficient packages that could extend 
the reach of existing munitions and lead to smaller weapons. 187 DARPA is currently experi -
menting with integrating these propulsion systems on missiles. 188 New energetic materials, 
which are discussed further below, are another vital aspect of advancing weapon propul -
sion. Integral to both propulsion and weapon payloads, modern energetics offer increased 
efficiency and range for future munitions. The energetics industrial base, which is partially 
government-owned, will play a vital role in preserving the U.S. military’s strike advantage. 189 
Modular propulsion kits and additions.  In addition to improving propulsion systems, 
existing weapons could be augmented with glide wings or low-cost engine kits. Glide kits 
like the JDAM-ER or add-on engine kits like the Powered JDAM and JSOW-ER could extend 
the ranges of proven PGMs with little additional cost or integration effort. 190 Add-on kits 
could be one way the U.S. military provides a large volume of effects from stand-in range 
and could even be used as low-cost decoys to absorb enemy missile defenses. These kits can 
186 The CLT has been integrated on the Air Force’s AC-130 aircraft and the Marine Corps’ KC-130J. The JQL seeks 
to rapidly integrate the air-launched JAGM into maritime and ground-based platforms. Michael Peck, “Special 
Operations Command Wants Tiny Cruise Missiles with Hundreds of Miles Range,” The Drive , September 7, 2021, 
https:/ /www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/42280/special-operations-command-wants-tiny-cruise-missiles-with-
hundreds-of-miles-range; and Peter Ong, “JQL Could Be The “Game Changing Force Multiplier” For Small Naval Boats 
And Littoral Warfare Ships,” Naval News, December 17, 2020, https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2020/12/
jql-could-be-the-game-changing-force-multiplier-for-small-naval-boats-and-littoral-warfare-ships/ .
187 Alex Hollings, “What Is a Rotating Detonation Engine and What Could It Mean for Aviation?,” Sandboxx , October 24, 
2022, https://www.sandboxx.us/blog/what-is-a-rotating-detonation-engine-and-what-could-it-mean-for-aviation/.
188 Stew Magnuson, “Air Force Labs Pursue More Powerful, Efficient Engines,” National Defense Magazine, January 5, 
2023, https:/ /www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2023/1/5/air-force-labs-pursue-more-powerful-efficient-
engines?mc_cid=8bc52b1cf4&mc_eid=7cbf43077b; and Alex Hollings, “DARPA’s New Missile Hints at Truly Game-
Changing Technology,” Sandboxx , July 26, 2022, https://www.sandboxx.us/blog/darpas-new-missile-hints-at-truly-  
game-changing-technology/.
189 Ashley D. Johnson, “The Dangerous Depletion of U.S. Weapon Arsenals,” Proceedings , U.S. Naval Institute, August 
2022, https:/ /www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings/2022/august/dangerous-depletion-us-weapon-arsenals.
190 Airforce Technology , “Boeing and RAAF evaluate JDAM ER weapon system,” February 24, 2015, https://www.
airforce-technology.com/news/newsboeing-and-raaf-evaluate-jdam-er-weapon-system-4519524/; Naegele, “Powered 
JDAM;” and Joseph Trevithick, “Cruise Missile Variant Of Navy’s JSOW Glide Bomb Is On The Chopping Block,” The 
Drive, June 2, 2021, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/40886/cruise-missile-variant-of-jsow-glide-bomb-  
on-the-chopping-block-in-new-navy-budget-request.

78  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
also extend the range of other essential weapons, such as torpedoes and undersea mines. 191 
For other missiles, additional range could be added with multi-stage propulsion systems. 192 
Ultimately, DoD should utilize advanced propulsion technologies to increase the number of 
munitions with an optimal balance of range and cost and enable the affordable massing of 
large numbers of weapons.
FIGURE 18: MODULAR PROPULSION KITS AND ADDITIONS
Source: Created by CSBA. Boeing, “Joint Direct Attack Munition: Historical Snapshot,” accessed February 9, 2023, https://www.boeing.com/his-
tory/products/joint-direct-attack-munition.page; Boeing, “Powered Joint Direct Attack Munition: Affordable Standoff,” accessed February 9, 2023, 
https://www.boeing.com/resources/boeingdotcom/defense/weapons-weapons/images/powered_JDAM_product_card.pdf.
Reduced cost hypersonics. For hypersonics, achieving some degree of affordability is 
essential to fielding a sufficient quantity of weapons for great power conflict. As propul -
sion systems and weapon bodies are improved, procuring hypersonics in greater numbers is 
expected to drive down their cost. 193 In addition to balancing range and cost, the DoD must 
balance speed and cost to ensure that a significant portion of its PGMs are survivable and 
capable of striking mobile targets in contested environments. Should the cost of hypersonic 
191 The Navy is currently using add-on kits to extend the range of its air-delivered mines and torpedoes. See Richard 
R. Burgess, “Navy Orders Quickstrike-Extended Range Glide Kits for Sea Mines,” Seapower, July 23, 2021, https://
seapowermagazine.org/navy-orders-quickstrike-extended-range-glide-kits-for-sea-mines/; and Joseph Trevithick, 
“Navy P-8 Poseidon Can Now Drop Winged Torpedoes In Combat (Updated),” The Drive , November 22, 2022, https://
www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/navy-p-8-poseidon-can-now-drop-winged-torpedos-in-combat.
192 For example, Boeing’s Long-Range Air-to-Air Missile (LRAAM). See Joseph Trevithick, “Boeing Unveils New 
Two-Stage Long-Range Air-to-Air Missile Concept,” The Drive , September 21, 2021, https://www.thedrive.com/
the-war-zone/42454/boeing-unveils-new-two-stage-long-range-air-to-air-missile-concept.
193 Mike Stone, “Pentagon Says Hypersonic Weapons Are Too Expensive,” Reuters, October 12, 2021, https://www.
reuters.com/business/aerospace-defense/pentagon-says-hypersonic-weapons-are-too-expensive-2021-10-12/.

78  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 79
weapons prevent them from being procured in substantial quantities, the Pentagon could 
consider pursuing mid-range supersonic weapons that can be employed in higher volumes. 194
Sensors, Networking, and Autonomy
Perhaps the most significant opportunities for technology to advance munitions capabili -
ties are those related to improved sensors, networking, and autonomy, which could reduce 
munitions requirements by attacking target sets more efficiently and achieving a higher rate 
of good effects. Advancements in these areas apply to both exquisite weapons and less costly, 
more numerous munitions. 
Multi-mode sensors. For high-end munitions, advanced sensors will guide the next 
generation of PGMs. Multi-mode sensors utilize a variety of phenomenologies, from electro-
optical to radio frequency to laser radar, to make up for the inadequacies of any single 
phenomenology and provide accurate target detection in all environments. 195 Initially fielded 
on ISR platforms, these multi-spectral sensors’ miniaturization and decreasing costs will 
ensure that exquisite munitions accurately reach their intended targets—even those camou -
flaged, hidden in challenging terrain, or obscured by decoys and non-combatants. 196 In 
addition to multi-mode seekers, quantum navigation sensors may eventually be compact and 
affordable enough to provide hyper-accurate guidance for specialty weapons without assis -
tance from external inputs like GPS. 197
194 Such a weapon would move toward a “high, mid, low,” mix of weapons instead of the mostly “high and low” mix 
the Pentagon is currently pursuing. See David N. Zikusoka, “How Fast Is Fast Enough? A Role For Supersonic 
Munitions In Standoff Strike,” War on the Rocks, November 9, 2020, https://warontherocks.com/2020/11/
how-fast-is-fast-enough-a-role-for-supersonic-munitions-in-standoff-strike/.
195 For example, see Air Force Research Laboratory, “AFRL/RYM – Multispectral Sensing & Detection Division, https://
www.afrl.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Fact-Sheet-Display/Article/2332214/afrlrym-multispectral-sensing-
detection-division/; BAE Systems, “EO/IR Sensor R&D,” https://www.baesystems.com/en/product/eo-ir-sensor-r-d; 
and Lockheed Martin, “Missiles and Fire Control,” https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/who-we-are/business-
areas/missiles-and-fire-control.html.
196 DARPA has long experimented with these kinds of sensors in programs such as Jigsaw. See Richard M. Marino and 
William R. Davis, Jr., “Jigsaw: A Foliage-Penetrating 3D Imaging Laser Radar System,” Lincoln Laboratory Journal  
15, no. 1, 2005, pp. 23-26, https://www.ll.mit.edu/sites/default/files/page/doc/2019-01/15_1jigsaw.pdf.
197 Patrick Tucker, “Quantum Sensor Breakthrough Paves Way For GPS-Free Navigation,” Defense One , November 2, 
2021, https://www.defenseone.com/technology/2021/11/quantum-sensor-breakthrough-paves-way-gps-free-  
navigation/186578/.

80  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 19: MULTI-MODE SEEKER FINDING A HIDDEN TARGET
Source: Created by CSBA.
Improved automatic target recognition. Paired with advanced sensors on exquisite 
munitions, improvements in automatic target recognition could reduce the need for detailed 
targeting and mission planning. This capability is key to defeating mobile and elusive targets 
as they are detected because the large numbers of these targets will overwhelm existing 
targeting processes in a great power war. Although concerns remain about autonomous 
weapons, artificial intelligence is already assisting with target identification in live opera -
tional kill chains. 198 Continued improvements will enable this capability to be integrated 
into munitions themselves and allow exquisite weapons to find, track, and engage the enemy 
semi-autonomously using a pre-loaded set of engagement criteria and rules.199
Ubiquitous affordable sensors.  With next-generation sensors guiding “silver bullets” to 
high-value targets, affordable sensors that can be placed on inexpensive weapons are equally 
valuable. Increasingly capable and abundant sensors must cut the umbilical between weapon 
and delivery platform and guide munitions with less external support or vulnerability to 
adversary interference. Various technology demonstrators have illustrated improvements 
in affordable sensing, from the JDAM Direct Attack Munition Affordable Seeker to the light 
detection and ranging (LADAR) sensor developed for the LOCAAS. 200 More recent examples 
include the multi-mode seeker of the GBU-53/B StormBreaker and the ubiquity of TV and 
198 Amanda Miller, “AI Algorithms Deployed in Kill Chain Target Recognition,” Air & Space Forces Magazine , September 
21, 2021, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/ai-algorithms-deployed-in-kill-chain-target-recognition/?mc_cid=  
524fe86410&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.
199 Even if human operators remain “on-the-loop” of future semi-autonomous weapons, they still offer increased speed 
and capability over existing precision targeting processes.
200 Both programs were cancelled. As of 2002, the DAMASK costed $12,700 per seeker, while the entire LOCAAS system 
was projected to cost $30,000. See Wilson, A Time-Critical Targeting Roadmap , pp. 31-33.

80  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 81
IR sensors on drones and loitering munitions such as UVision’s Hero series.201 Continued 
improvements will make these sensors more capable while also reducing their cost and 
allowing their integration with a variety of commonplace munitions. In many great power 
conflict scenarios, even weapons with simplistic seekers and targeting algorithms offer vast 
advantages over weapons requiring extensive operator input or external guidance support.
Collaborative capabilities.  To truly enable weapons with these sensors, future muni -
tions should be networked together and capable of semi-autonomous collaboration. These 
weapons communicate with each other and take advantage of loitering and sensor capabili -
ties to coordinate target detection, self-deconflict, and cooperatively engage a target set. 
Rather than launching multiple munitions at a single aimpoint to increase the likelihood of 
good effects, collaborative munitions can assess each other’s effects, reattack if necessary, 
or decide to move on to another aimpoint. Collaborative technologies were tested nearly 
two decades ago during the development of LOCAAS, and the Air Force has recently proven 
the collaborative weapon concept with Small Diameter Bombs as part of its Golden Horde 
program.202 Integrating this technology into longer-range munitions increases the time 
weapons have to collect information, coordinate engagements, and relay valuable informa -
tion back to the delivery platform.203 Modular architectures are necessary to enable various 
munitions to “plug in” to weapon networks and communicate with each other.
201 See Raytheon, “GBU-53/B SDB II: Small Diameter Bomb Increment II,” https://www.airandspaceforces.com/PDF/
SiteCollectionDocuments/Reports/2010/August%202010/Day25/SDBII_factsheet_0810.pdf; and Joseph Trevithick, 
“This Is Our First Look at The Marines’ Loitering Munition-Armed Light Armored Vehicle,” The Drive , October 11, 
2021, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/42707/this-is-our-first-look-at-the-marines-loitering-munition-
armed-light-armored-vehicle?mc_cid=19c78693bd&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.
202 Mike Hanlon, “Low-Cost Autonomous Attack System (LOCAAS) Successfully Flight Tested,” New Atlas, November 4, 
2005, https://newatlas.com/low-cost-autonomous-attack-system-locass-successfully-flight-tested/4812/; and Valerie 
Insinna, “US Air Force Completes Tests of Swarming Munitions, But Will They Ever See Battle?,” Defense News , June 
7, 2021, https:/ /www.defensenews.com/air/2021/06/07/us-air-force-successfully-completes-tests-of-swarming-  
munitions-but-their-future-is-unclear/ .
203 For example, Israeli defense manufacturer Rafael claims its Sea Breaker  missile combines collaborative capabilities 
with longer-range, an advanced seeker, and automatic target recognition. Seth J. Frantzman, “Rafael Combines AI 
and Automatic Target Recognition in New Sea Breaker Missile,” C4ISRNet, July 2, 2021, https://www.c4isrnet.com/
industry/2021/07/02/rafael-combines-ai-and-automatic-target-recognition-in-new-sea-breaker-missile/ .

82  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 20: COLLABORATIVE MUNITIONS ATTACKING MULTIPLE AIMPOINTS
Source: Created by CSBA.
Improved data collection and processing.  As sensors and networking increase the 
amount of data collected by munitions, it is imperative that this information be utilized 
to better battle damage assessments (BDA) and target databases. Weapon packages that 
collect and transmit their own BDA information can improve the accuracy of assessments 
and reduce the need for reattacks and expending additional munitions. Affordable sensors 
enable this by providing additional feedback to delivery platforms. 204 In addition, weapons 
that relay sensor data could update automatic target recognition databases and algorithms 
in order to improve the effectiveness of further engagements. Over time, these munitions 
could learn enemy camouflage and movement practices and reduce the number of munitions 
expended in subsequent missions.
Even with these improvements in networking and data sharing, the contested elec -
tromagnetic spectrum of great power conflict makes it essential that weapons remain 
network-enabled, but not network-dependent. Where possible, munitions must function 
using “smaller, semi-autonomous networks with their own organic data collection and 
processing capabilities.”205
Payloads and Effects
Technology can also reduce munitions requirements through innovative payloads that 
improve the likelihood a weapon produces the desired effect. 
204 Even basic electro-optical sensors provide a delivery platform (or potentially another munition) with better 
engagement feedback than a GPS-guided munition. Wilson, A Time-Critical Targeting Roadmap , pp. 14-15.
205 Jacquelyn Schneider and Julia MacDonald, “The Information Technology Counter-Revolution: Cheap, Disposable, 
and Decentralized,” War on the Rocks, July 19, 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2021/07/the-information-
technology-counter-revolution-cheap-disposable-and-decentralized/?mc_cid=86e7535659&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.

82  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 83
Advanced energetics.  For kinetic munitions, advancements in energetics can reduce 
warhead size and allow designers to pack more lethality into smaller packages. 206 Small-form 
munitions like the Small Diameter Bomb series are already taking advantage of improved 
warheads that equal the effects of older, larger weapons. Industry continues to improve 
warhead designs and has tested modern weapons weighing as little as six pounds which pack 
45 to 80 percent of the lethality of a 500-pound general-purpose bomb against light-skinned 
vehicles and radar.207 Multi-effect warheads and conventional payloads with adjustable 
yields would increase the versatility of a weapon by allowing the user to select the optimal 
effects for a given target while reducing the chances of unintended or collateral damage. 208 
In all, kinetic payloads using modern energetics and multi-effect warheads can give each 
munition a more lethal punch and help fill existing capability gaps such as attacking HDBTs. 
Already, China is experimenting with munitions that utilize more powerful materials. 209
Modernized area effect weapons.  In addition to more deadly unitary payloads, a 
plethora of technologies can help the U.S. military fill its requirement for area effects. Unlike 
the indiscriminate cluster munitions of the past, the miniaturization of electronics and 
sensors allows today’s munitions to deliver numerous precision effects over a wide area. In 
this way, modern area-effect weapons will complement unitary precision munitions rather 
than replace them. One way of providing area effects is through innovative submunitions. 
Smart, penetrating submunitions or “skeets” have proven effective against armored vehicles 
in past campaigns and could be updated with better sensors and payloads. 210 Modern itera-
tions of these submunitions could resemble small commercial quadcopters that collaborate 
to carry numerous explosively formed penetrators to spread out targets. 211 DoD has already 
tested small, independently targetable weapons that could augment existing PGMs and be 
deployed from a variety of platforms. 212 Submunitions are also key to efficiently attacking 
airfields. Modeling by RAND found that a 75 lb. payload of submunitions is three times 
more effective than a unitary warhead of equivalent weight for attacking parked aircraft in 
206 Nadia Schadlow, “DoD Needs More ‘Kaboom’ for the Buck,” Proceedings , U.S. Naval Institute, December 2022, 
https:/ /www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings/2022/december/dod-needs-more-kaboom-buck.
207 Northrop Grumman, “Ready Now: Hatchet Completes Live Drop Testing,” accessed March 30, 2023, https://www.
northropgrumman.com/what-we-do/advanced-weapons/hatchet-completes-live-drop-testing/.
208 Wilson, A Time-Critical Targeting  Roadmap, p. 36.
209 Sean Carberry, “Energetics: Community Warns of China’s Edge Developing Explosive Materials,” National Defense , 
June 27, 2022, https://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2022/6/27/community-warns-of-chinas-edge-  
developing-explosive-materials?mc_cid=13a02fead4&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.
210 Such as the BLU-108/B submunition in the CBU-105. During Operation Iraqi Freedom, BLU-108/B submunitions 
stopped a large Iraqi tank column by “killing the whole first one-third to half of it.” Seeing the devastating effects 
of the CBU-105, the remainder of the tank column surrendered to U.S. Marines. Ryan Hansen, “Capturing enemy 
forces,” Eglin Eagle, August 15, 2003, available at the Air Force Armament Museum.
211 Chris Martin, “The US Army Wants a Missile Filled With Drones,” Defense News , January 19, 2017, https://www.
defensenews.com/industry/techwatch/2017/01/19/the-us-army-wants-a-missile-filled-with-drones/.
212 Such as Hatchet. See Northrop Grumman, “Ready Now: Hatchet Completes Live Drop Testing,” accessed March 30, 
2023, https://www.northropgrumman.com/what-we-do/advanced-weapons/hatchet-completes-live-drop-testing/.

84  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
the open.213 Submunitions designed to crater and cut runways could also be used to attack 
airfields more effectively with fewer PGMs. 214 Should the United States field long-range 
ballistic missiles or hypersonic weapons, conventional multiple independent reentry vehi -
cles (MIRVs) could enable these exquisite weapons to have outsized effects on high-value 
targets.215 The use of advanced submunitions would go a long way toward enabling each PGM 
to precisely attack multiple aimpoints.
Loitering and persistent payloads.  Next-generation munitions should also take advan-
tage of technologies that decouple their time of effect from their time of launch, which 
increases their flexibility and utility for mobile targets. Loitering capability is one way to 
increase the time and space a weapon has to find its target. Small loitering munitions that 
blur the line between UAS and munitions have proven their worth in Ukraine, and future 
designs could increase their lethality when combined with swarming concepts and improved 
automatic target recognition.216 Already, the Marine Corps is looking to integrate these 
capabilities into its Organic Precision Fires program. 217 In addition to providing persis -
tent physical effects, loitering munitions can also cause virtual attrition of enemy forces. 218 
Improved propulsion systems and designs will boost the endurance of future loitering 
weapons, increasing their effectiveness and utility for a wide variety of missions. 219 Like 
loitering munitions, weapons with persistent or “stay behind” payloads could also be used 
213 According to RAND, this advantage “increases with increasing payload. An 1,100-pound M-9 ballistic-missile 
warhead covers almost eight times the area when using a submunition warhead than when using a unitary warhead.” 
John Stillion and David T. Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to Conventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile 
Attacks (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1999), p. xiii, https://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1028.html.
214 Jordan Rosza, Improving Standoff Bombing Capacity in the Face of Anti-Access Area Denial Threats  (Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND, 2015), p. 48, https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD363.html.
215 For illustrations of how conventional MIRVs might be utilized in great power conflict, see Edelman, Bassler, 
Yoshihara, and Hacker, Rings of Fire, pp. 57-61.
216 Loitering munitions and “kamikaze” drones have been utilized by both Ukrainian and Russian forces. See 
Brennan Deveraux, “Loitering Munitions In Ukraine And Beyond,” War on the Rocks, April 22, 2022, https://
warontherocks.com/2022/04/loitering-munitions-in-ukraine-and-beyond/; and Kyle Mizokami, “Self-Destructing 
‘Kamikaze Drones’ Are Hunting Down Targets in Ukraine,” Popular Mechanics , March 28, 2022, https://www.
popularmechanics.com/military/weapons/a39517660/kamikaze-drones-in-ukraine/.
217 Audrey Decker, “Marine Corps Searching for More Autonomy out of its Organic Fires Capability,” Inside Defense , 
September 17, 2021, https://insidedefense.com/daily-news/marine-corps-searching-more-autonomy-out-its-organic-  
fires-capability.
218 For example, the canceled AGM-136 Tacit Rainbow was designed to loiter over a target area for as much as 80 minutes 
looking for air defense radars to attack. Even if the anti-radiation missile did not find and strike an adversary’s radar, 
it was intended to keep the radars from emitting, which would give friendly aircraft an opportunity to conduct strike 
missions unopposed. Alex Hollings, “America’s Loitering Radar-Hunting Missile Is Due For A Comeback,” Sandboxx , 
December 14, 2021, https://www.sandboxx.us/blog/americas-loitering-radar-hunting-missile-is-due-for-a-  
comeback/?mc_cid=db58d717e8&mc_eid=7cbf43077b.
219 Anduril Industries recently unveiled loitering munitions with “twice the range and endurance of what’s currently 
best of breed.” Chris Brose quoted in Andrew Eversden, “Meet Anduril’s New Loitering Munitions, the Firm’s First 
(But Not Last) Weapons Program,” Breaking Defense , October 6, 2022, https://breakingdefense.com/2022/10/
meet-andurils-new-loitering-munitions-the-firms-first-but-not-last-weapons-program/?mc_cid=8ac2397126&mc_
eid=7cbf43077b.

84  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 85
to increase the amount of time available for a munition to deliver its effects. 220 Similar to 
mines, these weapons could be delivered to a target area (on land, sea, or undersea) from a 
variety of platforms, where they would wait to produce their effects until internal or external 
sensors detect a target. 221 These weapons could utilize organic sensors to identify their 
targets or could be networked to any number of external sensors and triggers. 222 Loitering 
and persistent weapons could enable U.S. forces to find and attack mobile targets without 
relying on exquisite, high-speed munitions and penetrating aircraft.
Non-kinetic payloads. Non-kinetic payloads are another opportunity for future muni -
tions to affect multiple targets simultaneously. The U.S. military has already tested cruise 
missiles that use high-power microwaves (HPM) and electronic warfare to disable enemy 
electronics.223 Although many non-kinetic technologies remain classified, electronic warfare 
packages can be included in increasingly small payloads. 224 Beyond electronic warfare, 
future munitions could deliver communications nodes and relays as their primary payload 
or in addition to other kinetic and non-kinetic packages. Munition-delivered networking 
nodes could play an important role in enabling other weapons or reinforcing communica -
tions between units in an A2/AD environment. 225 Other non-kinetic payloads might include 
sensors that increase the effectiveness of follow-on munitions. For instance, “interrogation 
munitions” packed with sensors could penetrate the ground to map and relay the precise 
location of hardened underground facilities to ensure subsequent bunker-busting weapons 
are maximally effective. 226 Auditory, seismic, or visual sensor payloads could lie in waiting 
in target areas, collecting information to update target databases and refine detection algo -
rithms for subsequent platforms and weapons. 227 All of these non-kinetic payloads offer an 
opportunity to expand the munitions industrial base beyond traditional kinetic weapons 
220 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense For Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Report of the Defense Science 
Board Task Force on Future Strategic Strike Forces  (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, February 2004), pp. 
6-6 – 6-7, https://dsb.cto.mil/reports/2000s/ADA421606.pdf.
221 Proven examples of these types of munitions include the Family of Scatterable Mines (FASCAM) on land and the 
Quickstrike  series of naval mines. Even these legacy systems are capable of autonomous operation and self-destruction.
222 Persistent munitions could use any combination of imaging, acoustic, seismic, or other internal sensors. They could 
also be linked to external sensors placed nearby or triggered from afar if equipped with datalinks. The “force package” 
of networks, sensors, and payloads for persistent munitions must be tailored to their intended mission. 
223 Such as the Counter-electronics High-powered Mircorwave Advanced Missile Project (CHAMP). See Boeing, 
“CHAMP – Lights Out,” October 12, 2012, https://www.boeing.com/features/2012/10/bds-champ-10-22-12.page.
224 For example, the Silent Impact  munition is a 155mm shell that contains a non-kinetic electronic warfare payload. 
Syracuse Research Corporation, “ Silent Impact Munition Launched EW System,” https://www.srcinc.com/products/
ew-spectrum-operations/silent-impact-munition-launched-ew-system.html.
225 Alexander Bordetsky, Stephen Benson, and Wayne Hughes, “Mesh Networks in Littoral Operations,” U.S. Naval 
Institute Blog , May 12, 2016, https://blog.usni.org/posts/2016/05/12/mesh-networks-in-littoral-operations.
226 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense For Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Report of the Defense Science 
Board Task Force on Future Strategic Strike Forces , p. 6-6.
227 As part of its Advanced Remote Ground Unattended Sensor (ARGUS) program, the Air Force previously experimented 
with sensors capable of updating target databases and improving detection algorithms. See Vick, Moore, Pirnie, and 
Stillion, Aerospace Operations Against Elusive Ground Targets , pp. 98-100.

86  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
manufacturers.228 For the highly-contested battlespaces of contemporary great power 
conflict, the U.S. military must think of munitions as more than just kinetic devices. Future 
weapons can enable other munitions and operations by delivering non-kinetic, communica -
tions, and sensor payloads in A2/AD environments.
Heterogenous payloads that combine complementary capabilities. Ultimately, 
many of these payload options should be included in modular, heterogenous mixes tailored 
to specific missions and targets. Modular munitions could contain mixed payloads that are 
mutually supportive and include sensors, network nodes, and kinetic and non-kinetic effects 
in a single weapon.229 Instead of considering only delivery platform and munition pairing, 
weapons planners must begin to think in terms of force packages that efficiently arrange the 
combination of components required for particular missions.
FIGURE 21: EXAMPLE HETEROGENOUS PAYLOADS FOR VARIOUS MISSIONS
Source: Created by CSBA.
Training and Sustainment
Finally, certain innovations are essential for keeping high-tech munitions stocks ready for war. 
Integrated test beds.  Integrated test beds (ITBs) and virtual labs are crucial for 
testing munitions with extended ranges that cannot be easily live-fired. These systems 
are also important for evaluating collaborative weapons because repeated live testing of 
228 DoD’s FY2020 report on the defense industrial base noted that “the missiles and munitions sector definition could 
broaden through the 2020s due to changing technologies. Directed energy and cyber could enhance this sector by 
substituting non-kinetic weapons and effects for traditional missiles and munitions.” Office of the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, “Fiscal Year 2020 Industrial Capabilities Report,” p. 85.
229 DARPA’s LongShot program is already seeking to develop an unmanned aircraft with a weapons bay capable of 
carrying a variety of munitions. Large platforms like LongShot blur the line between UAS and modular munitions. 
Thomas Newdick, “General Atomics Unveils New ‘LongShot’ Aircraft-Launched Air-to-Air Combat Drone Rendering,” 
The Drive , July 27, 2021, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/41719/general-atomics-unveils-new-longshot-  
aircraft-launched-air-to-air-combat-drone-rendering.

86  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 87
different collaborative tactics entails expending multiple munitions in each test. Virtual 
labs will allow planners to test millions of combinations of weapon and force packages on 
different targets without expending live munitions. As such, they are key to refining attack 
methods and developing future employment concepts. Virtual evaluation and testing will 
also assist the United States in keeping certain capabilities or concepts concealed from 
potential adversaries.
Predictive maintenance.  Future PGMs will also benefit from predictive maintenance, 
where the use of “digital twins” and improved data collection will reduce the need for time-
consuming and invasive maintenance checks. 230 These sustainment technologies are key 
to maintaining a large inventory of affordable PGMs that can be expended in significant 
volume. All smart weapons will require more intensive upkeep, so the U.S. military must 
pursue technologies that allow smaller troop formations to more easily and affordably main -
tain PGM inventories.
Conceptual Innovations
Technology is just one element of innovation key to meeting the munitions challenges of 
great power conflict. The United States must also think creatively about novel ways of 
executing traditional missions and how to best employ munitions that utilize these new 
technologies. New concepts should maximize the effects of legacy and future PGMs to cause 
the greatest dilemmas for great power adversaries. The following section highlights a range 
of employment and operational concepts that could reduce munitions requirements by 
decreasing the total number of aimpoints, increasing the chances that weapons survive to 
strike their targets, and attacking efficiently in volume.
Munitions as More Than Effectors
To develop and implement innovative munitions concepts, military planners must approach 
munitions as not just effectors, but rather as components in force packages assembled to 
accomplish specific missions. The munitions problem is, at its core, a resource (or compo -
nent) optimization problem. The objective is to have some form of effects on a target. Given 
unlimited resources, every munition could resemble an unmanned aircraft with a long-
distance propulsion system, advanced sensors and communications hardware, stealth 
characteristics, and the autonomous capability to make engagement decisions. With the 
previously identified fiscal and industrial base constraints, however, militaries cannot afford 
to expend all of these resources with every munition they launch—particularly if conflicts 
demand thousands or tens of thousands of weapons.
230 Frank Wolfe, “Digital Twins To Be New Hallmark for US Air Force Weapons Systems,” Aviation Today, May 3, 2021, 
https://www.aviationtoday.com/2021/05/03/digital-twins-new-hallmark-us-air-force-weapons-systems/.

88  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
When components like propulsion systems, sensors, communications equipment, and other 
hardware are expensive, heavy, or large, it makes more sense to place them on non-attritable 
assets, typically delivery platforms. This arrangement is reminiscent of the pre-precision 
era, when munitions were little more than explosives in a steel casing. The delivery platform 
assumed all other functions, including carrying engagement authority in the form of pilots 
or weapons operators.
As the previous section illustrated, many munition components and systems are now 
smaller, lighter, cheaper, and more capable and reliable than ever before. Developments 
in commercial and military UAS and loitering munitions are actively blurring the lines 
between traditional PGMs and new forms of attritable and non-attritable weaponry. With 
these technological advancements come fresh opportunities to re-optimize the munitions 
arrangement and realign the placement of components between sensor platforms, delivery 
platforms, weapons, and other intermediaries. The first step to developing innovative muni -
tions employment concepts is considering future munitions as not only effectors, but as 
pieces of broader force packages that include ISR, C2, and delivery platforms—attritable and 
non-attritable, manned and unmanned. Components must be arrayed between systems in a 
force package to efficiently accomplish the mission at hand.
FIGURE 22: OPTIMIZING MUNITION FORCE PACKAGES
Source: Created by CSBA.
Reducing the Total Number of Aimpoints
The U.S. military could reduce the number of aimpoints it must strike to achieve its objec -
tives by reconsidering how it targets enemy forces, particularly in protracted conflict. 
Targeting essential nodes.  The strike campaigns examined in Chapter Two demonstrate 
the U.S. military’s historic success in executing various forms of nodal warfare to quickly 
destroy an adversary’s military capability. From the counter-IADS campaign of Desert 
Storm to strikes on transportation infrastructure in the Balkans, the targeted destruction 

88  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 89
of nodes, chokepoints, and other single points of failure is essential to limiting munitions 
expenditures in great power conflict. Although this concept is not new, the technologies 
outlined in the previous section offer enhanced opportunities to identify, find, and disable 
these key assets. Persistent sensors and collaborative weapons with improved seekers can 
observe and refine their attacks to ensure these high-value targets are neutralized. Advances 
in target detection and recognition algorithms will increase the chances of future PGMs 
having the desired effects on vulnerable points, such as striking an enemy ship’s bridge or 
C2 center. Modular weapons with specialized payloads could allow strikes against previ -
ously unreachable or hard-to-kill nodes. Rather than attacking entire airfields or port 
facilities, future PGM employment concepts can use enhanced precision and other effects 
to target and destroy the single points of failure inherent in these targets. Military planners 
must ensure that exquisite and “silver bullet” weapons are employed to strike these essential 
nodes and take full advantage of their advanced capabilities, which will reduce the quantity 
of munitions needed to subdue adversary basing, infrastructure, and C4ISR systems.
Virtual attrition concepts. Another existing concept that can be enhanced by improve -
ments in weapon technology is virtual attrition. For some targets and objectives, physical 
destruction may not be necessary in every scenario. Rather than physically destroying a 
large target set by striking an equal or larger number of aimpoints, virtual attrition focuses 
on reducing the adversary’s operational effectiveness to a level sufficient to achieve oper -
ational objectives. For example, rather than attempting to find and destroy mobile SAM 
launchers through targeted strikes, the steady presence of TEL-hunting forces could ensure 
that air defense forces remain hidden, stay mobile, avoid emplacing for significant periods of 
time, or keep their emitters switched off in fear of being detected. 231 Similar virtual attrition 
concepts could center around hypersonic munitions, area effect and area denial weapons, 
munitions with persistent sensors and effects, and non-kinetic weapons. All of these tech -
nologies present opportunities to produce virtual attrition while consuming fewer resources 
than a campaign focused on physical attrition. Virtual attrition, like deterrence, relies 
on affecting the adversary’s thinking and planning. As such, it still requires U.S. forces 
to possess and use a number of weapons to demonstrate capability and influence adver -
sary behavior. Even so, virtual attrition concepts require further examination and could 
be exploited to reduce total munitions expenditure by striking fewer aimpoints but accom -
plishing the same objectives as physical attrition.
Attacking fixed elements of mobile target kill chains.  Finally, U.S. forces could 
reduce the number of aimpoints associated with mobile and elusive targets by focusing 
attacks on the fixed and unhardened elements of these forces’ kill chains and support 
infrastructure. Most mobile targets will remain stationary during tasks such as refueling, 
231 As was the case against Serbia in 1999. Although U.S. efforts in Operation Allied Force did not result in the 
destruction of Serbian air defense systems (as covered in Chapter Two), the SEAD campaign forced Serbian SAMs to 
remain mobile and emit intermittently. U.S. air forces suffered low casualties, making these efforts a success by some 
measures. See Heginbotham, Nixon, Morgan, and Heim et al., The U.S.–China Military Scorecard , p. 128.

90  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
rearming, or embarking cargo. Nearly all mobile targets are reliant on some form of fixed or 
vulnerable infrastructure, such as hides or shelters, port facilities, ammunition dumps, POL 
points, or even planned assembly areas. By identifying and focusing strikes on these assets, 
the U.S. military can reduce the number of PGMs expended on hard-to-kill mobile targets. 
Stopping a PLA invasion force is less ISR and munitions intensive if the campaign is focused 
on disabling loading and port facilities rather than sinking every transport during transit. 
Likewise, mobile SAM launchers require missile and fuel resupplies. Even if they are resup -
plied in the field using tailgate sustainment methods, their munitions and fuel trains draw 
from fixed dumps, depots, and storage sites. Moreover, disabling key bridges and other road 
and rail chokepoints may hinder the mobility of launchers and their sustainment trains. 
Even PLA Rocket Force TELs using impenetrable mountainside shelters and tunnels could 
be targeted by destroying the openings of these shelters and the connecting road networks. 
Although targeting these assets may not prevent PLA forces from firing their initial salvo of 
missiles or opposing U.S. forces altogether, doing so could accomplish some U.S. objectives 
at a reduced munitions consumption rate over an extended period.
Increasing Munition Survivability and Effectiveness
Other concepts can improve the chances that a munition successfully reaches its target by 
increasing attack complexity and degrading the effectiveness of adversary defenses. 
Heterogenous salvos. At the tactical level, heterogenous salvos of munitions and submu -
nitions can be utilized to create multiple dilemmas for the enemy and increase weapon 
effectiveness. For example, employing a salvo (or force package) that includes a mix of PGMs 
with different sensor phenomenologies and varied payloads could increase the chances that 
some of the weapons evade defenses, find their targets, and produce the desired effects. The 
goal of these concepts is to create salvos and attacks where one defensive system, posture, 
countermeasure, or tactic will not defeat a strike or render it ineffective. By utilizing strikes 
with mixes of inexpensive PGMs, the U.S. military can create uncertainty and impose costs 
on the defender by forcing them to defend against multiple types of threats.
Complex coordinated attacks. At the operational level, heterogenous salvos can be 
scaled up to create coordinated attacks by multiple weapon types across numerous domains. 
Varied mixes of stand-in and stand-off weapons with different flight profiles, speeds, 
payloads, and effects can be combined in one strike operation to create simultaneous or 
sequenced attacks from multiple directions that disrupt enemy defensive systems and proce -
dures. Joint warfighting concepts are key to integrating multi-domain strike capabilities 
from across the military services and making these complex attacks a reality. Organizations 
such as the Army’s Fires Center of Excellence, the Air Force’s Standoff Munitions 
Application Center, the Naval Air Warfare Center Weapons Division, or the Naval Surface 

90  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 91
Warfare Centers are vital for synthesizing technical capabilities and employment techniques 
into broader multi-domain concepts tailored to solve specific operational challenges. 232
DoD should assess the operational and cost-effectiveness of these concepts, as well as the 
degree to which they limit the risk assumed by various U.S. forces. “Silver bullet” hyper -
sonics and long-range ground-launched weapons may be expensive, but if they are used 
as part of a complex attack to neutralize defensive systems that might otherwise down a 
$700 million B-21 bomber, even a unit cost of $5 to $15 million becomes more acceptable. 
Scenarios like this speak to the need for DoD to first consider various operational challenges, 
potential concepts to address them, the broad spectrum of capabilities available, and their 
various tradeoffs—rather than looking at an operational challenge and asking how a specific 
capability solves that problem.
One mission that illustrates the potential of heterogenous salvos and complex attack 
concepts is the suppression and destruction of enemy air defenses, or SEAD/DEAD. At the 
tactical echelon, future PGMs can be employed in salvos that contain mixes of sensors and 
payloads to confuse defenses and increase the weapons’ survivability. These packages can 
be tested and modified using virtual labs to create the most efficient package for the targeted 
SAM systems and their kill chains.
FIGURE 23: COMPLEX SEAD/DEAD TACTICS TO INCREASE MUNITION SURVIVABILITY 
AND EFFECTIVENESS
Source: Created by CSBA.
232 See U.S. Army Fires Center of Excellence, “CDID Capabilities Development and Integration Directorate,” https://
sill-www.army.mil/cdid/; 8th Air Force, “Standoff Munitions Application Center,” https://www.8af.af.mil/Units/
Standoff-Munitions-Application-Center/; Naval Sea Systems Command, “Warfare Centers,” https://www.navsea.navy.
mil/Home/Warfare-Centers/; and Naval Air Warfare Center, “NAWCWD,” https://www.navair.navy.mil/nawcwd/.

92  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
At higher echelons, various weapon packages could be coordinated at the operational level 
to temporarily degrade enemy air and missile defenses in a region and enable follow-on 
strikes with decreased probabilities of intercept. Previous studies have referred to these as 
“tunneling” operations. 233 These attacks could be modern versions of Cold War Soviet SEAD 
plans, which envisioned “sanitized” attack corridors kept free of NATO defenses through 
jamming, chaff, and potentially nuclear weapons. 234 Even modern air defense systems are 
limited by the number of targets their sensors can track simultaneously, their firing rate, and 
their magazine size and reload times. Rather than aircraft jamming enemy sensors or drop -
ping chaff, initial waves of inexpensive munitions or purpose-built decoys could overwhelm 
enemy defenses and force them to expend their magazines before subsequent waves of more 
advanced munitions strike targets in these now undefended sectors. 235 Munitions with non-
kinetic effects could also be used to temporarily disable defenses for follow-on strikes.
Generating Precision Effects in Volume
Most importantly, the U.S. military needs concepts to enable the precision effects it has 
come to rely on in the volumes necessary for great power conflict. The preceding section 
identified modernized area-effect weapons as a technological innovation that could increase 
the number of aimpoints each PGM could attack. These weapons could be combined with 
the following procurement concepts to generate precision effects in greater volume.
Procurement of range and cost-balanced PGMs. DoD could pursue munitions that 
optimally balance range, speed, size, and cost to enable large-quantity procurement and 
delivery. Figure 24 shows the relationships between range, speed, and cost to illustrate 
the increasing cost-effectiveness of additional range and speed. This type of cost analysis 
should be paired with scenario analysis (similar to Chapter Three) and an assessment of 
weapon size and weight to determine the optimum range for future weapons ideal for the 
Indo-Pacific theater.236 Cost must be considered in order to procure large quantities of these 
PGMs. Size and weight must be considered to allow delivery platforms to carry large quan -
tities of these same PGMs. Finally, range and speed must be balanced with these competing 
characteristics to ensure PGMs have maximum utility in potential conflict scenarios. The 
fielding of greater numbers of penetrating aircraft like the F-35 and B-21 will enable these 
weapons by allowing delivery platforms to get closer to their targets and reducing the 
minimum range requirements for munitions.
233 Gunzinger and Clark, Sustaining America’s Precision Strike Advantage , pp. 37–38.
234 J.P. Santiago, “Soviet Wild Weasels: Part One (Doctrine/Tactics),” Tails Through Time, December 16, 2010, http://
aviationtrivia.blogspot.com/2010/12/soviet-wild-weasels-part-one.html.
235 Ukraine has accused Russia of utilizing decoys to attempt to overwhelm Ukrainian air defenses and increase the 
survivability of Russian missiles. John Leicester and Hanna Arhirova, “Ukraine Says Russia Turns to Decoy Missiles, 
Intel Balloons,” AP News, February 16, 2023, https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-81de149dcbd4eaf8830879d
ecc5614a4.
236 An example of size and weight analysis can be found Gunzinger and Clark, Sustaining America’s Precision Strike 
Advantage, pp. 35–37.

92  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 93
FIGURE 24: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PGM RANGE, SPEED, AND COST
Source: Created by CSBA using data from DoD budget documents from FY1998 to FY2023 and Jane’s database. Unit costs are averages based upon 
FY1998 to FY2023 procurement. 
Revised requirements for “second-tier” PGMs. To this point, PGM development 
has mainly focused on implementing new technologies and providing each weapon with 
the greatest number of advanced capabilities. The result is the current portfolio of exquisite 
PGMs that are produced and procured in numbers insufficient for great power conflict. To 
strike the volume of targets required in future campaigns, DoD may consider revising muni -
tions requirements to develop and stock high quantities of simpler PGMs with the minimum 
capability required for their intended mission. If needed, some capabilities could be shifted 
to a reusable launch platform. By examining future target sets and potential campaigns, 
the U.S. military could estimate the number of targets that do not require capabilities such 
as a CEP of less than 3 meters, advanced sensors and target recognition, or low observable 
characteristics. DoD could create requirements for munitions “just good enough” to strike 
these targets at reduced costs. Although not individually survivable in many Indo-Pacific 
scenarios, Iranian, Russian, and Israeli loitering munitions show that long-range can be 
achieved at a reduced cost.237
Ideally, a future PGM portfolio would include second-tier PGMs in each range category 
to maximize the number of targets that could be attacked with simpler weapons. This 
idea draws on previous U.S. weapons, such as the M3 submachine gun, designed during 
WWII to supplement and replace the M1A1 Thompson, which was complex and expen-
sive to produce. Realizing that many personnel who were issued the Thompson, such as 
vehicle crewmembers, did not require its ergonomics, the Army issued new requirements 
for a simpler, less expensive submachine gun. The resulting M3 consisted almost entirely of 
237 Chris Gordon, “Cheap UAVs Exact High Costs,” Air & Space Forces Magazine , January 20, 2023, https://www.
airandspaceforces.com/article/cheap-uavs-exact-high-costs/; and David Axe, “Take a Look at Russia’s New ‘Suicide 
Drones’,” National Interest , November 9, 2021, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/reboot/take-look-russias-new-  
suicide-drones-195929.

94  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
spot-welded stamped or pressed steel and was cheaply manufactured to equip large numbers 
of personnel for the duration of the war.238
Second-tier weapons would also allow capabilities to be disaggregated and distributed 
across salvos and force packages. Large quantities of simpler PGMs could be enhanced by 
utilizing them in packages that contain smaller quantities of other enabling weapons. In 
this manner, a group of second-tier munitions could be escorted into a target area by a more 
exquisite weapon with non-kinetic effects to suppress enemy defenses or advanced sensors 
to feed targeting data to second-tier weapons that lack their own sensors.
Unmanned munition carriers. To increase payload capacity and mass effects, “Loyal 
Wingman” type UAS could be utilized as munitions trucks to carry additional munitions in 
strike packages. Through manned-unmanned teaming (MUM-T), munitions-carrying UAS 
would not require advanced autonomous decision-making or sensors, only the capability to 
take off, land, and take commands from a manned “mothership” aircraft. The services are 
already experimenting with MUM-T concepts pairing the AH-64 Apache attack helicopter 
with the MQ-1C Gray Eagle and the F-35 and F-15EX with the XQ-58 Valkyrie.239 These 
systems could not only reduce the risk for manned aircraft but could also greatly expand 
the strike capacity of platforms like the F-35 by allowing a single aircraft to coordinate the 
massing of a larger quantity of PGMs from multiple unmanned wingmen. In addition to 
unmanned aircraft, unmanned surface and undersea vessels could provide similar capa -
bilities to U.S. maritime strike platforms. Unmanned munitions trucks would also be key to 
creating the capacity to execute many of the other concepts outlined in this monograph, such 
as heterogenous salvos and complex attacks.
…
New weapons technologies and the concepts to employ these advancements are essential 
for preparing the U.S. PGM arsenal for great power conflict. The innovations highlighted 
in this chapter represent opportunities to rethink the U.S. approach to munitions, reduce 
PGM requirements, and rebalance the cost ratio between attacker and defender. Just as U.S. 
adversaries have adapted to the precision-strike complex, the U.S. military must now move 
beyond precision to maintain its strike advantage in future conflicts.
238 Patrick J. Chaisson, “The Controversial M3 Grease Gun,” WWII History  20, no. 2, April 2021, https://
warfarehistorynetwork.com/article/the-controversial-m3-grease-gun/.
239 Becki Bryant, “Aerial MUM-T Reaches New Heights at DPG,” Army.mil, October 27, 2020, https://www.army.mil/
article/240283/aerial_mum_t_reaches_new_heights_at_dpg; and Valerie Insinna, “Under Skyborg Program, F-35 
And F-15EX Jets Could Control Drone Sidekicks,” Defense News , May 22, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/
air/2019/05/22/under-skyborg-program-f-35-and-f-15ex-jets-could-control-drone-sidekicks/.

94  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 95
CHAPTER 6
Findings and 
Recommendations
This study has revealed the inadequacies of the U.S. PGM portfolio for the demands of 
21st-century great power conflict. Based on the historical evolution of precision-strike and 
CSBA’s evaluation of potential conflict scenarios in the Indo-Pacific, the U.S. military should 
consider the following key findings and recommendations to fill critical PGM capacity and 
capability gaps.
Key Findings
Previous assumptions about munitions production and consumption do not 
apply to contemporary great power conflict.  Three key planning assumptions that 
informed the U.S. military’s current PGM inventory no longer hold and must be reexamined:
1. A conflict between the United States and a great power adversary would be rapid and 
short in duration, allowing the U.S. military to rely on small inventories of advanced 
stand-off munitions. History and our examination of prospective Indo-Pacific conflict 
scenarios indicate that great power conflict is more likely to be protracted and could last 
months or years. The current fighting in the Russia-Ukraine war reinforces this view.
2. PGM production and procurement are of less importance than that of platforms 
because munitions production can be rapidly surged to meet the demands of a conflict.  
The complexity of today’s PGMs and the state of the munitions industrial base mean 
that production of many PGMs essential to great power conflict cannot be quickly 
surged. On-hand quantities may be the only weapons available in the first months of a 
conflict, depending on the munition and the complexity of its supply chain and manu -
facturing process.

96  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
3. The precision-strike advantage by itself will continue to enable the United States to 
dominate its adversaries in contemporary great power conflict. Although precision was 
sufficient in the regional and limited strike campaigns of the previous 30 years, today’s 
adversaries have spent decades preparing to counter U.S. precision-strike operations. 
As a result, the munitions requirements for great power conflict are likely to exceed the 
quantities and capabilities of the current U.S. PGM inventory.
An examination of munitions requirements for great power conflict reveals 
that the United States has significant capacity and capability gaps in its current 
PGM portfolio. PGM procurement to date has mostly been driven by operational usage 
and unit cost rather than by long-term strategy or analysis. In addition to an overall PGM 
capacity gap that has reappeared throughout campaigns in the Middle East, the U.S. mili -
tary lacks sufficient quantities of weapons with the range and features ideal for conflict in 
the Indo-Pacific. Current PGM stocks are insufficient to provide precision effects in volume 
during a protracted conflict.
Beyond capacity, our examination of potential great power conflict scenarios exposes several 
capability gaps in the U.S. military’s current array of PGMs. Given the existing U.S. military 
force structure, which consists of mostly non-penetrating bombers and short-range fighters, 
many fielded PGMs suffer from insufficient range and survivability. A majority of current 
weapon programs are subsonic and rely on external guidance support that increases the 
demands on targeting processes and makes them unsuitable for time-sensitive and mobile 
targets. The U.S. PGM inventory also lacks non-kinetic options and weapons designed to 
attack hardened and deeply buried targets, wide area targets, and airfields.
Even with increased spending on and production of PGMs, the United States 
will likely struggle to maintain adequate quantities of PGMs to execute a 
comprehensive precision-strike campaign against a great power adversary. 
Unlike previous U.S. campaigns against regional opponents, the number of targets, extended 
distances, and density of defenses in a contemporary great power conflict create staggering 
munitions requirements for a comprehensive, protracted campaign. Conducting a campaign 
with a similar target set and depth as that of Desert Storm or Iraqi Freedom would involve 
tens of thousands of targets, many of them mobile, heavily defended, and/or spread 
throughout vast geographic areas. Short of total mobilization, realistic fiscal and industrial 
constraints mean the United States is likely incapable of maintaining PGM stocks adequate 
for such operations.
Simply put, DoD may not be able to quickly spend or produce its way out of its current PGM 
shortcomings in the near term. Instead, the U.S. military may be forced to rethink how 
it intends to accomplish certain operational objectives in a great power conflict. In addi -
tion to maximizing the production of critical munitions, the U.S. military must develop new 
weapons and concepts suited for fighting today’s great power adversaries.

96  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 97
Precision alone is necessary but insufficient for munitions in modern great 
power conflict. Future wars will require PGMs with advanced features such as semi-
autonomous and collaborative capabilities, integrated sensors, automatic target recognition, 
loitering capabilities, and heterogenous payloads that include both kinetic and non-kinetic 
effects. Many of these features are not wholly new but are becoming inexpensive and ubiqui -
tous thanks to commercial and government advances in microelectronics and computing.
These features offer solutions to the capacity and capability gaps described above. Next-
generation PGMs could reduce total munitions requirements to more feasible levels by 
multiplying the effects of each weapon. Rather than expending numerous PGMs on a single 
target, future technologies and concepts could allow each PGM to affect multiple targets.
Several variables have outsized effects on munitions requirements for great 
power conflict, including the operational objectives, the proportion of targets 
that must be attacked to achieve these objectives, and the effectiveness of 
enemy defenses. The scenarios outlined in Chapter Three show how the operational 
objectives (and, by corollary, the target set) of a precision-strike campaign influence the 
numbers and kinds of PGMs required. Planning assumptions, such as the ability to strike 
mainland targets or dual-use targets and the availability of long-range penetrating strike 
platforms, are particularly key to assessing a scenario’s munitions requirements. These 
assumptions reveal the value of strategic and operational wargaming of munitions mixes in 
addition to more in-depth (and myopic) modeling and simulation.
In addition to objectives and targets, assumptions about the depth of the total target set that 
must be affected are also key determinants of munitions requirements. Sinking a quarter or 
even a half of a Taiwan invasion fleet is a much different munitions problem than attacking 
all three hundred or more vessels. Finally, the effectiveness of enemy defenses at keeping 
delivery platforms at stand-off ranges and intercepting PGMs greatly affects both the quan -
tity of munitions required and the ideal characteristics of those weapons. More effective 
defenses necessitate PGMs and delivery platforms with longer ranges and more advanced 
survivability features, as well as more complex attack concepts.
Conflict duration is a major determinant of munitions requirements and, as 
a result, could influence campaign objectives. Chapter Three’s scenarios show how 
rapid and protracted conflicts have different operational objectives and target sets. If a 
conflict is expected to become prolonged, then a limited inventory of weapons may be better 
expended on force regeneration assets instead of more numerous and attritable forces or 
easily repairable basing and infrastructure. In a protracted conflict scenario, the United 
States must consider its long-term advantages and weaknesses relative to a great power 
adversary and utilize its PGMs to reduce that adversary’s long-term comparative advantage. 
Against the PRC, this advantage may be their ability to rapidly manufacture and replace 
munitions and other defense materiel. For this reason, a protracted conflict may favor a 
campaign that targets defense production and sustainment infrastructure, such as scenario 

98  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
five in this study. Further research is needed to assess how the PRC’s munitions stocks and 
industrial base compare to that of the United States.
Maintaining the United States’ strike advantage requires more than muni -
tions; it requires improvements along the entire kill chain. Many of the issues 
and constraints outlined in this monograph also apply to ISR assets, targeting processes, 
network infrastructure, and delivery platforms. As the final effector in a kill chain, however, 
munitions are of particular importance and require near-term attention due to long-term 
neglect. The use of large numbers of PGMs also creates unprecedented demands on sensors, 
ISR platforms, and staff targeting processes, particularly if PGMs do not possess internal 
sensing and guidance capabilities. Persistent surveillance technologies, AI-assisted data 
processing, and in-depth intelligence preparation of the battlefield may help alleviate these 
demands. Large numbers of networked PGMs with internal sensors also increase demands 
for network bandwidth and robustness. DoD’s current JADC2 efforts seek to fill these 
requirements, but it remains to be seen how these networking and C2 programs materialize 
in scale.
Recommendations
The United States must prepare its PGM inventories for the potential of protracted great 
power conflict. Given fiscal, industrial, and political constraints, the U.S. military should 
implement a time-phased set of recommendations to address both its near-term and 
long-run PGM and industrial base challenges. The following recommendations, phased 
by five-year Future Years Defense Programs (FYDPs), can help the U.S. military achieve 
these ends.
Near-Term: Recommendations within the FYDP (2023 to 2027)
In the near term, the United States must rapidly increase PGM procurement to bolster its 
preparedness for a conflict in the coming years, before it can amass large quantities of crit -
ical PGMs or significantly expand its munitions industrial base. The U.S. military must move 
quickly to maintain the precision-strike advantage of its current force structure in opera -
tions within the “Davidson window.”
Immediately increase munitions funding and procurement to maximize the 
production of critical precision munitions. The scenarios explored in Chapter 
Three highlight several essential categories of weapons for a conflict in the Indo-Pacific 
theater, including anti-ship and anti-air munitions, stand-off munitions to equip non-pene -
trating bombers and tactical aircraft, and intelligent loitering munitions capable of striking 
moving targets. Given current manufacturing capacity, the military services should maxi -
mize purchases of these weapons within the FYDP in order to reinforce current stockpiles 
and prepare for a conflict in the near term. PGM procurement quantities should reflect the 
reality that today’s munitions cannot be rapidly surged and must be stocked in quantities 

98  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 99
sufficient for potential conflict scenarios. As this study concludes, it appears that DoD is 
requesting funds for larger quantities of key PGMs, but it remains to be seen how these 
requests translate into increased appropriations, contracts, and deliveries. 240
Align PGM procurement spending with the requirements of long-term strategy 
and analysis rather than simply replacing weapons expended in recent oper -
ations. As increased procurement of essential PGMs begins reducing critical near-term 
capability and capacity gaps, the Department must ensure that munitions funding and 
requirements for the remainder of the FYDP are driven by thorough analysis with a long-
term focus. The scenarios presented in this monograph show the value that wargaming and 
campaign analysis bring to determining the munitions requirements for future conflicts. 
Based on the 2018 and 2022 National Defense Strategies, these changes should manifest in 
more balanced spending between delivery platforms and munitions and between short- and 
long-range weapons.
Ultimately, DoD must avoid thinking of inexpensive munitions as replacements for exquisite 
weapons, or exquisite long-range PGMs as replacements for high-tech delivery platforms. 
Rather, these systems should complement each other’s capabilities as components of a strike 
package. For instance, advanced aircraft will benefit from long-range munitions that reduce 
their attrition and short-range munitions that increase the volume of effects they can deliver. 
Exquisite munitions will benefit from simpler weapons carrying sensors and decoys to 
augment their effectiveness.
Incentivize expansion of the weapons industrial base by committing to 
consistent munitions purchases through multi-year procurement, direct 
investments, and other policies that foster a steady demand signal for preci -
sion weapons. Beyond additional spending to maximize active production lines, near-term 
investments must support the expansion of the weapons industrial base beyond the current 
FYDP. Building additional manufacturing capacity will take years, so the United States must 
make adequate purchases and investments in the near term to create additional capacity 
over the next several years. The military services should continue using multi-year procure -
ments and other measures taken in response to the Russia-Ukraine conflict to kick-start 
the industrial base and signal a commitment to sustained munitions spending. The Defense 
Department may also wish to explore direct investment in additional production capacity 
or the maintenance of surge capacity to ensure that weapons manufacturing can be scaled 
to support a prolonged conflict. Finally, DoD should explore other policies to incentivize the 
expansion of the munitions industrial base, such as streamlining foreign military sales and 
export requirements to support foreign buys of U.S. weapons, fostering joint development 
240 For example, see Anthony Capaccio, “Pentagon Puts Priority on Replacing Munitions in 2024 Budget,” Bloomberg, 
March 10, 2023, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-03-11/pentagon-puts-priority-on-replacing-
munitions-in-2024-budget?srnd=premium&sref=IYQ5mP1s&mc_cid=ba555218d5&mc_eid=7cbf43077b&leadSourc
e=uverify%20wall#xj4y7vzkg.

100  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
opportunities with allied nations, large lot purchases of common subcomponents, or offering 
tax credits and other incentives for the construction and maintenance of excess capacity.
Bolster the current PGM arsenal with rapidly producible modular kits and 
modifications to operational weapons. While increasing procurement of current 
PGM programs, DoD should expand the capabilities of these weapons using the modular 
kits explored in the previous chapter. These modifications should rely on mature technolo -
gies to fill key capability and capacity gaps. Glide kits and add-on propulsion systems can 
be fielded within the FYDP to extend the range of many PGMs and equip non-stealthy plat -
forms. These kits should be prioritized to fill urgent capability and capacity gaps, such as 
maritime strike, emplacing naval mines, and attacking mobile targets. Modular kits can be 
expanded with inexpensive, proven sensors and datalinks to increase their effectiveness in 
great power conflict. When possible, the Department and industry should take advantage 
of advances in commercial technologies related to sensors, networking, and autonomy to 
augment these kits.
Beyond modular kits for existing payloads, DoD should field additional payloads in already-
fielded munitions. These payloads could include more powerful energetics, non-kinetic 
effectors, persistent sensors, or policy-compliant area effects that provide multiple preci -
sion effects within a large target area. Both modular kits and new payloads can be fielded 
on expedited timelines that leverage existing weapon-platform integration. Together, they 
would allow more weapons within the United States’ current precision arsenal to service a 
greater number of targets with increased lethality.
Consider campaigns, operational concepts, and target sets that enable the 
current portfolio of precision weapons to be most effective, particularly in 
a protracted conflict. Creative operational concepts can help reduce total munitions 
requirements in a great power conflict. In the near term, the U.S. military can reduce the 
number of aimpoints in a strike campaign by targeting essential nodes, utilizing virtual 
attrition concepts, and attacking the fixed elements of mobile target kill chains. Focusing 
attacks on the key elements of adversary kill chains, command networks, and transportation 
and sustainment architectures may accomplish U.S. objectives using smaller quantities of 
munitions. Likewise, striking fixed pieces of mobile target support chains would allow U.S. 
forces to employ GPS-guided munitions, which make up a majority of its current PGM inven -
tory. Until new munitions with additional capability can fill the capability gaps explored in 
Chapter Three, planners must explore innovative methods of accomplishing campaign objec -
tives using the current precision arsenal.
Medium-Term: Recommendations for the Next FYDP (2028 to 2032)
By the late 2020s and early 2030s, a steady demand signal driven by near-term investments 
in munitions and their industrial base will expand production capacity for the weapons 
essential to future great power conflict. At that point, the Department should continue to 
shape the growth of the industrial base through requirements for resilient supply chains 

100  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 101
and advanced manufacturing processes. These middle years are key to designing and 
experimenting with new munitions designs that operationalize advanced technologies as 
they mature.
Continue expanding the active and surge capacity of the munitions industrial 
base with a focus on resilient and redundant rather than lean supply chains. 
While maintaining a steady demand signal through continued procurement, the Department 
should implement policies, requirements, and incentives that push weapon manufacturers 
to shift from a reliance on “just-in-time” to “just-in-case” supply chain models for select 
programs or components. Of course, this shift will reduce efficiency and increase costs, 
so analysis is key to prioritizing resiliency between weapon programs and determining 
which pieces or components of a munition are suited for just-in-case versus just-in-time 
methods. In determining these requirements, the Department should also study the most 
operational- and cost-effective balance between maintaining stockpiles and maintaining 
excess production capacity of different munitions. Increased costs will drive DoD to priori -
tize excess capacity and resiliency, making analysis key to ensuring that these expenditures 
match future requirements.
Implement open architectures and digital engineering into new muni -
tions designs to take advantage of modularity and advanced manufacturing 
methods. Beyond spending more on current PGMs, in the medium term, the U.S. mili -
tary must develop the next generation of weapons that fully utilize the technologies outlined 
in this study to enable their rapid development and large-scale production. These weapons 
should begin by leveraging digital engineering and modular architectures to ease their 
manufacturing requirements, expand their supply chains to more commercial producers, 
and increase their operational versatility. Automated production and additive manufac -
turing can alleviate workforce issues and allow future munitions to be affordably produced 
in large quantities. Modular and versatile designs fill capacity gaps by reducing procurement 
tradeoffs and allowing weapons (or components of weapons) to be used in a greater number 
of scenarios. These advancements are already happening on a small scale and should be 
implemented across programs and producers by the late 2020s.
Continue experimenting with and fielding advanced munitions technologies to 
fill current capability gaps. By the middle 2020s, technologies developed in the current 
FYDP should be widely fielded throughout the force. These advancements include exquisite 
and low-cost sensors that free PGMs from reliance on external targeting support and enable 
them to better track and attack mobile targets, collaborative and loitering capabilities that 
allow weapons to work together to attack wide area and elusive targets effectively and effi -
ciently, and area effect payloads that reduce the quantity of munitions required to attack 
large and complex targets. Additionally, hypersonic weapons should be fielded in greater 
numbers as current programs mature and costs are reduced.
In the medium-term, the services should continue experimentation with the more advanced 
technologies highlighted in this study, including interchangeable “mix-and-match” 

102  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
munitions, advanced propulsion, improved automatic target recognition and data collection, 
non-kinetic effects, and heterogenous payloads.
Pursue an affordable mix of exquisite and cheap PGMs to enable “affordable 
precision in mass”. Modular designs, digital engineering, and advanced manufacturing 
techniques can open the door to inexpensive weapons producible at scale. The Department 
should experiment with and pursue PGMs that, in combination with delivery platforms, 
optimally balance features such as range, speed, and cost to ensure adequate quantities can 
be procured for great power conflict. This balance might include developing and procuring 
“second-tier” PGMs with minimum capabilities that are inexpensive enough to be stocked in 
high quantities. In tandem with unmanned munition carriers, these second-tier PGMs could 
enable tactical aircraft such as the F-35 or naval vessels to guide the delivery of an unprec -
edented volume of precision effects. As delivery platforms evolve and more long-range 
penetrating strike platforms are fielded, the Department should actively reassess the balance 
of capability between its platforms and weapons.
Develop new employment techniques and operational concepts that leverage 
the advanced features of next-generation PGMs. As technologies and weapons 
evolve, the U.S. military must implement innovative concepts that employ these weapons 
in the most effective manner. U.S. forces should utilize heterogenous salvos and complex 
coordinated attacks from multiple domains to increase munition survivability and effec -
tiveness. Underpinning these concepts is the idea that future munitions will be more than 
just effectors. As components in broader force packages of sensors and delivery platforms, 
DoD must optimize munition force packages to carry out specific missions in the most 
resource-efficient manner. To increase the options available and better examine tradeoffs 
when constructing force packages, the services should first develop concepts to address 
operational challenges, and then use these concepts to determine priority capabilities and 
requirements. The PGMs of tomorrow will provide their package with more capability than 
a short-lasted kinetic effect, and U.S. warfighting concepts must leverage these new capabili -
ties accordingly.
Long-Term: Preparing for Beyond 2033
In the long run, the U.S. military must shape its PGM portfolio around its evolving force 
structure and the need to provide an immense volume of effects against an adversary 
striving to modernize its defenses at an equivalent rate. Maintaining America’s strike advan -
tage will require new PGM designs that leverage technologies matured in the 2020s and are 
stocked in quantities adequate for future great power conflict.
Procure a mix of PGMs that complement next-generation platforms as they are 
fielded in the 2030s. The U.S. military’s current force structure, particularly in the air 
domain, is centered around legacy platforms that require stand-off munitions to confront 
the distances and defenses associated with the Indo-Pacific theater. By the 2030s, however, 
the fielding of significant numbers of long-range, penetrating B-21 bombers will shift the 

102  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 103
favored balance between stand-off and stand-in weapons and increase the volume of short-
range munitions the U.S. military can deliver in contested environments at reduced costs. 
Similar force structure shifts may occur as stand-in ground forces are deployed and the 
Navy fields unmanned surface and undersea vessels. Given the continued tradeoff between 
munition range and cost, each of these changes in force structure and posture presents new 
opportunities to reexamine the alignment of range and capability between delivery plat -
forms, munitions, and other intermediaries.
Concurrently, the Chinese military will continue to modernize and evolve its own force 
structure. The PLA will likely continue to push its defensive perimeter outward from 
the mainland and may seek to bolster its own long-range strike capacity. The U.S. mili -
tary must continually adjust its weapon-platform pairing and force packages to confront 
these developments.
Develop and field munitions that utilize advanced technologies to fill long-
running capability gaps, reduce planning tradeoffs, and outpace adversary 
countermeasures. Some of the technologies highlighted in this monograph may not be 
sufficiently mature for operational use until the 2030s. Continued investment in artificial 
intelligence and computing underwrite future progress in stealth, speed, and autonomy that 
will increase PGM survivability and effectiveness. The Department of Defense must fund 
not only the research and development of the weapons-related technologies explored in the 
previous chapter, but also their operationalization in the next decade. DoD must avoid the 
development of advanced weapons that never become programs of record, such as LOCAAS 
or the Tri-Service Standoff Attack Missile (TSSAM).
Refine employment techniques and operational concepts to utilize advanced 
munitions and future force packages to create the greatest advantage. The 
Department must constantly explore innovative concepts that most effectively employ the 
advanced capabilities of future weapons. As further generations of PGMs are fielded, the 
U.S. military should continually redesign its force packages to create kill chains to address 
the evolving threat. These packages must include not only future delivery platforms and 
weapons, but also future unmanned ISR platforms and intermediaries such as attritable 
UAS and unmanned munitions trucks. Planners should use increasingly capable modeling, 
simulation, and integrated test beds to create force packages that deliver the greatest volume 
of effects on target sets while minimizing risk, attrition, and cost to levels appropriate for 
protracted great power conflict.
Final Thoughts
Just as early PGMs and precision-strike concepts faced criticism, so too will the weapons 
and ideas presented in this monograph. Former Secretary of Defense Bill Perry noted the 
resistance encountered while implementing the second offset strategy:

104  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
…there was no shortage of critics in those days who questioned whether we could depend on 
technology. They argued that, when this modern technology was put into combat, the fog of 
war would make it ineffective. They also argued that this technology would be too sophisti -
cated, too complex for our military personnel to operate and maintain. 241
Ultimately, operations in Desert Storm vindicated supporters of precision strike. Of course, 
the Defense Department should not trick itself into believing that technology alone can solve 
the challenges of preparing its PGM inventories for great power conflict. In many cases of 
protracted war, there is no substitute for maintaining large quantities of “dumb” weapons 
and the industrial base capacity to rapidly produce more. Quantity is a quality of its own, 
and no technology will ever fully replace it, particularly with expendable weaponry. But 
refusing to utilize the United States’ enduring technological advantage to its fullest poten -
tial risks the effectiveness of future military operations where PGM demands will inevitably 
exceed supplies.
As this study concludes, it appears the U.S. government is moving to greatly increase 
munitions funding, including funding for some types of weapons recommended by this 
monograph. The FY2023 NDAA authorizes multi-year procurements of large numbers of 
JAGMs, Harpoons, NSMs, GMLRS, AMRAAMs, LRASMs, JASSMs, and SM-6 missiles. 242 
These actions are positive signs of the U.S. Congress and military accepting the inadequacy 
of current U.S. stocks. Still, these procurements appear to be mostly driven by operational 
usage in Ukraine and ensuing panic about the state of U.S. inventories. Long-term strategy, 
analysis, and creative thought remain lacking. These purchases are a positive step, but the 
potential for prolonged great power conflict requires a deeper look and innovative thinking 
about the U.S. precision-strike portfolio. This monograph has attempted to provide a step 
toward looking beyond precision at the munitions requirements of tomorrow’s conflicts.
241 William J. Perry, “Perry on Precision Strike,” Air & Space Forces Magazine , April 1, 1997, https://www.
airandspaceforces.com/article/0497perry/.
242 U.S. Congress, House, James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 , HR 7776, 117 th 
Cong., 2nd sess., Section 1244, p. 452, https://www.congress.gov/117/bills/hr7776/BILLS-117hr7776enr.pdf.

104  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 105
APPENDIX A
Appendix A: Historical Strike 
Campaign Munitions Data
This appendix contains Table 1, annotated with a full list of sources and notes.
Desert 
Storm
1990 – 1991
Allied Force
1999
Enduring 
Freedom
2001
Iraqi Freedom
2003
Odyssey Dawn
Unified 
Protector (NATO 
combined)
2011
Inherent 
Resolve
2014 – 2019
Length (days) 43 78 176 30 2341 ~1,700
Total Sorties 116,0002 38,0043 ~25,0004 47,6005 26,500+6 234,0007
Average Sorties/
Day 2,5008 200 – 1,0009 ~10010 ~1,60011 ~11312 ~14313
Aimpoints
~40,00014
7,600 fixed
3,400 
mobile
11,000 
total15
120 fixed
400+ mobile
520+ total16
30,542
19,898 
struck17
- -
Total Munitions 277,16518 23,61419 17,47220 29,19921 7,64222 115,98323
Guided Munitions 17,16124
(7.6%)
6,72825
(29%)
12,00126
(69%)
19,94827
(68%)
7,64228
(100%)
Largely 
PGMs29
Average Guided 
Munitions/Day 30 399 86 68 665 33 ~68
TLAMs/CALCMs 
Expended 33231 27032 7433 95534 11035 17236
SEAD Sorties 4,32637 4,53838 - - 1,500+39 -
HARMs Expended 1,96140 1,000+41 - 40842 - -
Radars Destroyed ~250 / 
50043 10 / 4144 - - - -
SAMs Destroyed
35 / 120 
fixed 
batteries 45
3 / 25 SA-6 
batteries 46 - -
Presumed by 
DoD:
11 SA-5 batteries
4 SA-2 batteries
16 SA-3 batteries
Mobile uknown 47
-
Combat Losses (# 
of aircraft)
38 total 
coalition 48 249 0 150 1 mechanical 51 2 mechanical
5 UAS52
1 Operation Odyssey Dawn took place between March 19 th and 31st of 2011, while Unified Protector lasted from March 
24th to October 31 st.

106  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
2 Charles Pope, “30 Years Later, Desert Storm Remains a Powerful Influence on Air, Space Forces,” Secretary of the Air  
Force Public Affairs, February 23, 2021, https://www.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/2512938/30-years-later-
desert-storm-remains-a-powerful-influence-on-air-space-forces/#:~:text=is%20well%20known.-,The%20U.S.%20
and%20its%20allies%20flew%20more%20than%20116%2C000%20combat,used%20in%20a%20major%20way.
3 Benjamin S. Lambeth, NATO’s Air War for Kosovo: A Strategic and Operational Assessment (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 
2001), p. 61, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1365/RAND_MR1365.pdf.
4 Michael E. O’Hanlon, “A Flawed Masterpiece,” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2002, p. 48, https://www.brookings.edu/
wp-content/uploads/2016/06/20020501.pdf.
5 Chuck Roberts, “War and Peace – a Look at Operation Iraqi Freedom,” Airman Magazine , June 5, 2003, https://www.
af.mil/News/Article/139088/war-and-peace-a-look-at-operation-iraqi-freedom/.
6 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, “Operation UNIFIED PROTECTOR Final Mission Stats,” November 2, 2011, 
https://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/pdf_2011_11/20111108_111107-factsheet_up_factsfigure.pdf.
7 Becca Wasser, Stacie L. Pettyjohn, Jeffrey Martini, Alexandra T. Evans et al., The Air War Against the Islamic State: 
The Role of Airpower in Operation Inherent Resolve (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2021), p. 297, https://www.rand.org/
pubs/research_reports/RRA388-1.html.
8 Youtube.com, “Desert Storm – The Air War, Day 1 – Animated,” The Operations Room, August 8, 2020, https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=zxRgfBXn6Mg&list=PLErys4h2oiuyKCuzZhpHhCeRwSoQVEazb&index=3.
9 Lambeth, NATO’s Air War for Kosovo, p. 62.
10 O’Hanlon, “A Flawed Masterpiece,” p. 50.
11 Estimated by dividing total sorties by campaign length.
12 Estimated by dividing total sorties by campaign length.
13 Estimated by dividing total sorties by campaign length.
14 Mark Gunzinger, “Stand In, Standoff,” Air & Space Forces Magazine , July 1, 2020, https://www.airandspaceforces.
com/article/stand-in-standoff/ .
15 Lambeth, NATO’s Air War for Kosovo, p. 62.
16 Benjamin S. Lambeth, Air Power Against Terror: America’s Conduct of Operation Enduring Freedom  (Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND, 2006), p. 248, https://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG166-1.html.
17 U.S. Central Command Air Forces, Assessment and Analysis Division, “Operation IRAQI FREEDOM – By The Numbers,” 
April 30, 2003, p. 5, https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/2003/uscentaf_oif_report_30apr2003.pdf.
18 GAO/NSIAD-97-134, Operation Desert Storm: Evaluation of the Air Campaign  (Washington, DC: Government 
Accountability Office, June 1997), p. 29, https://www.gao.gov/assets/nsiad-97-134.pdf.
19 Lambeth, Air Power Against Terror, p. 138.
20 William Arkin, “Weapons Total From Afghanistan Includes Large Amount of Cannon Fire,” Defense Daily  213, issue 
42, March 5, 2002, https://www.proquest.com/docview/234028511?accountid=11091&forcedol=true&forcedol=true.
21 U.S. Central Command Air Forces, “Operation IRAQI FREEDOM – By The Numbers,” p. 11.
22 Gregory Alegi, Christian F. Anrig, Christopher S. Chivvis, Robert Egnell et al., Precision and Purpose: Airpower 
in the Libyan Civil War  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015), ed. Karl P. Mueller, p. 4, https://www.rand.org/pubs/
research_reports/RR676.html.
23 Wasser, Pettyjohn, Martini, and Evans et al., The Air War Against the Islamic State , p. 297.
24 GAO/NSIAD-97-134, Operation Desert Storm , p. 29.
25 Barry D. Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks: Progress and Prospects  (Washington, DC: 
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2007), p. 241, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2007.03.01-
Six-Decades-Of-Guided-Weapons.pdf.
26 Ibid., p. 241.
27 U.S. Central Command Air Forces, “Operation IRAQI FREEDOM – By The Numbers,” p. 11.
28 Alegi, Anrig, Chivvis, Egnell et al., Precision and Purpose , p. 4.
29 Based on the analysis of Pettyjohn and Dennis, Precision and Posture , p. 4–5.

106  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 107
30 Calculated by dividing the total number of guided munitions expended in each campaign by the campaign’s duration.
31 GAO/NSIAD-97-134, Operation Desert Storm , p. 166–167.
32 Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks , p. 238.
33 Arkin, “Weapons Total From Afghanistan Includes Large Amount of Cannon Fire.”
34 U.S. Central Command Air Forces, “Operation IRAQI FREEDOM – By The Numbers,” p. 11.
35 Jeremiah Gertler,  Operation Odyssey Dawn (Libya): Background and Issues for Congress  (Washington, DC: 
Congressional Research Service, March 30, 2011), p. 7, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/natsec/R41725.pdf.
36 Calculated based on the following reports: Dan Lamothe, “Tomahawk missiles the latest U.S. Weapon used against 
Islamic State,” Washington Post, September 23, 2014, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/
wp/2014/09/23/tomahawk-missiles-the-latest-u-s-weapon-used-against-islamic-state/; Michael R. Gordon, Helene 
Cooper, and Michael D. Shear, “Dozens of U.S. Missiles Hit Air Base in Syria,” April 6, 2017, https://www.nytimes.
com/2017/04/06/world/middleeast/us-said-to-weigh-military-responses-to-syrian-chemical-attack.html; BBC, 
“US-led Strikes on Syria: What Was Hit?,” April 16, 2018, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-43769332. 
37 Eric Heginbotham, Michael Nixon, Forrest E. Morgan, and Jacob L. Heim et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard: 
Forces, Geography, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 1996–2017  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015), p. 128, https://
www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR392.html.
38 Ibid., p. 128.
39 Alegi, Anrig, Chivvis, Egnell et al., Precision and Purpose , p. 146.
40 Gulf War Air Power Survey, Volume V: A Statistical Compendium and Chronology (Washington, DC: Department of 
Defense, 1993), p. 553, https://media.defense.gov/2010/Sep/27/2001329816/-1/-1/0/AFD-100927-065.pdf.
41 Heginbotham, Nixon, Morgan, Heim et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard , p. 128.
42 U.S. Central Command Air Forces, “Operation IRAQI FREEDOM – By The Numbers,” p. 11.
43 Quantity destroyed taken from Mike Pietrucha, “The Need for SEAD Part I: The Nature of SEAD,” War on the Rocks, 
May 17, 2017, https://warontherocks.com/2016/05/the-need-for-sead-part-i-the-nature-of-sead/; Total quantity 
taken from GAO/NSIAD-97-134, Operation Desert Storm , p. 205.
44 Christopher Bolkcom, Military Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD): Assessing Future Needs  (Washington, 
DC: Congressional Research Service, May 11, 2005), p. 6, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/weapons/RS21141.pdf.
45 Ibid., p. 6.
46 Ibid., p. 6.
47 Bill Gortney, “DOD News Briefing with Vice Adm. Gortney from the Pentagon on Operation Odyssey Dawn,” March 20, 
2011, https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20110529171115/http:/www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=4787.
48 Gulf War Air Power Survey, Volume V, p. 641.
49 Lambeth, NATO’s Air War for Kosovo, p. 65.
50 Bolkcom, Military Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD) , p. 4.
51 Sam Jones, “F-15 Fighter Jet Crashes in Libya,” The Guardian, March 22, 2011, https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2011/mar/22/f15-fighter-crash-libya.
52 Compiled from: Lieven Dewitte, “Pilot Killed as U.S. F-16 Crashes in Jordan,” F-16.net, December 1, 2014, https://
www.f-16.net/f-16-news-article4910.html; Ryan Browne, “US Aircraft Crashes in Syria,” CNN, September 29, 2017, 
https://edition.cnn.com/2017/09/29/politics/us-osprey-aircraft-crash-syria/index.html; Brian Everstine, “Air Force: 
Lost Predator was shot down in Syria,” Air Force Times, June 29, 2015, https://www.airforcetimes.com/news/
pentagon-congress/2015/06/29/air-force-lost-predator-was-shot-down-in-syria/; Phillip Swarts, “Reaper down: MQ-9 
Crashes in Syria,” Air Force Times, July 5, 2016, https://www.airforcetimes.com/news/your-air-force/2016/07/05/
Reaper-down-mq-9-crashes-in-syria/; Howard Altman, “Two US Drones Collide and Crash over Idlib, Syria, Defense 
Official Says,” Military Times, August 18, 2020, https://www.militarytimes.com/news/your-military/2020/08/18/
two-us-drones-collide-and-crash-over-idlib-syria-defense-official-says/ .

108  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
APPENDIX B
Appendix B: Great Power 
Conflict Scenario Data
This appendix contains additional information about the methodology and data supporting 
the scenario analysis in Chapter Three.
Scenario Data
This section contains the complete great power conflict scenario analyses used to inform 
Chapter Three’s conclusions. Targets were drawn from and verified using a variety of 
sources, including publicly available DoD documents, third-party studies, and open-
source online databases such as Janes. Where possible, all target data was verified using a 
second open source or publicly available satellite imagery. CSBA then estimated the quan -
tity of aimpoints for each target using 1,000 lb. warhead equivalents. Finally, the munitions 
requirements for each scenario were calculated to achieve a 90 percent or greater probability 
of hit for each aimpoint.
Neutralize Invasion Force in Taiwan Strait
Scenario 1 focuses on the naval and air forces of the PLA and civilian ships that would be 
used by the PLA to transport men and materiel across the Taiwan Strait. The operational 
objective in this scenario is the rapid neutralization of the Chinese invasion force, with 
the ultimate strategic objective of preventing large-scale amphibious landings on Taiwan. 
To accomplish this objective, U.S. forces would attack the invasion force itself as well as 
screening forces.
The primary targets in this scenario are PLA maritime and aviation forces. The Eastern 
and Southern fleets would likely support the invasion itself in the vicinity of the Taiwan 
Strait. The Northern Theater Navy would screen the invasion from the eastern side of 
Taiwan and possibly enforce a maritime blockade. PLAN attack submarines would patrol to 
defend surface forces and engage U.S. forces attempting to intervene. Together, these forces 
comprise around 250 surface combatants and submarines.
The invasion force itself would be supplemented by commercial transport ships and 
ferries, along with an unknown number of decoys and support vessels. PLA experts esti -
mate that “63 civilian RO-RO ships are currently suitable for use by military units, totaling 
140,000 deadweight tons.”243 Combining these 63 RO-RO vessels with the previously 
243 Kennedy, “Getting There,” p. 234.

108  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 109
described PLA naval combatants brings the total number of vessels to 310, on par with 
former Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Michele Flournoy’s testimony concerning the 
need to sink 300 Chinese vessels. Excluded from this target set are potentially hundreds 
of smaller landing and support vessels of the PLA Ground Force, civilian merchant fleet, 
Chinese Coast Guard, and maritime militia. 244 These vessels could be used for a variety of 
functions, including transporting PLA forces. Should U.S. munitions be unable to effec -
tively discriminate between these vessels and surface combatants and large RO-ROs, these 
ships could serve as decoys that absorb exquisite weapons like anti-ship cruise missiles. 
For these reasons, CSBA’s estimate of 310 vessels to sink in a Taiwan invasion scenario is 
likely conservative.
In addition to maritime targets, the invasion would be supported by PLAN and PLA Air 
Force (PLAAF) aircraft from the Eastern and Southern theater commands. These forces 
include around 700 fighter aircraft, 250 bombers, and over 100 special-purpose aircraft. 
Table 3 contains a list of the targets included in scenario 1. Figure 25 shows how this target 
list translates into munition aimpoints.
244 Ibid., pp. 224–243.

110  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
TABLE 3: SCENARIO 1 TARGET LIST
Category Subcategory Target Type Quantity
PLAN Surface Vessels 245
Northern Theater Navy
Aircraft carrier 1
Cruisers 2
Destroyers 11
Frigates 12
Corvettes 12
Tank landing ships 2
Medium landing ships 3
Eastern Theater Navy
Destroyers 13
Frigates 23
Corvettes 24
Amphibious transport docks 3
Tank landing ships 16
Medium landing ships 5
Southern Theater Navy
Aircraft carrier 1
Destroyers 10
Frigates 14
Corvettes 20
Amphibious transport docks 5
Tank landing ships 10
Medium landing ships 8
Auxiliaries 246 Commercial Transports RO-RO ships 63
PLAN Submarines 247 Northern, Eastern, and 
Southern Theater Navies
Nuclear-powered attack subs 6
Diesel-powered attack subs 46
Eastern/Southern TC 
PLAAF 248
Special Mission Aircraft Special mission aircraft 100
Bomber/Attack Aircraft Bombers/Attack aircraft 250
Fighter Aircraft Fighter aircraft 700
245 Theater surface vessel force laydowns taken from Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security 
Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2021: Annual Report to Congress (Washington, DC: Department 
of Defense, 2021), p. 54, https://media.defense.gov/2021/Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-1/0/2021-CMPR-FINAL.PDF.
246 Kennedy, “Getting There,” pp. 233–241.
247 Submarine force numbers taken from Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments 
Involving the People’s Republic of China 2021 , p. 54.
248 Ibid., p. 162.

110  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 111
FIGURE 25: SCENARIO 1 AIMPOINTS 
Given this target set, Figure 26 displays the approximate locations of PLA forces, along with 
the maximum engagement range of different munition types and the distances between 
these potential engagement ranges and U.S. bases in the Indo-Pacific. Figure 27 displays an 
estimate of munitions required by target type and the proportion of targets attacked.
FIGURE 26: SCENARIO 1 TARGET MAP


112  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 27: SCENARIO 1 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS
Neutralize South China Sea Outposts
Scenario 2 encompasses China’s manmade island features in the Paracel and Spratly 
Islands of the South China Sea. Unless otherwise noted, all data surrounding South China 
Sea targets was sourced from satellite imagery and analysis from the Asia Maritime 
Transparency Initiative at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. 249 The opera-
tional objective of scenario 2 is the neutralization of these outposts through the destruction 
of key infrastructure on each feature. Accomplishing this objective would prevent the PLA 
from using these outposts as bases to project power into the South China Sea and beyond, 
as well as remove A2/AD threats, such as air defenses and anti-ship cruise missiles, from 
the area.
China’s South China Sea outposts include four major bases with large airfields and harbors 
and a host of smaller features that vary in size. CSBA estimated the number of aimpoints of 
each feature based on its size and the facilities identifiable in satellite imagery.
PLA air and naval forces are not included in this target list because they are considered 
separately in Scenario 1. The following targets comprise Scenario 2:
249 See Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “China Island Tracker,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
https://amti.csis.org/island-tracker/china/.

112  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 113
TABLE 4: SCENARIO 2 TARGET LIST
Category Subcategory Target Type
Paracel Islands 250
Woody Island
Airfield
Harbors
Communications arrays
Radars
Fuel/water storage
Munitions storage
SAM sites
Short-range air defenses
Tree Island Outpost (harbor, helipads, radar)
Lincoln Island Outpost (harbor)
Drummond Island Outpost (harbor, helipads, radar)
Pattle Island Outpost (harbor, helipads, radar)
Money Island Outpost (harbor, helipads, radar)
Duncan Islands Outpost (harbor, helipads, hangars, radar)
Triton Island Outpost (harbor, helipads, radar)
Spratly Islands 251
Fiery Cross Reef
Airfield
Harbor
Communications arrays
Radars
Fuel/water storage
Munitions storage
SAM sites
Short-range air defenses
Mischief Reef
Airfield
Harbor
Communications arrays
Radars
Fuel/water storage
Munitions storage
SAM sites
Short-range air defenses
Subi Reef
Airfield
Harbor
Communications arrays
Radars
Fuel/water storage
Munitions storage
SAM sites
Short-range air defenses
Gaven Reef Outpost (harbor, radars, communications, helipad, air defenses)
Hughes Reef Outpost (harbor, radars, communications, helipad, air defenses)
Johnson Reef Outpost (harbor, radars, communications, helipad, air defenses)
Cuarteron Reef Outpost (harbor, radars, communications, helipad, air defenses)
250 Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “Update: China’s Continuing Reclamation in the Paracels,” Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, August 9, 2017, https://amti.csis.org/paracels-beijings-other-buildup/.
251 Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “Comparing Aerial and Satellite Images of China’s Spratly Outposts,” Center 
for Strategic and International Studies, February 16, 2018, https://amti.csis.org/comparing-aerial-satellite-images-
chinas-spratly-outposts/; Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “China’s New Spratly Island Defenses,” Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, December 13, 2016, https://amti.csis.org/chinas-new-spratly-island-defenses/.

114  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 28: SCENARIO 2 AIMPOINTS 
FIGURE 29: SCENARIO 2 TARGET MAP


114  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 115
FIGURE 30: SCENARIO 2 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS
Counter-C4ISR Campaign
Scenario 3 expands the target list to C4ISR targets on the Chinese mainland, including 
early warning sensors, communications nodes, IADS elements, and command and control 
elements. CSBA selected these targets to represent the key C4ISR nodes essential to 
executing a “blinding” campaign against the PLA.
Many of the counter-space, long-range sensor, and communications targets in this 
case were drawn from AirSea Battle. For some targets, CSBA utilized maps created by 
Taiwanese student Joseph Wen as an initial reference before verifying locations using 
satellite imagery.252 
In this scenario, CSBA considered the number of munitions required to attack only the 
sensing and communications infrastructure of airfields and naval bases, not the weapons 
required to completely disable the bases through the destruction of runways or docks.
252 For an explanation of Wen’s efforts and methodology, see Keoni Everington, “Taiwanese Student Creates Map of 
China’s PLA Bases,” Taiwan News, June 21, 2022, https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/4576244.

116  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
TABLE 5: SCENARIO 3 TARGET LIST
Category Target Type Quantity
Headquarters 253
CMC and Joint Headquarters 4
Theater Command Headquarters 12
Space Headquarters and Satellite 
Monitoring Facilities 2
PLA Rocket Force Headquarters 254 2
Airfields 255
Large PLAAF Air Bases 12
Medium PLAAF Air Bases 23
Small PLAAF Air Bases 3
Large PLAN Air Bases 6
Medium PLAN Air Bases 13
Small PLAN Air Bases 2
Naval Bases 256
Surface Combatant Bases 21
Submarine Bases 4
Space Facilities 257
Launch Centers 4
ASAT Facilities 2
Communications SATCOM Facilities 258 29
Radar and IADS
OTH Radar Sites and Submarine 
Communication Stations 259 6
Sensor and Radar Sites 260 443
253 Easton, The Chinese Invasion Threat ;  and Joseph Wen, “中國人民解放軍基地及設施 (持續更新) [Chinese People’s 
Liberation Army Bases and Facilities (Continuously Updated)],” Google Maps, accessed April 10, 2023, https://www.
google.com/maps/d/u/0/viewer?hl=zh-TW&mid=19Q8BraU1Nmnk23TzMb5rhXFuIAnOpTTq&ll=26.552553613860
333%2C117.87935509962861&z=6.
254 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Nuclear Notebook: Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists , December 7, 2020, Table 2, https://thebulletin.org/premium/2020-12/nuclear-notebook-chinese-  
nuclear-forces-2020/#post-heading.
255 Airfield locations sourced from Janes database and verified using satellite imagery.
256 Naval base locations sourced from Janes database and verified using satellite imagery.
257 Jan van Tol with Mark Gunzinger, Andrew Krepinevich, and Jim Thomas, AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure 
Operational Concept  (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2010), p. 59, https://
csbaonline.org/research/publications/airsea-battle-concept.
258 SATCOM facilities were found using Joseph Wen’s maps as an initial reference and verified using satellite imagery.
259 OTH radar and submarine communication installations were found using Joseph Wen’s maps as an initial reference 
and verified using satellite imagery.
260 Radar sites sourced from Janes database and verified using satellite imagery.

116  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 117
FIGURE 31: SCENARIO 3 AIMPOINTS 
FIGURE 32: SCENARIO 3 TARGET MAP 


118  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 33: SCENARIO 3 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS
Strike Campaign Against Conventional Bases
Scenario 4 examines a strike campaign against PLA air, maritime, and rocket force basing 
in eastern and southern China. CSBA scoped this campaign to these regions to show 
the immense requirements for such a campaign against even a portion of the PLA’s total 
force. The northern and central regions of China are similarly dense with PLA bases and 
supporting infrastructure.

118  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 119
TABLE 6: SCENARIO 4 TARGET LIST
Category Target Type Quantity
Headquarters
PLAN Theater Headquarters/Fleet Commands 3
PLAAF Theater Headquarters 3
PLARF Headquarters 2
Naval Bases
Surface Combatant Bases 21
Submarine Bases 4
Airfields
Large PLAN Air Bases 6
Medium PLAN Air Bases 13
Small PLAN Air Bases 2
Large PLAAF Air Bases 12
Medium PLAAF Air Bases 23
Small PLAAF Air Bases 3
Rocket Forces 261 PLARF Brigade Bases 14
Air Defense Forces 262 Long-Range Air Defense Sites 34
Logistics 263 Depots, POL Storage, and Railheads 102
FIGURE 34: SCENARIO 4 AIMPOINTS 
261 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Nuclear Notebook: Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists , December 7, 2020, Table 2, https://thebulletin.org/premium/2020-12/nuclear-notebook-chinese-nuclear-  
forces-2020/#post-heading.
262 Long-range air defense sites sourced from Janes database and verified using satellite imagery.
263 Logistics facilities in the Eastern and Southern Theater Commands were found using Joseph Wen’s maps as an initial 
reference and verified using satellite imagery.

120  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 35: SCENARIO 4 TARGET MAP 
FIGURE 36: SCENARIO 4 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS


120  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 121
Force Regeneration Campaign
Scenario 5’s targets were chosen to represent industrial facilities that would support the 
PLA in a protracted war of attrition. CSBA focused on the production and research facilities 
themselves rather than supporting dual-use infrastructure such as power plants and energy 
distribution. The facilities included in this target set are in no way comprehensive, but repre -
sent a selection of major identifiable Chinese facilities.
TABLE 7: SCENARIO 5 TARGET LIST
Production Facilities 264
Aerospace Factories 15
Military Shipyards 15
Research Facilities 265 Aerospace, Maritime, Electronics, and Munitions Research Facilities 25
Space Facilities Satellite Launch Centers 4
POL Infrastructure 266
Crude Oil Terminals 55
Oil Refineries 59
FIGURE 37: SCENARIO 5 AIMPOINTS 
264 Chinese military production facilities were found using Joseph Wen’s maps as an initial reference and verified using 
satellite imagery.
265 Chinese military research facilities were found using Joseph Wen’s maps as an initial reference and verified using 
satellite imagery.
266 Chinese oil terminals and refineries were found using the open source World Oil Map 2021 and the China Energy Map 
from Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy. See Roque Leal, “World Oil Map 2021,” https://www.oilmap.
xyz/; Center for Energy Studies, “China Energy Map,” Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice University, https://www.
bakerinstitute.org/chinas-energy-infrastructure.

122  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
FIGURE 38: SCENARIO 5 TARGET MAP
FIGURE 39: SCENARIO 5 MUNITIONS REQUIREMENTS


122  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 123
Aimpoint Methodology and Assumptions
CSBA utilized several methods to determine the quantity of aimpoints and estimate muni -
tions requirements based on target type. This section outlines the methodologies used for 
several major categories of targets found in each of the great power conflict scenarios. Where 
possible, CSBA used 1,000 lb. warhead equivalents as a standard measure of munition 
explosive power to estimate the number of aimpoints for each target. This measure equates 
to the Mark 83 general-purpose bomb, which weighs about 1,000 lbs.—halfway between the 
500 lb. Mark 82 and 2,000 lb. Mark 84.267 This increment allows us to easily extrapolate 
munitions requirements for weapons of different sizes. In addition, many stand-off PGMs 
and cruise missiles carry 1,000 lb.-class warheads.
Naval Forces
Munitions requirements for ship targets were determined by vessel tonnage. CSBA utilized 
the average displacement of various PLA vessels by class and calculated the number of 1,000 
lb. warhead equivalents required to neutralize the vessel according to the formula below, 
where T is the vessel’s displacement tonnage.268 CSBA rounded to the nearest whole number 
of warheads.
# of 1,000 lb.warhead equivalents required = 
CSBA assumed that a single heavyweight torpedo (such as the Mark 48) will sink a nuclear 
or diesel attack submarine if it hits its target.
Aircraft
To simplify the analysis, CSBA assumed all air-to-air missiles and surface-to-air missiles 
have the same probability of hit and probability of kill. Our analysis also assumed that a 
single missile hit is sufficient to destroy an aircraft, regardless of type. Accordingly, each 
aircraft is considered a single aimpoint in our estimates.
Airbases
PLAAF and PLAN airbases were coded by size based on runway length and the number of 
aircraft parking spaces, hangars, and shelters. 269 Figure 40 shows aimpoint calculations for 
267 These direct attack general-purpose bombs can each be augmented with laser- or GPS-guided precision-guidance kits.
268 This formula is derived from Alan D. Zimm, “Antiship Missile Lessons from Sinking of the Moskva,” Proceedings 
148/5/1,431, May 2022, https:/ /www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings/2022/may/antiship-missile-lessons-sinking-moskva.
269 Airbase target attack methodology was informed by John Stillion and David T. Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to 
Conventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1999), https://www.rand.org/
pubs/monograph_reports/MR1028.html; and Sal Sidoti, Airbase Operability: A Study in Airbase Survivability and 
Post-Attack Recovery (RAAF Base Fairbairn: Aerospace Centre, 2001), https://airpower.airforce.gov.au/sites/default/
files/2021-03/FELL20-Airbase-Operability-A-Study-in-Airbase-Survivalability-and-Post-Attack-Recovery.pdf.

124  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
neutralizing medium-sized airbases using Jiaxing Airbase as a typical example. 270 CSBA 
used satellite imagery to estimate the number of aimpoints required to cut runways and 
taxiways, destroy parked aircraft, and neutralize base C2 facilities. Depending on base 
size, additional aimpoints were added to consider camouflaged, hidden, and underground 
storage facilities not visible in satellite photographs. Runways and taxiways were cut so that 
no usable stretch exceeded 5,000 feet by 50 feet—the U.S. DoD’s minimum operating strip 
(MOS) for fighter aircraft.271
FIGURE 40: EXAMPLE AIRBASE AIMPOINT ESTIMATE
Source: Created by CSBA using satellite imagery from Google Earth.
Naval Bases and Harbors
Aimpoints for harbor and port facilities were estimated by the size of available berthing 
space, measured from open-source satellite imagery. Two aimpoints were allotted for every 
100 meters of berthing space. CSBA assumed that these aimpoints would be focused on 
infrastructure and cargo-handling equipment such as cranes, shiploaders, docks, and piers. 
Figure 41 displays an example of CSBA’s methodology using harbor facilities at Subi Reef in 
the Spratly Islands.
270 CSBA’s aimpoint estimates for Chinese airbases is similar to that of several RAND models. See Heginbotham, Nixon, 
Morgan, and Heim et al., The U.S.–China Military Scorecard , Chapter 6; Jordan Rozsa, Improving Standoff Bombing 
Capacity in the Face of Anti-Access Area Denial Threats  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015), p. 48, https://www.rand.
org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD363.html.
271 U.S. Department of Defense, O&M: Airfield Damage Repair, Tri-Service Pavement Working Group (TSPWG) Manual, 
May 21, 2020, p. 36, https://www.wbdg.org/FFC/DOD/STC/TSPWG_M_3_270_01_3_270_07.pdf.

124  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 125
FIGURE 41: EXAMPLE HARBOR AIMPOINT ESTIMATE
 Source: Created by CSBA using satellite imagery from Google Earth.
Fixed Point Targets: Air Defenses, Outposts, Radars, and Communications Nodes
Point targets throughout the scenarios include SAM sites, radar and communications sites, 
small outposts, and other targets of limited area or with small targetable elements. CSBA 
estimated the number of aimpoints based upon the size and nature of each target type. 272 For 
example, single radar sites (Figure 42) were considered one aimpoint. Air defense sites with 
multiple, separated elements were allotted a single aimpoint for each major element (radar, 
C2, TELs, etc.). 
FIGURE 42: EXAMPLE FIXED POINT TARGET AIMPOINT ESTIMATE
 Source: Created by CSBA using satellite imagery from Google Earth.
272 This point target methodology makes similar assumptions to cruise missile modeling in Rosza, Improving Standoff 
Bombing Capacity in the Face of Anti-Access Area Denial Threats , pp. 42–47.

126  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Area Targets: Military Facilities, Logistics Targets, Industrial Targets
CSBA considered large targets that required effects spread over a wide area as area targets. 
Military facility targets included headquarters, basing, various space facilities, and large 
SATCOM installations. Logistics targets included munitions and POL storage facilities and 
railheads. Industrial targets included production and research facilities as well as oil termi -
nals and refineries.
CSBA estimated the quantity of aimpoints for these targets based on the average size of 
targets of similar type (e.g., command posts, railheads, aerospace production facilities). For 
some complex targets, CSBA assumed that striking key elements (such as the process towers 
or control rooms of oil refineries) could effectively shut down larger facilities. The large size 
and distance between these numerous elements, however, differentiated these targets from 
point targets with multiple closely situated aimpoints.

126  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 127
APPENDIX C
Appendix C: Attributes 
of Selected Current and 
Developmental PGMs
This appendix contains the full list of current and developmental PGMs, along with selected 
attributes, used to support the analysis in Chapter Four. Grey highlights denote programs 
that are currently developmental and have not reached IOC. CSBA drew munitions data 
from Janes database, with additional sources included in the footnotes. Blank boxes repre -
sent data that may not be publicly available at this time.
Munition Range Speed Target Type Delivery Guidance Notes
Laser-guided bombs 
(LGB)
Direct 
Attack
Freefall Land Attack Air Laser seeking Guidance kit for 500, 1,000, 
2,000, and 5,000 lb. bombs.
JDAM (Joint Direct 
Attack Munition) Freefall Land Attack Air GPS, INS Guidance kit for 500, 1,000, 
and 2,000 lb. bombs.
CBU-105 Sensor 
Fuzed Weapon (SFW) Freefall Land Attack Air GPS, INS Releases 10 BLU-108 smart 
submunitions.
GBU-57A/B Massive 
Ordnance Penetrator 
(MOP)
Freefall Land Attack Air GPS, INS 30,000 lb. “bunker buster.”
AGM-114 Hellfire Supersonic Land Attack Air Laser seeking 
or MMW radar
Various payloads up to 100 
lbs.
JAGM (Joint Air-to-
Ground Missile) Supersonic Land Attack Air Laser seeking, 
MMW radar
Approved for full-rate produc -
tion in August, 2022. 273
AIM-9X Sidewinder Supersonic Air-to-Air Air IR seeking
RIM-162 ESSM 
(Evolved Sea Sparrow 
Missile)
Stand-in
Supersonic Anti-Air Sea Active/semi-
active radar Datalink.
GMLRS (Guided 
Multiple Launch 
Rocket System)
Supersonic Land Attack Ground GPS, INS
Unitary and alternative 
warhead (fragmentation) 
variants.
GBU-53/B 
StormBreaker Glide Land Attack Air
GPS, INS, IR 
seeking, laser 
seeking, active 
radar
250 lb. bomb with datalink.
273 Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin’s Joint-Air-To-Ground Missile (JAGM) Cleared for Full Rate Production, August 
2022, https:/ /www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/news/features/2022/lockheed-martins-joint-air-to-ground-missile-
jagm-cleared-for-full-rate-production.html.

128  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Munition Range Speed Target Type Delivery Guidance Notes
AGM-154 JSOW (Joint 
Standoff Weapon)
Stand-in
Glide Land Attack Air GPS, INS or IIR 
seeker
Variants carry 500 lb. unitary 
warhead, cluster munitions, 
or smart submunitions. Can 
be internally carried by F-35.
GBU-39/B SDB 
(Small Diameter 
Bomb)
Glide Land Attack Air GPS, INS 250 lb. bomb.
AGM-88E AARGM 
(Advanced Anti-
Radiation Guided 
Missile)
Supersonic Land Attack Air
Anti-radiation 
homing, MMW 
radar seeker, 
GPS, INS
Datalink.
GMLRS-ER  (Extended 
Range) Supersonic Land Attack Ground GPS, INS
SiAW (Stand-in Attack 
Weapon) Supersonic Land Attack Air -
Intended to fit in F-35 
internal bay and “to operate 
in [A2/AD] environments to 
strike mobile targets.” 274
AGM-88G AARGM-ER 
(Extended Range) Supersonic Land Attack Air
Anti-radiation 
homing, MMW 
radar seeker, 
GPS, INS
Intended for internal carry by 
F-35, “incorporates hardware 
and software modifica -
tions to include extended 
range, survivability, and 
effectiveness against future 
threats.”275
AIM-120D AMRAAM 
(Advanced Medium-
Range Air-to-Air 
Missile)
Supersonic Air-to-Air Air, 
Ground
Active radar, 
INS
Datalink for mid-course 
updates.
AIM-260 JATM  (Joint 
Advanced Tactical 
Missile)
Supersonic Air-to-Air Air
NSM (Naval Strike 
Missile) Subsonic Anti-Ship Sea, 
Ground
IIR seeker, 
GPS, TERCOM, 
INS
275 lb. warhead.
RGM/AGM/UGM-84 
Harpoon Subsonic Anti-Ship Air, Sea Active radar, 
GPS, INS
Datalink for mid-course 
updates, 500 lb. warhead.
SM-6 Supersonic Anti-Air, Anti-
Ship, BMD
Sea, 
Ground
Active or semi-
active radar, 
GPS, INS
Datalink, 150 lb. warhead. 
Ground-based SM-6s are 
part of the Army’s Mid-Range 
Capability (MRC) program.
AGM-84H/K 
SLAM-ER (Standoff 
Land Attack Missile 
Expanded Response)
Subsonic Land Attack Air IIR seeker, 
GPS, INS
Derivative of Harpoon with 
automatic target recogni -
tion and two-way datalink for 
man-in-the-loop control.
274 Frank Wolfe, “USAF Awards Contracts for Next Phase of Stand-in Attack Weapon to Lockheed Martin, Northrop 
Grumman and L3Harris,” Defense Daily , August 26, 2022, https://www.defensedaily.com/usaf-awards-
contracts-for-next-phase-of-stand-in-attack-weapon-to-lockheed-martin-nothrop-grumman-and-l3harris/
a i r-forc e/.
275 Naval Air Systems Command, “AARGM,” https://www.navair.navy.mil/product/AARGM.

128  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 129
Munition Range Speed Target Type Delivery Guidance Notes
MGM-140 ATACMS 
(Army Tactical Missile 
System)
Stand-in
Supersonic Land Attack Ground GPS, INS Variants with unitary and 
submunition payloads.
AGM-158A JASSM 
(Joint Air-to-Surface 
Standoff Missile)
Subsonic Land Attack Air IIR seeker, 
GPS, INS Datalink, 1,000 lb. warhead.
SM-2 Supersonic Anti-Air Sea
Semi-active 
radar, IR 
seeker, INS
Datalink.
HACM (Hypersonic 
Attack Cruise Missile)
Stand-off
Hypersonic Land Attack Air Unknown
Fighter-sized “scramjet-
powered hypersonic weapon 
designed to hold high-value 
targets at risk in contested 
environments from standoff 
distances.”276
AGM-183 ARRW 
(Air-Launched Rapid 
Response Weapon)
Hypersonic Land Attack Air
Unknown, 
intended for 
fixed targets
Tested from B-52.
HALO (Hypersonic 
Air-Launch Offensive 
anti-surface warfare)
Hypersonic Anti-ship Air Unknown
“envisioned to be a long-
range, aircraft carrier-based, 
strike fighter aircraft-
launched weapon system 
providing [anti-surface 
warfare] capabilities.” 277
Precision Strike 
Missile (PrSM) Supersonic Land Attack Ground GPS, INS
Potential for future vari -
ants to include multi-mode 
seekers for moving targets 
and extended range. 278
AGM-158C LRASM 
(Long Range Anti-Ship 
Missile)
Subsonic Anti-Ship Air, Sea
IIR seeker, 
passive radar 
homing, GPS, 
INS
Derivative of JASSM, 1,000 
lb. payload, datalink, auto -
matic target recognition and 
discrimination.
ADM-160 MALD 
(Miniature 
Air-Launched Decoy)
Subsonic Decoy, 
Non-Kinetic Air GPS, INS
Low-cost expendable decoy. 
Jammer and electronic 
warfare variants in service.
AGM-158B 
JASSM-ER (Extended 
Range)
Subsonic Land Attack Air IIR seeker, 
GPS, INS
276 Secretary of the Air Force Public Affairs, “Air Force Announces Hypersonic Missile Contract Award,” September 22, 2022, 
https:/ /www.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/3167976/air-force-announces-hypersonic-missile-contract-award/ .
277 Lee Willett, “HALO Programme Accelerates US Navy Hypersonic Capability Drive,” Naval News, September 5, 2022, 
https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2022/09/halo-us-navy-hypersonic-capability/.
278 Peter Ong, “Precision Strike Missile (PrSM) Information Update,” Naval News, August 5, 2022, https://www.
navalnews.com/naval-news/2022/08/precision-strike-missile-prsm-information-update/.

130  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
Munition Range Speed Target Type Delivery Guidance Notes
BGM-109 Tomahawk 
(all variants)
Long-
Range 
Strike
Subsonic
Land Attack, 
Anti-Ship in 
development
Sea, 
Ground
TERCOM, 
DSMAC, GPS, 
INS
Datalink and loitering capa -
bilities. Future Block V 
variants will be capable 
of striking moving targets 
at sea. Ground-based 
Tomahawks are part of the 
Army’s MRC program and are 
being experimented with by 
the USMC.
AGM-158D 
JASSM-XR (Extreme 
Range)
Subsonic Land Attack Air IIR seeker, 
GPS, INS
Also designated 
AGM-158B-2.
Long-Range 
Hypersonic Weapon 
(LRHW)
Hypersonic Land Attack Ground Unknown Utilizes Common Hypersonic 
Glide Body (CHGB).
Conventional Prompt 
Strike (CPS) Hypersonic Land Attack Sea Unknown Utilizes Common Hypersonic 
Glide Body (CHGB).

130  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 131
LIST OF ACRONYMS
A2/AD Anti-access/area denial
AARGM Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile
AARGM-ER  Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile – Extended Range
ACC Air Combat Command
AFB Air Force Base
AFRL Air Force Research Laboratory
AI Artificial intelligence
AMRAAM Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile
ARGUS Advanced Remote Ground Unattended Sensor
ARRW Air-Launched Rapid Response Weapon
ASAT Anti-satellite 
ASCM anti-ship cruise missile
ATACMS Army Tactical Missile System
ATR Automatic target recognition 
BDA Battle damage assessment
BMD Ballistic missile defense
C4ISR  Command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance
CALCM Conventional Air-Launched Cruise Missile
CC&D Camouflage, concealment, and deception
CCP Chinese Communist Party
CEP Circular error probable
CG guided missile cruiser
CHAMP Counter-Electronics High Power Microwave Advanced Missile Project
CHGB Common Hypersonic Glide Body
CLT Common Launch Tube
CMC Central Military Commission
CPS Conventional Prompt Strike
CR Continuing resolution
CSBA Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments
DAMASK Direct Attack Munition Affordable Seeker
DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DE Directed energy
DEAD Destruction of enemy air defenses
DIA Defense Intelligence Agency

132  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
DoD U.S. Department of Defense
DoDI Department of Defense Instruction
DSMAC Digital Scene Matching Area Correlator
ESSM Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile
FASCAM Family of Scatterable Mines
FY Fiscal year
FYDP Future Years Defense Program
GMLRS Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System
GPS Global Positioning System
HAAWC High Altitude Anti-Submarine Warfare Weapon Capability
HACM Hypersonic Attack Cruise Missile
HALO Hypersonic Air-Launch Offensive anti-surface warfare
HAS Hardened aircraft shelters
HPM High-power microwave
IAD Integrated air defense system
IIR Imaging infrared
INS Inertial navigation system
IOC Initial operational capacity
IR infrared
ISR Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
JAGM Joint Air-to-Ground Missile
JASSM Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile
JASSM-ER  Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile – Extended Range
JASSM-XR Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile – Extreme Range
JATM Joint Advanced Tactical Missile
JDAM Joint Direct Attack Munition
JQL JAGM Quad Launcher
JSM Joint Strike Missile
JSOW Joint Standoff Weapon
LADAR Light detection and ranging
LGB Laser-guided bomb
LO Low observable
LOCAAS Low Cost Autonomous Attack System
LRAAM Long-Range Air-to-Air Missile
LRASM Long Range Anti-Ship Missile
LRHW Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon

132  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT  www.csbaonline.org 133
MALD Miniature Air-Launched Decoy
MMT Modular Missile Technologies
MMW Millimeter wave
MOAB Massive Ordnance Air Blast
MOP Massive Ordnance Penetrator
MOS Minimum operating strip
MRC Mid-Range Capability
MRP Munitions Requirements Process
MUM-T Manned-unmanned teaming
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NMM Navy Modular Missile
NSM Naval Strike Missile
OTH Over-the-horizon
PGM Precision-guided munition
PLA People’s Liberation Army
PLAAF People’s Liberation Army Air Force
PLAGF People’s Liberation Army Ground Force
PLAN People’s Liberation Army Navy
PLARF People’s Liberation Army Rocket Force
POL Petroleum, oil, and lubricant
PRC People’s Republic of China
PrSM Precision Strike Missile
RDT&E Research, development, testing, and evaluation
ROC Republic of China
ROE Rules of engagement
RO-RO Roll-on roll-off
SAM surface-to-air missile
SATCOM Satellite communications
SDB Small Diameter Bomb
SEAD Suppression of enemy air defenses
SiAW Stand-in Attack Weapon
SLAM-ER  Standoff Land Attack Missile Expanded Response
SOCOM U.S. Special Operations Command
TEL Transporter, erector, launcher
TERCOM Terrain contour matching
THAAD Terminal High Altitude Area Defense

134  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT
TLAM Tomahawk Land Attack Missile
TSSAM Tri-Service Standoff Attack Missile
UAI Universal Armaments Interface
UAS Unmanned aerial system
USAF U.S. Air Force
USD(P) Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USINDOPACOM U.S. Indo-Pacific Command
USN U.S. Navy
VLS Vertical launch system
WOSA Weapons Open System Architecture

134  CSBA | BEYOND PRECISION: MAINTAINING AMERICA’S STRIKE ADVANTAGE IN GREAT POWER CONFLICT

1667 K Street, NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20006
Tel. 202.331.7990 • Fax 202.331.8019
www.csbaonline.org