Al Shabaab | Mapping Militants Project
Skip to main content
Key statistics
2006
First Recorded Activity
2007
First Attack
2025
Profile Last Updated
Download PDF
LOGIN to download this file
How to Cite
Crenshaw, M., & Robinson, K. (2025). Mapping Militants Project. Rice University. https://doi.org/10.25613/G0K4-WF70
Mapping Militants Project. “Al Shabaab.” Last modified
May 1, 2025
. https://mappingmilitants.org/node/316/
Profile Contents
Narrative
Narrative of the Organization's History
Organization
Leadership, Name Changes, Size Estimates, Resources, Geographic Locations
Strategy
Ideology, Aims, Political Activities, Targets, and Tactics
Major Attacks
First Attacks, Largest Attacks, Notable Attacks
Interactions
Foreign Designations and Listings, Community Relations, Relations with Other Groups, State Sponsors and External Influences
Maps
Mapping relationships with other militant groups over time in regional maps
Global Al Qaeda
Somalia
Main Tabs Group
Overview
Formed:
December 1, 2006
Disbanded:
Group is active.
First Attack:
March 26, 2007:
A man named Adam Salam Adam used a car bomb to conduct a suicide attack against Ethiopian soldiers in Mogadishu. Al Shabaab claimed responsibility for the bombing, allegedly the city’s first suicide attack. (~73 killed, unknown wounded).
[1]
Last Attack:
April 24, 2025:
Al Shabaab militants attacked a base in Wargaadhi, Somalia. The base is home to “soldiers, special forces, and clan fighters.” If successfully captured, Al Shabaab could use its position at the base to “sever a crucial road between the capital” to southwest Somalia and “the central Galmudug state.” The attack killed over forty people. The outcome of the attack is unclear, with both Al Shabaab and Somali forces claiming control over the base. (40+ killed, unknown wounded).
[2]
Al Shabaab is a Salafi militant organization seeking to build an Islamic state in Somalia. Although the group is based in Somalia, Al Shabaab has also conducted attacks in neighboring countries, including Kenya, Djibouti, and Ethiopia. Al Shabaab emerged as an independent organization around December 2006 after the dissolution of the Islamic Courts Union (ICU), for which it had served as the military wing. Since the late 2000s, Al Shabaab has had close ties to Al Qaeda and has sought to frame the Somali struggle as part of a global jihadist movement. The group has engaged in bombings, suicide attacks, and armed assaults against the Somali government,  religious minorities, private civilians, foreign troops, diplomats, and aid or non-governmental organization workers.
Narrative
Al Shabaab is a large militant organization in the Horn of Africa aiming to establish an Islamic state. The group’s name translates to “The Youth” or “The Young Men” in Arabic.
[3]
Al Shabaab’s exact origins are somewhat ambiguous. The group may have ties to
Al Ittihad Al Islamiya (AIAI)
, an armed group active in Somalia and Ethiopia between 1984 and 1997. Al Shabaab’s first leader, Aden Hashi Ayro, served in AIAI from 1991 to 1997. Sometime after 1997, Ayro joined
the Islamic Courts Union (ICU)
, a court system founded by Somali locals who sought to take control of and infuse order in Mogadishu due to chaos after Somali dictator Siad Barre’s death.
[4]
A series of ICU leaders were assassinated in 2005, allegedly by Somalia’s Transitional Federal Government (TFG). The armed enforcement wing of the ICU — Al Shabaab, led by Ayro — thereafter rose to prominence. The group developed into a cohesive and effective militant organization under Ayro’s leadership, during which he helped recruit and train its fighters. Al Shabaab advocated for violent revenge against TFG personnel, drawing criticism from Hassan Dahir Aweys, another former AIAI member who served as ICU legislative council chair. Aweys also criticized Ayro’s other brutal actions­, such as the 2005 disinterment of an Italian colonial-era cemetery, arguing it would damage the ICU’s reputation. In June 2006, the ICU gained control of Mogadishu and other areas in central and southern Somalia. As the courts spread their influence, they began to make tangible improvements to civilian quality of life. They removed roadblocks and trash from the Mogadishu streets, provided peace and security, and returned property to locals that was commandeered by US-backed warlords. For these reasons, the ICU enjoyed a large degree of support from the civilian population under its control.
[5]
The ICU’s reign over Mogadishu was short-lived, lasting approximately 3 months. This was partly due to escalating tensions within ICU leadership. Aweys, who was considered a Salafist, advocated for a nationalistic agenda of establishing an Islamic Somali state ruled by locals. On the other hand, Ayro pushed for the group to connect the struggle in Somalia to a broader international jihadist agenda. These struggles foreshadowed what would become to be Al Shabaab’s greatest weakness: its ideological lack of cohesion. As the group became increasingly outspokenthroughout 2006, the TFG became concerned. On December 20, 2006, a coalition of United Nations-backed Ethiopian troops, TFG forces, and competing warlords launched an offensive against the ICU. The ICU effectively disintegrated soon after this offensive. The ICU’s leaders left Mogadishu six days later and formally resigned their leadership on December 27, 2006. Although the ICU had been effectively demolished as an organization, Al Shabaab remained active under Ayro’s leadership and broke away to become an independent militant group.
[6]
The Ethiopian-TFG offensive was a crucial event for Al Shabaab. It led to the dissolution of the ICU, making Al Shabaab one of the main anti-government and anti-foreign forces in Somalia.
[7]
Ahmed Abdi Godane ­— former AIAI member who served as executive chairman of Al Shabaab — fundamentally reorganized the group and laid the groundwork for its insurgency.
[8]
Although Al Shabaab has a designated central commander – its first was Ayro – the group operates with a decentralized leadership structure. Top leaders, known as emirs, operate specific regional areas, each with its own political and administrative entities. This decentralized structure allows Al Shabaab to manage its network across South and Central Somalia. The Ethiopian offensive led to the widespread elimination of other Islamist factions, allowing Al Shabaab to further radicalize and expand its influence.
[9]
Beginning in January 2007, Al Shabaab conducted attacks against Ethiopian and TFG forces using a wide variety of tactics, including bombs, rocket-propelled grenades, and firefights. Frequent attacks in Mogadishu killed dozens, with over 1,000 civilian deaths in April 2007 alone. In early 2007, the African Union authorized peacekeeping forces from the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) to stabilize the country. Troops from Uganda and Burundi arrived to support the AMISOM mission, and Al Shabaab launched attacks against those troops as well.
[10]
In September 2007, former ICU leaders and members met with elements of other Somali opposition groups in Asmara, Eritrea to form an alliance, reemerging as the Alliance for the Reliberation of Somalia (ARS).
[11]
ARS-Asmara, led by Aweys, sought to continue the Somali resistance against foreign occupation.
[12]
However, Al Shabaab refused to attend the meeting in Eritrea and denounced the new group for failing to adopt a global jihadist agenda.
[13]
Al Shabaab leader Ayro sought to expand the group’s struggle beyond Somalia and link it to the broader jihadist movement. In his previous role as a member of AIAI, Ayro established connections with Al Qaeda (AQ), which he further cultivated after the disintegration of the ICU. In several statements between 2006 and 2007, AQ leaders Osama bin Laden and Ayman Al-Zawahiri called on Muslims to aid Al Shabaab’s efforts in Somalia. The group also adopted AQ tactics, including suicide bombings.
[14]
In February 2008, the United States designated Al Shabaab a foreign terrorist organization. Three months later, a U.S. missile strike killed Ayro, and Ahmed Abdi Godane — also known as Mukhtar Abu Zubeyr — became Al Shabaab’s top leader. Under Godane, Al Shabaab aligned itself more closely with AQ in ideology and tactics, leading to fundamental changes within the group.
[15]
Godane published a statement that praised AQ, and for the first time, publicly and explicitly framed the group’s struggle in Somalia as part of a larger global jihad. Al Shabaab leveraged its relationship with AQ to attract foreign fighters and monetary donations from AQ’s supporters. Al Shabaab members traveled abroad to train with AQ, and the group increasingly focused on conducting AQ-style suicide attacks. Although Al Shabaab retained most of its local Somali leaders, like regional commander Sheikh Mukhtar Robow, it began including AQ militants in its leadership after 2008.
[16]
These changes led to a rapid transformation of Al Shabaab from a local Islamist-nationalist group into an internationally oriented, AQ-aligned terrorist organization.
In mid-2008, Al Shabaab launched a violent campaign to avenge Ayro’s death, attacking government targets in Somalia. Among other attacks during that campaign, Al Shabaab simultaneously executed five suicide attacks against U.N. and other government targets on October 29, 2008, killing almost 30 people.
[17]
Al Shabaab continued using guerrilla and terror tactics against Ethiopian troops throughout 2008, gaining control of most of southern Somalia and some of Mogadishu by early 2009. During this time, Al Shabaab also gained control of important Somali cities like Baido and the port city of Kismayo.
[18]
These successes in 2008 and 2009 emboldened the group, allowing it to rally considerable support for its cause in south-central Somalia.
In January 2009, Ethiopian forces withdrew completely from Mogadishu in accordance with a 2008 U.N.-backed agreement between the TFG and the ARS, which also stipulated the deployment of U.N. peacekeepers.
[19]
Al Shabaab claimed that it had successfully expelled the Ethiopians from Somalia and turned its attention to forcing other foreign soldiers from the country. Its attacks targeted TFG and AMISOM troops. Under the terms of the U.N.-backed agreement, the ICU’s former leader, Sheikh Sharif, became the TFG’s president. Sharif’s ascension provided some stability in the country, and he vowed to implement Shariah law. After Sharif became president and Ethiopian troops left the country, Al Shabaab lost some of its basis for popular support. The group accomplished its goal of forcing out the Ethiopians, and Sharif took up its efforts to implement Shariah law. To remain relevant and undermine the TFG, Al Shabaab established its own governing structures in the territories it controlled. These local governments transcended existing clan divisions by drawing leadership from a wide representation of kinship groups.
[20]
Through these structures, the group collected taxes and provided social services.
[21]
In February 2009,
Hizbul Islam
emerged as a coalition of Somali Islamist groups opposed to the U.N.-backed agreement and cooperation with the TFG. ARS-Asmara, previously led by Hassan Aweys, was one of the four organizations that merged to form the coalition. Between May and July 2009, Al Shabaab and Hizbul Islam cooperated to target TFG forces and secure control of large areas of south-central Somalia and most of Mogadishu. The two groups had a shared interest in combating the TFG, but their cooperation ended there. Hizbul Islam and Al Shabaab competed militarily for influence over the Somali insurgency and control of territory. Ideologically, the groups clashed on a number of topics. For example, Hizbul Islam supported TFG president Sharif’s efforts to implement Shariah law, while Al Shabaab staunchly opposed them. In addition, Aweys strictly opposed Godane’s efforts to court AQ and have foreign jihadists interfere in Somalia. These tensions led to armed clashes between the two groups in late 2009.
[22]
Hizbul Islam slowly lost ground and ultimately chose to merge with Al Shabaab in late 2010 after a series of internal defections.
[23]
Some observers saw the merger as a takeover of Hizbul Islam by Al Shabaab.
[24]
In 2012, disagreements between Al Shabaab’s militants and its Hizbul Islam members led Hizbul Islam to ultimately split from the group.
[25]
The two factions disagreed about the nature and extent of the organization’s goals. Al Shabaab militants fought to internationalize the Somali conflict in the name of global jihad, while Hizbul Islam militants had more nationalist objectives and wanted to focus strictly on Somalia.
[26]
After the split, Hizbul Islam became inactive and renounced violence.
[27]
Al Shabaab members increasingly criticized Godane following the failed Mogadishu Ramadan offensive of August 2010. The operation, which was reportedly planned by Godane, resulted in the deaths of hundreds of militants.
[28]
In August 2011, mounting pressure from a coalition of TFG and AMISOM forces caused Al Shabaab to withdraw from Mogadishu. The coalition also expelled Al Shabaab from major seaports south of the capital, which the group has not been able to regain as of 2021.
[29]
As of 2025, the group has not recaptured the seaports. Al Shabaab offensives now target central Somalia, where territorial control is contested.
[30]
The control of these port cities, principally Kismayo and Barawe, allowed the group to gain revenue from smuggling and taxing overseas shipping.
[31]
These losses were reportedly a major humiliation for Godane. Two weeks later, Godane removed Mukhtar Robow and Ibrahim al-Afghani ­­— both founding members of Al Shabaab — as deputies over their criticism of his leadership abilities. Godane also suspended meetings of Al Shabaab’s Shura leadership council.
[32]
Despite setbacks and internal tensions, the group maintained control over large swaths of territory in central and southern Somalia. Al Shabaab later made the southern Somali city of Jilib its de facto capital following the loss of Mogadishu.
[33]
Al Shabaab’s internal struggles surfaced in February 2012 with Godane’s announcement of a formal affiliation with AQ.
[34]
The move caused disputes between the group’s leaders, reflecting disagreements over AQ’s role that have divided Al Shabaab since its ICU days.
[35]
In March 2012, an American Al Shabaab militant named Omar Hammami posted a video online announcing his defection from the group. Hammami said his life was in danger, leading him to join other Al Shabaab defectors in publicly criticizing Godane’s dictatorial methods.
[36]
The ensuing public relations nightmare concerned Godane, who feared that dissidents might break away from Al Shabaab. He issued a statement shortly after warning that anyone who tried to “weaken and tear Muslims apart” would be considered the enemy. Hassan Aweys responded publicly a week later by accusing Godane of being “far removed from Islam.”
[37]
In early 2013, Al Shabaab leaders began calling for Godane’s removal. An Al Shabaab militant known as Abu al-Muhajir accused Godane of serious abuses in an open letter issued in March. The following month, Ibrahim al-Afghani published an open letter to AQ leader Ayman al-Zawahiri. Al-Afghani, who was a longstanding friend of Godane, reiterated al-Muhajir’s accusations and warned that Al Shabaab’s jihad risked failure. Godane quickly and decisively responded to quell opposition. In June, he ordered the Amniyat, Al Shabaab’s intelligence unit, to arrest al-Afghani along with another founding member of the group, preacher Mu’allim Burhan. They were both killed shortly after under disputed circumstances.
[38]
In September, the Amniyat tracked down Omar Hammami, killing him and other dissidents. Other Al Shabaab pragmatists fled for safety, including Aweys, who was captured by the Somali government when attempting to escape the country. Although Godane and his loyalists ultimately succeeded in their goal to consolidate power, it came at a great cost to the group. Analysts argue that the removal of respected leaders within the group cost Al Shabaab substantial leverage with local populations. Godane and his loyalists reportedly suffered alienation from the broader Somali Salafi community.
[39]
Foreign deployments continued to attack Al Shabaab throughout 2012-2014, leading the group to respond by conducting large-scale attacks on civilian and military personnel abroad.
[40]
In September 2013, Al Shabaab attacked Westgate Mall in Nairobi, Kenya, sparking a four-day siege in which at least 67 people were killed.
[41]
Six months later, the group struck a nightclub in Djibouti, killing Turkish and EU nationals.
[42]
In June 2014, over 48 people were killed after Al Shabaab attacked hotels, restaurants, and a police station in the Kenyan coastal city of Lamu.
[43]
Al Shabaab claimed that its attacks on foreign targets intended to pressure troops to withdraw from Somalia.
[44]
The foreign attacks also appeared to raise the group’s profile, boosting recruitment and morale of its troops. Godane enjoyed the increased media attention that followed these attacks for only a short time before being killed by a U.S. airstrike in September 2014. Following Godane’s death, Ahmed Umar Abu Ubaidah, also known as Ahmed Diriye, became the emir of Al Shabaab. He previously served as one of Godane’s deputies and was reportedly a leader in the 2013 Amniyat crackdown on internal dissidents.
[45]
Al Shabaab leaders also considered another candidate — Mahad Karate — to become the new emir, but analysts argue they opted for a conservative figure like Abu Ubaidah to ensure a smooth transition of power.
[46]
Under Abu Ubaidah’s leadership, Al Shabaab continued to launch high-profile attacks with the goal of forcing foreign troops out of Somalia, especially the Kenyan armed forces and the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM).
[47]
In April 2015, Al Shabaab militants targeted Kenya’s Garissa University College, killing at least 147.
[48]
A month later, the IS began challenging Al Shabaab’s greatest vulnerability by encouraging defections from the group. The media apparatus of IS produced numerous propaganda films starting in May 2015, featuring Somali foreign fighters in Iraq urging Somalis to join the Islamic State. The IS claimed that they were “the only group truly fighting against the oppression of Ethiopian Christians.” The Islamic State’s propaganda saw limited success in Somalia, yet elicited a strong response from Al Shabaab leadership. In November 2015, Abu Ubaidah ordered the Amniyat to crackdown on internal dissidents. However, a small group of pro-IS defectors from Al Shabaab survived the purge.
[49]
They operate in the northern Somali region of Puntland, where occasional clashes between Al Shabaab and defectors have erupted.
[50]
Despite the ideological struggles and setbacks Al Shabaab experienced in 2015, the group managed to carry out several major attacks in 2016. In January, militants killed over 100 soldiers at a Kenyan AMISOM base, becoming one of Al Shabaab’s deadliest attacks on a foreign operation.
[51]
The next month, in an attempt to target Western intelligence officials, a group member detonated a bomb concealed in a laptop on a flight headed from Mogadishu to Djibouti City. The explosives only killed the bomber, and the plane landed safely. These attacks demonstrated the effectiveness of Al Shabaab’s evolving military strategy involving high-profile strikes against majority civilian targets, guerrilla warfare, and attacks on vulnerable AMISOM or government positions.
[52]
In fact, Al Shabaab grew to become the deadliest militant group in Africa in 2016.
[53]
The next year, Al Shabaab killed more than 500 people in a twin truck bomb strike in Mogadishu.
[54]
This incident is considered to be the deadliest attack since the inception of Al Shabaab’s insurgency in 2006.
Despite Al Shabaab’s increasingly devastating attacks, countries participating in AMISOM began planning in 2017 to gradually withdraw from Somalia. Foreign leaders were angered by their own domestic security concerns and the European Union’s decision to decrease its contributions to AMISOM.
[55]
However, a series of extensions by the United Nations Security Council has delayed the departure of AMISOM troops until at least the end of 2021.
[56]
At the time that AMISOM exit plans were floated, analysts were concerned that the Somali Federal Government (SFG) would be unable to counter Al Shabaab, enabling the militant organization to recapture swaths of territory.
[57]
In April 2022, AMISOM’s mandate expired, and the African Union (AU) reconfigured AMISOM into the African Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS). The AMISOM troops were replaced by a new configuration with troops from the AU.
[58]
Starting in 2017, the United States increased its involvement in the fight against Al Shabaab. In March 2017, the United States expanded its rules of engagement to allow for more strikes, including preemptive strikes against members of Al Shabaab.
[59]
Previously, U.S. airstrikes only targeted high-value targets, such as past Al Shabaab emir Ahmed Godane. In June 2017, a U.S. airstrike destroyed an Al Shabaab camp in the Middle Juba region of south Somalia. According to Somali government officials, the camp was “a key command and supply hub.”
[60]
The surge in U.S. drone strikes, however, did not significantly degrade Al Shabaab’s capabilities. Instead, Al Shabaab remained adaptable, moving away from direct confrontations with enemy armed forces and engaging in more bombings against soft targets.
[61]
Though the group survived external threats, it continued struggling with internal leadership disputes in 2017-2019. Al Shabaab’s leader, Abu Ubaidah, was reportedly bedridden due to illness in early 2018. Abu Ubaidah’s incapacity likely triggered a leadership crisis within Al Shabaab later that year. In June 2018, he was believed to be near death. The cost of his medication diverted funds meant for Al Shabaab’s operations.
[62]
Abu Ubaidah’s failing health and its drain on Al Shabaab’s resources were believed to have weakened his control over the group, spurring a power struggle.
[63]
Meetings of Al Shabaab’s Shura council of senior leaders in 2018 reportedly ended in deadlock, unable to coalesce around a single figure to succeed Abu Ubaidah as emir.
[64]
According to Kenyan intelligence sources, Al Shabaab financial administrator Hussein Ali Fiidow allegedly attempted to organize a coup to replace Abu Ubaidah during the first half of 2018.
[65]
Additionally, Shura council member Mahad Karate — who had been serving as head of the Amniyat since Godane’s death — allegedly attempted to wrestle power from the emir.
[66]
At the time, these organizational disputes and increased military efforts led many analysts to believe that Al Shabaab was on the decline.
However, Al Shabaab’s operations in 2019 challenged analysts’ assumptions about the group’s decline and clearly signaled that the group was still able to coordinate complex attacks.
[67]
In January 2019, Al Shabaab attacked a five-star hotel in Nairobi, Kenya, resulting in over 15 deaths and severe injuries. The group claimed that the attack was retaliation for the increase in U.S. military activity in the region and retribution for U.S. President Donald Trump’s decision to move the U.S. Israeli embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem in May 2018.
[68]
However, given the length of time elapsed between the embassy’s move and the hotel siege, some observers assert that the attack was just part of Al Shabaab’s broader campaign to end Kenyan military intervention in Somalia.
[69]
On September 25, 2019, Al Shabaab carried out twin attacks on U.S. and E.U. troops using vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices (VBIEDs).
[70]
In August 2020, the Somali National Intelligence and Security Agency (NISA) announced that Abu Ubaidah had temporarily transferred power to Abukar Aden, who was serving as his deputy.
[71]
According to NISA’s Twitter announcement, Aden took over the group’s activities amidst a bitter power struggle between Abu Ubaidah’s supporters and those of Mahad Karate. For some time, Karate targeted Ubaidah by refusing to provide the emir with access to the group’s finances. Karate also killed several kinsmen from the Rahawein clan, where the majority of Ubaidah’s support came from. In retaliation, the emir attempted to expel Karate and his supporters. Abu Ubaidah’s actions drew criticism from clan elders who demanded that the emir “cede power to a new generation.”
[72]
These internal clashes exacerbated existing financial struggles, brought on by the loss of important port cities, reportedly leading to “massive defections” from the group.
[73]
In response to the global COVID-19 pandemic’s onset in early 2020, Al Shabaab provided public medical services for Somalis. Al Shabaab opened a dedicated COVID-19 treatment center in Jilib, south of  Mogadishu.
[74]
In addition to providing specialized care for the virus’s respiratory symptoms, Al Shabaab claimed to have a fleet of vehicles ready to collect and transport civilians showing symptoms of COVID-19. Providing these medical and social services strengthened Al Shabaab’s political strategy of connecting to local communities, which have sometimes provided both material and information to the militant group.
[75]
After a brief decline in activity in the first half of 2020, Al Shabaab increased its attacks in the second half of the year. The group carried out several high-profile attacks between September and November in Kismayo, a city previously considered to be safe. One of these attacks targeted Jubaland’s deputy state speaker of parliament.
[76]
In December 2020, the United States announced it would withdraw all of its troops from Somalia.
[77]
The highly criticized move crucially coincided with the Somali government’s plan to hold parliamentary and presidential elections in the first months of 2021. Coupled with the November 2020 withdrawal of Ethiopian troops, experts argued that the U.S.’s move would create a security vacuum in Somalia, which would benefit Al Shabaab.
[78]
Especially concerning was Al Shabaab’s increasing number of suicide attacks, which doubled in number from the first to the second half of 2020.
[79]
Al Shabaab’s violent activities directly threatened the 2021 Somali election, which the group considered to be an “apostate activity.” Observers worried that Al Shabaab’s threats would intimidate voters and undermine election results.
[80]
U.S. President Joe Biden recognized this threat and redeployed just under 500 troops in May 2022.
[81]
As of 2025, the contingent of US troops remains in Somalia to support security forces in military operations against Al Shabaab.
[82]
Worries about Al Shabaab’s activities heightened after U.S. President Joe Biden took office in January 2021. The new U.S. administration tightened the previous rules of engagement on counterterrorism drone strikes, causing concern among senior Somali military officials.
[83]
Unable to control Al Shabaab, the Somali government canceled the February 2021 elections due to security concerns. In April 2021, Somali President Farmaajo signed legislation to extend his presidential term. As a result, political infighting and violence increased in Mogadishu between opposition forces and forces aligned with the Farmaajo government.
[84]
According to sources, Al Shabaab has taken advantage of the political gridlock by recruiting more fighters to its ranks.
[85]
In April 2021, prominent international bodies warned of grave consequences for the Somali government if Al Shabaab was allowed to continue taking advantage of the leadership divisions emerging from the political crisis.
[86]
Al Shabaab altered its strategy in 2022. The group withdrew from its bases in areas previously assumed to be strongholds, aiming to attract pro-government forces and attack them with explosives. Al Shabaab ceded control of villages and bases in the Hiiraan and Middle Shabelle regions to government-aligned troops and militias. While some of this shift in territorial control occurred non-violently, Al Shabaab’s violent activities increased in 2022. The group lost ground in some regions of Somalia, but it successfully carried out lethal attacks on government and civilian targets in Mogadishu.
[87]
This included an attack on the Ministry of Education in October 2022 in which the group exploded two car bombs at a busy intersection, killing over 100 people and wounding at least 300 more. The bombing was the deadliest attack in Somalia since October 2017, when Al Shabaab detonated a car bomb at the same intersection to kill more than 500 people.
[88]
On March 31, 2022, the mandate for AMISOM expired. The mission of African Union forces in Somalia shifted, now prioritizing a drawdown of AU troops and the ultimate transfer of security responsibilities to Somali government forces by December 2024. The new mission, African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), was very similar to AMISOM, though the new forces were more agile and mobile than AMISOM troops.
[89]
With new support from ATMIS, Somali government forces launched a major offensive campaign in 2022 in the Hiraan and Galmudug regions of Somalia. The offensive built upon local resistance to Al Shabaab and initially proved to be successful. By April 2023, government forces had reclaimed over 200 settlements across the Hiraan and Galmudug regions. The offensive pushed Al Shabaab forces out of their normal strongholds to regions near the Kenyan border. The group found hideouts in the terrain, taking advantage of vegetation cover and the Boni forest. The lack of a strong state presence in northeastern Kenya gave Al Shabaab space to launch attacks on ATMIS security forces.
As cross-border activity skyrocketed, AU forces initiated a key part of the transition plan: the troop drawdown. In June 2023, 2,000 AU troops withdrew from Somalia and ceded control of five Forward Operating Bases (FOBs) to Somali government forces. Al Shabaab capitalized on this withdrawal, raising concerns about the security of these bases. In July 2023, Al Shabaab attacked and nearly captured a FOB in a village near the Kenya-Somalia border.
[90]
Additionally, the group attacked several towns in central Somalia in August 2023. The attacks forced Somali forces to withdraw from territory they had recently captured from Al Shabaab.
[91]
Al Shabaab’s counterattacks eventually brought the war to another stalemate.
[92]
On August 6, 2023, President Mohamud declared “Total War” against Al Shabaab as the government launched another campaign that ultimately proved unsuccessful in dealing significant losses to Al Shabaab.
[93]
Amid growing security concerns, Somalia’s national security adviser, Hussein Sheikh Ali, requested that the UNSC pause the withdrawal in September 2023.
[94]
While the request was supported by AU members, the extensions exacerbated financial issues within ATMIS and highlighted growing fears that Somali forces could not provide security in the country.
[95]
In addition to an unrealistic timeline, the effectiveness of ATIMS was further undermined by its prioritization of military operations and limited efforts to address social and political drivers of insecurity, including weak state capacity.
[96]
Al Shabaab’s resilience drove the UNSC to revise the ATMIS timeline further several times. In November 2023, the UNSC extended ATMIS until June 30, 2024.
[97]
In June 2024, the UNSC voted again to extend ATMIS until August 12, 2024.
[98]
The UNSC then granted ATMIS a short, three-day extension to August 15, 2024.
[99]
ATMIS received one final extension until December 31, 2024.
[100]
In December 2024, the UNSC launched a new mission in Somalia: the African Union Support and Stabilisation Mission in Somalia (AUSSOM). This new mission differed from ATMIS in multiple ways. Instead of focusing on a transition, AUSSOM forces aimed to strengthen Somalia’s own security forces and engage in capacity-building operations to build long-term social and political stability. Additionally, Egypt joined the mission in Somalia and began contributing troops to AUSSOM. While ATMIS had less than three years to achieve its transitional mandate, AUSSOM forces will have five years (until 2029) to complete their objectives. AUSSOM will faces many of the same challenges that ATMIS experienced, including funding and logistical challenges, as well as the resilient threat posed by Al Shabaab.
[101]
Clashes between Al Shabaab and security forces declined in 2024. Political infighting within the Somali government and clan disputes led to a decrease in government operations as leaders struggled to agree on a course of action.
[102]
In February 2025, Al Shabaab launched its Shabelle offensive, expanding its foothold in central Somalia while exploiting the overstretched resources of Somali and AUSSOM forces.
Ansar Allah, a militant group based in Yemen, also known as the Houthis, supported this new offensive. Evidence of a relationship between Al Shabaab and Ansar Allah first surfaced in 2024.
[103]
In February 2025, the United Nations Security Council reported evidence that Ansar Allah members traveled to Somalia and participated in at least two meetings about providing Al Shabbab with weapons and training. In exchange for this support, “Al-Shabaab was to increase piracy activities within the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia, targeting cargo ships and disrupting vessel movement as well as collecting ransom from the captured vessels.” The UNSC report stated that Al Shabaab received arms and training from Ansar Allah, which supported the group’s attacks against AUSSOM forces in Shabelle Hoose in late 2024.
[104]
In 2025, Al Shabaab continued to increase its activities in the Hiraan and Middle Shabelle regions of south-central Somalia. By one estimate, the group launched fifty percent more attacks in those areas than it did in 2024.
[105]
In March 2025, Al Shabaab attempted to assassinate Somali President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud with a bomb that targeted his motorcade.
[106]
Following President Donald Trump’s inauguration in January 2025, the United States increased the frequency of its airstrikes against Al Shabaab. Between January and mid-May 2025, the United States carried out approximately 30 airstrikes in Somalia (compared to 51 total U.S. airstrikes under the Biden Administration between 2021-2024).
[107]
Other operations have been carried out by Somali forces, but none have been successful in repelling the escalating threat of Al Shabaab.
[108]
As of May 2025, Somali forces and Al Shabaab continue to fight for territorial control in Somalia, particularly in the district of Adan Yabaal in Middle Shabelle north of Mogadishu.
[109]
One critique of operations against Al Shabaab in Somalia has been their military focus and failure to coordinate with civilian authorities on improving local governance and security.
[110]
Organization
Vertical Tabs
Leadership
Aden Hashi Ayro
(Unknown to May 1, 2008) Ayro founded Al-Shabaab in 2006. He was a member of Al-Ittihad al-Islamiyya (AIAI) from 1991 to 1997. In the late 1990s, Ayro trained at Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan and reportedly met Osama bin Laden. He later returned to Somalia and joined the Islamic Courts Union (ICU). Within the ICU, Ayro helped recruit and train fighters for the ICU’s military wing, Al Shabaab. However, Ayro disagreed with ICU leadership on the group’s broader strategy. Ayro wanted to connect the Somali struggle to the global jihadist movement, while ICU leaders preferred a strictly nationalist agenda. In 2006, Ayro broke off from the ICU and became the official leader of Al Shabaab shifting the group towards his globalist ideology. He was killed in a U.S. airstrike on May 1, 2008.
[111]
Hassan Dahir Aweys
(Unknown to 2006): Aweys, sometimes called the spiritual leader of Al Shabaab has had a complex relationship with the group. He led the militant wing of Al Ittihad Al Islamiya (AIAI) before joining the ICU as a top leader, reportedly authorizing Ayro to lead Al Shabaab as its militant wing. However, Aweys opposed Ayro's brutal tactics and global jihadist agenda. After fleeing Somalia during Ethiopia's 2006 invasion, Aweys became a leader of the ARS, which opposed Al Shabaab. He later led Hizbul Islam, a rival group that Al Shabaab absorbed. Aweys left Al Shabaab in 2012, was arrested in 2013, and placed under house arrest in 2014.
Ahmed Abdi Godane
(2008 to September 1, 2014): Godane, also known as Mukhtar Abu Zubeyr, assumed leadership of Al Shabaab after Aden Hashi Ayro was killed in 2008. Under Godane, Al Shabaab aligned itself more closely with AQ in ideology and tactics, leading to fundamental changes within the group.
[112]
Godane was the first Al Shabaab leader to publicly and explicitly frame the group’s struggle in Somalia as part of a larger global jihad. The group pledged its allegiance to AQ in 2009, though this pledge was not formally accepted by AQ until 2012. Godane’s leadership capabilities helped rapidly expand Al Shabaab’s territory from 2008 to 2010. However, his desire for complete control of Al Shabaab’s power and violent crackdowns on internal opposition alienated him from the broader Somali Salafi community towards the end of his reign
[113]
Godane was killed in a U.S. air strike on September 1, 2014.
[114]
Ahmed Umar Abu Ubaidah
(2007 to Present): Abu Ubaidah, also called Abu Diriye, was named as Al Shabaab’s new leader in September 2014 shortly after a U.S. air strike killed Ahmed Abdi Godane. Abu Ubaidah is from Somalia’s Gedo region and is a member of the minority Dir clan. He joined Al Shabaab in 2007 under Aden Ayro.
[115]
Abu Ubaidah was reported to be severely ill in 2018, leading to an internal struggle for the group’s leadership.
[116]
In August 2020, Abu Ubaidah handed over temporary power to his deputy, Abukar Aden.
[117]
Details about Abu Ubaidah’s health are scarce, though it appears that he has recovered and resumed leading the group. In 2023, a video published by Al Shabaab included footage of Abu Ubaidah with group members.
[118]
Reports indicate that Abu Ubaidah continues to lead Al Shabaab as of 2025. For example, he issued an audio message in March 2025 about housing politics in Mogadishu.
[119]
Abukar Ali Aden
(unknown to present): Aden, also referred to as Ibrahim Afghan or Abukar Adan, is the current provisional leader of Al Shabaab.
[120]
According to an announcement by Somalia’s National Intelligence Security Agency (NISA), Aden was given partial power of the group around August of 2020.
[121]
He previously served as Ahmed Umar’s deputy leader and principal advisor, as well as the head of Al Shabaab’s military unit, the Jabhat.
[122]
As of May 2025, Aden is still serving as the deputy leader of Al Shabaab.
Mukhtar Robow
(unknown to 2017): Robow served as a founder, spokesman, and second-in-command of Al Shabaab. In 2017, Robow defected and pledged his loyalty to the Somali government. In 2018, he announced his candidacy for a regional presidency. The U.S. has withdrawn its $5 million reward for Robow’s capture, yet he is still subjected to sanctions imposed in 2008 when he was labeled a “specially designated global terrorist.”
[123]
Somali Prime Minister Hamza Abdi Barre appointed Robow as the country’s Minister of Religious Affairs in August 2022, drawing criticism from some analysts.
[124]
Hussein Ali Fiidow
(unknown to present): Fiidow has served as a financial administrator for Al Shabaab and has generally avoided public appearances. He is from Somalia’s Hawiye clan and the Murusade sub-clan.
[125]
In 2018, some analysts identified Fiidow as the most likely successor to Umar, though the position was ultimately given to Abukar Ali Aden. According to Kenyan intelligence reports, Fiidow allegedly attempted to stage a coup against Umar in early 2018.
[126]
Mohamed Mire
(unknown to 2024): Mire, also known as Abu Abdirahman, served as the “Governor of the Islamic Provinces of Somalia,” which is equivalent to serving as Al Shabaab’s interior minister. He previously served as Al Shabaab’s shadow governor for Somalia’s Hiraan region. He then stepped into the role of Zakat emir, overseeing taxation in areas controlled by the group before becoming the interior minister. He played a key role in the decision making of Al Shabaab as a member of its leadership council.  In 2022, Mire was designated as a global terrorist by the US State Department. He was reported killed in 2016, but this was inaccurate. In December 2024, Mire was killed. Mire’s death was confirmed byAl  Shabaab and the Somali government.
[127]
Size Estimates
2008: 6,000-7,000 (Stratfor)
[128]
2013: 5,000 (United Nations)
[129]
2015: 7,000-9,000 (BBC)
[130]
2017: 7,000-9,000 (State Department)
[131]
2019: 7,000-9,000 (The Washington Post)
[132]
2020: 7,000-9,000 (Council on Foreign Relations)
[133]
2022: 7,000-12,000 (United Nations)
[134]
2024; 7,000-12,000(United Nations)
[135]
Name Changes
Al Shabaab has not changed its name since its founding.
Resources
Al Shabaab has allegedly received funds and training from Al Qaeda-linked foreign jihadists.
[136]
The group has also obtained funds from Somali diaspora communities, including in the United States. In August 2010, for example, fourteen Americans were indicted for lending material support to and fundraising for Al Shabaab.
[137]
The U.S. and Somali governments have also accused other countries of supporting Al Shabaab by providing resources. (For more information, see the “External Influences” section of this profile.)
Al Shabaab has stolen equipment from various organizations within Somalia. It has looted private media stations, for example, to acquire media equipment and conduct its own broadcasts.
[138]
Al Shabaab has also allegedly looted U.N. compounds in the city of Baidoa, stealing emergency communication equipment as well as furniture and cars.
[139]
In November 2011, Al Shabaab banned the presence of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and other aid groups in Somalia, seizing their offices within its territory. Al Shabaab reportedly took control of sixteen NGOs and six U.N. compounds in eight different regions. Militants ordered office personnel to leave and subsequently
confiscated their equipment
.
[140]
Before 2012, Al Shabaab militants controlled Kismayo, an important port city from which the group received massive profits in charcoal exports. However, in 2012, Al Shabaab was forced out of Kismayo and several other major cities. As a result, the group lost key sources of revenue. In the territories that it does control, Al Shabaab collects protection fees and taxes from businesses and other organizations. One of these taxes, the zakat, is an annual obligation for Muslims to pay a specific percentage of their wealth to the poor. Al Shabaab heavily exploits the zakat in south-central Somalia, according to U.N. reporting.
[141]
Other sources of revenue for Al Shabaab have included profits from the ivory and sugar trades.
[142]
The group also capitalizes on illegal production and export of charcoal, a trade believed to be worth $10 million per year, despite a U.N. embargo on Somali charcoal.
[143]
In addition to coercion, Al Shabaab also engages in commercial revenue generation. The group is also known to exploit the Somali automobile trade, steal livestock, and engage in illegal mining.
[144]
Al Shabaab manages its funds in a highly centralized system, utilizing numerous accounts across various Somali financial systems. The funds are reportedly controlled by the shura council, which then designates budgets to Al Shabaab’s various departments. According to reports published in 2020, Al Shabaab operates with a significant budgetary surplus.
[145]
A 2024 report from the U.S. Department of the Treasury estimated that Al Shabaab generates more than 100 million USD annually through a large, multinational money-laundering network. The network includes businesses such as Qemat Al Najah General Trading and the Haleel Group in the UAE, as well as Haleel Group subsidiaries in Kenya, Cyprus, Uganda, and Somalia. The network also includes individuals based in Kenya, Finland, the UAE, Uganda, and Somalia.
[146]
Domestically, the group relies on the illegal collection of fees from local Somalis through coercion.
[147]
Locations
Disclaimer
: This is a partial list of where the militant organization has bases and where it operates. This does not include information on where the group conducts major attacks or has external influences.
Between 2006 and 2011, Al Shabaab controlled the capital city of Somalia, Mogadishu. During this time, the group also expanded its influence into rural areas of south-central Somalia. Prior to 2012, Al Shabaab controlled swaths of coastal territory, including the port city of Kismayo, which provided the group with supplies and significant revenue. However, most of this land was lost by the end of 2012 following AMISOM and Somali military offensives.
[148]
While Al Shabaab retreated from and lost control of Mogadishu in late 2011, it frequently conducts attacks in the city.
[149]
Mogadishu suffered its worst attack yet in October 2017, when Al Shabaab militants detonated twin VBIEDs that killed more than 500 people and wounded 300 more.
[150]
In recent years, Al Shabaab has aimed to expand its territorial control in southern and central Somalia. In September 2024, Al Shabaab established two new bases in the Kismayo and Jamaame districts as part of efforts to reassert control in Jubaland in southern Somalia. The group specifically aimed to reinforce its stronghold in the town of Jilib.
[151]
This town, located in southern Somalia, serves as Al Shabaab’s logistical and operational headquarters. It collects arms, coordinates attacks, and engages in political activities in the town. Additionally, the town is located on a road that leads directly to both the capital of Mogadishu and the key port city of Kismayo. Al Shabaab can also access the Indian Ocean from Jilib through secret routes. The town is also in a flat agricultural zone, ensuring the group has access to a consistent food supply.
[152]
Since July 2025, Al Shabaab has expanded operations in the district of Ceel Dheer in central Somalia. This district serves as a hideout and stronghold for Al Shabaab. The group also uses this district, located in the Galgaduud region, to coordinate attacks in regions across the states of Galmudug and Hirshabelle.
[153]
In April 2025, Al Shabaab began an attack on the strategic town of Adan Yabaal in central Somalia.
[154]
The group also continued to press an offensive in the town of Wargaadhi in the Middle Shabelle region just north of Mogadishu.
[155]
Beyond its activity in Somalia, Al Shabaab has conducted attacks in Kenya, Uganda, and Djibouti. The group was also implicated in a failed bombing in Ethiopia.
[156]
Al Shabaab’s first attack outside of Somalia came in 2010, when suicide bombings killed nearly 75 people in the Ugandan capital of Kampala.
[157]
By 2014, Al Shabaab’s operations were concentrated in Somalia and northeastern Kenya. From 2015 to 2018, the group did not stage any high-profile attacks outside of this limited region.
[158]
In January 2019, Al Shabaab attacked a hotel in the Kenyan capital of Nairobi, located in the southern part of the country, again displaying its ability to operate in a wider geographic range.
[159]
As of February 2024, Al Shabaab exerted substantive control in large areas of Somalia’s southern and central regions.  In recent years, Al Shabaab has conducted attacks in the northern region of Puntland, mainly against fighters aligned with the Islamic State.
[160]
As of 2025, Al Shabaab remains active outside of Somalia, with August 2024 being the most active month ever for Al Shabaab in Kenya.
[161]
Strategy
Vertical Tabs
Ideology and Goals
Al Shabaab’s primary goal is to topple the Somali government and establish an Islamic state within Somalia guided by a strict reading of Shariah law.
[162]
The group’s first leader, Aden Hashi Ayro, received training in Afghanistan and modeled Al Shabaab’s principles after the Taliban’s.
[163]
Like the Taliban and Al Qaeda, Al Shabaab promotes a jihadist Salafi religious ideology. In the territories under its control, Al Shabaab has carried out punishments in line with Sharia law, such as amputating the hands of thieves and stoning women accused of adultery. The group has also banned items and activities such as music, videos, shaving, and bras.
[164]
In an effort to rid the country of foreign influences, Al Shabaab shut down the British Broadcasting Corporation’s (BBC) transmissions in Somalia and banned its broadcasting in 2010, accusing the station of promoting an anti-Muslim colonialist agenda.
[165]
Al Shabaab opposes the presence of foreign troops in Somalia, chiefly the African Union’s peacekeeping mission, known as AMISOM, which is supported by the United Nations and European Union.
[166]
As part of its quest to establish a Somali state based on Islamist principles, Al Shabaab seeks to dislodge AMISOM and other foreign military troops from the country.
In addition to its domestic goals, Al Shabaab has increasingly framed the Somali civil war as part of the global jihadi movement. Al Shabaab has launched international attacks, including in Kenya and Uganda, and it has issued threats against other countries, such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada.
[167]
The group’s close relationship with Al Qaeda, especially beginning in 2008, significantly influenced the broadening of Al Shabaab’s objectives.
[168]
Analysts have remarked on Al Shabaab’s apparent commitment to environmental protection, including a ban on single-use plastic bags and cutting down trees in territory under its control, public condemnation of Somalia’s logging industry, and criticism of U.S. President Barack Obama’s record on climate change.
[169]
Political Activities
While some members of Al Shabaab have reportedly been open to negotiations with the government, the group has never engaged in peaceful political activity.
[170]
Further, Al Shabaab has assassinated peace activists who sought to encourage negotiations and reconciliation.
[171]
Part of Al Shabaab’s political strategy comes from its outreach to the local communities from which it operates. By providing social services and protection to local constituencies, the rebel group has facilitated greater cooperation in the form of intelligence sharing and material support. For instance, Al Shabaab has supported the communities it operates within by organizing greater sanitation and healthcare services than otherwise available. The provision of healthcare and other public goods took on even greater political significance during the 2020 global pandemic. In response to the pandemic, Al Shabaab opened a COVID-19 treatment center in Jilib, where there were no government-sponsored healthcare services.
[172]
Public-facing actions like these have helped Al-Shabaab accumulate political capital with local constituents as the central government struggles to provide services.
Beyond health care, citizens often favor the efficiency and effectiveness of Al Shabaab’s Islamic courts, particularly in under-governed areas of Northern Somalia.
[173]
Al Shabaab’s permanent and mobile courts rule on civil and criminal matters, leading some Somalis to travel to regions held by the group solely to petition its courts.
[174]
In areas where the group has complete control, Al Shabaab involves local elites and clans in its local governance structures. In so doing, the group seeks greater local legitimacy and involvement from the community. At the highest level, Al Shabaab is led by an executive religious council comprising of senior leaders. The government is then split into departments and security organizations that carry out judicial, financial, and security operations, among other functions.
[175]
Al Shabbab’s local government has two key factors: regional administrations and governors. Al Shabaab has nine regional administrations that function as local governments. Each administration reports to the national ministries. The broader government, consisting of commanders and councils, oversees these administrations.  Al Shabbab’s enforcement of its strict laws can be unpopular with local communities (e.g., restrictions on women), leading some of the group’s local administrations to relax regulations in order to maintain support.
[176]
The executive council also appoints governors for each region.
[177]
Regional governors oversee recruitment, enforce regulations, and collect taxes.
[178]
Governors are responsible for providing local clan elders with stipends as part of broader efforts to include elders in governance to provide them with a sense of ownership that keeps them loyal to Al Shabaab.
[179]
Clan elders hold influence in government by serving as representatives, engaging in peace negotiations on behalf of Al Shabaab, and resolving local disputes. Additionally, the group provides resources to clans it deems more loyal, making clans increase their support for Al Shabaab as they compete against each other for key resources.
[180]
Starting in August 2024, the group also organizes Dawrah (workshops) with clan elders and local militias in an effort to reach an agreement on “rejecting the government administration and supporting the militants.”
[181]
As Al Shabaab’s size, support, and political and legal influence have grown, some Somali politicians have called for allowing the group to run candidates in Somali elections.
[182]
In previous years, former Al Shabaab militants defected from the group and expressed a desire to run for political office.
[183]
Most notably, founding Al Shabaab member Mukhtar Robow ran for the presidency of Somalia’s South West State in 2018. Although he was detained by the Somali government during his campaign, Robow’s actions set off international debates about the implications of an ex-jihadist gaining power through democratic elections.
[184]
While Al Shabaab has been prevented from taking part in the Somali government until now, it is possible it will seek a hybrid political-military role as pursued by other armed groups such as
Hezbollah
in Lebanon.
Targets And Tactics
To further its goals of toppling the Somali government and expelling foreign troops, Al Shabaab has targeted government officials and AMISOM forces. Al Shabaab also works to destabilize the Somali government by disrupting democratic elections and eroding public support for international peacekeeping missions.
[185]
The group has targeted police, journalists, peace activists, international aid workers, businesses, diplomats, and other civilians. Driven by Salafi ideology, militants have directed violence towards so-called “enemies of Islam,” including Somalia’s Christians and Sufi Muslims.
[186]
Staring in 2011 after the group’s loss of Mogadishu and Kismayo, Al Shabaab prioritized guerrilla tactics that avoided direct military confrontations.
[187]
Al Shabaab has engaged in kidnappings and vandalism, and it has used bombings, shootings, and suicide attacks to inflict violence on civilians and soldiers alike. Al Shabaab’s use of suicide attacks, namely with vehicle-born improvised explosive devices (VBIEDs), has risen since 2008.
[188]
Analysts attribute the increased use of this tactic to the group’s close relationship with Al Qaeda.
[189]
Al Shabaab specifically uses VBIEDs to maximize civilian casualties in its attacks in major cities, such as Mogadishu. (For more information on the group’s attacks, see the “Major Attacks” section in this profile.)
Additionally, Al Shabaab has allegedly committed rape and extensive acts of violence against women. The group has also engaged in the forced recruitment of fighters, including children.
[190]
In territories under its control, Al Shabaab is known to enforce a strict code of behavior for women; those who breach its provisions are often stoned to death.
[191]
Al Shabaab has repeatedly targeted Kenyan citizens in high-profile attacks in visible locations, such as the Westgate Mall in 2013 and the DusitD2 hotel in 2019. Analysts believe that the group hopes to erode support for the Kenyan government’s military intervention in Somalia.
[192]
Some analysts have also proposed that Al Shabaab’s increased attacks in Kenya are aimed at provoking a crackdown on Somalis living in Kenya, which the group hopes will facilitate militant recruitment.
[193]
Researchers have noted that Al Shabaab targets Kenya much more frequently than other East African countries participating in AMISOM. This may be due to Kenya’s strong tourism industry and independent media, which provide soft targets and international publicity, respectively.
[194]
In addition to acts of physical violence, Al Shabaab also seeks to control the information environment in Somalia. In an effort to rid the country of foreign influences, Al Shabaab shut down the transmissions of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and banned its broadcasting in 2010, accusing the station of promoting an anti-Muslim colonialist agenda.
[195]
In the same year, Al Shabaab set up the Al Kataib News Channel — in Arabic and English rather than in the Somali language — in an attempt to recruit foreign fighters, threaten nearby countries, and discourage support for AMISOM.
[196]
Al Shabaab also uses Internet outlets to share graphic videos and propaganda promoting the group’s strength, especially to counter claims that the group may be losing ground in its war against AMISOM and the Somali national government.
[197]
Al Shabaab attracts recruits through the release of videos on social media. Notably, in 2016, the group utilized footage of then-presidential candidate Donald Trump calling for a ban on Muslims entering the U.S. in a nearly hour-long film critiquing the West.
[198]
Al Shabaab social media accounts also engage with anti-Al Shabaab rhetoric online to increase engagement with the core ideologies of the group. They continue to out-maneuver opponents online by creating new accounts to replace ones that are taken down as part of efforts to combat the group rapidly, making the content impossible to censor. For rural areas that lack internet access, Al Shabaab utilizes radio systems that show similar messaging.
[199]
While Al Shabaab’s use of terrorism has received the most attention, some scholars and analysts have identified the group’s extensive intelligence gathering networks — often led by women — as being equally, if not more, important.
[200]
In many regions, women and girls affiliated with the group are able to cross checkpoints, gather intelligence, and ferry explosives without inspection or scrutiny.
[201]
Security forces tend to pay more attention to men than women, allowing women to gather critical information and transport weapons that have been instrumental in major attacks.
[202]
Although their cooperation is often the result of coercion, women continue to play a crucial role in Al Shabaab’s resilience.
Al Shabaab relies on a multi-faceted recruitment strategy. According to a report based on focus groups and interviews with Somali citizens, Al Shabaab has largely focused on recruiting boys between 10 to 15 years old. The group offers financial, educational, and social incentives for those who join, including a salary and the prospect of marriage. Al Shabaab also attracts other types of recruits with the promise of protection and religious salvation. Individuals embroiled in clan conflicts can find safe haven as members of Al Shabaab, and those seeking religious salvation are promised “entry into paradise” if they join the group. Beyond this voluntary recruitment, Al Shabaab has also relied on kidnapping to expand its ranks.
[203]
Attacks
Disclaimer
: These are some selected major attacks in the militant organization's history. It is not a comprehensive listing but captures some of the most famous attacks or turning points during the campaign.
March 26, 2007:
A man named Adam Salam Adam used a car bomb to conduct a suicide attack against Ethiopian soldiers in Mogadishu. Al Shabaab claimed responsibility for the bombing, which allegedly was the city’s first suicide attack (~73 killed, unknown wounded).
[204]
October 29, 2008:
Al Shabaab conducted five simultaneous suicide car bombings in the cities of Hargeisa and Bosasso, targeting U.N. and government buildings (29+ killed, 36+ wounded).
[205]
July 11, 2010:
Al Shabaab conducted two simultaneous suicide bombings in Kampala, Uganda. One took place at an Ethiopian restaurant, while the other occurred at a rugby club during the FIFA World Cup final. A group spokesman warned that any country sending its armed forces to Somalia would face similar attacks (74+ killed, 85+ wounded).
[206]
April 14, 2013:
Al Shabaab bombed court buildings in Mogadishu and then conducted an armed assault inside the buildings. On the same day, Al Shabaab bombed a convoy of Turkish aid workers (30+ killed, unknown wounded).
[207]
September 21, 2013:
Al Shabaab gunmen attacked the Westgate Mall in Nairobi, Kenya, triggering a four-day siege by government forces (~68 killed, 175 wounded).
[208]
February 21, 2014:
Al Shabaab attacked Villa Somalia, the presidential palace compound, with a car bomb before entering the compound to engage in a gunfight with guards (14+ killed, unknown wounded).
[209]
June 16, 2014:
Al Shabaab gunmen attacked several targets in the Kenyan town of Mpeketoni, including a police station, a bank, several hotels, and a hall in which people were viewing the World Cup. The next day, gunmen also conducted an attack on the nearby village of Poromoko (49+ killed, unknown wounded).
[210]
November 22, 2014:
Al Shabaab militants attacked a bus with sixty passengers traveling from Mandera, Kenya to Nairobi. The militants executed passengers who could not recite Quran verses as well as those who resisted the attack (28 killed, unknown wounded).
[211]
April 2, 2015
: Al Shabaab gunmen attacked Garissa University College in Kenya, targeting non-Muslim students (~151 killed, unknown wounded).
[212]
October 7, 2015:
Al Shabaab militants ambushed a car carrying two passengers, killing both. The victims included the nephew of Somali president Hassan Sheikh Mohamoud (2 killed, unknown wounded)
[213]
January 15, 2016:
Roughly 200 Al Shabaab militants attacked an AMISOM base in el-Ade, Somalia, beginning with a suicide bomb attack and continuing with an assault by gunmen. The Kenyan military has resisted releasing information on the extent of the attack, one of the country’s greatest military defeats since its independence in 1963. Al Shabaab quickly released propaganda materials to trumpet the alleged success of its offensive, which observers have deemed a “massacre” (141 killed, unknown wounded).
[214]
October 14, 2017:
Al Shabaab militants detonated two truck bombs in busy districts of Mogadishu, severely damaging entire buildings and streets. One of the bombs is believed to have been destined for Mogadishu’s airport but was detonated early by gunfire. This incident is considered the deadliest attack since the inception of Al Shabaab’s insurgency in 2006. (512 killed, 312 wounded, 62 missing).
[215]
April 1, 2018:
Al Shabaab militants attacked an African Union peacekeeper base with two suicide car bombs, killing over forty Ugandan troops in the town of Bulamarer (46 killed, unknown wounded).
[216]
November 9, 2018:
Al Shabaab claimed responsibility for an attack with coordinated car bombs on the headquarters of Somalia’s Criminal Investigations Department and the Sahafi Hotel, a locale frequented by government officials. The bombs were timed to go off around 4pm, when pedestrians and traffic flooded the streets (53 killed, hundreds wounded).
[217]
January 15, 2019:
Exactly three years after Al Shabaab’s devastating attack on an AMISOM base in Kenya, militants besieged the five-star DusitD2 hotel in Nairobi, Kenya for 19 hours. The group claimed that the attack was retaliation for U.S. President Donald Trump’s increased airstrikes in Somalia and move of the U.S. Israeli embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem (21 killed, unknown wounded).
[218]
February 28, 2019:
After detonating a car bomb outside, Al Shabaab militants stormed the Maka Al-Mukarama hotel, killing 29. Somali government officials frequent this hotel in central Mogadishu (29 killed, 80+ wounded).
[219]
March 24, 2019:
Al Shabaab militants stormed a government building in Mogadishu after detonating a car bomb. The attack resulted in an hours-long standoff and killed at least 15 people, including the Somali deputy labor minister (15+ killed, unknown wounded).
[220]
July 24, 2019:
Only hours after a visit by the U.N. envoy to Somalia, a female Al Shabaab suicide bomber detonated inside of the Mogadishu mayor’s office. The mayor, Abdirahman Omar Osman, and 5 other city officials were killed (6 killed, 6 wounded).
[221]
December 29, 2019:
An Al Shabaab truck bomb detonated at a busy security checkpoint in Mogadishu, killing 78 and injuring over a hundred people. The attack, which killed many university students, was described as the worst Al Shabaab attack since the October 2017 bombing that killed over five hundred (78 killed, 100+ wounded).
[222]
February 2, 2020:
Al Shabaab killed 8 Somali soldiers and wounded 13 others when the group attacked a Somali National Army and African Union peacekeeping base in the Shabelle region. Al Shabaab reportedly lost 10 fighters in the attack (8 killed, 13 wounded).
[223]
October 15, 2020:
Al Shabaab militants attacked a Somali military operation and injured dozens more near the town of Afgoye, just northwest of Mogadishu. Al Shabaab claimed that it killed 24 troops, while the Somali military says 13 of its own were killed (~18 killed, dozens wounded).
[224]
December 11, 2020:
An Al Shabaab militant killed 14 in a suicide bombing at a stadium entrance in the city of Galkayo. Somali Prime Minister Mohamed Roble was scheduled to speak there about the upcoming presidential election (14 killed, unknown wounded).
[225]
May 10, 2021:
An Al Shabaab suicide bomber killed 6 police officers, including the commander of the Waberi police station, in an attack in Mogadishu (6 killed, unknown wounded).
[226]
June 15, 2021
: Al Shabaab militants killed over 15 Somali army recruits in a suicide bombing outside of the General Degaban military camp in Mogadishu (15+ killed, 20+ wounded).
[227]
November 25, 2021:
Al Shabbab militants detonated a car bomb intending to attack a United Nations convoy that  was passing by a Mogadishu school. (8 killed, 17 wounded).
[228]
January 18, 2022:
An Al Shabbab suicide bomber detonated a bomb in a tea shop near a military base in Mogadishu (4 killed, 10 wounded).
[229]
February 19, 2022:
An Al Shabbab suicide bomber detonated a bomb in a restaurant frequented by local politicians and officials in central Somalia. A majority of those killed were civilians (13 killed, 20 wounded).
[230]
August 21, 2022:
Al Shababb militants sieged the popular Hayat Hotel in Mogadishu with guns and bombs. After an arduous gun fight for 30 hours, Somali forces ended the siege (21 killed, 117 wounded).
[231]
November 1, 2022:
After detonating a suicide car bomb, Al Shabaab militants exploded a trailer carrying explosives near the Somali Ministry of Education in Mogadishu. The terror attacks were the second deadliest in the country’s history, killing more than 120 (121+ killed, 333+ injured).
[232]
May 26, 2023:
Al Shabaab militants carried out suicide bomb attacks on a base housing African Union (AU) peacekeepers in Bulamarer, Somalia. Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni said that 54 Ugandan soldiers serving in the AU Transition Mission in Somalia were killed, and that the Ugandan People’s Defence Forces had since reclaimed the base from Al Shabaab. Al Shabaab claimed that it killed 137 AU soldiers in the attacks (54 killed, unknown wounded).
[233]
June 9, 2023:
Al Shabaab laid siege to a beach hotel restaurant in Mogadishu for six hours, killing at least 6 people. Somali security forces reportedly killed seven Al Shabaab militants in the attack (6+ killed, 10 wounded).
[234]
January 10, 2024:
Al Shabaab militants killed one and abducted five others in an attack on a U.N. helicopter in Galmudug, Somalia. The helicopter held one Somali national and six foreigners of unknown nationality
. (
~1 killed, 5 abducted
).
[235]
February 6, 2024:
Al Shabaab militants attacked the Bakara market in Mogadishu, Somalia. The attack killed at least ten people and injured more than 20 others. (10+ killed, 20+ wounded).
[236]
February 11, 2024:
The General Gordon military base in Mogadishu, Somalia, was attacked by Al Shabaab during a training exercise. The attack resulted in the deaths of four soldiers from the UAE and a military officer from Bahrain. One soldier was injured. (5 killed, 1 wounded).
[237]
July 13, 2024:
Al Shabaab inmates at a prison in Mogadishu, Somalia, attempted to escape after securing weapons. The confrontation with security forces resulted in five prisoners and three soldiers killed. Among those wounded were eighteen prisoners and three soldiers. The escape attempt was unsuccessful. (8 killed, 21 wounded).
[238]
July 14, 2024:
Al Shabaab killed nine and injured twenty in a car bombing outside a café in Mogadishu, Somalia. The attack destroyed ten cars and damaged numerous buildings in the capital city. (9 killed, 20 wounded).
[239]
August 2, 2024:
A suicide bombing and gun attack by Al Shabaab on Lido Beach in Mogadishu, Somalia, killed thirty-two people and injured about sixty-three others. One soldier was among those killed while another soldier was injured. The rest were civilians. (32 killed, ~63 wounded).
[240]
March 11, 2025:
Al Shabaab laid siege to a hotel in Beledweyne, Somalia for 24 hours. The attack began with a car bombing. The group then entered the hotel and clashed with security forces. Al Shabaab claims that twenty people were killed in the attack.  The city’s mayor claimed that seven people were killed, including military officials, elders, and soldiers. Witnesses say that the death toll could be higher than seven (7 killed, unknown wounded).
[241]
March 18, 2025:
Al Shabaab militants conducted a bomb attack on Somali President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s motorcade. The attack killed four people, but Mohamud survived (4 killed, unknown wounded).
[242]
April 16, 2025:
Al Shabaab attacked the strategic town of Adan Yabaal in Somalia. The town was used as an operating base for raids on Al Shabaab. Control of the town is still contested, with both Al Shabaab and Somali officials claiming to control it. The number of individuals dead or wounded as unknown with the outcome still unclear. (Unknown killed and wounded).
[243]
April 24, 2025:
Al Shabaab militants attacked a base in Wargaadhi, Somalia. The base is home to “soldiers, special forces, and clan fighters.” If successfully captured, Al Shabaab could use its position at the base to “sever a crucial road between the capital” to southwest Somalia and “the central Galmudug state.” The attack killed over forty people. The outcome of the attack is unclear, with both Al Shabaab and Somali forces claiming control over the base. (40+ killed, unknown wounded).
[244]
Interactions
Vertical Tabs
Designated / Listed
Australian National Security List of Terrorist Organizations: August 22, 2009, to present.
[245]
E.U. Designated Terrorist Organizations: April 26, 2010, to present.
[246]
U.K. List of Proscribed Groups: March 2010 to present.
[247]
United Nations Security Council: April 12, 2010, to present.
[248]
U.S. State Department Foreign Terrorist Organizations: March 18, 2008, to present.
[249]
Community Relations
Somalia has been engulfed in civil war since the early 1990s.
[250]
The deteriorating economic and political conditions allowed Al Shabaab to originally win support from the public by promising to bring stability to a country in turmoil.
[251]
Al Shabaab has established its own governing structures in the territories under its control, collecting taxes and providing social services. The group established an Islamic court system that was often favored by citizens due to its efficiency and effectiveness, particularly in under-governed areas of Northern Somalia.
[252]
Al Shabaab’s permanent and mobile courts rule on matters ranging from civil to criminal, leading some Somalis to travel to regions held by the group for the sole purpose of petitioning its courts.
[253]
Additionally, Al Shabaab tries to cultivate support through constructing and maintaining infrastructure, as well as collecting money for distribution to the poor.
[254]
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Al Shabaab provided treatment to Somalis and opened a COVID-19 treatment center in Jilib, where there were no government-sponsored healthcare services.
[255]
Additionally, Al Shabaab’s leadership prioritizes building relationships with clan elders — the backbone of Somali society — to strengthen recruitment and gain access to territory.
[256]
Though initially popular for its provision of public services, Al Shabaab’s support has declined. Citizens across multiple regions of Somalia reported that the group has negatively affected their communities with forced marriages, disruptions to education, economic harms, and religious intimidation.
[257]
Forced recruitment also damaged the group’s local reputation, and the group has increasingly relied on foreign fighters and internet recruitment.
[258]
In some cases, grievances against Al Shabaab drove local clans to rebel against the group and support the government’s offensives.
[259]
Relationships With Other Groups
Al Shabaab interacts with both domestic and transnational militant groups. In Somalia, Al Shabaab’s relationship with the short-lived Hizbul Islam alternated between alliance and rivalry, though tending toward the latter. Between May and July 2009, Al Shabaab and Hizbul Islam cooperated to target TFG forces and secure control of large swaths of southern and central Somalia and most of Mogadishu. The two groups shared an interest in combatting the TFG, but their cooperation stopped there. Hizbul Islam and Al Shabaab competed for influence over the Somali insurgency and territorial control. These tensions led to armed clashes between the two groups in late 2009.
[260]
Hizbul Islam slowly lost ground to Al Shabaab and ultimately chose to merge with Al Shabaab in late 2010 after a series of internal defections.
[261]
The merger was seen by some observers as a takeover of Hizbul Islam by Al Shabaab.
[262]
In 2012, disagreements between Al Shabaab militants and its Hizbul Islam members led Hizbul Islam to split from the group.
[263]
The two factions disagreed about the nature and extent of the organization’s goals. Al Shabaab militants fought to internationalize the Somali conflict in the name of global jihad, while Hizbul Islam militants had more nationalist objectives and wanted to focus strictly on Somalia.
[264]
After the split, Hizbul Islam became inactive and renounced violence.
[265]
Al Shabaab has also interacted with other domestic groups. Ahlu Sunna Wal Jamaa — a Somali militant organization established to protect the country’s traditional form of Sufism — began fighting Al Shabaab in 2008 after the group started destroying Sufi sacred sites.
[266]
A third Somali militant group, the Ras Kamboni Movement, was allied with Al Shabaab in the late 2000s. Divisions within Ras Kamboni led one faction to officially merge with Al Shabaab in 2010, while the remainder of Ras Kamboni allied with the Kenyan government to fight Al Shabaab.
[267]
Al Shabaab also has ties to militant groups abroad. Since its early years, Al Shabaab has built connections with Al Qaeda and shares its long-term interest in establishing one Islamic caliphate to unite all Muslims. Al Shabaab and Al Qaeda leaders have trained and fought together.
[268]
The Al Shabaab-Al Qaeda relationship was strengthened after Ahmed Abdi Godane became Al Shabaab’s top leader in 2008. As leader, Godane published a statement praising Al Qaeda and emphasized the struggle in Somalia as part of a global jihad, a shift from Al Shabaab’s previous rhetoric. Al Shabaab also aligned itself more closely with Al Qaeda in ideology and tactics. It began targeting civilians through suicide attacks much more frequently, and the organization’s leadership grew to include many Al Qaeda members. Al Shabaab leveraged its relationship with Al Qaeda to attract foreign fighters and monetary donations from Al Qaeda’s supporters.
[269]
In 2009, Al Shabaab officially pledged allegiance to Al Qaeda, though this was not officially acknowledged by Al Qaeda until 2012.
[270]
While both Al Shabaab and Al Qaeda maintain some operational links, the groups operate largely independently from each other.
In 2015, the Islamic State (IS) released a video encouraging Al Shabaab, as East Africa’s most prominent jihadi group, to pledge allegiance to IS. Al Shabaab’s leadership rejected the offer and reaffirmed its affiliation with AQ, a decision that provoked a schism among its members and created a rivalry between AQ and IS sympathizers in Somalia.
[271]
Despite this refusal to pledge allegiance to IS, Al Shabaab is frequently misidentified as an IS affiliate since it shares a similar, though not identical, flag. Militants supportive of IS splintered from Al Shabaab and founded a new group allied with IS, Jahba East Africa (also known as the East African Front), in early 2016. This group actively recruits from the ranks of Al Shabaab.
[272]
Al Shabaab and Jahba East Africa are thought to compete for supporters and territory in Somalia.
[273]
As of 2018, it is unclear whether Jahba East Africa is still active.
[274]
In 2016, Somali government officials claimed that Al Shabaab was backing Boko Haram, a Salafi militant group based in Nigeria. Its support for Boko Haram has included training in suicide attack methods, the use of weaponry, and other tactics and capabilities. Both Al Shabaab and Boko Haram share a similar goal: the imposition of strict Shariah law in Somalia and Nigeria, respectively.
[275]
Al Shabaab was also believed to coordinate in a similar fashion with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), which operated primarily in Algeria.
[276]
In addition to these collaborations, various affiliate groups have sworn allegiance to Al Shabaab, including the Kenyan militant organization Al Hijra (also called the Muslim Youth Center).
[277]
An Islamist militant group operating in Mozambique since late 2017, founded under the name Ahlu Sunnah Wa-Jama (“Followers of the Prophet”), is often called “Al Shabaab” by locals, but no link to the Somali Al Shabaab of that name is known.
[278]
Al Shabaab has also developed ties with Ansar Allah, also known as the Houthi movement, in Yemen. Evidence of a relationship between Al Shabaab and Ansar Allah first surfaced in 2024.
[279]
In February 2025, the United Nations Security Council reported evidence that Ansar Allah members traveled to Somalia and participated in at least two meetings about providing Al Shabbab with weapons and training. In exchange for this support, “Al-Shabaab was to increase piracy activities within the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia, targeting cargo ships and disrupting vessel movement as well as collecting ransom from the captured vessels.” The UNSC report stated that Al Shabaab received arms and training from Ansar Allah, which supported the group’s attacks against AUSSOM forces in Shabelle Hoose in late 2024.
[280]
The weapons provided by Ansar Allah to Al Shabaab reportedly are of Iranian origin, and Ansar Allah’s training has included instruction on building bombs and weapons.
[281]
State Sponsors And External Influences
Al Shabaab has allegedly received support from several African and Middle Eastern countries, most notably Eritrea. The U.S. and Somali governments have accused Eritrea of supporting Al Shabaab through weapons and funding, although Eritrea has denied these allegations.
[282]
While the Eritrean government does not share Al Shabaab’s ideology, it is believed to have supported the militant organization to counter Ethiopian influence in Somalia.
[283]
In 2017, the U.N. Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea concluded that there was insufficient evidence to prove a link between Eritrea and Al Shabaab.
[284]
Since at least 2018, several Gulf states have increased their provision of training and weapons to various armed factions operating in Somalia, including Al Shabaab. As part of a growing rivalry, both Qatar and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) have sought to use armed groups like Al Shabaab to pressure each other into abandoning or scaling back commercial contracts in the region.
[285]
In 2019, the Qatari Ambassador to Somalia allegedly claimed that the 2019 Al Shabaab bombing of the Bosaso port in Somalia was expected to push the UAE into abandoning a lucrative shipping contract that the Qatari government hoped to acquire.
[286]
The U.N. has also claimed that Djibouti, Iran, Syria, Libya, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia have provided Al Shabaab with machine guns, missiles, and training. Hezbollah, an armed group operating in Lebanon, is also believed to have given aid to Al Shabaab. This support from these state and non-state actors violates the 1992 arms embargo imposed on Somalia.
[287]
Footnotes
Footnotes:
[1]
Chris Harnisch, “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab,” Critical Threats Project (American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010),
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[2]
Al Jazeera. (2025, April 24).
Al-Shabab battles Somalia’s army for strategic military base
. Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/4/24/al-shabab-battles-somalias-army...
[3]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab
.; Pate, Amy, and Michael Jensen and Erin Miller. “Al-Shabaab Attack on Garissa University in Kenya.”
Background Report
, National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, April 2015.
https://www.start.umd.edu/pubs/STARTBackgroundReport_alShabaabGarissaU_April2015.pdf
.; Curran, Cody. “Global Ambitions: An Analysis of al Shabaab’s Evolving Rhetoric.”
Critical Threats Project
, American Enterprise Institute, February 17, 2011.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/global-ambitions-an-analysis-of...
.
[4]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia - Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20...
[5]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia - Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20...
[6]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia - Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20...
[7]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia – Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20%20Development%20of%20Radical%20Islamism%20and%20Current%20Implications#gsc.tab=0
.
[8]
Christopher Anzalone, “The Life and Death of Al-Shabab Leader Ahmed Godane,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 9 (September 2014),
https://ctc.usma.edu/the-life-and-death-of-al-shabab-leader-ahmed-godane/
.
[9]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011. pg. 5.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
[10]
Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project. American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-the-internationalization-of-al-shabaab
.; Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia - Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20...
.
[11]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab
.; Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia – Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20-%20Development%20of%20Radical%20Islamism%20and%20Current%20Implications#gsc.tab=0
.
[12]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia - Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20...
[13]
Gartenstein-Ross, Daveed. “The Strategic Challenge of Somalia’s Al-Shabaab: Dimensions of Jihad.”
Middle East Quarterly
16.4 (Fall 2009): 25-36.
https://www.meforum.org/2486/somalia-al-shabaab-strategic-challenge
.
[14]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia – Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20%20Development%20of%20Radical%20Islamism%20and%20Current%20Implications#gsc.tab=0
.
[15]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011. pg. 7.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
[16]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011. pg. 6-8.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
.; Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project. American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[17]
Ibrahim, Mohammed, and Jeffrey Gettleman. “5 Suicide Bomb Attacks Hit Somalia.”
The New York Times
, October 29, 2008.
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/30/world/africa/30somalia.html.;
“Deadly car bombs hit Somaliland.” BBC News, October 29, 2008.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7696986.stm
.
[18]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
[19]
Somalia Business Law Handbook, Volume 1: Strategic Information and Laws
(Washington, D.C.: International Business Publications, 2012)
[20]
“Somalia: Al-Shabaab – It Will Be a Long War.” International Crisis Group, June 26, 2014.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/somalia-al-shabaa...
.
[21]
Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project. American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[22]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia – Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20%20Development%20of%20Radical%20Islamism%20and%20Current%20Implications#gsc.tab=0
.
[23]
Roggio, Bill. “Hizbul Islam joins Shabaab in Somalia.”
The Long War Journal
, December 19, 2010.
https://www.longwarjournal.org/archives/2010/12/hizbul_islam_joins_s.php
.
[24]
“Somali Islamists al-Shabab and Hizbul Islam ‘to merge,’” BBC News, December 20, 2010.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-12038556
[25]
“Kenyan Amisom soldier kills six Somali civilians.” BBC News, September 24, 2012.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-19698348
[26]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia – Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20%20Development%20of%20Radical%20Islamism%20and%20Current%20Implications#gsc.tab=0
.
[27]
“Hizbul Islam splinter group forms new political party.” Sabahi, June 24, 2014.
https://web.archive.org/web/20140925202233/http://sabahionline.com/en_GB/articles/hoa/articles/newsbriefs/2014/06/25/newsbrief-04?change_locale=true
; “Hizbul Islam renounces violence.” Sabahi, September 17, 2013.
https://web.archive.org/web/20150118173520/http://sabahionline.com/en_GB/articles/hoa/articles/newsbriefs/2013/09/17/newsbrief-01
[28]
Christopher Anzalone, “The Life and Death of Al-Shabab Leader Ahmed Godane,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 9 (September 2014),
https://ctc.usma.edu/the-life-and-death-of-al-shabab-leader-ahmed-godane/
.
[29]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab.
[30]
Karr, L., Tyson, K., & Ford , Y. (2025).
Institute for the Study of War
. Institute for the Study of War.
https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/africa-file-april-17-2025-...
[31]
Fanusie, Yaya J. and Alex Entz. “Al-Shabaab: Financial Assessment.” Foundation for Defense of Democracies. June 2017.
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/defenddemocracy/uploads/documents/CSIF_TFBB_Al-Shabaab_v05_web.pdf
.
[32]
Bryden, Matt. “The Reinvention of Al-Shabaab: A Strategy of Choice or Necessity?”. Center for Strategic & International Studies, February 2014, pg. 4.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/140221_Bryden_ReinventionOfAlShabaab_Web.pdf
.
[33]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, July 20, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab.
[34]
CNN Wire Staff. “Al-Shabaab Joining Al Qaeda, Monitor Group Says.”
CNN World News
. February 10, 2012.
https://www.cnn.com/2012/02/09/world/africa/somalia-shabaab-qaeda/index....
.
[35]
Bryden, Matt. “The Reinvention of Al-Shabaab: A Strategy of Choice or Necessity?”. Center for Strategic & International Studies, February 2014, pg. 4.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/140221_Bryden_ReinventionOfAlShabaab_Web.pdf
.
[36]
Christopher Anzalone, “The Life and Death of Al-Shabab Leader Ahmed Godane,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 9 (September 2014),
https://ctc.usma.edu/the-life-and-death-of-al-shabab-leader-ahmed-godane/
.
[37]
Bryden, Matt. “The Reinvention of Al-Shabaab: A Strategy of Choice or Necessity?”. Center for Strategic & International Studies, February 2014, pg. 4.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/140221_Bryden_ReinventionOfAlShabaab_Web.pdf
.
[38]
Christopher Anzalone, “The Life and Death of Al-Shabab Leader Ahmed Godane,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 9 (September 2014),
https://ctc.usma.edu/the-life-and-death-of-al-shabab-leader-ahmed-godane/
.
[39]
Bryden, Matt. “The Reinvention of Al-Shabaab: A Strategy of Choice or Necessity?”. Center for Strategic & International Studies, February 2014, pg. 4-6.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/140221_Bryden_ReinventionOfAlShabaab_Web.pdf
.
[40]
“Al-Shabaab Five Years after Westgate: Still a Menace in East Africa,” International Crisis Group, September 21, 2018, pg. 4,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/kenya/265-al-shabaab-five...
.
[41]
Campbell, John. “Justice, Terrorism, and Nairobi's Westgate Mall.” Council on Foreign Relations, October 9, 2020.
https://www.cfr.org/blog/justice-terrorism-and-nairobis-westgate-mall
[42]
“Al Shabaab Claims Responsibility for Djibouti Suicide Attack,”
Reuters
, May 27, 2014,
https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-djibouti-attacks/al-shabaab-claims-re...
.
[43]
“Kenya Attack: Mpeketoni near Lamu Hit by Al-Shabab Raid,”
BBC News
, June 16, 2014,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-27862510
.
[44]
Iaccino, Ludovica. “Kenya Garissa University massacre: Five worst attacks by al-Shabaab terrorists.”
International Business Times
, April 8, 2015.
https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/kenya-garissa-university-massacre-five-worst-a...
“Kenya families mourn loved ones after Garissa massacre.” Al Jazeera, April 3, 2015.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/4/3/kenya-families-mourn-loved-ones-...
Karimi, Faith, and Steve Almasy and Lillian Leposo. “Kenya mall attack: Military says most hostages freed, death toll at 68.” CNN. September 23, 2013.
https://www.cnn.com/2013/09/22/world/africa/kenya-mall-attack/index.html
.
[45]
Ludovica Iaccino, “Who Is Sheikh Ahmed Umar, Al-Shabaab's Ruthless New Leader?”
International Business Times
, September 8, 2014,
https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/who-sheikh-ahmed-umar-al-shabaabs-ruthless-new...
.
[46]
Hassan M Abukar, “After Godane: Al-Shabaab’s New Leadership Fights Internal Reform,”
African Arguments
, October 1, 2014,
https://africanarguments.org/2014/10/after-godane-al-shabaabs-new-leader...
.
[47]
West, Sunguta. “Increased Attacks Suggest al-Shabaab Resurgence.” The Jamestown Foundation. October 12, 2018.
https://jamestown.org/program/increased-attacks-suggest-al-shabaab-resurgence/
.
[48]
Iaccino, Ludovica. “Kenya Garissa University massacre: Five worst attacks by al-Shabaab terrorists.”
International Business Times
, April 8, 2015.
https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/kenya-garissa-university-massacre-five-worst-a...
“Kenya families mourn loved ones after Garissa massacre.” Al Jazeera, April 3, 2015.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/4/3/kenya-families-mourn-loved-ones-...
Karimi, Faith, and Steve Almasy and Lillian Leposo. “Kenya mall attack: Military says most hostages freed, death toll at 68.” CNN. September 23, 2013.
https://www.cnn.com/2013/09/22/world/africa/kenya-mall-attack/index.html
.
[49]
Christopher Anzalone, “The Resilience of Al-Shabaab,”
CTC Sentinel
9, no. 4 (April 2016),
https://www.ctc.usma.edu/the-resilience-of-al-shabaab/
.
[50]
U.S. Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service,
Al Shabaab
, by Lauren Ploch Blanchard. IF10170. 2020.
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF10170.pdf
[51]
Oladipo, Tomi. “What happened when al-Shabab attacked a Kenyan base in Somalia?” BBC News. January 22, 2016.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-35364593
.
[52]
Christopher Anzalone, “The Resilience of Al-Shabaab,”
CTC Sentinel
9, no. 4 (April 2016),
https://www.ctc.usma.edu/the-resilience-of-al-shabaab/
.
[53]
Aria Bendix, “Al-Shabaab Kills 15 in Latest Car Bomb Attack,”
The Atlantic
, June 20, 2017,
https://www.theatlantic.com/news/archive/2017/06/al-shabab-kills-15-in-l...
.
[54]
Sullivan, Emily. “Mogadishu Truck Bomb's Death Toll Now Tops 500, Probe Committee Says.” NPR. December 2, 2017.
https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/12/02/567985077/mogadishu-truck-bombs-death-toll-now-tops-500-probe-committee-says
[55]
Paul D. Williams,
Fighting for Peace in SOMALIA: A History and Analysis of the African Union MISSION (AMISOM), 2007-2017
(Oxford, UK: Oxford university press, 2018).
[56]
Meressa K Dessu, “AMISOM Should Provide More than Security in Somalia,” ISS Africa (Institute for Security Studies, February 25, 2021),
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/amisom-should-provide-more-than-security...
.
[57]
Blaine, Seth. “Al-Shabaab Preparing for New Leadership.” Center for Security Policy. June 19, 2018.
https://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2018/06/19/al-shabaab-preparing-...
.
[58]
Matamis, J. (2024, October 7).
ATMIS Transition and Post-ATMIS Security Arrangements in Somalia • Stimson Center
. Stimson Center.
https://www.stimson.org/2024/atmis-transition-and-post-atmis-security-ar...
[59]
Bearak, Max. “Deadly Nairobi attack comes as U.S. military ramps up airstrikes against al-Shabab in Somalia.” The Washington Post. January 17, 2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/deadly-nairobi-attack-comes-...
.
[60]
Timothy Gardner, Idrees Ali, and George Obulutsa, “U.S. Air Strike Hits Al Shabaab; Somalia Says Base Destroyed,” ed. Kevin Liffey and Grant McCool,
Reuters
, June 11, 2017,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-somalia-attack/u-s-air-strike-hits-al...
.
[61]
Bearak, Max. “2019 saw record U.S. airstrikes in Somalia. Why is al-Shabab surging?” Washington Post, January 15, 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/2019-saw-record-us-airstrikes-in-somalia-why-is-al-shabab-surging/2020/01/15/be9bc808-30c2-11ea-971b-43bec3ff9860_story.html
[62]
Blaine, Seth. “Al-Shabaab Preparing for New Leadership.” Center for Security Policy. June 19, 2018.
https://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2018/06/19/al-shabaab-preparing-...
.
[63]
West, Sunguta. “Hussein Ali Fiidow’s Challenge to al-Shabaab Leadership.” The Jamestown Foundation. June 6, 2018.
https://jamestown.org/brief/hussein-ali-fiidows-challenge-to-al-shabaab-...
.
[64]
West, Sunguta. “Hussein Ali Fiidow’s Challenge to al-Shabaab Leadership.” The Jamestown Foundation. June 6, 2018.
https://jamestown.org/brief/hussein-ali-fiidows-challenge-to-al-shabaab-...
.
[65]
Blaine, Seth. “Al-Shabaab Preparing for New Leadership.” Center for Security Policy. June 19, 2018.
https://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2018/06/19/al-shabaab-preparing-...
.
[66]
West, Sunguta. “Al-Shabaab’s Top Leader Transfers Power Amid Factional Strife.”
Terrorism Monitor
18, no. 19 (October 23, 2020).
https://jamestown.org/program/al-shabaabs-top-leader-transfers-power-ami...
.
[67]
“Al Shabaab wants you to know its alive and well” Foreign Policy, January 19, 2019.
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/01/19/al-shabab-wants-you-to-know-its-ali...
[68]
Bearak, Max. “Deadly Nairobi attack comes as U.S. military ramps up airstrikes against al-Shabab in Somalia.” The Washington Post. January 17, 2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/deadly-nairobi-attack-comes-...
.
[69]
Ward, Alex. “Al-Shabaab’s Kenya attack proves the terrorist group is still deadly.” Vox. January 16, 2019.
https://www.vox.com/world/2019/1/16/18185182/nairobi-kenya-hotel-attack-...
.
[70]
Max Bearack, “Twin Al-Shabab Attacks in Somalia Target U.S. and European Armed Forces,”
The Washington Post
, September 30, 2019,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/twin-al-shabab-attacks-in-so...
.
[71]
“Al-Shabaab Leader Hands over Power to Deputy amid ‘Ill-Health’ Speculations.” Garowe Online. August 29, 2020.
https://www.garoweonline.com/index.php/en/news/somalia/al-shabaab-leader...
.
[72]
West, Sunguta. “Al-Shabaab’s Top Leader Transfers Power Amid Factional Strife.”
Terrorism Monitor
18, no. 19 (October 23, 2020).
https://jamestown.org/program/al-shabaabs-top-leader-transfers-power-ami...
.
[73]
“Al-Shabaab Leader Hands over Power to Deputy amid ‘Ill-Health’ Speculations.” Garowe Online. August 29, 2020.
https://www.garoweonline.com/index.php/en/news/somalia/al-shabaab-leader...
.
[74]
“Somalia's Islamist group al Shabaab says sets up COVID-19 treatment centre”
Reuters
, June 12, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-somalia/somalias-i...
[75]
Hockey, Christopher, and Michael Jones. "The Limits of ‘Shabaab-CARE’: Militant Governance amid COVID-19."
CTC
Sentinel.
June 2020.
https://ctc.usma.edu/the-limits-of-shabaab-care-militant-governance-amid...
[76]
“Blunting Al-Shabaab's Impact on Somalia's Elections.” International Crisis Group. December 31, 2020.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/b165-blunting-al-...
.
[77]
Borger, Julian. “Trump Orders US to Pull Troops from Somalia.”
The Guardian
, December 4, 2020.
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/dec/04/us-troops-somalia-withdr...
.
[78]
Dahir, Abdi Latif, and Eric Schmitt. “Somalia Worries That a U.S. Withdrawal Will Be Disastrous.”
The New York Times
, November 19, 2020.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/18/world/africa/somalia-us-troops.html
.
[79]
Felbab-Brown, Vanda. “What Ethiopia's Crisis Means for Somalia.” Brookings Institution, November 23, 2020.
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2020/11/20/what-ethiopia...
.
[80]
“Blunting Al-Shabaab's Impact on Somalia's Elections.” International Crisis Group. December 31, 2020.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/b165-blunting-al-...
.
[81]
BBC. (2022, May 16). Somalia: President Biden reverses Trump’s withdrawal of US troops.
BBC News
.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-61467478
[82]
US Africa Command Public Affairs. (2025, March 17).
Federal Government of Somalia engages al Shabaab with support from U.S. Forces
. Africom.mil.
https://www.africom.mil/pressrelease/35744/federal-government-of-somalia...
[83]
Harun Maruf and Jeff Seldin, “Somalia Fears New US Airstrike Guidance Is Benefiting Al-Shabab,”
VOA News
, March 6, 2021,
https://www.voanews.com/usa/somalia-fears-new-us-airstrike-guidance-bene...
.
[84]
Nor, Mohamed Sheikh, and Mohamed Omar Ahmed. “Somalia Faces Violent Turn With Factions Seen in Security Ranks.”
Bloomberg
, April 26, 2021.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-04-26/somalia-faces-violent-turn-with-factions-seen-in-security-ranks
.
[85]
Malingha, David. “Political Crisis in Somalia Raises Security Risk For Region.”
Bloomberg
, May 1, 2021.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-01/political-crisis-in-s...
.
[86]
Odowa, Mohammed. “US, EU Threaten to Sanction Somalia.”
Deutsche Welle
, April 15, 2021.
https://www.dw.com/en/us-eu-threaten-to-sanction-somalia/a-57216652
.
[87]
ACLED. (2023, March 3).
Context Assessment: Heightened Political Violence in Somalia
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2023/03/03/context-assessment-heightened-political...
[88]
Mukhtar, Idris,
Mohammed Tawfeeq
and Heather Yamour. “Explosions near Somalia’s education ministry kill 100 people.” CNN, October 30, 2022.
https://www.cnn.com/2022/10/30/africa/explosions-somalia-education-minis...
; Sheikh , Abdi, and Abdiqani Hassani. “Car bombs at busy Somalia market intersection killed at least 100, president says.” Rueters, October 30, 2022.
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/somalia-president-least-100-people-killed-car-bombs-2022-10-30/
[89]
ISS Africa. (2022, March 29).
Is the AU mission in Somalia changing in name only?
ISS Africa.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/is-the-au-mission-in-somalia-changing-in...
[90]
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data. (2023, September 1).
Special Report | Kenya-Somalia Border: Rising al-Shabaab Threat in the Wake of ATMIS Drawdown
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2023/09/01/special-report-kenya-somalia-border-ris...
[91]
Security Council Report . (2023).
Somalia
. Security Council Report.
https://www.securitycouncilreport.org/monthly-forecast/2023-10/somalia-3...
[92]
Willliams, P. (2024, April 30).
The Somali National Army Versus al-Shabaab: A Net Assessment
. Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.
https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-somali-national-army-versus-al-shabaab-a-n...
[93]
Center for Preventive Action. (2023, June 30).
Al-Shabab in Somalia
. Global Conflict Tracker.
https://www.cfr.org/global-conflict-tracker/conflict/al-shabab-somalia
[94]
Kinkoh , H. (2023).
Inconsistencies are costing the AU Mission in Somalia | ISS Africa
. ISS Africa.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/inconsistencies-are-costing-the-au-missi...
[95]
Kinkoh , H. (2023).
Inconsistencies are costing the AU Mission in Somalia | ISS Africa
. ISS Africa.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/inconsistencies-are-costing-the-au-missi...
[96]
PSC Report. “Will the latest AU mission in Somalia achieve better results?” Institute for Security Studies, May 1, 2025.
https://issafrica.org/pscreport/psc-insights/will-the-latest-au-mission-...
; Dessu, Meressa K, Dawit Yohannes, and Tsion Belay Alene. “New AU mission for Somalia: old problems, fresh solutions?” Institute for Security Studies, August 29, 2024.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/new-au-mission-for-somalia-old-problems-fresh-solutions
[97]
United Nations. (2023, November 15).
Security Council Extends Authorization of African Union Transition Mission in Somalia, Unanimously Adopting Resolution 2710 (2023) | UN Press
. Press.un.org.
https://press.un.org/en/2023/sc15494.doc.htm
[98]
United Nations. (2024, June 28).
Security Council Extends Authorization of African Union Transition Mission in Somalia, Unanimously Adopting Resolution 2741 (2024) | Meetings Coverage and Press Releases
. Un.org.
https://press.un.org/en/2024/sc15756.doc.htm
[99]
United Nations. (2024, August 12).
Security Council Extends Authorization of African Union Assistance Mission in Somalia for Three Days, Unanimously Adopting Resolution 2747 (2024) | Meetings Coverage and Press Releases
. Un.org.
https://press.un.org/en/2024/sc15789.doc.htm
[100]
United Nations. (2024, August 15).
Security Council Extends Authorization of African Union Transition Mission in Somalia until 31 December, Unanimously Adopting Resolution 2478 (2024) | Meetings Coverage and Press Releases
. Un.org.
https://press.un.org/en/2024/sc15793.doc.htm
[101]
Dessu, M., Yohannes, D., & Belay Alene, T. (2024).
New AU mission for Somalia: old problems, fresh solutions? | ISS Africa
. ISS Africa.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/new-au-mission-for-somalia-old-problems-...
[102]
ACLED. (2023, March 3).
Context Assessment: Heightened Political Violence in Somalia
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2023/03/03/context-assessment-heightened-political...
Communications ACLED. (2024c, December 13).
Mapping al-Shabaab’s activity in Somalia in 2024
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2024/12/13/mapping-al-shabaabs-activity-in-somalia...
[103]
Katie Bo Lillis, Kylie Atwood and Natasha Bertrand. “US intelligence assesses Houthis in Yemen in talks to provide weapons to al-Shabaab in Somalia, officials say.” CNN, June 11, 2024.
https://edition.cnn.com/2024/06/11/politics/us-intelligence-houthis-al-shabaab/index.html
[104]
United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 6 February 2025 from the President of the Security Council acting in the absence of a Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities addressed to the President of the Security Council.” S/2025/71/Rev.1, February, 6 2025.
https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n25/041/59/pdf/n2504159.pdf
[105]
The Soufan Center. (2025, April 2).
Between Islamic State and Al-Shabaab: An Embattled Mogadishu? - The Soufan Center
. The Soufan Center.
https://thesoufancenter.org/intelbrief-2025-april-2/
[106]
“Somali militants target presidential convoy in bomb attack, president safe.” Reuters, March 18, 2025.
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/somali-militants-target-presidential-convoy-bomb-attack-president-safe-2025-03-18/
[107]
See strike data in Bergen, Peter , David Sterman, Melissa Salyk-Virk. “The War in Somalia,” in
America’s Counterterrorism Wars.
New America (2021).
https://www.newamerica.org/future-security/reports/americas-counterterrorism-wars/the-war-in-somalia/
[108]
The Soufan Center. (2025, April 2).
Between Islamic State and Al-Shabaab: An Embattled Mogadishu? - The Soufan Center
. The Soufan Center.
https://thesoufancenter.org/intelbrief-2025-april-2/
[109]
Al Jazeera. (2025, April 16).
Al-Shabab fighters attack strategic town in central Somalia
. Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/4/16/al-shabaab-attack-strategic-tow...
[110]
Bradford, R. (2025, April 9).
Practical Lessons to Improve Stabilization Operations in Somalia – Africa Center
. Africa Center.
https://africacenter.org/spotlight/lessons-stabilization-somalia/
[111]
Sengupta, Kim. “Aden Hashi Ayro: Militant Islamist leader in Somalia.”
Independent
, May 3, 2008.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/aden-hashi-ayro-militant-i...
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia - Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20...
.
[112]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011. pg. 7.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
[113]
Bryden, Matt. “The Reinvention of Al-Shabaab: A Strategy of Choice or Necessity?”. Center for Strategic & International Studies, February 2014, pg. 4-6.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/140221_Bryden_ReinventionOfAlShabaab_Web.pdf
.
[114]
Sengupta, Kim. “Aden Hashi Ayro: Militant Islamist leader in Somalia.”
Independent
, May 3, 2008.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/aden-hashi-ayro-militant-i...
Chothia, Farouk. “Ahmed Abdi Godane: Somalia’s killed al-Shabab leader.”
BBC News
, September 9, 2014.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-29034409
[115]
Cleaves, Sam. “Profile: Ahmad Umar (Abu Ubaidah).” Critical Threats Project, February 17, 2017.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/profile-ahmad-umar-abu-ubaidah
.
[116]
Blaine, Seth. “Al-Shabaab Preparing for New Leadership.” Center for Security Policy. 19 June 2018. Web. 26 Nov. 2018. <
https://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2018/06/19/al-shabaab-preparing-...
.
[117]
West, Sunguta. “Al-Shabaab’s Top Leader Transfers Power Amid Factional Strife.” Jamestown Foundation, Terrorism Monitor vol 18, no 19, October 23, 2020.
https://jamestown.org/program/al-shabaabs-top-leader-transfers-power-amid-factional-strife/
[118]
Zenn, Jacob. “Al-Shabaab Leader Abu Ubaidah Reemerges From the Shadows.” Jamestown Foundation, Militant Leadership Monitor vol 14, no 5, June 2, 2023.
https://jamestown.org/brief/al-shabaab-leader-abu-ubaidah-reemerges-from-the-shadows/
[119]
Yusuf, Ali. “Al-Shabaab Issues Warning Against Land Auctions and Evictions in Mogadishu.” Horn Observer, March 3, 2025.
https://hornobserver.com/articles/3227/Al-Shabaab-Issues-Warning-Against-Land-Auctions-and-Evictions-in-Mogadishu
[120]
Tillerson, Rex. “Designation of Abukar Ali Adan, Aka Abukar Ali Aden, Aka Sheikh Abukar, Aka Ibrahim Afghan, as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist.” Federal Register. U.S. State Department, January 9, 2018.
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/01/09/2018-00196/designat...
.
[121]
“Al-Shabaab Leader Hands over Power to Deputy amid ‘Ill-Health’ Speculations.” Garowe Online, August 29, 2020.
https://www.garoweonline.com/index.php/en/news/somalia/al-shabaab-leader...
.
[122]
West, Sunguta. “Al-Shabaab’s Top Leader Transfers Power Amid Factional Strife.”
Terrorism Monitor
18, no. 19 (October 23, 2020).
https://jamestown.org/program/al-shabaabs-top-leader-transfers-power-ami...
.
[123]
Guled, Abdi and Cara Anna. “Al-Shabaab’s former No. 2 leader runs for office in Somalia.”
AP
(October 30, 2018).
https://apnews.com/article/f6c08be2b0664f9fa137aaf57b67cf0f
.
[124]
Caato, Bashir Mohamed. “From al-Shabaab to the cabinet. Somalia’s move fuels debate.”
Al Jazeera
(August 5, 2022).
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/8/5/from-al-shabab-to-the-cabinet-somalias-move-fuels-debate
.
[125]
West, Sunguta. “Hussein Ali Fiidow’s Challenge to Al-Shabaab Leadership.”
Militant Leadership Monitor
9, no. 5 (June 6, 2018).
https://jamestown.org/brief/hussein-ali-fiidows-challenge-to-al-shabaab-...
.
[126]
Blaine, Seth. “Al-Shabaab Preparing for New Leadership.” Center for Security Policy. June 19, 2018.
https://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2018/06/19/al-shabaab-preparing-...
.
[127]
Bermudez, K. (2024b, December 26).
Shabaab announces the death of senior official Mohamed Mire
. FDD.
https://www.fdd.org/analysis/op_eds/2024/12/26/shabaab-announces-the-dea...
[128]
“Somalia: Al Qaeda and Al Shabaab.”
Stratfor
, May 5, 2008.
https://worldview.stratfor.com/article/somalia-al-qaeda-and-al-shabaab
[129]
United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 12 July 2013 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council.” July 12, 2013.
https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/752995?ln=ru
.
[130]
“Who Are Somalia's Al-Shabab?”
BBC News
, December 22, 2017,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-15336689
.
[131]
“Country Reports on Terrorism 2017.” U.S. Department of State. 2017.
https://www.state.gov/reports/country-reports-on-terrorism-2017/
[132]
Herbling, David and Mike Cohen.” Who are the Al-Shabaab Militants Plaguing Kenya?”
The Washington Post
, January 16, 2018.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/who-are-the-al-shabaab-militants...
.
[133]
“Al-Shabab in Somalia | Global Conflict Tracker.” Council on Foreign Relations, June 15, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/global-conflict-tracker/conflict/al-shabab-somalia
.
[134]
United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 3 February 2022 from the Chair of the Security CounCil Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities addressed to the President of the Security Council.” February 3, 2022.
https://nordicmonitor.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/UNSC_report_al_Qaeda_ISIS.pdf
.
[135]
Security, UN., & Security, UN. (2024, January 29).
Letter dated 23 January 2024 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities addressed to the President of the Security Council
. United Nations Digital Library System; UN,.
https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/4035877?ln=en&v=pdf#files
[136]
Wadhams, Nick. “Could Al-Shabab Topple Somalia's Government?”
TIME
. August 26, 2010.
http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2013649,00.html
.
[137]
“Cash and Compassion: The Role of the Somali Diaspora in Relief, Development and Peace-building.” Chatham House, March 7, 2012.
https://www.prio.org/Publications/Publication/?x=4849;
Miller, Greg. “U.S. charges 14 with giving support to Somali insurgent group.”
The Washington Post
, August 6, 2010.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/08/05/AR20100...
“US rounds up ‘al-Shabab backers.”
Al Jazeera
, August 5, 2010.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2010/8/5/us-rounds-up-al-shabab-backers.:
Caulderwood, Kathleen. “Al-Shabab's Finances: The Militant Group Gets Funding from Local Businesses, Sources Abroad.”
International Business Times
, September 4, 2014.
https://www.ibtimes.com/al-shababs-finances-militant-group-gets-funding-local-businesses-sources-abroad-1678894
.
[138]
Dickinson, Elizabeth. “Inside Al-Shabab’s Media Strategy.”
Foreign Policy
. September 3, 2010.
https://foreignpolicy.com/2010/09/03/inside-al-shababs-media-strategy/
.
[139]
The Associated Press. “Islamic insurgents loot UN compounds in Somalia.”
CBC News
. July 20, 2009.
https://www.cbc.ca/news/world/islamic-insurgents-loot-un-compounds-in-somalia-1.810132
.
[140]
“Somali group bans aid organizations.”
Al Jazeera
, November 28, 2011.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2011/11/28/somali-group-bans-aid-organisations
[141]
United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 28 September 2020 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia addressed to the President of the Security Council.” S/2020/949. September 28, 2020.
https://www.undocs.org/en/S/2020/949
[142]
Caulderwood, Kathleen. “Al-Shabab's Finances: The Militant Group Gets Funding from Local Businesses, Sources Abroad.”
International Business Times
, September 4, 2014.
https://www.ibtimes.com/al-shababs-finances-militant-group-gets-funding-local-businesses-sources-abroad-1678894
.
[143]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab
.
[144]
Rewards for Justice . (2025).
Al-Shabaab’s Financial Network – Rewards For Justice
. Rewards for Justice.
https://rewardsforjustice.net/rewards/al-shabaabs-financial-network/
[145]
United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 28 September 2020 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia addressed to the President of the Security Council.” S/2020/949. September 28, 2020.
https://www.undocs.org/en/S/2020/949
[146]
Treasury Designates Transnational al-Shabaab Money Laundering Network
. (2024, March 19). U.S. Department of the Treasury.
https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2168
[147]
US Department of Treasury. (2025, April 14).
Terrorist Financing Targeting Center Designates Al-Shabaab Networks in Somalia
. U.S. Department of the Treasury.
https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sb0084
[148]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab
[149]
Blaine, Seth. “Al-Shabaab Preparing for New Leadership.” Center for Security Policy. June 19, 2018.
https://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2018/06/19/al-shabaab-preparing-...
.
[150]
Sullivan, Emily. “Mogadishu Truck Bomb's Death Toll Now Tops 500, Probe Committee Says.” NPR. December 2, 2017.
https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/12/02/567985077/mogadishu-truck-bombs-death-toll-now-tops-500-probe-committee-says
[151]
Communications ACLED. (2024b, October 28).
Controversy over electoral reform sparks debate in Somalia amid al-Shabaab operation - October 2024
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2024/10/28/controversy-over-electoral-reform-spark...
[152]
Jamestown Foundation. (2016, August 19).
UNHCR Web Archive
. Unhcr.org.
https://webarchive.archive.unhcr.org/20230527212112/https://www.refworld...
[153]
Communications ACLED. (2024b, October 28).
Controversy over electoral reform sparks debate in Somalia amid al-Shabaab operation - October 2024
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2024/10/28/controversy-over-electoral-reform-spark...
[154]
Reuters. (2025, April 16). Al Shabaab attacks strategic Somalia town as it presses offensive.
Reuters
.
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/al-shabaab-attacks-strategic-somali...
[155]
Al Jazeera. (2025, April 24).
Al-Shabab battles Somalia’s army for strategic military base
. Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/4/24/al-shabab-battles-somalias-army...
[156]
Bryden, Matt. “The Reinvention of Al-Shabaab: A Strategy of Choice or Necessity?” Center for Strategic & International Studies, February 2014.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/140221_Bryden_ReinventionOfAlShabaab_Web.pdf
.; “Al-Shabaab.” Counterterrorism Guide, National Counterterrorism Center. August 20, 2015.
https://www.dni.gov/nctc/groups/al_shabaab.html
[157]
“Al-Shabaab.” Counterterrorism Guide, National Counterterrorism Center. August 20, 2015.
https://www.dni.gov/nctc/groups/al_shabaab.html
. Rice, Xan. “Uganda bomb blasts kill at least 74.”
The Guardian
, July 12, 2010.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/12/uganda-kampala-bombs-explosions-attacks
[158]
“Country Reports on Terrorism 2017.” U.S. Department of State. 2018.
https://www.state.gov/reports/country-reports-on-terrorism-2017/
[159]
Bearek, Max. “Survivors recount nightmarish siege in Nairobi hotel attack that killed 21.”
The Washington Post
, January 16, 2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/standoff-at-nairobi-hotel-attack-st...
.
[160]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab
[161]
ACLED. (2024, September 4).
What’s next for the fight against al-Shabaab in Kenya and Somalia - August 2024
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2024/09/04/whats-next-for-the-fight-against-al-sha...
[162]
“Who Are Somalia's Al-Shabab?”
BBC News
, December 22, 2017,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-15336689
.
[163]
Adow, Mohammed. “Somali fighters undeterred.”
Al Jazeera
, January 27, 2009.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2009/1/27/somali-fighters-undeterred
.
[164]
James, Randy. “A Brief History of Al-Shabab.”
TIME
. December 7, 2009.
http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1945855,00.html
.
[165]
Greste, Peter. “Somalia Islamists Al-Shabab Ban BBC Transmissions.”
BBC News
, April 9, 2010.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8612654.stm
.
[166]
Tisdall, Simon. “Somalia attacks signal escalation of al-Shabaab offensive”
The Guardian
, February 29, 2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/somalia-attacks-signal-esc...
.
[167]
Karimi, Faith, and Ashley Fantz and Catherine E. Shoichet. “Al-Shabaab threatens malls, including some in U.S.; FBI downplays threat.” CNN, February 21, 2015.
https://www.cnn.com/2015/02/21/us/al-shabaab-calls-for-mall-attacks/inde...
[168]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
.; Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project. American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[169]
Sommerlad, Joe. “Al-Shabaab: Who are the East African jihadi group and what are their goals?”
The Independent
, July 16, 2018.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/al-shabaab-who-africa-terror-group-jihadi-group-somalia-islamist-a8449201.html
.; Robert Kluijver, “Al Shabaab Governance,” The Zomia Center for the Study of Non-State Spaces (The Zomia Center for the Study of Non-State Spaces, July 15, 2019),
https://www.zomiacenter.org/posts/2019/4/19/al-shabaab-governance
.
[170]
Elmi, Afyare Abdi, and Abdi Aynte. “Negotiating an End to Somalia’s War with al Shabaab.”
Foreign Affairs
, February 7, 2012.
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/somalia/2012-02-07/negotiating-e...
.
[171]
“Country Reports on Terrorism 2013.” U.S. Department of State, April 2014.
https://2009-2017.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2013/index.htm
[172]
“Somalia's Islamist group al Shabaab says sets up COVID-19 treatment centre”
Reuters
, June 12, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-somalia/somalias-i...
[173]
van de Walle, Nicolas. “Two Books on Islamist Militants in Africa.”
Foreign Affairs
, December 10, 2019.
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/capsule-review/2019-12-10/two-boo...
.
[174]
“Women and Al-Shabaab's Insurgency.” International Crisis Group, June 28, 2019.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/b145-women-and-al...
.
[175]
Harrington, J., & Thompson, J. (2021, September 23).
Examining Extremism: Harakat al Shabaab al Mujahideen (al Shabaab)
. Www.csis.org.
https://www.csis.org/blogs/examining-extremism/examining-extremism-harakat-al-shabaab-al-mujahideen-al-shabaab
[176]
Mubarak, M., & Jackson, A. (2023, August).
Playing the long game: Exploring the relationship between Al-Shabab and civilians in areas beyond state control
. ODI: Think Change.
https://odi.org/en/publications/playing-the-long-game-exploring-the-rela...
[177]
Joseph, D., & Maruf, H. (2018).
Inside Al-Shabaab
. Google Books.
https://books.google.com/books?id=5aBxDwAAQBAJ&dq=al+shabaab+wilayat&pg=...
[178]
Mubarak, M., & Jackson, A. (2023, August).
Playing the long game: Exploring the relationship between Al-Shabab and civilians in areas beyond state control
. ODI: Think Change.
https://odi.org/en/publications/playing-the-long-game-exploring-the-rela...
[179]
Mubarak, M., & Jackson, A. (2023, August).
Playing the long game: Exploring the relationship between Al-Shabab and civilians in areas beyond state control
. ODI: Think Change.
https://odi.org/en/publications/playing-the-long-game-exploring-the-rela...
[180]
Mubarak, M., & Jackson, A. (2023, August).
Playing the long game: Exploring the relationship between Al-Shabab and civilians in areas beyond state control
. ODI: Think Change.
https://odi.org/en/publications/playing-the-long-game-exploring-the-rela...
[181]
Communications ACLED. (2024, October 28).
Controversy over electoral reform sparks debate in Somalia amid al-Shabaab operation - October 2024
. ACLED.
https://acleddata.com/2024/10/28/controversy-over-electoral-reform-spark...
[182]
Mwanzia, Charles. “Somalia Should Allow Al Shabaab to Participate in Polls.”
The Star
, July 19, 2020.
https://www.the-star.co.ke/siasa/2020-07-19-mwanzia-somalia-should-allow...
.
[183]
Andrew Harding, “Somali Defector: Why I Left Al-Shabab,”
BBC News
, May 20, 2015,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-32791713
.
[184]
Christopher Anzalone and Stig Jarle Hansen, “The Saga of Mukhtar Robow and Somalia's Fractious Politics,” War on the Rocks, January 30, 2019,
https://warontherocks.com/2019/01/the-saga-of-mukhtar-robow-and-somalias...
.
[185]
Tisdall, Simon. ”Somalia attacks signal escalation of al-Shabaab offensive”
The Guardian
, February 29, 2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/somalia-attacks-signal-esc...
.
[186]
Sommerlad, Joe. “Al-Shabaab: Who are the East African jihadi group and what are their goals?”
The Independent
, July 16, 2018.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/al-shabaab-who-africa-te...
.
[187]
International Crisis Group. (2022b, June 21).
Considering political engagement with Al-Shabaab in Somalia
. International Crisis Group.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/309-considering-p...
[188]
U.S. Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service,
Al Shabaab
, by Lauren Ploch Blanchard. IF10170. 2020.
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF10170.pdf
[189]
“Country Reports on Terrorism 2013.” U.S. Department of State, April 2014.
https://2009-2017.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2013/index.htm
.; Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
.; Miller, Erin. “Al-Shabaab Attack on Westgate Mall in Kenya.”
Background Report
, National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, September 2013.
https://www.start.umd.edu/sites/default/files/publications/local_attachm...
.
[190]
“Country Reports on Terrorism 2013.” U.S. Department of State, April 2014.
https://2009-2017.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2013/index.htm
.
[191]
Sommerlad, Joe. “Al-Shabaab: Who are the East African jihadi group and what are their goals?”
The Independent
, July 16, 2018.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/al-shabaab-who-africa-te...
.
[192]
Ward, Alex. “Al-Shabaab’s Kenya attack proves the terrorist group is still deadly.”
Vox News
, January 16, 2019.
https://www.vox.com/world/2019/1/16/18185182/nairobi-kenya-hotel-attack-...
[193]
Bearak, Max. “Deadly Nairobi attack comes as U.S. military ramps up airstrikes against al-Shabab in Somalia.”
The Washington Post
, January 17, 2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/deadly-nairobi-attack-comes-...
.
[194]
Cannon, Brendon J. and Martin Plaut. “Why al-Shabaab targets Kenya and how to stop the attacks.”
Quartz.
January 16, 2019.
https://qz.com/africa/1525710/nairobi-hotel-attacks-why-al-shabaab-targe...
.
[195]
Greste, Peter. “Somalia Islamists Al-Shabab Ban BBC Transmissions.”
BBC News
. April 9, 2010.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8612654.stm
.
[196]
Harnisch, Chris. “Al Shabaab’s First ‘News’ Video: An Effort to Recruit Westerners and Expel Peacekeepers.” Critical Threats Project,
American Enterprise Institute,
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/al-shabaabs-first-news-video-an...
[197]
Gettleman, Jeffrey. “Shabab and East African Front Militants Compete for Notoriety.” The New York Times, April 12, 2016.
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/13/world/africa/militant-groups-compete-...
.
[198]
“Somalia's al-Shabaab militants use Donald Trump in recruiting film.”
The Guardian
. January 2, 2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/02/somalis-al-shabaab-milit...
.
[199]
Hummel, K. (2024, January 19).
The Online Frontline: Decoding al-Shabaab’s Social Media Strategy
. Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.
https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-online-frontline-decoding-al-shabaabs-soci...
[200]
van de Walle, Nicolas. “Two Books on Islamist Militants in Africa.” Foreign Affairs, December 10, 2019.
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/capsule-review/2019-12-10/two-boo...
.
[201]
“Women and Al-Shabaab's Insurgency.” International Crisis Group, June 28, 2019.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/b145-women-and-al...
.
[202]
van de Walle, Nicolas. “Two Books on Islamist Militants in Africa.” Foreign Affairs, December 10, 2019.
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/capsule-review/2019-12-10/two-boo...
.
[203]
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. (2017)
Countering Al-Shabaab Propaganda and Recruitment Mechanisms in South Central Somalia
.
https://unsom.unmissions.org/sites/default/files/countering_al-shabaab_p...
[204]
Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project. American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[205]
Ibrahim, Mohammed, and Jeffrey Gettleman. “5 Suicide Bomb Attacks Hit Somalia.”
The New York Times
, October 29, 2008.
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/30/world/africa/30somalia.html.;
“Deadly car bombs hit Somaliland.”
BBC News
, October 29, 2008.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7696986.stm
.
[206]
“Al-Shabaab.” Counterterrorism Guide, National Counterterrorism Center. August 20, 2015.
https://www.dni.gov/nctc/groups/al_shabaab.html
. Rice, Xan. “Uganda bomb blasts kill at least 74.”
The Guardian
, July 12, 2010.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/12/uganda-kampala-bombs-explosions-attacks
. ; Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab
.
[207]
“Somalia: New Al-Shabaab Attacks are War Crimes.”
Human Rights Watch
, April 16. 2013.
https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/04/16/somalia-new-al-shabaab-attacks-are-w...
Ibrahim, Mohammed. “Coordinated Blasts Kill at Least 20 in Somalia’s Capital.”
The New York Times
, April 14, 2013.
https://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/15/world/africa/deadly-attacks-strike-so...
“Somalia supreme court attack kills at least 20.”
The Guardian
, April 14. 2013.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/14/somalia-supreme-court-atta...
.
[208]
Karimi, Faith, and Steve Almasy and Lillian Leposo. “Kenya mall attack: Military says most hostages freed, death toll at 68.”
CNN News
, September 23, 2013.
https://www.cnn.com/2013/09/22/world/africa/kenya-mall-attack/index.html...
Miller, Erin. “Al-Shabaab Attack on Westgate Mall in Kenya.”
National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism
, September 2013.
https://www.start.umd.edu/publication/al-shabaab-attack-westgate-mall-kenya
.
[209]
“Al-Shabab Attacks Somali Presidential Palace.”
Al Jazeera
. February 22, 2014.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2014/02/22/al-shabab-attacks-somali-presi...
.
[210]
Saul, Heather. “Kenya attack: al-Shabaab militants kill 10 in second raid near Mpeketoni.” The Independent, June 17, 2014.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/kenya-attack-al-shabaab-...
“Kenya attack: Mpeketoni near Lamu hit by al-Shabab raid.”
BBC News
, June 16, 2014.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-27862510
.
[211]
“Kenya bus killings claimed by Somali group al-Shabab.”
BBC News
, November 22, 2014.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-30157581.;
Karimi, Faith, and Christabelle Fombu. “Police: Islamist militants hijack bus in Kenya at dawn, kill dozens.”
CNN News
, November 22. 2014.
https://www.cnn.com/2014/11/22/world/africa/kenya-bus-attack/index.html#...
Khalif, Abjata, and Mohamed Sheikh Nor. “Kenyan Bus Attack by al-Qaeda Militants Kills 28 People.”
Bloomberg Business
, November 21, 2014.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-11-22/kenyan-bus-attack-by-...
.
[212]
Levs, Josh, and Holly Yan. “147 dead, Islamist gunmen killed after attack at Kenya college.”
CNN News
, April 2, 2015.
https://www.cnn.com/2015/04/02/africa/kenya-university-attack/index.html.:
Karimi, Faith, and David McKenzie. “Kenya attack victims: Vigil mourns 147 slain by terrorists in Garissa.”
CNN News
, April 10, 2015.
https://www.cnn.com/2015/04/07/africa/kenya-attack-victims-vigil/index.html
.
[213]
Sheikh, Abdi, and Feisal Omar. “Somali Militants Kill President's Nephew in Ambush.” Edited by Edith Honan.
Reuters
, October 7, 2015.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-somalia-attacks/somali-militants-kill...
.
[214]
Oladipo, Tomi. “What happened when al-Shabab attacked a Kenyan base in Somalia?”
BBC News
, January 22, 2016.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-35364593
; Kriel, Robyn and Briana Duggan. “Kenya Covers Up Military Massacre.”
CNN News
, May 31, 2016.
https://edition.cnn.com/2016/05/31/africa/kenya-soldiers-el-adde-massacr...
.
[215]
Sullivan, Emily. “Mogadishu Truck Bomb's Death Toll Now Tops 500, Probe Committee Says.” NPR. December 2, 2017.
https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/12/02/567985077/mogadishu-truck-bombs-death-toll-now-tops-500-probe-committee-says
[216]
Burke, Jason and Abdalle Ahmed Mumin. “Al-Shabaab attack kills dozens of Ugandan soldiers in Somalia.” April 1, 2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/apr/01/al-shabaab-attack-kills-ug...
.
[217]
Ombuor, Rael. “Car bombs rock Somali capital, killing at least 20 in attacks claimed by al-Shabab.”
The Washington Pos
t. November 9, 2018.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/car-bombs-rock-somali-capital-killing-at-least-20-in-attacks-claimed-by-al-shabab/2018/11/09/960bff40-e431-11e8-8f5f-a55347f48762_story.html?utm_term=.ced6f294f923
; Associated Press. “Toll rises to 53 dead from bomb blasts in Somalia’s capital.” The Washington Post. November 10, 2018.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/toll-rises-to-53-dead-from-b...
.
[218]
Bearek, Max. “Survivors recount nightmarish siege in Nairobi hotel attack that killed 21.”
The Washington Post
. January 16, 2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/standoff-at-nairobi-hotel-attack-st...
.
[219]
Sheikh, Abdi. “Death Toll from Al Shabaab Suicide Car Bomb in Somalia Rises to 29 - Police.” Edited by John Stonestreet.
Reuters
, March 1, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-somalia-security/death-toll-from-al-shabaab-suicide-car-bomb-in-somalia-rises-to-29-police-idUSKCN1QI3V5
.
[220]
Associated Press. “Militants Hit State Building In Somalia.”
The New York Times
, March 24, 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/23/world/africa/somalia-bombing-gunfight...
.
[221]
Guled, Abdi. “Suicide Bomber Walks into Mayor's Office, Detonates Explosives in Somalia Capital.”
USA Today World News
. July 24, 2019.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2019/07/24/mogadishu-somalia-mayors-office-al-shabab-suicide-bomber/1817830001/
.
[222]
Guled, Abdi. “Somalia Bombing Kills Dozens; Airstrikes Target Militants.”
Associated Press News
. December 29, 2019.
https://apnews.com/article/somalia-ap-top-news-mogadishu-mohamed-abdullahi-mohamed-international-news-6f7839c0cff441bee9beef6ac2264519
.
[223]
Dhaysane, Mohammed. “8 Soldiers Killed in Al-Shabaab Attack in Somalia.”
Andalou Agency
, February 2, 2020.
https://www.aa.com.tr/en/africa/8-soldiers-killed-in-al-shabaab-attack-i...
.
[224]
“Somali Soldiers Killed in Al-Shabab Attack near Mogadishu.”
Al Jazeera
, October 15, 2020.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/10/15/at-least-13-somali-soldiers-ki...
.
[225]
Ahmed, Mohammed Omar. “Suicide Bomber Kills 14 in Attack Aimed at Somali Prime Minister.”
Bloomberg
, December 19, 2020.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-19/suicide-bomber-kills-14-in-attack-aimed-at-somali-prime-minister
.
[226]
Uwiringiyimana, Clement, and Abdiqani Hassan. “Suicide Bombing by Somalia's Al Shabaab Group Kills Six.” Edited by Gareth Jones.
Reuters
, May 10, 2021.
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/suicide-bomber-kills-six-police-officers-somali-capital-police-2021-05-10/
.
[227]
Maggie Fick, “At Least 15 Killed in Somalia Suicide Bombing Claimed by Militants,” ed. Catherine Evans,
Reuters
, June 15, 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/least-10-people-killed-suicide-bombing-army-camp-somalia-state-media-2021-06-15/
.
[228]
“Al-Shabab Bombing near Mogadishu School Kills at Least 8.” 2021. Www.aljazeera.com. November 25, 2021.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/11/25/large-explosion-rocks-somali-capital-mogadishu
.
[229]
“Four People Killed, 10 Wounded in Bombing in Somali Capital.” 2022. Www.aljazeera.com. January 18, 2022.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/1/18/several-people-killed-in-bombin...
.
[230]
Jazeera, Al. 2022. “At Least 13 Killed by Suicide Bomber in Central Somalia.” Al Jazeera. February 19, 2022.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/2/19/at-least-13-killed-by-suicide-b...
.
[231]
“Somali Forces End Al-Shabab Siege at Mogadishu Hotel.” Al Jazeera. August 21, 2022.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/8/21/somali-forces-end-al-shabab-sie...
.
[232]
Maruf, Harun, “Death Toll Rises to 121 in Somalia Al-Shabaab Attacks,”
VoA
, November 1, 2022,
https://www.voanews.com/a/death-toll-rises-in-somalia-al-shabab-attacks/6815098.html
.
[233]
Ghosh, Kanjyik and Elias Biryabarema, “Uganda says 54 soldiers killed by al Shabaab in Somalia,”
Reuters
, June 3, 2023,
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/54-ugandan-soldiers-killed-by-al-shabaab-somalia-uganda-says-2023-06-03/
.
[234]
Al Jazeera, “Several killed in hotel siege in Somalia’s Mogadishu,” June 9, 2023,
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/6/9/somalias-al-shabaab-attack-hotel-in-mogadishu
.
[235]
Associated Press, “Al-Shabaab militants seize UN helicopter killing one and abducting five,”
The Guardian
, January 10, 2024,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/jan/10/somalian-rebels-kill-one-and-abduct-five-after-un-helicopters-emergency-landing
.
[236]
Al Jazeera. (2024, February 6).
Ten dead, 20 others injured in multiple blasts in market in Somali capital
. Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/2/6/ten-dead-20-others-injured-in-mu...
[237]
Al Jazeera. (2024, February 11).
Al-Shabab claims attack on UAE military in Somalia
. Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/2/11/al-shabab-kills-three-emirati-t...
[238]
Al Jazeera. (2024, July 13).
At least eight killed in shootout during Somalia prison breakout attempt
. Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/7/13/eight-killed-in-mogadishu-priso...
[239]
Al Jazeera. (2024, July 15).
Car bomb targets busy cafe in Somalia’s capital, kills at least nine
. Al Jazeera; Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/7/15/deadly-car-bomb-targets-busy-ca...
[240]
Al Jazeera. (2024, August 3).
At least 32 killed in al-Shabab beach attack in Somalia’s capital Mogadishu
. Al Jazeera; Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/8/3/al-shabab-lido-beach-attack-soma...
[241]
Fardowsa Hanshi. (2025, March 11). Somali al-Shabab militants storm Qahira Hotel in Beledweyne.
British Broadcasting Corporation
.
https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cx2gdjd57lro
[242]
Reuters. (2025, March 18). Somali militants target presidential convoy in bomb attack, president safe.
Reuters
.
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/somali-militants-target-presidentia...
[243]
Reuters . (2025, April 16). Al Shabaab attacks strategic Somalia town as it presses offensive.
Reuters
.
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/al-shabaab-attacks-strategic-somali...
[244]
Al Jazeera. (2025, April 24).
Al-Shabab battles Somalia’s army for strategic military base
. Al Jazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/4/24/al-shabab-battles-somalias-army...
[245]
“Al-Shabaab.” Terrorist organizations. Australian National Security, August 22, 2009.
https://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/Listedterroristorganisations/Pages/A...
.
[246]
“Council Regulation (EU) No 356/2010 of 26 April 2010 Imposing Certain Specific Restrictive Measures Directed against Certain Natural or Legal Persons, Entities or Bodies, in View of the Situation in Somalia,” EUR-Lex (European Union, April 26, 2010),
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2010/356/oj/eng
.
[247]
“Proscribed Terrorist Groups or Organizations.” United Kingdom Home Office, April 23, 2021.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/proscribed-terror-groups-or-o...
.
[248]
“United Nations Security Council Consolidated List,” United Nations Security Council (United Nations Security Council, April 12, 2010),
https://scsanctions.un.org/en/?keywords=somalia
.
[249]
“Foreign Terrorist Organizations.” U.S. Department of State.
https://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/other/des/123085.htm
.
[250]
Felter, Claire, Jonathan Masters, and Mohammed Aly Sergie. “Al-Shabab.” CFR Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations, May 19, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/al-shabab
.
[251]
Sommerlad, Joe. “Al-Shabaab: Who Are the East African Jihadi Group and What Are Their Goals?”
The Independent
, January 15, 2019,
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/al-shabaab-who-africa-te...
.
[252]
van de Walle, Nicolas. “Two Books on Islamist Militants in Africa.”
Foreign Affairs
, December 10, 2019.
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/capsule-review/2019-12-10/two-boo...
.
[253]
“Women and Al-Shabaab's Insurgency.” International Crisis Group, June 28, 2019.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/b145-women-and-al...
.
[254]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia - Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20...
Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project. American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[255]
“Somalia's Islamist group al Shabaab says sets up COVID-19 treatment centre”
Reuters
, June 12, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-somalia/somalias-i...
[256]
West, Sunguta. “Hussein Ali Fiidow’s Challenge to al-Shabaab Leadership.” The Jamestown Foundation. June 6, 2018.
https://jamestown.org/brief/hussein-ali-fiidows-challenge-to-al-shabaab-...
.
[257]
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. (2017)
Countering Al-Shabaab Propaganda and Recruitment Mechanisms in South Central Somalia
.
https://unsom.unmissions.org/sites/default/files/countering_al-shabaab_p...
[258]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” Center for Strategic and International Studies, AQAM Futures Project, Case Study Series, July 2011.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
[259]
“Sustaining Gains in Somalia’s Offensive against Al-Shabaab.” International Crisis Group, Crisis Group Africa Briefing No 187, March 21, 2023.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/somalia/b187-sustaining-gains-somalias-offensive-against-al-shabaab
[260]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia – Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20%20Development%20of%20Radical%20Islamism%20and%20Current%20Implications#gsc.tab=0
.
[261]
Roggio, Bill. “Hizbul Islam joins Shabaab in Somalia.”
The Long War Journal
, December 19, 2010.
https://www.longwarjournal.org/archives/2010/12/hizbul_islam_joins_s.php
.
[262]
“Somali Islamists al-Shabab and Hizbul Islam ‘to merge,’” BBC News, December 20, 2010.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-12038556
[263]
“Kenyan Amisom soldier kills six Somali civilians.” BBC News, September 24, 2012.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-19698348
[264]
Page, Jacqueline. “Jihadi Arena Report: Somalia – Development of Radical Islamism and Current Implications.” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, March 22, 2010.
https://www.ict.org.il/Article/1071/Jihadi%20Arena%20Report%20Somalia%20%20Development%20of%20Radical%20Islamism%20and%20Current%20Implications#gsc.tab=0
.
[265]
“Hizbul Islam splinter group forms new political party.” Sabahi, June 24, 2014.
https://web.archive.org/web/20140925202233/http://sabahionline.com/en_GB/articles/hoa/articles/newsbriefs/2014/06/25/newsbrief-04?change_locale=true
; “Hizbul Islam renounces violence.” Sabahi, September 17, 2013.
https://web.archive.org/web/20150118173520/http://sabahionline.com/en_GB/articles/hoa/articles/newsbriefs/2013/09/17/newsbrief-01
[266]
Abdulahi Hassan, “Inside Look at the Fighting Between Al-Shabab and Ahlu-Sunna Wal-Jama,”
CTC Sentinel
2, no. 3 (March 2009),
https://ctc.usma.edu/inside-look-at-the-fighting-between-al-shabab-and-a...
.
[267]
Andrew McGregor, “Sudanese Security Forces Raid Islamist Training Camp in National Park,”
Terrorism Monitor
, December 14, 2012,
https://jamestown.org/brief/briefs-75/
.
[268]
Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project.
American Enterprise Institute
, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[269]
Wise, Rob. “Al Shabaab.” AQAM Futures Project Case Study Series, Center for Strategic & International Studies/Homeland Security & Counterterrorism Program Transnational Threats Project. July 2011.
https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110715_Wise_AlShabaab_AQAM%20Futures%20Case%20Study_WEB.pdf
.; Harnisch, Chris. “The Terror Threat from Somalia: The Internationalization of Al Shabaab.” Critical Threats Project. American Enterprise Institute, February 12, 2010.
https://www.criticalthreats.org/analysis/the-terror-threat-from-somalia-...
.
[270]
Houreld, Katharine. “Somali militant group al-Shabaab formally joins al-Qaida.”
The Guardian
, February 9, 2012.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/09/somali-al-shabaab-join-al-...
“Al-Shabaab joining al Qaeda, monitor group says.”
CNN
, February 10, 2012.
https://www.cnn.com/2012/02/09/world/africa/somalia-shabaab-qaeda/index....
Berger, J.M. “Al Qaeda’s Merger.”
Foreign Policy
, February 15, 2012.
https://foreignpolicy.com/2012/02/15/al-qaedas-merger/
[271]
Joe Sommerlad, “Al-Shabaab: Who Are the East African Jihadi Group and What Are Their Goals?”
The Independent
, January 15, 2019,
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/al-shabaab-who-africa-te...
.
[272]
Dearden, Lizzie. “Isis: New Terrorist Group Jahba East Africa Pledges Allegiance to 'Islamic State' in Somalia.”
The Independent
, April 8, 2016.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/isis-new-terrorist-group...
.
[273]
Gettleman, Jeffrey. “Shabab and East African Front Militants Compete for Notoriety.”
The New York Times
, April 12, 2016.
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/13/world/africa/militant-groups-compete-...
.
[274]
Hummel, K. (2018, August 8).
The Islamic State in Africa: Estimating Fighter Numbers in Cells Across the Continent
. Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.
https://ctc.westpoint.edu/islamic-state-africa-estimating-fighter-numbers-cells-across-continent/
[275]
Busari, Stephanie. “Boko Haram sought terror training in Somalia, security chief says.”
CNN News
, February 26, 2016.
https://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/25/africa/boko-haram-al-shabaab-somalia/...
.
[276]
“Who are Somalia’s al-Shabab?”
BBC News
, December 22, 2017.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-15336689
.
[277]
“Muslim Youth Center/al-Hijra - Kenya.” Terrorism Research & Analysis Consortium. October 10, 2015.
https://www.trackingterrorism.org/group/muslim-youth-center-al-hijra-kenya
.
[278]
“Suspected Militant Attack Kills 12 in North Mozambique.”
VOA News
, November 25, 2018.
https://www
.voanews.com/a/suspected-militant-attack-kills-12-in-north-mozambique/4673074.html.
[279]
Katie Bo Lillis, Kylie Atwood and Natasha Bertrand. “US intelligence assesses Houthis in Yemen in talks to provide weapons to al-Shabaab in Somalia, officials say.” CNN, June 11, 2024.
https://edition.cnn.com/2024/06/11/politics/us-intelligence-houthis-al-shabaab/index.html
[280]
United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 6 February 2025 from the President of the Security Council acting in the absence of a Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities addressed to the President of the Security Council.” S/2025/71/Rev.1, February, 6 2025.
https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n25/041/59/pdf/n2504159.pdf
[281]
Tejeda, G. (2024, September 24).
Houthis Expand Ties Beyond Iran’s Axis - The Soufan Center
. The Soufan Center.
https://thesoufancenter.org/intelbrief-2024-september-24/
[282]
“Clinton threatens Eritrea action.”
BBC News
, August 6, 2009.
http://news
.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/frica/8186781.stm.: “President Sharif Sheikh Ahmed accuses Eritrea of arming rebel Islamists.”
France 24 International News
, May 28, 2009.
https://www
.france24.com/en/20090527-president-sharif-sheikh-ahmed-accuses-eritrea-arming-rebel-islamists-
[283]
Joselow, Gabe. “Q&A: Who’s Supporting Al-Shabab?”
VOA News
, November 3, 2011.
https://www.voanews.com/a/qa-whos-supporting-al-shabab-133240378/159135....
.
[284]
Soloman, Salem. “UN Group Recommends Dropping Inquiry into Eritrea’s Ties to Al-Shabab.”
VOA News
. November 13, 2017.
https://www.voanews.com/a/un-group-recommends-dropping-inquiry-into-erit...
.
[285]
Bergmen, Ronen and David D. Kirkpatrick. "With Guns, Cash and Terrorism, Gulf States Vie for Power in Somalia"
The New York Times
, July 22, 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/22/world/africa/somalia-qatar-uae.html
[286]
Bergmen, Ronen and David D. Kirkpatrick. "With Guns, Cash and Terrorism, Gulf States Vie for Power in Somalia"
The New York Times
, July 22, 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/22/world/africa/somalia-qatar-uae.html
[287]
Reynolds, Paul. “Threat of regional conflict over Somalia.”
BBC News
, November 16, 2006.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/6154690.stm
.