 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Tradecraft Primer: 
Structured Analytic Techniques 
for Improving Intelligence Analysis 
Prepared by the US Government 
March 2009 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This primer highlights structured analytic techniques—some widely used in the private 
sector and academia, some unique to the intelligence profession.  It is not a 
comprehensive overview of how intelligence officers conduct analysis.  Rather, the 
primer highlights how structured analytic techniques can help one challenge judgments, 
identify mental mindsets, stimulate creativity, and manage uncertainty. In short, 
incorporating regular use of techniques such as these can enable one to structure 
thinking for wrestling with difficult questions.  

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S 
Introduction................................................................................................................. 1 
How To Use These Techniques .................................................................................. 5 
Diagnostic Techniques................................................................................................ 7 
Key Assumptions Check..................................................................................... 7 
Quality of Information Check ............................................................................. 10 
Indicators or Signposts of Change.................................................................... 12 
Analysis of Competing Hypotheses (ACH) ....................................................... 14 
Contrarian Techniques............................................................................................... 17 
Devil’s Advocacy................................................................................................ 17 
Team A/Team B ................................................................................................. 19 
High-Impact/Low-Probability Analysis............................................................... 22 
“What If?” Analysis............................................................................................. 24 
Imaginative Thinking Techniques .............................................................................. 27 
Brainstorming..................................................................................................... 27 
Outside-In Thinking............................................................................................ 30 
Red Team Analysis............................................................................................. 31 
Alternative Futures Analysis............................................................................... 34 
Strategies for Using Structured Analytic Techniques................................................ 38 
Selective Bibliography ............................................................................................... 40 



    
   
 
 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
THE “MIND-SET” CHALLENGE 
Using the analytic techniques contained 
in this primer will assist analysts in 
dealing with the perennial problems 
of intelligence: the complexity of 
international developments, incomplete 
and ambiguous information, and the 
inherent limitations of the human mind. 
Understanding the intentions and 
capabilities of adversaries and other 
foreign actors is challenging, especially 
when either or both are concealed. 
Moreover
, transnational threats today 
pose even greater complexity, in that 
they involve multiple actors—including 
nonstate entities—that can adapt and 
transform themselves faster than those 
who seek to monitor and contain them. 
Finally, globalization has increased the 
diversity of outcomes when complex, 
interactive systems such as fnancial fows, 
regional economies or the international 
system as a whole are in fux.
2 
The frst hurdle for analysts is identifying 
the relevant and diagnostic information 
from the increasing volume of ambiguous 
and contradictory data that is acquired 
through open source and clandestine 
means. Analysts must also pierce the 
shroud of secrecy—and sometimes 
deception—that state and nonstate actors 
use to mislead. A systematic approach 
that considers a range of alternative 
explanations and outcomes offers one 
way to ensure that analysts do not dismiss 
potentially relevant hypotheses and 
supporting information resulting in missed 
opportunities to warn. 
1 Richards J. Heuer, Jr., The Psychology of 
Intelligence Analysis (Washington: Center for the 
Study of Intelligence, 1999). 
2 These observations were drawn from a lengthier 
treatment of cognitive bias found in the Sherman 
Kent Center’s Occasional Paper, Making Sense of 
Transnational Threats, Vol. 3, No. 1, October 2004. 
Cognitive and perceptual biases in 
human perception and judgment are 
another important reason for analysts to 
consider alternatives. As Richards Heuer 
and others have argued, all individuals 
assimilate and evaluate information 
through the medium of “mental models” 
(sometimes also called “frames” or 
“mind-sets”). These are experience-
based constructs of assumptions and 
expectations both about the world in 
general and more specifc domains. 
These constructs strongly infuence what 
information analysts will accept—that is, 
data that are in accordance with analysts’ 
unconscious mental models are more 
likely to be perceived and remembered 
than information that is at odds 
with them. 
Mental models are critical to allowing 
individuals to process what otherwise 
would be an incomprehensible volume of 
information. Yet, they can cause analysts 
to overlook, reject, or forget important 
incoming or missing information that is 
not in accord with their assumptions and 
expectations. Seasoned analysts may 
be more susceptible to these mind-set 
problems as a result of their expertise 
and past success in using time-tested 
mental models. The key risks of mind-
sets are that: analysts perceive what they 
expect to perceive; once formed, they are 
resistant to change; new information is 
assimilated, sometimes erroneously, into 
existing mental models; and conficting 
information is often dismissed or ignored. 
Intelligence 
analysts should 
be self-conscious 
about their reasoning 
processes. They 
should think about 
how they make 
judgments and reach 
conclusions, not just 
about the judgments 
and conclusions 
themselves. 
— Richards Heuer, 
The Psychology of 
Intelligence Analysis
1 
“
     ”
1

 
   
    
 
 
Common Perceptual and Cognitive Biases 
Perceptual Biases 
Expectations. We tend to perceive what we 
expect to perceive. More (unambiguous) 
information is needed to recognize an 
unexpected phenomenon. 
Resistance. Perceptions resist change even 
in the face of new evidence. 
Ambiguities. Initial exposure to ambiguous 
or blurred stimuli interferes with accurate 
perception, even after more and better 
information becomes available. 
Biases in Evaluating Evidence 
Consistency. Conclusions drawn from a 
small body of consistent data engender 
more confdence than ones drawn from a 
larger body of less consistent data. 
Missing Information. It is diffcult to 
judge well the potential impact of missing 
evidence, even if the information gap 
is known. 
Discredited Evidence. Even though 
evidence supporting a perception may 
be proved wrong, the perception may not 
quickly change. 
Biases in Estimating Probabilities 
Availability. Probability estimates are 
infuenced by how easily one can imagine an 
event or recall similar instances. 
Anchoring. Probability estimates are 
adjusted only incrementally in response to 
new information or further analysis. 
Overconfdence. In translating feelings of 
certainty into a probability estimate, people 
are often overconfdent, especially if they 
have considerable expertise. 
Intelligence analysts must actively review 
the accuracy of their mind-sets by applying 
structured analytic techniques that will 
make those mental models more explicit 
and expose their key assumptions. 
The techniques found in this primer are 
designed to assist in this regard by: 
• Instilling more structure into the 
intelligence analysis. 
• Making analytic arguments more 
transparent by articulating them and 
challenging key assumptions. 
• Stimulating m
 ore creative, “out-of-the-
box” thinking and examining alternative 
outcomes, even those with low 
probability
, to see if available data might 
support these outcomes. 
Biases in Perceiving Causality 
Rationality. Events are seen as part of 
an orderly, causal pattern. Randomness, 
accident and error tend to be rejected 
as explanations for observed events. For 
example, the extent to which other people 
or countries pursue a coherent, rational, 
goal-maximizing policy is overestimated. 
Attribution. Behavior of others is attributed 
to some fxed nature of the person or 
country
, while our own behavior is attributed 
to the situation in which we fnd ourselves. 
• Identifying indicators of change (or 
signposts) that can reduce the chances 
of surprise. 
Incorporating fndings derived from these 
techniques into our intelligence products 
also serves the policymaker by: 
• Highlighting potential changes that 
would alter key assessments or 
predictions. 
• Identifying key assumptions, 
uncertainties, intelligence gaps and 
disagreements that might illuminate 
risks and costs associated with policy 
choices. 
• Exploring alternative outcomes for which 
policy actions might be necessary. 
2 

  
Strategic Assumptions That Were Not Challenged 
1941 World War II 
Japan would avoid all-out war because it recognized US military superiority. 
Given that US superiority would only increase, Japan might view a frst strike as the only 
way to knock America out of the war
. 
1950s Korean War 
China would not cross the Yalu River in support of the North Korean government. 
Red China could make good on its threats to counter “US aggression” against the North. 
1962 Cuban Missile Crisis 
The Soviet Union would not introduce offensive nuclear weapons into Cuba. 
The Kremlin could miscalculate and believe it could create a fait accompli that a young 
US President would not be prepared to reverse. 
1973 Yom Kippur War 
Arabs knew they could not win because they had failed to cooperate in the past and 
still lacked suffcient air defenses to counter Israeli airpower. 
A surprise Arab attack, even if repelled, could wound Israel psychologically and prompt 
international calls for cease-fres and diplomatic negotiations. 
1989 German Unifcation 
East Germany could not unify with the West Germany against the wishes of the 
Soviet Union. 
The Soviet Union—under Gorbachev—might not be prepared to intervene militarily in 
Eastern Europe as it had in the past. 
1998 Indian Nuclear Test 
Conducting a nuclear test risked international condemnation and US sanctions and 
would threaten a newly elected coalition government. 
A successful and surprise nuclear test could boost Indian nationalist pride and solidify 
public support for a shaky coalition government. 
2003 Iraq’s WMD Programs 
Saddam failed to cooperate with UN inspectors because he was continuing to develop 
weapons of mass destruction. 
If Iraqi authorities had destroyed their WMD stocks and abandoned their programs, 
they might refuse to fully acknowledge this to the UN to maintain 
Iraq’s regional status, 
deterrence, and internal regime stability. 
3 

4 

 
 
HOW TO USE THESE TECHNIQUES 
The analytic techniques in this primer 
are designed to help individual analysts, 
as well as teams, explore and challenge 
their analytical arguments and mind-
sets. Some techniques are fairly simple 
to understand and employ—such as 
Brainstorming and Devil’s Advocacy
. 
Others are more complex and demand a 
greater degree of analytical sophistication, 
resource commitment, and time. All the 
techniques are included because they 
have helped other analysts avoid rigid 
ways of thinking or assisted them in 
exploring new outcomes or implications 
of an intelligence problem. 
The techniques are grouped by their 
purpose: 
diagnostic techniques are 
primarily aimed at making analytic 
arguments, assumptions, or intelligence 
gaps more transparent; contrarian 
techniques explicitly challenge current 
thinking; and imaginative thinking 
techniques aim at developing new 
insights, different perspectives and/or 
develop alternative outcomes. In fact, 
many of the techniques will do some 
combination of these functions. However
, 
analysts will want to select the tool that 
best accomplishes the specifc task 
they set out for themselves. Although 
application of these techniques alone 
is no guarantee of analytic precision or 
accuracy of judgments, it does improve 
the sophistication and credibility of 
intelligence assessments as well as their 
usefulness to policymakers. As Richards 
Heuer notes in his own work on cognitive 
bias, “analysis can be improved.”
3 
3 Heuer, Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, p. 184. 
5 



   
 
DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES 
KEY ASSUMPTIONS CHECK 
List and review the key working 
assumptions on which fundamental 
judgments rest. 
WHEN TO USE 
A Key Assumptions Check is most useful 
at the beginning of an analytic project. An 
individual analyst or a team can spend 
an hour or two articulating and reviewing 
the key assumptions. Rechecking 
assumptions also can be valuable at 
any time prior to fnalizing judgments, 
to insure that the assessment does not 
rest on fawed premises. Identifying 
hidden assumptions can be one of the 
most diffcult challenges an analyst 
faces, as they are ideas held—often 
unconsciously—to be true and, therefore, 
are seldom examined and almost never 
challenged. 
A key assumption is any hypothesis that 
analysts have accepted to be true and 
which forms the basis of the assessment. 
F
or example, military analysis may focus 
exclusively on analyzing key technical 
and military variables (sometimes called 
factors) of a military force and “assume” 
that these forces will be operated in a 
particular environment (desert, open 
plains, arctic conditions, etc.). Postulating 
other conditions or assumptions, 
however, could dramatically impact the 
assessment. Historically, US analysis of 
Soviet-Warsaw Pact operations against 
NATO had to “assume” a level of non-
Soviet Warsaw Pact reliability (e.g., would 
these forces actually fght?). In this case, 
there was high uncertainty and depending 
on what level of reliability one assumed, 
the analyst could arrive at very different 
conclusions about a potential Soviet 
offensive operation. Or when economists 
assess 
the prospects for foreign economic 
reforms, they may consciously, or not, 
assume a degree of political stability in 
those countries or the region that may 
or may not exist in the future. Likewise, 
political analysts reviewing a developing 
country’s domestic stability might 
unconsciously assume stable oil prices, 
when this key determinant of economic 
performance and underlying social peace 
might fuctuate. All of these examples 
highlight the fact that analysts often rely 
on stated and unstated assumptions to 
conduct their analysis. The goal is not to 
undermine or abandon key assumptions; 
rather, it is to make them explicit and 
identify what information or developments 
would demand rethinking them. 
VALUE ADDED 
Explicitly identifying working assumptions 
during an analytic project helps: 
• Explain the logic of the analytic 
argument and expose faulty logic. 
• Understand the key factors that shape 
an issue. 
• Stimulate thinking about an issue. 
• Uncover hidden relationships and links 
between key factors. 
• Identify developments that would cause 
you to abandon an assumption. 
• Prepare a nalysts for changed 
circumstances that could surprise them. 
7 

 
 
 
 
 
Key Assumptions Check: The 2002 DC Sniper Case 
The outbreak of sniper shootings in the Washington, DC area in the fall of 2002 provides 
a good example of how this technique could have been applied. After the initial furry of 
shootings, the operating assumption that quickly emerged was that the shootings were the 
work of a single, white male who had some military training and was driving a white van. 
If law enforcement offcials had conducted a Key Assumptions Check, they could have 
broken this statement into its key components and assessed the validity of each statement 
as follows: 
        Key Assumption  Assessment 
The sniper is a male. 
The sniper is acting alone. 
The sniper is white. 
The sniper has military 
training/experience. 
The sniper is driving a 
white van. 
Highly likely (but not certain) given past precedent with 
serial killers. W
e are taking little risk by not looking for a 
female. 
Highly likely (but not certain) given past precedents. 
Likely, but not as certain, given past precedents. We would 
be taking some risk if we rule out nonwhites as suspects. 
Possible, but not suffcient reason to exclude from 
consideration potential suspects who have not had any 
military training. 
Possible because you have a credible eyewitness account 
but worthy of continuing scrutiny given the number of 
white vans in the area (more than 70,000 registered in the 
Maryland suburbs of Metropolitan W
ashington, DC) and 
that different kinds of vehicles are being described. 
A Key Assumptions Check could have allowed law enforcement officials to: 
• Avoid jumping to conclusions (the sniper is white, has military training, and is driving 
a white van) that did not hold up under closer scrutiny. By explicitly examining each 
assumption, offcials could have avoided prematurely narrowing down the potential pool 
of suspects to a group that did not include the actual perpetrator. Similarly, they might 
have been more cautious about accepting that the sniper was driving a white van. 
• Be receptive to new leads and citizen tips, such as eyewitness reports that the sniper fled 
the scene driving a specifc model Chevrolet. 
• More seriously consider evidence that subsequently became avail able, which 
contradicted a key assumption. If offcials had stated explicitly that they were assuming 
the sniper was acting alone, they might have been sensitive to new information that 
contradicted that key assumption. Often this type of information gets “lost in the noise” if 
the analyst has not already thought about what key assumptions he or she is making. 
8 

THE METHOD 
Checking for key assumptions requires 
analysts to consider how their analysis 
depends on the validity of certain 
premises, which they do not routinely 
question or believe to be in doubt. A four-
step process will help analysts: 
1. Review what the current analytic line on 
this issue appears to be; write it down 
for all to see. 
2. Articulate all the premises, both stated 
and unstated in fnished intelligence, 
which are accepted as true for this 
analytic line to be valid. 
3. Challenge each assumption, asking 
why it “must” be true and whether it 
remains valid under all conditions. 
4. Refne the list of key assumptions to 
contain only those that “must be true” 
to sustain your analytic line; consider 
under what conditions or in the face of 
what information these assumptions 
might not hold. 
QUESTIONS  TO  ASK  DURING  THIS 
PROCESS INCLUDE: 
• How much confidence exists that this 
assumption is correct? 
• What explains the degree of confidence 
in the assumption? 
• What circumstances or information 
might undermine this assumption? 
• Is a key assumption more likely a key 
uncertainty or key factor? 
• Could the assumption have been true in 
the past but less so now? 
• If the assumption proves to be wrong, 
would it signifcantly alter the analytic 
line? 
How? 
• Has this process identified new factors 
that need further analysis? 
9 

QUALITY OF INFORMATION CHECK 
Evaluates completeness and soundness 
of available information sources. 
WHEN TO USE 
Weighing the validity of sources is a key 
feature of any critical thinking. Moreover, 
establishing how much confdence 
one puts in analytic judgments should 
ultimately rest on how accurate and 
reliable the information base is. Hence, 
checking the quality of information used 
in intelligence analysis is an ongoing, 
continuous process. Having multiple 
sources on an issue is not a substitute 
for having good information that has 
been thoroughly examined. Analysts 
should perform periodic checks of 
the information base for their analytic 
judgments. Otherwise, important analytic 
judgments can become anchored to weak 
information, and any “caveats” attached 
to those judgments in the past can be 
forgotten or ignored over time. 
If a major analytic assessment is planned, 
analysts should individually or collectively 
review the quality of their information 
and refresh their understanding of the 
strengths and weaknesses of past 
reporting on which an analytic line rests. 
W
ithout understanding the context and 
conditions under which critical information 
has been provided, it will be diffcult 
for analysts to assess the information’s 
validity and establish a confdence level in 
an intelligence assessment. 
VALUE ADDED 
A thorough review of information 
sources provides analysts—as well 
as policymakers—with an accurate 
assessment of “what we know” and “what 
we do not know.”  It is also an opportunity 
to confrm that sources have been cited 
accurately. In the case of HUMINT , this will 
require extensive review of the sources’ 
background information and access as well 
as his or her motivation for providing the 
information. Similarly, reviewing technical 
sourcing can sometimes reveal inadvertent 
errors in processing, translation, or 
interpretation that otherwise might have 
gone unnoticed. 
In addition, a quality of information check 
can be valuable to both collectors and 
policymakers: 
• It can help to detect possible deception 
and denial strategies by an adversary. 
• It can identify key intelligence gaps and 
new requirements for collectors. 
• It can assist policymakers in 
understanding how much confdence 
analysts are placing on analytic 
judgments. 
10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE METHOD 
An analyst or a team might begin 
a quality of information check by 
developing a database in which 
information is stored according to source 
type and date, with additional notations 
indicating strengths or weaknesses in 
those sources.
4  Ideally, analysts would 
have a retrieval and search capability on 
the database, so that periodic reviews 
are less labor intensive and result in a 
more complete review of all sources 
used in past analysis. For the information 
review to be fully effective, analysts will 
need as much background information 
on sources as is feasible. Knowing the 
circumstances in which reporting was 
obtained is often critical to understanding 
its validity. With the data in hand, analysts 
can then: 
• Review systematically all sources for 
accuracy. 
4 Analysis of Competing Hypotheses (ACH), 
discussed later in the primer, is a useful technique 
for exploring the possibility that deception could 
explain the absence of evidence. 
• Identify information sources that appear 
most critical or compelling. 
• Check for sufficient and strong 
corroboration of critical reporting. 
• Reexamine previously dismissed 
information in light of new facts or 
circumstances that cast it in a 
different light. 
• Ensure that any recalled reporting is 
identifed and properly fagged for other 
analysts; analysis based on recalled 
reporting should also be reviewed to 
determine if the reporting was essential 
to the judgments made. 
• Consider whether ambiguous 
information has been interpreted and 
caveated properly
. 
• Indicate a level of confidence that 
analysts can place in sources, which 
are likely to fgure in future analytic 
assessments. 
Quality of Information Problem on Iraq 
“. . . Analysts community wide are unable to make fully informed judgments on the 
information they received, relying instead on nonspecifc source lines to reach their 
assessments. Moreover, relevant operational data is nearly always withheld from analysts, 
putting them at a further analytical disadvantage . . .” 
—Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Report on the US Intelligence Community’s 
Prewar Intelligence Assessments on Iraq 
“Analytic errors included over-reliance on a single, ambiguous source, [and, in addition 
to collection shortfalls] failure of analysts to understand fully the limitations of technical 
collection . . .” 
“The Intelligence Community relied too heavily on ambiguous imagery indicators . . .” 
—Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding 
Weapons of Mass Destruction. 
11 

   
 
 
 
 
INDICATORS OR SIGNPOSTS OF 
CHANGE 
Periodically review a list of observable 
events or trends to track events, monitor 
targets, spot emerging trends, and warn 
of unanticipated change. 
WHEN TO USE 
An analyst or team can create an 
indicators or signposts list of observable 
events that one would expect to see if a 
postulated situation is developing; e.g., 
economic reform, military modernization, 
political instability, or democratization. 
Constructing the list might require only a 
few hours or as much as several days to 
identify the critical variables associated 
with the targeted issue. The technique 
can be used whenever an analyst needs 
to track an event over time to monitor 
and evaluate changes. However, it can 
also be a very powerful aid in supporting 
other structured methods explained later 
in this primer. In those instances, analysts 
would be watching for mounting evidence 
to support a particular hypothesis, low-
probability event, or scenario. 
When there are sharply divided views 
on an issue, an indicators or signposts 
list can also “depersonalize” the 
argument by shifting analytic attention 
to a more objective set of criteria. Using 
an indicators list can clarify substantive 
disagreements, once all sides agree 
on the set of objective criteria used to 
measure the topic under study
. 
VALUE ADDED 
By providing an objective baseline for 
tracking events or targets, indicators 
instill rigor into the analytic process 
and enhance the credibility of analytic 
judgments. An indicators list included 
in a fnished product also allows the 
policymaker to track developments and 
builds a more concrete case for the analytic 
judgments. By laying out a list of critical 
variables, analysts also will be generating 
hypotheses regarding why they expect 
to see the presence of such factors. In so 
doing, analysts make the analytic line much 
more transparent and available for scrutiny 
by others. 
THE METHOD 
Whether used alone, or in combination with 
other structured analysis, the process is the 
same: 
• Identify a set of competing hypotheses or 
scenarios. 
• Create separate lists of potential 
activities, statements, or events expected 
for each hypothesis or scenario. 
• Regularly review and update the 
indicators lists to see which are changing. 
• Identify the most likely or most correct 
hypotheses or scenarios, based on the 
number of changed indicators that are 
observed. 
Developing two lists of indicators for each 
hypothesis or scenario may prove useful 
to distinguish between indicators that a 
development is or is not emerging. This is 
particularly useful in a “What If?” Analysis, 
when it is important to make a case that a 
certain event is unlikely to happen. 
12 

 
 
  
                 
Tracking the Potential for Political Instability in a Foreign Country 
Topics Indicators 1999 2000 
I II III IV I II III 
Government 
Capacity 
Quality of leadership/organizational capabilities 
Responsiveness to popular demands 
Ability to deliver basic goods and services 
Internal Security Capabilities 
Effectiveness of civil/criminal justice systems 
Legitimacy of 
Regime 
Breadth and depth of political participation 
Perceived level of corruption 
Human rights violations 
Weakness of civil society 
Pervasiveness of transnational criminal organizations 
External support for government 
Opposition 
Activity 
Ethnic/religious discontent 
Military discontent with civilian government 
Popular demonstrations/strikes/riots 
Insurgent/separatist/terrorist group activity 
External support for opposition 
Threat of confict with or in neighboring state 
Economic 
Factors 
Weakness of domestic economy/unemployment/ 
infation 
Degree of income disparity 
Capital fight 
Decreased access to foreign funds 
Reduced trade openness 
Environmental 
Issues 
Extent of environmental degradation 
Food/energy shortages 
Ability to respond to natural disasters 
Presence of Trigger Mechanisms (  if present) 
Contested elections 
Unpopular changes in food/energy prices 
Sudden imposition of unpopular policies 
Coup plotting 
Government mismanagement of natural disaster or national 
emergency 
Death of key fgure 
Serious concern 
Substantial concern 
Moderate concern 
Low concern 
Negligible concern 
Tracking the Potential for Political Instability in an Indicators Matrix. Analysts tracked the potential for 
regime change in 2000 and identifed a list of indicators, to which they posed the question, “is this occurring or not? 
Analysts also went further and developed a list of “trigger mechanisms” that might bring about a political shift. 
13 

 
       
 
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
ANALYSIS OF COMPETING 
HYPOTHESES (ACH) 
Identifcation of alternative explanations 
(hypotheses) and evaluation of all 
evidence that will disconfrm rather than 
confrm hypotheses. 
WHEN TO USE 
Analysis of Competing Hypotheses 
(ACH) has proved to be a highly effective 
technique when there is a large amount 
of data to absorb and evaluate. While 
a single analyst can use ACH, it is 
most effective with a small team that 
can challenge each other’s evaluation 
of the evidence. Developing a matrix 
of hypotheses and loading already 
collected information into the matrix can 
be accomplished in a day or less. If the 
data must be reassembled, the initial 
phases of the ACH process may require 
additional time. Sometimes a facilitator or 
someone familiar with the technique can 
lead new analysts through this process 
for the frst time. 
ACH is particularly appropriate for 
controversial issues when analysts want 
to develop a clear record that shows 
what theories they have considered and 
how they arrived at their judgments. 
Developing the ACH matrix allows 
other analysts (or even policymakers) 
to review their analysis and identify 
areas of agreement and disagreement. 
Evidence can also be examined more 
systematically
, and analysts have found 
that this makes the technique ideal for 
considering the possibility of deception 
and denial. 
VALUE ADDED 
ACH helps analysts overcome three 
common mistakes that can lead to 
inaccurate forecasts: 
• Analysts often are susceptible to being 
unduly infuenced by a frst impression, 
based on incomplete data, an existing 
analytic line, or a single explanation that 
seems to ft well enough. 
• Analysts seldom generate a full set 
of explanations or hypotheses at the 
outset of a project. 
• Analysts often rely on evidence to 
support their preferred hypothesis, 
but which also is consistent with other 
explanations. 
In essence, ACH helps analysts to avoid 
picking the frst solution that seems 
satisfactory instead of going through all 
the possibilities to arrive at the very best 
solution. 
THE METHOD 
ACH demands that analysts explicitly 
identify all the reasonable alternative 
hypotheses, then array the evidence 
against each hypothesis—rather than 
evaluating the plausibility of each 
hypothesis one at a time. To create a level 
playing feld, the process must: 
• Ensure that all the information and 
argumentation is evaluated and given 
equal treatment or weight when 
considering each hypothesis. 
• Prevent the analyst from premature 
closure on a particular explanation or 
hypothesis. 
• Protect t
he analyst against innate 
tendencies to ignore or discount 
information that does not ft 
comfortably with the preferred 
explanation at the time. 
To accomplish this, the process should 
follow these steps: 
• Brainstorm among analysts with 
different perspectives to identify all 
possible hypotheses. 
• List a
ll significant evidence and 
arguments relevant to all the 
h
ypotheses. 
14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
            
                   
                
                   
 
 
           
• Prepare a matrix with hypotheses 
across the top and each piece of 
evidence on the side. Determine 
whether each piece of evidence 
is consistent, inconsistent, or not 
applicable to each hypothesis.
5 
• Refine the matrix and reconsider the 
hypotheses—in some cases, analysts 
will need to add new hypotheses and 
re-examine the information available. 
• F
ocus on disproving hypotheses rather 
than proving one. Talley the pieces 
of evidence that are inconsistent and 
consistent with each hypothesis to see 
which explanations are the weakest and 
strongest. 
5 The “diagnostic value” of the evidence will emerge 
as analysts determine whether a piece of evidence 
is found to be consistent with only one hypothesis, 
or could support more than one or indeed all 
hypotheses. In the latter case, the evidence can 
be judged as unimportant to determining which 
hypothesis is more likely correct. 
• Analyze how sensitive the ACH results 
are to a few critical items of evidence; 
should those pieces prove to be wrong, 
misleading, or subject to deception, how 
would it impact an explanation’s validity? 
• Ask what evidence is not being seen but 
would be expected for a given hypothesis 
to be true. Is denial and deception a 
possibility? 
• Report all the conclusions, including the 
weaker hypotheses that should still be 
monitored as new information becomes 
available. 
• Establish the relative likelihood for the 
hypotheses and report all the conclusions, 
including the weaker hypotheses 
that should still be monitored as new 
information becomes available. 
• Identify and monitor indicators that would 
be both consistent and inconsistent with 
the full set of hypotheses. In the latter 
case, explore what could account for 
inconsistent data. 
Terrorism in Tokyo From Aum Shinrikyo 
Weight H: 1 H: 4 H: 2 H: 3 
Kooky 
Cult 
Terrorist 
Group 
Political 
Movement 
Criminal 
Group 
Inconsistency Score -1.0 -1.0 -2.0 -3.0 
E3 Attacks on Journalists MEDIUM I N I I 
E2 Religious Affliation MEDIUM C I I I 
E4 Established Party MEDIUM N N C I 
E1 Blind Leader Mastsumoto MEDIUM C C C C 
ACH Matrix of Terrorism in Tokyo. In March 1995, a largely unknown group attacked the Tokyo subways by 
using a highly lethal nerve agent known as sarin. ACH provides a mechanism to carefully examine all the evidence and 
possible explanations for understanding what type of group could have been responsible. In simplifed form, the above 
matrix arrays each piece of evidence on the vertical axis and then evaluates each in terms of the item’s consistency 
with four possible explanations for the terrorist attack in Tokyo (horizontal axis). Analysts rate a piece of evidence as 
consistent (C); inconsistent (I); or neutral (N). This process allows analysts to see that some evidence will be consistent 
with more than one hypothesis and be less valuable in disproving hypotheses. 
15 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTRARIAN TECHNIQUES 
DEVIL’S ADVOCACY 
Challenging a single, strongly held 
view or consensus by building the 
best possible case for an alternative 
explanation. 
WHEN TO USE 
Devil’s Advocacy is most effective when 
used to challenge an analytic consensus 
or a key assumption regarding a critically 
important intelligence question. On 
those issues that one cannot afford to 
get wrong, Devil’s Advocacy can provide 
further confdence that the current analytic 
line will hold up to close scrutiny. An 
individual analyst can often assume the 
role of the Devil’s Advocate if he or she 
has some doubts about a widely held 
view, or a manager might designate a 
courageous analyst to challenge the 
prevailing wisdom in order to reaffrm the 
group’s confdence in those judgments. 
In some cases, the analyst or a team 
can review a key assumption of a 
critical judgment in the course of their 
work, or more likely, a separate analytic 
product can be generated that arrays 
all the arguments and data that support 
a contrary hypothesis. While this can 
involve some analytic time and effort, 
when a group of analysts have worked 
on an issue for a long period of time, it 
is probably wise to assume that a strong 
mind-set exists that deserves the closer 
scrutiny provided by Devil’s Advocacy. 
VALUE ADDED 
Analysts have an obligation to 
policymakers to understand where 
their own analytic judgments might be 
weak and open to future challenge. 
Hence, the Devil’s Advocacy process 
can highlight weaknesses in a current 
analytic judgment or alternatively help to 
reaffrm one’s confdence in the prevailing 
judgments by: 
• Explicitly challenging key assumptions 
to see if they will not hold up under 
some circumstances. 
• Identifying any faulty logic or information 
that would undermine the key analytic 
judgments. 
• Presenting alternative hypotheses 
that would explain the current body of 
information available to analysts. 
Its primary value is to serve as a check 
on a dominant mind-set that can develop 
over time among even the best analysts 
who have followed an issue and formed 
strong consensus that there is only one 
way of looking at their issue. This mind-
set phenomenon makes it more likely that 
contradictory evidence is dismissed or 
not given proper weight or consideration. 
An exercise aimed at highlighting such 
evidence and proposing another way of 
thinking about an issue can expose hidden 
assumptions and compel analysts to review 
their information with greater skepticism 
about their fndings. The analyst could 
come away from the exercise more certain 
that: 1) the current analytic line was sound; 
2) the argument is still the strongest, but 
that there are areas where further analysis 
is needed; or 3) some serious faws in logic 
or supporting evidence suggest that the 
analytic line needs to be changed or at 
least caveated more heavily
. 
THE METHOD 
To challenge the prevailing analytic line, the 
Devil’s Advocate must: 
• Outline the mainline judgment and 
key assumptions and characterize the 
evidence supporting that current analytic 
view
. 
• Select one or more assumptions—stated 
or not—that appear the most susceptible 
to challenge. 
• Review the information used to determine 
whether any is of questionable validity, 
whether deception is possibly indicated, 
or whether major gaps exist. 
17 

 
 
 
 • Highlight the evidence that could 
support an alternative hypothesis or 
contradicts the current thinking. 
• Present to the group the findings 
that demonstrate there are fawed 
assumptions, poor quality evidence, or 
possible deception at work. 
• Consider drafting a separate contrarian 
paper that lays out the arguments for 
a different analytic conclusion if the 
review uncovers major analytic faws. 
• Be sure that any products generated 
clearly lay out the conventional wisdom 
and are identifed as an explicitly 
“Devil’s Advocate” project; otherwise, 
the reader can become confused as to 
the current offcial view on the issue. 
18 

 
   
 
TEAM A/TEAM B 
Use of separate analytic teams that 
contrast two (or more) strongly held 
views or competing hypotheses. 
WHEN TO USE 
A Team A/Team B approach is different 
from Devil’s Advocacy, where the purpose 
is to challenge a single dominant mind-
set. Instead, Team A/Team B recognizes 
that there may be competing and possibly 
equally strong mind-sets held on an issue 
that need to be clarifed. Sometimes 
analysts confuse the two techniques by 
drafting a T
eam B exercise that is really a 
Devil’s Advocacy exercise. 
If there are at least two competing 
views within an analytic offce or 
perhaps competing opinions within 
the policymaking community on a key 
issue, then T
eam A/Team B analysis can 
be the appropriate technique to use. 
Developing a full-blown Team A/Team B 
exercise requires a signifcant commitment 
of analytic time and resources, so it is 
worthwhile considering if the analytic issue 
merits this kind of attention. 
A longstanding policy issue, a critical 
decision that has far
-reaching implications, 
or a dispute within the analytic community 
that has obstructed effective cross-agency 
cooperation would be grounds for using 
T eam A/T eam B. If those circumstances 
exist, then analysts will need to review all 
of the data to develop alternative papers 
that can capture the essential differences 
between the two viewpoints. 
VALUE ADDED 
Managers have found that when there are 
offce tensions among competing factions 
of analysts, a Team A/Team B approach can 
help opposing experts see the merit in the 
other group’s perspective. The process of 
conducting such an exercise can reduce 
the friction and even narrow the differences. 
At a minimum, it allows those holding 
opposing views to feel that their views have 
been given equal attention. 
For the policymaker, this technique helps 
to surface and explain important analytic 
differences within the expert community
. 
Often senior offcials can learn more by 
weighing well-argued conficting views than 
from reading an assessment that masks 
substantive differences or drives analysis 
to the lowest common denominator. 
By making the key assumptions and 
information used for each argument more 
transparent, a policymaker can judge the 
merits of each case, pose questions back 
to the analysts, and reach an independent 
judgment on which argument is the 
strongest. Moreover, highlighting alternative 
views puts collectors on notice that they 
need to be searching for new information 
that can confrm or disconfrm a range of 
hypotheses. 
If opposing positions are well established, 
it can be useful to place analysts on teams 
that will advocate positions they normally 
do not support; forcing analysts to argue 
“the other side” can often make them more 
aware of their own mind-set. 
19 

 
 
     
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
  
 
A Team A/Team B View: China’s Military 
A: China’s Hollow Military
 by Bates Gill and Michael O’Hanlon 
B: China’s Military: A Second 
Opinion by James Lilley and Carl Ford 
“. . . We believe that the recent clamor 
over China’s strategic ambitions is greatly 
overblown. Most of the Chinese aims that 
run counter to US interests are in fact 
not global or ideological but territorial 
in nature and confned primarily to the 
islands and waterways to China’s south 
and southeast . . . 
An enormous gap separates China’s 
military capabilities from its aspirations. 
The PRC’s armed forces are not very good 
and not getting better very fast. Whatever 
China’s concerns and intentions, its 
capacity to act upon them in ways inimical 
to US interests is severely limited, and will 
remain so for many years . . . 
The PRC’s power projection capabilities, 
too, are constrained by huge weaknesses– 
especially in areas such as aerial refueling, 
electronic warfare, command and control 
and amphibious and air assault assets. 
China owns considerably less top-level 
equipment than medium powers like Japan 
and Britain; it owns even less than smaller 
powers such as Italy
, South Korea or The 
Netherlands . . . The resources it devotes 
to acquiring modern weaponry are akin to 
those of countries spending $10-20 billion 
a year on defense . . .” 
“. . . We think they got it half right. China 
is no military superpower and will not 
acquire that status for some years to 
come. But measured in terms of its 
capacity to challenge key US allies in East 
Asia, China’s capabilities have grown 
exponentially . . . 
By emphasizing direct comparisons 
between the defense capabilities of the 
United States and the PRC, the authors 
create an artifcial and misleading 
construct . . . What the regime gives 
every indication of striving for is suffcient 
military clout to achieve its aims in Asia. 
In the short term, it wishes to intimidate 
T
aiwan suffciently to bring about 
unifcation on Beijing’s terms . . . 
. . . Investments of the sort Beijing is 
making can mean only one thing: China 
is determined to improve the PLA’s 
fghting capability
. While most nations 
are reducing defense expenditures in the 
post–Cold War era, China is one of the few 
doing the opposite . . . Across the board, 
the PLA is engaged in a major spending 
effort to upgrade weapons and equipment 
and improve its operational capability. 
According to the Pentagon, these efforts 
have already enhanced China’s ability to 
project military power . . .” 
—Excerpted from journal articles found in The National Interest, Fall and Winter 2000/2001. 
20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE METHOD 
Analysis Phase. A Team A/Team B 
exercise can be conducted on an 
important issue to: 
• Identify the two (or more) competing 
hypotheses or points of view. 
• F orm teams or designate individuals to 
develop the best case that can be made 
for each hypothesis. 
• Review all pertinent information that 
supports their respective positions. 
• Identify missing information that would 
buttress their hypotheses. 
• Structure each argument with an explicit 
presentation of key assumptions, 
key pieces of evidence, and careful 
articulation of the logic behind the 
argument. 
Debate Phase.  An oral presentation of 
the alternative arguments and rebuttals in 
parallel fashion can then be organized for 
the beneft of other analysts: 
• Set aside time for an oral presentation 
of the alternative team fndings; this can 
an informal brainstorming session or a 
more formal “debate.” 
• Have an independent “jury of peers” 
listen to the oral presentation and 
be prepared to question the teams 
regarding their assumptions, evidence, 
or logic. 
• Allow each team to present their case, 
challenge the other team’s arguments, 
and rebut the opponent’s critique of its 
case. 
• Let the jury consider the strength of 
each presentation and recommend 
possible next steps for further research 
and collection efforts. 
21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HIGH-IMPACT/LOW-PROBABILITY 
ANALYSIS 
Highlights a seemingly unlikely 
event that would have major policy 
consequences if it happened. 
WHEN TO USE 
High-Impact/Low-Probability Analysis 
is a contrarian technique that sensitizes 
analysts to the potential impact of 
seemingly low probability events that 
would have major repercussions on US 
interests. Using this technique is advisable 
when analysts and policymakers are 
convinced that an event is unlikely but 
have not given much thought to the 
consequences of its occurrence. In 
essence, this can be a warning that the 
intelligence and policy communities 
must be alert to an unexpected but not 
impossible event. For example, the fall 
of the Shah, the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, and the reunifcation of Germany 
were all considered low probability events 
at one time; however, analysts might 
have benefted from considering the 
consequences of such events and how 
they might plausibly have come about. 
VALUE ADDED 
Mapping out the course of an unlikely, 
yet plausible, event can uncover hidden 
relationships between key factors and 
assumptions; it also can alert analysts 
to oversights in the mainstream analytic 
line. In addition, an examination of the 
“unthinkable” allows analysts to develop 
signposts that may provide early warning 
of a shift in the situation. By periodically 
reviewing these indicators an analyst 
is more likely to counter any prevailing 
mind-set that such a development is 
highly unlikely. 
THE METHOD 
If there is a strongly held view that an event 
is unlikely, then postulating precisely the 
opposite should not be diffcult. 
• Define the high-impact outcome clearly
 . 
This process is what will justify examining 
what most analysts believe to be a very 
unlikely development. 
• Devise one or more plausible 
explanations for or “pathways” to the low 
probability outcome. This should be as 
precise as possible, as it can help identify 
possible indicators for later monitoring. 
• Insert possible triggers or changes in 
momentum if appropriate. These can 
be natural disasters, sudden health 
problems of key leaders, or new 
economic or political shocks that might 
have occurred historically or in other 
parts of the world. 
• Brainstorm with analysts having a broad 
set of experiences to aid the development 
of plausible but unpredictable triggers of 
sudden change. 
• Identify for each pathway a set of 
indicators or “observables” that would 
help you anticipate that events were 
beginning to play out this way
. 
• Identify factors that would deflect a 
bad outcome or encourage a positive 
outcome. 
22 

                
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
              
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
  
High Impact of a Low-Probability Event: Pearl Harbor 
“. . . So far as relations directly between the United States and Japan are concerned, there 
is less reason today than there was a week ago for the United States to be apprehensive 
lest Japan make “war” on this country. 
Were it a matter of placing bets, the undersigned would give odds of fve to one that the 
United States and Japan will not be at “war” on or before December 15; would wager three 
to one that the United States and Japan will not be at ‘war’ on or before the 15th of January 
(i.e, seven weeks from now); would wager even money that the United States and Japan 
will not be at “war” on or before March 1 (a date more than 90 days from now) . . .” 
—State Department Special Assessment, 27 November 1941 
High-Impact/Low-Probability Analysis on 9/11 
The 9/11 Commission report includes examination of speculative analysis that was 
provided to senior policymakers highlighting what were thought to be highly unlikely 
scenarios that would have a very high impact. One of those items was the 6 August 2001 
President’s Daily Brief, which stated: 
Al-Qai’da members—including some who are US citizens—have resided in or traveled to 
the US for years, and the group apparently maintains a support structure that could aid 
attacks. Two al-Qai‘da members found guilty in the conspiracy to bomb our embassies in 
East Africa were US citizens, and a senior EIJ [Egyptian Islamic Jihad] member lived in 
California in the mid-1990s. 
• A clandestine source said in 1998 that a Bin Ladin cell in New York was recruiting 
Muslim-American youth for attacks. 
We have not been able to corroborate some of the more sensational threat reporting, such 
as that from a service in 1998 saying that Bin Ladin wanted to hijack a US aircraft to gain 
the release of “Blind Shaykh” ‘Umar Abd al-Rahman and other US-held extremists. 
—9/11 Commission Report, declassifed and approved for release 10 April 2004. 
23 

      
    
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
“WHAT IF?” ANALYSIS 
Assumes that an event has occurred with 
potential (negative or positive) impact 
and explains how it might come about. 
WHEN TO USE 
“What If?” analysis is another contrarian 
technique for challenging a strong mind-
set that an event will not happen or that 
a confdently made forecast may not be 
entirely justifed. It is similar to a High -
Impact/Low-Probability analysis, but it 
does not dwell on the consequences 
of the event as much as it accepts 
the signifcance and moves directly to 
explaining how it might come about. 
VALUE ADDED 
By shifting the focus from whether an 
event could occur to how it may happen, 
analysts allow themselves to suspend 
judgment about the likelihood of the event 
and focus more on what developments— 
even unlikely ones—might enable such an 
outcome. An individual analyst or a team 
might employ this technique and repeat 
the exercise whenever a critical analytic 
judgment is made. 
Using this technique is particularly 
important when a judgment rests 
on limited information or unproven 
assumptions. Moreover
, it can free 
analysts from arguing about the 
probability of an event to considering 
its consequences and developing some 
indicators or signposts for its possible 
emergence. It will help analysts address 
the impact of an event, the factors that 
could cause—or alter—it, and likely 
signposts that an event is imminent. 
A “What If?” analysis can complement a 
diffcult judgment reached and provide 
the policymaker a thoughtful caution 
to accepting the conventional wisdom 
without considering the costs and risks 
of being wrong. This can help decision-
makers consider ways to hedge their bets, 
even if they accept the analytic judgment 
that an event remains unlikely
. 
THE METHOD 
Like other contrarian methods, “What If?” 
analysis must begin by stating clearly 
the conventional analytic line and then 
stepping back to consider what alternative 
outcomes are too important to dismiss, 
even if unlikely. Brainstorming over a few 
days or weeks can develop one or more 
plausible scenarios by which the unlikely 
event occurs: 
• Assume the event has happened. 
• Select some triggering events that 
permitted the scenario to unfold to help 
make the “what if
” more plausible; for 
example, analysts might postulate the 
death of a leader, a natural disaster, or 
some economic event that would start a 
chain of other events. 
• Develop a
  chain of argumentation based 
as much on logic as evidence to explain 
how this outcome could have come 
a
bout. 
• “Think backwards” from the event in 
concrete ways–that is, specifying what 
must actually occur at each stage of the 
scenario is often very useful. 
• Identify one or more plausible pathways 
or scenarios to the unlikely event; very 
o
ften more than one will appear possible. 
• Generate a list of indicators or 
“observables” for each scenario that 
would help to detect the beginnings of 
the event. 
• Consider the scope of the positive and 
negative consequences of each scenario 
and their relative impacts. 
• Monitor the indicators developed on a 
periodic basis. 
24 

 
    
              
 
         
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
“What If?” Analysis: An Unlikely Outcome in Yugoslavia, 1990. 
The possibility of muddling through is very low. In the unlikely event that it happens, this is 
what it would look like. 
Memories of the internecine civil war during World War II and fear of another destructive 
confict would lead the two most numerous South Slav people—Serbs and Croats—to 
r
each some political accommodation. A compromise that preserves Yugoslavia would 
include: 
•Basic principles: 
-No change in existing Republic borders. 
-No change in Y
ugoslavia’s existing international status. 
-Mutually recognized sovereignty of each republic 
•Confederal institutions: 
-A single foreign ministry, to which diplomatic representatives would be accredited. 
-A central military organization with a joint General Staff responsible for planning. 
-A central bank, determining macroeconomic policy
, a common currency, 
•Powers reserved to republics. 
-Veto over actions of the Confederal Authority. 
-Control of internal security
, including guarantee of minority rights. 
-Operational control over some or all military units stationed on the republic’s territory. 
-Raising taxes and allocating funds to discharge mutually agreed confederal 
responsibilities
. 
Only the Serbs can open the door to a confederal Yugoslavia, and Serbia’s leader, 
Slobodan Milosevic, holds the key. Some observers felt there are pressures on him to try. 
If he does not, he would give his opponents the leverage to remove him. The potential 
penalties of failure to compromise would be too great, in this view, for the peoples and 
leaders of Yugoslavia to forgo every effort to fnd a compromise. 
—Excerpts from the declassifed NIE: Prospects for Yugoslavia, October 1990. 
25 



 
 
 
 
IMAGINATIVE THINKING TECHNIQUES 
BRAINSTORMING 
An unconstrained group process 
designed to generate new ideas and 
concepts. 
WHEN TO USE 
Brainstorming is a widely used technique 
for stimulating new thinking and it can 
be applied to virtually all of the other 
structured analysis techniques as an 
aid to thinking. Typically, analytic will 
brainstorm when they begin a project 
to help generate a range of hypotheses 
about their issue. 
Brainstorming, almost by defnition, 
involves a group of analysts meeting to 
discuss a common challenge; a modest 
investment of time at the beginning 
or critical points of a project can take 
advantage of their different perspectives 
to help structure a problem. This group 
process allows others to build on an 
initial idea suggested by a member of the 
brainstorming session. 
An individual analyst also can brainstorm 
to produce a wider range of ideas than 
a group might generate, without regard 
for other analysts’ egos, opinions, or 
objections. However
, an individual will not 
have the beneft of others’ perspectives to 
help develop the ideas as fully. Moreover, 
an individual may have diffculty breaking 
free of his or her cognitive biases without 
the beneft of a diverse group. 
VALUE ADDED 
This technique can maximize creativity 
in the thinking process, force analysts 
to step outside their normal analytic 
mind-sets, and suspend their typical 
“good judgment” about the practicality 
of ideas or approaches. More generally, 
brainstorming allows analysts to see a 
wider range of factors that might bear 
on the topic than they would otherwise 
consider. Analysts typically censor 
out ideas that seem farfetched, poorly 
sourced, or seemingly irrelevant to the 
question at hand. Brainstorming gives 
permission to think more radically or 
“outside the box.” 
In particular, it can spark 
new ideas, ensure a comprehensive look at 
a problem or issues, raise unknowns, and 
prevent premature consensus around a 
single hypothesis. 
THE METHOD 
Paradoxically, brainstorming should be 
a very structured process to be most 
productive. An unconstrained, informal 
discussion might produce some interesting 
ideas, but usually a more systematic 
process is the most effective way to 
break down mind-sets and produce new 
insights. In particular, the process involves 
a divergent thinking phase to generate and 
collect new ideas and insights, followed 
by a convergent phase in which ideas 
are grouped and organized around key 
concepts. Some of the simple rules to be 
followed include: 
• Never censor an analyst’s ideas no 
matter how unconventional they might 
sound. 
• Rather find out what prompted the 
thought, as it might contain the seeds 
of an important connection between the 
topic and an unstated assumption. 
• Give yourself enough time to do 
brainstorming correctly. It usually takes 
one hour to set the “rules” of the game, 
get the group comfortable, and exhaust 
the conventional wisdom on the topic. 
Only then will the truly creative ideas 
begin to emerge. 
• Involve at least one “outsider” in the 
process—that is, someone who does not 
share the same educational background, 
culture, technical knowledge or mind-
set as the core group but has some 
familiarity with the topic. 
A two-phase, twelve-step, structured 
process is often used to get the most out of 
the brainstorming sessions: 
27 

 
 
                 
 
 
 
         
               
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
       
 
 
 
          
 
 
                 
Brainstorming and Divergent Thinking: 
Perspectives of an Experienced Practitioner 
“. . . First, leave rank at the door and focus on “a democracy of ideas.” Thoughts from 
experts, senior offcers, and supervisors are of course, valuable and welcome, but such 
experts are not permitted to cut off debate by citing their seniority. In fact, it pays to invite 
junior offcers as well as senior ones who are not involved directly in working the issue 
under discussion. Some of the most creative ideas at brainstorming sessions frequently 
come from relatively junior people who can look at a problem with fresh perspective, or 
from senior ones who are not experts on the issue. 
Second, make sure there is no offcial analytic line. One of the most signifcant blocks to 
new thinking is the presence of a long held analytic line that analysts—and even more so 
managers—are reluctant to change. Rather than trying to ft ideas into the framework of 
“what we’ve said before,” analysts need to feel free to go wherever bits of the evidence 
a
nd informed supposition take them. They must feel free to throw out seemingly strange 
but plausible ideas that might be based on historical precedent and instinct rather than 
on concrete information. Facilitators can stimulate this process by deliberately posing 
an alternative outcome to a problem that differs starkly from the accepted analysis or by 
proposing a contrary way to think about an issue. 
Third, don’t permit killer phrases like “that would not work” or “that could not happen” 
to be voiced out loud. Effective brainstorming starts with ideas and possibilities, not with 
practicalities and self
-imposed obstacles to fresh perspectives. Force the group to get as 
wide a range of ideas out for discussion as possible. At some point, a set of ideas might 
be winnowed down and subject to tests of workability, but that comes later—not during 
brainstorming. 
Fourth, keep the brainstorming session to no more than 90 minutes. There is no hard and 
fast rule, but somewhere between 60 and 90 minutes, the idea stream starts to dry up, 
p
eople repeat themselves, and jokes replace creative ideas. 
Fifth, record ideas in a visible way. Lots of people take notes at brainstorming sessions 
for their own use, and that is good. W
e have found it valuable to have someone jot down 
the ideas presented on large paste-a-note sheets that we put on the walls. This allows 
participants in brainstorming sessions to react to ideas generated earlier. Moreover, 
analysts are encouraged to participate in such exercises if they see their own ideas put 
down in writing. Having a notional record of brainstorming also helps the analyst who ends 
up writing a report based on the discussion. Ideas that may not be used in one report are 
invariably put to use later, so it is good to have a record of them . . .” 
28 

 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Divergent Thinking Phase: 
• Distribute “P ost-It” notes and pens or 
markers to all participants. Typically, 
10-12 people works best. 
• P ose the problem in terms of a “focal 
question.” Display it in one sentence on 
a large easel or whiteboard. 
• A
sk the group to write down responses 
to the question, using key words that will 
ft on the small “Post-It” note. 
• Stick all the notes on a wall for all to 
see—treat all ideas the same. 
• When a pause follows the initial flow of 
ideas, the group is reaching the end 
of their conventional thinking and the 
new divergent ideas are then likely to 
emerge. 
• End the “collection stage” of the 
brainstorming after two or three pauses. 
Convergent Thinking Phase: 
• Ask the participants as a group 
to rearrange the notes on the wall 
according to their commonalities or 
similar concepts. No talking is permitted. 
Some notes may be moved several 
times as notes begin to cluster. Copying 
some notes is permitted to allow ideas 
to be included in more than one group. 
• Select a word or phrase that 
characterizes each grouping or cluster 
once all the notes have been arranged. 
• Identify any notes that do not easily fit 
with others and consider them either 
useless noise or the beginning of an 
idea that deserves further attention. 
• Assess what the group has 
accomplished in terms of new ideas 
or concepts identifed or new areas 
that need more work or further 
brainstorming. 
• Instruct each participant to select one 
or two areas that deserve the most 
attention. T
abulate the votes. 
• Set the brainstorming group’s priorities 
based on the voting and decide on the 
next steps for analysis. 
29 

 
 
 
 
 
OUTSIDE-IN THINKING 
Used to identify the full range of basic 
forces, factors, and trends that would 
indirectly shape an issue. 
WHEN TO USE 
Analysts fnd this technique most useful 
at the conceptualization of an analytic 
project, when the goal is to identify all the 
critical, external factors that could infuence 
how a particular situation will develop. It 
would work well for a group of analysts 
responsible for a range of functional and/or 
regional issues. When assembling a large 
database that must identify a number of 
information categories or database felds, 
this technique can aid in visualizing the 
entire set of categories that might be 
needed in a research effort. Often analysts 
realize only too late that some additional 
information categories will be needed and 
then must go back and review all previous 
fles and recode the data. With a modest 
amount of effort, “Outside-in Thinking” 
can reduce the risk of missing important 
variables early in the analytic process. 
VALUE ADDED 
Most analysts spend their time concentrating 
on familiar factors within their feld or 
analytic issue. That is, they think from the 
“inside”—namely, what they control—out 
to the broader world. Conversely, “thinking 
from the outside-in” begins by considering 
the external changes that might, over time, 
profoundly affect the analysts’ own feld or 
issue. This technique encourages analysts 
to get away from their immediate analytic 
tasks (the so-called “inbox”) and think 
about their issues in a wider conceptual 
and contextual framework. By recasting the 
problem in much broader and fundamental 
terms, analysts are more likely to uncover 
additional factors, an important dynamic, or 
a relevant alternative hypothesis. 
THE METHOD 
The process begins by developing a 
generic description of the problem or the 
phenomenon under study. Then, analysts 
should: 
• List all the key forces (social, 
technological, economic, environmental, 
and political) that could have an impact 
on the topic, but over which one can 
exert little infuence (e.g., globalization, 
social stress, the Internet, or the global 
economy). 
• Focus next on key factors over which 
an actor or policymaker can exert some 
infuence. In the business world this 
might be the market size, customers, the 
competition, suppliers or partners; in the 
government domain it might include the 
policy actions or the behavior of allies or 
adversaries. 
• Assess how each of these forces could 
affect the analytic problem. 
• Determine whether these forces actually 
do have an impact on the particular issue 
based on the available evidence. 
30 

      
 
 
 
RED TEAM ANALYSIS 
Models the behavior of an individual 
or group by trying to replicate how an 
adversary would think about an issue. 
WHEN TO USE 
Frequently, analysts face the challenge 
of forecasting how a foreign leader or 
decisionmaking group may behave when 
it is clear that there is a risk of falling 
into a “mirror-image” problem. That is, 
analysts can sometimes impute to a 
foreign actor the same motives, values, or 
understanding of an issue that they hold. 
Traditional analysis sometimes assumes 
that foreign leaders or groups will behave 
“rationally” and act as the analysts 
would if faced with the same threats or 
opportunities. History has shown that 
foreign leaders often respond differently 
to events because of different cultural, 
organizational, or personal experiences. 
Red Team analysis tries to consciously 
place analysts in the same cultural, 
organizational, and personal setting 
(“putting them in their shoes”) in which 
the target individual or group operates. 
Whereas analysts normally work from the 
position of the “blue” (friendly forces), a 
“red” team of analysts attempts to work in 
the environment of the hostile forces. 
VALUE ADDED 
Like Devil’s Advocacy and T eam A/T eam B 
techniques, Red Team analysis is aimed 
at freeing the analyst from the prison of a 
well-developed mind-set; in this case, the 
analyst’s own sense of rationality, cultural 
norms, and personal values. Whereas 
analysts usually operate as “observers” 
of a foreign adversary, the Red Team 
technique transforms the analyst into an 
“actor” operating within the adversary’s 
culture and political milieu. This form of 
“role playing” is useful when trying to 
replicate the mind-set of authoritarian 
leaders, terrorist cells, or other non-
Western groups that operate under very 
different codes of behavior or motivations. 
Often this technique can introduce new or 
different stimuli that might not have been 
factored into traditional analysis—such as 
the target’s familial ties or the international 
political, economic, and military pressures 
felt by the individual. F
or example, Red 
Team participants might ask themselves: 
“What would my peers, family, or tribe 
expect me to do? Alternatively, a Red 
Team analyst might pose the question 
to his colleagues: “How do we perceive 
the external threats and opportunities?” 
Finally, the Red Team technique can factor 
into its analysis the way in which personal 
power and status might infuence a target’s 
behavior. 
THE METHOD 
On issues that lend themselves to Red 
Team analysis, a manager needs to build 
a team of experts with in-depth knowledge 
of the operating environment, the target’s 
personality, and the style of thinking used. 
The team should be populated not just 
with those who understand the language, 
but also with people who might have 
experienced the culture, share the ethnic 
background, or have worked in a similar 
operational environment. Once established 
and separated from traditional analysis, the 
team members should: 
• Put themselves in the adversary’s 
circumstances and react to foreign stimuli 
as the target would. 
• Develop a set of “first-person” questions 
that the adversary would ask, such 
as: “How would I perceive incoming 
information; what would be my personal 
concerns; or to whom would I look for an 
opinion?” 
• Draft a set of policy papers in which the 
leader or group makes specifc decisions, 
proposes recommendations, or lays 
out courses of actions. The more these 
papers refect the cultural and personal 
norms of the target, the more they can 
offer a different perspective on the 
analytic problem. 
31 

            
A Red Team Perspective
 Iran’s Military Strategy Vis-a-vis the United States 
“. . . The United States and Israel may be contemplating military operations against Iran, as per 
recent media reports . . . A week-long combined air and ground maneuver has just concluded 
in fve of the southern and western provinces of Iran, mesmerizing foreign observers, who 
have described as ‘spectacular’ the massive display of high-tech, mobile operations, including 
rapid-deployment forces relying on squadrons of helicopters, air lifts, missiles, as well as 
hundreds of tanks and tens of thousands of well-coordinated personnel using live munitions. 
Learning from both the 2003 Iraq war and Iran’s own previous experiences of the 1980-88 
war with Iraq and the 1987-88 confrontation with US forces in the P
ersian Gulf, Iranians have 
focused on the merits of a fuid and complex defensive strategy that seeks to take advantage 
of certain weaknesses in the US military superpower while maximizing the precious few areas 
where they may have the upper hand, e.g.; numerical superiority in ground forces, guerrilla 
tactics, terrain, etc. 
Any US attack on Iran will likely be met frst and foremost by missile counter-attacks engulfng 
the southern P
ersian Gulf states playing host to US forces, as well as any other country—e.g., 
Azerbaijan, Iraq, or Turkey allowing their territory or airspace to be used against Iran. The 
rationale for this strategy is precisely to pre-warn Iran’s neighbors of the dire consequences, 
with potential debilitating impacts on their economies for a long time, should they become 
accomplices of foreign invaders of Iran. 
Another key element of Iran’s strategy is to “increase the arch of crisis” in places such as 
Afghanistan and Iraq, where it has considerable infuence, to undermine the United States’ 
foothold in the region, hoping to create a counter
-domino effect wherein instead of gaining 
inside Iran, the US would actually lose territory partly as a result of thinning its forces and 
military ‘overreach.’ 
Iran’s counter-psychological warfare, on the other hand, seeks to take advantage of the ‘death-
fearing’ American soldiers who typically lack a strong motivation to fght wars not necessarily 
in 
defense of the homeland. A war with Iran would defnitely require establishing the draft in the 
US, without which it could not possibly protect its fanks in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
There is a sense of national-security siege in Iran these days, in light of a tightening “security 
belt” by the US benefting from military bases in Iraq, T
urkey, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, 
Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, as well as Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Bahrain, Oman, and the island-
turned garrison of Diego Garcia. From Iran’s vantage point, the US, having won the Cold War, 
has turned into a ‘leviathan unhinged’ capable of manipulating and subverting the rule of 
international law and the United Nations with impunity, thus requiring a sophisticated Iranian 
strategy of deterrence, that, in the words of certain Iranian media pundits, would even include 
the use of nuclear weapons . . .” 
—Excerpts from Kaveh L. Afrasiabi (Tehran University), “How Iran Will Fight Back,” 
cited in Asia Times Online Ltd., 2004. 
32 

 
 
 
 
Red Team analysis is not easy to conduct. 
It requires signifcant time to develop a 
team of qualifed experts who can think like 
the adversary. The team has to distance 
itself from the normal analysis and work 
as though living in the target’s world. 
Without a sophisticated understanding of 
the culture, operational environment, and 
personal histories of the foreign group, 
analysts will not be able to behave or think 
like the enemy. Analysts can never truly 
escape their own experiences and mind-
sets, but this technique can at least prevent 
them from falling into “mirror
-imaging” 
unconsciously. 
The most novel feature of Red Team 
analysis is its presentation. 
• The analysis is often in a “first person” 
format—that is, drafted as memos to or 
from a leader or group. 
• Red Team analysis avoids the use of 
caveats or qualifcations and assumes 
that the recipient understands that 
the paper is aimed more at provoking 
thought or challenging the conventional 
understanding of how an adversary 
thinks. 
• Such papers are rarely coordinated 
among other experts and do not purport 
to represent the consensus view on an 
issue. 
Red Team papers do not plot out all 
possible courses of action but seek to 
give a prediction based on the target’s 
special personal, organizational, or 
cultural experiences. 
33 

     
 
 
 
 
 
   ALTERNATIVE FUTURES ANALYSIS 
Systematically explores multiple ways a 
situation can develop when there is high 
complexity and uncertainty. 
WHEN TO USE 
Alternative futures analysis (often referred 
to as “scenarios”) is most useful when 
a situation is viewed as too complex or 
the outcomes as too uncertain to trust 
a single outcome assessment. First, 
analysts must recognize that there is 
high uncertainty surrounding the topic in 
question. Second, they, and often their 
customers, recognize that they need 
to consider a wide range of factors that 
might bear on the question. And third, 
they are prepared to explore a range of 
outcomes and are not wedded to any 
preconceived result. Depending on how 
elaborate the futures project, the effort 
can amount to considerable investment in 
time, analytic resources, and money. 
A team of analysts can spend several 
hours or days organizing, brainstorming, 
and developing multiple futures; 
alternatively, a larger-scale effort can 
require preparing a multi-day workshop 
that brings together participants 
(including outside experts). Such an 
undertaking often demands the special 
skills of trained scenario-development 
facilitators and conferencing facilities. 
This technique is a sharp contrast to 
contrarian techniques, which try to 
challenge the analysts’ high confdence 
and relative certitude about an event 
or trend. Instead, multiple futures 
development is a divergent thinking 
technique that tries to use the complexity 
and uncertainty of a situation to describe 
multiple outcomes or futures that the 
analyst and policymaker should consider
, 
rather than to predict one outcome. 
VALUE ADDED 
Alternative futures analysis is extremely 
useful in highly ambiguous situations, when 
analysts confront not only a lot of “known 
unknowns” but also “unknown unknowns.” 
What this means is that analysts recognize 
that there are factors, forces, and dynamics 
among key actors that are diffcult to 
identify without the use of some structured 
technique that can model how they would 
interact or behave. As the outcomes are not 
known prior to the futures exercise, analysts 
must be prepared for the unexpected and 
willing to engage in a more free-wheeling 
exchange of views than typically occurs 
in order to “imagine the future.” Given 
the time and resources involved, scenario 
analysis is best reserved for situations that 
could potentially pose grave threats or 
otherwise have signifcant consequences. 
From past experience, analysts have 
found that involving policymakers in the 
alternative futures exercise is the most 
effective way to communicate the results of 
this exploration of alternative outcomes and 
sensitize them to key uncertainties. Most 
participants fnd the process of developing 
such scenarios as useful as any fnished 
product that attempts to capture the results 
of the exercise. Analysts and policymakers 
can beneft from this technique in several 
ways: 
• It provides an effective means of weighing 
multiple unknown or unknowable 
factors and presenting a set of plausible 
outcomes. 
• It can help to bound a problem by 
identifying plausible combinations of 
uncertain factors. 
• It provides a broader analytic framework 
for calculating the costs, risks, and 
opportunities presented to policymakers 
by different outcomes. 
The future is plural. 
—Peter Schwartz, 
author of The Art of 
the Long View and 
a widely acclaimed 
scenario developer. 
”
“
34 

 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
”
Hypothetical Threats to the Homeland: 
Using Spectrums to Defne Potential Targets 
HIGH 
(Weapons of 
Mass Destruction) 
• BW attack on military • Information warfare 
base water supply 
• RPG or SAM attack on 
military aircraft 
SELECTIVE 
Sophistication
• Introduce contaminated 
of Weapon 
drugs into domestic 
supply chain 
BROAD 
(Military/Police 
post) Intended 
• Mortar attack on US 
military’s home base 
• Sniper attacks on home 
base Guard Post 
(General US 
Impact population) 
• Kidnapping senior policy 
offcial’s child 
• Coordinated car bombs 
at shopping centers 
LOW 
(Rife/Handgun) 
A Futures Exercise. The graphic captures four potential futures to understand how foreign insurgents 
might carry out an attack on the United States. A brainstorming exercise helped analysts identify two 
key uncertainties (the sophistication of weapons used by the insurgents and the intended impact of the 
attack) and arrayed these factors on a graph as the “x” and “y” axes. The four resulting quadrants in the 
2 x 2 matrix allowed analysts to visualize potential targets from the various combinations (low to high 
sophistication of weapons and selective to broad intended impact of an attack). For example, if a group 
possessed highly sophisticated weapons and intended a broad attack on the United States, potential 
targets could include computer networks and domestic drug supplies. Having flled in a quadrant, 
analysts can then turn to devising likely indicators or signposts of such a future. 
35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• It aids analysts and policymakers in 
anticipating what otherwise would be 
surprising developments by forcing 
them to challenge assumptions and 
consider possible “wild cards” or 
discontinuous events. 
• It generates indicators to monitor 
for signs that a particular future is 
becoming more or less likely
, so that 
policies can be reassessed. 
THE METHOD 
Although there are a variety of ways to 
develop alternative futures, the most 
common approach used in both the public 
and private sectors involves the following 
steps: 
• Develop the “focal issue” by 
systematically interviewing experts and 
offcials who are examining the general 
topic. 
• Convene a group of experts (both 
internal and external) to brainstorm 
about the forces and factors that could 
affect the focal issue. 
• Select by consensus the two most 
critical and uncertain forces and convert 
these into axes or continua with the 
most relevant endpoints assigned. 
• Establish the most relevant endpoints 
for each factor; e.g., if economic 
growth were the most critical, uncertain 
force, the endpoints could be “fast” 
and “slow” or “transformative” and 
“stabilizing” depending on the type of 
issue addressed. 
• Form a futures matrix by crossing the 
two chosen axes. The four resulting 
quadrants provide the basis for 
characterizing alternative future worlds. 
• Generate colorful stories that describe 
these futures and how they could 
plausibly come about. Signposts or 
indicators can then be developed. 
Participants, especially policymakers, can 
then consider how current decisions or 
strategies would fare in each of the four 
worlds and identify alternative policies 
that might work better either across all the 
futures or in specifc ones. By anticipating 
alternative 
outcomes, policymakers have a 
better chance of either devising strategies 
fexible enough to accommodate multiple 
outcomes or of being prepared and agile 
in the face of change. 
36 

37 

 
 
     
      
      
       
   
 
     
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    S T R A T E G I E S F O R U S I N G S T R U C T U R E D 
ANALYTIC TECHNIQUES 
These structured analytic techniques 
can be used in a variety of ways when 
analysts begin a new assessment. Some 
can be used equally effectively at multiple 
points in the process and can promote 
an analyst’s ability to keep an open mind, 
to consider multiple—including highly 
unlikely—hypotheses, to challenge 
conventional wisdom, and to assess the 
impact of important information gaps or 
deception on analytic judgments and 
confdence levels. The Timeline for Using 
Analytic Techniques provides some 
thoughts on when to use one or more of 
them during the course of an analyst’s 
research and writing. 
Starting Out 
At the beginning of an analytic project, 
analysts are always wise to consider 
brainstorming and assumptions checks 
to insure that important factors are not 
being missed or taken for granted. 
Similarly, outside-in-thinking can 
sometimes put an analytic project into a 
broader international context, in which 
factors outside the lead analyst’s area 
of responsibility might impact on his or 
her analytic judgments. For instance, 
economic assumptions about the price 
of oil might be key to a regional political 
analyst’s understanding the prospects 
for political stability in an oil-exporting 
A Timeline for Using Analytic Techniques 
Throughout an Analytic Project 
Begin Paper/ 
Commence Project 
Deliver Final Paper/ 
Brief Key Findings 
Brainstorming Brainstorming
Key Assumptions Check              Key Assumptions Check 
What If? Analysis 
High Impact/Low Probability Analysis 
Outside-In Thinking Team A/Team B 
Analysis/Debate 
Devil’s Advocacy 
Red T
eam Red Team 
Deception Detection Deception Detection 
ACH 
Scenarios and Alternative Futures Analysis 
Gaming, Modeling, and Simulation* 
Indicators 
*Gaming, Modeling, and Simulation are among the more sophisticated techniques taught in 
a more advanced analytic methods course and usually require substantial commitments of 
analyst time and corporate resources. 
38 

 
      
      
country or a underdeveloped country 
entirely dependent on expensive energy 
imports. A High Impact/Low Probability 
assessment can also sensitize analysts 
early on to the signifcance of dramatic 
events that might affect their analytic lines. 
Some techniques like Indicators and 
Signposts or Analysis of Competing 
Hypotheses (ACH) can be useful 
throughout a project and revisited 
periodically as new information 
is absorbed and analyzed. ACH, 
in particular
, is a good tool to use 
throughout a project to prevent 
premature closure and to highlight 
evidence that is most “discriminating” in 
making an analytic argument. Alternative 
Futures analysis is similarly useful at the 
beginning of a project, but can amount to 
the structure for the entire project. 
Hypothesis Testing 
As an analytic project takes shape, and 
hypotheses are being formed about 
the key intelligence question, it can 
be appropriate to use one or another 
contrarian technique to challenge the 
conventional analytic line that is being 
developed. If the assessment contains 
strong judgments about an adversary’s 
behavior
, then challenging this view with 
a “Red Team” effort might be a good 
corrective to too much of a rational actor 
approach. Also, a review of intelligence 
gaps at this juncture can also help give 
the analysts a better degree of confdence 
in the information base and judgments 
reached in the assessment. 
A Final Check 
As the assessment is being fnalized, 
it can still be useful to review key 
assumptions as a sanity check on 
the underlying logic of the analysis. A 
brainstorming session also may be helpful 
to insure that no plausible hypothesis has 
been dismissed or left unaddressed. If 
a frm consensus has formed around an 
analytic line and has not been seriously 
questioned in some time, then a Devil’s 
Advocacy exercise could be useful. 
Analysts might also use a fnal review to 
decide if they have identifed a list of key 
indicators for future developments. This 
can be an important guide to include in 
the assessment as a way to track future 
developments and monitor whether the 
analytic judgments reached are being 
realized or in need of revision. 
39 

 
           
 
 
 
SELECTIVE BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Graham Allison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis: Examines 
the Kennedy Administration’s decisionmaking style from alternative perspectives of the 
“rational actor,” “organizational actor,” and “bureaucratic politics” models. 
Max Bazerman and Michael D. Watkins, Predictable Surprises: The Disasters You Should 
Have Seen Coming and How T
o Prevent Them. Examines the cognitive, organizational and 
political causes of some predictable surprises and outlines steps to overcome them. 
Richard Betts, Surprise Attack: Lessons for Defense Planning. Explains why surprise 
attacks historically have succeeded and argues that the US needs strategies for avoiding 
surprise or at least reducing their consequences. Uses examples from W
orld War II, Korea, 
and the Middle East. 
Josh Epstein and Rob Axtell, Sugarscape: Creating Artifcial Societies from the Ground 
Up
. Develops a very simple agent-based model of a silicon-based society and then does 
simulations of various social, economic and political phenomena, including confict. 
Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference. Examines 
how social trends, ideas, and products emerge from nowhere and take hold. 
Cynthia M. Grabo, Anticipating Surprises: Analysis for Strategic Warning. Examines distinctive 
ingredients of the analytical method of intelligence and suggests ways of improving 
warning assessments. 
Richards J. Heuer, Jr., The Psychology of Intelligence Analysis. Examines the impediments 
to good analysis and provides techniques for overcoming mind-sets and cognitive biases. 
Barry Hughes, International Futures. Develops scenarios for international relations using a 
simulation tool contained in a CD ROM in the back jacket. 
Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics. Examines how 
policymakers learn from history
, perceive complexity, and form and change their beliefs. 
Gary Klein, Intuition At Work. Shows how developing one’s intuition can improve your 
analytic skills and that it is a “learnable” technique. 
Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, Thinking in Time: The Uses of History for 
Decisionmakers
. Uses case study methods to identify the perils of historical analogies and 
recommends identifying what is “known, unclear and presumed.” 
Peter Schwartz, The Art of the Long View: Planning for the Future in an Uncertain World. 
Explains the “scenaric” approach pioneered at Royal Dutch Shell and argues for making 
strategic decisions that will be sound for “all plausible futures.” 
James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds. Argues that diversity and independence of 
even non-expert individuals in groups, properly organized, can reach more accurate 
forecasts than individual experts. 
M. Mitchell Waldrop, Complexity: The Emerging Science at the Edge of Disorder and 
Chaos
. Introduces the literature of complex systems and suggests why forecasting 
anything complicated is so diffcult. 
40 

SELECTIVE BIBLIOGRAPHY