(JSAT)
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON
JOINT
STRUCTURED
ANALYSIS
TECHNIQUES
T
JIPS
Essential
Toolkit
J
E


2
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Acknowledgements
Published by: JIPS
Contributing authors and reviewers: Caryn Saslow, Svend-Jonas Schelhorn, 
Wilhelmina Welsch, Beatrice Barco, Corina Demottaz (JIPS)
Graphic designer: Visualab
Credit for illustrations: thenounproject.com, storyset.com
                 
      
This publication was made possible through the generous support of the American people through 
the Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance (BHA) of the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), and the Danish Development Cooperation Agency (DANIDA). The contents 
are the responsibility of JIPS and do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or DANIDA.
Suggested citation: JIPS (2021). Technical Brief on Joint Structured Analysis Techniques.
© All rights reserved. The copyright for this material lies with JIPS. It may be reproduced for 
educational purposes (including training, research, and programme activities) and elements of this 
publication may be quoted in other publications, provided JIPS is acknowledged as per the above-
mentioned suggested citation.
JIPS is an interagency service set up in 2009 and dedicated to bringing governments, displaced 
persons, host communities, and national and international actors together to jointly produce 
data and analysis that can inform durable solutions to internal displacement. All our efforts are 
driven by our vision of a world in which internally displaced persons can progress towards 
durable solutions and live in dignity while doing so.
A globally recognised neutral broker, JIPS specifically provides supporttechnical and collaboration 
support to field partners, namely on profiling, and strategic advice on data; consolidates its 
expertise into quality guidance and hands-on tools; and advances global practice and discourse 
towards sound global action and standards. Field-focused and committed to enhancing local 
ownership and capacity, JIPS brings specific expertise on protracted displacement, durable 
solutions, urban displacement and IDP statistics. 
Find out more about JIPS’ vision, mission and strategy 2021-2023.

3
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Table of contents
1. Introduction  6
2. What Are Joint Structured Analysis Techniques? 9
History 11
Collaboration 12
Benefits 12
Challenges 13
Good Practices  14
3. Categories of Technique 15
4. Selecting Techniques for a Joint Analysis Process 18
Skills, training and time required 21
Relationships between techniques 23
5. Description of Techniques 26
Decomposition & Visualisation 27
Getting Started Checklist    27
Customer Checklist  27
Issue Redefinition  27
Chronologies & Timelines  28
Sorting 28
Ranking, Scoring, Prioritising 28
Matrices 29
Network Analysis 29
Mind Maps & Concept Maps 29

4
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Idea Generation 30
Structured Brainstorming 30
Virtual Brainstorming 30
Nominal Group Technique 30
Starbursting  31
Cross-Impact Matrix 31
Scenarios & Indicators 32
Simple Scenarios  32
Alternative Futures Analysis &    Multiple Scenarios Generation  32
Indicators   32
Indicators Validator 32
Hypothesis Generation & Testing 33
Simple Hypotheses 33
Multiple Hypotheses Generator  33
Diagnostic Reasoning 33
Analysis of Competing Hypotheses 34
Argument Mapping 34
Six Thinking Hats  34
Assessment of Cause & Effect 35
Key Assumptions Check  35
Role Playing  35
Outside-In Thinking 35
Fishbone Analysis  36
Challenge Analysis 37
Structured Self-Critique 37
Devil’s Advocacy 37
Delphi Method 37

5
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Conflict Management 38
Adversarial Collaboration 38
Decision Support 39
Force Field Analysis 39
Pros-Cons-Faults-and-Fixes 39
SWOT Analysis 39
Conclusion 40
Bibliography 41
Annex I: Skills, training and time required 
per structured analysis technique  46
Annex II: Relationships between JSATs 52

01
INTRODUCTION
1. Introduction 

7
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
In the analysis phase of a collaborative data process, such as profiling or joint needs assessments, 
it is important to ensure that all voices are heard. This involves making space to discuss and 
understand consent as well as dissent around the reading of data, as well as relevant hypotheses 
and information that can support or enhance the analysis. Joint Structured Analysis Techniques 
(JSATs) provide a structure to explore and challenge analytical arguments and mindsets 
collectively, stimulate creativity, and manage uncertainty. 1 They provide mental tools for 
externalising internal thoughts in a transparent and systematic way for closer examination2, 
shifting the focus from the what to the how one thinks to improve the quality of analysis 3 with 
increased objectivity and reduced bias. 
“ Joint Structured Analysis Techniques (JSATs) provide a structure 
to explore and challenge analytical arguments and mindsets 
collectively, stimulate creativity, and manage uncertainty. They 
provide mental tools for externalising internal thoughts in a 
transparent and systematic way.”
While the value of joint analysis is recognised in the humanitarian field, there is a need for further 
exploration of the diverse ways to effectively facilitate it. This technical brief serves as a starting 
point: it offers a toolbox of facilitation techniques and discusses how they can be used to enable 
and elevate joint analysis processes. It also utilises lessons learned from other fields, namely the 
intelligence community, as a guide. It builds on an extensive literature review that was analysed 
applying an analytical framework specifically developed for this purpose and using the Data 
Entry and Exploration Platform (DEEP) to tag text. The tagged content was then synthesised, 
analysed and related to the joint analysis steps in the profiling process. 
"This technical brief serves as a starting point: it offers a tool box 
of facilitation techniques and discusses how they can be used to 
enable and elevate joint analysis processes. It also utilises lessons 
learned from other fields, namely the intelligence community, 
as a guide."
1 US Government, 2009.
2 Pherson, 2013.
3 Peterson, 2008.

8
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
This technical brief is aimed at humanitarian and development practitioners engaged in 
coordinating and facilitating collaborative data processes, notably profiling coordinators, 
information management officers, and analysts. Being focused on facilitation, it is intended 
to go hand-in-hand with the JIPS Joint Analysis Guide, which discusses how joint analysis can 
be structured and planned as part of a displacement profiling process. The utility of certain 
techniques, however, may extend beyond joint analysis to other aspects of profiling, joint needs 
assessments or other collaborative data processes. 
The technical brief is structured as follows: 
Chapter 2: Defines what Joint Structured Analysis Techniques are and briefly discusses their 
history, key benefits and challenges, and good practices based on our literature review. 
Chapter 3: Introduces commonly used JSAT categories and associated techniques. 
Chapter 4: Provides a brief guide to selecting JSAT techniques in view of a joint analysis 
process, based on the task at hand and criteria. 
Chapter 5: Describes each of the techniques that were previously introduced. 
We hope that this technical brief will serve as a useful reference for all partners interested in the 
facilitation of collaborative analytical processes.

02
WHAT ARE JOINT
STRUCTURED
ANALYSIS
TECHNIQUES?
2. What Are Joint Structured Analysis Techniques?

10
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
What exactly are Joint Structured Analysis Techniques? Let’s look at the building blocks of the 
concept: 
Analysis 
Varying definitions and levels of analysis exist. However, one overarching theme is that analysis 
consists of a process of breaking down an issue into its key parts for further examination.4 
Structured Analysis  
As different types of issues or questions exist, there are many ways to structure analysis. 
Determining the best structure for an issue to be approached is one of the first steps in its 
analysis.5  
Structured Analysis Techniques (SAT) 
Techniques provide a step-by-step process to handle the different parts of an analytical issue.6 
Just as we use physical tools like utensils to eat, techniques provide a "box of (mental) tools" 
to help mitigate the adverse impact on analysis of one's cognitive limitations and pitfalls. 7 
SATs allow us to externalise internal thoughts in a transparent and systematic way so that the 
thought process may be examined, compared, and questioned by others.8 They are thus intended 
to guide analytic thinking, and consequently increase objectivity and decrease analytic error.9  
4 Krizan, 1999; Eaton et al., 2007; ACAPS, 2016.
5 Heuer, 1999.
6 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
7 Heuer, 1999.
8 Pherson, 2013.
9 ACAPS, 2016.

11
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Joint Structured Analysis Techniques (JSAT)
As SATs involve externalising one’s internal thoughts to share, discuss and critique, this implies 
a collaborative effort to view an issue from different perspectives.10 Therefore, the use of SATs 
often occurs in a joint process. Techniques provide structure not only to the individual thought 
and analysis process – which may differ significantly from one person to the next – but also 
to the interaction of those involved.11 This transparency of sharing thoughts allows for effective 
communication at the working level, which is a necessity for collaboration.12  
In fact, the main benefits of SATs come when performed both early in the analytic process and 
jointly. In this way, participants with different types and levels of expertise learn of alternative 
ideas, evidence or mental models (assumptions and expectations based on past experience).13 
JSAT can thus help to avoid cognitive limitations, pitfalls, and groupthink as the structure guides 
the group through the analytical process.14  
History
The concept of Structured Analysis Techniques dates back to the 1980s in the United States, 
when an intelligence analyst started to write and teach about “alternative analysis”. In 2004, when 
updating the CIA training program, this term no longer appeared appropriate to the intelligence 
community, and in 2005 the name “structured analysis techniques” was approved.15 Following 
serious intelligence failures in the early 2000s (i.e. World Trade Center attacks and Iraqi weapons 
of mass destruction), the U.S. Intelligence Community turned to SATs to overcome cognitive 
limitations, analytic pitfalls and mindset problems.16 As of 2011, the intelligence community had at 
least 160 SATs at hand, and by 2017 SATs were a main feature of U.S. intelligence analysis training 
programs.17 SATs have not only been taught and widely used in the intelligence community, but 
also in academia, the private industry and business consulting.18 
10 Duvenage, 2010; Pherson & Pherson, 2013; ACAPS, 2016.
11 Johnston, 2000; Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
12 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
13 US Government, 2009.
14 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
15 Grunt, 2017.
16 Ibid; PSU, 2014.
17 Moore, 2011; Chang et al. 2017.
18 Pherson & Pherson, 2013.

12
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Collaboration
Structured techniques have been referred to as “enablers of collaboration”. When facing complex 
issues, the coordinated interaction of several minds using a structured analysis is typically more 
effective than an individual’s thinking.19 Intelligence analysis, for example, has improved when 
bringing together analysts with complementary expertise and different perspectives. 20 This 
generally allows for divergent thinking to occur, opening minds to creative alternatives and thus 
ensuring substantive analysis and problem solving.21  
Small groups of eight or fewer individuals, as is typically the case for JSAT sessions, are 
thought to be particularly conducive to improved analysis, especially when those involved are 
encouraged to share different opinions, ideas and perspectives. When groups exceed this small 
size, it has been found challenging to maintain trust between participants. The extent of sharing 
in a collaborative context may also be impacted by the sensitivity of information. 
In today’s increasingly virtual world, some posit that collaboration may be difficult when those 
involved have not met in person. One part of this is in not being able to read body language. Others 
argue, however, that this is less important with younger participants who are more accustomed 
to virtual social networking.22  
Benefits
The benefits of using JSATs are manifold. Unlike traditional analysis, which often relies on 
intuition, JSATs employ a systematic method that mitigates cognitive biases by rendering the 
thought process more rigorous, consistent, transparent and ultimately objective.23 This has 
been referred to as an “accountability mechanism”, with the use of JSATs resulting in a reduced 
frequency and severity of error.24 Shifting the focus from the what to the how one thinks, has 
been found to improve the quality of analysis while reducing the overconfidence that often arises 
with human intuition.25 This in turn strengthens the credibility of analysis and helps to counter 
potential pressure to politicise it.26  
"Shifting the focus from the what to the how  one thinks, has 
been found to improve the quality of analysis while reducing the 
overconfidence that often arises with human intuition."
19 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
20 National Research Council, 2011.
21 Duvenage, 2010.
22 Pherson & Pherson, 2013; Heuer & Pherson 2011.
23 Abdalla, 2010; Chang et al. 2017.
24 Pherson, 2013; Chang et al. 2017.
25 Peterson, 2008.
26 Duvenage, 2010; Pherson & Pherson, 2013.

13
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
The process of using JSATs has also been found to depersonalise arguments when there are 
differences of opinion. Communication is improved as it is guided through a step-by-step 
process.27 This process typically saves time when used early on in projects with groups to 
help build consensus, as it makes reasoning transparent and reduces the possibility of 
misunderstanding later.28 It also helps those involved to better understand complex problems 
and cope with information overload.29  
Overall, JSATs are intended to help identify and overcome mental mindsets (assumptions and 
expectations based on past experience), challenge key assumptions, stimulate creativity, generate 
alternatives, manage uncertainties, and reduce the chance of surprise. 30 In this sense, JSATs 
provide the toolbox to structure and facilitate a joint analysis process, such as in the context of 
a profiling exercise or a joint needs assessment.31  
Challenges
While JSATs have many benefits, their use does not guarantee the “right answer” or accurate 
analysis.32 Structured thinking is a considerable contrast to the habitual way the human mind 
works – using simplified mental models of reality to solve problems mainly intuitively by trial and 
error.33 While mental models are crucial for individuals to process information, they can result in 
important or missing information to be overlooked, rejected or forgotten.34  
"To be used effectively, JSATs depend on the analytic skills and 
expertise of those using them. Analytical thinking is a skill that, 
like driving, requires learning by doing, involving substantial 
effort and hard work."
Breaking this habit to form a new way of thinking has been cited as a significant challenge 35, 
notably for those with more expertise and past success in using their mental models.36 Working 
mental models must be challenged, refined, and challenged again when involved in interpreting 
complex and ambiguous issues.37 
27 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Smart, 2011.
28 Pherson, 2013.
29 Chang et al., 2017.
30 US Government, 2009; Directorate for Analysis, 2008; Pherson, 2005.
31 JIPS, 2021.
32 Abdalla, 2010.
33 Heuer, 1999; Folker, 2000.
34 US Government, 2009.
35 Folker, 2000.
36 US Government, 2009.
37 Heuer, 1999.

14
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
To be used effectively, JSATs depend on the analysis skills and expertise of those using them.38 
Analytical thinking is a skill that, like driving, requires learning by doing, involving substantial 
effort and hard work.39 Hence, while JSATs can save time later on, some have viewed them as 
too time consuming to master and implement, particularly for projects with short deadlines.40  
Good Practices 
Further research is needed for a comprehensive understanding of best practices related to JSATs.41 
Nevertheless, some key takeaways and good practices can be identified from our literature review: 
1. There is no one-size-fits all approach to JSATs. Many techniques can be used in more 
than one way, and each should be adapted to the issue at hand.42 Establishing a clear 
goal is a prerequisite to deciding which technique(s) to use.43 
2. As JSATs are typically used in complex or ambiguous situations, multiple techniques are 
often needed to address each “piece [of the] puzzle”.44  Structured analysis has been 
referred to as an art when it comes to knowing how to put these pieces together.45 The 
appropriate use of several different techniques is intended to increase accuracy as it 
distances intuitive reasoning and its accompanying pitfalls.46 
3. As with driving a car or riding a bike, JSATs are best learned by doing.47 The regular 
use of JSATs is needed to gain confidence in their application, and encouraging this 
is important.48 Ideally those using JSATs would be trained in all different tools and 
techniques to choose and apply the most appropriate ones.49  
4. Lastly, mental models or cognitive biases must be identified and addressed early on. 
Objective analysis requires making basic assumptions and reasoning explicit, followed by 
having these challenged by others and re-examined by the individual.50 Periodically, it is 
also important to recheck assumptions as situations change with time and assumptions 
from the past may no longer be relevant.51  
38 Artner et al., 2016.
39 Heuer, 1999.
40 Artner et al., 2016.
41 Ibid.
42 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
43 Stigall, 2012.
44 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
45 Ibid.
46 Peterson, 2008.
47 Heuer, 1999.
48 Abdalla, 2010.
49 Duvenage, 2010.
50 Heuer, 1999.
51 Stigall, 2012.

03
CATEGORIES OF
TECHNIQUES
3. Categories of Technique

16
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Structured analysis techniques have been categorised in different ways over time. For instance, 
techniques have been organised based on their intended use, or how they help to overcome 
cognitive limitations or pitfalls. Below are eight categories, or families, of techniques developed 
by intelligence and SAT experts Richards Heuer and Randolph Pherson, organised by purpose 
and main focus, and commonly referenced in the literature52:
1. Decomposition and Visualisation: Analysis is complex, and typically only seven things 
(plus or minus two) can be kept in working memory at once. Decomposition breaks 
an issue down into its component parts, allowing each to be examined separately. 
Visualisation organises all parts on paper or digitally to see how they interrelate. All 
SATs use the techniques from this category to some extent to address the limitations of 
the human mind. 
2. Idea Generation: As the name suggests, these are techniques that involve creative 
thinking to allow for the development of new ideas or combine old ideas in new 
ways. This allows for imaginative thinking to occur whereby new insights and different 
perspectives are developed. As with most structured techniques, these are particularly 
effective when used in a collaborative group process. 
3. Scenarios and Indicators: As people have a tendency to see what they expect, the 
unanticipated is often overlooked. Techniques in this category prepare users to 
recognise change. When working with uncertainty, it is important to identify drivers 
that could change a situation and different potential scenarios or futures. Indicators 
subsequently allow for monitoring of signs that a particular future is more or less likely to 
occur. 
4. Hypothesis Generation and Testing: Hypothesising about given information often 
occurs subconsciously, and validation of hypotheses intuitively. These techniques help 
users to explore a wider range of hypotheses, and thus consider different possibilities 
and explanations. They help to prevent another phenomenon known as “satisficing” 
or accepting the first good enough answer. Techniques allow evidence both for and 
against all potential hypotheses, explanations, or outcomes to be identified, considered 
and weighed. Focus is often on refuting rather than confirming hypotheses so that the 
remaining hypothesis is robust enough for subsequent examination. 
5. Assessment of Cause and Effect: Making assumptions about the cause and effect of 
events or indicators can be a pitfall in analysis. In the context of lacking or ambiguous 
information or disinformation, untested assumptions and conclusions are risky. These 
techniques help to both refine and strengthen how current and future situations are 
interpreted. 
52 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Heuer, 2009; PSU, 2014; ACAPS, 2016; Duvenage, 2010; Bearstone Global, 2020; 
Pherson & Pherson, 2013; Grunt, 2017.

17
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
6. Challenge Analysis: Mindsets or mental models are our assumptions and expectations 
based on experience. These techniques challenge one’s thinking to allow for an issue 
or question to be viewed from different perspectives. This reframing helps to identify 
and assess new ideas, arguments, perspectives and evidence. The techniques can also be 
useful for examining old ideas from an original point of view. 
7. Conflict Management: When significant differences of opinion arise, these techniques 
provide an effective means to resolve interpersonal analytic disagreements. 
Techniques exist for situations in which those opposed are still open to a mutual 
exchange, and for those in which an objective third party is needed. 
8. Decision Support: These techniques are available to support and facilitate planning and 
decision-making processes. They allow the user to view an issue from the decision-
maker’s perspective. The techniques help to describe what factors are anticipated to 
shape the decision, identify potential outcomes, and then pin down signs or indicators to 
keep in mind as potential early warning of the direction events may take. 
A list of these categories and their associated techniques53 are provided in table 1  in Chapter 4. 
It is not exhaustive, but contains those techniques that may be most useful or relevant for joint 
analysis processes in profiling or joint needs assessments. A description of each technique is 
provided in Chapter 5.  
53 Mainly from Heuer & Pherson, 2011.

04
 SELECTING
TECHNIQUES FOR
A JOINT ANALYSIS
PROCESS
4. Selecting Techniques for a Joint Analysis Process

19
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
The selection of the most appropriate technique(s) will determine the accuracy and value of 
resulting products or processes. The use of multiple techniques is typically needed for different 
parts of a single project. For instance, different techniques can be used for coming up with 
ideas, evaluating them, identifying assumptions, making conclusions, and challenging previous 
conclusions.54 Some techniques can even be used more than once in the process to continue to 
encourage open mindsets.55  
How to know which technique to choose when it comes to a joint analysis process? How to 
decide with JSAT to apply and when in a collaborative analysis undertaking? Experts from the 
intelligence community, like Heuer and Pherson56, have provided guidance to help users choose 
the most appropriate technique(s) based on the task at hand. Building on this work, we have 
examined how this relates to the different steps in the joint analysis process as outlined in JIPS’ 
Joint Analysis Guide (also see Figure 2, the joint analysis process).  
Table 1 at pages 24 and 25 outlines nine tasks along with their associated category, techniques 
and the three key steps of a joint analysis process. Tasks are diverse and range from defining 
a project to ultimately providing decision support. 57 Several of the techniques, such as those 
related to brainstorming and key assumptions, are versatile and applicable throughout or at 
different points along the process. 
As discussed earlier, SATs are generally most effective when used in a small group or team 
rather than by an individual. The classification of JSATs along the analysis process emphasises 
the importance of this, particularly for those that can be used for explanatory, interpretive, 
anticipatory, and prescriptive types of analysis. It also provides an important conceptual framework 
for contextualising and operationalising JSATs in the joint analysis phase of the profiling process.
Five core techniques applicable across the analysis process
Heuer and Pherson also identified ‘core techniques’ that all intelligence analysts starting out 
should be trained in due to their frequent and broad applicability across the analysis process. 
These include Structured Brainstorming, Cross-Impact Matrix, Indicators, Analysis of Competing 
Hypotheses, Key Assumptions Check, and Structured Self-Critique.58  
The Key Assumptions Check in particular is recommended for all major projects as assumptions 
play an important role in analysis, especially for situations with many uncertainties 59. Figure 1 
explains when each of the core techniques can be adopted at the initial stage of the analysis 
process.
54 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
55 University of Foreign Military and Cultural Studies, 2012.
56 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
57 Ibid; US Government, 2009; International Association for Intelligence Education, 2010.
58 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
59 Heuer, 2009.

20
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
 
Start
Outside-in
Thinking
Key
Assumption
Structured
Brainstroming
Contexualise the
Project
Focus on Important
Factors
Figure 1. Using core joint structured analysis techniques at the start of a collaborative analytical process60  
At the start of a collaborative analytical process, the use of Structured Brainstorming and 
Key Assumptions Check techniques are encouraged to avoid overlooking important factors. 
To contextualise the project in broader terms outside of one’s expertise, Outside-In Thinking 
is recommended. 
Throughout the analysis, techniques like Indicators or Analysis of Competing Hypotheses  
can be helpful, particularly with the acquisition and analysis of new information. The re-use of 
Analysis of Competing Hypotheses, for instance, can prevent premature closure and underline 
the most distinctive evidence for an analytic argument. Along with the development of hypotheses, 
applying a challenge technique such as Structured Self-Critique is important to view the analysis 
developed through a more critical lens. 
In finalising the analysis, a Key Assumptions Check is useful to double check its underlying 
logic. Structured Brainstorming can also be revisited to verify that no plausible hypothesis has 
been overlooked. If a solid consensus has formed around an analysis and not been questioned 
for a while in a serious manner, the Devil’s Advocacy technique can provide this service. In a final 
review, ensuring identification of a list of key indicators for future developments can provide a 
crucial guide to track these and monitor if conclusions reached are realised or need adjustment.   
60 US Government, 2009.

21
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Skills, training and time required
It is important to note that not all techniques are equally demanding in terms of the skill level, 
amount of training and time needed to apply them effectively. These variables are in fact 
closely linked and it is critical to consider all three of them when choosing a SAT.61 For instance, 
a technique that is simpler will require less skill, training and time to employ. 
Annex I  provides an overview of the structured analysis techniques in light of the skills, training 
and time they each require. Each variable is classified as low, moderate, high, or a combination 
thereof. SATs that are classified as ‘high’ typically require a substantial investment in time, 
training, analytical resources and funds. Experienced facilitators and conferencing facilities may 
also be needed depending on the nature of the SAT.62 For each technique, additional information 
is provided regarding data prerequisites, the most suitable number of participants, the process 
and the methods. 
For instance, those in the categories of Decomposition and Visualisation, Idea Generation, 
and Decision Support generally involve a low to moderate amount of skill, training and time. 
Hypothesis Generation and Testing, Challenge Analysis, and Conflict Management on the other 
hand, require more of a moderate to high commitment of resources. The remaining categories 
of techniques fall somewhere in between. 
As mentioned earlier, these classifications are dependent on the complexity of the issue at hand 
as well. It should also be noted that while some SATs require more resources, they may save 
time in the long run (e.g. Analysis of Competing Hypotheses) as they help to avoid analytical 
pitfalls later on in the process.63 In addition, the indicated time and training required will decrease 
as facilitators gain experience and expertise in effectively employing the different SATs in the 
humanitarian and development field.64 To accelerate the learning process, the CIA for instance 
has used “tradecraft cells” or small groups of analysts whose job was to help less experienced 
analysts choose the most appropriate techniques, guide the use of them, and facilitate group 
processes.65   
61 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Folker, 2000.
62 US Government, 2009.
63 Pherson, 2013.
64 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
65 Heuer, 2009.

22
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Varying levels or phases of analysis exist and are succinctly illustrated by the Assessment 
Capacities Project (ACAPS)’ Analysis Spectrum.66 Analysis along this spectrum ranges from 
exploratory (what exists on a topic of interest), to descriptive, explanatory, interpretive, anticipatory 
and prescriptive. The spectrum starts with more individual analysis that is data-driven using 
a reactive approach, and ends with more shared (or joint) analysis that is concept-driven and 
proactive. It also moves from hindsight to insight, to foresight-focused types of analysis.67  
 
2. In-depth
analysis
1. Preliminary
analysis
We describe patterns,
distributions and trends in
the data to produce
a preliminary analysis.
Who is involved?
A small team of analysts.
Outputs
The preliminary ﬁndings are
documented in a report.
The preliminary analysis is jointly
contextualised, and validated
with stakeholders.
Action and response oriented
recommendations are jointly drafted,
endorsed and disseminated.
Stakeholders: affected communities, government, humanitarian and
development actors, civil society organizations and others when relevant.
We contextualise the
preliminary analysis with
the expertise of partners
and communities.
We develop recommendations
for the concrete use of the
results in policies, programmes
and interventions.
3. Actionable
recommendations
Figure 2. The three key steps of the joint analysis process
The JIPS Joint Analysis Guide defines Joint Analysis as a collaborative process during which 
partners with complementary areas of expertise and responsibilities collectively make sense 
of information from a given context, following an agreed-upon methodology. The purpose of 
this approach is to transform information into actionable findings to support decision-making.
The Guide describes three key steps in a joint analysis process: 
1. Preliminary analysis (→ Descriptive Analysis): What do we see in the data?
2. In-depth analysis (→ Explanatory & Interpretive Analysis): Why do we see what we see?
3. Recommendations (→ Anticipatory & Prescriptive Analysis): So, what now?   
66 ACAPS, 2020.
67 ACAPS, 2020; Krizan, 1999.

23
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Relationships between techniques
Other considerations include the relationships between techniques. In many cases, techniques 
complement or use one another, thus “mutually reinforcing” each other. For instance, Mind Maps 
and Concept Maps can be used to visualise the results from many other techniques, particularly 
the different types of Brainstorming and Cross-Impact Analysis techniques. While not exhaustive, 
Annex II  indicates some of the interrelations between techniques. An explanation can be found 
in the technique description in Chapter 5. The linkages between JSAT categories and techniques 
have also been mapped more extensively by experts.68  
There are numerous ways to implement techniques, and some experts avoid using one technique 
twice in the same way. Experience in using techniques allows for them to be adjusted well to 
the issue at hand.69 
68 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Gay et al., 2012.
69 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.

24
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
TASKS
1: Define the Project
2: Get Started
3: Examine & make sense of the data
4: Explain Recent Events
5: Foresee the Future
6: Challenge your mindset
7: See from another perspective
8: Manage Conflicting Mindsets
9: Support Decision on Different Options
CATEGORY TECHNIQUE 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS
Decomposition & visualisation
Getting Started 
Checklist
Customer 
Checklist
Issue Redefinition
Chronologies & 
Timelines
Sorting
Ranking, Scoring, 
Prioritising
Matrices
Network Analysis
Mind Maps & 
Concept Maps
RECOMMENDATIONS
Idea Generation
Structured 
Brainstorming
Virtual 
Brainstorming
Nominal Group 
Technique
Starbursting
Cross-Impact 
Matrix
Scenarios & 
Indicators
Simple Scenarios
Alternative 
Futures Analysis
Multiple 
Scenarios 
Generation
Indicators
Indicators 
Validator

25
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
TASKS
1: Define the Project
2: Get Started
3: Examine & make sense of the data
4: Explain Recent Events
5: Foresee the Future
6: Challenge your mindset
7: See from another perspective
8: Manage Conflicting Mindsets
9: Support Decision on Different Options
CATEGORY TECHNIQUE 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS
RECOMMENDATIONS
Hypothesis Generation & 
Testing
Simple 
Hypotheses
Multiple 
Hypotheses 
Generator
Diagnostic 
Reasoning
Analysis of 
Competing 
Hypotheses
Argument 
Mapping
Six Thinking Hats
Assessment 
of Cause & 
Effect
Key Assumptions 
Check
Role Playing
Outside-In 
Thinking
Fishbone Analysis
Challenge 
Analysis
Structured 
Self-Critique
Devil's Advocacy
Delphi Method
Conflict 
Management
Adversarial 
Collaboration
Decision 
Support
Force Field 
Analysis
Pros-Cons-
Faults-and-Fixes
SWOT Analysis
Table 1. Nine tasks associated with their category, techniques, tasks and the three key steps of the joint analysis 
process.

05
DESCRIPTION
OF TECHNIQUES
5. Description of Techniques

27
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Decomposition & Visualisation
 Getting Started Checklist   
As the name suggests, this technique is useful when starting a project. It provides an opportunity 
to reflect on important aspects of the project, allowing for time to be saved in the long run and the 
quality of the final output to be enhanced. Heuer and Pherson provide a suggested list of starter 
questions to begin the process. Examples include: 
1. “What prompted the need for analysis?” 
2. “What is the key question to be answered?” 
3. "Why is this issue important, and how can analysis make a meaningful contribution?”.70  
  Customer Checklist 
The Customer Checklist is used to shape an output according to the end user’s or “customer’s” 
needs to ensure its relevance and value. If there are multiple end users, the requirements of the 
main audience should be addressed. The needs and preferences of the end user/main audience 
should be taken into account throughout the process. Heuer and Pherson propose a list of user or 
customer-focused questions to include in the checklist. For instance: 
1. “Who is the key person for whom the product is being developed?” 
2. “Will this product answer the question the customer asked or the question the customer should 
be asking?” 
3. “What is the most important message to give this customer?”.71
 Issue Redefinition 
Issue Redefinition is a technique for exploring the various ways in which an issue can be defined. 
An issue statement is typically how many analytic projects begin. This technique is thus effective at 
the start of a project as issue definition will substantially influence its subsequent direction. It is also 
useful to employ later when a new hypothesis or important new evidence appears. Alternatively, if 
the analysis feels stuck or has veered off track from the original issue definition, Issue Redefinition 
can help as well. Intelligence experts identify several strategies for issue redefinition including: 
• rephrasing 
• asking why
• turning (the issue) 180 degrees 
• broadening
• narrowing
• redirecting the focus
As with most techniques, Issue Redefinition is most effective when employed in a collaborative 
manner, in this case to develop and track the definition process with a sharable modality such as 
a wiki format. 
It is often used with the Getting Started Checklist and the Customer Checklist.72 
70 Ibid.
71 Ibid.
72 Ibid; University of Foreign Military and Cultural Studies, 2012.

28
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
 Chronologies & Timelines 
Chronologies and timelines allow for data on significant events or actions to be organised and 
visualised in chronological order. This is useful for identifying patterns, correlations, developing 
issues, anomalies, information gaps, and/or key events. Chronologies and timelines are typically 
used at the start of a project to contextualise an issue. 
The technique is simple whereby an Excel spreadsheet or a Word document can be used to keep 
track of and organise new information by date or order in which it occurred. Heuer and Pherson 
provide a series of questions and suggestions to guide the subsequent analysis of the chronology 
or timeline. For example: “Look for relationships and patterns in the data connecting persons, 
places, organizations, and other activities. Identify gaps or unexplained time periods, and consider 
the implications of the absence of evidence ” 73.
  Sorting
This is a simple technique to organise data in a way that may provide new understanding. It is 
particularly suitable when information needs to be disaggregated into categories or subcategories 
and compared. Similarities, differences, trends or abnormalities that may otherwise be overlooked 
are thus examined. This technique is especially useful during initial data collection and hypothesis 
creation. It can be done in an Excel spreadsheet or database, following a series of steps. These 
include reviewing the data to discern categories, grouping associated items into the categories, 
sorting and analysing the data within them, and lastly a final review to see if other ways of sorting 
exist. Note, it is important that sorted data be standardised.74  
  Ranking, Scoring, Prioritising
Ranking, Scoring, and Prioritising consists of methods that can be applied to lists to identify factors 
like value, importance, priority, probability, and more. Ranking is useful when a list contains too many 
elements to decipher at a glance, or to aggregate opinions on ranking from a group. It is typically 
used after an Idea Generation activity such as Structured Brainstorming, Virtual Brainstorming 
or the Nominal Group Technique. 
Ranked Voting is the most simple and fastest ranking method and typically suffices. Participants in 
a group first individually rank each item according to their preference or opinion of its importance. 
The votes are then tallied, with the lowest ranking item designated number one. Ranked Voting is 
accurate for the top two or three ranked items, but less so for lower-ranked ones. It indicates how 
items are ranked in relation to one another (higher or lower), but not to what extent. 
Paired Comparison is another way of ranking, whereby all items are compared with each other and 
assigned a score indicating the relative importance, preferability or probability of one versus another. 
It thus goes a step beyond simple ranking to indicate the “degree of importance or preference for 
each item”. Weighted Ranking provides further information by applying a set of criteria to rank 
items and assigning weights for each item in a list.75  
It can be used after Brainstorming SATs.
73 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
74 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
75 Ibid.
Decomposition & Visualisation

29
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Matrices
Matrices are analytic tools used to sort and organise data for analysis and comparison. They allow 
for complex data to be broken down into its component parts and to be visualised. As such, each 
element can be examined separately within the general context of the issue at hand. Matrices are 
also useful for creating analytic frameworks to understand an issue, providing more structure to 
explain a situation.
A matrix is a flexible and easy tool composed of a simple grid with cells. All matrices have enough 
rows and columns for two sets of data to be entered and compared. 
SATs that use matrices include Analysis of Competing Hypotheses, Cross-Impact Matrix, and 
Ranking, Scoring, and Prioritising, among others.76 
  Network Analysis
Network Analysis consists of reviewing, compiling and interpreting data to understand the 
relationships or links that exist between individuals, groups, or others. It also examines what these 
connections mean to those involved, and the extent to which such links may be strengthened or 
weakened. As such it assists in both understanding and seeing opportunities to influence actors. 
Network Analysis can be divided into three stages: 
1. Network charting (or link charting): identifying people, groups, events or things (nodes) and 
connecting them with lines (links) based on different kinds of association
2. Network analysis: structuring the chart by grouping relationships (sorting) and looking for 
patterns within and between groups
3. Social network analysis: deriving additional information from the chart, particularly by 
mathematically measuring variables related to the distance between nodes and kinds of 
relationships to understand the extent and kind of impact the nodes have on each other
Depending on the issue at hand, either one or all three stages may be appropriate.77  
  Mind Maps & Concept Maps
Mind maps and concept maps illustrate visually an individual or group’s thinking about a given 
topic. They are diagrams that show both ideas perceived to be relevant to the topic and connections 
(lines) between the ideas. These techniques start with a focal question and then follow a series 
of steps. Mind maps and concept maps can be used for many purposes including analysis and 
decision-making. Advantages include facilitation of thinking, a shared understanding of fundamental 
concepts, and communication of complex relationships. 
The size and complexity of both types of maps can vary considerably as a result of why and how 
they are used. Although they provide a simplified version of reality, mind maps and concept maps 
provide an overview of relevant variables for a topic and their interrelations, thus providing a 
solid basis for determining next steps. Experts cite the process of making these maps as the main 
value rather than the maps themselves as new ideas spring forth, concepts are clarified, pertinent 
knowledge is identified, and differences of opinion are resolved. 
Mind Maps and Concept Maps can be used as visualisations of results obtained through other 
techniques, such as Cross-Impact Matrix and Brainstorming SATs.78  
76 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
77 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
78 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
Decomposition & Visualisation

30
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Structured Brainstorming
Structured Brainstorming is typically used at the start of a project in a small group to discuss 
pertinent information or insights. It can be used to identify and make a list of relevant variables, 
driving forces, important stakeholders, a comprehensive range of hypotheses, available sources 
of information, possible solutions to a problem, potential scenarios or outcomes and more.79  
Structured Brainstorming can also be useful at critical points of a project to encourage new thinking. 
Due to its extensive nature, it is applicable to nearly all other SATs. The structured brainstorming 
process consists of a divergent thinking phase to come up with and gather new insights and ideas, 
followed by a convergent thinking phase to group and organise ideas around key concepts80 For 
this to be most effective, it is important the issue under discussion be clearly identified, an objective 
set, and a list of relevant outcomes recorded.81  
It is useful to follow Structured Brainstorming with a Cross-Impact Analysis to take a closer look 
at the relationship between variables, stakeholders, or other elements identified.82  
  Virtual Brainstorming
Virtual Brainstorming is different from Structured Brainstorming in that it occurs online with 
participants in different geographic locations or who are not able to meet in person. The technique 
can take a synchronous or an asynchronous form. A synchronous virtual brainstorming session 
involves all participants at the same time, and thus allows for a similar synergy as that of Structured 
Brainstorming with reacting to and building upon ideas in real time. 
An asynchronous virtual brainstorming session allows participants to provide their input and read 
that of others in their own time. In this way, the participant’s full attention can be focused on their 
ideas and reviewing those of others. When this occurs over two or three days, participants can 
revisit all inputs with a fresh mind, which is typically conducive to coming up with additional ideas. 
Whether it is synchronous or asynchronous, Virtual Brainstorming also allows for participants to 
contribute their ideas anonymously. This may be preferred to add objectivity to the process where 
hierarchy or status would otherwise impact participants’ thinking.83
  Nominal Group Technique
The Nominal Group Technique offers an alternative to Structured Brainstorming when there is 
concern that more experienced or outspoken participants may dominate the session. It is also 
useful when there is concern that some participants may not contribute to the discussion, or if 
the issue at hand is controversial and may lead to a heated exchange. 
Like structured brainstorming, the Nominal Group Technique is a process that facilitates coming up 
with and evaluating ideas. As opposed to opening the floor for ideas to be shared freely, however, it 
employs a round-robin approach in which ideas are presented one at a time in an iterative process 
until all ideas have been exhausted. A facilitated group discussion then follows.84  
79 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
80 US Government, 2009.
81 McDowell, 2009.
82 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
83 Ibid.
84 Ibid.
Idea Generation

31
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Starbursting 
Starbursting is a type of brainstorming that generates questions instead of ideas or answers. It 
is typically used to help define a project after a topic or issue is chosen for analysis. The following 
six questions are posed: 
Who? When? What? Where? Why? and How? 
A Starburst diagram is then created in the form of a star, with each question placed at one of 
its points. Participants try to come up with as many questions as possible related to each point. 
These are then prioritised for answering or sorted into logical categories. 
The Ranking, Scoring, Prioritising technique can help to prioritise questions to address. Starbursting 
can also be combined well with the Getting Started Checklist and Issue Redefinition techniques. 
It is closely related to Cause and Effect Assessment as well.85  
  Cross-Impact Matrix
The Cross-Impact Matrix is the logical next step to brainstorming that identifies a list of pertinent 
variables, driving forces, or key stakeholders. It can help a group to visualise and subsequently 
discuss how these are related. Cross-Impact Matrix is a useful technique early in a project to 
address complex issues when there are many interrelations. Participants systematically look at 
how each element of a given context influences others it seems related to. 
This approach requires all assumptions about relationships to be clearly communicated. Depending 
on the project, a discussion of relationships between variables may suffice, or recording variables 
and their interactions in a matrix may be necessary. In addition to identifying relationships and 
their direction, a cross-impact matrix is particularly useful for illustrating important interactions 
between variables that may have previously gone unnoticed, or combinations of variables that can 
reinforce one another. Discussions that come from using this technique may be further developed 
with a mind map or concept map of the relationships.86  
85 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
86 Ibid.
Idea Generation

32
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
   Simple Scenarios 
As with scenario analysis in general, Simple Scenarios look at the different ways a situation could 
evolve to decrease uncertainty and manage risk. It is best for complex situations or when it is not 
possible to trust only one prediction due to significant uncertainty. The technique is quick and 
easy, and can be used by an individual, although it is recommended to be used in a group as with 
most SATs. 
Simple Scenarios identify drivers, forces and events that will likely influence the future, and 
groups them together into at least four plausible scenarios – best case, worst case, baseline and an 
additional one. The implications of each scenario are then specified, and a list of indicators for each 
is produced to help monitor and understand which scenario may be unfolding. Scenario analysis 
in general can be followed by generating a cross-impact matrix to identify and analyse possible 
interactions or “feedback loops” between each scenario’s different driving forces.87  
   Alternative Futures Analysis & 
    Multiple Scenarios Generation 
Alternative Futures Analysis and Multiple Scenarios Generation take the same approach to scenario 
analysis, only differing in the number of scenarios analysed. As opposed to Simple Scenarios, both 
are appropriate for larger projects that need a group of experts (typically decision-makers and 
academics), and employ a more systematic process for which a trained facilitator is recommended. 
Alternative Futures Analysis utilises two driving forces with two extremes, which are combined 
to create four possible scenarios. A narrative is developed for each scenario, along with indicators 
that are subsequently monitored. Multiple Scenarios Generation has no limitations on the number 
of scenarios, aside from the time available and complexity.88  
  Indicators  
Indicators are observable, or possibly observable, events or actions that can be used as an objective 
baseline to detect, monitor or assess change over time. They are often used with scenarios to 
identify which possible scenario is evolving. Their added value thus comes in preparing the user to 
recognise signs of change that would otherwise go unnoticed. They can also help to “depersonalise” 
arguments by moving attention to an objective set of criteria. Indicators are listed in detail for each 
scenario or hypothesis to help open minds to the different possibilities. They are then monitored 
regularly to detect signs of change. 
Indicators often use some type of brainstorming to elicit diverse expert thought in creating them. 
They are also used in scenario analysis and as evidence in Analysis of Competing Hypotheses.89 
  Indicators Validator
Indicators Validator is the logical next step to the Indicators technique. Indicators are rated 
according to their likelihood of occurrence. Indicators that are the least likely are removed, and 
the analyst may develop new and more feasible indicators or scenarios. 
This is particularly important to employ after indicators are developed for scenarios or competing 
hypothesis analyses.90 
87 Heuer & Pherson; 2011, Duvenage, 2010.
88 Heuer & Pherson; 2011, Duvenage, 2010.
89 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; US Government, 2009.
90 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
Scenarios & Indicators

33
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Simple Hypotheses
A hypothesis is a plausible explanation or conclusion to be tested by gathering and presenting evidence. 
It is an “educated guess” based on data, understanding and speculation, that is formulated into a 
declarative statement. Development of hypotheses is useful when the issue at hand necessitates 
a systematic analysis of all alternatives, several variables are part of the analysis, users have 
competing perspectives, or uncertainty about the outcome exists. 
Simple Hypotheses starts by defining the issue and determining how hypotheses will be used at 
the start of a project – in hypothesis testing, as a foundation for developing scenarios, or a way 
to choose from a large range of alternative outcomes that require close consideration. A diverse 
group comes together to review available information and propose hypotheses. 
Several other types of techniques can be used to generate hypotheses, including Structured  
Brainstorming, Starbursting, Scenario Analysis (to follow), and the Delphi Method.91 
  Multiple Hypotheses Generator 
Multiple Hypotheses Generator is a structured technique for when many factors are at play in an 
analysis and a high level of uncertainty exists regarding the outcome, or those making decisions 
have competing perspectives. It begins by generating as many hypotheses as possible, followed by 
rating these according to their credibility, and listing the most important for additional examination. 
This technique can provide more confidence than others that an important alternative or outlier 
has not been missed.92  
  Diagnostic Reasoning
Diagnostic Reasoning is a useful technique when examining a new development in a situation 
of interest, or the reliability or importance of new information. It helps the user avoid making a 
quick intuitive judgement in their assessment. Therefore, the user must examine whether the new 
information is consistent with other logical conclusions or alternative hypotheses. This technique 
involves a process whereby the user(s) attempts to refute alternative conclusions instead of 
confirming what is already thought to be true. A series of steps can be followed to guide this process. 
Diagnostic Reasoning is useful to apply to other SATs, particularly Indicators Validator and Analysis 
of Competing Hypotheses.93 
91 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Heuer, 1999; McDowell, 2009.
92 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
93 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
Hypothesis Generation & Testing

34
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Analysis of Competing Hypotheses
Analysis of Competing Hypotheses  is used to help make judgements about issues for which 
alternative hypotheses, explanations or estimates need to be weighed. Essentially, it helps users 
to consider all possibilities to determine the best solution instead of choosing the first solution 
that appears satisfactory. The technique is particularly effective when a large amount of data must 
be taken into account and evaluated. A matrix is created for these alternatives and evidence is 
provided for each to analyse the weight. Hypotheses are compared to each other, along with each 
piece of evidence, instead of assessing their plausibility separately. Ultimately, the best hypothesis 
is the one with the least evidence against it, rather than the most evidence for it. 
Although it can be used by an individual, Analysis of Competing Hypotheses is most effective when 
used in a small team with participants who can challenge one another’s assessment of the evidence. 
If being used for the first time a facilitator is helpful to lead participants through the process. 
The technique is often used with Structured Brainstorming, Nominal Group, Hypothesis Generator, 
and the Delphi Method, which can identify hypotheses or evidence to be used in the Analysis of 
Competing Hypotheses or to assess the evidence’s importance. Diagnostic Reasoning is part of 
the technique, and Indicators are identified for tracking future developments.94 
  Argument Mapping
Argument Mapping is complementary and ideally used together with Analysis of Competing 
Hypotheses, although it can also be used separately. It is different from the latter in that it aims 
to test a single hypothesis or initial analytic judgement with logical reasoning (as opposed to a 
more general analysis of several hypotheses). It allows an analyst to test one’s own reasoning 
when making a judgement that is intuitive. Thinking is clarified and organised with a visual map 
(box-and-arrow diagram) showing the reasoning along with evidence for and against it, to distill  
the strengths, weaknesses and gaps in the argument. This is helpful not only for thinking about a 
complex issue but also provides a guide for presenting the rationale and conclusions to others.95  
  Six Thinking Hats 
Six Thinking Hats involves a “parallel thinking process” to examine a hypothesis, idea or data 
from different perspectives. Six roles and/or coloured hats are assigned to participants as follows: 
Facilitator Neutral Emotional Creative Optimist Pessimist
Participants may only think in the way their hat prescribes. Ideas are discussed from each 
perspective, and hats are then changed until everyone has worn all six. The benefits and limitations 
of each point of view are thus communicated and acknowledged by all. This helps to overcome 
assumptions and biases, as well as to generate new ideas to adapt plans with new information 
taken into consideration.96 
94 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; ACAPS, 2016; Duvenage, 2010; US Government, 2009.
95 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
96 ACAPS, 2016; Eaton et al., 2007.
Hypothesis Generation & Testing

35
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Key Assumptions Check 
Key Assumptions Check is used to investigate assumptions (mental models) based on situational 
logic, expert judgement and understanding of similar situations. The most significant working 
assumptions of an analysis are listed explicitly and questioned to then guide interpretation of 
evidence and reasoning for an issue. This is done in a group, whereby all possible assumptions are 
first listed, then questioned, categorised (i.e. solid, correct with some caveats, or unsupported/
questionable), filtered (last category removed), and the remaining refined. 
This technique has been cited as most useful at the start of an analytic project (an individual or 
team spends an hour or two with it). However, rechecking assumptions is valuable at any other 
stage of the project as a quality control before reaching conclusions. 
Key Assumptions Check is often paired with and applicable to all other SATs, particularly Analysis 
of Competing Hypotheses as “evidence” in such a matrix.97 
  Role Playing 
This involves assigning participants roles according to the subject of the analysis. Responses are 
then played out accordingly. Generally, the scenario is the same as the current situation with a real 
or hypothetical new development thrown in for response. This technique is commonly used to better 
understand what may happen with interactions between two or more people or organisations. In this 
way, participants can also view the issue from a different perspective or context. New information 
and insights are consequently gained.98  
  Outside-In Thinking
Outside-In Thinking entails identifying all factors, trends and basic forces that could impact an issue 
indirectly.  It is most helpful in conceptualising an analytic project whose aim is to identify critical 
external factors that could impact the development of a situation. Participants explore all variables 
from global, political, social, legal, environmental, economic, and technological perspectives. As 
most people focus on factors familiar to them within their field, or think from the inside-out, this 
technique requires participants to broaden their perspective and reflection on issues to a larger 
contextual and conceptual framework. In this way, they may discover other factors, significant 
dynamics, or a pertinent alternative hypothesis. This also leads to new information gaps and 
hypotheses to be further examined.99  
97 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010; US Government, 2009.
98 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
99 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010; US Government, 2009.
Assessment of Cause & Effect

36
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Fishbone Analysis 
Fishbone Analysis is a technique employed to demonstrate cause and effect. It identifies and 
subsequently explores the factors surrounding a given issue. The issue to be examined is described 
on the right side of a diagram and forms the fish head. Major bones of the fish are then created and 
represent the main information categories for the issue at hand. These form the analysis framework 
and may consist of people, methods, policies, etc. Minor bones are then added to the major bones 
to indicate contributing issues for each information category. By breaking down an issue in this 
way, this technique is meant to identify the causes of a problem in order to recommend potential 
solutions. 
SATs like Structured Brainstorming and the Nominal Group can also be used to help come up with 
ideas for solutions.100 
100 Prunckun, 2015
Assessment of Cause & Effect

37
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Structured Self-Critique
Structured Self-Critique is a technique for groups to identify weaknesses in their analysis and 
subsequently reframe the issue. This occurs prior to sharing an analysis with outsiders and helps 
to instill analytic rigor. Participants take on a critical perspective and respond to a list of questions 
regarding the analytical processes employed, important assumptions, sources of uncertainty, 
information gaps, and more. A review of the responses then occurs, and together participants 
reassess overall confidence in their own judgement. The analysis may consequently be modified 
if needed. Structured Self-Critique serves both as an analytic quality control and a way to resolve 
conflicting opinions. This technique has also been noted as more impactful than a similar one of 
Devil’s Advocacy as it requires an entire group or team to play the critic.101  
  Devil’s Advocacy
Devil’s Advocacy is used to challenge a key assumption or analytic consensus concerning a 
crucial question or a proposed analytic judgement, plan or decision. It therefore serves as a check 
on a prevailing mindset, to make sure consideration of alternative solutions takes place. This 
technique is employed by an individual who was not involved in the earlier analytic processes. The 
individual critiques the analysis, identifying among other factors its faults and potential impact 
for decision-making.102   
  Delphi Method
The Delphi Method uses a consensus methodology whereby experts with different levels and 
types of experience separately provide their input (ideas, judgements or forecasts) on a given 
issue. Once this information is collected, participants receive feedback about overall judgements 
from the group on an anonymous basis and may modify their previous responses. A second round 
then occurs with questions building on the first round’s results, and expert input is provided again. 
This iterative review and response process continues until some type of agreement is reached. 
The Delphi Method is designed to take place within a controlled system. Experts often participate 
remotely to avert emotional and dynamic interactions resulting from personal contact. While 
applicable to many situations, the technique is particularly useful when the issue at hand is 
complex and information is limited. Due to its iterative and dispersed nature, it requires a significant 
investment of both time and effort.103  
It is used to generate Simple Hypoteses alongside Ranking, Scoring and prioritising, and Virtual 
Brainstorming.
101 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
102 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010; US Government, 2009.
103 McDowell, 2009; Heuer & Pherson, 2011; IPC, 2015.
Challenge Analysis

38
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Adversarial Collaboration
Adversarial Collaboration is essentially an agreement between opposing groups on how they will 
work together to better understand and resolve differences, or collaborate on a joint product that 
explains these differences. Participants are tasked to understand the assumptions or evidence 
behind opposing opinions and explore how to best address them. An open mind to consider and 
discuss an issue is required on both sides for this to take place. 
The following techniques can be used to help reach agreement: 
1. Key Assumptions Check; 
2. Analysis of Competing Hypotheses; 
3. Argument Mapping; 
4. Mutual Understanding; 
5. Joint Escalation; 
6. The Nosenko Approach. 
The first three techniques have been described previously. Mutual Understanding involves a 
meeting of both sides with a facilitator, moderator or decision-maker. Both are required to describe 
the other’s perspective accurately, and then discuss their differences in a more rational and less 
emotional manner. Joint Escalation requires participants to prepare a joint statement about the 
disagreement and present it together to their superiors, thus discouraging the escalation that 
can arise when this is done separately. The Nosenko Approach is typically applied to an analytic 
controversy that is long-standing. Its main rule is that issues that are important to both sides must 
be seriously considered by all.104   
104 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
Conflict Management

39
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
  Force Field Analysis
Force Field Analysis is a simple technique whereby all forces for and against a change, issue, 
or goal are listed and evaluated. This technique measures the relative strength of both types of 
forces. It is based on the theory that driving forces must surpass obstructing forces for change to 
happen. It allows for the issue at hand to be closely examined with many elements considered that 
may otherwise have been overlooked. After defining the issue and identifying the key influencing 
forces, a list of driving and restraining forces is made, weights are applied and totalled, the 
difference is assessed, and finally a corresponding action plan developed. Force Field Analysis is 
typically used at the start of a project with data collection, issue definition, or the development 
of recommendations for action.105  
  Pros-Cons-Faults-and-Fixes
Pros-Cons-Faults-and-Fixes is an easy technique for quickly assessing a new idea or a systematic 
analysis of a choice between two options. Parts of an issue are organised both logically and 
objectively to aid the decision-maker. As the name indicates, a list of pros and cons is developed, 
reviewed, and consolidated. If there is overwhelming acceptance of the pros, then the faults of 
these are examined. Similarly, if the cons are regarded as more prevalent, the next step is to look 
for fixes. Ultimately this technique is intended to ensure careful consideration of all aspects of a 
new idea or analysis and prevent any rush to conclusions.106 
  SWOT Analysis
SWOT Analysis is a simple technique that is frequently used in projects or plans to assess strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT). It is useful to incorporate after developing an 
objective or goal, as a framework to gather and organise information in support of planning and 
decision-making to achieve this. Strengths and weaknesses are linked to the plan or project (inside 
environment), while opportunities and threats are from the outside environment. Although simple, 
SWOT Analysis provides a useful foundation for more analysis and often indicates specific actions 
that may be taken.107 
105 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
106 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Duvenage, 2010.
107 Ibid.
Decision Support

40
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
CONCLUSION  
This technical brief has outlined the meaning, types, selection and use of Joint Structured 
Analysis Techniques. Though not a panacea, JSATs are of great value in guiding analytic thinking 
and group interactions in collaborative processes. Analogous to a ‘box of tools’ to reduce the 
effects of human cognitive limitations and analytic pitfalls 108, techniques can range from simple to 
complex, and utilise text-based or visual methods 109. They can help users to identify and overcome 
mental mindsets, challenge key assumptions, stimulate creativity, generate alternatives, manage 
uncertainties, and reduce the chance of surprise. 110 Their main benefits come when used early 
in an analytic process and jointly in small groups.111  
As we have seen, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to these techniques. Many can be 
used in more than one way, and each should be adapted to the issue at hand. 112 Synergies and 
complementarity also exist between different techniques. The appropriate use of multiple 
techniques may increase the accuracy of analysis.113 Whether using one or several techniques, 
having a clear goal in mind is fundamental to determining which to choose.114 In the context of 
joint analysis, a solid understanding of the analysis step(s), objectives, and the target audience 
is needed to identify an appropriate technique. Experience and the regular use of techniques 
facilitate this process as, like riding a bike, they are simply best learned by doing.115 Therefore, while 
this technical brief provides an overview of JSATs both generally and within the context of a joint 
analysis process, it is not a replacement for training and experience in the different techniques. 
 
108 PSU, 2014.
109 Chang et al., 2017.
110 US Government, 2009; Directorate for Analysis, 2008; Pherson, 2005.
111 Heuer & Pherson, 2011; Pherson & Pherson, 2013.
112 Heuer & Pherson, 2011.
113 Peterson, 2008.
114 Stigall, 2012.
115 Abdalla, 2010; Heuer, 1999.
Conclusion

41
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Bibliography
Abdalla, C. (2010). Reducing the Risk of Intelligence Failure Through the Use of 
Structured Analytic Techniques to Mitigate Cognitive Bias.
https://www.academia.edu/6310097/Reducing_the_Risk_of_Intelligence_Failure_
through_the_Use_of_Structured_Analytic_Techniques_to_Mitigate_Cognitive_Bias
ACAPS. (2016). Cognitive Biases. Assessment Capacities Project. 
https://www.acaps.org/sites/acaps/files/resources/files/acaps_technical_brief_
cognitive_biases_march_2016.pdf 
ACAPS. (2016). Homo Analyticus: Profile of Skilled Humanitarian Analysts. Assessment 
Capacities Project. 
https://www.acaps.org/homo-analyticus-humanitarian-analyst-profile
ACAPS. (2020). The Analysis Spectrum. Assessment Capacities Project. https://www.
acaps.org/sites/acaps/files/resources/files/acaps_analysis_spectrum_poster.pdf
Agrell, W., Treverton, G.F. (2015). National Intelligence and Science. Oxford University 
Press. 
https://global.oup.com/academic/product/
national-intelligence-and-science-9780199360864?cc=ch&lang=en& 
Artner, S., Bruce, J. B., Girven, R.S. (2016). Assessing the Value of Structured Analytic 
Techniques in the U.S. Intelligence Community. RAND Corporation.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1408.html 
Bearstone Global. (2020). Key Techniques per Theme of Analysis.  
CDR Gay, T. N., LCDR Ripley, D. B., & 1/C Fecskovics, A. K. (2012). Use of Case Studies 
and Structured Analytic Techniques in Intel Studies: USCGA Example [PowerPoint slides].  
United States Coast Guard Academy. 
https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.iafie.org/resource/resmgr/2012_conference/
iafie23may2012.ppt 
Chang, W., Berdini, E., Mandel, D., & Tetlock, P . (2017). Restructuring Structured Analytic 
Techniques in Intelligence. Intelligence & National Security.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02684527.2017.1400230 
Clark, R. M. (2010). An Analysis Approach to the Target. CQ Press. ISBN-13 : 
978-1604265439 
Directorate for Analysis, US Government. (2008) A Tradecraft Primer: Basic Structured 
Analytic Techniques. Central Intelligence Agency.
https://www.cia.gov/static/955180a45afe3f5013772c313b16face/Tradecraft-Primer-
apr09.pdf 
Bibliography

42
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Directorate of Intelligence, US Government. (1997). A Compendium of Analytic Tradecraft 
Notes. Central Intelligence Agency. 
http://www.oss.net/dynamaster/file_archive/040319/
cb27cc09c84d056b66616b4da5c02a4d/OSS2000-01-23.pdf 
Duvenage, M. A. (2010). Intelligence Analysis in the Knowledge Age [Published Master’s 
Thesis]. Stellenbosch University. 
https://scholar.sun.ac.za/handle/10019.1/3087
Eaton, J., Redmayne, J., Thordsen, M. (2007). Joint Analysis Handbook. North Atlantic 
Treaty Organisation.
https://nllp.jallc.nato.int/IKS/Sharing%20Public/ Joint%20Analysis%20Handbook%20
3rd%20Edition.pdf 
F AO (2015). Lesson: IPC Analytical Approach and Overview of Tools. F AO eLearning 
Academy. http://www.fao.org/elearning/Course/IPC2/en/pdf/1254_textonly1254.pdf 
Greitzer, F. L. (2005). Methodology, Metrics and Measures for Testing and Evaluation of 
Intelligence Analysis Tools. Glass Box. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/242077089_Methodology_Metrics_and_
Measures_for_Testing_and_Evaluation_of_Intelligence_Analysis_Tools
Grunt, P . (2017). Structured Analytic Techniques: Taxonomy and Technique Selection for 
Information and Intelligence Analysis Practitioners. Journal of Management and Financial 
Sciences. 
https://econjournals.sgh.waw.pl/ JMFS/article/view/732 
Hibbs Pherson, K., Boardman, M. C. (2012). Analyst's Roadmap [PowerPoint Slides]. 
Pherson Associates, LLC. 
https://slideplayer.com/slide/9453365/ 
Hibbs Pherson, K., Pherson, R. H. (2013). Critical Thinking for Strategic Intelligence. CQ 
Press. 
International Association for Intelligence Education. (2021, May 22nd). Standard for 
Intelligence Analyst Initial Training. https://www.iafie.org/page/TrainingStandards 
International Association for Intelligence Education. (2009). Teaching Structured 
Analytical Techniques. Pherson Associates, LLC. 
JIPS. (2021). Joint Analysis Guide.  
https://www.jips.org/jips-publication/joint-analysis-guide-2021/
Johnston, R. (2003). Developing a Taxonomy of Intelligence Analysis Variables. Central 
Intelligence Agency. 
https://www.cia.gov/static/8934230381c6bf1406360d74a81ec92a/Developing-a-
Taxonomy.pdf 
Joint Chiefs of Staff. (2013). Joint Intelligence. Joint Publication 2-0.

43
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp2_0.pdf 
Kang, Y., Stasko, J. (2010). Characterizing the Intelligence Process. Georgia Institute of 
Technology. 
https://www.cc.gatech.edu/~john.stasko/papers/vast11-intell.pdf 
Krizan, L., Joint Military Intelligence College (U.S.). (1999). Intelligence essentials for 
everyone. Washington, DC: Joint Military Intelligence College.
Lehner, P ., Michelson, A., Adelman, L. (2010). Measuring the Forecast Accuracy of 
Intelligence Products. The MITRE Corporation. https://www.mitre.org/publications/
technical-papers/measuring-the-forecast-accuracy-of-intelligence-products 
Mangio, C. A, Wilkinson, B. J. (2008). Intelligence Analysis: Once Again. International 
Studies Association.
https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA520278 
McDowell, D. (1997). Strategic Intelligence and Analysis. The Intelligence Study Centre.  
McDowell, D. (2009). Inc. Strategic Intelligence: A Handbook for Practitioners, Managers and 
Users. The Scarecrow Press. 
Mercyhurst College Intelligence Communications Class 2007-08. (2008). Walking 
Through the Halls of Intelligence. Mercyhurst College Institute for Intelligence Studies 
Press. 
https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/98513/Halls_Intelligence.pdf
Miller Beebe, S. (2020). Teaching Structured Analytic Techniques with Cases. Ascendant 
Analytics, LLC. 
Moore, D. T. (2007). Critical Thinking and Intelligence Analysis. National Defense 
Intelligence College. 
https://www.amazon.com/Critical-Thinking-Intelligence-Analysis-Second/
dp/1780391188 
Moore, D. T. (2011). Sensemaking. National Defense Intelligence College.
https://ni-u.edu/ni_press/pdf/Sensemaking.pdf  
Moore, D. T. (2005). Species of Competencies for Intelligence Analysis. American 
Intelligence Journal. Vol. 23 (Autumn/Winter 2005), pp. 29-43 (15 pages)
https://www.jstor.org/stable/44327035 
MSgt Folker, R. D. Jr. (2002). intelligence analysis in theater joint intelligence centers: 
an experiment in applying structured methods. Joint Military Intelligence College. 
Washington, DC.
https://fas.org/irp/eprint/folker.pdf 
National Research Council. (2011). Intelligence Analysis for Tomorrow. National Academy 
of Sciences. 

44
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13040/
intelligence-analysis-for-tomorrow-advances-from-the-behavioral-and-social 
Pennsylvania State University, Department of Geography. (2014). The Structured Analytic 
Techniques "Toolbox". The Learner's Guide to Geospatial Analysis. 
https://www.e-education.psu.edu/sgam/node/155
Petersen, M. (2011). What I Learned in 40 Years of Doing Intelligence Analysis for US 
Foreign Policymakers. Central Intelligence Agency. 
https://www.cia.gov/resources/csi/studies-in-intelligence/volume-55-no-1/what-i-
learned-in-40-years-of-doing-intelligence-analysis-for-us-foreign-policymakers/ 
Peterson, J. J. (2008). Appropriate Factors to Consider When Assessing Analytic Confidence 
in Intelligence Analysis [Published Master’s Thesis]. Department of Intelligence Studies, 
Mercyhurst College. 
https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/49942/Appropriate_Factors_To_Consider_When_
Assessing_Analytic_Confidence_In_Intelligence_Analysis.pdf 
Pherson, R. H. (2015). Methodologies for Sorting Through the Chaff [PowerPoint 
presentation]. Pherson Associates LLC.
https://www.slideserve.com/noe/methodologies-for-sorting-through-the-chaff-
presentation-to-dhs 
Pherson, R. H. (2013). The Five Habits of the Master Thinker. Journal of Strategic Security.
https://scholarcommons.usf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1282&context=jss 
Pherson, R. H. (2005). Overcoming Analytic Mindsets: Five Simple Techniques. Person 
Associates LLC
http://www.pherson.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/01.-Overcoming-Analytic-
Mindsets.-Five-Simple-Techniques_FINAL.pdf
Pigg, V. H. (2009). Common Analytic Standards. Small Wars Foundation.
https://smallwarsjournal.com/blog/journal/docs-temp/260-pigg.pdf 
Prunckun, H. (2015). Scientific Methods of Inquiry for Intelligence Analysis. Rowman & 
Littlefield.
Prunckun, H. (2010). Handbook of Scientific Methods of Inquiry for Intelligence Analysis. 
The Scarecrow Press, Inc. 
Richards J. Heuer, Jr. (1999). Psychology of Intelligence Analysis. Center for 
the Study of Intelligence. Central Intelligence Agency https://www.cia.gov/
static/9a5f1162fd0932c29bfed1c030edf4ae/Pyschology-of-Intelligence-Analysis.pdf 
Richards J. Heuer, Jr. & Pherson, R. H. (2011). Structured Analytic Techniques for 
Intelligence Analysis. Library of Congress. 

45
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Richards J. Heuer, Jr. (2009). The Evolution of Structured Analytic Techniques. National 
Academy of Sciences. 
https://www.e-education.psu.edu/geog885/sites/www.e-education.psu.edu.geog885/
files/file/Evolution_SAT_Heuer.pdf 
Richards J. Heuer, Jr. (2008). Rethinking Challenge Analysis. Pherson Associates. 
Smart, L. (2011). The Forecasting Accuracy and Effectiveness of Complexity Manager. 
Mercyhurst College.  
Stigall, S.M. (2012). A Strategy Framework for the Intelligence Analyst. Central Intelligence 
Agency. 
https://www.cia.gov/static/7b64ca4cbbe0155f1a728ad7d78bf34f/Strategy-
Framework-Intel-Analyst.pdf 
Taylor, S. M., Lockheed, M. (2005) The Several Worlds of the Intelligence Analyst. 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2011). Criminal Intelligence: Manual for 
Analysts. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 
https://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/Law-Enforcement/Criminal_
Intelligence_for_Analysts.pdf 
University of Foreign Military and Cultural Studies. (2012). Red Team Handbook. 
University of Foreign Military and Cultural Studies. 
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/ufmcs-red-team-central/m/
red-team-handbook/276147/download
US Government. (2009). A Tradecraft Primer: Structured Analytic Techniques for Improving 
Intelligence Analysis. Central Intelligence Bureau.
https://www.cia.gov/static/955180a45afe3f5013772c313b16face/Tradecraft-Primer-
apr09.pdf 
Von Winterfeldt, D., Edwards, W. (2007). Defining a Decision Analytic Technique. 
University of Southern California. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/239823960_Defining_a_Decision_Analytic_
Structure 
Wheaton, K.J. (2008). A Wiki Is Like A Room. Mercyhurst College. 
https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/50060/A_Wiki_Is_Like_A_Room_Final.pdf 
Wikipedia. (2019). Words of Estimative Probability [Webpage, accessed on May 1st 2021]. 
Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Words_of_estimative_probability 
Woocher, L. (2011). Conflict Assessment and Intelligence Analysis. United States Institute 
of Peace.
https://www.usip.org/publications/2011/06/
conflict-assessment-and-intelligence-analysis 

46
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Annex I
Skills, training and time required per structured analysis technique      
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES SKILL/TRAINING/TIME ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Decomposition & visualisation
Getting 
Started 
Checklist
Low
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Single step (answer checklist questions)
Methods: Thought or discussion
Customer 
Checklist Low
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Single step (answer checklist questions)
Methods: Thought or discussion
Issue 
Redefinition Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Group
Process: Multiple steps (question, rephrase, redirect focus, etc.)
Methods: Discussion
Chronologies 
& Timelines Low
Prerequisites: Temporal data related to the issue
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (list, question, synthesize, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (list), visualisation (timeline)
Sorting Low
Prerequisites: Existing data that can be broken into categories or 
subcategories
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (review, list, group, etc.) 
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (list), and visualisation (table)
Ranking, 
Scoring, 
Prioritizing
Low/Moderate/High
Prerequisites: Existing list or group opinions
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (varies by technique) 
Methods: Voting, text (list), visualisation (table), calculation
Matrices Low
Prerequisites: Existing data to be compared
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (varies by technique)
Methods: Visualisation (table)
Network 
Analysis Moderate/High
Prerequisites: Existing data for review, compilation, and interpreta-tion
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (varies by technique)
Methods: Text (list), visualisation (network), measurement
Mind Maps & 
Concept Maps Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (question, list, sort, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (list), visualisation (map)
Annex I: Skills, training and time required per structured analysis technique

47
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES SKILL/TRAINING/TIME ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Idea Generation
Structured 
Brainstorming Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined purpose, topic, and initial ideas from partici-pants
Participants: Group (with at least one "outsider") and Facilitator
Process: Multiple steps (question, discuss, sort, etc.)
Methods: Thought, text (ideas), discussion (open), visualisation (sticky 
notes)
Virtual 
Brainstorming Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined purpose, topic, initial ideas from participants, and 
internet access
Participants: Group (external expert panel or geographically dis-persed 
team) and Facilitator
Process: Multiple steps (question, discuss, sort, etc.)
Methods: Thought, text (ideas), discussion (online input - synchro-nous or 
asynchronous)
Nominal 
Group 
Technique
Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined purpose, topic, and initial ideas from partici-pants
Participants: Group and Facilitator 
Process: Multiple steps (question, present ideas individually, dis-cuss, 
etc.)
Methods: Thought, text (ideas), discussion (round-robin approach)
Starbursting Low
Prerequisites: Defined purpose and topic
Participants: Group and Facilitator 
Process: Multiple steps (diagram, questions, prioritize, etc.)
Methods: Discussion (generate questions) and visualisation (star-burst 
diagram)
Cross-Impact 
Matrix Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Brainstorming session
Participants: Group 
Process: Multiple steps (discuss, visualise, compare, etc.)
Methods: Discussion and visualisation (table)

48
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES SKILL/TRAINING/TIME ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Scenarios & Indicators
Simple 
Scenarios Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Individual or Group (ideal)
Process: Multiple steps (issue definition, grouping, matrix, narra-tive, 
indicators, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (lists, etc.), visualisation (ta-ble), 
monitor (indicators)
Alternative 
Futures 
Analysis
High
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Group (experts) and Facilitator
Process: Multiple steps (issue definition, grouping, matrix, narra-tive, 
indicators, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (lists, etc.), visualisation (table - two key 
drivers), monitor (indicators)
Multiple 
Scenarios 
Generation
High
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Group (experts) and Facilitator
Process: Multiple steps (issue definition, grouping, matrix, narra-tive, 
indicators, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (lists, etc.), visualisation (table - multiple 
drivers), monitor (indicators)
Indicators Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Specific situation, topic or issue in need of monitoring
Participants: Group
Process: Multiple steps (identify indicators - via brainstorming, sce-nario 
or hypothesis devel-opment, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (list), visualisation (from other tech-nique(s) 
used to identify indica-tors)
Indicators 
Validator Low
Prerequisites: Use in development of indicators for alternative sce-narios 
or competing hypoth-eses
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (matrix, likelihood assessment, re-sort, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, visualisation (table)

49
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES SKILL/TRAINING/TIME ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Hypothesis Generation & Testing
Simple 
Hypotheses Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined issue and expected use of hypotheses
Participants: Group (diverse expertise)
Process: Multiple steps (brainstorm, list, group, problem restate-ment, 
starbursting, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (list), visualisation (diagram)
Multiple 
Hypotheses 
Generator
Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: None
Participants: Group
Process: Multiple steps (issue definition, lists, score, re-sort, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (lists), visualisation (diagram)
Diagnostic 
Reasoning Moderate
Prerequisites: New information, development, or source with un-certain 
reliability
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (brainstorm, list, question, tentative judge-ment, 
etc.) 
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (list)
Analysis of 
Competing 
Hypotheses
High
Prerequisites: Data to be reviewed and evaluated
Participants: Individual or Group (ideal) with Facilitator
Process: Multiple steps (hypothesize, narratives, lists, evidence 
di-agnosticity analysis, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (lists), visualisation (table), 
calculation (inconsistency score)
Argument 
Mapping High
Prerequisites: Single hypothesis or tentative analytical judgement to test, 
prior use of ACH rec-ommended
Participants: Individual or Group (training and practice required)
Process: Multiple steps (statement, evidence, reasoning, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, visualisation (diagram)
Six Thinking 
Hats Moderate
Prerequisites: Single hypothesis, idea or data to examine
Participants: Group and Facilitator 
Process: Multiple steps (hat selection, discussion, exchange, etc.)
Methods: Discussion (role-play)

50
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES SKILL/TRAINING/TIME ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Assessment of Cause & Effect
Key 
Assumptions 
Check
Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined issue, information or analysis that has been 
reviewed and interpreted
Participants: Group (including a few "outsiders")
Process: Multiple steps (list, brainstorm, question, categorize, etc.)
Methods: Thought, discussion, text (list)
Role Playing Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined issue or situation, synopsis from leader, re-search 
on assigned role from participants
Participants: Group (different organizations/agencies), Control Team and 
Leader
Process: Multiple steps (review, discuss, message, etc.) 
Methods: Discussion (role-play and after-action review), text (notes) 
Outside-In 
Thinking High
Prerequisites: Defined issue
Participants: Group
Process: Multiple steps (brainstorm, list, assess, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (list)
Fishbone 
Analysis Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined issue
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (list, categorize, diagram, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (list), visualisation (diagram)
Challenge Analysis
Structured 
Self-Critique Moderate/High
Prerequisites: Analysis to review
Participants: Group
Process: Multiple steps (topics, questions, reassess, etc.) 
Methods: Discussion, text (notes)
Devil's 
Advocacy Moderate/High
Prerequisites: Analysis, plan, or potential decision
Participants: Individual ("outsider")
Process: Single step or multiple steps (varies by technique)
Methods: Diverse approaches (no single procedure)
Delphi 
Method High
Prerequisites: Analysis, plan, or potential decision
Participants: Group (experts - often anonymous) and Moderator
Process: Multiple steps (iterative questions, response, feedback cycle, 
etc.)
Methods: Thought, text (questionnaire)
Conflict 
Management
Adversarial 
Collaboration High
Prerequisites: Both parties agree on having a discussion
Participants: Group (two parties with opposing views)
Process: Multiple steps (varies by technique)
Methods: Diverse approaches (key assumptions check, argument 
mapping, etc.)

51
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES SKILL/TRAINING/TIME ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Decision Support
Force Field 
Analysis Low/Moderate
Prerequisites: Defined issue, change, or goal
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (brainstorm, list, score, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (list), calculation
Pros-Cons-
Faults-and-
Fixes
Low
Prerequisites: New idea or choice between two options
Participants: Group
Process: Multiple steps (define, list, review, etc.)
Methods: Discussion, text (list), visualisation (table)
SWOT 
Analysis Low
Prerequisites: Analysis, plan, or potential decision
Participants: Individual or Group
Process: Multiple steps (define, list, question, etc.)
Methods: Thought or discussion, text (list), visualisation (table)

52
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
Annex II
Relationships between Joint Structured Analysis Techniques, 
by categories and techniques
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES USE RELATED TECHNIQUES 
Decomposition & 
Visualisation
Issue Redefinition With
• Getting Started Checklist
• Customer Checklist
Ranking, Scoring, Prioritising After • Brainstorming SATs
Matrices With
• Ranking, Scoring, Prioritizing
• Cross-Impact Matrix
• Analysis of Compet-ing Hypotheses
Mind Maps & Concept Maps To visualise results of
• Cross-Impact Matrix
• Brainstorming SATs
• Many other SATs
Idea Generation
Structured Brainstorming
With • Many other SATs
To generate • Simple Hypotheses
Starbursting
With
• Getting Started Checklist
• Issue Redefinition
• Ranking, Scoring, Prioritizing
To generate • Simple Hypotheses
Cross-Impact Matrix After • Brainstorming SATs
Scenarios & 
Indicator
Scenarios Analysis
Before • Cross-Impact Matrix
With • Indicators
To generate • Simple Hypotheses
Indicators
As evidence in • Analysis of Competing Hypotheses
With • Brainstorming SATs
Indicators Validator After • Indicators
Annex II: Relationships between JSATs

53
TECHNICAL BRIEF ON JOINT STRUCTURED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (JSAT)
CATEGORY TECHNIQUES USE RELATED TECHNIQUES 
Hypothesis Generation & 
Testing
Simple Hypotheses Before • Scenarios Analysis
Diagnostic Reasoning With
• Indicators Validator
• Analysis of Compet-ing Hypotheses
Analysis of Competing 
Hypotheses With
• Structured Brain-storming
• Nominal Group Technique
• Hypothesis Genera-tor
• Diagnostic Reason-ing
• Argument Mapping
• Delphi Method
Assessment 
of Cause & 
Effect
Key Assumptions Check With • All other SATs (ACH in particular)
Fishbone Analysis With • Brainstorming SATs
Challenge 
Analysis
Delphi Method
To generate • Simple Hypotheses
With
• Ranking, Scoring, Prioritizing
• Virtual Brainstorm-ing
Conflict 
Management
Adversarial Collaboration With
• Analysis of Compet-ing Hypotheses
• Argument Mapping
• Key Assumptions Check
Decision 
Support
SWOT Analysis Same factors as • Outside-In Thinking