HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    1
HUMAN/spaceliningRIGHTS/spaceliningCENTER
Use of Biometric Data  
to Identify Terrorists:  
Best Practice or  
Risky Business?
Report prepared under the aegis of the Mandate  
of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and  
protection of human rights and fundamental  
freedoms while countering terrorism
Dr. Krisztina Huszti-Orbán and Prof. Fionnuala Ní Aoláin

2
Use of Biometric Data to Identify 
Terrorists: Best Practice or Risky 
Business?
This report was written by Dr. Krisztina  
Huszti-Orbán, with Prof. Fionnuala Ní Aoláin.
Dr. Krisztina Huszti-Orbán is a Research Fellow 
at the Human Rights Center at the University of 
Minnesota Law School and Senior Legal Advisor 
to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the 
promotion and protection of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.
Prof. Fionnuala Ní Aoláin is Regents Professor  
and Robina Professor of Law, Public Policy and 
Society at the University of Minnesota Law School, 
Faculty Director of the University of Minnesota 
Human Rights Center, and jointly Professor of 
Law at the Queens University of Belfast, Northern 
Ireland. She is the United Nations Special Rappor-
teur on the promotion and protection of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering 
terrorism (2017-). 
The Human Rights Center would like to thank for 
the pro bono research support by the Minnesota 
Advocates and DLA Piper and for the research, 
translation and other support provided by Kath-
ryn Campbell, Katie Smith, Caroline Sell, Zakaria 
Almulhim, Harry Gray Carvo and Lucas Morel. 
The report benefited from multi-stakeholder  
consultations held at RightsCon 2019 in Tunis, 
Tunisia.
Undertaking this work would not have been possi-
ble without the financial support provided by the 
Knowledge Platform on Security and Rule of Law’s 
Knowledge Management Fund. 
The views and  opinions expressed in this report 
are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the official policy or position of any organi-
zation or entity. 
Copyright © 2020 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights reserved


HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
A. Biometrics and their use .......................................................... 4
1. The Evolution of Biometrics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2. Implications of the Use of Biometric Tools .............................................. 7
B.  The use of biometrics in the context of preventing and countering terrorism and  
violent extremism. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1. International standards: United Nations Security Resolution 2396 ......................... 10
2. United Nations capacity-building ...................................................... 13
a) Capacity-building and technical assistance responses on part of UN entities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
C. Biometric tools and data: Towards a human rights approach ......................... 14
1. The right to privacy .................................................................. 14
2. The Protection of personal and sensitive data ........................................... 16
3. There’s more to it: the broader human rights implications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
4. Stages of the data lifecycle: a non-exhaustive inventory of human rights implications. . . . . . . . 22
a) Collection and retention of biometric data  ............................................. 22
b) Processing of biometric data: the human rights implications of automation,  
machine learning and artificial intelligence  ............................................. 24
c) Domestic and cross-border sharing of biometric data ................................... 27
5. The obligation to develop and implement biometric systems under UNSCR 2396 ........... 29
D.  State-business cooperation in law enforcement and national security contexts and  
the human rights-compliant development and deployment of biometric tools. . . . . . . . . . 29
1. International standards applicable to business conduct. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
 a) Responsibility to create a due diligence framework ..................................... 30
i. Policy commitment ................................................................ 30
ii. Risk assessment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
iii. Accountability mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31
iv. Reporting and other forms of external communication. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31
 b) Importance of a corporate due diligence framework .................................... 32
2. State duties vis-à-vis third-party conduct. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3. Challenges of State-business ‘cooperation’ and potential ways forward. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
 a) Transfer or sale of biometric technology ............................................... 36
 b) Sharing of biometric data ............................................................ 39
i. Compliance with domestic law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
ii. Compliance with international human rights law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
c) Furthering rights compliance through interest groups and public-private partnerships ...... 40
Conclusions and Recommendations ................................................. 41

4
Introduction
The distinct value and practical benefits of the use of 
biometric data is increasingly acknowledged including in 
the context of addressing trans-border challenges in law 
enforcement and intelligence gathering, border man-
agement, evidentiary and forensic use. This trend is also 
reflected in the regulatory efforts by the United Nations 
Security Council via resolution 23961 requiring States 
to “develop and implement systems to collect biometric 
data” in order to “responsibly and properly identify ter-
rorists, including foreign terrorist fighters”.
Despite the rapid advancement of biometric technolo-
gy and its widespread usage, human rights analysis and 
guidance on its use remains limited and underdeveloped. 
The Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protec-
tion of human rights and fundamental freedoms while 
countering terrorism (hereinafter: Special Rapporteur) 
has repeatedly highlighted this shortcoming, including in 
her report to the 73rd session of the General Assembly2 
and stressed the need for granular rule of law and human 
rights-based analysis in relation to the extensive obliga-
tions imposed by the Security Council, with particular 
emphasis on resolution 2396. She has highlighted the 
requirements relating to biometric systems and data as 
a distinct priority in light of the particular challenges 
raised in connection with their use. 
Bridging the human rights guidance gap concerning the 
use of biometric tools in the counter-terrorism context 
is essential to advance compliance with existing State 
human rights obligations. Such guidance would contrib-
ute towards ensuring that legislative and policy efforts 
spurred by resolution 2396 uphold the rule of law as the 
bedrock of effective and sustainable counter-terrorism 
1  S/RES/2396 (2017).
2  A/73/361
efforts. It is particularly salient given the changed inter-
national and regional peace and security risk environ-
ment linked to having foreign fighters, formerly affiliated 
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/ 
Da’esh) and its satellites, return to their countries of 
origin or travel to other conflict zones. This development 
has spawned challenges in developing and implementing 
effective screening, prosecution, rehabilitation, and rein-
tegration strategies, in light of regulatory developments 
led by the United Nations Security Council.
Against this background, this report explores the human 
rights implications of the use of biometric tools and 
data, with particular focus on challenges to their human 
rights-compliant deployment in the context of prevent-
ing and countering terrorism and violent extremism. The 
report provides a summary of the ways in which biomet-
ric data and tools are employed, including in the context 
of counter-terrorism. It then sets out the human rights 
implications of the use of biometrics, including but not 
limited to, the rights to privacy and data protection and 
outlines both State obligations and business responsibili-
ties in this regard. Finally, it presents a set of recommen-
dations on measures towards promoting a human rights-
based approach to the use of biometric tools and data. 
A. Biometrics and their use
The use of biometric tools and data has garnered consid-
erable attention in past years. News articles, analyses and 
discussion frequently mention ‘biometrics’, with finger-
prints, facial and voice recognition, iris scans or DNA 
flagged as examples. But, what exactly are ‘biometrics’ 
and what is their use?


HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    5
Biometrics is the scientific discipline concerned with 
measurements and metrics related to biological or behav-
ioral human characteristics, that are commonly possessed 
by all human beings while also being highly representa-
tive of a person, thus allowing for the identification of 
individuals.3 Such markers may be related to a person’s 
physiological characteristics, such as finger or palm 
prints, DNA, and facial, iris, or retina recognition (i.e. 
biological biometrics). Others are linked to behavioral 
patterns, such as recognition based on a person’s gait 
(behavioral biometrics or ‘behaviometrics’). As biometric 
identity attributes are both unique to a person and stable 
over time,4 they provide for a singularly useful tool for 
accurate and efficient identification5 and authentication.6 
These characteristics7 are also what makes such data par-
ticularly sensitive, thus creating a need for secure systems 
for data storage and processing to mitigate the risk of 
unauthorized access. 
1. The evolution of biometrics
Despite biometrics-related queries and concerns having 
entered public debates relatively recently, biometrics as a 
concept and tool are not novel, with the history of bio-
metrics going back for centuries. “Early” biometrics, such 
as fingerprints or identification based on photographs, 
have been used by public authorities since the 19th cen-
tury. Biometric systems have widely been adopted in the 
former colonial world, with colonial authorities advocat-
ing for the use of fingerprints for identification purposes, 
3  The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines biometric characteristics as “biological and behavioural characteristic of an individual from which distinguishing, 
repeatable biometric features” that “can be extracted for the purpose of biometric recognition.” See ISO/IEC 2382-37:2017(E). The Biometric Consortium set up by the US Gov-
ernment defines biometrics as “the automated recognition of individuals based on their behavioral and biological characteristics.” See National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
‘Biometrics’, available at https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/Biometrics (visited 20 February 2020); ‘A further note on the definition of biometrics’, available at https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK219892/box/bbb00012/?report=objectonly, (visited 20 February 2020). India’s draft Personal Data Protection Bill defines biometrics as “facial images, 
fingerprints, iris scans, or any other similar personal data resulting from measurements or technical processing operations carried out on physical, physiological, or behavioural char-
acteristics of a data principal, which allow or confirm the unique identification of that natural person.” See The Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019, Bill no. 373 of 2019, Chapter I, 
article 3(7), available at https://prsindia.org/sites/default/files/bill_files/Personal%20Data%20Protection%20Bill%2C%202019.pdf (visited 20 February 2020). The UK’s Biometrics 
Strategy offers the following definition: “the recognition of people based on measurement and analysis of their biological characteristics or behavioural data.” See Home Office 
Biometrics Strategy (2018), Chapter 1. 
 4 They are however not necessarily immutable and may be subject to change during a person’s lifetime. This is particularly pertinent when dealing with behavioral biometrics but may 
be relevant also in relation to biological biometrics which may also undergo alteration as a result of the growing or aging process as well as changes in a person’s health (due to illness 
or accident).  
 5 For the purposes of this report, identification is used to mean a one-to-many comparison, namely querying whether a person’s data or records can be found in the reference database. 
 6 For the purposes of this report, authentication is used to mean a one-to-one comparison, namely verifying that the data matches that which has been enrolled into the system. 
 7 “In principle, any human characteristic can be used as a biometric data source provided it meets the following four basic criteria (although others are also sometimes added): univer-
sality, uniqueness, permanence, and collectability (objectively measurable in a quantitative way).” Additional desirable criteria for biometric markers include resistance to circumven-
tion and acceptability (meaning that it is acceptable to the community of users for whom it is intended). See Michael Fairhurst, Biometrics: A Very Short Introduction (OUP , Oxford, 
2018), pp. 8 and 10.
 8 See Keith Breckenridge, Biometric State: The Global Politics of Identification and Surveillance in South Africa, 1850 to the Present, (CUP , Cambridge, 2014), p. 166; Francis Galton, 
‘Identification Offices in India and Egypt’, Nineteenth Century 48, p. 119. 
 9 See Keith Breckenridge, Biometric State: The Global Politics of Identification and Surveillance in South Africa, 1850 to the Present, p. 167. 
 10 IOL Business Report, ‘Scotland Yard Marks 100 Years of Fingerprints’, 27 June 2001, available at https://www.iol.co.za/business-report/technology/scotland-yard-marks-100-years-
of-fingerprints-68739 (visited 20 February 2020). 
11 Gemalto, ‘Biometrics: Authentication & Identification (definition, trends, use cases, laws and latest news) - 2020 review’, available at https://www.gemalto.com/govt/inspired/bio-
metrics (visited 20 February 2020). 
12 Stephen Mayhew, ‘History of Biometrics’, Biometric Update, available at https://www.biometricupdate.com/201802/history-of-biometrics-2 (visited 20 February 2020). 
13 Ibid. 
14 United State Holocaust Memorial Museum, ‘Tattoos and Numbers: The System of Identifying Prisoners at Auschwitz’, Holocaust Encyclopedia, available at https://encyclopedia.
ushmm.org/content/en/article/tattoos-and-numbers-the-system-of-identifying-prisoners-at-auschwitz (visited 20 February 2020).  
15 United State Holocaust Memorial Museum, ‘The Nuremberg Race Laws, Holocaust Encyclopedia, available at https://web.archive.org/web/20140519233009/http://www.ushmm.
org/outreach/en/article.php?ModuleId=10007695 (visited 20 February 2020).
arguing problematically, inter alia, that “natives [were] 
too illiterate for the common use of signatures.”8 This has 
led to biometric registration becoming an alternative to 
documentary registration within the British Empire, at 
times also involving coercive biometric registration.9 The 
use of biometrics was not restricted to colonial contexts: 
the Metropolitan Police in the United Kingdom started 
fingerprinting criminal suspects in 1901,10 followed by 
French police in 1902,11 and the New York state peniten-
tiary system in 1903.12  
Biometric tools have become a staple for contemporary 
use by security sector actors. This includes the military 
and law enforcement, in the context of criminal justice 
processes, border management, and civil identification, 
to name a few. In recent decades, automation has turned 
biometrics into even more powerful instruments.13 
While biometric tools have successfully been used for 
legitimate public interest purposes and have played an 
important role in criminal justice processes, they have 
also been employed in connection with gross human 
rights violations, atrocity crimes, and by oppressive and 
authoritarian regimes. Nazi German practice included 
tattooing camp serial numbers on Jewish inmates held 
in concentration camps, a practice introduced in order 
to “identify the bodies of registered prisoners who had 
died.”14 Nazi authorities have also imposed identifica-
tion cards that included identifying marks allowing for 
security forces to easily pinpoint those of Jewish origin.15 
The Rwandan genocide was similarly facilitated by the 

6
obligation on citizens to carry identity cards that  
contained information about the person’s ethnicity.16
Past months have seen detailed reporting on practices 
carried out by Chinese authorities in the Xinjiang  
Uyghur Autonomous Region in the context of the appli-
cation of China’s Counter-Terrorism Law and its Imple-
menting Measures in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous 
Region.17 Among a slate of measures presenting serious 
human rights concerns, reports indicate that authorities 
have conducted mass collection of biometric data (such 
as DNA samples, fingerprints, iris scans, and blood 
types) of residents of the region, under guise of a public 
health program.18 Authorities are further alleged to col-
lect relevant data in the context of the passport applica-
tion process and during police interviews.19 Moreover, 
the government has reportedly increased the number of 
police checkpoints equipped with biometric sensors, iris 
scanners, and access to nearby CCTV cameras, enabling 
Chinese security services to monitor the movement and 
behavior of Xinjiang residents “in unparalleled detail.”20 
While the most serious allegations have been made in 
relation to the Xinjiang region, concerning practices 
relating to the collection and use of biometric data have 
been reported throughout China,21 considered by key 
commentators among the States with the weakest record 
16 Human Rights Watch, ‘History’, available at https://www.hrw.org/reports/1999/rwanda/Geno1-3-09.htm#P196_82927 (visited 20 February 2020); Prevent Genocide Internation-
al, ‘Indangamuntu 1994: Ten Years Ago in Rwanda this Identity Card cost a Woman Her Life’, http://www.preventgenocide.org/edu/pastgenocides/rwanda/indangamuntu.htm 
(visited 20 February 2020).
17 Communication by the Mandates of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism; the Working 
Group on Arbitrary Detention; the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances; the Special Rapporteur on the right to education; the Special Rapporteur on the 
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression; the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association; the Special 
Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health; the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights 
defenders; the Special Rapporteur on minority issues; the Special Rapporteur on the right to privacy; the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief; and the Special Rap-
porteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, OL CHN 18/2019, 1 November 2019, available at https://spcommreports.ohchr.org/TMRe-
sultsBase/DownLoadPublicCommunicationFile?gId=24845 (visited 20 February 2020).
18 Ibid., p. 16; Human Rights Watch, ‘“Eradicating Ideological Viruses”: China’s Campaign of Repression Against Xinjiang’s Muslims’, 9 September 2018, available at https://www.
hrw.org/report/2018/09/09/eradicating-ideological-viruses/chinas-campaign-repression-against-xinjiangs (visited 20 February 2020). 
19 Human Rights Watch, ‘“Eradicating Ideological Viruses”: China’s Campaign of Repression Against Xinjiang’s Muslims’, 9 September 2018, available at https://www.hrw.org/
report/2018/09/09/eradicating-ideological-viruses/chinas-campaign-repression-against-xinjiangs (visited 20 February 2020). 
20 Alina Polyakova and Chris Meserole, ‘Policy Brief: Exporting Digital Authoritarianism’, Foreign Policy at Brookings, available at https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/up-
loads/2019/08/FP_20190826_digital_authoritarianism_polyakova_meserole.pdf (visited 20 February 2020). 
21 Human Rights Watch, ‘China: V oice Biometric Collection Threatens Privacy’, 22 October 2017, available at https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/10/22/china-voice-biometric-collec-
tion-threatens-privacy (visited 20 February 2020); Paul Mozur, ‘One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China Is Using A.I. to Profile a Minority’, New York Times, 14 April 2019, 
available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/technology/china-surveillance-artificial-intelligence-racial-profiling.html (visited 20 February 2020). 
22 See Paul Bischoff, ‘Data privacy laws & government surveillance by country: Which countries best protect their citizens?’, Comparitech, 15 October 2019, available at  
https://www.comparitech.com/blog/vpn-privacy/surveillance-states/ (visited 19 February 2020).
23 Charlie Campbell/ Chengdu, ‘How China Is Using “Social Credit Scores” to Reward and Punish Its Citizens’, Time, Davos 2019, available at https://time.com/collection/da-
vos-2019/5502592/china-social-credit-score/; https://www.wired.com/story/age-of-social-credit/ (visited 20 February 2020); Zhou Jiaquan, ‘Drones, Facial Recognition and a Social 
Credit System: 10 Ways China Watches Its Citizens’, South China Morning Post, 4 August 2018, available at https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2157883/drones-
facial-recognition-and-social-credit-system-10-ways-china (visited 20 February 2020); Mara Hvistendahl, ‘Inside China’s Vast New Experiment in Social Ranking’, WIRED, 14 
December 2017, available at https://www.wired.com/story/age-of-social-credit/ (visited 20 February 2020).
24 See, for example, Pete Fussey and Daragh Murray, ‘Independent Report on the London Metropolitan Police Service’s Trial of Live Facial Recognition Technology’, The Human 
Rights, Big Data and Technology Project, University of Essex Human Rights Centre (July 2019); Nila Bala and Caleb Watney, ‘What Are the Proper Limits on Police Use of Facial 
Recognition?’ Brookings TechTank, 20 June 2019, available at https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2019/06/20/what-are-the-proper-limits-on-police-use-of-facial-recognition/ 
(visited 20 February 2020); Amitai Ziv, ‘This Israeli Face-recognition Startup Is Secretly Tracking Palestinians’, Haaretz, 15 July 2019, available at https://www.haaretz.com/isra-
el-news/business/.premium-this-israeli-face-recognition-startup-is-secretly-tracking-palestinians-1.7500359 (visited 20 February 2020); Rina Chandran, ‘Mass Surveillance Fears 
as India Readies Facial Recognition System’, Reuters, available at https://www.reuters.com/article/us-india-tech-facialrecognition-trfn/mass-surveillance-fears-as-india-readies-fa-
cial-recognition-system-idUSKBN1XH0S9 (visited 20 February 2020); BBC News, ‘Russia’s Use of Facial Recognition Challenged in Court’, 31 January 2020, available at https://
www.bbc.com/news/technology-51324841 (visited 20 February 2020).
25 See United States Government Accountability Office, ‘DOD Biometrics and Forensics. Report to Congressional Committees’, GAO-17-580 (August 2017); PM Department of 
Defense Biometrics, ‘Mission’, available at https://peoiews.army.mil/programs/pm-dod-bio/ (visited 20 February 2020). In these contexts, the DOD has capabilities to collect, 
match, store, share, analyze, reference, and manage contextual data and biometrics to include iris, fingerprint, facial images, palm prints, and voice on adversaries as well as known 
and suspected terrorists. 
when it comes to privacy and data protection standards.22 
Biometric information is, among others, one of the cor-
nerstones of China’s controversial social credit system.23 
While the example of the widespread use of biometrics 
by the Chinese government is notable, many have voiced 
apprehension about the misuse of such tools and data  
in relation to a significant number of governments 
worldwide.24 
Aside from the threat of misuse, in particular by oppres-
sive and/ or authoritative governments, concerns have 
also been raised regarding the collection of biometric 
data on vulnerable populations and persons in vulnera-
ble situations, in diverse contexts. In the context of their 
military response to the 9/11 attacks and the so-called 
“Global War on Terror”, more broadly, the United States 
and some of its allies proceeded to collect biometric  
data of populations in conflict zones, such as Iraq and 
Afghanistan.25 In 2007, human rights organizations 
flagged that the database compiling information col-
lected in Iraq contained approximately 750,000 records, 
including fingerprints, photographs and iris scans and 
cautioned that the database could become a ‘hit list’ in 
the wrong hands due to the “particular risk of identifica-
tion requirements in regions of the world torn by ethnic 

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    7
and religious division.”26 Related concerns seem to persist 
and have also been echoed by the US House Committee 
on Oversight and Reform as recently as June 2019 when 
the Committee raised questions about the military’s 
wide-spread collection of biometric data of “millions of 
Afghan and Iraqi citizens who have never been accused 
of any wrongdoing.”27
The United Nations and its specialized agencies, funds 
and programmes28 as well as other humanitarian or-
ganizations have similarly grappled, in the context of 
their protection work, with reconciling efforts aimed 
at improving the efficiency of assistance delivery with 
ensuring that data processing methods and practices 
are protective of the privacy and other human rights of 
beneficiaries. These organizations have been under con-
siderable pressure to increase efficiency of their services 
and consequently put in place heightened safeguards 
protecting against fraud and diversion of aid from legiti-
mate beneficiaries. In this regard, donors have repeatedly 
pushed for the integration of biometrics in aid delivery.29  
As a result, assistance is at times linked to and condi-
tioned on persons in vulnerable situations providing 
their biometric data. This raises questions as to the free, 
informed, and unadulterated nature of consent given by 
beneficiaries bearing in mind the implications of refusing 
consent30 and the responsibility of humanitarian actors 
who act as data controllers and processors in this context. 
Moreover, related data collection and processing often 
happens in partnership with governments,31 which may, 
in some circumstances, lead to such collaboration putting 
refugees, asylum-seekers, and other beneficiaries at risk.32 
26 See Electronic Privacy Information Center, ‘Iraqi Biometric Identification System’, available at https://epic.org/privacy/biometrics/iraq.html (visited 20 February 2020); Electronic 
Privacy Information Center, Human Rights Watch and Privacy International, Letter to Secretary Robert M. Gates, 27 July 2007, available at https://www.epic.org/privacy/biomet-
rics/epic_iraq_dtbs.pdf (visited 20 February 2020). See also Edward Wong, ‘To Stay Alive, Iraqis Change Their Names’, New York Times, 6 September 2006, available at https://
www.nytimes.com/2006/09/06/world/middleeast/06identity.html (visited 20 February 2020). 
27 House of Representatives Committee on Oversight and Reform, Letter to Acting Secretary Patrick Shanahan, Department of Defense, Secretary of the Army, Mark Esper, Secre-
tary of the Navy, Richard Spencer, Secretary of the Air Force, Heather Wilson, 19 June 2019. 
28 For example, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) uses the Biometrics Identity Management System that records fingerprints and iris scans. 
It is deployed in at least 52 countries, often in partnership with governments, and holds the biometrics data of at least 6 million refugees and asylum-seekers. The World Food 
Programme (WFP) has a system called SCOPE, which is a web-based platform acting as repository for beneficiary data, and uses relevant data provided by UNHCR to manage 
aid and assistance-related entitlements. See, for example, Ariel Bogle, ‘Biometric Data Is Increasingly Popular in Aid Work, But Critics Say It Puts Refugees at Risk’, ABC Science, 
available at https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/2019-06-21/biometric-data-is-being-collected-from-refugees-asylum-seekers/11209274 (visited 20 February 2020); Claire 
Walkey, Caitlin Procter and Nora Bardelli, ‘Biometric Refugee Registration: Between Benefits, Risks, and Ethics’, International Development LSE Blog, available at https://blogs.
lse.ac.uk/internationaldevelopment/2019/07/18/biometric-refugee-registration-between-benefits-risks-and-ethics/ (visited 20 February 2020).
29 The Engine Room and Oxfam, Biometrics in the Humanitarian Sector (March 2018) available at https://www.theengineroom.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Engine-Room-Ox-
fam-Biometrics-Review.pdf (visited 20 February 2020); Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, Katja Lindskov Jacobsen, and Sean Martin McDonald, ‘Do No Harm: A Taxonomy of the 
Challenges of Humanitarian Experimentation’, International Review of the Red Cross, 99(904) (2017), pp. 319-344.
30 Dragana Kaurin, Data Protection and Digital Agency for Refugees, World Refugee Council Research Paper no. 12, Center for International Governance Innovation, 15 May 2019, 
available at https://www.cigionline.org/publications/data-protection-and-digital-agency-refugees (visited 20 February 2020).
31 It has been reported that, in 2009, the US encouraged the Kenyan government, working in partnership with the UN, to conduct biometric registration of all refuges and asy-
lum-seekers near the Somali border and “to cross-check this data with the US’ Terrorist Interdiction Program, on the basis that it would help ‘catch terrorists posing as refugees’”. In 
recent years it has been reported that the US Department of Health Services retained the biometric data of tens of thousands of asylum-seekers transmitted by UNHCR, including 
persons that will not come to the US as refugees. See Chris Burt, ‘DHS to Store Tens of Thousands of Refugee Biometric Records from UNHCR’, Biometric Update, 21 August 
2019, available at https://www.biometricupdate.com/201908/dhs-to-store-tens-of-thousands-of-refugee-biometric-records-from-unhcr (visited 20 February 2020).
32 Elise Thomas, ‘Tagged, Tracked and in Danger: How the Rohingya Got Caught in the UN’s Risky Biometric Database’, WIRED, 12 March 2018, available at https://www.wired.
co.uk/article/united-nations-refugees-biometric-database-rohingya-myanmar-bangladesh (visited 20 February 2020).
33 Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, ‘Calling Out the Misuse of Terrorism Rhetoric Against Refugee and Asylum Seekers’, Just Security, 18 November 2019, available at https://www.justsecurity.
org/67289/calling-out-the-misuse-of-terrorism-rhetoric-against-refugee-and-asylum-seekers/ (visited 20 February 2020).
34 A/71/384.
35 Heartbeat patterns are distinctive enough to allow for the identification of a person. See The Economist, ‘People Can Now Be Identified at a Distance by Their Heartbeat’, 23 Janu-
ary 2020, available at https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2020/01/23/people-can-now-be-identified-at-a-distance-by-their-heartbeat (visited 20 February 2020).
These developments are all the more troublesome con-
sidering the tendency on part of some governments to 
connect migration to the threat of terrorism,33 despite 
such connection being “analytically and statistically 
unfounded.”34
2. Implications of the use of  
biometric tools
The use of biometrics is becoming ubiquitous. This 
development manifests, on the one hand, through the 
expanded deployment of existing biometric tools, includ-
ing their use for more diverse purposes and ends. On the 
other hand, relevant actors seek to develop tools using 
new measurements and metrics, to be employed for iden-
tification and authentication. For example, US defense 
agencies have recently developed a laser vibrometry tool 
that allows for identifying persons from a distance based 
on their “heart print.”35 
It is no wonder that in addition to highlighting posi-
tive implications of such tools and ways in which they 
contribute to societal development and the rule of law, 
public discourse evidences unease over their short- and 
long-term implications on individuals and societies.  
As noted above, biometric tools have traditionally been 
used by public authorities for military, law enforcement, 
criminal justice, and border management purposes. They 
are however increasingly employed in a variety of new 
ways. As such, they have been linked to the provision of 
government services and benefits in many jurisdictions. 
Biometric technology and data have been used to set 

8
up biometric identification systems, voter registration 
systems, to enable or facilitate access to social and health 
services, and, as such, have also been a staple in smart 
city initiatives.
These initiatives employ ever more sophisticated technol-
ogies to collect, process and analyze expanding categories 
of biometric data (in addition to fingerprints, DNA, 
and facial analysis, more and more systems work with 
additional biological and behavioral biometrics, such 
as gait recognition, voice recognition, etc., while others 
dabble in predictive biometrics as well).36 Biometric data 
is collected in more spaces and contexts, both online and 
offline. For example, some facial recognition systems rely 
on cameras in public spaces, making it impossible for in-
dividuals to opt out of having their data captured. More-
over, voice recognition databases may use open source 
information such as audio from social media and other 
online platforms like YouTube. Keeping in mind that 
any person owning a smartphone likely uses fingerprint, 
facial, or voice recognition technology,37 the options to 
tap into such data are endless (and, for the most part, 
inadequately regulated). The ever-growing datasets that 
governments can access are increasingly stored in central 
or interconnected/ integrated databases that are at time 
sought to function as “one-stop-shops,”38 with access 
provided to various public authorities, including security 
sector actors.39  
The use of biometrics has also rapidly increased in and by 
the private sector, including in the context of a series of 
initiatives involving diverse forms of government-busi-
ness cooperation. Such cooperation is present in many 
public policy areas, including in relation to preventing 
and countering terrorism and violent extremism (to be 
addressed in Section D below). 
36 See Michael Fairhurst, Biometrics: A Very Short Introduction (OUP Oxford, 2018), Chapter 5. 
37 For the purposes of this report, a facial recognition system denotes technology able to identify or authenticate individuals through a mapping of their facial features. 
38 For example, the Aadhaar database in India. See e.g. Michael Safi, ‘Indian Court Upholds Legality of World’s Largest Biometric Database’, The Guardian, 26 September 2018, 
available at https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/sep/26/indian-court-upholds-legality-of-worlds-largest-biometric-database (visited 20 February 2020).
39 These actors at times include private companies, in particular private security contractors. See, for example, Privacy International, ‘Briefing to the UN Counter-Terrorism Executive 
Directorate on the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometric Data to Tackle Terrorism’ ( June 2019). 
40 S/RES/1373 (2001), adopted on 28 September 2001. 
41 INTERPOL, ‘Preventing Terrorist Travel’ available at https://www.interpol.int/en/Crimes/Terrorism/Preventing-terrorist-travel (visited 20 February 2020).
42 US Department of Homeland Security, ‘Biometric Pathway Transforming Air Travel’, EPIC-17-10-17-CBP-FOIA-20180319-Production, available at https://epic.org/foia/dhs/
cbp/biometric-entry-exit/Biometric-Pathway.pdf (visited 20 February 2020).
43 US Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2018, available at https://www.state.gov/reports/country-reports-on-terrorism-2018/ (visited 20 February 2020).
B. The use of biometrics in the  
context of preventing and  
countering terrorism and violent 
extremism
While the security sector has a long history with the use 
of biometric systems, the potential of biometrics in the 
area of preventing and countering terrorism has received 
increased and sustained attention in the aftermath of the 
9/11 attacks. 
United Nations Security Council resolution 1373,40  
adopted in the aftermath of 9/11, requires Member 
States, under Chapter VII of the Charter to:
“[p]revent the movement of terrorists or terrorist 
groups by effective border controls and controls on 
issuance of identity papers and travel documents, 
and through measures for preventing counterfeit-
ing, forgery or fraudulent use of identity papers and 
travel documents.” 
While it does not articulate the precise tools that States 
are expected to use in this regard, border security is one 
of the areas where the use of biometrics is most common. 
Biometrics in this context are used for various purposes: 
to verify a person’s identity, and to check whether the 
person in question figures in law enforcement and count-
er-terrorism databases, including through connection to 
relevant INTERPOL databases.41 The primary biometric 
here are fingerprints but there is a trend towards using 
faces as the primary way for identifying travelers.42 
Some States and international organizations have devel-
oped biometric traveler screening systems that they also 
put at the disposal of other States. For example, the US 
Personal Identification Secure Comparison and Evalua-
tion System (PISCES) is used in at least 23 countries.43 
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
has developed the Migration Information and Data 
Analysis System (MIDAS) that ports of entry in at  

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    9
least 20 countries, mostly in Sub-Sharan Africa,44 have 
adopted. While IOM states that it “promotes the respon-
sible use of biometrics, effective personal data protection 
and respect to privacy” and “[w]hen processing biometric 
data, IOM ensures that the data is collected in a law-
ful and fair manner with the consent of beneficiaries, 
and that the purpose of the processing is specified and 
legitimate,”45 none of the publicly available documents 
providing information on MIDAS, consulted for this 
report, contain any references to human rights. They  
also provide no indication that a human rights-based  
approach is promoted by IOM in relation to MIDAS’ 
use by governments.46  This lack of an explicit human 
rights-based approach is of significant concern to the 
Special Rapporteur’s mandate.47
Furthermore, many States are also experimenting with 
expanded use of biometrics at ports of entry. This includes 
in-motion facial recognition/ gait recognition that identify 
travelers on-the-go,48 facial recognition for check-in and 
other airport services49 and even predictive biometrics that 
can provide information on a person’s mental or emo-
tional state facilitating authorities to discern – however 
unreliably – whether the respective person poses a secu-
rity threat.50 Such expanded use of biometrics generally 
includes data-sharing between different actors (frequently 
between State and non-State actors), which would require 
a well-defined framework with sufficient safeguards to 
protect against unlawful or arbitrary use. 
44 Such countries include, among others, Burkina Faso, the DRC, Mali, Niger, Somalia, and South Sudan. International Organization for Migration, ‘Migration Information and Data 
Analysis System/MIDAS. A Comprehensive and Affordable Border Management Information System’, available at https://www.iom.int/sites/default/files/our_work/DMM/IBM/
updated/midas-brochure18-v7-en_digital-2606.pdf (visited 20 February 2020). See also Giacomo Zandonini, ‘Biometrics: The New Frontier of EU Migration Policy in Niger’,  
The New Humanitarian, 6 June 2019, available at https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news-feature/2019/06/06/biometrics-new-frontier-eu-migration-policy-niger (visited  
20 February 2020)
45 International Organization for Migration, ‘Biometrics’, available at https://www.iom.int/biometrics (visited 20 February 2020).
46 International Organization for Migration, ‘Migration Information and Data Analysis System/MIDAS. A Comprehensive and Affordable Border Management Information Sys-
tem’; International Organization for Migration, ‘IOM and Data Management, Intelligence and Risk Analysis’, available at https://www.iom.int/sites/default/files/our_work/DMM/
IBM/updated/07_FACT_SHEET_Data%20management%2C%20intelligence%20and%20risk%20management%202015.pdf (visited 20 February 2020). 
47 It bears highlighting in this respect that, in line with the Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration, 
IOM undertakes ‘to conduct its activities in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United Nations and with due regard to the policies of the United 
Nations furthering those Purposes and Principles and to other relevant instruments in the international migration, refugee and human rights fields.’ See A/70/976, Article 2 (Princi-
ples), para. 5.
48 Arie Melamed, ‘2018 Biometric Predictions: Advanced Biometric Technologies Take Off ’, Biometric Update, 23 January 2018, available at https://www.biometricupdate.
com/201801/2018-biometric-predictions-advanced-biometric-technologies-take-off (visited 20 February 2020).
49 Kelly Yamanauchi, ‘As Delta Air Lines Expands Face Recognition, Criticism Grows’, Government Technology, 18 September 2019, available at https://www.govtech.com/products/
As-Delta-Air-Lines-Expands-Face-Recognition-Criticism-Grows.html (visited 20 February 2020); Allie Funk, ‘I Opted Out of Facial Recognition at the Airport—It Wasn’t Easy’, 
WIRED, 2 July 2019, available at https://www.wired.com/story/opt-out-of-facial-recognition-at-the-airport/ (visited 20 February 2020).
50 Jason Davis, ‘Biometric Screening at Airports Is Spreading Fast, But Some Fear the Face-Scanning Systems’, NBC News, 14 March 2019, available at https://www.nbcnews.
com/mach/science/biometric-screening-airports-spreading-fast-some-fear-face-scanning-systems-ncna982756 (visited 20 February 2020); Katherine LaGrave, ‘How Airlines and 
Airports Use Your Data, From Security to the Flight Itself ’, Condé Nast Traveler, 28 August 2019, available at https://www.cntraveler.com/story/how-airlines-and-airports-use-
your-data-from-security-to-the-flight-itself (visited 20 February 2020).
51 For example, the notorious ‘Golden State Killer’ has been identified with the help of a genealogical database run by a corporate entity. While the forensic evidence thereby generated 
led to a successful criminal conviction, the case caused such backlash among users and the public that the genealogy site had to change its terms of service regarding the use of its 
database by law enforcement. See Sarah Zhang, ‘The Messy Consequences of the Golden State Killer Case’, The Atlantic, 1 October 2019, available at  https://www.theatlantic.
com/science/archive/2019/10/genetic-genealogy-dna-database-criminal-investigations/599005/ (visited 20 February 2020); Megan Molteni, ‘The Future of Crime-Fighting Is 
Family Tree Forensics’, WIRED, 26 December 2018, available at https://www.wired.com/story/the-future-of-crime-fighting-is-family-tree-forensics/ (visited 20 February 2020).
52 See, for example, United Nations Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), ‘Guidelines to facilitate the use and admissibility as evidence in 
national criminal courts of information collected, handled, preserved and shared by the military to prosecute terrorist offences (“Military Evidence Guidelines”)’, developed within 
the framework of the Working Group on Criminal Justice, Legal Responses and Countering the Financing of Terrorism of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordi-
nation Compact, available at  https://www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Battlefield_Evidence_Final.pdf (visited 20 February 2020).
53 It is also acknowledged in relation to the Military Evidence Guidelines developed under the leadership of CTED that these “are merely intended to serve as a basis for discussion 
and to illustrate the issues that will need to be comprehensively addressed at the national level by those national authorities responsible for determining and enforcing the criteria for 
the admissibility of evidence in national criminal proceedings.” See Military Evidence Guidelines, p. 1. 
Biometric tools, such as identification based on finger-
prints or DNA, have long been used for law enforce-
ment and criminal justice purposes. The field of criminal 
justice has also seen a trend towards the expanded use of 
biometrics, both through novel uses of existing technol-
ogy51 and by adding new tools to the mix, such as facial 
or voice recognition. It is notable in this context that a 
number of States and international organizations and 
fora have launched initiatives exploring issues around 
data collected, handled, preserved, and shared by military 
actors in a battlefield context, with a view to facilitate the 
use of such data as evidence in domestic counter-terror-
ism criminal trials.52 Information collected in this context 
likely contains biometric data, and such data collection, 
sharing, and use raises a series of particularly challenging 
questions under human rights law.53  The Special  
Rapporteur takes the preliminary view that, in the 
absence of robust human rights protections which are 
institutionally embedded to oversee collection, storage, 
and use of  such evidence, relevant practices are likely  
to infringe international human rights law standards.
Finally, biometric tools and data have been collected, 
retained and analyzed by diverse intelligence services. 
While some intelligence services do not have the legal 
authority to collect biometric data themselves, they do 
generally have access to such data, based on domestic 
and cross-border data-sharing arrangements. Albeit a 
potentially powerful and efficient intelligence tool, 

10
data-sharing arrangements often come with serious rule 
of law and human rights deficiencies, the implications of 
which will be addressed in Section C.4 infra. 
Despite the broad use of biometric tools and data in a 
counter-terrorism context post 9/11, having such sys-
tems in place has not been a binding requirement under 
international law until the adoption of United Nations 
Security Council resolution 2396. The report now turns 
to outlining the standards set up by the Security Council 
in this regard, together with relevant United Nations 
efforts aimed at promoting their full implementation. 
1. International standards: United Nations 
Security Council Resolution 2396 
The United Nations Security Council unanimous-
ly adopted resolution 2396 in December 2017.54 The 
resolution follows a record number of thematic count-
er-terrorism resolutions adopted in that year and builds 
on resolution 2178 (2014),55 with the aim to address 
the evolving threat posed by so-called “foreign terrorist 
fighters” as a result of ISIL/ Da’esh having lost control 
over territory it once held. Territorial loss forced the 
group to change tactics and move towards a more decen-
tralized approach to its operations and to the assumption 
by States that  significant movement of its members as 
well as persons associated with the group, such as family 
members of “foreign terrorist fighters,” would follow 
between and out of conflict zones.56 
The resolution focuses on three themes identified as  
priorities: 1) improving border and aviation security;57  
2) strengthening efforts aimed at the prosecution, reha-
bilitation, and reintegration of “foreign terrorist fight-
ers”; and 3) improving coordination within the United 
Nations counter-terrorism architecture in its support to 
Member States in this context. 
As such, the resolution requires States to “develop and 
implement systems to collect biometric data, which 
could include fingerprints, photographs, facial recog-
54 S/RES/2396 (2017)
55 See A/73/361. See also, Martin Scheinin, ‘A Comment on Security Council Res 2178 (Foreign Terrorist Fighters) as a “Form” of Global Governance’, Just Security, 6 October 2014, 
available at https://www.justsecurity.org/15989/comment-security-council-res-2178-foreign-fighters-form-global-governance/ (visited 20 February 2020); Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, 
‘The UN Security Council, Global Watch Lists, Biometrics, and the Threat to the Rule of Law’, Just Security, 17 January 2018, available at https://www.justsecurity.org/51075/
security-council-global-watch-lists-biometrics/ (visited 20 February 2020)
56 While there is broad agreement among States that the return of such ‘foreign terrorist fighters’ poses a significant security threat, it bears flagging that the numbers of returnees are 
considerably lower than predicted. Furthermore, while States have the right and the obligation to take necessary and effective steps towards addressing the concrete threat posed by 
individual returnees and to ensure that such individuals are also held to account for criminal conduct while abroad, in particular in relation to crimes under international law, such  
as war crimes or crimes against humanity, any such measures must be based on an individualized assessment. See, for example, Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, ‘Ensuring a Human 
Rights-Compliant Approach to the Challenge of Foreign Fighters’, Just Security, 7 November 2018, available at https://www.justsecurity.org/61376/ensuring-human-rights-com-
pliant-approach-challenge-foreign-fighters/ (visited 20 February 2020). 
57 See Statement by the Representative of the United States at the 8116th meeting of the Security Council (8 November 2017), S/PV.8116.
58 S/RES/2396 (2017), para. 15.
59 See A/73/361.
60 Resolution 2160 was the first thematic counter-terrorism resolution to explicitly highlight biometrics as a counter-terrorism tool. See S/RES/2160 (2014), para. 18.
nition, and other relevant identifying biometric data, 
in order to responsibly and properly identify terrorists, 
including foreign terrorist fighters.”58 It further impos-
es an obligation on all UN Member States to establish 
advance passenger information (API) systems “in order 
to detect the departure from their territories, or attempt-
ed travel to, entry into or transit through their territories, 
by means of civil aircraft, of foreign terrorist fighters” 
and other designated individuals, to collect, process and 
analyze passenger name record (PNR) data, as well as to 
develop “watch lists or databases of known and suspected 
terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters, for use by 
law enforcement, border security, customs, military, and 
intelligence agencies to screen travelers and conduct risk 
assessments and investigations.” The resolution encour-
ages States to share such information to be used by all 
relevant national authorities, “with full respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms for the purpose of 
preventing, detecting and investigating terrorist offenses 
and related travel.” The Special Rapporteur has set out 
her concerns with the process and substance of this res-
olution in her report submitted to the 73rd session of the 
General Assembly.59  She reiterates those concerns here 
and urges that her recommendations be implemented by 
States and United Nations entities.
While this report focuses on an analysis of questions 
raised by the use of biometric tools in counter-terror-
ism, it must be flagged that the multifaceted obligations 
listed above are interconnected. Both API and PNR are 
frequently linked with biometric data, with watchlists 
and other relevant databases also commonly containing 
biometric information—an aspect that needs to be con -
sidered when addressing implications of these obliga-
tions separately.  
The use of biometric data as a counter-terrorism tool 
was first referenced in Security Council resolution 2160 
(2014),60 which encouraged Member States to submit 
photographs and other biometric data to INTERPOL, 
for the inclusion in the INTERPOL-United Nations 

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    11
Security Council Special Notices.61 This recommendation 
appeared in a number of subsequent counter-terrorism 
resolutions of the Council62 and was expanded to data 
related to individuals, groups, undertakings, and entities 
included in the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions 
List63 and the 1988 Sanctions List.64 Resolution 2322 
(2016) broadened the recommendation for biomet-
rics-related data-sharing by calling upon States to share 
“information about foreign terrorist fighters and other 
individual terrorists and terrorist organizations, including 
biometric and biographic information, as well as infor-
mation that demonstrates the nature of an individual’s 
association with terrorism” via “bilateral, regional and 
global law enforcement channels,” and underscored the 
importance of providing such information to national 
watch lists and multilateral screening databases.65  
Resolution 2322 included, for the first time, a recom-
mendation that such data-sharing occur in compliance 
with both domestic and international law.66
This evolution culminated in resolution 2396 imposing 
a binding obligation to develop biometric capabilities 
while keeping calls for sharing such data at the level of a 
non-binding recommendation.67 This approach is in line 
with the one taken by the Council when adopting reso-
lution 217868 by 1) by turning recommendations con-
tained in previous resolutions into binding obligations 
under Chapter VII of the UN Charter; and 2) imposing 
obligations that, prior to the adoption of resolution 2396, 
have not been established under international law. While 
regional standards69 and other non-binding interna-
tional guidelines70 existed in relation to API and PNR, 
no comparable multilaterally negotiated instruments 
governing biometric data have been developed. Keeping 
in mind the sensitivity of such data and the far-reaching 
61 Note that para. 18 of S/RES/2160 encourages Member States to act “in accordance with their national legislation”, without explicitly mentioning international law, including  
international human rights law standards.  
62 S/RES/2161 (2104), para. 34; S/RES/2253 (2015) para. 47, Annex I (aa); S/RES/2255 (2015), para. 25, Annex I (x)
63 S/RES/2253 (2015) para. 79.
64 S/RES/2255 (2015), para. 45.
65 S/RES/2322 (2016).
66 In para. 3 of resolution 2322, the Security Council “Calls upon States to share, where appropriate, information about foreign terrorist fighters and other individual terrorists and 
terrorist organizations, including biometric and biographic information, as well as information that demonstrates the nature of an individual’s association with terrorism via bilateral, 
regional and global law enforcement channels, in compliance with international and domestic national law and policy, and stresses the importance of providing such information to 
national watch lists and multilateral screening databases.
67 When it comes to data-sharing, a number of Security Council and other Member States would not welcome an obligation to share data as that would amount to obligatory intel-
ligence-sharing removing State’s discretion to choose the governments they cooperate with in this area. Furthermore, sharing data with governments that have lower rule of law or 
human rights standards would risk contributing to human rights violations, going against States’ obligations under international human rights [and domestic] law. 
68 For a more detailed analysis, see A/73/361, paras. 24-32.
69 See, for example, Directive (EU) 2016/681 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the use of passenger name record (PNR) data for the prevention, 
detection, investigation and prosecution of terrorist offences and serious crime; Council Directive 2004/82/EC of 29 April 2004 on the obligation of carriers to communicate 
passenger data. 
70 See, for example, International Civil Aviation Organization, Guidelines on Passenger Name Record (PNR) Data (Doc 9944); World Customs Organization/ International Air 
Transport Association/ International Civil Aviation Organization, Guidelines on Advance Passenger Information (API). 
71 See Sections C and D. 
72 A/73/361. 
73 Security Council Report, ‘Security Council Penholders’, available at https://www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D27-4E9C-8CD3-CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/
working%20methods_penholders-1.pdf (visited 20 February 2020).
74 See 8116th meeting of the Security Council (8 November 2017), S/PV.8116. Security Council resolution 2396 was adopted on 21 December 2017. 
75 In particular measures related to API/ PNR, biometric data and watchlisting. See Statement by the Representative of the United States at the 8148th meeting of the Security  
Council (21 December 2017), S/PV.8148. 
implications of its use, this is a critical point to flag and 
will be addressed in more detail below.71
The mandate of the Special Rapporteur highlights that: 
• Resolution 2396 was adopted following limited and, 
by all accounts, inadequate engagement with relevant 
stakeholders,72 including UN human rights mecha-
nisms and other independent experts, among others 
civil society with specialist knowledge of international 
human rights law, humanitarian law, or refugee law. 
• The United States, the penholder for counter-ter-
rorism related thematic matters in the Security 
Council,73 proposed that the Council adopt a new 
resolution addressing the evolving threat posed by 
so-called “foreign terrorist fighters” on 28 November 
2017, less than a month before the resolution’s date 
of adoption.74 
• There are no indications of a human rights or 
international law impact assessment having been 
undertaken in this time and no detailed and explicit 
international law or human rights guidance reflected 
in the text of the resolution. Similarly, the resolution 
does not provide for any tools or mechanisms to 
monitor the human rights implications of the resolu-
tion’s implementation. 
• Resolution 2396 endorses and/ or imposes a series 
of practices that have already been implemented in 
US domestic policy,75 thereby representing a clear 
example of the United States successfully exporting 
domestic policies to the international stage. 

The 2018 Addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles
The 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles76 were devel-
oped in follow-up to Security Council resolution 
2178 with the purpose of aiding the implementa-
tion of the measures aimed at stemming the flow 
of “foreign terrorist fighters” by Member States. 
In December 2018, Member States negotiated an 
Addendum77 to the Guiding Principles, providing 
non-binding but authoritative guidance towards 
the implementation of resolution 2396, particularly 
focused on addressing the screening, prosecution, 
rehabilitation, and reintegration of “foreign ter-
rorist fighters” and other persons associated with 
terrorist groups. 
Guiding Principle 3 of the Addendum focuses on 
the implementation of the obligation “to collect, 
use and share biometric data in order to respon-
sibly and properly identify terrorists, including 
FTFs” and highlights the following recommended 
actions in this respect:
• Develop, use, and maintain biometric systems 
and data-sharing protocols;
• Compare the biometrics of individuals entering, 
departing, or seeking residence in their country 
against other national and international biomet-
ric databases, including those of known and 
suspected “foreign terrorist fighters”;
• Employ biometric systems to authenticate/ 
identify individuals and prevent the use of false 
particulars or attempts to impersonate other 
people;
• Adopt clear human rights-based frameworks 
for the use of biometric technology, which 
include procedural safeguards, effective over-
sight,78 and remedy. Importantly, the guiding 
principle flags that human rights-based frame-
works “could be supplemented by a review 
process that informs all national policy and 
decision-making regarding the use of biomet-
rics for counter-terrorism purposes”;
76 S/2015/939
77 S/2018/1177.
78 Ensuring effective oversight may include, among others, “establishing, or expanding the remit of existing, appropriate oversight bodies to supervise the implementation of relevant 
legislation.”
• Take into consideration specific issues that may 
arise with respect to protecting and promoting 
the rights of the child in the context of biomet-
rics and put in place the requisite frameworks 
and safeguards (including when children’s 
biometric data is collected for child-protection 
purposes);
• Conduct regular risk assessments to avoid  
security breaches, data being damaged or  
compromised;
• Ensure that biometric systems allow for  
interoperability between other national and 
international biometric databases, including 
INTERPOL and maximize the use of INTER-
POL’s biometric databases.
While the Addendum also expands on what the 
Security Council meant when requiring that Mem-
ber States take measures mandated by the reso-
lution in line with international and domestic law, 
including international human rights law, inter-
national humanitarian law, and refugee law, the 
human rights guidance contained in the Adden-
dum is constrained. The Addendum helpfully flags 
a number of essential human rights requirements, 
including the need to set up human rights-compli-
ant frameworks that incorporate procedural safe-
guards, effective oversight and guarantees the right 
to remedy in case of violations. At the same time, 
it does not provide the granular guidance that the 
human rights implications of the resolution warrant. 
The mandate of the Special Rapporteur has already 
expressed concerns that the lack of such detailed 
guidance on human rights was a hallmark of the 
regulatory approach of the global counter-terror-
ism architecture and the Security Council in  
particular.
12

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    13
2. United Nations capacity-building
A significant component of resolution 2396 is technical 
assistance and capacity-building, to be led by relevant 
UN entities, members of the United Nations count-
er-terrorism architecture.79 However, as noted by some 
members of the Security Council, such as Egypt80 and 
Uruguay,81 at the time of adoption, the obligations 
imposed by the resolution are consequential and oner-
ous. Many Member States may thus find compliance 
challenging. This has also been highlighted in the 2018 
Addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles 
acknowledging that the implementation of the require-
ments of resolution 2396 “requires legal frameworks, 
skills, capacity, expertise and equipment that [some 
Member States] do not currently possess.”82 
States also highlighted that the resolution does not pro-
vide Member States with the tools needed for its imple-
mentation. This includes failing to provide compulsory 
support in terms of funding, technical assistance, and 
capacity-building. In this respect, it is worth emphasiz-
ing that while the relevant obligations under the resolu-
tion are to be formally implemented in compliance with 
international human rights law,83 none of the UN human 
rights entities are explicitly mentioned as part of man-
dated United Nations efforts to offer capacity-building 
and technical assistance.84 Furthermore, as these human 
rights entities struggle with lack of human, financial, and 
other resources, it would be challenging, if not impossi-
ble, for them to take up such role at their own initiative.85  
79 S/RES/2396 (2017), paras. 42-50.
80 8148th meeting of the Security Council (21 December 2017), S/PV.8148.
81 Ibid. 
82 S/2018/1177.  
83 Resolution 2396 contains 19 references to international human rights law and relevant obligations, including in relation to the use of biometrics (para. 15). 
84 The resolution further highlights the need for compliance with international humanitarian law and refugee law but, similarly to human rights entities, no organizations or agencies 
specialized in humanitarian or refugee matters are explicitly referenced.
85 There are two UN human rights entities that are members of the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Human Rights (OHCHR) and the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. 
The Special Rapporteur is explicitly mandated to oversee the interface between counter-terrorism and human rights (see A/HRC/RES/15/15). However, as a part-time, pro bono 
independent expert, the Special Rapporteur fulfils relevant activities within the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact without a corresponding budget or adequate staff. 
As OHCHR is the principal UN entity mandated to promote and protect all human rights for all people, its mission encompasses conducting relevant work at the intersection of 
human rights and counter-terrorism. However, the Office similarly does not have the resources needed to comprehensively cover developments in the counter-terrorism space. 
  Other UN human rights mechanisms, such as treaty bodies as well as relevant special procedure mechanisms also address issues related to counter-terrorism and human rights 
within the scope and confines of their respective mandates. The complementary contributions brought by these bodies are important and should be given due consideration by the 
counter-terrorism architecture. However, the limitations linked to their particular roles and mandates do not permit these bodies to consistently and systematically contribute to the 
mainstreaming of human rights in the counter-terrorism architecture. 
86 The Biometrics Institute was founded in July 2001 with a mission to “promote the responsible and ethical use of biometrics through thought-leadership and good-practice guid-
ance.” See https://www.biometricsinstitute.org/. The Institute has developed a series of relevant guidelines, including on privacy and biometrics. As these documents are not publicly 
available, they have not been reviewed by the mandate of the Special Rapporteur. 
87 United Nations Compendium of Recommend Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism (2018).
88 A Summary of the United Nations Compendium of Recommend Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism, available at https://www.un.org/sc/ctc/
wp-content/uploads/2019/03/UNOCT-Biometrics-Summary-Bro_WEB.pdf (visited 20 February 2020).
89 Ibid. 
90 United Nations Compendium of Recommend Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism (2018), page 9. 
91 In addition to privacy-specific recommendations, the Compendium also addresses issues related to data protection and due process rights. 
Capacity-building and technical assistance  
responses on part of UN entities
In light of the newly imposed obligations and concerns 
expressed by Member States as to the difficulties their 
implementation poses, biometrics have also been iden-
tified by UN counter-terrorism entities, including the 
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate 
(CTED), as a priority area for capacity building. 
In 2018, in association with the Biometrics Institute,86 
the UN compiled and published a Compendium of Rec-
ommended Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of 
Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism (hereinafter “Compen-
dium”).87 The intent of the Compendium is to provide 
“Member States with a high-level overview of biomet-
ric technology and operating systems in the context of 
counter-terrorism.”88 Specifically, it is intended to address 
“critical issues such as governance, regulation, data 
protection, privacy, human rights, and risk management 
and vulnerability assessments” along with recommended 
practices and case studies.89 
While the Compendium underscores the need for  
governments to:
“address the protection of those who are identi-
fied by such systems and ensure that the collection, 
storage and use of biometric data is conducted in 
accordance with international human rights and 
privacy laws (…)” 90 
and includes a number of relevant recommendations, 
in particular relating to the right to privacy,91 the man-
date of the Special Rapporteur finds that in its current 
iteration, the Compendium falls short of comprehensive-
ly addressing human rights implications and providing 

14
granular guidance to Member States in this regard. Such 
efforts would require a freestanding guiding document 
with a main focus on human rights concerns and ways  
in which compliance with resolution 2396 can be  
implemented in line with the international human rights 
norms that States have agreed to be bound by. The man-
date of the Special Rapporteur is very concerned that in 
the absence of such comprehensive and free-standing 
human rights guidance, capacity-building and technical 
assistance in this area is conducted by UN entities with  
a significant human rights lacuna.
C. Biometric tools and data:  
Towards a human rights approach
The human rights impact linked to the use of biometric 
tools and data is enormous. Related consequences are 
felt across a range of fundamental rights, including, but 
not limited to, the rights to life, to liberty and security of 
person, the right to be free from torture, cruel, inhuman 
or degrading treatment, the rights to a fair trial, privacy 
and family life, freedom of expression or movement, etc. 
It is the scale of impingement, together with the uni-
versal, interdependent, and interconnected nature of 
these rights leading to manifold, interrelated effects 
across a series of individual and collective freedoms that 
makes the need for human rights compliant regulation 
of the use of biometric tools and data an imperative and 
urgent need. 
The mandate of the Special Rapporteur recognizes that 
the capabilities linked to biometric data and technol-
ogy turn them into powerful tools in the hands of law 
enforcement and intelligence agencies, with the potential 
to further border control and management and to be of 
great added value in the delivery of criminal justice. As 
such, these tools also have the potential to substantially 
contribute to making counter-terrorism efforts more 
targeted, more precise, and thereby more efficient.
At the same time, as also emphasized in the 2018 
Addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles92, 
“[t]hese technologies present complex legal and policy 
challenges that are relevant both to States’ efforts to 
counter terrorism and to their human rights obligations.” 
For this reason, “the expansive technical scope and rapid 
92 S/2018/1177. 
93 Ibid., para. 15. 
94 See e.g. ‘The right to privacy in the digital age. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights’, A/HRC/39/29, para. 14; Privacy International, ‘Biometrics: 
Friend or Foe of Privacy?’ (2017), available at https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2017-11/Biometrics_Friend_or_foe.pdf (visited 19 February 2020). 
95 A/RES/68/167; A/RES/69/166; A/RES/71/199. 
development of this [biometric] technology” is thought 
to deserve greater attention as it relates to the protection 
of human rights.93
The use of biometrics comes with salient human rights 
challenges:94 
• Some common to many means of information  
gathering and use; 
• Others commonly arise in relation to the use of 
diverse data-driven technologies; and
• Again others are either specific to the use of biomet-
ric data and related technologies or amplified when 
biometrics are involved.
This section will proceed to outline some of the pertinent 
human rights implications of the use of biometric tools 
at each vital stage of data usage: 
• Collection; 
• Retention; 
• Processing; and 
• Sharing. 
It will lay out the ramifications of the use of biometric 
data and technology on the rights to privacy and data 
protection while also addressing ways in which such 
ramifications point beyond these rights. 
1. The right to privacy
Discussions on the human rights impact of data gath-
ering and use overwhelmingly focus on relevant impli-
cations on the right to privacy. Such implications have 
also been recognized and addressed at the international 
level, including by United Nations organs. The General 
Assembly has highlighted that:
“the rapid pace of technological development enables 
individuals all over the world to use new infor-
mation and communication technologies and at the 
same time enhances the capacity of governments, 
companies and individuals to undertake surveil-
lance, interception and data collection, which may 
violate or abuse human rights, in particular the 
right to privacy.”95 

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    15
Technological developments, together with the prolifera-
tion of and increased reliance on various consumer- 
facing technologies, have made interferences with the 
right to privacy both less noticeable to society and the 
individual subjects affected and, at the same time, more 
intrusive, with potentially far-reaching consequences  
that frequently include implications beyond the right  
to privacy. 
The right to privacy is enshrined in international and 
regional human rights instruments96 demonstrating a 
“universal recognition of [its] fundamental importance, 
and enduring relevance, […] and of the need to ensure 
that it is safeguarded, in law and in practice.”97 Notwith-
standing the arguably universal nature of the right to 
privacy, about one third of the world’s jurisdictions do 
not have adequate (or any) privacy protections incorpo-
rated in law and practice.98 Even in the case of  countries 
with relevant protections embedded in domestic law, a 
comparative analysis shows consistent shortcomings in 
safeguarding the right to privacy in practice, together 
with a trend towards stepping up data collection and 
retention, notably in relation to biometric data—a trend 
that risks “creating surveillance states.”99
Despite these serious deficiencies, the mandate of the 
Special Rapporteur stresses that States have an obliga-
tion under international human rights law to safeguard 
the privacy of persons within their jurisdiction. In this 
96 See, for example, Universal Declaration of Human Rights (article 12); International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (article 17); Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(article 16); International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (article 14).
97 See ‘The right to privacy in the digital age. Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights’, A/HRC/27/37, para. 13. See also ‘Report of the 
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to the freedom of opinion and expression, Frank la Rue’, A/HRC/23/40, para. 20.
98 See, for example, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, ‘Data Protection and Privacy Legislation Worldwide’, available at https://unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/
STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D-Legislation/eCom-Data-Protection-Laws.aspx (visited 19 February 2020). 
99 See Paul Bischoff, ‘Data Privacy Laws & Government Surveillance by Country: Which Countries Best Protect Their Citizens?’, Comparitech (15 October 2019), available at 
https://www.comparitech.com/blog/vpn-privacy/surveillance-states/ (visited 19 February 2020).
100 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
101 At the regional level the right to privacy is protected by the European Convention on Human Rights (article 8) and the American Convention on Human Rights (article 11), 
among others
102 This means that the law must be “foreseeable as to its effects, that is, formulated with sufficient precision to enable the individual to regulate his conduct” and that the individual 
affected by it “must be able - if need be with appropriate advice - to foresee, to a degree that is reasonable in the circumstances, the consequences which a given action may entail.” 
See European Court of Human Rights, Sunday Times v. The United Kingdom (no. 1), Application no. 6538/74, 26 April 1979, § 49. This requirement does not call for absolute fore-
seeability but rather that the law give individuals an “adequate indication as to the circumstances in which and the conditions on which public authorities are empowered to interfere 
with their rights.” The law must also provide sufficient guidance to those charged with its execution to enable them to ascertain when privacy can be restricted and indicate the scope 
of any discretion conferred on the competent authorities as well as the manner of its exercise. See, European Court of Human Rights, Malone v. The United Kingdom, Application 
no. 8691/79, 2 August 1984, §§ 66-68. 
  See also, European Court of Human Rights, Roman Zakharov v. Russia [GC], Application no. 47143/06, 4 December 2015, § 230; Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promo-
tion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, A/69/397, para. 35.
103 Accessibility implies that individuals that are to be affected by the respective legislation must have the possibility to become aware of its content. See European Court of Human 
Rights, Groppera Radio AG and Others v. Switzerland, Application no. 10890/84, Series A no. 173, 28 March 1990, §§ 65-68.
104 European Court of Human Rights, Kruslin v. France, Application no. 11801/85, 24 April 1990, §§ 33 and 35; European Court of Human Rights, Huvig v. France, Application no. 
11105/84, 24 April 1990, §§ 32 and 34. 
105 At the same time, relevant restrictions impacting on the right to privacy cannot be justified merely by a general reference to a protected interest, such as national security. See, for 
example, Roman Zakharov v. Russia [GC], Application no. 47143/06, 4 December 2015, § 269.
106 See, for example, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, A/HRC/37/52;  
Human Rights Committee, General Comment no. 34, CCPR/C/GC/34, para. 26; Hirst v The United Kingdom (GC), no. 74025/01, ECHR 2005-IX, 6 October 2005, § 62ff;  
Georgian Labour Party v. Georgia, no. 9103/04, 8 July 2008, § 119. 
107 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, article 2(3), American Convention on Human Rights, article 25, European Convention on Human Rights, article 13.
sense, the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR) guarantees a person’s right not to be 
subject to “arbitrary or unlawful interference with his 
privacy, family, or correspondence.”100 Many States also 
have relevant obligations under regional human rights 
systems.101 
Collection, retention, processing, sharing, and other uses 
of information relating to a person, particularly when 
done without the person’s valid consent, amount to an 
interference with that person’s right to privacy and thus 
must meet a set of conditions in order for such measures 
to be human rights-compliant. In particular, such inter-
ference must be implemented pursuant to a domestic 
legal basis that is sufficiently: 
• Foreseeable;102 
• Accessible,103 and 
• Provides for adequate safeguards against abuse.104 
Restrictions taken must be: 
• Aimed at protecting a legitimate aim;105 and
• With due regard for the principles of necessity,  
proportionality, and non-discrimination.106 
In case of infringements on the right to privacy in viola-
tion of international human rights standards, States must 
provide for an effective remedy.107

16
Applying these considerations to biometric data is cru-
cial but in practice frequently insufficient. This is particu-
larly pertinent if one considers that certain aspects of our 
biometrics, such as a person’s face and appearance, their 
movement, and voice are—unlike our online activity, 
emails, text messages, and diverse other kinds of infor-
mation that law enforcement or intelligence services may 
target—if not inherently public, at least easily accessible. 
As a result, related data, despite allowing for the identifi-
cation of the individual, may not enjoy protection, in law 
or in practice, under privacy frameworks in a number of 
jurisdictions. Such shortcomings also highlight the im-
portance of comprehensive data protection regimes that 
extend legal protection to biometric information, even in 
109 General Data Protection Regulation, Regulation (EU) 2016/679, article 9. See also, Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing 
of Personal Data (Convention 108+), article 6; Brazilian General Data Protection Law (LGPD), Federal Law no. 13,709/2018 which also qualifies genetic or biometric data as 
sensitive personal data. India’s draft Personal Data Protection Bill similarly defines biometric data as sensitive personal data. See PRS Legislative Research, ‘The Personal Data 
Protection Bill, 2019’, available at https://prsindia.org/billtrack/personal-data-protection-bill-2019 (visited 19 February 2020).
110 See, for example, Information Commissioner’s Office, ‘Guide to the General Data Protection Regulation (GCPR)/ The Principles’, available at https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/
guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/principles/ (visited 19 February 2020); Data Protection Commission, ‘Principles of Data Protec-
tion’, available at https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals/principles-data-protection (visited 19 February 2020); Renato Leite Monteiro, ‘The  New Brazilian General Data 
Protection Law – A Detailed Analysis’, International Association of Privacy Professionals, 15 August 2018, available at https://iapp.org/news/a/the-new-brazilian-general-data-pro-
tection-law-a-detailed-analysis/ (visited 19 February 2020). 
111 DLA Piper, Data Protection Laws of the World, available at https://www.dlapiperdataprotection.com (visited 19 February 2020). 
cases when such information may not be characterized  
as inherently private. 
Recommendation: 
• States must set up and implement comprehensive 
and efficient legal frameworks aimed at protecting 
the right to privacy and make sure that the easily ac-
cessible nature of some types of biometric data does 
not lead to insufficient protection under relevant 
domestic regulations. 
2. The protection of personal and  
sensitive data
Biometric data, as data relating to the physical, physio-
logical or behavioural characteristics of a person, must 
fall within the scope of data protection laws. The  
European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR), heralded as the most comprehensive data 
protection framework in the world, categorizes biometric 
data as a “special category of personal data”109 due to its 
sensitive character, requiring special protections when 
such data is collected or processed. Biometric data should 
be collected and handled in line with recognized data 
protection principles including:
• The principles of lawfulness and fairness; 
• Transparency in collection and processing; 
• Purpose limitation; 
• Data minimization; 
• Accuracy; 
• Storage limitation; 
• Security of data; and 
• Accountability for data handling.110 
In practice, however, domestic data protection frame-
works frequently do not provide for adequate protection 
of biometric data, for diverse reasons. To this date, a large 
number of countries have not passed comprehensive data 
protection laws.111 Due to the easy accessibility of certain 
types of biometric data, such information may not  
Independent oversight
The collection and use of biometric data  
may happen in the context of surveillance 
operations, including as a component of mass 
surveillance systems. The mandate of the  
Special Rapporteur underscores that  adequate 
protection of the right to privacy requires that 
surveillance measures are subject to robust, 
independent oversight systems as an effective 
safeguard against arbitrariness, as also consis-
tently highlighted by UN and regional human 
rights mechanisms, including in respect of  
surveillance carried out pursuant to anti- 
terrorism powers.108 
108 See ‘Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of 
human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, Martin 
Scheinin. Compilation of good practices on legal and institutional frameworks 
and measures that ensure respect for human rights by intelligence agencies 
while countering terrorism, including on their oversight’, A/HRC/14/46, para. 
34. Oversight is best ensured by the judiciary or an independent body with 
a judicial component and must include the review of relevant evidence “by 
means of some form of adversarial proceedings.” See, for example, Janowiec and 
Others v. Russia [GC], Applications nos. 55508/07 and 29520/09, 21 October 
2013, §§ 213 and 214; Roman Zakharov v. Russia [GC], Application no. 
47143/06, 4 December 2015, § 269.

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    17
explicitly be recognized as sensitive or even personal data 
under the law. Some jurisdictions, while having estab-
lished data protection frameworks, do not attach suffi-
cient safeguards and protection to biometric information 
in this context, at times as a consequence of the gap 
between technological advances and regulation. There 
is overwhelming good governance rationale justifying 
stringent protection afforded to sensitive data in domes-
tic systems. As outlined above, biometric data is linked to 
an individual’s measurable characteristics that make this 
person unique and identifiable and consequently must 
be characterized and protected as such in domestic law, 
if we are to adequately address the risks attached to its 
collection and use. 
Even in the case of countries with robust data protection 
frameworks, relevant protections and safeguards may 
not apply or apply in a modified format to information 
collected by law enforcement and, even more so, if data 
collection and processing happens in a national security 
context. The GDPR, flagged above, does not apply to 
data processed by law enforcement and criminal justice 
authorities. Such processing is governed by the Direc-
tive on the processing of personal data for authorities 
responsible for preventing, investigating, detecting and 
prosecuting crimes (the “Police Directive”).112 Further-
more, neither the GDPR or the Police Directive regulate 
data collection, retention, processing, and sharing to the 
extent this happens for purposes of national security.113 
The GDPR’s approach in this respect seems to reflect the 
global norm as opposed to being an outlier. 
While applying data protection rules in an amended 
format to national security processes may be warranted, 
such adjustments must not lead to curtailed safeguards, 
insufficient transparency or inadequate oversight.  
Importantly, the principle of purpose limitation must  
be respected. Purpose limitation requires data to be col-
lected with a specific, defined, and legitimate purpose in 
mind (purpose specification) and not used for a purpose 
that is different from or incompatible with the origi-
nal purpose (compatible use).114 Furthermore, relevant 
authorities must pay due regard to data minimization 
by restricting collection and processing measures to data 
that is necessary or relevant for accomplishing the legiti-
mate purpose for which data was collected. 
112 Directive EU 2016/ 680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investi-
gation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 
2008/977/JHA
113 The EU lacks competence to directly legislate in this area as the Treaty on European Union provides that “national security remains the sole responsibility of each Member State.” 
See Consolidated Version of the Treaty on European Union (TEU), article 4(2). 
114 See, for example, Maximilian von Grafenstein, ‘The Principle of Purpose Limitation in Data Protection Laws: The Risk-based Approach, Principles, and Private Standards as 
Elements for Regulating Innovation’, 1st ed., Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft MbH, 2018.
Recommendation: 
• States must make sure that biometric data falls with-
in the scope of data protection laws and that relevant 
protection is not unduly restricted even when such 
data is collected, retained, processed or shared in a 
national security context. 
3. There’s more to it: the broader human 
rights implications  
Biometric tools have been heralded for their promise 
to deliver positive outcomes in multiple regulatory 
contexts. Indeed, such tools can:
• Contribute to combating social exclusion or margin-
alization; 
• Enhance economic, social, and cultural rights, among 
others, by facilitating access and delivery of services 
such as food, health care, and other basic social 
needs; 
• Facilitate meaningful and equal participation of all 
in political and public life, including through the 
strengthening of election processes, for example via 
biometric voter registration systems; 
• Aid the setting up of identification and registration 
systems aimed at preventing identity fraud and theft; 
and, 
• Serve as a powerful tool to improve law enforcement 
efforts and the delivery of criminal justice. 
But, biometric tools also come with a number of poten-
tial drawbacks that need close attention. As data-driven 
tools, they are powered by personal data of a sensitive na-
ture and, as any data-driven tools, raise concerns relating 
to the right to privacy and lawful, fair and safe handling 
of data. Some salient concerns in this regard have been 
outlined above. 
However, it is crucial to emphasize that questions on 
how technology and data usage encroach on privacy can-
not be meaningfully addressed without relevant analysis 
and responses duly considering the universal, indivisible, 
interdependent, and interrelated nature of all human 
rights.

18
Both the General Assembly and the Human Rights 
Council have stressed that the right to privacy serves as 
one of the foundations of democratic societies and, as 
such, plays an important role for the realization of the 
rights to freedom of expression and to hold opinions 
without interference as well as to the freedoms of peace-
ful assembly and association.115 Due to the interconnect-
edness of a range of human rights, the adverse impacts 
may, however, point even further and engage a broad 
spectrum of rights. These include, inter alia, the right to 
equal protection of the law without discrimination, the 
rights to life, to liberty and security of person, fair trial 
and due process, the right to freedom of movement, the 
right to enjoy the highest attainable standard of health, 
and to have access to work and social security. Such 
concerns are particularly well-grounded when exploring 
issues around biometric data and tools driven by such 
data. 
115 A/RES/71/199; A/RES/73/179; A/HRC/RES/34/7.
116 While a detailed analysis of derogations under human rights law goes beyond the scope of this paper, article 4 of the ICCPR provides for the possibility for States to temporarily  
adjust certain obligations under the treaty in time of “public emergency which threatens the life of the nation,” provided a number of conditions are met, including that such 
measures be limited to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation. This obligation reflects the principle of proportionality which is common to derogation and 
limitation powers. Any measures thus taken need to be in genuine response to the situation, aimed at the restoration of a constitutional order respectful of human rights and be fully 
justified by the circumstances. For a detailed analysis on States’ use of emergency powers post-9/11, see A/HRC/37/52. 
117 Some human rights are absolute. Such rights include the prohibitions of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, of slavery and servitude, as well as the 
principle of legality. The absolute character of these rights means that it is not permitted to restrict them by balancing their enjoyment against the pursuit of a legitimate aim or 
against any other consideration, including in case of armed conflict, or any case of public emergency. Other rights, though some of them derogable in a state of emergency, may 
not be limited. These include freedom of thought, conscience and religion, as well as freedom of opinion. It has to be noted in this respect however that the right to manifest one’s 
religion or beliefs as well as the right to freedom of expression are not absolute and may be limited in line with relevant conditions imposed by human rights law. For a more detailed 
analysis, see A/HRC/37/52. 
118 Such law must comply with the requirements foreseeability and accessibility and must contain sufficient safeguards to protect against arbitrary implementation. See also relevant 
analysis in Section C.1.
119 It should be noted in this respect that legitimate aims must be interpreted narrowly. For example, the creation of a biometric tool or system cannot be invoked as a legitimate aim 
in itself. In this sense, see also Privacy International, ‘Briefing to the UN Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate on the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometric Data to Tackle 
Terrorism’ ( June 2019), p. 7.
In the context of measures aimed at preventing and 
countering terrorism and violent extremism, taking 
effective measures to protect the population against such 
security threats while at the same time ensuring the pro-
tection of human rights may raise practical challenges for 
States. However, States can effectively meet their obli-
gations under international law by using the flexibilities 
built into the international human rights law framework. 
In case of a state of emergency “threatening the life of 
the nation,” States may lawfully derogate from certain 
human rights obligations, subject to a set of conditions.116 
Moreover, even outside of a state of emergency, States 
can impose limitations on the exercise of certain rights.117 
Such limitations must be provided by law118 and neces-
sary to protect a legitimate aim (such as national security, 
public order, or the rights and freedoms of others).119 
Any measures must also be governed by the principles of 
necessity and proportionality and must respect the need 
for consistency with other guaranteed human rights. 


COVID-19 and biometrics
Countries worldwide are currently grappling with 
the COVID-19 pandemic.120 In response to the 
health and economic crisis caused by the pan-
demic, the number of countries having taken mea-
sures involving restrictions on a series of human 
rights,121 or having declared a state of emergency122 
is on a continuous rise. 
These measures include restrictions on move-
ment such as shelter in place orders, curfews, 
travel restrictions, and diverse means of tracking 
the movement and whereabouts of the general 
population or of individuals diagnosed with or 
suspected of COVID-19 to monitor their compli-
ance with relevant restrictions. Diverse iterations 
of surveillance measures have been implemented 
in a variety of countries,123 with some jurisdictions 
adding biometric tools to the mix. Countries and 
territories using facial recognition to monitor 
120 See WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 - 11 March 2020, available at https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-
opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020 (visited 15 April 2020).
121 Such measures are based on newly adopted laws and policies or on “repurposed” existing legislation. See, for example, ICNL, ECNL and the Mandate of the Special Rapporteur 
on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, ‘COVID-19 Civic Freedom Tracker’, available at https://www.icnl.org/
covid19tracker/ (visited 15 April 2020); University of Oxford Blavatnik School of Government, ‘COVID-19 Government Response Tracker’, available at https://www.bsg.ox.ac.
uk/research/research-projects/coronavirus-government-response-tracker (visited 15 April 2020); Privacy International, ‘Tracking the Global Response to COVID-19’, available at 
https://privacyinternational.org/examples/tracking-global-response-covid-19 (visited 15 April 2020). 
122 Ibid.
123 See, for example, Yuval Noah Harari, ‘The World After Coronavirus’, Financial Times, 20 March 2020, available at https://www.ft.com/content/19d90308-6858-11ea-a3c9-
1fe6fedcca75 (visited 15 April 2020); Jeremy Cliffe, ‘The Rise of the Bio-Surveillance State’, New Statesman, 25 March 2020, available at https://www.newstatesman.com/sci-
ence-tech/2020/03/rise-bio-surveillance-state (visited 15 April 2020); Allie Funk, ‘How to Protect Both Public Health and Privacy’, Freedom House, 6 April 2020, available at 
  https://freedomhouse.org/article/how-protect-both-public-health-and-privacy (visited 15 April 2020); Isobel Asher Hamilton, ‘Compulsory Selfies and Contact-Tracing:  
Authorities Everywhere Are Using Smartphones to Track the Coronavirus, And It’s Part of a Massive Increase in Global Surveillance’, Business Insider, 14 April 2020, available  
at https://www.businessinsider.com/countries-tracking-citizens-phones-coronavirus-2020-3 (visited 15 April 2020).
124 Yuval Noah Harari, ‘The World After Coronavirus’, Financial Times, 20 March 2020, available at https://www.ft.com/content/19d90308-6858-11ea-a3c9-1fe6fedcca75 (visited  
15 April 2020).
125 Chris Burt, ‘Biometric Checks and Facial Recognition Payments to Support Social Distancing, Fight Spread of Covid-19’, Biometric Update, 23 March 2020, available at  
https://www.biometricupdate.com/202003/biometric-checks-and-facial-recognition-payments-to-support-social-distancing-fight-spread-of-covid-19 (visited 15 April 2020).
126 Evan Gershkovich, ‘How Russia Is Responding to the Coronavirus: Cameras, Deportations and Skepticism’, The Moscow Times, 13 March 2020, available at https://www.themos-
cowtimes.com/2020/03/13/how-russia-is-responding-to-the-coronavirus-cameras-deportations-and-skepticism-a69616 (visited 15 April 2020); Reuters, ‘Moscow Deploys Facial 
Recognition Technology for Coronavirus Quarantine’, 21 February 2020, available at https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-health-moscow-technology/moscow-deploys- 
facial-recognition-technology-for-coronavirus-quarantine-idUSKBN20F1RZ (visited 15 April 2020).
127 Privacy International, ‘Moldova: Transnistria Uses Facial Recognition to Identify Quarantine Violators’, 28 March 2020, available at https://privacyinternational.org/exam-
ples/3629/moldova-transnistria-uses-facial-recognition-identify-quarantine-violators (visited 15 April 2020).
128 Cynthia Brumfield, ‘New Coronavirus-Era Surveillance and Biometric Systems Pose Logistical, Privacy Problems’, CSO, 3 April 2020, available at https://www.csoonline.com/
article/3535194/new-coronavirus-era-surveillance-and-biometric-systems-pose-logistical-privacy-problems.html  (visited 15 April 2020); Takashi Kawakami, ‘Coronavirus Gives 
China More Reason to Employ Biometric Tech’, Nikkei Asian Review, 30 March 2020, available at https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/China-tech/Coronavirus-gives- 
China-more-reason-to-employ-biometric-tech (visited 15 April 2020).
129 Martin Pollard, ‘China Firm Develops System to Recognize Faces Behind Coronavirus Masks’, Reuters, 9 March 2020, available at https://www.reuters.com/article/health-coro-
navirus-facial-recognition/china-firm-develops-system-to-recognise-faces-behind-coronavirus-masks-idUSL8N2B20QP (visited 15 April 2020); Lindsey O’Donnell, 
‘Covid-19 Spurs Facial Recognition Tracking, Privacy Fears’, Threat Post, 20 March 2020, available at  https://threatpost.com/covid-19-spurs-facial-recognition-tracking-priva-
cy-fears/153953 (visited 15 April 2020); Tom Simonite, ‘How Well Can Algorithms Recognize Your Masked Face?’, WIRED, 1 May 2020, available at https://www.wired.com/
story/algorithms-recognize-masked-face/ (visited 1 May 2020).
130 Cynthia Brumfield, ‘New Coronavirus-Era Surveillance and Biometric Systems Pose Logistical, Privacy Problems’, CSO, 3 April 2020, available at https://www.csoonline.com/
article/3535194/new-coronavirus-era-surveillance-and-biometric-systems-pose-logistical-privacy-problems.html  (visited 15 April 2020).
131 Ibid.; Dave Gershgorn, ‘Facial Recognition Companies See the Coronavirus as a Business Opportunity’, Medium OneZero, 19 March 2020, available at https://onezero.medium.
com/facial-recognition-companies-see-the-coronavirus-as-a-business-opportunity-6c9b99d60649 (visited 15 April 2020); Lindsey O’Donnell, ‘Covid-19 Spurs Facial Recognition 
Tracking, Privacy Fears’, Threat Post, 20 March 2020, available at  https://threatpost.com/covid-19-spurs-facial-recognition-tracking-privacy-fears/153953 (visited 15 April 2020); 
Joseph Cox, ‘Surveillance Company Says It’s Deploying “Coronavirus-Detecting” Cameras in US’, VICE, 17 March 2020, available at https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/epg8xe/
surveillance-company-deploying-coronavirus-detecting-cameras (visited 15 April 2020).
132 Isobel Asher Hamilton, ‘Compulsory Selfies and Contact-Tracing: Authorities Everywhere Are Using Smartphones to Track the Coronavirus, And It’s Part of a Massive Increase 
in Global Surveillance’, Business Insider, 14 April 2020, available at https://www.businessinsider.com/countries-tracking-citizens-phones-coronavirus-2020-3 (visited 15 April 
2020).
133 Joel Schectman, Christopher Bing, Jack Stubbs, ‘Special Report: Cyber-Intel Firms Pitch Governments on Spy Tools to Trace Coronavirus’, Reuters, 28 April 2020, available 
at https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-spy-specialreport/special-report-cyber-intel-firms-pitch-governments-on-spy-tools-to-trace-coronavirus-idUSKC-
N22A2G1 (visited 28 April 2020); Leo Kelion, ‘Coronavirus: Apple and Google Team Up to Contact Trace Covid-19’, BBC News, 10 April 2020, available at https://www.bbc.
com/news/technology-52246319 (visited 15 April 2020); Natasha Lomas, ‘An EU coalition of techies is backing a ‘privacy-preserving’ standard for COVID-19 contacts tracing’, 
Tech Crunch, 1 April 2020, available at https://techcrunch-com.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/techcrunch.com/2020/04/01/an-eu-coalition-of-techies-is-backing-a-privacy-preserving-
standard-for-covid-19-contacts-tracing/amp/ (visited 15 April 2020).
public spaces and enforce quarantine include Chi-
na,124 Malaysia125, Russia,126 and Transnistria.127 The 
broadest application of such tools has so far been 
reported in China where cameras equipped with 
facial recognition software have been employed to 
assist the authorities.128 Several Chinese companies 
have reportedly developed software that can iden-
tify individuals wearing masks with a high level of 
accuracy.129 In addition to facial recognition, body 
temperatures of individuals using public transit 
are also recorded.130 Many other countries con-
template the use of facial recognition and diverse 
forms of bio-surveillance, such as temperature 
sensors.131 Poland has released an application to be 
used by those in quarantine that requires individ-
uals to periodically send geotagged selfies as a 
means of monitoring compliance.132 Many jurisdic-
tions, aided by business enterprises,133 deploy or 
HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    19

plan on deploying tracing technology to facilitate 
the easing of pandemic-related restrictions with-
out triggering a second wave of infections.134 The 
emergency nature of the situation may result in 
relevant tools being developed without a proper 
human rights risk assessment and deployed pre-
maturely.
At the same time, the use of certain biometric 
tools such as fingerprint scanners has been scaled 
back due to the health safety risks that they pose. 
Numerous governments and organizations decid-
ed to, at least temporarily, replace such tools with 
other, preferably contactless, options (such as 
facial recognition or QR codes) or more low-tech 
means of identification and authentication.135 
Action taken to address the challenges posed by 
COVID-19 does not belong in the realm of national 
security or counter-terrorism. However, various 
government representatives have used war rhet-
oric in their COVID-19-related public communi-
cation136 and certain countries chose to resort to 
tools hitherto employed in a counter-terrorism 
context.137 At the same time, surveillance-related 
measures taken to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic 
134 See, for example, Susan Landau, ‘Location Surveillance to Counter COVID-19: Efficacy Is What Matters’, Lawfare, 25 March 2020, available at https://www.lawfareblog.com/
location-surveillance-counter-covid-19-efficacy-what-matters (visited 15 April 2020); BBC News, ‘Coronavirus Privacy: Are South Korea’s Alerts Too Revealing?’ 5 March 2020, 
available at https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-51733145 (visited 15 April 2020).
135 For example, the World Food Programme has been using QR codes instead of fingerprints to authenticate beneficiaries. See https://twitter.com/WFPInnovation/sta-
tus/1250336530561789952 (visited 15 April 2020). 
136 See, for example, Adam Westbrook, ‘Beware of Politicians Who Declare “War” on the Coronavirus’, The New York Times, 20 April 2020, available at https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/04/20/opinion/coronavirus-war-politicians.html (visited 20 April 2020); Jacob Hagstrom, ‘Stop Calling Covid-19 a War’, The Washington Post, 20 April 2020, available 
at https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2020/04/20/stop-calling-covid-19-war/ (visited 20 April 2020). 
137 Amir Cahane, ‘The Israeli Emergency Regulations for Location Tracking of Coronavirus Carriers’, Lawfare, 21 March 2020, available at https://www.lawfareblog.com/israeli-emer-
gency-regulations-location-tracking-coronavirus-carriers (visited 15 April 2020); Haaretz, ‘An Epidemic of Surveillance’, 18 March 2020, available at https://www.haaretz.com/
opinion/editorial/an-epidemic-of-surveillance-1.8685396 (visited 15 April 2020).
138 See ‘Joint civil society statement: States use of digital surveillance technologies to fight pandemic must respect human rights’, 2 April 2020, available at https://www.accessnow.org/
cms/assets/uploads/2020/04/Joint-statement-COVID-19-and-surveillance-FINAL1.pdf (visited 15 April 2020).
139 For more information on the human rights dimension of COVID-19 and measures aimed at addressing the pandemic, see, for example, Office of the High Commissioner for  
Human Rights, ‘COVID-19 and its human rights dimensions’, available at https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/COVID-19.aspx (visited 15 April 2020); Special Proce-
dures of the Human Rights Council, ‘COVID-19 and Special Procedures’, available at https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/SP/Pages/COVID-19-and-Special-Procedures.aspx 
(visited 15 April 2020). 
140 See Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, A/HRC/37/52; Human Rights 
Committee, ‘Statement on derogations from the Covenant in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic’, 24 April 2020, CCPR/C/128/2, available at https://www.ohchr.org/Doc-
uments/HRBodies/CCPR/COVIDstatementEN.pdf (visited 26 April 2020). See also the statement by UN Special Procedures mandate holders on ‘COVID-19: States should not 
abuse emergency measures to suppress human rights’, 16 March 2020, available at https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=25722&LangID=E 
(visited 15 April 2020). 
141 See, for example, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, A/HRC/37/52; Adam 
Klein and Edward Felten, ‘The 9/11 Playbook for Protecting Privacy’, Politico, 4 April 2020, available at https://www.politico.com/news/agenda/2020/04/04/9-11-playbook-coro-
navirus-privacy-164510 (visited 15 April 2020); Andrew Roth, Stephanie Kirchgaessner, Daniel Boffey, Oliver Holmes and Helen Davidson, ‘Growth in surveillance may be hard to 
scale back after pandemic, experts say’, The Guardian, 14 April 2020, available at https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/14/growth-in-surveillance-may-be-hard-to-scale-
back-after-coronavirus-pandemic-experts-say (visited 15 April 2020). 
may similarly be expanded for use in other sectors 
or continued beyond the end of the pandemic.138 
The mandate of the Special Rapporteur notes 
that the above outlined measures interfere with a 
series of human rights, including but not limited 
to, the rights to freedom of movement and assem-
bly, freedom of religion and belief and the right to 
private and family life. As such, States must ensure 
that limitations to these rights are provided by 
law, are necessary, proportionate and non-discrim-
inatory.139 Measures taken need to be assessed 
against States’ obligation to take necessary and 
feasible measures to protect their population from 
the threat posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and 
must provide for necessary and efficient means 
for tackling the threat. States should only resort to 
derogations to the extent public health and other 
legitimate public policy objectives cannot be met 
through restrictions on certain limitable rights.140 
The mandate of the Special Rapporteur stresses 
that the scope of relevant measures must be lim-
ited in time and warns of the risks associated with 
wide-ranging surveillance becoming a staple of 
post-COVID-19 societies.141 
20

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    21
Several human rights treaties specify that the 
obligations contained therein extend to individuals 
that are, at any given moment, within the jurisdic-
tion of a State Party.142 The exercise of jurisdiction 
under human rights treaties is primarily territorial, 
meaning that everyone on the territory of a State 
is ipso facto under the respective State’s jurisdic-
tion and that jurisdiction is presumed to be exer-
cised throughout the State’s national territory.143 
However, under certain circumstances, States may 
also exercise jurisdiction extraterritorially144 and 
have certain human rights obligations towards 
individuals that are under their effective control 
or otherwise within their power or authority. A 
somewhat simplified snapshot of relevant juris-
prudence produced by international and regional 
courts and human rights mechanisms will distin-
guish two modalities of extraterritorial application 
of human rights instruments: extraterritorial juris-
diction based on a spatial model (i.e. control over 
territory) and extraterritorial jurisdiction based on 
a personal model (i.e. control over an individual). 
Traditionally, both approaches translate to the 
exercise of physical control in practice, at least to 
the extent that such extraterritorial jurisdiction is 
exercised with respect to non-citizens.145  
However, as access to and use of information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) has become 
142 It has to be noted in this respect that the notion of jurisdiction under human rights treaties has a particular meaning attached to it. As opposed to simply referring to the State’s 
right under international law to exercise its powers and regulate conduct, it serves as a threshold criterion determining whether the State had an obligation to secure the rights 
guaranteed in the respective treaty.
143 See, e.g. Ilaşcu and Others v. Moldova and Russia [GC], Application no. 48787/99, 8 July 2004, § 312; Al-Skeini and Others v. the United Kingdom [GC], Application no. 55721/07,  
7 July 2011, § 131. At the same time, State jurisdiction on its own territory can be restricted in certain matters, most notably due to immunities (in particular, diplomatic immunities 
– see, for example Article 22(1), Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations). 
144 See, for example, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion, 9 July 2004, ICJ Reports 2004, paras. 109-113; Case Con-
cerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo, (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Uganda), Judgment, 19 December 2005, ICJ Reports 2005, para. 179; Case Concerning the 
Application of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. the Russian Federation) Request for the Indication of Provisional Measures, Order of 
15 October 2008, para. 109; Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31: The Nature of the General Legal Obligation Imposed on States Parties to the Covenant (2004), 
CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13, para. 10.
145 With respect to citizens, States may exercise power or authority over certain aspects of their human rights even when such persons are outside of the State’s territory: for example 
the State may restrict their freedom of movement by revoking or refusing to issue travel documents (see, e.g., Human Rights Committee, Samuel Lichtensztejn v. Uruguay, Commu-
nication no. 77/1980, CCPR/C/OP/2 (1990), para. 1.2.). Arguably, interreferences with citizens’ human rights, such as the right to privacy, including in the context of the use of 
biometric tools, that are not permissible when the person is within the territory of their State of citizenship would not be justifiable under international human rights law in case 
such persons find themselves outside of the State’s territory. 
146 See, for example, Carly Nyst, ‘Interference-Based Jurisdiction over Violations of the Rights to Privacy’, EJIL:Talk!, 21 November 2013, available at https://www.ejiltalk.org/interfer-
ence-based-jurisdiction-over-violations-of-the-right-to-privacy/ (visited 19 February 2020); Beth Van Schaack, ‘The Extraterritorial Right to Privacy: An Opportunity to Impact 
the Debate’, Just Security, 27 March 2014, available at https://www.justsecurity.org/8654/extraterritorial-privacy-opportunity-impact-debate/ (visited 19 February 2020).
147 See, for example, Human Rights Committee, Ibrahima Gueye et al. v. France, Communication no. 196/1985, CCPR/C/35/D/196/1985; Committee on the Rights of the Child, 
Concluding observations on the second periodic report of the Holy See, 31 January 2014, CRC/C/VAT/CO/2; European Court of Human Rights, Sejdovic v. Italy [GC], Appli-
cation no. 56581/00, 1 March 2006; African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, Association Pour la Sauvegarde de la Paix au Burundi v. Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, 
Zaire and Zambia, Communication no. 157/96 (2003);  United States Department of State, Office of the Legal Adviser, ‘Memorandum Opinion on the Geographic Scope of the 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights’, 19 October 2010, available at  https://www.justsecurity.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/state-department-iccpr-memo.pdf (visited 19 
February 2020);  Anne Peters, ‘Surveillance without Borders: The Unlawfulness of the NSA Panopticon, Part II’, EJIL:Talk!, 4 November 2013, available at https://www.ejiltalk.
org/surveillance-without-borders-the-unlawfulness-of-the-nsa-panopticon-part-ii/#more-9785 (visited 19 February 2020); Ryan Goodman, ‘Forum on the Extraterritorial Applica-
tion of Human Rights Treaties: Analyzing the State Department Memos’, Just Security, 7 March 2014, available at https://www.justsecurity.org/7946/forum-extraterritorial-appli-
cation-human-rights-treaties-analyzing-state-department-memos/ (visited 19 February 2020).
  It must further be noted in this respect that in the cases relating to foreign and extraterritorial surveillance decided by the European Court of Human Rights, respondent States did 
not challenge the case on grounds of the State not having exercised jurisdiction. 
essential to the conduct of government oper-
ations, to business, and to individuals’ day-to-
day lives, exercise of power and authority in this 
context has increasingly been disjointed from 
the exercise of physical control. Data collection, 
processing, and sharing practices (including, but 
not limited to, trans-border data-sharing) result in 
States handling the personal and sensitive data of 
individuals that are not, and may have never been, 
under the respective State’s jurisdiction if one is to 
employ a traditional conceptualization of extrater-
ritorial jurisdiction revolving around the exercise 
of physical control. Relevant conduct is rarely 
effectuated outside of the State’s territory but 
may come with far-reaching extraterritorial effects 
and results in the exercise of power or authority 
over at least certain implicated human rights of 
affected individuals. Promoting worldwide respect 
for universally guaranteed human rights requires 
a shift—albeit prudent and pondered—towards an 
“interference-based” approach to jurisdiction146 
and derived responsibilities. Such approach al-
ready has support in international and regional 
jurisprudence and expert opinion147 and is expect-
ed to be further and authoritatively developed as 
relevant mechanisms are increasingly called to 
decide on questions reflecting the human rights 
challenges of the digital age.
Biometrics and the scope of human rights obligations:  
the question of jurisdiction


22
The mandate of the Special Rapporteur highlights 
that relevant human rights implications are likely to be 
amplified in case of groups and persons who are already 
marginalized or discriminated against, such as women, 
members of ethnic, religious, racial, sexual, and other mi-
norities as well as groups and persons in vulnerable sit-
uations, such as refugees and asylum-seekers or persons 
affected by armed conflict and other types of violence. 
Among such categories, States and other stakeholders 
handling biometric data must pay particular attention 
to means and modalities for collecting, retaining, pro-
cessing and sharing children’s data.148 The mandate of 
the Special Rapporteur is unequivocal that such data use 
must always comply with the safeguards contained in the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child149 and, in par-
ticular, with the requirement that any relevant measures 
be “in the best interest of the child.”150 This means that 
considerations related to the best interest of the child 
must inform the assessment as to whether the measure  
in question is necessary and proportionate. Relevant 
examinations must also address the appropriateness of 
using biometric markers that may be less stable in case  
of children (as they may undergo alteration as a result  
of the growing or aging process). 
Finally, States bear an obligation to protect children 
against “all forms of discrimination or punishment on 
the basis of the status, activities, expressed opinions, or 
beliefs of the child’s parents, legal guardians, or family 
members,”151 a consideration of utmost importance when 
addressing children associated with terrorist groups, in-
cluding family members of known or suspected “foreign 
terrorist fighters.” 
The use of biometric data may be uniquely helpful and 
serve the interest of the child in a number of instances. 
This includes cases when such data is employed to prove 
the child’s parentage and reunite them with their family 
or with the aim of using such parentage information to 
ascertain the child’s nationality in view of their repatri-
ation. At the same time, concerns related to data usage 
and, in particular, long-term retention of biometric data 
148 The Convention on the Rights of the Child defines children as “every human being below the age of eighteen years.” See Convention on the Rights of the Child, article 1.
149 The Convention on the Rights of the Child has 196 State Parties and as such is almost universally ratified (the only UN Member State that has signed but not ratified the Conven-
tion is the United States). 
150 Convention on the Rights of the Child, article 3(1). The Convention requires States to ensure that in all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social 
welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration. The Committee on the Rights of the 
Child stated that the child’s best interests was a threefold concept, namely a substantive right; a fundamental, interpretative legal principle; and a rule of procedure. Any determina-
tion of what is in the best interest of a child “requires a clear and comprehensive assessment of the child’s identity, including his or her nationality, upbringing, ethnic, cultural and 
linguistic background, particular vulnerabilities and protection needs.” Relevant assessment processes must be carried out “in a friendly and safe atmosphere by qualified profession-
als who are trained in age and gender-sensitive interviewing techniques.” See, for example, Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment no 14 on the right of the child 
to have his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration (2013), CRC/C/GC/14; and General Comment no. 6: Treatment of unaccompanied and separated children outside 
their country of origin (2005), CRC/GC/2005/6.
151 Convention on the Rights of the Child, articles 2 and 3. 
of minors based on the child’s family affiliation must 
be flagged. Data collection and retention, when it is for 
monitoring or surveillance purposes, must be based, 
among others, on a threat assessment, and the neces-
sity for the data to be retained and for children to be 
included in databases or watchlists must be periodically 
reviewed. Relevant measures must also be subject to 
independent oversight. Such oversight should include 
review by a public authority specifically tasked with pro-
tecting the rights of the child (such as an ombudsperson) 
or ensure that experts duly specialized in children’s rights 
are part of the oversight body’s composition. 
Recommendations: 
• States must carry out comprehensive a priori and a 
posteriori assessments of the human rights impact 
of biometric tools and data in the counter-terrorism 
context. Such assessments must consider impact on 
the whole spectrum of human rights. Suitable vehi-
cles for relevant assessments include independent 
reviewers of terrorism-related legislation and policy, 
national human rights institutions, or other special-
ist government entities.
• The collection and processing of biometric data  
concerning children must be in the best interest 
of the child and, as such, limited, exceptional, and 
subject to strict review. 
4. Stages of the data lifecycle:  
a non-exhaustive inventory of human 
rights implications
a. Collection and retention of biometric data
Data collection, retention, processing, and sharing  
engage a range of human rights, including but not  
limited to, the right to privacy and data protection. 
In order to ensure human rights compliant use of  
biometric data and relevant tools, the human rights 
compliance of measures must be assessed at every stage 
of data usage. While a human rights assessment is  

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    23
commonly conducted at the data collection stage—at 
least with respect to the right to privacy—relevant evalu -
ations are frequently omitted or carried out in an incom-
plete manner at subsequent stages. However, data having 
been collected in a human rights-compliant manner 
does not mean that the requirements imposed by hu-
man rights law are satisfied with respect to retention,152 
processing, and sharing of that data. 
The data lifecycle
The ever-increasing length of the data 
lifecycle brought by the new and trans-
formed means and modalities of usage 
makes addressing these concerns all the 
more critical. A violation at one stage of 
the data chain or in the data lifecycle will 
impact the lawfulness and human rights 
compliance of data usage at subsequent 
stages and may lead to a continuous viola-
tion unless the deficiency is duly remedied. 
For example, unlawfully collected data 
may not be lawfully retained, processed 
or shared. In case a violation occurs at the 
processing stage by aggregating datasets, 
some of which were unlawfully collected, 
obtained or retained, this deficiency will 
affect the legality of the resulting datasets 
and their subsequent use. 
152 Retention of biometric data in line with international human rights law requires that such retention be provided by law and be necessary and proportionate. This also means that as 
soon as these conditions are not fulfilled, retention must be terminated through the safe and responsible disposal of the data. For the purposes of this report, such safe and responsi-
ble disposal is understood to be part of the obligations related to the human rights-compliant retention of biometric data.
153 Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Kenneth Cukier, Big Data. The Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think (Mariner Books, Boston-New York, 2013), p. 15. 
154 In the case of S. and Marper v. The United Kingdom, the European Court of Human Rights found that there had been a violation of the right to privacy by the UK, as a result of the 
blanket and indiscriminate nature of the powers of retention of the fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA profiles of persons suspected but not convicted of offences which failed to 
strike a fair balance between competing public and private interests. European Court of Human Rights, S. and Marper v. The United Kingdom [GC], Applications nos. 30562/04 and 
30566/04, 4 December 2008.
  It must be noted that long retention periods are commonplace in many jurisdictions, including frequently outside of the scope of criminal justice processes. In this respect it is nota-
ble for example that the United States and Five Eyes countries retain photos and fingerprints of travelers for a period of up to 75 years. See US Department of Homeland Security, 
Privacy Impact Assessment for the Automated Biometric Identification System (IDENT), DHS/NPPD/PIA-002 (2012); US Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact 
Assessment for the Traveler Verification Service, DHS/CBP/PIA-056 (2018).
155 European Court of Human Rights, S. and Marper v. The United Kingdom [GC], Applications nos. 30562/04 and 30566/04; European Court of Human Rights, M. K. v. France, 
Application no. 19522/09, 18 April 2013; European Court of Human Rights, Gaughran v. The United Kingdom, Application no. 45245/15, 13 February 2020. 
156 European Court of Human Rights, Gaughran v. The United Kingdom, Application no. 45245/15, §§ 81-82. 
157 European Court of Human Rights, Gaughran v.Tthe United Kingdom, Application no. 45245/15, §§ 84 and 88. 
158 For example, storing biometric data in the chip of the biometric identity document.
  In relation to the option to store biometric data in a central national database, the European Union Fundamental Rights Agency noted that “due to [the] scale and the sensitive 
nature of the data which would be stored, the consequences of any data breach could seriously harm a potentially very large number of individuals. If such information ever falls into 
the wrong hands, the database could become a dangerous tool against fundamental rights.” See, European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, Fundamental rights implications 
of storing biometric data in identity documents and residence cards (2018), p. 14. 
Lengthy or indefinite retention of diverse sets of person-
al data figures among the most pertinent and concern-
ing current trends in this field. Both governments and 
companies seek to collect and store large troves of data, a 
trend aided by declining costs of data storage. With the 
advent of “datafication,” the potential current and future 
uses of such information are practically endless.153  
International human rights law does not allow for the 
indiscriminate retention of personal data, including 
biometric data, as such indiscriminate retention cannot 
satisfy the criteria of necessity and proportionality.154 
In this respect, the European Court of Human Rights 
has repeatedly held that blanket and indiscriminate 
retention of biometric data, such as fingerprints and 
DNA samples, were in breach of the right to priva-
cy.155  Importantly, the Court also ruled that indefinite 
retention of genetic data of persons convicted of crim-
inal offences, including after the data subject’s death, 
interfered with the right to privacy of individuals bio-
logically related to the data subject156 and stressed that 
there was a “narrowed margin of appreciation available 
to States when setting retention limits for the biometric 
data of convicted persons.”157 
Decisions to retain biometric data must also consider 
issues related to data security and the risk of biometric 
data being compromised. Certain storage modalities, 
such as the creation of central databases, pose a higher 
risk than localized storage of such data.158 In this respect, 
due consideration must be given to the potential severe 
and at times irreversible consequences resulting from 
biometric data being misused or compromised. Further-
more, in addition to the risks related to security, pro-
longed retention periods also heighten the risk of 

24
“mission creep” and may lead to use beyond the purpose 
for which the data was collected.159
Recommendations: 
• The human rights compliance of measures involving 
biometric data must be duly assessed at every stage 
of data usage.
• Data must be safely and appropriately discarded as 
soon its retention does not meet the requirements of 
lawfulness, necessity or proportionality. Indefinite 
retention of data is inconsistent with States’ human 
rights obligations.
b. Processing of biometric data: the human 
rights implications of automation, machine 
learning and artificial intelligence
In addition to its use for identification and authenti-
cation purposes, so-called primary biometric data also 
allows for deducing ancillary attributes, such as gender, 
age, ethnicity, appearance (hair or eye color, height, 
weight). Such data may provide complementary informa-
tion for identification or authentication. These are called 
‘soft’ or ‘light’ biometrics and refer to a set of physical 
or behavioral characteristics that may aid in recognizing 
individuals, but that are not sufficient for distinguishing 
159 See also subsection C(4)(c) below. 
160 Antitza Dantcheva, Petros Elia and Arun Ross, ‘What Else Does Your Biometric Data Reveal? A Survey on Soft Biometrics’, 11(3) IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics 
and Security 441 (2015).
161 Roderick B. Woo, ‘Challenges Posed by Biometric Technology on Data Privacy Protection and the Way Forward’, Ethics and Policy of Biometrics, 2010, Volume 6005, pp. 1-6.
162 For example. body mass index (BMI) may be determined based on facial images, thereby suggesting the possibility of assessing health from biometric data. A person’s DNA sample 
may similarly disclose sensitive health information, such as genetic predisposition to certain illnesses, affecting not only the data subject but also biological next of kin. 
163 See Michal Kosinski and Yilun Wang, ‘Deep Neural Networks Are More Accurate Than Humans at Detecting Sexual Orientation from Facial Images’, Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, Vol. 114, Issue 2, pp. 246-257. As the authors note, “[g]iven a single facial image, a classifier could correctly distinguish between gay and heterosexual men in 81% 
of cases, and in 71% of cases for women. Human judges achieved much lower accuracy: 61% for men and 54% for women. The accuracy of the algorithm increased to 91% and 83%, 
respectively, given five facial images per person.”
  See also, Tactical Tech, ‘Quantifying Homosexuality: A Critique’, available at https://ourdataourselves.tacticaltech.org/posts/40-quantifying-homosexuality-critique/ (visited 19 
February 2020); Tristan Greene, ‘The Stanford Gaydar AI is Hogwash’, The Next Web, 20 February 2018, available at https://thenextweb.com/artificial-intelligence/2018/02/20/
opinion-the-stanford-gaydar-ai-is-hogwash/ (visited 19 February 2020). 
164 Michal Kosinski and Yilun Wang, ‘Deep Neural Networks Are More Accurate Than Humans at Detecting Sexual Orientation from Facial Images’, Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, Vol. 114, Issue 2, p. 2.
165 Ibid., p. 8.
166 Ibid., p. 7.
between individuals, as they lack the necessary level of 
distinctiveness and/ or permanence.160 For example, voice 
or iris recognition tools also provide information on the 
gender, age and race/ ethnicity of a person—all sensitive 
information that qualify as “protected grounds” on which 
discrimination is prohibited. The use of soft biometrics is 
associated with a risk of discriminatory use of such infor-
mation through its potential to facilitate profiling based 
on protected grounds.161 
In addition, technology allows for certain types of sensi-
tive information not immediately detectable to the naked 
eye to be discerned from biometric data. For example, 
tools analyzing faces, irises, or a person’s gait can derive 
information on the respective person’s health.162 While 
such advanced systems may make significant positive 
inroads as diagnostic tools, their use may raise red flags 
when employed without the data subject’s consent and 
for purposes other than safeguarding the person’s right 
to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical or 
mental health. Biometric data may also be employed to 
divulge information on a person’s sexual orientation, as 
demonstrated by a study conducted by two Stanford aca-
demics.163 Unlike technology analyzing health conditions 
based on biometric data, it is challenging to imagine a 
legitimate use of such technology that is in line with 
public interest. However, as highlighted by the authors 
of the study, “given that companies and governments are 
increasingly using computer vision algorithms to de-
tect people’s intimate traits,” 164 and are “developing and 
deploying face-based prediction tools aimed at intimate 
psycho–demographic traits, such as the likelihood of 
committing a crime, being a terrorist or a pedophile,”165 
the findings also expose a threat to the privacy and safety 
of LGBTI+ persons.”166
As the above examples also demonstrate, technology 
allows for increasingly sophisticated ways of processing 
biometric data through the use of automation, diverse 
machine learning algorithms, and artificial intelligence 


(AI). These developments allow for the processing of 
large datasets and have contributed to making biometric 
tools and systems safer and more reliable.167 At the same 
time, algorithms driving some of these tools have been 
shown to suffer from bias.168 Studies have demonstrat-
ed that the majority of facial recognition technologies 
show gender and racial bias leading to less reliable results 
when identifying women and persons with darker skin 
tones.169 This has real-life implications and may lead to 
false positives or false negatives, including in the count-
167 For example, algorithms in biometric tools relating to fingerprint or facial recognition now can adjust for change in a person’s biometrics over time, for example as part of the aging 
process. 
168 See, for example, Ali Breland, ‘How White Engineers Built Racist Code – And Why It’s Dangerous for Black People’, The Guardian, 4 December 2017, available at https://www.
theguardian.com/technology/2017/dec/04/racist-facial-recognition-white-coders-black-people-police (visited 19 February 2020); Matt Burgess, ‘Holding AI to Account: Will Al-
gorithms Ever Be Free from Bias If They’re Created by Humans?’, WIRED, 11 January 2016, available at https://www.wired.co.uk/article/creating-transparent-ai-algorithms-ma-
chine-learning (visited 19 February 2020). 
169 Joy Buolamwini, ‘Response: Racial and Gender Bias in Amazon Rekognition — Commercial AI System for Analyzing Faces’, Medium, 25 January 2019, available at https://medi-
um.com/@Joy.Buolamwini/response-racial-and-gender-bias-in-amazon-rekognition-commercial-ai-system-for-analyzing-faces-a289222eeced (visited 19 February 2020); National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, ‘NIST Study Evaluates Effects of Race, Age, Sex on Face Recognition Software’, 19 December 2019, available at https://www.nist.gov/
news-events/news/2019/12/nist-study-evaluates-effects-race-age-sex-face-recognition-software (visited 19 February 2020).
170 See Michael Fairhurst, Cheng Li and Márjory Da Costa-Abreu, ‘Predictive Biometrics: A Review and Analysis of Predicting Personal Characteristics from Biometric Data’, IET 
Biometrics, The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2017, pp. 369-378.
171 United Nations Compendium of Recommend Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism (2018), p. 75. 
172 See, for example, Ivan Manokha, ‘Facial Analysis AI Is Being Used In Job Interviews – It Will Probably Reinforce Inequality’, The Conversation, 7 October 2019, available at 
http://theconversation.com/facial-analysis-ai-is-being-used-in-job-interviews-it-will-probably-reinforce-inequality-124790 (visited 19 February 2020); Alex Lee, ‘An AI to Stop 
Hiring Bias Could Be Bad News for Disabled People’, WIRED, 26 November 2019, available at https://www.wired.co.uk/article/ai-hiring-bias-disabled-people (visited 19 Febru-
ary 2020). 
er-terrorism context, such as during screening at border 
checks or in the context of real-time surveillance using 
facial recognition. Moreover, facial recognition tools are 
increasingly used to assess a person’s facial expressions 
with the aim of deducing the subject’s emotional state,170 
including in a law enforcement context171, despite such 
tools exhibiting insufficient levels of sensitivity to cultur-
al and other differences in ways in which people behave 
and emote.172 
HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    25

Restrictions on the use of facial recognition technologies
Many States and companies are stepping up the 
use of facial recognition. India is planning on set-
ting up a nationwide facial recognition system.173 A 
number of local authorities in Brazil have adopted 
the use of some kind of facial recognition soft-
ware, with about half of these initiatives instituted 
in the past two years.174 At the same time, oppo-
site trends are also discernable. Due to concerns 
regarding the accuracy and the potential negative 
individual and societal impact linked to the use 
of facial recognition technologies, some govern-
ments and local authorities have recently taken 
steps aimed at imposing moratoria on the deploy-
ment of such technology. In the US, various pieces 
of draft federal legislation have been proposed in 
this respect,175 with senators Jeff Merkley and Cory 
Booker having recently introduced a bill pursu-
ing temporary restrictions on the use of facial 
recognition by federal authorities.176 These devel-
opments follow repeated calls by civil liberties, 
173 Vasudevan Sridharan, ‘India Setting Up World’s Biggest Facial Recognition System’, Deutsche Welle, 7 November 2019, available at https://www.dw.com/en/india-set-
ting-up-worlds-biggest-facial-recognition-system/a-51147243, (visited 19 February 2020). 
174 Jonas Valente, ‘Face Recognition Tech Gains Ground in Brazil’, Agencia Brasil, 20 September 2019, available at http://agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/en/geral/noticia/2019-09/face- 
recognition-tech-gains-ground-brazil, (visited 19 February 2020); The Christian Science Monitor, ‘Brazil Takes a Page From China, Taps Facial Recognition to Solve Crime’,  
12 February 2020, available at https://cacm.acm.org/news/242783-brazil-takes-a-page-from-china-taps-facial-recognition-to-solve-crime/fulltext, (visited 19 February 2020).  
175 As of March 2020, none have passed through Congress. 
  See also, Chris Mills Rodrigo, ‘Booker, Merkley Propose Federal Facial Recognition Moratorium’, 12 February 2020, available at https://thehill.com/policy/technolo-
gy/482815-booker-merkley-propose-facial-recognition-moratorium, (visited 19 February 2020). 
176 ‘A Bill to create a moratorium on the government use of facial recognition technology until a Commission recommends the appropriate guidelines and limitation for use of facial 
recognition technology’, 116th Congress, 2nd Session, available at  https://www.merkley.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/20.02.12%20Facial%20Recognition.pdf; (visited 19 February 
2020).
  See also, Richard Lawler, ‘Senate Bill Would Place a Moratorium on Feds Using Facial Recognition’, Endgadget, 13 February 2020, available at https://www.engadget.
com/2020/02/13/ethical-use-of-ai-act-facial-recognition/, (visited 19 February 2020). It must be noted that this Bill would restrict use until Congress passes relevant legislation.  
At the same time, the Bill does not propose a full moratorium and allows for example for police authorities to continue make use of such technologies, subject to a warrant. 
177 See Coalition letter to the US House Oversight and Reform Committee, available here: https://www.aclu.org/letter/coalition-letter-calling-federal-moratorium-face-recognition, 
(visited 19 February 2020); and Letter to the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, available here: https://epic.org/privacy/facerecognition/PCLOB-Letter-FRT-Suspension.
pdf, (visited 19 February 2020).
178 The cities include San Francisco and Oakland in California, and Somerville in Massachusetts. See Electronic Privacy Information Center, ‘State Facial Recognition Policy’, available 
at https://epic.org/state-policy/facialrecognition/, (visited 19 February 2020).
179 Khari Johnson, ‘From Washington State to Washington, D.C., Lawmakers Rush to Regulate Facial Recognition’, Venture Beat, 19 January 2020, available at https://venturebeat.
com/2020/01/19/from-washington-state-to-washington-dc-lawmakers-rush-to-regulate-facial-recognition/, (visited 19 February 2020). 
180 Commission Nationale de Contrôle de la Protection des Données à Caractère Personnel, Délibération n° D-194-2019 du 30/08/2019 relative à un moratoire sur la reconnaissance 
faciale, available at https://www.cndp.ma/images/deliberations/deliberation-n-D-194-2019-30-08-2019.pdf, (visited 19 February 2020). 
181 Financial Times, ‘EU Backs Away from Call for Blanket Ban on Facial Recognition Tech’, 11 February 2020, available at https://www.ft.com/content/ff798944-4cc6-11ea-95a0-
43d18ec715f5, (visited 19 February 2020); ‘Structure for the White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – A European approach’, available at https://www.euractiv.com/wp-content/
uploads/sites/2/2020/01/AI-white-paper-EURACTIV.pdf, (visited 19 February 2020). 
privacy, and other groups arguing that the use of 
such technology should be suspended, pending 
further review.177 The State of California and some 
US cities178 already have temporary restrictions in 
place, with legislation pending elsewhere.179 These 
developments are not unique to the US: many 
jurisdictions worldwide ponder ways to meaning-
fully address the challenges posed by the use of 
facial recognition technology. Morocco has recent-
ly introduced a rather short but comprehensive 
moratorium on the use of the technology, justified 
rightly on the grounds of Morocco’s human rights 
obligations.180 The European Union and its Member 
States have also grappled with finding the opti-
mum way to approach the problem—however, the 
latest version of the European Commission’s White 
Paper on AI walks back on a suggestion contained 
in previous versions to impose a 5-year moratori-
um on the use of relevant technologies.181 
26

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    27
Facial recognition technologies are, of course, not the 
only ones shown to exhibit bias: voice recognition soft-
ware, for example, regularly performs worse in recogniz-
ing women’s voices, despite women on average having 
higher speech intelligibility than men.182 Similar con-
cerns are valid with recognition of non-standard accents 
which frequently includes racial or ethnic minorities.183 
The above outlined examples may negatively affect 
protections for the right to non-discrimination and equal 
treatment before the law184 and may have further impli-
cations on rights such as the right to liberty and security 
of person, freedom of movement, freedom of assembly, 
the prohibition of arbitrary deprivation of liberty as well 
as due process and fair trial rights. Furthermore, as also 
highlighted above, these implications are likely to be 
amplified in case of groups and persons who are already 
marginalized or discriminated against, as well as groups 
and persons in vulnerable situations. 
Recommendations:
• The potential for fundamentally discriminatory 
impact of biometric data is exceptionally high and 
requires State action aimed at ensuring and safe-
guarding transparency and accountability of auto-
mated processes. 
• Human rights impact assessment as well as relevant 
monitoring and evaluation processes must address 
the disparate impact of such technologies and data 
usage on underprivileged and marginalized groups 
as well as persons and groups in a vulnerable  
situation. 
c. Domestic and cross-border sharing  
of biometric data
Human rights concerns dominate with respect to the 
means and modalities of sharing biometric data,185  
both domestically and internationally. As flagged  
182 Caroline Criado Perez, Invisible Women, (Abrams Press, New York, 2019); Tina Tallon, ‘A Century of “Shrill”: How Bias in Technology Has Hurt Women’s Voices’, The New  
Yorker, 3 September 2019, available at  https://www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/a-century-of-shrill-how-bias-in-technology-has-hurt-womens-voices, (visited  
19 February 2020). 
183 Joan Palmiter Bajorek, ‘Voice Recognition Still Has Significant Race and Gender Biases’, Harvard Business Review, 10 May 2019, available at https://hbr.org/2019/05/voice-recog-
nition-still-has-significant-race-and-gender-biases, (visited 19 February 2020). 
184 The right to equality and non-discrimination is part of the foundations of the rule of law and human rights. It is protected in all core human rights treaties as well as in the Univer-
sal Declaration of Human Rights (articles 1 and 7). 
185 Please note that the observations related to data-sharing contained in this report are equally valid to any arrangements concerning providing access to data. While permissions 
linked to access differ (they may allow or prohibit copying; include or preclude data editing privileges, etc.), the authors consider providing access a modality of data-sharing.
186 See, e.g., Michael Safi, ‘Indian Court Upholds Legality of World’s Largest Biometric Database’, The Guardian, 26 September 2018, available at https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2018/sep/26/indian-court-upholds-legality-of-worlds-largest-biometric-database (visited 20 February 2020).
187 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012, Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) and another versus Union of India and others, paras. 219 (c) and (d), available at https://indiankanoon.org/
doc/127517806/, (visited 19 February 2020).
earlier, Security Council resolution 2396 also encourages 
“responsible” sharing of biometric data domestically, with 
Member States, and international bodies. 
Broad data-sharing practices between diverse domestic 
authorities, public and private actors, and between States 
themselves, are becoming normalized. This means that 
purpose limitation-related safeguards are increasingly 
challenging to meaningfully implement and implies that: 
• Data gathered for counter-terrorism purposes may 
be shared with broader stakeholders, including pub-
lic authorities and potentially also private actors; and 
• Data gathered for purposes other than counter-ter-
rorism may be shared with security sector actors to 
be used in preventing or countering terrorism. 
Such practices need sustained attention to ensure that 
they comply with requirements related to legality, trans-
parency, purpose limitation, and data minimization. 
At the domestic level, law enforcement and counter-ter-
rorism actors are often given access to databases set up 
and operated by other public authorities. While regulat-
ed targeted access to relevant data can greatly facilitate 
law enforcement and counter-terrorism operations, al-
lowing sweeping access for a broad range of actors raises 
necessity and proportionality concerns. The question of 
such access has arisen in relation to the Aadhaar data-
base in India, commonly understood to be the largest da-
tabase of biometric information that the world currently 
knows.186 Domestic courts recognized that access to the 
data by multiple actors raised legitimate concerns and 
held that such access must be linked to effective safe-
guards that protect against abuse, including in relation to 
authorization and oversight.187 
With reference to domestic sharing of data, the United 
Nations Compendium of Recommended Practices for the Re-
sponsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terror-
ism makes the case that “lawful integration of all national 
law enforcement biometric databases into a ‘national 

28
watch list’ configuration […] would expose the optimum 
amount of relevant data to watch list searches.”188 In 
addition to traditional authentication and identifica-
tion purposes, such integrated databases can be used to 
“pro-actively to infer and predict potential future actions 
and associations.”189 The mandate of the Special Rappor-
teur emphasizes that States opting for an integrated na-
tional database would need to justify why this alternative 
is necessary and proportionate for effectively addressing 
existing threats. It is notable that the Compendium does 
not address necessity and proportionality considerations, 
or ways to ensure that such measures comply with the 
principles of purpose limitation and data minimization 
in its analysis. The mandate of the Special Rapporteur 
takes the position that, from a human rights point of 
view, optimum levels of data-sharing are rarely synony-
mous with sharing the data as broadly as feasible.190 
The 2018 Addendum to the 2015 Madrid Principles 
recommends that “systems operating biometric data and 
the legal frameworks associated with their use allow for 
interoperability between other national and international 
biometric databases, including INTERPOL.”191 While 
efficient international and regional cooperation may 
serve as a potent tool for successfully countering terror-
ism, such cooperation, whether in the area of judicial 
assistance or intelligence-sharing, is not a rights-free 
zone. The need for measures taken to combat terrorism, 
notwithstanding their nature or the context in which 
they were enacted, to be in compliance with obliga-
tions under international law, in particular international 
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law has also 
been underscored by the General Assembly, the Human 
Rights Council, and the Security Council.192
As highlighted earlier, Security Council resolution 2396 
also encourages “responsible” sharing of biometric data 
domestically, with Member States, and international 
bodies. In the context of international data-sharing 
arrangements and practices, governments will be faced 
with dilemmas. These include:
188 United Nations Compendium of Recommended Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism, p. 61. 
189 Ibid., p. 67.
190 See also Privacy International, ‘Briefing to the UN Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate on the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometric Data to Tackle Terrorism’ ( June 
2019), p. 7. 
191 2018 Addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles, S/2018/1177, Guideline 3 (h). 
  The UN Compendium has a similar recommendation noting that “the aggregation of disparate, single-mode databases […] has evolved, in some countries and regions, into state-
of-the-art, replacement networks that feature interconnected multi-modal databases designed to service a range of business needs across law enforcement, border management and 
other government functions at both a national and international level.” See United Nations Compendium of Recommend Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in 
Counter-Terrorism, p. 63.
192 See S/RES/1373 (2001), 1456 (2003), 1566 (2004), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2341 (2017), 2354 (2017), 2368 (2017), 2370 (2017), 2395 (2017), 2396 (2017) 2462 (2019) and 
2482 (2019); A/RES/68/167; A/RES/69/166; A/RES/71/199; A/RES49/60; A/RES 51/210; A/RES/72/123; A/RES/72/180; A/HRC/RES/28/16; A/HRC/RES/34/7.
193 See, for example, A/69/397 and A/ HRC/13/37. 
194 See ‘The right to privacy in the digital age. Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights’, A/HRC/27/37. See also, Privacy International, 
‘Secret Global Surveillance Networks: Intelligence Sharing Between Governments and the Need for Safeguards’ (April 2018). 
195 A/HRC/27/37, para. 30.
196 A/69/397, para. 44. 
• State sovereignty considerations; 
• Jurisdictional complexities; and 
• Complications caused by the diverging legal and pol-
icy frameworks and standards applicable in different 
jurisdictions. 
In the absence of protective parity, the implementation 
of measures advocated for States by the Security Coun-
cil is likely to contribute to greater privacy intrusions, 
which in turn lead to enhanced risk to the protection of 
interlinked rights. For this reason, the mandate of the 
Special Rapporteur takes the view that States must avoid 
any form of cooperation that may facilitate human rights 
violations or abuses. State must also be mindful that state 
responsibility under international law may be triggered 
through the sharing of information that contributes to 
the commission of gross human rights violations. 
Cross-border intelligence-sharing arrangements raise 
particular human rights concerns. International human 
rights mechanisms, including the mandate of the Spe-
cial Rapporteur have repeatedly warned against such 
arrangements falling short of international human rights 
norms and standards, particularly the lack of a human 
rights-compliant legal basis and of adequate oversight.193 
However, relevant information-sharing agreements are 
frequently not only not based on law but are classified 
and as such not subject to any democratic or public 
scrutiny.194 The lack of such scrutiny may also be man-
ifest in case of Security Council-mandated measures 
where ordinary domestic regulatory processes may 
be entirely sidestepped. Therefore, private or sensitive 
information concerning individuals may be shared with 
foreign intelligence agencies without the protection of 
a publicly available legal framework and without prop-
er safeguards,195 making the operation of such regimes 
unforeseeable for those affected by it.196 Moreover, such 
arrangements may lead to information gathered for one 
purpose being used for other unrelated governmental 
objectives. This “purpose creep” presents concerns not 

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    29
only because of reducing foreseeability, but also because 
surveillance measures that may be necessary and pro-
portionate for one legitimate aim may not be so for the 
purposes of another.197
In addition to the above addressed shortcomings, intelli-
gence-sharing arrangements tend to be—more often than 
not—exempted from the supervision of an independent 
authority.198 Oversight bodies are typically not informed 
of the conclusion of intelligence-sharing agreements and 
therefore unlikely to review the compatibility of such 
agreements with domestic and international law. Due to 
limitations justified by state sovereignty, they have very 
little or no oversight over the use of information shared 
with foreign agencies. Moreover, they are limited in their 
powers to seek or verify information about the means 
and methods of collection, retention, and processing 
of information shared by another State, particularly as 
intelligence-sharing arrangements regularly prohibit the 
disclosure of such information to third parties. 
Recommendations: 
• Data-sharing arrangements and practices must be 
provided for by law and strictly comply with the 
principles of necessity and proportionality.
• States must take necessary and effective measures 
to avoid any form of international cooperation that 
may facilitate human rights violations or abuses.
• Independent oversight of the activities of intelligence 
agencies must encompass all forms of data usage, 
including cross-border data-sharing cooperation.
5. The obligation to develop and  
implement biometric systems under  
UNSCR 2396
Complying with the above set out requirements put 
in place under human rights law would require that 
competent domestic authorities develop comprehensive 
national legal frameworks regulating the use of biometric 
tools and data. Such regulation should follow a threat 
assessment and a human rights impact assessment and 
provide for measures that are necessary and adequate for 
efficiently tackling relevant threats. Due to the obliga-
tions imposed under Security Council resolution 2396, 
such domestic assessments may be considered moot and 
197  A/HRC/13/37, para. 50; A/69/397, para. 56. 
198  A/HRC/13/37, A/69/397. 
199  A/HRC/27/37, para. 3ff.
200  A/HRC/32/38, para. 57. 
201  See, in particular, Section C.
sidestepped. This would be a concerning development 
considering the lack of any meaningful human rights 
risk assessment conducted by the Security Council in 
the context of developing the resolution. Such approach 
would also go against the obligation of States to imple-
ment duties pursuant to Security Council resolutions 
with due respect for binding human rights obligations of 
States, a requirement explicitly contained in para. 15 of 
the resolution. 
Recommendation: 
• Competent domestic authorities must develop 
comprehensive national frameworks regulating the 
use of biometric tools and data as a matter of best 
practice and to ensure compliance with international 
human rights norms and standards.
D. State-business cooperation in  
law enforcement and national  
security contexts and the human 
rights-compliant developments 
and deployment of biometric tools 
Technology employed to collect and process biometric 
data is overwhelmingly developed by private compa-
nies at their own initiative or following solicitation of 
commission by government authorities. Indeed, in the 
context of surveillance technology, the growing reliance 
by States on the private sector to conduct and facilitate 
digital surveillance is well-established.199 The capacity of 
States to conduct surveillance may even “depend on the 
extent to which business enterprises cooperate with or 
resist such surveillance.”200 
1. International standards applicable to 
business conduct 
The broad human rights implications linked to the use of 
biometrics, highlighted above,201 means that the compa-
nies developing and deploying biometric tools and their 
business relationships (whether State or non-State) have 
far-reaching influence on ways in which human rights 
of large categories of persons are safeguarded. Such 
influence may be employed to further the fulfilment of 
diverse human rights in the context of the services that 

30
they provide but can equally be used to limit the enjoy-
ment of those rights. 
The growing role of corporate actors and their increased 
impact on the enjoyment of human rights is addressed 
by the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights (UNGPs), providing an authoritative global stan-
dard for preventing and addressing adverse human rights 
impacts linked to business activity. While the UNGPs 
have been endorsed by the Human Rights Council in 
resolution 17/4 of 16 June 2011,202 they are not formally 
legally binding. They represent however an important 
step towards matching the impact of business on human 
rights with corresponding levels of corporate responsi-
bility. They further represent the course of development 
under international law, as many soft law norms con-
tained in the UNGPs are expected to crystalize to hard 
law obligations over time and use. As such, they are be-
ing recognized, accepted, and implemented by a growing 
number of private companies. 
At the same time, as the Interpretive Guide to the 
UNGPs specifies, “[t]he responsibility of business en-
terprises to respect human rights is distinct from issues 
of legal liability and enforcement, which remain defined 
largely by national law provisions in relevant jurisdic-
tions.”203 As the responsibilities entailed in the UNGPs 
are not legally enforceable, applicable domestic legis-
lation frequently falls short of ensuring full corporate 
accountability. 
a. Responsibility to create a due diligence 
framework 
Under the UNGPs, the responsibility to respect interna-
tionally recognized human rights204 implies that busi-
nesses must “[a]void causing or contributing to adverse 
human rights impacts through their own activities, and 
address such impacts when they occur” and “[s]eek to 
prevent or mitigate adverse human rights impacts that 
are directly linked to their operations, products or ser-
vices by their business relationships” (including users of 
202 A/HRC/17/4.
203 Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, The Corporate Responsibility to Respect Human Rights. An Interpretive Guide (2012), at 14. See also P . Simons and A. Macklin, 
The Governance Gap (Routledge, 2014), p. 4.
204 These are understood to include, at a minimum, the rights expressed in the International Bill of Human Rights (comprising the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Inter-
national Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights) and the principles concerning fundamental rights set out 
in the International Labour Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work. See UNGPs, Principle 12.
205 UNGPs, Principle 13. 
206 See The Corporate Responsibility to Respect Human Rights. An Interpretive Guide, p. 13.
207 UNGPs, Principle 13. 
208 At the same time, business responsibility in no way affects or diminishes the State’s role as the primary duty-bearer when it comes to ensuring human rights protection for all 
persons within the State’s jurisdiction. This is reflected in the UNGPs in Principles 1-10.
209 UNGPs, Principle 15. 
  The policy commitment should clearly set out expectations from employees of the company (including management) and their business relationships.
210 The Corporate Responsibility to Respect Human Rights. An Interpretive Guide, p. 28.
211 See ibid., at 15ff. See also Shift and Institute for Human Rights and Business, ‘ICT Sector Guide on Implementing the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights’ 
(European Commission, 2013). 
products and services), even if they have not contributed 
to those impacts.205 
Corporate responsibility in the context of the UNGPs 
is independent of State obligations and thus “exists over 
and above compliance with national laws” and irre-
spective of States’ abilities and/or willingness to fulfil 
their own duties under human rights law.206 Businesses 
therefore cannot invoke the host or other involved States’ 
poor human rights record as a justification for their own 
conduct. This is further evidenced by the requirement 
that companies exercise due diligence in preventing and 
mitigating adverse human rights impact resulted through 
actions of their business relationships.207 Companies may 
therefore risk contributing to human rights violations 
and may under certain circumstances be morally or legal-
ly complicit in such violations, if they supply States with 
technology or data without complying with their due 
diligence obligations to safeguard against abuse, or pro-
vide data  pursuant to requests that violate international 
human rights standards or where the data is otherwise 
used in violation of international human rights law.208 
Policy commitment
In line with the UNGPs, businesses should adopt 
an explicit and public policy commitment to meet 
their responsibility to respect human rights and 
the commitment should be reflected in operation-
al policies and procedures governing their ac-
tivities.209 To aid this process, businesses should 
identify the human rights the enterprise’s activi-
ties are most likely to impact and effective ways 
to prevent and/or mitigate such impact.210 
Risk assessment
Human rights due diligence on part of businesses in-
volves conducting risk assessments examining actual and 
potential human rights impacts, both direct and indirect, 
of the business’s operations.211 Risk assessments should 
encompass all phases and aspects of business activities 

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    31
and monitor how the nature and scope of the risks may 
change over time. Such comprehensive monitoring 
allows for a timely and effective response on part of the 
company. 
In this vein, companies should make sure that human 
rights considerations are given due weight at all opera-
tional stages. In the context of data-handling, this would 
include collection, retention, processing and sharing as 
well as disposal of data. When it comes to relevant tech-
nological tools, due diligence responsibilities cover all 
phases of technology development and deployment, in-
cluding in relation to the sale or transfer of the product, 
as well as after-sales support and maintenance. Compa-
nies should have a policy in place setting up minimum 
standards regarding the existing legal and policy frame-
work, including regulatory safeguards and oversight that 
must be in place in countries where they operate or the 
government or public authorities of which they have 
developed business relations with. As part of their due 
diligence process, companies must also assess any poten-
tial business relationships, including public authorities, 
to identify, prevent and mitigate potential human rights 
impact prior to entering contractual relationships. Such 
arrangements should incorporate end-user assurances 
against unlawful or arbitrary use of technology or infra-
structure. 
The findings resulting from the human rights due dili-
gence process, including from risk assessments, should 
inform action taken by the company to prevent adverse 
impact or mitigate the effects where the impact occurs. 
The impact of such efforts should also be monitored and 
evaluated for efficiency. 
212 UNGPs, Principles 22, 29 and 31. 
213 See The Corporate Responsibility to Respect Human Rights. An Interpretive Guide, Section III; ‘ICT Sector Guide on Implementing the UN Guiding Principles on Business and  
Human Rights’, Section VI. 
214 In accordance with Principle 31, such grievance mechanisms can be considered effective if they are 1) legitimate, 2) accessible, 3) predictable, 4) equitable, 5) transparent, 6) 
rights-compatible, 7) a source of continuous learning and 8) based on engagement and dialogue. 
215 UNGPs, Principle 21. In addition to the Guiding Principles, reporting requirements have been set up by interest groups and regional organizations. For example, companies acced-
ing to the UN Global Compact are to “embrace, support and enact, within their sphere of influence”, the principles of the Global Compact and they are to report annually on the 
initiatives taken to make those principles part of their operations. In this sense, see United Nations Global Compact, ‘Reporting’ at https://www.unglobalcompact.org/participation/
report. 
  Directive 2014/95/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2013/34/EU as regards disclosure of non-financial and diversity information by certain 
large undertakings and groups requires companies of a certain size that can be classified as public interest entities to report on a number of issue areas, including respect for human 
rights. 
216 In instances where the domestic legal or policy framework hinders such reporting, companies should use their leverage with the government and other relevant stakeholders (such 
as the diplomatic representation of their own government in case they are operating abroad) and advocate for the possibility to make such information available, including through 
changes in the law.
217 While restrictions on reporting may, under certain circumstances and for a limited time, be warranted, such limitations should only be imposed to the extent they are strictly neces-
sary and proportionate to the protection of a legitimate interest. 
Accountability mechanisms 
Companies are required to set up internal account-
ability mechanisms for the implementation of human 
rights policies.212 Furthermore, in line with the “respect, 
protect, remedy” framework set out under the UNGPs, 
companies should have processes in place that enable 
the remediation of adverse human rights impacts that 
the company caused or contributed to.213 In this sense, 
operational-level grievance mechanisms may be an effec-
tive means to ensure access to remedies for stakeholders 
whose legitimate interests have been infringed upon by 
the company.214 The existence of such mechanisms may 
be of particular significance in contexts where access to 
effective judicial and quasi-judicial remedies is restricted 
or lacking.
Reporting and other forms of external  
communication
The UNGPs also stipulate that corporations should 
communicate externally how they address human rights 
impacts linked to their operations, particularly when 
concerns are raised by or on behalf of affected stakehold-
ers.215 Companies should report on their business rela-
tionship with governments and public authorities, unless 
such reporting is prohibited under national law.216  
However, States themselves should also be transparent 
about technology purchases and transfers and other 
relevant transactions related to acquiring biometric tools 
and data and should refrain from imposing blanket 
prohibitions on companies to reveal information about 
technology sales and transfer.217 Importantly, meaningful 
transparency would further include public reporting on 
lobbying activities of companies active in this space. 

32
b. Importance of a corporate due diligence 
framework 
Setting up a due diligence framework that complies 
with the above considerations goes a long way towards 
enabling companies to act in line with their responsibili-
ties under the UNGPs. The existence of such policies and 
mechanisms is particularly important in situations where 
companies have limited opportunity to monitor ways in 
which State authorities use technology or data acquired 
from the business. 
Many companies operate in environments where do-
mestic legislation and policies fall short of requirements 
under international human rights law. This phenomenon 
is distinctly noticeable in the national security context, 
particularly with respect to measures aimed at prevent-
ing and countering terrorism-related offences, and has a 
considerable negative impact on the ability of companies 
to comply with their responsibilities under the “respect, 
protect, remedy” framework set up by the UNGPs. 
Operating in these conditions may cause the compa-
nies to contribute to human rights violations and may 
result in moral or legal complicity. The challenges raised 
in this context come with no straightforward solutions. 
They however highlight the importance of stepping up 
corporate efforts to prevent, mitigate, and challenge the 
adverse human rights impact that companies may be 
contributing to, including through collaborative efforts, 
such as interest groups and public-private partnerships. 
At the same time, there is extremely limited publicly 
available information on whether companies producing, 
selling or transferring biometric tools or data have an 
adequate due diligence framework in place and whether 
carrying out human rights risk assessments of their activ-
ities and evaluating the human rights record of busi-
ness relationships is a regular part of relevant corporate 
processes. While a number of such companies publicly 
218 For example, the Booz Allen Hamilton Code of Business Ethics and Conduct states that the company “honors” and “celebrates” human rights and emphasize their support for the 
UNGPs but granular information on how such commitment is operationalized is largely lacking. See ‘Booz Allen Hamilton Code of Business Ethics and Conduct’, available at 
https://investors.boozallen.com/static-files/f708a2e9-5fb1-4ba2-9850-0233b683716c (visited 20 February 2020). Amazon’s Global Human Rights Principles state that the company 
is guided by the UNGPs and supports the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. See Amazon, ‘Global Human Rights Principles’, available at https://sustainability.aboutamazon.
com/governance/amazon-global-human-rights-principles (visited 20 February 2020). Again, detailed information on how such values are reflected in their operations is not readily 
available. It is also notable in relation to Amazon’s biometrics-related operations that Amazon investors have recently voted against limiting the sale of facial recognition technology 
to public authorities and rejected a proposal aimed at commissioning an independent report on the impact of their software, Rekognition. See Kris Holt, ‘Amazon Investors Reject 
Call to Limit Facial Recognition System Sales’, Endgadget, 22 May 2019, available at https://www.engadget.com/2019/05/22/amazon-facial-recognition-law-enforcement-share-
holders-climate-change/ (visited 20 February 2020). Cyber-intelligence company NSO Group has recently adopted a human rights policy document stating the firm’s commitment 
to the International Bill of Rights and the UNGPs. It also provides information about due diligence processes and states, among others, that NSO Group thoroughly evaluates 
human rights impact arising from the misuse of their products by considering the specific customer, their past human rights performance and governance standards in the country 
involved. See NSO Group, ‘Human Rights Policy’ (September 2019), available at https://www.nsogroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/NSO-Human-Rights-Policy_Septem-
ber19.pdf (visited 20 February 2020). Human rights actors are however skeptical about the level of commitment on part of the company to meaningfully implement the policy, due 
to the company’s history with its products repeatedly used to commit human rights violations, particularly as its current business relationships also seem to include governments 
with problematic human rights records. See, for example, Eva Galperin and Cindy Cohn, ‘Private Companies, Government Surveillance Software and Human Rights’, Electronic 
Frontier Foundation, 28 October 2019, available at https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2019/10/applying-human-rights-framework-sale-government-surveillance-software (visited 20 
February 2020).
state their commitment to human rights,218 they do not 
provide information on ways in which such commit-
ment is operationalized, including with respect to their 
business relationships. This, at the very least, points to 
an incomplete due diligence framework that is missing 
mechanisms and processes aimed at ensuring transparen-
cy. Moreover, the widespread concerns raised concerning 
a number of biometric tools and ways in which these are 
employed by public authorities, including in a national 
security or surveillance context, make skepticism in rela-
tion to corporate due diligence in this area warranted. 
Recommendations:
• Business enterprises must ensure that their opera-
tions are guided by international human rights law, 
including the “respect, protect, remedy” framework 
set up under the United Nations Guiding Principles 
on Business and Human Rights. 
• Businesses should adopt an explicit and public 
policy commitment to meet their responsibility to 
respect human rights and the commitment should 
be reflected in operational policies and procedures 
governing their activities.
• Business enterprises must conduct human rights 
due diligence. This includes conducting risk assess-
ments examining actual and potential human rights 
impacts, both direct and indirect, of the business’s 
operations. Risk assessments must encompass all 
phases and aspects of the business’s operations and 
monitor how the nature and scope of the risks may 
change over time.
2. State duties vis-à-vis third-party  
conduct 
In the context of their obligations under international 
human rights law, States have the duty to protect persons 
within their jurisdiction from undue interference with 

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    33
their human rights by third parties, including private 
actors such as business enterprises. States’ duty to ensure 
respect for human rights implies the obligation to enact 
legislation on the basis of which they can take necessary 
and adequate measures to prevent, investigate, and pun-
ish activities that endanger these rights and to offer re-
dress in case abuses have occurred.219 This is also reflected 
in the “protect, respect, and remedy” framework of the 
UNGPs which urge States to “exercise adequate over-
sight when they contract with, or legislate for, business 
enterprises to provide services that may have an impact 
on the enjoyment of human rights.”220 The obligation to 
safeguard human rights against interference by third par-
ties is particularly important in the context of biometrics 
keeping in mind the high human rights risk associated 
with 1) use of sensitive personal information, combined 
with 2) the use of automated tools, many powered by 
algorithms or artificial intelligence software. 
In line with their human rights obligations, States must 
set up a domestic framework that requires businesses op-
erating within their jurisdiction (including with respect 
to their activities with transnational impact) to:
• Create a due diligence framework and carry out 
human rights risk assessment and monitoring with 
respect to their activities and the activities of their 
business relationships; 
• Commit to human rights-compliant policies;
• Commit to public reporting on ways in which these 
policies are implemented as well as their efficiency; 
and 
• Set up accountability mechanisms.221 
219 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, article 2.
220 UNGPs, Principle 5. 
221 Similar recommendations are also contained in the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, available at
  http://mneguidelines.oecd.org/guidelines/ (visited 20 February 2020).
222 Revised Legally binding instrument to regulate, in international human rights law, the activities of transnational corporations and other business enterprises, OEIGWG  
Chairmanship Revised Draft (16 July 2019) available at https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/WGTransCorp/OEIGWG_RevisedDraft_LBI.pdf (visited  
20 February 2020). 
Draft UN Treaty on Business 
and Human Rights
The above requirements are also highlight-
ed in the draft Legally binding instrument 
to regulate, in international human rights 
law, the activities of transnational corpo-
rations and other business enterprises.222 
The draft instrument includes a provision 
requiring States to adopt “measures neces-
sary to ensure that all persons conducting 
business activities, including those of trans-
national character, undertake human rights 
due diligence.” Human rights due diligence 
includes “identifying and assessing any ac-
tual or potential human rights violations or 
abuses that may arise from their business 
activities or from their contractual rela-
tionships.” It further requires taking appro-
priate actions to prevent these violations 
or abuses, monitor human rights impact, 
publicly account for corporate policies and 
the results and implications of those poli-
cies, including through reporting publicly 
and periodically. 


    
The challenge of future-proofing laws and policies
To paraphrase the 2018 Addendum to the 2015 
Madrid Guiding Principles, as Member States’ use 
of biometric tools and data continues to expand, 
the parameters for their human rights-compliant 
use continue to evolve accordingly. Bridging the 
gap between technological developments and 
legal and policy responses is a constant challenge 
for governments and one that comes with a set 
of problems with no obvious solutions. The nature 
and pace of technological developments impacts 
foreseeability of the implications of technology. 
This highlights the importance that human rights 
principles and safeguards, including independent 
oversight, are duly reflected in the legal and policy 
framework and, as a result, meaningfully incor-
porated in relevant processes. Critically, robust 
human rights assessments, including effective 
monitoring and evaluation processes, are a sine 
qua non  of safeguarding against negative human 
rights ramifications resulting from the use of tech-
nology. A human rights-conscious approach also 
necessitates due attention to implementing strong 
protections on data-sharing and use; reduced 
foreseeability of future implications also means 
that consequences of data use may not have been 
foreseeable at the time the data was collected. 
This raises challenges relating to the adequacy of 
informed consent as the basis for processing per-
sonal data, fairness and transparency in collection 
and processing, purpose limitation, and account-
ability in the handling of data. It further highlights 
the importance of assessing the lawfulness and 
human rights compliance of data use at every 
stage.
223 Meinhard Schröder, ‘Precautionary Approach/ Principle’, Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law, available at  https://opil.ouplaw.com/view/10.1093/
law:epil/9780199231690/law-9780199231690-e1603 (visited 20 February 2020).
224 See, e.g., Sonia Boutillon, ‘The Precautionary Principle: Development of an International Standard’, 23 Michigan Journal of International Law 429 (2002); Owen McIntyre and 
Thomas Mosedale, ‘The Precautionary Principle as a Norm of Customary International Law’, Journal of Environmental Law, Volume 9, Issue 2, (1997) pp. 221–241.
225 Ibid. 
226 Jean-Marie Henckaerts and Louise Doswald-Beck, Customary International Humanitarian Law—Volume II : Practice (ICRC/Cambridge University Press, 2005), Chapter 14,  
Section B. 
227 See, e.g., UNESCO and World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology, ‘The Precautionary Principle’ (2005); Gregory E. Kaebnick, Elizabeth Heitman, 
James P . Collins et al., ‘Precaution and Governance of Emerging Technologies’, Science, Vol. 354, Issue 6313 (2016);  Claudia Som, Lorenz M. Hilty and Andreas R. Köhler, ‘The 
Precautionary Principle as a Framework for a Sustainable Information Society’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 85 (2009), pp. 493-505. 
Against this background, the precautionary prin-
ciple has the potential to provide for a useful tool 
in addressing challenges related to regulating the 
future impact of technologies. A “guiding princi-
ple of modern international law,”223 the principle 
advocates for State decision-making to be guid-
ed by precaution in circumstances where there is 
scientific uncertainty around the potential impact 
of relevant activities, tools, and technology.224 
Importantly, the scope of the principle covers 
situations where there is insufficient information to 
prove an activity or tool unsafe. While the pre-
cautionary principle has primarily been applied in 
international environmental law225 and internation-
al humanitarian law in relation to rules concerning 
the environmental impact of weapons,226 adopting 
an analogous approach to technological develop-
ment may be of considerable added value. Various 
stakeholders and experts have expressed support 
for expanding the precautionary principle to the 
governance of emerging technologies.227 Strin-
gent application of responsibilities and obligations 
under human rights law, including the duty of care 
connected to the prevention and mitigation of 
negative human rights impact, could provide for 
an essential component of the principle’s opera-
tionalization.
34

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    35
3. Challenges of State-business  
‘cooperation’ and potential ways forward
As noted above, biometric tools are overwhelmingly 
developed and sold by private companies, frequently 
in the context of processes lacking transparency and 
not benefitting from human rights input. There is, for 
example, rising scrutiny towards initiatives by a large 
number of companies to develop facial recognition 
software. These companies are not limited to companies 
specializing in cyber-security but also include major tech 
companies, such as Amazon, Facebook, Google, and 
Microsoft.228 While these companies may not be de-
veloping such tools with the primary aim of employing 
them for national security purposes, tools developed by 
them are used by security sector actors in a number of 
jurisdictions.229 These companies are also very well-posi-
tioned to collect data of millions of users to power their 
algorithms, a concern that has been consistently flagged 
by privacy advocates. Governments also enter diverse 
partnerships with businesses in the context of which one 
party may provide the technology while the other the 
data to feed into the algorithm.230 
The US border control database system231 is based on bio-
metrics developed by US security contractor Booz Allen 
Hamilton. This system is employed at US entry ports but 
has also been put at the disposal of other States and, based 
on the 2018 Country Reports on Terrorism, compiled by 
the US Department of State, has been used at 227 ports of 
entry in 23 countries to screen more than 300,000 trav-
228 BBC News, ’US Lawmakers Concerned by Accuracy of Facial Recognition’, 16 January 2020, available at  https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-51130904 (visited 20 February 2020). 
229 See AI Now Institute, ‘AI Now Report 2018’, New York University, available at https://ainowinstitute.org/AI_Now_2018_Report.pdf (visited 20 February 2020). See also, Matt 
Cagle and Nicole Ozer, ‘Amazon Teams Up With Government to Deploy Dangerous New Facial Recognition Technology’, American Civil Liberties Union, 22 May 2018, available 
at https://www.aclu.org/blog/privacy-technology/surveillance-technologies/amazon-teams-government-deploy-dangerous-new (visited 20 February 2020); Kade Crockford, ‘Over 
150,000 People Tell Amazon: Stop Selling Facial Recognition Tech to Police’, American Civil Liberties Union, 18 June 2018, available at https://www.aclu.org/blog/privacy-tech-
nology/surveillance-technologies/over-150000-people-tell-amazon-stop-selling-facial (visited 20 February 2020). 
230 For example, US Customs and Border Protection partners with a number of airlines, including American Airlines, Delta and JetBlue. Airlines photograph each passenger when 
boarding and use the government’s Biometric Exit Program’s software to authenticate passengers in the process. While the use facial recognition in this context has been described 
as an opt-out system, travelers have reported that no information was provided in this regard during the boarding process. 
  See Kelly Yamanauchi, ‘As Delta Air Lines Expands Face Recognition, Criticism Grows’, Government Technology, 18 September 2019, available at https://www.govtech.com/prod-
ucts/As-Delta-Air-Lines-Expands-Face-Recognition-Criticism-Grows.html (visited 20 February 2020); Allie Funk, ‘I Opted Out of Facial Recognition at the Airport—It Wasn’t 
Easy’, WIRED, 2 July 2019, available at https://www.wired.com/story/opt-out-of-facial-recognition-at-the-airport/ (visited 20 February 2020).
231 Personal Identification Secure Comparison and Evaluation System (PISCES), a project that falls under the Terrorist Interdiction Program (TIP) of the US Department of State. 
232 Partner countries include Cameroon, Chad, Ethiopia, Iraq, Niger, Yemen, among others. See US Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2018, available at https://www.
state.gov/reports/country-reports-on-terrorism-2018/ (visited 20 February 2020).
233  Jon Fingas, ‘Chinese Surveillance Company Found Tracking 2.5 Million People’, Endgadget, 17 February 2019, available at: https://www.engadget.com/2019/02/17/chinese-sur-
veillance-company-tracks-2-5-million-people/ (visited 20 February 2020). 
234  These countries include Italy, Singapore, Ecuador, Malaysia, Zimbabwe, UAE, Ethiopia, South Africa, Bolivia, Saudi Arabia, Rwanda, etc. See, for example, Council on Foreign 
Relations, ‘Authoritarians Are Exporting Surveillance Tech, And With it Their Vision for the Internet’, 5 December 2018, available at https://www.cfr.org/blog/authoritari-
ans-are-exporting-surveillance-tech-and-it-their-vision-internet (visited 20 February 2020); Jun Mai, ‘Ecuador Is Fighting Crime Using Chinese Surveillance Technology’, South 
China Morning Post, 22 January 2018, available at https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2129912/ecuador-fighting-crime-using-chinese-surveillance 
(visited 20 February 2020). 
235 BBC News, ‘Russia’s Use of Facial Recognition Challenged in Court’, 31 January 2020, available at https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-51324841 (visited 20 February 2020); 
Felix Light, ‘Russia Is Building One of the World’s Largest Facial Recognition Networks’, The Moscow Times, 12 November 2019, available at https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2019/11/12/russia-building-one-of-worlds-largest-facial-recognition-networks-a68139 (visited 20 February 2020).
236 See, for example, Peter Bourgelais, ‘Commonwealth of Surveillance States: on the Export and Resale of Russia Surveillance Technology to Post-Soviet Central Asia’, Access Now, 
available at https://www.accessnow.org/cms/assets/uploads/archive/docs/Commonwealth_of_Surveillance_States_ENG_1.pdf (visited 20 February 2020).  
237 See Amnesty International, ‘Israel: Stop NSO Group Exporting Spyware to Human Rights Abusers’, 14 January 2020, available at https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/
news/2020/01/israel-nso-spyware-revoke-export-license/ (visited 20 February 2020); Lucie Krahulcova and Isedua Oribhabor, ‘New Report Shows 100+ Members of Civil Society 
Targeted as NSO Group Continues to Evade Scrutiny’, Access Now, available at https://www.accessnow.org/new-report-shows-100-members-of-civil-society-targeted-as-nso-
group-continues-to-evade-scrutiny/ (visited 20 February 2020).
238 Council on Foreign Relations, ‘Authoritarians Are Exporting Surveillance Tech, And With it Their Vision for the Internet’, available at https://www.cfr.org/blog/authoritari-
ans-are-exporting-surveillance-tech-and-it-their-vision-internet (visited 20 February 2020). 
elers each day.232 Other technology companies similarly 
partner with the US government as well as numerous oth-
er governments worldwide to assist with the development 
and implementation of biometric systems.
The role of Chinese facial recognition and biometric 
surveillance companies in facilitating data collection, 
surveillance and the implementation of initiatives by 
Chinese authorities, such as the social credit system, is 
well established.233 Some of these companies have further 
partnered with public authorities in other countries, not 
only in Asia but also in Africa, Europe and Latin Amer-
ica.234 Similarly, Russian firms have built sophisticated 
algorithms feeding the government’s facial recognition 
network project,235 and biometric technology developed 
by Russian companies has reportedly been transferred to 
various Central Asian governments.236 Israeli companies 
are likewise at the forefront of such developments, with 
surveillance technology company, NSO Group having 
achieved notoriety in recent years for recurring reports 
about the misuse of its technology by some governments 
to target, among others, human rights defenders and 
journalists.237 While there seems to be a certain level of 
unease on part of some (mostly European) governments 
to authorize transfer of surveillance technology to at 
least some governments with particularly poor rule of 
law and human rights records, this concern does not 
seem to be shared by a number of other governments 
playing significant roles in spyware transfers and compa-
nies operating under their jurisdiction.238 


36
These are but a few examples of companies active in this 
space developing, employing, selling, and transferring 
biometric tools and collecting, retaining, and processing 
relevant data. By all accounts, the number of companies 
active in the area of biometrics may at the very least be in 
the hundreds.239 Mapping the commercial space comes 
with challenges, for a number of reasons. While consid-
erable (and deserved) criticism has been directed at the 
human rights record and insufficient level of transpar-
ency of activities of Internet platforms, including social 
media companies, the businesses active in the “biomet-
rics game” tend to be even less transparent about relevant 
operations, initiatives, and business partnerships. Many 
such companies are less “public-facing” than major Inter-
net platforms240 and, as such, are less sensitive to public 
opinion as this is less likely to affect their business.241
When addressing the human rights and rule of law  
implications of state-business cooperation in relation  
to biometrics, two main aspects need distinguishing:  
1) implications related to transfer or sale of relevant 
technology; and 2) concerns raised by different means 
and modalities of sharing biometric data. In the follow-
ing, this section will look into these two questions in 
more detail. 
a. Transfer or sale of biometric technology
It is well established that the potential of biometric 
technologies to influence the enjoyment of a broad range 
of human rights is substantial. While the extent of such 
influence varies depending on the technology in ques-
tion, many biometric tools, and definitely those used 
in a national security/ surveillance context, are, from a 
human rights perspective, high-risk technologies. As set 
out above, government obligations and business respon-
sibilities under international human rights law imply a 
comprehensive due diligence duty aimed at ensuring that 
239 According to Privacy International, in 2016 there were well over five hundred companies developing, marketing and selling such products to government purchasers. See Privacy 
International, ‘The Surveillance Industry and Human Rights. Privacy International submission to the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression’ (February 2019) available at https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/FreedomOpinion/Pages/SR2019ReporttoHRC.aspx (visited 20 February 2020).
240 Even in case of ‘public-facing’ companies, such as Amazon, their operations concerning the development, deployment, sale and transfer of biometric tools tend to be less transparent 
than other aspects of the company’s operations. 
241 Companies such as Nexa Technologies (formerly known as Amesys), The Gamma Group, Hacking Team, or the NSO Group have been subject to considerable criticism relating 
to the use of their technology by governments to commit human rights violations, with relatively limited reaction on part of these businesses. See, for example, DJ Pangburn, ‘The 
Secretive Billion-Dollar Company Helping Governments Hack Our Phones’, Fast Company, 30 November 2017, available at https://www.fastcompany.com/40469864/the-billion-
dollar-company-helping-governments-hack-our-phones (visited 20 February 2020); International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH), ‘Amesys and Qosmos Targeted by the 
Judiciary: Is There a New Law on the Horizon?’, 18 June 2013, available at https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/france/amesys-and-qosmos-targeted-by-the-judicia-
ry-is-there-a-new-law-on-the-13966 (visited 20 February 2020); Cora Currier, Morgan Marquis-Boire, ‘A Detailed Look at Hacking Team’s Emails About Its Repressive Clients’, 
The Intercept, 7 July 2015, available at https://theintercept.com/2015/07/07/leaked-documents-confirm-hacking-team-sells-spyware-repressive-countries/  (visited 20 February 
2020).
242 As also highlighted in the guidance of the European Commission on implementing the Guiding Principles in the information and communications technology sector, European 
Commission, ICT Sector Guide on Implementing the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (Luxembourg, 2013).
243 The government of the United Kingdom, in partnership with a technology industry association, produced a set of guidelines for the cybersecurity industry in which they stress the 
importance of preventing and mitigating human rights risks “through appropriate design modification” at the earliest stages of product development.
244 See, for example, Brad A. Greenberg, ‘Rethinking Technology Neutrality’, 100 Minnesota Law Review 1495 (2016); Lance Strate, ‘If It’s Neutral, It’s Not Technology’, Educational 
Technology 52, no. 1 (2012), at 6-9; Ritse Erumi, ‘Technology Is Not Neutral – It’s Political’, Ford Foundation, 3 November 2017, available at https://www.fordfoundation.org/
ideas/equals-change-blog/posts/technology-is-not-neutral-it-s-political/ (visited 20 February 2020); Melissa Gregg and Jason Wilson, ‘The Myth of Neutral Technology’, The 
Atlantic, 13 January 2015, available at https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/01/the-myth-of-neutral-technology/384330/ (visited 20 February 2020).
the development and deployment of such technology is 
compliant with international human rights norms and 
standards. It also mandates that necessary and adequate 
steps are taken to mitigate the risks of negative human 
rights impact at every stage of the product lifecycle. 
Meaningful due diligence requires improved efforts 
on part of both governments and private companies. 
Due diligence implies conducting a comprehensive risk 
assessment to guide product development and deploy-
ment. This process should translate into a “human rights 
by design” approach242 to the development of biometric 
tools, starting with the earliest stages of such process-
es. Whereas businesses should develop and implement 
relevant policies and processes at their own initiative, 
international human rights law requires States to set 
up enforcement frameworks in this regard. While some 
jurisdictions have taken steps towards ensuring more 
human-rights-conscious technology development by the 
private sector,243 such initiatives are few and far between 
and frequently lack bite. 
While the truism that technology was inherently neutral 
has been discredited,244 in particular as concerns da-
ta-driven technologies, it is nonetheless true that most 
tools can be used in ways that uphold rule of law and 
human rights and in ways that violate them. This un-
derscores the importance of due diligence obligations in 
relation to transfer and sale of technologies. The UNGPs 
clearly call on businesses to examine the human rights 
record of business relationships and analyze the pos-
sible negative human rights impact of doing business 
with them. To the extent such risks exist, businesses are 
required to implement necessary and effective mitigating 
measures and even to cease relevant transactions if miti-
gating measures prove insufficiently effective. 

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    37
However, it needs reiterating that States, as the primary 
duty-bearers under human rights law, bear obligations in 
this respect as well. This means that States must set up 
and effectively implement a framework that guarantees 
that businesses comply with the above-described respon-
sibilities. These considerations must guide State action 
with respect to conduct by public authorities as well as 
companies within the State’s jurisdiction. The mandate of 
the Special Rapporteur highlights that the scope of due 
diligence obligations extends to post-sale or post-transfer 
human rights impact even in case where biometric tools 
are used by a third country’s government. While it is left 
up to States to decide on the most effective way to oper-
ationalize this duty, considering the particular domestic 
context and relevant challenges, some positive practices 
can be delineated in this regard. 
One such practice of particular relevance is to subject 
high human rights risk technologies to licensing re-
quirements, including in the context of exports. In this 
respect, relevant international and regional initiatives, 
such as the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls 
for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Tech-
nologies245 (hereinafter “Wassenaar Arrangement”) and 
Council [of the European Union] Regulation setting up 
a Community regime for the control of exports, transfer, 
brokering and transit of dual-use items246 constitute no-
table examples. Although their effectiveness in practice 
has been limited for a number of reasons, both frame-
works provide useful models and tools, with the most 
pertinent aspects set out below. 
245 See Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, ‘Founding Documents’ (Public Documents. Volume I) and ‘List of 
Dual-Use Goods and Technologies and Munitions List’, (Public Documents. Volume II). 
246 Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 setting up a Community regime for the control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual-use items. The regulation is currently under 
review, with a new Commission proposal having been published in 2016. 
247 For more information, see https://www.wassenaar.org/.
248 Certain technologies, such as mobile telecommunication interception equipment, intrusion software and Internet protocol network surveillance software have been added to the 
control list, in light of concerns related to some participating countries providing surveillance equipment to governments from the Middle East and North Africa region, some of 
which were used to crack down on protesters and opposition in the context of the Arab Spring and as such used to aid serious human rights violations, including torture, crimes 
against humanity and likely also war crimes. See, e.g., Collin Anderson, ‘Considerations on Wassenaar Arrangement Control List Additions for Surveillance Technologies’, Access 
Now, available at https://www.accessnow.org/cms/assets/uploads/archive/Access%20Wassenaar%20Surveillance%20Export%20Controls%202015.pdf (visited 20 February 2020).
249 For more information, see https://www.wassenaar.org/about-us/#faq.
250 See Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, ‘Founding Documents’ (Public Documents. Volume I). 
251 See ‘Surveillance and human rights. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression’, A/HRC/41/35, para. 34. 
252 Justin Sherman and Robert Morgus, ‘As Exports of Surveillance Tech Rise, Freer Countries Face a Choice’, Defense One, 10 December 2018, available at  https://www.defenseone.
com/threats/2018/12/exports-surveillance-tech-rise-freer-countries-face-choice/153416/ (visited 20 February 2020).
253 See European Commission, “Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council setting up a Union regime for the control of exports, transfer, brokering, tech-
nical assistance and transit of dual-use items (recast)”, 28 September 2016, 2016/0295 (COD). See also, Electronic Privacy Information Center, ‘Submission of the Electronic Privacy 
Information Center to the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. The Surveillance Industry and Human 
Rights’, 13 February 2019, available at https://epic.org/privacy/intl/EPICUNSurveillanceIndustry20190213.pdf (visited 20 February 2020); Lucie Krahulcova, ‘The European Par-
liament Is Fighting to Strengthen the Rules for Surveillance Trade’, Access Now, 8 December 2017, available at https://www.accessnow.org/european-parliament-fighting-strength-
en-rules-surveillance-trade/ (visited 20 February 2020).
254 As the EU list is based on the control list of the Wassenaar Arrangement as well as that of other multilateral export control regimes (such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG); 
the Australia Group (AG); and the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)), the additions to the Wassenaar list in terms of surveillance technology also came to be reflected 
in the EU’s dual use list.
The Wassenaar Arrangement, bringing together 42 
States, has been established with the aim “to contribute 
to regional and international security and stability, by 
promoting transparency and greater responsibility in 
transfers of conventional arms and dual-use goods and 
technologies,” including “to prevent the acquisition of 
these items by terrorists.” 247 A limited list of surveillance 
technologies have been added to the list of dual-use 
goods after the Arab Spring;248 however, as the Arrange-
ment is not a binding instrument, “practical implemen-
tation varies from country to country in accordance 
with national procedures.”249 The founding documents 
of the Wassenaar Arrangement contain no references 
to international law, international human rights law, or 
international humanitarian law norms and standards,250 
a significant shortcoming leading to a lack of human-
rights-based approach to surveillance technology (or any 
technology covered by the Arrangement).251 Neverthe-
less, some participating countries have reportedly sought 
limiting the transfer of such technology to States with 
poor human rights records, as a consequence of their 
participation in the Arrangement.252 
The European Union has, for a while now, been in the 
process of updating the EU-wide regulation focused on 
control of exports, transfer, brokering, technical assis-
tance and transit of dual-use items.253 The 2009 Reg-
ulation has been subject to criticism by human rights 
stakeholders, among others, due to surveillance technol-
ogies originally falling outside of its scope.254 These actors 
viewed the review process as an opportunity to strength-
en the human rights protections in the European Union 
export regime through an expansion of categories cov-

38
ered and establishment of mechanisms to ensure “respect 
for human rights in the country of final destination.”255 
The proposal put forward by the European Commission 
advanced the creation of an “autonomous” EU control 
list that would include a set of surveillance technologies 
not currently covered under the Wassenaar Arrangement, 
such as digital forensics and data retention systems.256 
Such endeavors however met with considerable push-
back on part of some EU Member States as well as lobby 
organizations, led by concerns that tighter export con-
trols “could seriously undermine the competitiveness of 
EU-based industry.”257 While there seems to be agree-
ment among the Commission, the European Parliament, 
and the Council of the European Union that certain 
surveillance technologies should come within the scope 
of the EU’s dual-use regulation, opinions seem to differ 
as to the scope of amendments to be made to the control 
list.258 The mandate of the Special Rapporteur reiterates 
that surveillance technologies are, from a human rights 
point of view, high risk technologies and considers that 
bringing them within the remit of the Regulation would 
improve human rights protection. 
Despite all the shortcomings outlined above, export 
control mechanisms can provide for powerful tools to 
further the responsible sale and transfer of relevant tech-
nology, including biometric tools. Such mechanisms have 
the potential to provide for a comprehensive framework 
governing all relevant transactions and thus present a 
clear added value to relevant restrictions implemented 
in the context of sanctions regimes. These mechanisms 
should be built on the existing frameworks outlined 
above and based on human rights obligations incumbent 
upon States and corporate responsibilities established 
255 Coalition Against Unlawful Surveillance Exports (CAUSE), ‘A Critical Opportunity: Bringing Surveillance Technologies Within the EU Dual-Use Regulation’ (2015). The 
report advanced a series of recommendations: the EU should include cyber-surveillance tools in the dual-use list; strengthen protection of privacy, data protection, and freedom of 
assembly; emphasize that the exporters of high human rights risk products not listed in the regulation have to make sure that their goods don’t fall into the wrong hands; increase 
the transparency of national authorities’ export control decisions as well as baseline statistics on where the export is going; strengthen role of civil society in relation to monitoring 
control regimes. 
256 Mark Bromley and Paul Gerharz, ‘Revising the EU Dual-use Regulation: Challenges and Opportunities for the Trilogue Process’, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 
(SIPRI), 7 October 2019, available at https://www.sipri.org/commentary/topical-backgrounder/2019/revising-eu-dual-use-regulation-challenges-and-opportunities-trilogue-pro-
cess (visited 20 February 2020).
257 Delegations of Cyprus, Czechia, Estonia, Finland, Ireland, Italy, Poland, Sweden and the United Kingdom, ‘For adoption of an improved EU Export Control Regulation 428/2009 
and for cyber-surveillance controls promoting human rights and international humanitarian law globally’, WK 5755/2018 INIT (15 May 2018); Catherine Stupp, ‘Nine Countries 
Unite Against EU Export Controls on Surveillance Software’, EURACTIV, 8 June 2018, available at https://www.euractiv.com/section/cybersecurity/news/nine-countries-unite-
against-eu-export-controls-on-surveillance-software/ (visited 20 February 2020); Reporters Without Borders, ‘International Regulations: Broken or Blocked by Lobbies’, 14 March 
2017, available at https://rsf.org/en/reports/international-regulations-broken-or-blocked-lobbies (visited 20 February 2020); Daniel Moßbrucker, ‘Surveillance Exports: How EU 
Member States Are Compromising New Human Rights Standards’, Netzpolitik.org, 29 October 2018, available at https://netzpolitik.org/2018/surveillance-exports-how-eu-mem-
ber-states-are-compromising-new-human-rights-standards/#spendenleiste (visited 20 February 2020). See also A/HRC/41/35, para. 19. 
258 Some stakeholders have expressed unease about the EU’s list going beyond those of other multilaterally agreed control regimes. 
259 Such processes must be conducted in full respect for the right to participate in public affairs, as guaranteed in article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
This includes consultation with relevant stakeholders, including civil society actors.
260 Participating States, as well as other exporting Governments, should deny licensing “where there is a substantial risk that those exports could be used to violate human rights, where 
there is no legal framework in place in a destination governing the use of a surveillance item, or where the legal framework for its use falls short of international human rights law or 
standards.” See Privacy International, ‘The Surveillance Industry and Human Rights. Privacy International submission to the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection 
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression’ (February 2019), available at https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/FreedomOpinion/Pages/SR2019ReporttoHRC.aspx (visited 20 
February 2020).
261 See also A/HRC/41/35, para. 49. 
262 Monitoring should extend to licensing standards, decisions to authorize, modify or reject licenses, incidents or patterns of misuse of surveillance technologies and related human 
rights violations. In this sense see also A/HRC/41/35.
under frameworks such as the UNGPs. In this respect, 
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur makes the 
following recommendations:
• Relevant frameworks must contain binding obliga-
tions with respect to both government and business 
conduct (noting that this latter aspect would have to 
be enforced at the domestic level, through the action 
of government authorities).
• Export control frameworks must cover all tools the 
use of which presents a high risk to the enjoyment 
of human rights. Tools driven by or used to extract 
biometric data are to be presumed high-risk, due to 
the high sensitivity of such data and the far-reaching 
implications of its use.
• These frameworks must be developed through a 
human rights-conscious process259 with due consid-
eration to all human rights obligations of the State 
and ensuring adequate protection for all affected hu-
man rights, including the rights to privacy and data 
protection. The human rights-based approach must 
also be reflected in relevant benchmarks developed 
in this context.260
• The scope of certification and monitoring must 
cover all relevant stages, including post-sale and 
post-transfer.
• Processes set up under such frameworks must con-
tain inbuilt safeguards that protect against abuse, 
including independent oversight261 and transparency 
requirements covering export control decisions and 
relevant benchmarks used, as well as information on 
follow-up and monitoring processes.262 Such trans-

HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    39
parency requirements also serve as a prerequisite 
for allowing the public and civil society to efficiently 
monitor the implementation of relevant frameworks. 
b. Sharing of biometric data
In the context of the use of biometric tools, there are 
frequent examples of data-sharing between govern-
ment and corporate actors. In instances of governments 
sharing data with corporate actors, they have the obli-
gation to ensure that such data-sharing does not result 
in any unwarranted interferences with human rights. 
Data-sharing must pursue a legitimate public interest 
goal and incorporate necessary and efficient safeguards 
ensuring that corporations uphold the same standards 
that states have an obligation under human rights law to 
maintain. The considerations outlined above (Section C) 
are fully relevant in this respect. 
However, a particular issue that needs addressing relates 
to government requests for biometric data addressed at 
companies. Companies must only share biometric data 
with governments:
• With the informed, free, and unambiguous consent 
of the data subject; or 
• To the extent such data-sharing is in the legitimate 
public interest and subject to a procedure set out 
in domestic law, with sufficient safeguards against 
unlawful or arbitrary use. 
However, many companies operate in environments or 
maintain business relationships with governments where 
domestic legislation and policies fall short of require-
ments under international human rights law. This phe-
nomenon is distinctly noticeable in the national security 
context, particularly with respect to measures aimed at 
preventing and countering terrorism-related offences. In 
the following, this subsection sets out some recommend-
ed steps companies should follow when faced with State 
263 As relevant measures may restrict human rights, such measures must be provided by law. See European Court of Human Rights, Malone v. The United Kingdom, Application no. 
8691/79, 2 August 1984, §§ 66-68. 
  See also, European Court of Human Rights, Roman Zakharov v. Russia [GC], Application no. 47143/06, 4 December 2015, § 230; Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promo-
tion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, A/69/397, § 35.
264 This requirement has first been voiced by the European Court of Human Rights in Sunday Times v. The United Kingdom, specifying that national law must conform to a certain 
standard of quality. See European Court of Human Rights, Sunday Times v. The United Kingdom (no. 1), Application no. 6538/74, 26 April 1979, § 49. That mere compliance with 
domestic law is not sufficient for compliance with Convention standards has further been underlined in Malone v. The United Kingdom where the Court stated that lawfulness 
“does not merely refer back to domestic law but also relates to the quality of the law, requiring it to be compatible with the rule of law.” See European Court of Human Rights, 
Malone v. The United Kingdom, Application no. 8691/79, 2 August 1984, § 67.
265 Accessibility implies that individuals that are to be affected by the respective legislation must have the possibility to become aware of its content. See European Court of Human 
Rights, Groppera Radio AG and Others v. Switzerland, Application no. 10890/84, Series A no. 173, 28 March 1990, §§ 65-68.
266 Sunday Times v. The United Kingdom (no. 1), § 49. This requirement does not call for absolute foreseeability but rather that the law give individuals an “adequate indication as to the 
circumstances in which and the conditions on which public authorities are empowered to interfere with their rights.” See Malone v. The United Kingdom, §§ 66-68.
267 Malone v. the United Kingdom, §§ 67-68. 
268 European Court of Human Rights, Kruslin v. France, Application no. 11801/85, 24 April 1990, §§ 33 and 35; and European Court of Human Rights, Huvig v. France, Application 
no. 11105/84, 24 April 1990, §§ 32 and 34. See also Zakharov v Russia, § 269.
269 Human Rights Committee, General Comment no. 34, CCPR/C/GC/34, para. 26.
270 In the cases of Kruslin v. France and Huvig v. France, the European Court of Human Rights emphasized the need for clear, detailed rules, especially as the technology available for 
use was continually becoming more sophisticated.
requests to share biometric data. 
Compliance with domestic law
Business enterprises should ensure that they only act 
upon State requests for biometric data that are made 
in compliance with domestic law.263 In particular, they 
should determine the existence of a substantive basis in 
domestic law for the particular request and that all rele-
vant procedural requirements have been complied with. 
Should this not be the case, companies should refuse 
to comply with the request and explore available legal 
means to challenge it. 
Companies should forego collaborating with States in a 
manner that may interfere with human rights of indi-
viduals on an informal basis as this removes the relevant 
transactions from the regular safeguards and oversight as 
well as remedial mechanisms established under the law. 
Compliance with international human rights law
State requests received by companies should also be 
assessed for compliance with international human 
rights norms and standards to the extent such assess-
ment is feasible. In this vein, companies should examine 
the compliance of the domestic legal framework with 
international human rights law.264 This means that the 
legal framework in question must be must be sufficiently 
accessible265 and foreseeable as to its effects.266 The law 
must also provide sufficient guidance to those charged 
with their execution and indicate the scope of any discre-
tion conferred on the competent authorities.267 Finally, 
it must provide for sufficient and adequate safeguards 
against abuse268 and must not violate the prohibition 
against discrimination entailed in international human 
rights law.269 Having clear and detailed rules govern 
interference through digital technology is of particular 
importance especially when the technology that enables 
such interference is continually becoming more and 
more sophisticated.270 

40
Evaluating the human rights compliance of State 
requests may, however, pose serious challenges to compa-
nies. Such requests are rarely accompanied with sufficient 
information that would make it possible to meaningfully 
assess whether a State measure would be in line with 
international human rights law. 
If, on the basis of the information available to the com-
pany and the assessment conducted, the company has 
reason to believe that the request may not be in full com-
pliance with international human rights law, it should 
seek clarifications from the government with regard to 
the aspects of concern. If necessary, clarification on the 
scope of the request should be sought, in particular re-
garding the legal basis of the order and the way in which 
the law has been applied to the case at hand. 
In case the government’s replies do not settle the doubts 
expressed, the company should use available legal means 
at its disposal to challenge the request, wherever feasible. 
In case judicial or other independent review is not avail-
able, companies must make sure they use their leverage 
to influence the outcome in the particular case as well as 
advocate for change in the legal framework and policy 
that would guarantee improved respect for human rights. 
Companies should use such leverage with the govern-
ment involved as well as with other stakeholders that 
could influence government conduct and policies, such 
as international organizations or, in case of companies 
operating abroad, the diplomatic representation of their 
own government. 
In situations in which the company “lacks the leverage 
to prevent or mitigate adverse impacts and is unable to 
increase its leverage,” it should give due consideration 
to ending the business relationship.271 In this sense the 
business must consider the severity of the adverse human 
rights impact that it contributes to through its activi-
ties.272 In case it decides to continue its business relation-
ship, it must demonstrate continuous engagement with 
the authorities and other relevant stakeholders aimed at 
271 See UNGPs, Principle 19. 
  In accordance with the Interpretive Guide, ending the relationship may be particularly challenging in case it can be qualified as “crucial” relationship for the company. In order for a 
relationship to qualify as “crucial,” it must provide “a product or service that is essential to the enterprise’s business, and for which no reasonable alternative source exists’. See The Corporate 
Responsibility to Respect Human Rights. An Interpretive Guide, p. 22.
272 Ibid. The Interpretive Guide warns that “the more severe the abuse, the more quickly the enterprise will need to see change before it takes a decision on whether it should end the 
relationship.” 
273 Ibid.
274 Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs/FDFA and International Committee of the Red Cross, Montreux Document on pertinent international legal obligations and good practices 
for States related to operations of private military and security companies during armed conflict (Montreux, 17 September 2008), available at https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/assets/files/oth-
er/icrc_002_0996.pdf (visited 20 February 2020).
mitigating negative human rights effects. Moreover, in 
such situations the business should be prepared to accept 
financial, legal or reputational consequences linked to its 
continued operations in this context and its connections 
to human rights violations and abuses.273 
Recommendations: 
• Companies should forego informal collaboration 
with States that may interfere with human rights of 
individuals, as this removes the relevant transactions 
from the regular safeguards and oversight as well as 
remedial mechanisms established under the law. 
• Should companies have doubts about the human 
rights compliance of State requests for biometrics 
data, they must use any legal avenues at their dispos-
al to avoid contributing to State practices that run 
afoul of human rights protections. 
• In this regard, business enterprises should keep 
in mind that corporate responsibility under the 
UNGPs is independent of State obligations and as 
such “exists over and above compliance with nation-
al laws” and irrespective of States’ abilities and/or 
willingness to fulfil their own duties under human 
rights law.
c. Furthering rights compliance through  
interest groups and public-private  
partnerships
In certain areas, efforts aimed at improving international 
law and human rights compliance of corporate conduct, 
including in the context of state-business cooperation, 
have been strengthened and supported through the for-
mation of interest groups and implementation of pub-
lic-private partnerships. 
For example, with respect to addressing challenges posed 
by the activities of private security and military compa-
nies, the Montreux Document on pertinent international 
legal obligations and good practices for States related 
to operations of private military and security companies 
during armed conflict274 (hereinafter “Montreux Docu-

ment”) has been developed as a result of a joint initiative 
by the Swiss government and the ICRC. Almost twelve 
years after its adoption, there are currently 56 States 
supporting the Document.275 As non-State actors such 
as companies cannot join the Montreux Document, a 
non-binding International Code of Conduct for Private 
Security Service Providers276 has been developed aimed 
at articulating human rights responsibilities of com-
275 Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs/FDFA, ‘Participating States of the Montreux Document’, available at https://www.eda.admin.ch/eda/en/home/foreign-policy/interna-
tional-law/international-humanitarian-law/private-military-security-companies/participating-states.html (visited 20 February 2020).
276 The International Code of Conduct for Private Security Service Providers, available at https://www.icoca.ch/en/the_icoc (visited 20 February 2020).
277 For information on the International Code of Conduct Association, see https://icoca.ch/en/association (visited 20 February 2020).
278 Other notable initiatives of relevance include the Global Network Initiative (https://globalnetworkinitiative.org), Tech Against Terrorism (https://globalnetworkinitiative.org) and 
the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism  (https://gifct.org). Furthermore, Ranking Digital Rights produces a Corporate Accountability Index that evaluates the publicly 
disclosed policies and practices of major tech companies for effects on users’ freedom of expression and privacy. See https://rankingdigitalrights.org. 
panies active in the space. The implementation of the 
Code is facilitated and overseen by the multi-stakeholder 
International Code of Conduct Association (ICOCA).277 
A comparable initiative would have the potential to 
considerably boost international law and human rights 
compliant approaches to the development and use of 
biometric tools and data.278 
Conclusions and recommendations
Biometric tools are becoming ubiquitous. They are 
employed by a multitude of stakeholders, both public 
authorities and private actors, corporations and individ-
uals. They are used in law enforcement, criminal justice, 
smart city initiatives, in identification and registration 
systems aimed at preventing identity fraud and theft, 
or to authenticate beneficiaries of humanitarian aid. 
Biometric tools come with great potential to contribute 
towards positive change in many societal areas. However, 
their use may also lead to abuses and violations of human 
rights and have at times become weapons in the hands of 
authoritarian or oppressive governments enabling gross 
infringements on human rights. 
As such, biometric tools and data can constitute a pow-
erful instrument in the prevention and countering of 
terrorism and violent extremism by facilitating efficient 
and targeted responses to threats. This is also reflected 
in the regulatory efforts by the United Nations Security 
Council with its resolution 2396 requiring that States 
“develop and implement systems to collect biomet-
ric data” in order to “responsibly and properly identify 
terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters” and to do 
so “in compliance with domestic and international law, 
including human rights law.” 
Indeed, compliance with internationally recognized hu-
man rights norms is an essential precondition for effec-
tive and sustainable counter-terrorism action. However, 
the Security Council resolution and relevant subsequent 
technical guidance do not develop on ways in which 
such obligations can be implemented in a manner that 
safeguards human rights. Given the universally binding 
nature of the Security Council’s resolution, requiring all 
193 UN Member States to implement biometric data 
systems, many of which do not have adequate privacy 
and data protection frameworks set up under domestic 
law, the need for detailed and granular human rights 
guidance is evident. 
It is against this background, that this report embarked 
upon identifying the salient human rights gaps in 
connection to the use of biometric tools and data, with 
particular focus on the prevention and countering of 
terrorism and violent extremism. 
In outlining the human rights implications linked to 
the use of biometric tools and technology, the report 
highlights ways in which the use of biometrics affect the 
right to privacy and data protection, but also stresses that 
pertinent ramifications point beyond, engaging a broad 
range of civil, political, economic, social, and cultural 
rights. Efficiently tackling the rights impact of biomet-
rics requires that relevant stakeholders adopt a com-
prehensive approach that considers the indivisible and 
interdependent character of all human rights.
In the view of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, 
the existing international human rights framework 
governing State obligations regarding collection, reten-
tion, processing and sharing of biometric data, as set out 
in the report, offers an adequate structure to ensure that 
human rights are duly safeguarded. However, implemen-
tation on part of duty-bearers is often inadequate, patchy, 
HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    41

and insufficiently resourced. Common shortcomings 
include the lack of comprehensive human rights  
impact assessments as well as meaningful monitor-
ing and evaluation of ways in which human rights are 
affected by relevant laws, policies, and practices, and, in 
particular, the lack of effective independent oversight.
An important protection gap highlighted by the report 
relates to the role of business enterprises in developing, 
deploying, selling, and transferring biometric tools.  
Businesses are not formally bound by international  
human rights law and States commonly fall short of  
setting up and implementing necessary frameworks to 
duly ensure corporate accountability. To address that 
shortcoming, the Special Rapporteur’s mandate recom-
mends that both State and business stakeholders re-
evaluate the ways in which they tackle the development 
and deployment of biometric tools by adopting a human 
rights-based approach to all phases of development 
and use, including in relation to sales, transfers, and 
post-transfer monitoring and maintenance. 
The report further explores areas where legal and policy 
development is needed or compliance with international 
human rights norms needs strengthening in order to 
ensure that ways in which biometric tools and data are 
developed and used reinforce human rights protections 
and the rule of law as opposed to undermining these 
fundamental values. 
In this respect, the mandate of the Special Rappor-
teur advances the following recommendations: 
States
• States must set up a comprehensive domestic legal 
framework that enables them to tackle the challeng-
es and opportunities presented by the use of biomet-
ric tools and data in line with international human 
rights norms and standards. This also includes the 
development and effective implementation of  
adequate privacy and data protection safeguards. 
• States must take necessary and adequate steps to 
bridge the gap between technological developments 
on the one hand and legal and policy responses on 
the other. This requires a future-proof approach to 
legislation and policy, ensuring that such frameworks 
meet the challenges brought by innovation, among 
others through incorporating human rights princi-
ples and safeguards. Human rights-sensitive regula-
tory impact assessments can meaningfully contribute 
towards such future-proofing efforts. 
• Considering the high risk associated with the use 
of biometric tools, due to the sensitive character of 
biometric data and the potential for exploitation and 
abuse, States must conduct comprehensive human 
rights risk assessments. Such risk assessments must 
examine implications on the right to privacy of data 
subjects and incidental effects on third parties, and 
tackle compliance with recognized data protection 
principles. Risk assessments also must fully consid-
er the broader human rights impact in light of the 
universal, indivisible, interdependent, and interre-
lated nature of all human rights.
• Any measures that interfere with human rights must 
be in line with conditions established under human 
rights law. Restrictions on rights must be provided 
by law and necessary to protect a legitimate aim 
(such as national security, public order, or the rights 
and freedoms of others). Any measures must also be 
governed by the principles of proportionality and 
non-discrimination and respect the need for consis-
tency with other guaranteed human rights.
• States should only resort to derogations from their 
human rights obligations when the legitimate public 
interest pursued cannot be met through restrictions 
on limitable rights within the scope of the ordinary 
law of the State. Derogations should be strictly 
aimed at restoring a state of normalcy and thus 
limited in material scope and duration. Relevant 
measures must comply with the principle of pro-
portionality and be consistent with the State’s other 
obligations under international law. 
• The use of biometric tools employed to address the 
threats and challenges posed by the COVID-19 
pandemic should be subject to rigorous and inde-
pendent monitoring and evaluation. States should 
further ensure that such tools are not unreflectively 
expanded to counter-terrorism, security, and other 
public policy spheres.
• When States collect, retain, process, and share 
biometric data, conditions governing restrictions 
of human rights must be met at every stage of data 
usage. 
• States should ensure that data-intensive systems, 
including those involving the collection and reten-
tion of biometric data, are only deployed when States 
42

can demonstrate that they are necessary and propor-
tionate to achieving a legitimate aim. Such consider-
ations are particularly relevant when States choose to 
implement integrated and/ or centralized systems.
• States must take necessary and adequate measures 
to safeguard the security of biometric systems and 
databases. 
• States must ensure that recognized data protec-
tion principles including the principles of law-
fulness, fairness and transparency in collection and 
processing; purpose limitation; data minimization; 
accuracy; storage limitation; security of data; and 
accountability for data handling are complied with 
even when such data is gathered and processed in a 
national security or law enforcement context. 
• A human-rights-minded approach should govern 
State conduct in relation to all phases of devel-
opment and deployment of biometric tools. This 
includes integrating “human rights by design” in the 
development of relevant technology from the earliest 
stages. 
• When sharing biometric data with State or other 
stakeholders across borders, States must ensure that 
such actions are governed by a sufficiently accessible 
and foreseeable domestic legal basis that provides 
adequate human rights safeguards against abuse. 
Data-sharing practices must be driven by the prin-
ciple of accountability and subject to comprehensive 
independent oversight. 
• States must ensure that relevant oversight bodies 
are duly mandated to review the compatibility of 
data-sharing agreements with domestic and interna-
tional law. Furthermore, States must find solutions to 
guarantee that such bodies have the power to seek or 
verify information about the means and methods of 
collection, retention, and processing of information, 
including when such information has been acquired 
from another State. 
• States should set up and implement authorization 
and licensing systems governing technology present-
ing a high human rights risk. Biometric tools are to 
be presumed high-risk due to the high sensitivity 
of such data and the far-reaching implications of its 
use. Such systems should cover development, sales, 
and transfer of high-risk technology, including for 
export purposes. 
• Building on existing frameworks, such as the  
Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for 
Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Tech-
nologies, States should work towards establishing 
comprehensive export control systems with strong 
inbuilt human rights safeguards, governed by the 
principles of accountability and transparency. 
• States must ensure that non-State actors, includ-
ing business enterprises, comply with due diligence 
requirements, as set out in the “respect, protect, 
remedy” framework set up by the United Nations 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. 
• States should only use biometric tools that have un-
dergone a comprehensive human rights risk assess-
ment and found human rights compliant. In case of 
technology that falls short of these standards, States 
must implement moratoria on their use until the 
tool can be brought in line with international human 
rights norms and standards. 
• In the context of United Nations efforts aimed at 
capacity-building support and technical assistance 
to Member States with a view of facilitating the full 
implementation of Security Council resolution 2396, 
Member States should promote the meaningful par-
ticipation of United Nations human rights entities, 
including the Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights and the mandate of the Special Rap-
porteur on the promotion and protection of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering 
terrorism. Meaningful participation would require 
that these entities are resourced commensurately 
with their role in the United Nations counter- 
terrorism architecture.   
Business enterprises
• Business enterprises must ensure that their opera-
tions are guided by international human rights law, 
including the “respect, protect, remedy” framework 
set up under the United Nations Guiding Principles 
on Business and Human Rights. 
• Businesses should adopt an explicit and public policy 
commitment to meet their responsibility to respect 
human rights. This commitment should be reflected 
in operational policies and procedures governing the 
business’s activities.
HUMAN RIGHTS CENTER  University of Minnesota    43

• Business enterprises must conduct human rights 
due diligence. This includes conducting risk assess-
ments examining actual and potential human rights 
impacts, both direct and indirect, of the business’s 
operations. Risk assessments must encompass all 
phases and aspects of the business’s operations and 
monitor how the nature and scope of the risks may 
change over time. In relation to biometric tools, due 
diligence responsibilities cover all phases of tech-
nology development and deployment, including in 
relation to sales or transfers of the product as well as 
after-sales support and maintenance.
• Companies should set up internal accountability 
mechanisms for the implementation of human rights 
policies and have processes in place that enable the 
remediation of adverse human rights impacts that 
the company caused or contributed to. Companies 
should externally communicate the ways in which 
they address human rights impacts linked to their 
operations. In particular, companies should report on 
their business relationships with governments and 
public authorities, both in relation to sales and trans-
fer of biometric technology as well as any relevant 
data-sharing arrangements. 
• Companies should adopt a human-rights-minded 
approach towards development and deployment of 
biometric tools. This includes integrating “human 
rights by design” in the development of relevant 
technology from the earliest stages. 
• Companies must take necessary steps towards ensur-
ing that their data-sharing practices do not infringe 
on internationally recognized human rights. In case 
such data is requested by a State, companies should 
ensure that they only act upon State requests that are 
made in compliance with domestic law. Companies 
should forego informal collaboration with States 
in ways that may interfere with human rights of 
individuals as this removes the relevant transactions 
from regular legal safeguards and oversight as well 
as remedial mechanisms. Should they have doubts 
about the human rights compliance of requests, 
companies must use legal avenues at their disposal to 
avoid contributing to State practices that run afoul 
of human rights protections. 
• Business enterprises should keep in mind that 
corporate responsibility under the United Nations 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights 
is independent of State obligations and as such “ex-
ists over and above compliance with national laws” 
and irrespective of States’ abilities and/or willingness 
to fulfil their own duties under human rights law.
United Nations entities and the global  
counter-terrorism architecture
• Ensure that international law, including international 
human rights law, international humanitarian law, 
and refugee law norms and standards are duly incor-
porated in technical assistance and capacity-building 
activities, at all relevant stages. 
• Support the development of detailed United  
Nations-wide human rights guidance on the  
development and deployment of biometric tools  
and the collection, retention, processing, and sharing 
of biometric data. 
• Facilitate the establishment of an international 
framework to govern the transfer, sale, and export 
of biometric technology while ensuring that such 
framework duly incorporates relevant international 
law, including human rights law safeguards, and is 
transparent and accountable.
• Support human-rights-based law and policy-making 
at the international, regional, and domestic level by 
ensuring that any efforts aimed at supporting States 
in the implementation of international obligations 
include comprehensive human rights mainstreaming. 
• Step up efforts aimed at the consolidation and 
strengthening of the 4th Pillar of the Global  
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
44

