Welcome to the Department of the Air Force's China Aerospace Studies Institute 

China Aerospace Studies Institute (CASI) seeks to advance understanding of the capabilities, operating concepts, and limitations of China's aerospace forces.

More CASI News

CASI Quarterly Webinar - China Hypersonics Research Landscape (March 2023)
As part of CASI's quarterly webinar series, we explored the hypersonics research landscape in China. Based on the recent publication by CASI and BPL.

Competition With China Video Series
Part of CASI's "Competition With China" video series which helps Airmen better understand the strategic competition with China broadly, and takes a deep look at many of the military and security aspects of that competition.

20th Party Congress Webinar
Every 5 years, the Chinese Communist Party holds its national Congress. This webinar describes and analyzes the 20th Party Congress which took place in 2022.

China's Views on Deterrence Video
This video is part of CASI's "Competition with China" series. Colonel Kyle Marcum discusses China's views on deterrence.

Recent CASI Publications:

China's fifth spaceport, the Oriental Maritime Space Port (OMSP), also known as the Dongfang Spaceport, in Shandong Province, is a facility responsible for both the manufacture and launch of rockets.

Unmanned aerial systems (UAS), including unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platforms, are a core element of the PRC's military modernization program. The PLA has operated UAVs since the 1950s.

China's extensive investments in unmanned systems and their incorporation into informatized and eventually intelligentized warfare is a central component of the People's Liberation Army's (PLA's) modernization.

Report on China's air defense radar capabilities and the industrial base that develops, produces, and deploys them. Key findings include: China's large air defense radar network.

Analysis of the geopolitical dynamics between the United States and China, focusing on military and strategic considerations.

"In Their Own Words" Series - dedicated to translations of Chinese documents to help non-Mandarin speaking audiences access and understand Chinese thinking.

The Big Picture: As the People's Liberation Army (PLA) moves ever closer to its centennial anniversary, it shows no signs of slowing the pace of modernization. Under the direct guidance of Xi Jinping, Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC) of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

China's National Security White Paper translation (May 12th, 2025)

China's AI Governance Plan translation (July 26, 2025)

More ITOW (In Their Own Words) translations available.

Source URL: https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/
