 
HAYAT TAHRIR AL-SHAM (HTS) 
 
 
 
THESOUFANCENTER.ORG VIOLENT NON-STATE ACTOR (VNSA) SNAPSHOT UPDATED DECEMBER 2024 
 
PROFILE GOALS/ TARGETS 
 
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, a coalition of northern Syria-based Sunni Islamist 
insurgent groups, evolved from Jabhat al-Nusrah, al-Qaeda’s former 
affiliate in Syria. The split occurred following strategic disagreement with 
al-Qaeda in July 2016, when the group’s leader, Abu Muhammad al-Jolani, 
severed ties with then-al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri. In 2017, Jabhat 
al-Nusrah merged with other anti-Assad regime rebel groups in 
northwestern Syria to create HTS. Mainly localized within Syria, HTS 
remained a fierce opposition force throughout the Syrian civil war and was 
crucial in the offensive in November and early December 2024 that led to 
the toppling of the Assad regime.  
 
 
1. Replace the Assad regime with a 
government modeled on Salafist Islamic 
principles. 
 
2. Expunge all Iranian militias (HTS claimed 
to have completed this goal in 2018). 
 
3. Campaign against Islamic State and its 
allies in Syria. 
 
Targets: Assad regime, Huras al-Din, Islamic 
State and its allies in Syria, Iranian militias 
OPERATIONAL DYNAMICS STRUCTURE 
 
 
Financing: HTS, as the de-facto governing entity of northwestern Syria, 
funded itself through tax collection, businesses, customs fees levied at the 
Bab Al-Hawa border crossing, and economic monopolies such as the oil 
trade.  
 
Recruitment Tactics: HTS has focused on recruiting mostly Syrian fighters, 
aligned with its shift from transnational Salafi-Jihadi group to a more 
localized Syrian Islamist organization. 
 
Terror Tactics/ Weaponry: Typically uses guerilla attacks (suicide 
bombings, ambushes, and small-arms units to carry out attacks). The 2024 
offensive showed HTS graduated to modern warfare techniques and 
advanced military logistics, which many analysts assess is likely an 
indication of Turkish support for the group.  
 
Control Tactics: HTS served as governing body through the Syrian Salvation 
Government (SSG) established in 2017 in northwestern Syria. The SSG has 
11 ministries (i.e., Health, Economy, Agriculture) and a 75-person Shura 
Council. It also has various state-like institutions that regulate services like 
telecommunications, the cadaster, and transport. HTS has started to 
provide similar services in the territory it captured during the 2024 
offensive. 
 
 
Size: Estimated up to 30,000 
 
Leader: Abu Muhammad al-Jolani 
 
Structure: Centers around Jolani who is 
advised by a small Shura council made up 
largely of Syrian fighters but will likely evolve 
as the new Syrian government is formed. 
 
Allies: Türkiye, Turkestan Islamic Party (TIP), 
Jamaat Ansar al-Islam, Katibat Imam al-
Bukhari, Katibat gal-Tawhid wal Jihad 
THREAT ANALYSIS 
 
HTS' offensive in northwestern Syria during November and December 2024 suggests that the group is attempting to present 
a more moderate image compared to its early years or at least create the perception of moderation. This shift is evident in 
their efforts to reach out to Kurdish, Alawite, and Christian Syrians through public statements and communications, 
signaling a possible recalibration of their approach to garner broader support and legitimacy.  
 
With the collapse of Assad's regime in Syria, Abu Muhammad al-Jolani has emerged as a prominent figure, granting 
interviews to international media and shedding his jihadist moniker in favor of his real name, Ahmed al-Sharaa, likely in an 
effort to enhance his legitimacy. The success of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS) in uniting rebel groups, which contributed to 
the weakening of Assad's hold on power, has further solidified Jolani's standing. Additionally, the March 2020 ceasefire 

 
HAYAT TAHRIR AL-SHAM (HTS) 
 
 
 
THESOUFANCENTER.ORG VIOLENT NON-STATE ACTOR (VNSA) SNAPSHOT UPDATED DECEMBER 2024 
provided HTS with a strategic opportunity to shift focus toward institution-building and the establishment of proto-
governance, reinforcing its influence in the region. 
 
It is yet to be seen what Jolani’s and HTS’s role in establishing a new government in Syria will be, though HTS recently 
appointed the head of the SGG, Mohammed al-Bashir, as the interim prime minister and will govern for three months within 
its proposed 18-month transitional government. The group has promised safety to Syrians, including minorities, and has 
pledged peaceful relations to neighboring countries, even assuring Russia its bases in Syria would not be harmed if it 
ceased its attacks. However, HTS’s attempt at projecting a reconciliatory image has been tainted by reports of human 
rights abuses including arbitrary killings and unlawful detentions of civilians. HTS's more moderate approach could signal 
the decline of more extreme global jihadist groups, positioning itself as an example of a more pragmatic strategy to gain 
legitimacy and achieve political objectives. Alternatively, it could lead to a bolstering of more radical factions, with 
disaffected elements of HTS potentially joining ISIS. The collapse of Assad's regime could also create a power vacuum, 
providing fertile ground for groups like ISIS to reassert themselves. Despite its shift towards moderation, HTS remains 
designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization by the U.S., reflecting ongoing concerns over its extremist roots and 
potential threat to regional stability. 
 
 
RECENT & NOTABLE ATTACKS 
 
» February 2017: HTS conducted a double bombing at offices from the General Intelligence Directorate, the regime’s 
secret police, in Homs, killing at least 42 people.  
 
» March 2017: HTS facilitated a twin suicide bombing in the old city of Damascus, which killed roughly 40 people and 
injured more than 100 people. The victims were mostly Iraqi Shia pilgrims, who traveled to Syria to visit its many shrines.  
 
» July 2017: HTS began its arrest campaign against Islamic State. As of February 2023, HTS has arrested 279 individuals, 
alleging 51 of those arrested were leaders of Islamic State. 20 of those arrested were executed following HTS’ court 
process, and 40 had been killed during HTS’ attempt to arrest them, either from being shot by HTS or by blowing 
themselves up to prevent getting caught. 
 
» January 2019: HTS conducted large-scale operations against the National Front for Liberation, a Turkish-backed rebel 
group operating in northwestern Syria, capturing large parts of Idlib province. 
 
» June 2020: HTS arrested two leaders from jihadist groups that shifted alliances from HTS to Huras al-Din, leading to 
infighting between the two factions with HTS ultimately banning military operations by groups other than HTS and its 
affiliates. As a result, Huras al-Din’s military bases were shut down, ceasing its ability to publicly operate. 
 
» 2022: More than 400 armed clashes with regime forces occurred throughout the year. 
 
» November 2024: HTS-led forces capture Aleppo. 
 
» December 2024: HTS-led forces capture Hama, Homs, Damascus and topple the Assad regime. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*This is not a comprehensive list. 