WWW.MEI.EDU
THE MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE
 
 
MATTHEW LEVITT
JULY 2021
HEZBOLLAH’S REGIONAL ACTIVITIES 
IN SUPPORT OF IRAN’S PROXY 
NETWORKS

Cover photo: Hezbollah militants hold flags during the funeral procession of five of their colleagues who were killed in clashes with 
Turkish army in the Syrian province of Idlib, March 1, 2020. Photo by Marwan Naamani/picture alliance via Getty Images.
ABOUT THE MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE
The Middle East Institute is a center of knowledge dedicated to narrowing divides between the peoples of the Middle East and 
the United States. With over 70 years’ experience, MEI has established itself as a credible, non-partisan source of insight and 
policy analysis on all matters concerning the Middle East. MEI is distinguished by its holistic approach to the region and its deep 
understanding of the Middle East’s political, economic and cultural contexts. Through the collaborative work of its three centers — 
Policy & Research, Arts & Culture, and Education — MEI provides current and future leaders with the resources necessary to build a 
future of mutual understanding. 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Matthew Levitt is the Fromer-Wexler Fellow at The Washington Institute and director of its Jeanette and Eli Reinhard Program on 
Counterterrorism and Intelligence. Levitt is the author of Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon’s Party of God (Georgetown 
Univ. Press, 2013).


4 I. Introduction: Hezbollah’s Shifting Center                 
 o f Gravity   
      
5 II. Ir an’s Role in the Formation of Hezbollah
6 III. He zbollah Development as an Iranian  
 Proxy
9 IV . Hezbollah’s Multiple Allegiances and  
 Objectives
10 V . Personnel Decisions Underscore Regional   
 Commitments
11 VI. He zbollah Operational Activities across  
 the R egion
   
11 Deplo ying Troops to Foreign Battlefields    
 
13 T raining Regional Shi’a Militants     
 
15 R egional Illicit Financial Activities
17 P rocurement, Intelligence, Cyber, and  
 Disinf ormation Operations 
18 VII. He zbollah Management of Iran’s  
 R egional Proxies   
    
22 VIII. Conclusion: “ We are not a party now,  
 w e’re international”   
    
23 Endno tes      
 
 
CONTENTS
ABSTRACT
As a Lebanese actor ideologically tied to Iran, Hezbollah has 
multiple allegiances and objectives that do not always align 
symmetrically. Hezbollah’s regional activities are a reflection 
of the group’s increasingly close alignment with Iran, rather 
than the interests of the Lebanese state or citizenry. Today, 
Hezbollah’s regional adventurism is most pronounced in 
its expeditionary forces deployed in Syria and elsewhere in 
the region, but no less important are the group’s advanced 
training regimen for other Shi’a militias aligned with Iran, its 
expansive illicit financing activities across the region, and its 
procurement, intelligence, cyber, and disinformation activities. 
Together, these underscore the scale and scope of the group’s 
all-in approach to transforming from one of several Lebanese 
militias into a regional player acting at Iran’s behest.
3

4
I. Introduction: Hezbollah’s Shifting 
Center of Gravity
From its inception, Hezbollah has always been closely allied 
with Iran. Iran played a key, hands-on role in its formation, and 
Hezbollah’s commitment to Iran is a primary reason for the inherent 
and often uncomfortable conflict between its competing goals in 
Lebanon and across the Middle East. Hezbollah has deep interests 
in Lebanon, where it engages in political, economic, social, and 
military activities. But the group is also engaged in a wide array of 
militant, terrorist, and criminal activities outside Lebanon that are 
equally fundamental to understanding the group in its totality. This 
includes Hezbollah training other Iranian proxy groups and even 
deploying key personnel and military units far beyond Lebanon’s 
borders. These activities abroad, even more than its militia activity 
at home and its wars with Israel, have led countries around the 
world to task their law enforcement and intelligence agencies with 
countering Hezbollah’s activities. 
Photo above: Supporters of the Shiite Hezbollah movement watch as the movement’s leader Hassan Nasrallah delivers a speech on a screen in 
the southern Lebanese city of Nabatieh on January 12, 2020. Photo by MAHMOUD ZAYYAT/AFP via Getty Images.
Hezbollah’s roles in 
the wars in Iraq and 
Syria significantly 
changed ... how the 
group’s alliance with 
Iran plays out in 
practice throughout 
the region.

5
“Following the ... assassination of Soleimani, Hezbollah assumed more 
of a leadership role coordinating the activities of a broad network of Shi’a 
militant proxies — the ‘Resistance Axis’ — on behalf of Iran’s IRGC-QF.”
But Hezbollah’s roles in the wars in Iraq and Syria significantly 
changed the nature of how the group’s alliance with Iran plays 
out in practice throughout the region, including significant 
deployments of Hezbollah personnel beyond Lebanon’s 
borders and a well-organized training program to help Iran 
develop networks of Shi’a militant fighters. Recognizing this 
growing regional threat, in 2016 the Gulf Cooperation Council 
(GCC) branded Hezbollah a terrorist group and Gulf states 
have cracked down on Hezbollah supporters and financiers 
within their borders.
1 The Arab League and the Organization 
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) have issued statements 
condemning Hezbollah as well, 2 leading to a war of words 
between the group and Gulf officials. In 2018, Morocco broke 
diplomatic ties with Iran over reported Hezbollah ties to the 
Polisario Front.
3 
The first signs of Hezbollah’s shift to a regional posture in support 
of Iranian interests were structural and involved moving key 
personnel from positions focused on Israel to those involving 
Iraq, Yemen, and Syria. As Hezbollah trained more Shi’a fighters 
from around the region, and then led them in battles across Syria, 
the group emerged as the leader and coalescing force for a broad 
range of Shi’a militants tied to Iran and the Quds Force (QF), 
the branch of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) 
primarily responsible for foreign operations. Over time, IRGC-QF 
commander Gen. Qassem Soleimani personally assumed more 
of a command leadership position over Hezbollah’s fighting 
forces, at times at the expense of the group’s own commanders.
Then, following the January 2020 assassination of Soleimani 
alongside Iraqi Shi’a militia leader Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, 
Hezbollah assumed more of a leadership role coordinating 
the activities of a broad network of Shi’a militant proxies — 
the “Resistance Axis”
4 — on behalf of Iran’s IRGC-QF. Taken 
together, these events shifted Hezbollah’s center of gravity in 
the region from being a Lebanese militia primarily focused on 
activities in Lebanon and opposition to Israel to a regional actor 
playing a leadership role for Iran’s regional network of militant 
proxies on behalf of the IRGC-QF.
II. Iran’s Role in the Formation of 
Hezbollah5
Founded in 1982 by a group of young Shi’a militants, Lebanese 
Hezbollah (the “Party of God”) was the product of an Iranian 
effort to aggregate under one roof a variety of militant Shi’a 
groups in Lebanon, themselves the products of the domestic 
and regional instability of the time. Hezbollah was the 
outgrowth of the country’s complex and bloody civil war. For 
the first time, Lebanon’s historically marginalized Shi’a Muslims 
attempted to assert economic and political power. A 1984 
CIA report notes that “Iran began to develop close links with 
Lebanese Shias soon after the Israeli invasion in June 1982. 
Some 800 Revolutionary Guards were sent to Lebanon through 
Syria to help recruit Hezbollahi, provide political and religious 
indoctrination and military training, including instruction in 
terrorist tactics.”
6 In 1987, the CIA assessed that “an Islamic 
fundamentalist movement probably would have developed in 
Lebanon without outside support, but Iranian aid has been a 
major stimulant.” 7 Shortly after the Israeli invasion, hundreds 
of IRGC advisors and trainers set up a base in the Bekaa Valley 
with the goal of exporting the Islamic revolution to the Arab 
world.8 Hezbollah Deputy Secretary-General Naim Qassem 
recalls how training camps supervised by the IRGC were set 
up in the Bekaa Valley as early as 1982 and how all members 
were required to attend these camps and learn how to confront 
the “enemy.”
9
In its early years, Hezbollah functioned as a “network of radical 
Shia paramilitary groups that agree[d] on major strategic goals 
such as the establishment of an Islamic republic but often 
differ[ed] on tactical or operational matters.”
10 These militant 
networks were typically organized around specific family clans, 
such as the Musawi and Hamadi families. 11 In 1985, Hezbollah 
identified the organization’s ideological platform: “We view the 
Iranian regime as the vanguard and new nucleus of the leading 
Islamic State in the world. We abide by the orders of one single 
wise and just leadership, represented by ‘ waliyat el faqih’ 
[guardianship of the jurist] and personified by [Iranian Supreme 

6
Shi’a activities within Lebanon at the behest of the Iranian 
senior leadership. 19 The Iranian ambassador in Damascus 
and the IRGC commander in the Bekaa Valley worked closely 
with the Council of Lebanon, an Iranian-created committee of 
radical Lebanese Shi’a leaders, to coordinate all fundamentalist 
activities in Lebanon.
20 Some Iranian “auxiliaries” were even 
embedded in Hezbollah units in the Bekaa Valley, with the IRGC 
sharing Hezbollah’s communications and support network. 21 
Nor was the symbiotic relationship between Iran and Hezbollah 
premised purely along the military and terrorism dimension. 
Hezbollah also adheres the ideological, cultural, and religious 
tenets of the Iranian Revolution and the guardianship of the 
jurist, waliyat al-faqih.
 Hezbollah extremists “responded 
with zeal to Khomeini’s revolutionary message.” 22 The group 
shared a desire to establish a fundamentalist state and export 
it worldwide. In fact, early expansion in Hezbollah’s base was 
likely due to the popular preachings of Iranian-trained clerics 
and a “fanatical devotion to Ayatollah Khomeini and the 
cause of sparking an Islamic revolution in Lebanon,” the CIA 
concluded.
23 Shi’a religious hierarchy in Lebanon was tightly 
bound to Iran, “historically in both a religious and kinship 
sense.”24 Lebanese clerics received training in Iran, married 
into Iranian clerical families, and acted as mouthpieces and 
amplifiers of Iranian theological discourse, with the revolution 
“providing a well-formulated extremist ideology and a model for 
Shia fundamentalist activism.”
25 
Beyond the educational and familial pathways, Iranian ideology 
permeated Lebanon by means of official channels. In addition to 
providing paramilitary and terrorist skills, the IRGC in Lebanon 
provided political and religious indoctrination.
26 Thus, the 
CIA concluded in 1987, although “an Islamic fundamentalist 
movement probably would have developed in Lebanon without 
outside support [...] Iranian aid has been a major stimulant.”
27
Over the years, U.S. government sources have variously referred 
to Hezbollah and its leaders as a “surrogate,”
28 “puppet,”29 “the 
vanguard of an Iranian-influenced revolutionary movement,” 30 
and “Iran’s most important and longest-standing non-state 
partner and a core member of Tehran’s ‘Axis of Resistance.’”31 
Nonetheless, Hezbollah developed even from its earliest days 
along two often overlapping but sometimes competing tracks. 
For all of their pro-Iranian spirit, Hezbollah’s leaders also sought 
to create an independent, domestic movement aligned with Iran 
but independent to make its own decisions. While considering 
Leader Ayatollah Ruhollah] Khomeini.”
12 Hezbollah has been 
Iran’s proxy ever since, and it is estimated that Iran provides 
Hezbollah with as much as $700 million-1 billion per year.
13
III. Hezbollah Development as an 
Iranian Proxy14
Despite its foundation as a Lebanese political party, Hezbollah 
has always profited from Iran’s material and ideological 
support. The close alignment between Iran and Hezbollah 
was exemplified early on by the latter’s “name game.” 
Hezbollah adopted the alias of the Islamic Jihad Organization 
to give it “a modicum of plausible deniability,” muddling its 
relationship with Iran.
15 As early as 1983, the CIA observed 
that Islamic Jihad “more likely is a cover used by Iran for 
its terrorist operations, whether employing local Shias in 
Lebanon or locally recruited agents of other nationalities” 
and that “[s]urrogates provide Iran with an excellent means 
for creating the illusion that an independent, international 
organization is at work against U.S. interests.”
16 
Soon, the U.S. intelligence community would collect information, 
later declassified, underscoring the close relationship between 
Hezbollah, its Islamic Jihad terrorist wing, and Iran. For 
example, instructions from Iran’s Ministry of Intelligence 
to Lebanese terrorists in 1985 urged them to conduct a 
propaganda campaign in the name of Islamic Jihad, an event 
the National Intelligence Council found to be “the first definite 
link” between the Iranians and Islamic Jihad.
17 Throughout the 
1980s, Iran and Hezbollah continued to seek a degree of public 
separation by means of using the alias Islamic Jihad, but CIA 
reports definitively established Islamic Jihad was Hezbollah, 
not some rogue militant group. 
Islamic Jihad started off as a loosely organized group, but Iran 
helped it coalesce into the organized group we now know as 
Hezbollah. In March 1984, the CIA assessed that “Tehran could 
change the present character of ‘Islamic Jihad’ from a loose 
association of largely independent, irregularly organized Shiite 
factions into a more formalized, international organization.”
18 
Indeed, this predicted formalization and professionalization of 
Hezbollah into a full-fledged arm of Iran’s terrorist apparatus 
occurred through an influx of money, weaponry, personnel, 
military and explosives training, and tactical guidance. Iranian 
embassy officials were responsible for coordinating radical 

7
“For all of their pro-Iranian spirit, Hezbollah’s leaders also sought to create 
an independent, domestic movement aligned with Iran but independent to 
make its own decisions.” 
itself “a part of the Islamic nation in the world,” the organization’s 
founding statement said it intended “to determine our fate by 
our own hands.”32 
U.S. government sources were well aware of Hezbollah’s 
chimeric attitude: “The Hizballah movement does not depend 
on Iran for its existence. Shia fundamentalism, whetted by 
decades of Shia deprivation and a brutal Israeli occupation, has 
firmly taken root in Lebanon and has achieved a momentum 
of its own,” the CIA observed in a 1985 report.
33 Although a 
ceasing of Iranian support to Hezbollah would slow the latter’s 
growth, Hezbollah could satisfy its material needs on its own, if 
the need arose.34 Hezbollah was also asserting independence of 
action, carrying out operations without Iranian foreknowledge.35 
In an assessment of Iranian sponsorship of terrorism, the CIA 
found “mounting evidence that the Lebanese Shias—although 
respectful of Khomeini and the Iranian revolution—will no longer 
tolerate Iranian attempts to dictate their policies.”
36 Case in 
point was the release of hostages. Tehran would be unlikely to 
be able to force Hezbollah to free all its hostages in Lebanon, 
particularly when the proxy’s goals did not coincide with 
Tehran’s.
37 Hezbollah, it seemed, had “become an autonomous 
terrorist problem in its own right.”38
Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah, Hezbollah’s foremost cleric 
in the group’s early years, was particularly adamant about 
maintaining autonomy from Iran. Fadlallah maintained that 
the “revolutionary circumstances” in Iran were fundamentally 
different than those in Lebanon, and that Hezbollah would 
consult with — but not pander to — Iran.
39 Following Syria’s 
occupation of West Beirut in February 1986, Fadlallah went 
so far as to block Hezbollah from executing Tehran’s order to 
attack the Syrians.
40 As a result, Iranian leaders “circumvent[ed] 
Fadlallah’s authority by dealing directly with Hizballah officials 
through the Iranian embassies in Beirut and Damascus and 
through the Iranian Revolutionary Guard contingent in the Bekaa 
Valley.”
41 Over time, Fadlallah fell out of favor with Tehran, and 
within Hezbollah leadership circles, over his refusal to subscribe 
to the Iranian concept of waliyat al-faqih.
But one of Fadlallah’s proteges, Imad Mughniyeh, who founded 
the group’s Islamic Jihad terrorist unit, frequently consulted 
with Iranian intelligence and IRGC officials, according to U.S. 
intelligence sources. An Iranian official sat on the Hezbollah 
Shura Council in 1992, and around the same time two Iranian 
officials were members of Hezbollah’s military committee. The 
IRGC ran Hezbollah’s intelligence planning section until 1989, 
when a Lebanese candidate was finally deemed capable of 
doing the job. Over the years, senior IRGC-QF and Ministry of 
Intelligence and Security (MOIS) officials would periodically 
visit Lebanon to work with Hezbollah and assess the group’s 
security.
42 And when Mughniyeh wanted to target U.S. interests, 
he would seek Iranian consent. For example, in December 1991 
the CIA worried over intelligence suggesting that Hezbollah 
planned to attack U.S. interests in Beirut in the ensuing weeks. 
Iran would likely oppose more Hezbollah kidnappings, the 
CIA assessed, since Tehran wanted to preserve its political 
capital from the recent release of some hostages. However, the 
agency warned, “It is possible that Tehran has approved low-
level terrorist operations against US interests—such as sniper 
attacks—to allow Hezbollah elements to vent their animosity 
toward the United States. These Hezbollah elements may 
include former hostage holder Imad Mughniyeh.” 
Two decades after the U.S. Marines barracks bombing, 
testimony in U.S. federal court established that Hezbollah 
carried out the bombings with Syrian and Iranian oversight. 
According to the testimony of former U.S. military officials, two 
days after the bombing — on October 25, 1983 — the chief of 
naval intelligence notified the deputy chief of naval operations 
of an intercepted message from September 26, 1983, just a few 
weeks before the barracks bombing. Sent from MOIS in Tehran, 
the message instructed the Iranian ambassador in Damascus, 
Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, to contact Hussein al-Musawi and to 
direct him to “take spectacular action against the United States 
Marines” and the multinational coalition in Lebanon.
43 In the 
words of Col. Timothy Geraghty, commander of the Marine 
unit in Beirut at the time of the bombing, “If there was ever a 
24-karat gold document, this was it. This is not something from 

8
“Hezbollah is both part of and above the sectarian political party system 
in Lebanon, participating in the system from within and functioning as 
a non-state actor pursuing its own goals, independent of and often at 
loggerheads with those of the central government.” 
Photo above: Ali Mekdad, Lebanese MP for the Shiite Hezbollah party, speaks to press on July 11, 2019. The lawmakers from the Lebanese 
Shiite movement condemned U.S. sanctions against three of its officials, saying they would “change nothing” in the group’s rejection of U.S. 
policies in the region. Photo by JOSEPH EID/AFP via Getty Images.

9
“Hezbollah cannot be truly understood without an appreciation for its 
political, social, and military activities in Lebanon. But its activities 
outside the country are equally fundamental.”
the third cousin of the fourth wife of Muhammad the taxicab 
driver.”44 U.S. signals intelligence had caught Iranian officials 
instructing a Hezbollah leader to carry out an attack targeting 
U.S. Marines in Lebanon, but the military bureaucracy prevented 
that information from getting where it needed to be in time to 
prevent the attack.
45
Years later, a former Hezbollah member would testify in a U.S. 
federal court case that Ambassador Mohtashemi followed 
orders and contacted an IRGC member named Kanani, who 
commanded its Lebanon headquarters.
46 Mughniyeh and his 
brother-in-law, Mustafa Badreddine, were named operation 
leaders after a meeting that included Kanani, Musawi, and then-
Hezbollah security official Hassan Nasrallah. Planning meetings 
were held at the Iranian embassy in Damascus, often chaired 
by Ambassador Mohtashemi, who helped establish Hezbollah in 
the first instance.
47
IV. Hezbollah’s Multiple Allegiances 
and Objectives
Hezbollah is one of the dominant political parties in Lebanon, 
even as the group also maintains its own militia and a stockpile of 
advanced weapons systems — including precision-guided missiles 
— that it controls and deploys independent of the Lebanese 
government or Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF). Hezbollah also runs 
social, educational, health, and religious institutions in the country, 
which provide a wide range of services to its constituents beyond 
the often-meager services provided by the Lebanese government. 
Hezbollah members have held cabinet posts in the government 
and several group officials are members of parliament, even as the 
group makes life-or-death decisions for the Lebanese people in 
service of its own interests, often at Iran’s behest, independent of 
the LAF and the central government. 
Hezbollah is both part of and above the sectarian political party 
system in Lebanon, participating in the system from within 
and functioning as a non-state actor pursuing its own goals, 
independent of and often at loggerheads with those of the 
central government. 
At the same time, Hezbollah is also a pan-Shi’a movement and 
an Iranian proxy group, rounding out the foundation and context 
for the group’s radical Shi’a ideology. In 1985, Hezbollah’s 
original political platform included the establishment of an 
Islamic republic in Lebanon as a central pillar, although this 
emphasis has since been downplayed.
48 Also prominent in this 
document is the fight against “Western imperialism” and the 
continued conflict with Israel. 
By virtue of its ideological commitment to Ayatollah Khomeini’s 
revolutionary doctrine of  waliyat al-faqih, Hezbollah is 
committed simultaneously to the decrees of Iranian clerics, 
the Lebanese state, its sectarian Shi’a community, and fellow 
Shi’a abroad. Hezbollah’s other (often competing) goals have 
included resisting Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory 
and contesting, and ultimately seeking to eliminate, Israel’s 
very existence; promoting the standing of Shi’a communities 
worldwide; undermining Arab states with Shi’a minorities in 
an effort to export the Iranian Shi’a revolution; and serving 
as the long arm of Iran in coordination with the IRGC-QF. The 
consequences of these competing ideological drivers was clear 
after Hezbollah dragged both Israel and Lebanon into a war 
neither state wanted by crossing the U.N.-demarcated “Blue 
Line” border between the two countries in July 2006, killing 
three Israeli soldiers while kidnapping two more.  Hezbollah’s 
multiple and sometimes mutually exclusive goals came to 
light again when the group sent forces to defend the regime 
of Bashar al-Assad in Syria, a decision which itself gave rise to 
several more such situations when the group’s fighting in Syria 
boomeranged back into Lebanon.
To be sure, Hezbollah cannot be truly understood without 
an appreciation for its political, social, and military activities 
in Lebanon. But its activities outside the country are equally 
fundamental, including its criminal enterprises, terrorist 
networks, and military units deployed beyond Lebanon’s borders. 

10
In Yemen, too, the State Department explained, Hezbollah 
dispatched trusted and proven commanders “to provide training, 
materiel, and personnel” — alongside Iranian IRGC-QF officers — 
in support of Houthi rebels.55 According to the U.S. government, 
Khalil Harb, a former special operations commander and a close 
adviser to Nasrallah, oversaw Hezbollah’s activities in Yemen 
— managing the transfer of funds to the organization within the 
country — and travels to Tehran to coordinate them with Iranian 
officials.
56 Hezbollah also sent battle-hardened commanders 
like Abu Ali Tabtabai, a senior Hezbollah commander first sent 
from southern Lebanon where he faced off with Israeli forces in 
Syria, but was then quickly redeployed from there to Yemen to 
upgrade the Houthis’ guerilla tactics training program.
57
Hezbollah even dispatched operatives stationed in southern 
Lebanon to Egypt, where a Hezbollah cell first focused on 
smuggling Iranian weapons through Egypt to Hamas in the Gaza 
Strip and later shifted to target tourist and other destinations in 
the country. Muhammad Qabalan, a former Hezbollah infantry 
platoon commander, headed the unit in Egypt, working together 
with another Hezbollah operative formerly stationed in south 
Lebanon, Muhammad Mansour.
58
Then there is the startling case of Syria. Around 2013, Hezbollah 
went so far as to make significant structural changes to its 
military command to oversee its massive commitment in 
Syria. The group added two new military commands — the first 
on the Lebanese-Syrian border and the second within Syria 
itself — to its existing ones in southern and eastern Lebanon.
59 
Hezbollah then transferred key personnel from its traditionally 
paramount Southern Command, along Lebanon’s border with 
Israel. Chief among these was Mustafa Badreddine, who took 
over the leadership of Hezbollah’s foreign terrorist operations 
from his cousin, Imad Mughniyeh, after the latter was killed in 
2008. Around 2012, Badreddine began coordinating Hezbollah 
military activities in Syria and quickly assumed the dual-hatted 
position of overseeing Hezbollah foreign operations as well as 
the group’s Syrian command.  Badreddine was a veteran and 
senior Hezbollah operative implicated in the 1983 bombing 
of U.S. barracks in Beirut, the 2005 assassination of former 
Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, and terrorist bombings in 
Kuwait in the 1980s, among other attacks. His appointment was 
the strongest sign Hezbollah could give of its commitment to 
Syria’s civil war. Indeed, according to U.S. intelligence officials, 
Nasrallah hesitated when IRGC-QF leaders first asked him to 
deploy Hezbollah forces to Syria to defend the Assad regime. 
V. Personnel Decisions Underscore 
Regional Commitments 
Hezbollah’s transformation into a regional actor is underscored 
by the assignment of key personnel from the group’s Southern 
Command along the border with Israel to new fronts around the 
region, including Iraq, Syria, and Yemen. 
Hezbollah has long supported other Shi’a militant groups 
in the region, trained their operatives, and periodically 
participated in terrorist attacks with members of other Shi’a 
militant groups at the behest of Iran. As early as 1985, the 
CIA reported two years later, Hezbollah ran a training camp 
near Janta, Lebanon, for over 2,000 Shi’a militants, including 
about 60 from Saudi Arabia and Bahrain who were trained 
at the facility before being sent back to the Gulf states to 
conduct operations there.
49 And as early as December 1983, 
Lebanese Hezbollah and Iraqi Dawa operatives together 
attacked a series of targets in Kuwait. 50 Later, a couple of years 
into the Iraq war and with Iran deeply concerned about U.S 
forces in both Afghanistan and Iraq, Iran called on Hezbollah 
to take on more regional responsibilities separate from the 
group’s core interests and activities in Lebanon and targeting 
Israel. The commitment with which Hezbollah responded to 
the call was most evident from key personnel assignments 
as Hezbollah dedicated top commanders to the group’s new, 
regional missions. 
Even before Hezbollah’s 2006 war with Israel, the group 
acceded to Iranian requests to step up its role training Iraqi 
Shi’a militants. According to information revealed by the U.S. 
Treasury Department, sometime in 2005 “Iran asked Hezbollah 
to form a group to train Iraqis to fight Coalition Forces in Iraq. 
In response, Hassan Nasrallah established a covert Hezbollah 
unit to train and advise Iraqi militants” from Jaish al-Mahdi 
(JAM), and JAM Special Groups including Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq.
51 In 
May 2006, Hezbollah sent a master trainer — Ali Musa Daqduq 
al-Musawi — to Iran to coordinate the training program and 
make periodic visits to Iraq.
52 Daqduq was a Hezbollah special 
operations commander who had been a senior operative since 
1983 and at one point headed Nasrallah’s protective detail.53 In 
Iraq, Daqduq served under Yusuf Hashim, the Hezbollah official 
in charge of Unit 3800, the designation for Hezbollah’s unit 
operating in Iraq.
54

11
“Hezbollah’s most significant military commitment, by far, has been to Syria in 
defense of the Assad regime. This has involved thousands of Hezbollah boots 
on the ground and the training and commanding of other Shi’a militants.”
According to a Wall Street Journal account, “Nasrallah only 
agreed to the deployments after he received a personal appeal 
from Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who made 
clear that Tehran expected Hezbollah to act decisively.”60 Once 
Nasrallah made the decision to engage in the Syrian civil war — 
first in 2011 and then in a bigger, more organized fashion in mid-
2012 — he personally assumed responsibility for overseeing the 
activities.
61 Indeed, Nasrallah has directed the group’s activities 
in Syria since at least September 2011, when he and Badreddine 
began holding weekly strategic coordination meetings with 
Assad in Damascus. 62 The organization’s intense focus on the 
Syrian conflict was the main reason for its blacklisting by the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury in 2012.63
VI. Hezbollah Operational Activities 
across the Region
Deploying key commanders to priority conflict zones facilitated 
the group’s ability to commit significant added value to its and 
Iran’s allies in these conflicts. Hezbollah’s contributions vary 
from large and small military deployments, training local militias, 
capacity building efforts focused on weapons or technology 
transfers, propaganda and disinformation, cyber training and 
campaigns, illicit financial activities, intelligence collection 
efforts, and even terrorist plots and preoperational surveillance 
in the region.
Deploying Troops to Foreign Battlefields 
Hezbollah’s most significant military commitment, by far, has 
been to Syria in defense of the Assad regime. This has involved 
thousands of Hezbollah boots on the ground and the training and 
commanding of other Shi’a militants from Syria, Iraq, Pakistan, 
and Afghanistan, among others. 
Cognizant of the domestic challenges its fighting in Syria 
would create, Hezbollah first tried to hide its deployment 
to defend the Assad regime. But in August 2012, the U.S. 
Treasury Department re-designated Hezbollah, this time 
exposing the group’s support for Assad. At the time, the 
department noted how Hezbollah’s “extensive support to 
the Syrian government’s violent suppression of the Syrian 
people” underscored the group’s involvement in a conflict 
beyond Lebanon’s borders and “exposes the true nature of 
this terrorist organization and its destabilizing presence in 
the region.” Beyond stressing the group’s status as a regional 
actor, Treasury also pointed to the fact that Nasrallah himself 
“has overseen Hezbollah’s efforts to help the Syrian regime’s 
violent crackdown on the Syrian civilian population.”
64 After an 
August 2013 speech in which Nasrallah defended the group’s 
activities in Syria as part of its “resistance” against Israel, one 
Shiite Lebanese satirist commented: “Either the fighters have 
lost Palestine on the map and think it is in Syria (or) they were 
informed that the road to Jerusalem runs through Qusayr and 
Homs,” locations in Syria where Hezbollah has fought with 
Assad loyalists against Sunni rebels.
65 
Up to 10,000 Hezbollah fighters have been deployed to Syria at a 
time, though the number of fighters in the country was typically 
lower than that as fighters rotated in and out on months-long 
tours of duty. Hezbollah trained other Shi’a militants to fight in 
Syria (see below), but the group’s deployment to Syria stands 
out not only for the number of personnel deployed but also for 
their direct involvement in fighting across the country, from 
areas near the Lebanese border up north to Aleppo and down 
south near the border with Jordan and the Golan Heights. At 
Iran’s behest, Hezbollah fighters played a decisive role turning 
the tide of the civil war in favor of the Assad regime. Naturally, 
given the extent of its battlefield deployments, Hezbollah 
suffered significant losses — more, in fact, than the group lost 
in all its battles and skirmishes with Israeli forces. An estimated 
1,600-2,000 Hezbollah troops were killed in action in Syria, 
which, based on typical military estimates, suggests 4,800-
6,000 wounded.
66 Senior Hezbollah commanders oversee the 
group’s military activities in Syria. For example, the U.S. Treasury 
Department reported that Ibrahim Aqil and Fuad Shukr, both 
of whom sit on Hezbollah’s Jihad Council, the group’s highest 

12
attack targeting British forces in which he was involved — other 
documents refer to attacks on British bases at the Basra Palace 
and the Shatt al-Arab Hotel.73
In one entry, Daqduq recorded meeting with Special Groups 
operatives who were involved in attacks targeting fellow Iraqis 
as well as coalition forces in Diyala Province with improvised 
explosive device (IED) bombings and small arms fire. He wrote 
about IED bombings in the first person, suggesting he was either 
personally involved in the attacks on the ground or, at a minimum, 
saw himself as integral to the plot: “Met with the brothers[,] 
the observers of Diyalah province and I listened regarding the 
operations. ... We conducted eight explosive charge operations 
on both sides.”
74
Hezbollah continued to aid Shi’a militias in Iraq, sending small 
numbers of skilled trainers to help fight the Islamic State and 
defend Shi’a shrines. In June 2014, Nasrallah pledged, “We 
are ready to sacrifice martyrs in Iraq five times more than 
what we sacrificed in Syria in order to protect shrines,” noting 
that Iraqi holy sites “are much more important” than Shiite 
shrines in Syria.
75 Nasrallah was surely exaggerating, but to 
ensure the group was able to follow through on the spirit of 
his commitment, key Hezbollah operatives and supporters 
have invested in commercial front organizations in Iraq that 
provide the group both financial support and organizational 
infrastructure. For example, Husayn Ali Faour, described by the 
U.S. government as “a member of Hezbollah’s Islamic Jihad” 
overseas terrorism unit, has also worked with Hezbollah 
financier Adnan Tabaja “to secure and manage construction, 
oil, and other projects in Iraq for Al-Inmaa Engineering and 
Contracting.”
76
Hezbollah also deployed senior operatives to Yemen. Some, 
like Abu Ali Tabtabai, would be deployed to Syria first, only to 
be redeployed to Yemen.
77 While Tabtabai oversaw training 
and provision of materiel to the Houthis, his assignment also 
included overseeing provision of Hezbollah “personnel in 
support of its destabilizing regional activities,” according to 
the State Department.
78 According to Saudi officials, Hezbollah 
operatives fired a ballistic missile toward Riyadh international 
airport in November 2017. “It was an Iranian missile, launched 
by Hezbollah, from territory occupied by the Houthis in 
Yemen,” Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir told CNN.
79 
Photo right: A man holds a poster of Lebanon’s Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah and Shiite Houthi movement’s leader Abdul-Malik 
al-Houthi during a celebration by Houthi rebels to mark the anniversary of the birth of the Prophet Muhammad, October 29, 2020. 
Photo by Hani Al-Ansi/picture alliance via Getty Images.
military body, have “played a vital role in Hizballah’s military 
campaign in Syria by aiding Hizballah fighters and pro-Syrian 
regime troops against Syrian opposition forces in battles inside 
Syria.”67 In return for Hezbollah and Iran’s contributions to the 
preservation of the Assad regime, Syria has allowed Hezbollah 
and Iranian operatives to establish a network of mostly Syrian 
operatives along the Syrian Golan in an effort to open a new 
front with Israel.
68
Even prior to the Syrian civil war, Hezbollah fighters began 
deploying around the region — albeit in much smaller numbers 
— to support Iranian objectives in places like Iraq, and later, 
Yemen. A 2009 Australian report on Hezbollah’s Islamic Jihad 
Organization (also known as the External Services Organization, 
or ESO) concluded that Hezbollah’s activities in Iraq went 
much further than simply training Iraqi Shi’a militants tied to 
Iran: “Hizballah has established an insurgent capability in Iraq, 
engaging in assassinations, kidnappings and bombings. The 
Hizballah units have been set up with the encouragement and 
resources of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards al Qods Brigades.”
69 
The U.S. military also uncovered evidence suggesting 
Hezbollah may have run operations of its own in Iraq. A 
U.S. intelligence report includes the assessment of an Iraqi 
militant who believed one of his Hezbollah trainers in Iran 
seemed to have previously been involved in covert activities 
in Iraq.
70 But the clearest evidence came from the capture 
in southern Iraq of Ali Musa Daqduq al-Musawi, the senior 
Hezbollah operative sent to Iraq, together with Asa’ib al-Ahl-
Haq leader Qais al-Khazali, in March 2007. One document 
seized in the raid in particular caught the attention of 
U.S. analysts: a 22-page memorandum that “detailed the 
planning, preparation, approval process and conduct of 
the [January 2007 Karbala Provisional Joint Coordination 
Center] operation,” among others.
71 
Daqduq, the documents revealed, was personally involved in 
violent operations in Iraq. For example, in his personal diary 
Daqduq recorded his involvement in a plot to kidnap a British 
soldier. “The operation is to infiltrate two brothers to the base 
to detain a British soldier in the first brigade from the bathrooms 
by drugging him,” Daqduq wrote.
72 Daqduq noted meeting with 
Special Groups operatives who described the attack, which 
failed when Iraqi soldiers intervened. This was not the only 

13
“At least some Hezbollah commanders are open about the group’s intent to 
expand its regional adventurism once it can begin to draw down forces in 
Syria. … ‘After we are done with Syria, we will start with Yemen; Hezbollah 
is already there.’”
Others, like Khalil Harb, a  former Hezbollah special operations 
commander and a close adviser to Nasrallah, oversaw Hezbollah’s 
activities in Yemen — managing the transfer of funds to the 
organization within the country — and traveled frequently to Tehran 
to coordinate Hezbollah activities with Iranian officials.
80 Harb 
already had experience overseeing Hezbollah’s regional activities, 
serving for several years around 2003-06 as head of the group’s 
activities in Syria, Jordan, Israel, and Egypt. 81 Some would not 
only advise but actually operate rocket systems firing salvos at 
Saudi Arabia, while others were deployed to critical battlefields. 
As the Houthis closed in on Marib in May 2021, for example, a 
Saudi airstrike reportedly killed Hezbollah commander Mustafa al-
Gharawi.
82 In 2019, Nasrallah conceded that Hezbollah operatives 
were on the ground in Yemen, adding: “We are not ashamed that 
we have martyrs from Hezbollah in Yemen.”
83
At least some Hezbollah commanders are open about the group’s 
intent to expand its regional adventurism once it can begin to draw 
down forces in Syria. Writing in Foreign Affairs, Alexander Corbeil 
and Amarnath Amarasingam recall interviewing a Hezbollah 
commander who boasted: “After we are done with Syria, we will 
start with Yemen; Hezbollah is already there,” he said. “Who do 
you think fires Tochka missiles into Saudi Arabia? It’s not the 
Houthis in their sandals, it’s us.”
84
Training Regional Shi’a Militants
Hezbollah’s hard turn toward a more activist regional posture 
first came in the context of the Iraq war. “Generally,” U.S. 
military intelligence assessed in 2010, the IRGC-QF “directs and 
supports groups actually executing attacks, thereby maintaining 
plausible deniability within the international community.”
85 
Much as it did for Hezbollah in Lebanon in the 1980s, the IRGC-
QF set out to build up an array of Shi’a militias in Iraq. The 
IRGC-QF did some training itself, but it often used Hezbollah to 
Hezbollah’s hard turn 
toward a more activist 
regional posture first came 
in the context of the Iraq 
war.

14
Hezbollah’s training mission in Yemen has been much smaller, but 
no less effective. According to detained Houthi fighters, Hezbollah 
trained dozens of Houthi recruits at a time in two-month basic 
training courses in Yemen before the recruits were dispatched 
to the battlefield.
91 A video that gained media attention in early 
2016 purported to show a Hezbollah trainer addressing a group of 
Houthi forces in Yemen about training for assassination operations 
targeting Saudi Arabia.92 Around late 2014, when Iran instituted 
twice-weekly flights to Yemen on Mahan Air — an Iranian airline 
the IRGC-QF uses to move personnel and materiel to conflict 
zones93 — Yemeni officials noted that “Lebanese Hezbollah and 
Iranian trainers entered on these flights and up to 300 Yemenis 
were sent to Iran for training.”94 A U.N. Panel of Experts similarly 
documented Houthi recruits being sent to Iran for training, 
as well.
95 In interviews with military analyst Michael Knights, 
Yemeni political and military leaders reported that “Hezbollah 
provided mentoring and training in infantry tactics, ATGM [anti-
tank guided missile] operations, offensive mine warfare, and 
anti-shipping attacks.”
96 Indeed, Hezbollah’s training relationship 
with the Houthis appears to go back several years. Speaking to 
the Financial Times in 2015, a Hezbollah commander said the 
training relationship dates back to 2005. “They trained with us 
in Iran, then we trained them here [in Lebanon] and in Yemen.”97
At the same time, Hezbollah continued training Shi’a militants 
from elsewhere in the Gulf, including Bahrain and Kuwait. For 
example, in 2018 Bahraini authorities arrested over 100 Shi’a 
militants who reportedly received militant training from Iranian 
proxy groups like Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq in Iraq and Hezbollah in 
Lebanon. In a statement, the authorities noted that “This is done 
through recruiting terrorist elements in Bahrain, arranging and 
coordinating training for them in terrorist camps, and providing 
them with funds, firearms, and explosive devices.”
98 In Iraq and 
Lebanon, authorities charged, the militants received weapons 
and explosives training “at the behest of Iranian regime leaders 
who ordered the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps elements 
to unify the Bahrain-based terrorist elements to carry out their 
plots and acts of terrorism against Bahrain.
99 Similarly, in 2016 
a Kuwaiti court convicted 23 militants on charges of spying for 
Iran and Hezbollah, buying and storing weapons and explosives, 
and undergoing Hezbollah militant training in Lebanon.
100
Meanwhile, in Syria Hezbollah has been training and overseeing 
Shi’a militants from around the region. Together with the 
IRGC, Hezbollah forces in Syria took on a leading role not only 
overseeing the deployment of other Shi’a militias but also 
provide training and operational supervision on its behalf. The 
outsourcing of training to Hezbollah spoke volumes about Iran’s 
regard for the group’s professionalism as terrorist trainers. The 
use of Hezbollah also averted Iraqi militants’ complaints about 
the religious indoctrination included in the Iranian training 
programs, which were generally uninspiring and taught by 
sheikhs who did not speak Arabic well.
86
Hezbollah’s activities in Iraq following the 2003 U.S. invasion 
were a function of the group’s close alliance with Iran in general 
and the IRGC-QF in particular. Tehran’s strategy in Iraq — and 
Hezbollah’s role in that strategy as Iran’s primary militant proxy 
group — was a logical extension of Iran’s covert activities in 
Iraq and the region throughout the 1980s and 1990s, including 
proxies such as Hezbollah, the Dawa Party, and the Badr 
Organization.
87
Mirroring the creation of Unit 1800, a unit dedicated to 
supporting Palestinian terrorist groups and targeting Israel, 
Hezbollah created Unit 3800, a unit dedicated to supporting 
Iraqi Shi’a terrorist groups targeting multinational forces in 
Iraq. The unit, established by Hezbollah leader Nasrallah
88 
at Iran’s request, trained and advised Iraqi militant groups. 
Almost immediately following the U.S. invasion of Iraq, reports 
emerged indicating Hezbollah operatives were reaching out 
to re-establish ties to Iraqi Shi’a groups. A July 29, 2003, U.S. 
intelligence report citing Israeli military intelligence stated that 
Hezbollah “military activists” were trying to make contact with 
Muqtada al-Sadr and his Mahdi Army. By late August they had 
succeeded, according to a report prepared by a U.S. military 
analyst. Based on information from a source with “direct access 
to the reported information,” the report claimed Hezbollah had 
assembled a team of 30 to 40 operatives in Najaf “in support 
of Moqtada Sadr’s Shia paramilitary group.” Hezbollah was both 
recruiting and training new members of the Mahdi Army, the 
report added.
89
In Tehran, Daqduq and Hashim met with the commander and 
deputy commander of IRGC-QF special external operations. In 
the year before British Special Forces captured him in Basra in 
late 2007, Daqduq made four trips to Iraq. He reported back to 
the IRGC-QF on the Special Groups’ use of mortars and rockets, 
their manufacture and use of IEDs, and kidnapping operations. 
His overall instructions were simple: “He was tasked to organize 
the Special Groups in ways that mirrored how Hezbollah was 
organized in Lebanon.”
90

15
“As Hezbollah and IRGC-QF operations become more and more 
interconnected ... Hezbollah took on additional roles running illicit financial 
schemes intended to evade sanctions, fund the IRGC-QF, and through it 
finance key Iranian allies and proxies.”
forming local Shi’a militias allied with Iran. In May 2014, IRGC 
Gen. Hossein Hamedani declared the formation of “a second 
Hezbollah in Syria.” In early 2014, several Shiite militias in Syria 
began to call themselves, Hezbollah fi Suriya , or “Hezbollah 
in Syria.” Inspired by the success of Lebanese Hezbollah, the 
objective was to build a Syrian wing of the movement, to “carry 
out ideological as well as other regional power-projection 
goals.”
101 While most of their actions so far have been limited 
to Syria, Hezbollah fi Suriya has made calls to unify with others 
in Iraq as well. The Hezbollahzation of these groups, in name, 
structure, and allegiance, signifies a major accomplishment for 
Tehran, allowing Iran to preserve harder-core influence and 
more effectively project power within Syria.
102
Regional Illicit Financial Activities
Hezbollah’s regional activities expanded just as sanctions 
began to truly affect Iran’s ability to finance its own and its 
proxies’ illicit activities at will, which also coincided with other 
events that cut into Tehran’s budget, like drops in the price of 
oil. This led Hezbollah to double down on its own transnational 
criminal moneymaking enterprises to fund its activities,
103 
some of which, like Hezbollah’s sharply increased regional 
trade in Captagon, specifically undermine security and public 
health in the Middle East.
104
But as Hezbollah and IRGC-QF operations become more and 
more interconnected around the region, Hezbollah took on 
additional roles running illicit financial schemes intended to 
evade sanctions, fund the IRGC-QF, and through it finance key 
Iranian allies and proxies like the Assad regime, Hamas, the 
Houthis, Iraqi militias, and Hezbollah itself.
“Over the past year,” the Treasury Department reported in 
September 2019,
105 “the IRGC-QF has moved oil worth hundreds 
of millions of dollars or more through [an illicit shipping] network 
for the benefit of the brutal Assad regime, Hezbollah, and other 
illicit actors.” The IRGC-QF and Hezbollah directed this shipping 
network, which benefits both financially, Treasury noted.
106 
In fact, the precipitant event for this “oil-for-terror” 107 network 
was the May 2018 Treasury designation of Valiollah Seif, 108 
Iran’s Central Bank governor, and Ali Tarzali, assistant director 
of the Central Bank’s International Department. As the Iraq 
war ended and Shi’a fighters shifted to Syria, Hezbollah 
developed extensive illicit financial networks in Iraq. Among 
the entities targeted in this 2018 action were Al-Bilad Islamic 
Bank in Iraq and the bank’s chief executive, along with senior 
Hezbollah official Mohammad Qasir. “Iran’s Central Bank 
Governor covertly funneled millions of dollars on behalf of the 
IRGC-QF through Iraq-based al-Bilad Islamic Bank to enrich 
and support the violent and radical agenda of Hezbollah,” the 
Treasury secretary explained.
109 Qasir served as “a critical 
conduit”110 for the IRGC-QF payments to Hezbollah, and with 
this illicit financing scheme exposed, Qasir and his IRGC-QF 
counterparts shifted toward a trade-based financing scheme 
involving smuggled Iranian oil.
Six months later, in November 2018, the Treasury Department 
exposed
111 a convoluted 112 Iranian illicit financing scheme in 
which Qasir and other Hezbollah officials, working together with 
Iranian operatives, Russian113 companies, and the Central Bank 
of Syria, facilitated the shipment of millions of barrels of Iranian 
oil to the Assad regime in Syria. The Assad regime would then 
facilitate the movement of hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars 
to the IRGC-QF, which would transfer
114 the funds to Hamas and 
Hezbollah. In a letter 115 to a senior official at the Central Bank 
of Iran, Qasir (aka Mr. Fadi) and a Syrian associate confirmed 
receipt of $63 million as part of a scheme to benefit Hezbollah.
The Treasury Department revealed 116 that Qasir heads Unit 
108, “the Hezbollah unit responsible for facilitating the 
transfer of weapons, technology, and other support from 
Syria to Lebanon.” Leading Unit 108 made Qasir the perfect 
person to coordinate Iran’s oil-for-terror scheme. He was also 
a logical choice because he came from a dedicated Hezbollah 
family: one brother was the group’s first suicide bomber, while 
another is the son-in-law of Hezbollah leader Nasrallah.
117 
Lineage aside, Qasir’s close relationship with then-IRGC-QF 

16
are Syria-based Talaqi Group, 123 which he co-founded with 
his wife,124 and other “terrorist financing enterprises” he 
controls such as Hokoul S.A.L Offshore,125 Nagham Al Hayat,126 
Tawafuk,127 and ALUMIX.128 Al-Bazzal oversaw Talaqi Group and 
ALUMIX’s business shipping aluminum to Iran, and in early 2019 
attempted129 to evade U.S. sanctions by removing his name as 
owner and shareholder from Talaqi Group documents.
In September 2019, the Treasury Department took action 130 
targeting multiple components of Iran’s illicit oil shipping 
network, noting that it was “directed by and financially supports 
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force (IRGC-QF) 
and its terrorist proxy Hezbollah.” More specifically, it exposed 
the fact that Hezbollah officials oversaw and ran
131 this 
network of IRGC-QF front companies for the express purpose 
of concealing Iran’s role in selling crude oil, condensate, and 
gas oil
132 for the benefit of the Assad regime, Hezbollah, and 
other Iranian proxies. 
Photo above: An Iranian flag flutters on board the Adrian Darya oil tanker, formerly known as Grace 1, off the coast of Gibraltar on August 18, 2019. 
Gibraltar rejected a U.S. demand to seize the Iranian oil tanker at the center of a diplomatic dispute as it prepared to leave the British overseas 
territory after weeks of detention. Photo by JOHNNY BUGEJA/AFP via Getty Images.
commander Qassem Soleimani, Syria’s Bashar al-Assad, and a 
long list of other key Iranian operatives made him the man for 
the job. In February 2019, Qasir appeared as a notetaker 118 in 
photographs and video clips of President Assad’s secret visit to 
Tehran for meetings with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani and 
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei. For operational security, 
Assad’s visit reportedly dispensed with traditional protocols. 
But Soleimani selected
119 Qasir, the head of Hezbollah’s most 
sophisticated smuggling operations, to accompany him to these 
meetings.
Qasir was able to rely on a coterie of Hezbollah operatives to help 
him manage Iran’s trade-based terror finance scheme. One of 
Qasir’s associates is Hezbollah operative Mohammad Qasim al-
Bazzal,
120 a “key financier for Hezbollah and the IRGC-QF.”121 Al-
Bazzal uses a network of companies “to finance, coordinate, and 
obscure various illicit IRGC-QF-linked oil shipments.”122 Among 
the companies he employs, according to the U.S. government, 

17
“Hezbollah continues to play central roles in IRGC-QF financing 
schemes to support its proxies.” 
Qasir, al-Bazzal, and their companies featured prominently 
in the exposed network, along with Ali Qasir, Mohammad 
Qasir’s nephew. Based in Tehran, Ali Qasir was serving as 
both a Hezbollah representative 133 to Iran and as Talaqi 
Group’s managing director. In these capacities, he “ assigned  
maritime vessels to deliver shipments for the terrorist 
network based on the IRGC-QF’s guidance.”
134 For example, 
Ali Qasir played135 central roles in the Adrian Darya 1  episode, 
including working with others to cover expenses and facilitate 
Iranian oil shipments to Syria for the benefit of the IRGC-QF. 
From his perch in Tehran, Ali Qasir has also represented 136 
Lebanon-based Hokoul S.A.L. Offshore in negotiations over 
its supply of Iranian crude oil to Syria.
While relying heavily on these and other Hezbollah officials 
and front companies to broker the contracts, the sprawling oil 
smuggling network is overseen by IRGC-QF official and former 
Iranian Minister of Petroleum Rostam Qasemi.
137 Qasemi, who 
also heads the Iranian-Syrian Economic Relations Development 
Committee, relies on trusted associates like Mohammad Qasir’s 
Hezbollah network and his son, Morteza Qasemi, 138 to finalize 
the illicit Iranian oil smuggling contracts, including some they 
attempted to pass off139 as Iraqi-origin. In October 2020, the U.S. 
Rewards for Justice140 program posted a $10 million reward 141 
for information on the Hezbollah illicit financial network run by 
Mohammad Qasir, Ali Qasir, and Mohammad al-Bazzal.
Hezbollah continues to play central roles in IRGC-QF financing 
schemes to support its proxies. In June 2021, for example, the 
U.S. Treasury designated Iran-based Houthi financial logistician 
Sai’d al-Jamal, along with a group of facilitators from Turkey, 
the UAE, and Somalia, for running a network of front companies 
that together provided financing for the Houthis, the IRGC-QF, 
and others, including Hezbollah. Al-Jamal, Treasury added, 
“maintains connections to Hizballah and has worked with the 
group to send millions of dollars to support the Houthis.”
142
Procurement, Intelligence, Cyber, and 
Disinformation Operations
Given Hezbollah’s long history of weapons smuggling, it 
should not come as a surprise that Hezbollah plays a hands-
on role in procuring weapons for itself and other Iranian proxy 
groups. Hezbollah procurement efforts in partnership with Iran 
significantly expanded in the context of the Syrian civil war.
143 
By early 2015, U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) 
investigations into Hezbollah operations exposed some of 
the group’s extensive drug trafficking and money laundering 
activities, some of the proceeds of which, the DEA revealed, 
“are used to purchase weapons for Hizballah for its activities 
in Syria.”
144 Meanwhile, an FBI undercover operation targeting 
Iman al-Kobeisi revealed that Hezbollah procurement networks 
had matured to the point that Iran was seeking to leverage 
Hezbollah’s ability to gain access to weapons and sanctioned 
goods for its own direct needs.
145 In turn, Iran also took the 
opportunity to use Hezbollah networks to benefit some of its 
other proxies as well, including Houthi rebels in Yemen.
In 2013, Yemeni security forces interdicted the Iranian 
vessel  Jihan 1 off the coast of Yemen and arrested eight Yemenis 
and two Lebanese Hezbollah operatives. Believed to be heading 
for Houthi territory, the ship carried several tons of Iranian 
weapons and explosives. 146 In another case, U.S. authorities 
determined a Hezbollah weapons procurement officer sourcing 
IED components in China planned for the weapons to be sent to 
the Houthis in Yemen.
147
Similarly, Bahraini authorities disrupted two Hezbollah attempts 
to smuggle explosives into the country from Iran in August 
2020. According to Bahrain’s Ministry of Interior, the suspects 
confessed Hezbollah was behind the operation.
148 Further west, 
Morocco broke off diplomatic relations with Iran over charges 
that Hezbollah operatives and Iranian agents, some of the latter 
under diplomatic cover, smuggled weapons to the Polisario 
Front in Western Sahara.
149 Morocco reportedly provided 
Iran names of Hezbollah operatives who visited Polisario-

18
and cyber activities of Iranian proxy Shi’a militant groups 
across the region. 
Separate from the cyber espionage and sophisticated malware 
operations Hezbollah has been implicated in, typically in concert 
with Iran,158 the group also runs disinformation boot camps in 
Lebanon for the purpose of building up the “electronic armies” of 
Iran’s proxy groups around the region. “Since at least 2012,” The 
Telegraph reported in August 2020, “Hizbollah has been flying 
individuals into Lebanon for courses teaching participants how to 
digitally manipulate photographs, manage large numbers of fake 
social media accounts, make videos, avoid Facebook’s censorship, 
and effectively spread disinformation online.”
159 Students from 
Bahrain, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Syria were among the thousands 
of “Iran-backed social media activists” who attended the 10-
day courses, which were taught by Hezbollah specialists. In the 
words of an Iraqi politician who was involved in sending students 
to these courses, “The people we sent developed their skills in 
Beirut and when the returned they started training activists inside 
Iraq.”
160 One of the groups to benefit from this Hezbollah training 
course was Kata’ib Hezbollah in Iraq, which now runs its own 
“online façade” group, Unit 10,000, which has developed its own 
“electronic armies capable of hacking, information operations 
and open source intelligence gathering.”
161
Iran and Hezbollah work together in the disinformation space 
in several other ways, as well, including Iran’s creation of “the 
International Union of Virtual Media,” established to promote 
Iranian and Hezbollah propaganda while obscuring the 
source of such information.
162 The U.S. Treasury Department 
sanctioned cyber threat actors backed by Iran’s MOIS, 163 and 
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence concluded that 
Iran engaged in a “multi-pronged covert influence campaign” 
targeting the 2020 U.S. presidential election while Hezbollah 
“took some steps to attempt to influence the election.”
164 
VII. Hezbollah Management of Iran’s 
Regional Proxies
The central theme running through the steady increase in 
Hezbollah’s regional activism — be it in the form of fielding 
fighters to battlefields of strategic importance to Iran, training 
other Iranian proxies, collecting intelligence, engaging in illicit 
financial schemes, or promoting disinformation campaigns — 
is that it has been done at Iran’s behest. Hezbollah’s regional 
controlled refugee camps “in order to supervise training 
courses, set up facilities and meet with Polisario officials.”
150 
 
But Hezbollah has also engaged in other, still more covert 
regional exploits in close partnership with Iran, including 
intelligence collection and cyber and disinformation operations 
across the region. Consider, for example, the case of Iraq-
based Hezbollah operative Muhammad Farhat. According to 
the U.S. Treasury Department, “as of 2017, Farhat was tasked 
with collecting security and intelligence information in Iraq and 
subsequently providing reports to senior Hezbollah and Iranian 
leadership.” He also helped a Hezbollah and IRGC-QF effort “to 
analyze and report on the Iraqi security situation.”
151 
In 2015, Kuwaiti authorities arrested a cell of several Kuwaiti 
and one Iranian Shi’a operatives on charges of spying for Iran 
and Hezbollah.
152 That same year, an Israeli airstrike in the Golan 
Heights targeted a joint Hezbollah and IRGC-QF intelligence 
collection effort, killing Hezbollah’s Jihad Mughniyeh (son of 
the late Imad Mughniyeh) along with several other Hezbollah 
operatives and Iranian IRGC-QF Gen. Mohammad Ali 
Allahdadi.
153 Within a few short years, Israeli officials would 
reveal the new head of this Golan operation was none other than 
Ali Musa Daqduq al-Mousawi, the operative previously detained 
in Iraq.
154 In 2018, Bahraini authorities arrested a group of Shi’a 
suspected militants on charges of setting up a terrorist network 
in coordination with Iranian intelligence services.155
But perhaps the most glaring example of Hezbollah’s regional 
intelligence operations is the case of U.S. military contract linguist 
Mariam Taha Thompson who, while stationed in Iraq, provided 
a Hezbollah contact intelligence about human sources involved 
in the January 2020 assassination of IRGC-QF commander 
Soleimani. According to her plea, Thompson admitted accessing 
and sharing dozens of intelligence files, including names of 
human assets, to provide to her Hezbollah contact.
156 Tellingly, 
what Hezbollah intelligence officers sought from Thompson was 
not information specific to Israel or Lebanon, but information of 
particular interest to Iran and its proxy network.
Hezbollah has long helped other Shi’a militant groups 
establish media and propaganda outlets, including television, 
radio, and online outlets. For example, both Kata’ib Hezbollah 
in Iraq and the Houthis in Yemen operate satellite television 
stations based out of Beirut, with support from Lebanese 
Hezbollah.
157 Now, Hezbollah also supports the disinformation 

19
“The central theme running through the steady increase in Hezbollah’s 
regional activism ... is that it has been done at Iran’s behest.”
escalation coincided with a period of time during which Iranian 
operatives began to play increasingly important decision-making 
roles for Hezbollah. As Lebanon analyst Hanin Ghaddar has 
noted, Hezbollah’s role as a regional actor did not start with its 
deployment to Syria, it was present in Iraq even earlier, “but it 
became more obvious and more structured in Syria — especially 
under IRGC [QF] commander Qassem Soleimani.” Over time, 
Ghaddar explains, Soleimani became the one leading Hezbollah 
deployments and activities across the region.
165 Indeed, it was 
because of his dual-hatted role as head of the IRGC-QF and 
director of Iran’s sub-state proxies that U.S. government lawyers 
concluded Soleimani was a legitimate target for a targeted 
assassination in January 2020. The extent of his personal 
leadership of these proxies became clear as U.S. analysts tracked 
his movements and mapped out his “pattern of life.”
166
The IRGC-QF began to take on this more pronounced day-to-day 
role directing Hezbollah operations after the 2008 assassination 
of Imad Mughniyeh, who held a unique position of confidence 
with Iranian leaders and IRGC-QF commanders. In fact, senior 
IRGC-QF and MOIS officials regularly visited Lebanon to work 
with Mughniyeh and assess the group’s security practices. IRGC 
officials were familiar with Mughniyeh since his teen years, and 
decision-makers in Iran were known to consult with him when 
determining regional policy.
167 As Mughniyeh’s relationship with 
the IRGC deepened, Hezbollah was able to achieve a measure of 
independence from Tehran and instead rely more heavily on his 
personal relationships. But Mughniyeh’s assassination put a halt 
to this trend. Hezbollah leaders promised to avenge his death, 
but the group’s plan, dubbed “Operation Radwan,” experienced 
a series of setbacks. Hezbollah not only lacked the resources 
and capability to carry out such operations abroad, it no longer 
had Mughniyeh to guide its operations. The failure of the group’s 
initial attempts to carry out vengeance for its terrorist chief 
forced Hezbollah closer to Iran as it suffered a series of thwarted 
attacks and failed to deliver the revenge it had promised.
168
Hezbollah divided up Mughniyeh’s responsibilities among 
several senior leaders, including his cousin and brother-in-law, 
Mustafa Badreddine. But Badreddine never enjoyed the kind of 
relationship with the IRGC-QF that Mughniyeh had cultivated, 
and he even clashed with Soleimani over Hezbollah’s mission in 
Syria, fueling tensions between the two leaders.
169 In fact, media 
reports from just before Badreddine’s assassination in 2016 
suggested that Iran was so displeased with its new Hezbollah 
counterpart that it wanted him removed from the battlefield.
170 
Following Badreddine’s death, Hezbollah’s military operations 
became even more subservient to Tehran. While high-ranking 
Hezbollah commanders like Ibrahim Aqil, Fuad Shukr, and Talal 
Hamiyah went on to serve as Soleimani’s link to Hezbollah’s 
military apparatus, these men have never enjoyed the trust or 
sense of mutual respect once held by Mughniyeh. 
As a result, the nature of the relationship between the IRGC-QF 
and Hezbollah shifted. In February 2012, Director of National 
Intelligence James Clapper characterized the relationship 
between Hezbollah and Iran as “a partnership arrangement, 
with the Iranians as the senior partner.”
171 This “strategic 
partnership,” as National Counterterrorism Center Director 
Matthew Olsen put it, is the product of a long evolution from 
the 1980s, when Hezbollah was just a proxy of Iran. Together, 
Olsen added, these strategic partners pursue their shared “aims 
against Israel and the United States.”
172
Within this partnership, one of Hezbollah’s key roles was to serve 
as the managing partner for Iran’s proxy network. As Hezbollah 
dispatched expeditionary forces beyond Lebanon’s borders, 
its fighters typically commanded units including militants from 
other Shi’a groups. And through its training programs, Hezbollah 
established intimate working relationships with Shi’a militants 
across the region. Hezbollah managed these groups in close 
cooperation with Soleimani, who in the years before his death 
emerged from the shadows and became the public face of Iran’s 
“fighters without borders,” as some Iranians described Tehran’s 
regional proxy network.
173
In the wake of the Arab Spring, the fall of Saddam Hussein in 
Iraq, the Syrian civil war, and the rise of the Islamic State, Tehran 

20
tapped Soleimani to build up Iran’s regional proxy alliances. 
Soleimani built a devoted following among Iranian proxy 
groups, including both their leaders and foot soldiers. A hands-
on commander, Soleimani established personal bonds with key 
militia commanders and mediated disputes over funding or 
prestige — until he was killed, alongside one of his key deputies, 
Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, in January 2020.
Soleimani’s force of personality and longtime connections 
made him uniquely qualified to oversee the management of 
Iran’s growing proxy network. But since no one commander 
could replace him, the IRGC-QF is drawing on a brain trust 
of several of its more senior and experienced managers to 
collectively fill Soleimani’s shoes. And as Iran’s “strategic 
partner,” Hezbollah leader Nasrallah and some of his key 
lieutenants are sure to play major roles. Indeed, the IRGC-QF 
officers stepping in to fill Soleimani’s shoes are all longtime 
Hezbollah partners.
Photo above: Iranian men hold Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces (C), Iran, Iraq, and Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) flags while 
taking part a rally to mark the Islamic Revolution anniversary in Azadi (Freedom) Square in western Tehran on February 11, 2020. Photo by 
Morteza Nikoubazl/NurPhoto via Getty Images.
The IRGC-QF officers 
stepping in to fill 
Soleimani’s shoes 
are all longtime 
Hezbollah partners.

21
“From Iran’s perspective, it has built an extensive network of proxy 
organizations — some more tightly connected to Iran than others — 
which follow the Hezbollah model.” 
In August 2013, the U.S. Treasury Department sanctioned 
a group of Hezbollah operatives responsible for the group’s 
regional activities beyond Lebanon’s borders in places like 
Cyprus, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Turkey, Syria, and Yemen. At the time, 
the Treasury Department revealed that Mohammad Kawtharani 
had long served as “the individual in charge of Hizballah’s Iraq 
activities.”
174 Within weeks of Soleimani’s death, the State 
Department issued a reward for information about Kawtharani 
and other members of Hezbollah’s illicit financial networks, 
noting that he “has taken over some of the political coordination 
of Iran-aligned paramilitary groups formerly organized by Qassim 
Sulemani after Sulemani’s death in January. In this capacity, he 
facilitates the actions of groups operating outside the control of 
the Government of Iraq that have violently suppressed protests, 
attacked foreign diplomatic missions, and engaged in wide-
spread organized criminal activity.” He also “assisted extremists 
transiting to Syria to support the Assad regime,” according to 
the State Department.
175 A senior Iraqi Shi’a leader noted that 
Kawtharani “was trusted by Soleimani, who used to depend and 
call on him to help him in crises and in meetings in Baghdad.”
176 
Kawtharani’s “right-hand man” is another Hezbollah official, his 
brother Adnan Hussein Kawtharani, who was also designated by 
Treasury in 2018. Adnan also “attended meetings in Iraq with 
sectarian armed groups and Hizballah officials.”
177 Naturally, 
Kawtharani chaired urgent meetings of Iraqi militia leaders in 
Iraq after Soleimani’s death.178 
When the Treasury Department designated Adnan Kawtharani 
for his Hezbollah activities, it also listed Shibl Muhsin Ubayd al-
Zaydi, a senior leader of the Kata’ib al-Imam Ali militia and an 
IRGC-QF operative. A close confidant of Soleimani’s, al-Zaydi 
worked closely with Hezbollah and IRGC-QF officers to establish 
financial support networks in Iraq for Iran’s proxy groups and 
fund Hezbollah’s participation in the Syrian civil war.
179
Consider also the man tapped to serve as the IRGC-QF deputy 
commander after Soleimani’s death, Gen. Muhammad Hussein-
Zada Hejazi. As Iran’s regional strategy took on a decidedly 
more aggressive regional posture, Soleimani tapped Hejazi to 
command Department 2000, overseeing all IRGC-QF operations 
in the Levant. In 2013, when Iran began shipping precision-
guided missiles to Hezbollah through Syria, Hejazi oversaw 
the program.
180 Iran announced Hejazi’s sudden death under 
strange circumstances in April 2021.181
Similarly, as the IRGC-QF looked to increase its support to 
Houthi rebels on the ground in Yemen, it assigned IRGC-QF 
officials with established track records working with other 
elements of Iran’s proxy network, often in cooperation with 
Hezbollah. When Iran dispatched an official diplomatic envoy 
to the Houthis, the man they tapped for the job was Hasan Irlu, 
an IRGC-QF official who had years of experience overseeing 
weapons transfers and training for Houthi fighters as well as 
supporting IRGC-QF operations elsewhere on the Arabian 
Peninsula. Irlu was close to Soleimani, but he also provided 
training to Hezbollah operatives in Iran.
182 In fact, on the day 
Soleimani was killed, one of his deputy commanders, Abdul 
Reza Shahlai, was also targeted in Yemen. 183 Shahlai survived, 
but the presence of an IRGC-QF deputy commander in Yemen 
with ties to previous attack plots in the United States, Iraq, 
and elsewhere was telling. No less important was Shahlai’s 
extensive experience training Shi’a militias tied to Iran in Iraq 
and helping to plan their attacks, typically in concert with 
Hezbollah. At one point, Shahlai served as the final approving 
authority for all Iran-based training that Hezbollah provided for 
members of JAM Special Groups. In 2006, he instructed a senior 
Hezbollah official to coordinate anti-aircraft rocket training 
for JAM Special Groups. Shahlai partnered with Hezbollah’s 
Ali Mousa Daqduq al-Musawi to plan the 2007 attack on U.S. 
forces at the Karbala Provincial Join Coordination Center.
184
From Iran’s perspective, it has built an extensive network of 
proxy organizations — some more tightly connected to Iran than 
others — which follow the Hezbollah model. In the words of 
IRGC Gen. Mazaher Majidi, “There was a time when we used to 
boast that we had Hezbollah of Lebanon in the region. Today, 
we have dozens of cohesive forces that are ready to carry out 
military operations and are acting like Hezbollah: in Syria, in 
Iraq, in Yemen, in Afghanistan, and even in Pakistan.”
185

22
VIII. Conclusion: “We are not a party 
now, we’re international”
Hezbollah is a distinctly Lebanese actor, but its ideological 
alliance with Iran goes back to the group’s original founding 
and periodically dictates the prioritization of its sometimes-
competing goals. Hezbollah’s current quandary revolves 
around the push and pull of two different sets of frequently 
competing priorities: first, serving as a regional militant player 
as part of what Iran sometimes calls its “fighters without 
borders” under the IRGC-QF; and second, its self-portrayal as 
a distinctly Lebanese party at a time when the crony-sectarian 
political system of which it is a key part has come under such 
tremendous pressure.
186 Hezbollah has long played a dominant 
role in Lebanon, extending its influence through political and 
social activism as well as terrorism, political violence, and 
military strength. But it has long insisted that it acts only with 
Lebanon’s best interests at heart. Today, with its extensive 
militant commitments across the region, Hezbollah can no 
longer maintain that fiction. 
Speaking in 2015, a Hezbollah commander explained: “We 
shouldn’t be called Party of God. We’re not a party now, 
we’re international. We’re in Syria, we’re in Palestine, we’re 
in Iraq and we’re in Yemen. We are wherever the oppressed 
need us. …   He zbollah is the school where every freedom-
seeking man wants to learn.” 187 Today, Hezbollah acts as the 
managing partner for Iran’s network of militant proxies. And 
in the wake of Soleimani’s death, the group has taken on still 
more leadership responsibilities. Speaking after Soleimani’s 
death, it was Hezbollah leader Nasrallah  who called  on Iran’s 
proxies — the “Axis of Resistance,” as he called them — to step 
up operations to force the U.S. military out of the region.
188 
Looking ahead, Iranian proxies may operate in an even more 
coordinated fashion, with Houthi rockets targeting southern 
Israel and foreign terrorist operations carried out by Shi’a 
militants of varying nationalities operating at Iran’s behest and 
Hezbollah’s direction.
189 To counter the growing regional threat 
posed by Iran’s proxy militant network, Western powers will 
have to work closely with regional allies to contain and disrupt 
the destabilizing activities of the IRGC-QF, Hezbollah, and other 
Shi’a militant groups active across the region.

23
ENDNOTES
1.  “GCC Designates Hezbollah as a Terrorist Organization,” 
entry in Washington Institute Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
map, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=602. 
2.  “Arab League Designates Hezbollah as a Terrorist Organization,” 
entry in Washington Institute Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
map, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=603; 
“Islamic Summit Slams Hezbollah for ‘Terrorism’,” Al Arabiya 
News, April 15, 2016, https:/ /english.alarabiya.net/News/middle-
east/2016/04/15/Islamic-summit-denounces-Hezbollah-for-
backing-terrorism.  
3.  “Why has Morocco Severed its Diplomatic Relations with 
Iran?” Al Arabiya, May 2, 2018 https:/ /english.alarabiya.net/
features/2018/05/02/Why-did-the-Kingdom-of-Morocco-sever-
its-diplomatic-relations-with-Iran-.  
4. Timour Azhari, “Hezbollah vows retaliation against US for 
Soleimani killing,” Al Jazeera, January 5, 2020, https:/ /www.
aljazeera.com/news/2020/1/5/hezbollah-vows-retaliation-
against-us-for-soleimani-killing. 
5. This section originally appeared, in French, in Matthew 
Levitt, “Le Hezbollah au Liban: Concilier Allegeance a L’Iran, 
Militantisme Pan-Chiite et Politique Interieure,” Revue Politique et 
Parlementaire, No 1098, Jan-Mars 2021, p. 145-164. 
6. “Iranian Terrorist Activities in 1984,” CIA report included in “Iran 
Recruits and Trains Hizballahi” entry in Washington Institute 
Hezbollah Worldwide Activities map, Washington Institute 
for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/#year=1982&id=802.  
7. “Lebanon: Prospects for Islamic Fundamentalism [redacted],” A 
Research Paper. 
8. Daniel Byman, Deadly Connections: States that Sponsor Terrorism 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), p. 82.
9. Naim Qassem, Hizbullah: The Story from Within, (London: Saqi 
Press, 2005), p. 66. 
10. “Lebanon: Prospects for Islamic Fundamentalism [redacted],” A 
Research Paper, Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence 
Agency, July 1987, Approved for Release October 1997, http:/ /
www.foia.cia.gov /docs/DOC_0000138966/DOC_0000138966.
pdf.  
11. Magnus Ranstrop, “Hezbollah Training Camps in Lebanon,” 
in James Forest, Ed, The Making of a Terrorist vol. 2, Training, 
Westport: Praeger, 2005, p. 252. 
12. As cited in Center for Special Studies, Intelligence and Terrorism 
Information Center special information bulletin, “Hezbollah,” 
June 2003, http:/ /www.terrorism-info.org.il/malam_multimedia/
English/eng_n/html/hezbollah.htm.  
13. Dan Williams, “Top Israeli general sees increased Iran spending 
on foreign wars,” Reuters, January 2, 2018, https:/ /www.reuters
.
com/article/us-iran-rallies-israel/top-israeli-general-sees-
increased-iran-spending-on-foreign-wars-idUSKBN1ER0Q9.  
14. This section originally appeared, in French, in Matthew 
Levitt, “Le Hezbollah au Liban: Concilier Allegeance a L’Iran, 
Militantisme Pan-Chiite et Politique Interieure,” Revue Politique et 
Parlementaire, No 1098, Jan-Mars 2021, p. 145-164. 
15. “April 1985 Terrorism Review,” Central Intelligence Agency, 
April 8, 1985, 9, available at Matthew Levitt, “CIA Report Notes 
Hezbollah Harassment in Beirut,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=94. 
16. “December 1983 Terrorism Review,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, December 1983, 6, available at Matthew Levitt, “CIA 
Report Assesses Islamic Jihad Is a Cover for Iran,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.

24
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=874. 
17. “February 1985 National Intelligence Council Threat Outlook,” 
National Intelligence Council, February 1985, 5, available 
at Matthew Levitt, “National Intelligence Council Report 
Warns of Islamic Jihad Propaganda Campaign,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=85. 
18. “March 1984 Terrorism Review,” Central Intelligence Agency, 
March 1984, 18, available at Matthew Levitt, “CIA Report 
Assesses Islamic Jihad Is Iranian Cover Name,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=877.  
19.  “Iranian Terrorist Activities in 1984,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, 1984, 4, available at Matthew Levitt, “Iran Recruits and 
Trains ‘Hizballahi’ Fighters,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=802. 
20. “Iranian Involvement with Terrorism in Lebanon,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 26, 1985, 2, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Report Outlines Hezbollah-Iran Relationship,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=105.  
21. “Directory of Lebanese Militias: A Reference Aid,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 1984, 11, available at Matthew 
Levitt, “CIA Report Predicts Continued Violence by Radical 
Shia Militias,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities Interactive 
Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=70; “Lebanon’s Hizballah: 
The Rising Tide of Shia Radicalism,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, October 1985, 4, available at Matthew Levitt, “CIA 
Report Details Hezbollah Use of Media Outlets to Cultivate 
Fundamentalism,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities Interactive 
Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=120. 
22. “Iranian Terrorist Activities in 1984,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, 1984, 2, available at Matthew Levitt, “Iran Recruits and 
Trains ‘Hizballahi’ Fighters,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=802. 
23. “Amal and Hizballah: The Line Between Politics and Terrorism,” 
Central Intelligence Agency, August 16, 1985, 3-5, available 
at Matthew Levitt, “CIA Report Observes Many Hezbollah 
Sympathizers Within Amal Camp,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=109. 
24. “Amal and Hizballah: The Line Between Politics and Terrorism,” 
Central Intelligence Agency, August 16, 1985, 5-6, available 
at Matthew Levitt, “CIA Report Observes Many Hezbollah 
Sympathizers Within Amal Camp,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=109. 
25. “Lebanon’s Hizballah: The Rising Tide of Shia Radicalism,” 
Central Intelligence Agency, October 1985, available at Matthew 
Levitt, “CIA Report Details Hezbollah Use of Media Outlets to 
Cultivate Fundamentalism,” 1, Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=120. 
26. “Iranian Terrorist Activities in 1984,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, 1984, 3, available at Matthew Levitt, “Iran Recruits and 
Trains ‘Hizballahi’ Fighters,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 

25
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=802. 
27. “Lebanon: The Prospects for Islamic Fundamentalism,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, July 1987, iii, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Memo Notes Sheikh Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah’s Attempt 
to Maintain Hezbollah’s Independence from Iran,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=1032. 
28. Iran Enhanced Terrorist Capabilities and Expanding Target 
Selection,” Central Intelligence Agency, April 1992, 11, available 
at Matthew Levitt, “CIA Memo Notes Iran’s Support for Hezbollah 
Plans to Attack U.S. Interests,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=1029. 
29. “Directory of Lebanese Militias: A Reference Aid,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 1984, 11, available at Matthew 
Levitt, “CIA Report Predicts Continued Violence by Radical 
Shia Militias,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities Interactive 
Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=70. 
30. “November 1983 Terrorism Review,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, November 10, 1983, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Report Confirms Link between Amal of Islam and 
Hezbollah,” 9, Hezbollah Worldwide Activities Interactive 
Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=58. 
31. “Iran Military Power: Ensuring Regime Survival and Securing 
Regional Dominance,” Defense Intelligence Agency, August 2019, 
available at Matthew Levitt, “DIA Report Notes Hezbollah’s Strong 
Ties to Iran and Autonomy on Lebanese Affairs,” 59, Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=718. 
32. “Lebanon’s Hizballah: The Rising Tide of Shia Radicalism,” 
Central Intelligence Agency, October 1985, available at Matthew 
Levitt, “CIA Report Details Hezbollah Use of Media Outlets to 
Cultivate Fundamentalism,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities 
Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=120. 
33. “Iranian Involvement with Terrorism in Lebanon,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 26, 1985, 2, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Report Outlines Hezbollah-Iran Relationship,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=105. 
34. “Iranian Involvement with Terrorism in Lebanon,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 26, 1985,19, available at 
Matthew Levitt, “CIA Report Outlines Hezbollah-Iran 
Relationship,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities Interactive 
Map and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=105. 
35. “Iranian Involvement with Terrorism in Lebanon,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 26, 1985, 2, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Report Outlines Hezbollah-Iran Relationship,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=105. 
36. “Iranian Involvement with Terrorism in Lebanon,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 26, 1985, 3, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Report Outlines Hezbollah-Iran Relationship,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=105.

26
37. “December 1987 Terrorism Review,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, December 21, 1987, 7, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Report Notes Potential Areas of Hezbollah Independence 
from Iran,” Hezbollah Worldwide Activities Interactive Map 
and Timeline, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=889. 
38. “Iranian Involvement with Terrorism in Lebanon,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 26, 1985, 3, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Report Outlines Hezbollah-Iran Relationship,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=105. 
39. “Lebanon: The Prospects for Islamic Fundamentalism,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, July 1987, 15, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Memo Notes Sheikh Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah’s Attempt 
to Maintain Hezbollah’s Independence from Iran,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=1032. 
40. “Lebanon: The Prospects for Islamic Fundamentalism,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, July 1987, 2, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Memo Notes Sheikh Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah’s Attempt 
to Maintain Hezbollah’s Independence from Iran,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=1032. 
41. “Lebanon: The Prospects for Islamic Fundamentalism,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, July 1987, 6, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“CIA Memo Notes Sheikh Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah’s Attempt 
to Maintain Hezbollah’s Independence from Iran,” Hezbollah 
Worldwide Activities Interactive Map and Timeline, Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2020, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/ /#id=1032. 
42. James Risen, “U.S. Traces Iran’s Ties to Terror through a 
Lebanese,” New York Times, January 17, 2002. 
43. D. Peterson, et al., v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Information and Security, 
United States District Court, District of Columbia, Docket No. CA 
01-2684, March 17, 2003, p. 53. 
44. D. Peterson, et al., v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Information and Security, 
United States District Court, District of Columbia, Docket No. CA 
01-2684, March 17, 2003, 55.  
45.  “Hizballah Terrorist Plans against U.S. Interests,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, December 6, 1991, https:/ /www.cia.gov/
library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0000258811.pdf. 
46. D. Peterson, et al., v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Information and Security, 
United States District Court, District of Columbia, Docket No. CA 
01-2684, March 17, 2003, Memorandum Opinion, pp. 6–7.  
47. D. Peterson, et al., v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Information and Security, 
United States District Court, District of Columbia, Docket No. 
CA 01-2684, March 17, 2003, Memorandum Opinion, pp. 
6–7, 6–7; Hala Jaber, Hezbollah: Born with a Vengeance, (New 
York: Columbia University Press, May 1997), 82. 
48. Fadhil Ali, “New Hezbollah Manifesto.” 
49. “Lebanon: Hezbollah Spreading the Word,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, December 21, 1987, available at Matthew Levitt, 
“Hezbollah Acts as Tutor to the Gulf States,” Lebanese Hezbollah 
Select Worldwide Activity Interactive Map and Timeline, 
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=884.  
50. Matthew Levitt, “Six Kuwait Sites Bombed,” Lebanese Hezbollah 
Select Worldwide Activity Interactive Map and Timeline, 
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.

27
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=59.  
51. “Treasury Designated Hizballah Commander Responsible for 
American Deaths in Iraq,” November 19, 2012, https:/ /www.
treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/tg1775.aspx  
52. Iraqi Shia resented and distrusted their Iranian sponsors and 
trainers. Hezbollah compensated for Iran’s shortcomings. See 
Harmony document IR 012, cited in Felter and Fishman, “Iranian 
Strategy in Iraq.” 
 
53. See Multinational Force Iraq Situational Update by Brig Gen Keven 
J Gergner, July 2, 2007, available at Matthew Levitt, “Karbala 
Provincial Center Targeted in Attack,” Lebanese Hezbollah Select 
Worldwide Activity Interactive Map and Timeline, The Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.
org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=367; “Treasury Designated 
Hizballah Commander Responsible for American Deaths in Iraq,” 
November 19, 2012, https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/
press-releases/Pages/tg1775.aspx.  
54. Matthew Levitt, Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon’s 
Party of God (Georgetown University Press, 2013), Pp 300-301; 
“Treasury Sanctions Key Hizballah, IRGC-QF Networks in Iraq,” 
U.S. Treasury Department, November 13, 2018, https:/ /home.
treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm546. 
 
55. “State Department Terrorist Designation for Haytham ‘Ali 
Tabataba’I,” U.S. Department of State, October 20, 2016, 
https:/ /2009-2017.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2016/10/263346.htm. 
 
56. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Leadership,” US Department of 
Treasury, August 22, 2013, https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-
center/press-releases/Pages/jl2147.aspx.  
57. Matthew Levitt, “Waking Up the Neighbors: How Regional 
Intervention Is Transforming Hezbollah,” Foreign Affairs, July 23, 
2015, https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/israel/2015-07-23/
waking-neighbors; https:/ /static.rewardsforjustice.net/uploads/
LebanesePoster8_5x11ENG_508.pdf. 
58. Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah’s Man in Egypt,” Perspectives 
on Terrorism, vol 8, Issue2, April 2014, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/hezbollahs-man-egypt; 
See also https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Pages/jl2147.aspx. 
59. Matthew Levitt, “Waking Up the Neighbors: How Regional 
Intervention Is Transforming Hezbollah,” Foreign Affairs, July 23, 
2015, https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/israel/2015-07-23/
waking-neighbors. 
60. Adam Entous and Siobhan Gorman, “Behind Assad’s Comeback, 
a Mismatch in Commitments,” Wall Street Journal, December 31, 
2013 https:/ /www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303453
004579292543464208138. 
 
61. “Treasury Designates Hizballah Leadership,” U.S. Department of 
the Treasury, September 13, 2012, https:/ /www.treasury.gov/
press-center/press-releases/Pages/tg1709.aspx. 
62. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Leaders, Military Officials, and an 
Associate in Lebanon,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 21, 
2015, https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Pages/jl0121.aspx. 
63. “Treasury Designates Hizballah Leadership,” U.S. Department of 
the Treasury, September 13, 2012, https:/ /www.treasury.gov/
press-center/press-releases/Pages/tg1709.aspx. 
 
64. “Treasury Targets Hizballah for Supporting the Assad Regime,” US 
Department of Treasury, August 10, 2012, http:/ /www.treasury.
gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/tg1676.aspx. 
 
65. Sarah Birke, “Hezbollah’s Choice,” Latitude (blog), New 
York Times, August 6, 2013, http:/ /latitude. blogs.nytimes.
com/2013/08/06/hezbollahs-choice. 
66. “Mapping Militants: Hezbollah,” Stanford, 2018, https:/ /cisac.fsi.
stanford.edu/mappingmilitants/profiles/hezbollah; Wounded in 
action estimate based on 1:3 ration of KIA to wounded.

28
67. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Leaders, Military Officials, and an 
Associate in Lebanon,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 21, 
2015, https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Pages/jl0121.aspx. 
68. Judah Ari Gross, “IDF says it has exposed new Hezbollah cell in 
Syrian Golan Heights,” Times of Israel, March 13, 2019, https:/ /
www.timesofisrael.com/idf-says-it-has-exposed-new-hezbollah-
cell-operating-from-syrian-golan-heights/. 
 
69. Australian Government, Attorney General’s Department, 
“Hizballah External Security Organisation,” May 16, 2009. 
70. Harmony document IR005, cited in Joseph Felter and Brian 
Fishman, “Iranian Strategy in Iraq: Politics and ‘Other Means,’” 
Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 13, 2008, p. 
17. https:/ /ctc.usma.edu/app/uploads/2010/06/Iranian-Strategy-
in-Iraq.pdf. 
71. U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Assistant Secretary of 
Defense, “News Briefing with Gen. Petraeus from the Pentagon,” 
April 26, 2007. https:/ /www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/
news/2007/04/mil-070426-dod01.htm.  
72. “Ali Musa Daqduq: Translated Excerpt from Personal Journal,” 
slides accompanying press briefing with Brig. Gen. Kevin Bergner. 
73. Mark Urban, Task Force Black, p. 225; “Attacks on “Palace” in 
Basrah,” slides accompanying press briefing with Brig. Gen. Kevin 
Bergner. 
74. “Ali Musa Daqduq: Translated Excerpt from Personal Journal,” 
slides accompanying press briefing with Brig. Gen. Kevin Bergner. 
75. Maria Abi-Habib, “Shiite Militias Decamping From Syria to Fight 
in Iraq,” Wall Street Journal, June 17, 2014. https:/ /www.wsj.
com/articles/shiite-militias-decamping-from-syria-to-fight-in-
iraq-1403051977. 
 
76. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Front Companies and Facilitators 
in Lebanon And Iraq,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, June 10, 
2015. http:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Pages/jl0069.aspx.  
 
77. “Haytham ‘Ali Tabataba’i,” Rewards for Justice, https:/ /
rewardsforjustice.net/english/haytham_tabatabai.html.  
78. “Haytham ‘Ali Tabataba’i,” Rewards for Justice, https:/ /
rewardsforjustice.net/english/haytham_tabatabai.html. 
79. Becky Anderson and Hilary Clarke, “Missile attack ‘an act of war’ 
by Iran, Saudi Foreign Minister says,” CNN, November 6, 2017. 
https:/ /www.cnn.com/2017/11/06/middleeast/saudi-foreign-
minister-interview/index.html.  
80. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Leadership: Action Targets 
Hizballah’s Leadership Resonsible for Operations Outside of 
Lebanon,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, August 22, 2013, 
https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/
jl2147.aspx. 
 
81. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Leadership: Action Targets 
Hizballah’s Leadership Resonsible for Operations Outside of 
Lebanon,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, August 22, 2013, 
https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/
jl2147.aspx.  
82. Ali Mahmoud, “Saudi Arabia-led coalition air strike kills high-
ranking Hezbollah commander, says Yemeni official,” The 
National, May 25, 2021. https:/ /www.thenationalnews.com/
gulf-news/saudi-arabia-led-coalition-air-strike-kills-high-ranking-
hezbollah-commander-says-yemeni-official-1.1229791.  
83. “Hassan Nasrallah admits the presence of members of Hezbollah 
in Yemen and the killing of a number of them,” Mareb Press, 
February 16, 2019. https:/ /marebpress.net/news_details.
php?lng=arabic&sid=147754. 
84. Alexander Corbeil and Amarnath Amarasingam, “The Houthi 
Hezbollah,” Foreign Affairs, March 31, 2016, https:/ /www.

29
foreignaffairs.com/articles/2016-03-31/houthi-hezbollah. 
 
85. U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Iran’s 
Military Power: Hearing before the Committee on Armed Services, 
111th Cong., 2d sess., April 14, 2010, Statement of Lt. Gen. 
Ronald L. Burgess Jr. 
86. Harmony document IR 011, cited in Felter and Fishman, “Iranian 
Strategy in Iraq.”  
87. Matthew Levitt, Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon’s Party 
of God (Washington DC: Georgetown University Press, 2013), Pp 
286-291. 
88. The United States designated Nasrallah a Specially Designated 
Terrorist on January 23, 1995, https:/ /www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/
FR-1995-01-25/pdf/95-2035.pdf; and a Specially Designated 
Global Terrorist on May 16, 2018, https:/ /www.treasury.gov/
resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20180516.
aspx.  
89. Edward Pound, “Special Report: The Iran Connection,” U.S. News 
& World Report, November 14, 2004. 
90. Jim Garamone, “Iran Arming, Training, Directing Terror Groups 
in Iraq, U.S. Official Says,” American Forces Press Service, 
July 2, 2007. http:/ /archive.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.
aspx?id=46606. 
 
91. Islam Seif, “Houthi prisoners reveal they were trained by 
Hezbollah experts,” Al Arabiya, February 28, 2018. https:/ /english.
alarabiya.net/News/gulf/2018/02/28/Houthi-prisoners-reveal-
they-were-trained-by-Hezbollah-experts.  
92. “Fears of sanctions on Lebanon after new video ‘shows Hezbollah 
in Yemen’,” Al Arabiya, February 25, 2016. https:/ /english.
alarabiya.net/webtv/reports/2016/02/25/Fears-of-sanctions-on-
Lebanon-after-new-video-shows-Hezbollah-in-Yemen-. 
 
93. “FACT SHEET: Mahan Air’s Support for Terrorism,” U.S. Embassy in 
Austria, December 7, 2018. https:/ /at.usembassy.gov/fact-sheet-
mahan-airs-support-for-terrorism/.  
94. Michael Knights, “The Houthi War Machine: From Guerrilla War to 
State Capture,” CTC Sentinel, September 2018, https:/ /ctc.usma.
edu/houthi-war-machine-guerrilla-war-state-capture/.  
95. “Letter dated 22 January 2021 from the Panel of Experts on 
Yemen addressed to the President of the Security Council,” UN 
Security Council, January 22, 2021, https:/ /reliefweb.int/sites/
reliefweb.int/files/resources/S_2021_79_E.pdf.  
96. Michael Knights, “The Houthi War Machine: From Guerrilla War to 
State Capture,” CTC Sentinel, September 2018, https:/ /ctc.usma.
edu/houthi-war-machine-guerrilla-war-state-capture/-state-
capture/. 
97. Erika Soloman, “Lebanon’s Hizbollah and Yemen’s Houthis open 
up on links,” Financial Times, May 8, 2015. https:/ /www.ft.com/
content/e1e6f750-f49b-11e4-9a58-00144feab7de.  
98. Ahmad Majidyar, “Bahrain says arrested 116 members of IRGC-
established ‘terror cell,’” Middle East Institute, March 5, 2018, 
https:/ /www.mei.edu/publications/bahrain-says-arrested-116-
members-irgc-established-terror-cell. 
 
99. Matthew Levitt, “169 Bahraini Hezbollah Members Indicted,” 
Lebanese Hezbollah Select Worldwide Activity Map, The 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=666.  
100. Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah Operatives Storing Explosives Arrested 
in Kuwait,” Lebanese Hezbollah Select Worldwide Activity Map, 
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=577. 
 
101.  Philip Smyth, “How Iran Is Building Its Syrian Hezbollah,” The 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, March 8, 2016, https:/ /
www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/how-iran-is-
building-its-syrian-hezbollah. 

30
102. Philip Smyth, “How Iran Is Building Its Syrian Hezbollah,” The 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy¸ March 8, 2016, https:/ /
www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/how-iran-is-
building-its-syrian-hezbollah. 
103. Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah: Party of Fraud,” Foreign Affairs, July 
27, 2011, https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2011-07-27/
hezbollah-party-fraud.  
104. Joby Warrick and Souad Mekhennet, “Hezbollah operatives seen 
behind spike in drug trafficking, analysts say,” Washington Post, 
August 4, 2020. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/national-
security/hezbollah-operatives-seen-behind-spike-in-drug-
trafficking-analysts-say/2020/08/03/fa286b1a-d36a-11ea-8c55-
61e7fa5e82ab_story.html.  
105.  “Treasury Designates Vast Iranian Petroleum Shipping Network 
That Supports IRGC-QF and Terror Proxies,” U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, September 4, 2019, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/
news/press-releases/sm767. 
106.  Ibid. 
107.  Ibid. 
108.  “Treasury Targets Iran’s Central Bank Governor and an Iraqi Bank 
Moving Millions of Dollars for IRGC-Qods Force,” U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, May 15, 2018, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm0385. 
109.  Ibid. 
110.  Ibid. 
111.  “Treasury Designates Illicit Russia-Iran Oil Network Supporting 
the Assad Regime, Hizballah, and HAMAS,” U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, November 20, 2018, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm553. 
112.  Visual Depiction of the Alchwiki Network, U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, November 20, 2018, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/sites/
default/files/136/alchwiki-network.png. 
113.  Photo of Mohammad Amer Alchwiki and Andrey Dogaev, U.S. 
Department of the Treasury, November 20, 2018, https:/ /home.
treasury.gov/sites/default/files/136/amer-alchwiki-andrey-
dogaev.jpg. 
114. “Treasury Designates Illicit Russia-Iran Oil Network Supporting 
the Assad Regime, Hizballah, and HAMAS,” U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, November 20, 2018, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm553. 
115.  A letter from Alchwiki and Muhammad Qasir, a.k.a. Mr. Fadi, to 
Rasoul Sajjad of CBI confirming receipt of U.S. $63 million, U.S. 
Department of the Treasury, November 20, 2018, https:/ /home.
treasury.gov/sites/default/files/136/alchwiki-letter.png. 
116.  “Treasury Designates Illicit Russia-Iran Oil Network Supporting 
the Assad Regime, Hizballah, and HAMAS,” U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, November 20, 2018, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm553. 
117.  Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah’s Procurement Channels: Leveraging 
Criminal Networks and Partnering with Iran,” The Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, March 21, 2019. https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/hezbollahs-procurement- 
channels-leveraging-criminal-networks-and-partnering-iran. 
118.  Syrian Presidency (@Presidency_sy), “From the president’s 
working visit,” Twitter, February 25, 2019, 12:23 p.m., https:/ /ctc.
usma.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Levitt-March-image-3.
png. 
119.  Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah’s Procurement Channels: Leveraging 
Criminal Networks and Partnering with Iran,” The Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, March 21, 2019. https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/hezbollahs-procurement- 
channels-leveraging-criminal-networks-and-partnering-iran.  

31
120.  “Treasury Designates Illicit Russia-Iran Oil Network Supporting 
the Assad Regime, Hizballah, and HAMAS,” U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, November 20, 2018, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm553. 
121.  “Rewards for Justice – Up to $10 Million Reward Offer for 
Information on Hizballah’s Financial Networks: Muhammad Qasir, 
Muhammad Qasim al-Bazzal, and Ali Qasir,” U.S. Department of 
State, October 23, 2020, https:/ /2017-2021.state.gov/rewards-
for-justice-up-to-10-million-reward-offer-for-information-on-
hizballahs-financial-networks-muhammad-qasir-muhammad-
qasim-al-bazzal-and-ali-qasir/index.html. 
122.  Ibid. 
123.  “Lebanese Hizballah’s Financial Network,” Rewards for Justice, 
https:/ /rewardsforjustice.net/english/lebanese_hizballah_
financial_network.html. 
124.  “Treasury Designates Vast Iranian Petroleum Shipping Network 
That Supports IRGC-QF and Terror Proxies,” U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, September 4, 2019, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/
news/press-releases/sm767. 
125.  “Lebanese Hizballah’s Financial Network,” Rewards for Justice, 
https:/ /rewardsforjustice.net/english/lebanese_hizballah_
financial_network.html. 
126.  Ibid. 
127.  “Treasury Designates Vast Iranian Petroleum Shipping Network 
That Supports IRGC-QF and Terror Proxies,” U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, September 4, 2019, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/
news/press-releases/sm767. 
128.  Ibid. 
129. “Lebanese Hizballah’s Financial Network,” Rewards for Justice, 
https:/ /rewardsforjustice.net/english/lebanese_hizballah_
financial_network.html.
130.  “Treasury Designates Vast Iranian Petroleum Shipping Network 
That Supports IRGC-QF and Terror Proxies,” U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, September 4, 2019, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/
news/press-releases/sm767. 
131.  Ibid. 
132.  Ibid. 
133.  “Lebanese Hizballah’s Financial Network,” Rewards for Justice, 
https:/ /rewardsforjustice.net/english/lebanese_hizballah_
financial_network.html. 
134.  “This Week in Iran Policy,” The U.S. Embassy in Georgia, October 
2020, https:/ /ge.usembassy.gov/this-week-in-iran-policy-5/. 
135.  Ibid. 
136.  “Treasury Designates Vast Iranian Petroleum Shipping Network 
That Supports IRGC-QF and Terror Proxies,” U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, September 4, 2019, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/
news/press-releases/sm767. 
137.  Ibid. 
138.  Ibid. 
139.  Ibid. 
140.  “Lebanese Hizballah’s Financial Network,” Rewards for Justice, 
https:/ /rewardsforjustice.net/english/lebanese_hizballah_
financial_network.html. 
141.  “Rewards for Justice – Up to $10 Million Reward Offer for 
Information on Hizballah’s Financial Networks: Muhammad Qasir, 
Muhammad Qasim al-Bazzal, and Ali Qasir,” U.S. Department of 
State, October 23, 2020, https:/ /2017-2021.state.gov/rewards-
for-justice-up-to-10-million-reward-offer-for-information-on-
hizballahs-financial-networks-muhammad-qasir-muhammad-
qasim-al-bazzal-and-ali-qasir/index.html.

32
142. “Treasury Sanctions Network Financing Houthi Aggression and 
Instability in Yemen,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, June 10, 
2021. https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0221.  
143. Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah’s Procurement Channels: Leveraging 
Criminal Networks and Partnering with Iran,” The Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, March 21, 2019. https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/hezbollahs-procurement-
channels-leveraging-criminal-networks-and-partnering-iran. 
144. “DEA and European Authorities Uncover Massive Hizballah 
Drug and Money Laundering Scheme,” U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Administration Press Release, February 1, 2016, https:/ /www.dea.
gov/press-releases/2016/02/01/dea-and-european-authorities-
uncover-massive-hizballah-drug-and-money.  
145. “Two Hezbollah Associates Arrested On Charges Of Conspiring To 
Launder Narcotics Proceeds And International Arms Trafficking,” 
U.S. Department of Justice Press Release, October 9, 2015, 
https:/ /www.justice.gov/usao-edny/pr/two-hezbollah-associates-
arrested-charges-conspiring-launder-narcotics-proceeds-and.  
146. “Yemen: Extremism and Terrorism,” Counter Extremism Project, 
February 2018, https:/ /www.counterextremism.com/countries/
yemen. 
147. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Procurement Agents and Their 
Companies,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, November 5, 2015, 
https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/
jl0255.aspx.  
148. Matthew Levitt, “Bahraini Authorities Disrupt Explosives 
Smuggling,” Lebanese Hezbollah Select Worldwide 
Activity Map, The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
August 6, 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=1037.  
149. Mariam Elatouabi, “Diplomatic relations between Morocco and 
Iran sour over Western Sahara dispute,” Atlantic Council, July 
16, 2018, https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/menasource/
diplomatic-relations-between-morocco-and-iran-sour-over-
western-sahara-dispute/.  
150. Haytham Mouzahem, “Morocco-Algeria tensions flare over 
claims of Hezbollah support to Polisario,” Al-Monitor, May 22, 
2018, https:/ /www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/05/
lebanon-hezbollah-support-polisario-algeria-iran-morocco.
html#ixzz6oYlsPvVt. 
 
151. “Treasury Sanctions Key Hizballah, IRGC-QF Networks in Iraq,” 
U.S. Treasury Department, November 13, 2018, https:/ /home.
treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm546.  
152. Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah Operatives Storing Explosives Arrested 
in Kuwait,” Lebanese Hezbollah Select Worldwide Activity Map, 
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=577. 
153. Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah Operatives Storing Explosives Arrested 
in Kuwait,” Lebanese Hezbollah Select Worldwide Activity Map, 
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=557.  
154. Matthew Levitt, “Israel Exposes Hezbollah Cell in Syrian Golan 
Heights,” Lebanese Hezbollah Select Worldwide Activity Map, 
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=688.  
155. Matthew Levitt, “169 Bahraini Hezbollah Members 
Indicted,” Lebanese Hezbollah Select Worldwide Activity 
Map, The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
September 25, 2018, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
hezbollahinteractivemap/#id=666. 
156. “Defense Department Linguist Pleads Guilty to Transmitting Highly 
Sensitive Classified National Defense Information to Aid a Foreign 
Government,” Department of Justice, March 26, 2021, https:/ /
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/defense-department-linguist-pleads-
guilty-transmitting-highly-sensitive-classified-national.  

33
157. Michael Knights, “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib 
Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq,” CTC Sentinel, October 
2020, https:/ /ctc.usma.edu/back-into-the-shadows-the-future-
of-kataib-hezbollah-and-irans-other-proxies-in-iraq/; Michael 
Knights, “The Houthi War Machine: From Guerrilla War to State 
Capture,” CTC Sentinel, September 2018, https:/ /ctc.usma.edu/
houthi-war-machine-guerrilla-war-state-capture/. 
158. Jeff Moskowitz, “Cyberattack Tied to Hezbollah Ups the Ante 
for Israel’s Digital Defenses,” Christian Science Monitor, June 
1, 2015, https:/ /www.csmonitor.com/layout/set/print/World/
Passcode/2015/0601/Cyberattack-tied-to-Hezbollah-ups-the-
ante-for-Israel-s-digital-defenses.  
159. Wil Crisp and Suadad al-Salhy, “Inside Hizbollah’s Fake News 
Training Camps Sowing Instability Across the Middle East,” 
The Telegraph, August 2, 2020, https:/ /www.telegraph.co.uk/
news/2020/08/02/exclusive-inside-hezbollahs-fake-news-
training-camps-sowing/.  
160. Wil Crisp and Suadad al-Salhy, “Inside Hizbollah’s Fake News 
Training Camps Sowing Instability Across the Middle East,” 
The Telegraph, August 2, 2020, https:/ /www.telegraph.co.uk/
news/2020/08/02/exclusive-inside-hezbollahs-fake-news-
training-camps-sowing/.  
161. Crispin Smith and Hamdi Malik, “Profile: Unite 10,000,” Militia 
Spotlight Profiles, The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
April 25, 2021, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-
analysis/profile-unit-10000. 
 
162. Jack Stubbs and Christopher Bing, “Iran-Based Political Influence 
Operation, Bigger, Persistent, Global,” Reuters, August 28, 2018, 
https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-iran-facebook-exclusive-
idINKCN1LD2R9.  
163. “Treasury Sanctions Cyber Actors Backed by Iranian Intelligence 
Ministry,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, September 17, 2020, 
https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm1127.  
164. “Foreign Threats to the 2020 Federal Elections,” Intelligence 
Community Assessment, National Intelligence Council, Office 
of the Director of National Intelligence, March 10, 2021, https:/ /
www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ICA-declass-
16MAR21.pdf.  
165. Hanin Ghaddar (Guest), “Hezbollah’s Regional Challenge,” 
Middle East Focus, Middle East Institute, May 20, 2021, https:/ /
middleeastinst.libsyn.com/hezbollahs-regional-challenge. 
 
166. Adam Entous and Evan Osnos, “Qassem Suleimani and How 
Nations Decide to Kill,” The New Yorker, February 10, 2020, 
https:/ /www.newyorker.com/magazine/2020/02/10/qassem-
suleimani-and-how-nations-decide-to-kill.  
167. Hanin Ghaddar and Nader Uskowi, “Iran Will Spare Hezbollah in 
Its Conflict with Israel, for Now,” Washington Institute for Near 
East Policy, June 5, 2018, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
policy-analysis/iran-will-spare-hezbollah-its-conflict-israel-now. 
 
168. Matthew Levitt, “Hizballah and the Qods Force in Iran’s Shadow 
War with the West,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
January 29, 2013, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-
analysis/hizballah-and-qods-force-irans-shadow-war-west.  
169. Hanin Ghaddar and Nader Uskowi, “Iran Will Spare Hezbollah in 
Its Conflict with Israel, for Now,” The Washington Institute for Near 
East Policy, June 5, 2018, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/
policy-analysis/iran-will-spare-hezbollah-its-conflict-israel-now.  
170. Yuval Ben-David, “Israel says 2016 killing of top Hezbollah 
commander was inside job,” Reuters, March 21, 2017, https:/ /
www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-israel-badreddine/
israel-says-2016-killing-of-top-hezbollah-commander-was-
inside-job-idUSKBN16S1L6.  
171. James R. Clapper, “Unclassified Statement for the Record on the 
Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community 
for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence,” January 31, 2012, 
http:/ /www.fas.org/irp/congress/2012_ hr/013112clapper.pdf. 

34
172. Matthew G. Olsen, “The Homeland Threat Landscape and U.S. 
Response,” testimony before the Senate Committee on Homeland 
Security and Governmental Affairs, September 19, 2012.  
173. Maryam Sinaiee, “New Vice-Commander of Iran’s Qods Force 
Signifies Khamenei’s Message of ‘Fighters without Borders,’” 
Radio Farda, January 20, 2020. https:/ /en.radiofarda.com/a/new-
vice-commander-of-iran-s-qods-signifies-khamenei-message-of-
fighters-without-borders-/30387595.html. 
 
174. “Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Leadership: Action Targets 
Hizballah’s Leadership Responsible for Operations Outside of 
Lebanon,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, August 22, 2013, 
https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/
jl2147.aspx.  
175. “Lebanese Hizballah’s Financial Network,” Rewards for Justice, 
U.S. Department of State, https:/ /rewardsforjustice.net/english/
lebanese_hizballah_financial_network.html.  
176. “Tehran-backed Hezbollah steps in to guide Iraqi militias in 
Soleimani’s wake,” Reuters, February 11, 2020, https:/ /www.
reuters.com/article/us-iran-iraq-hezbollah-insight/tehran-
backed-hezbollah-steps-in-to-guide-iraqi-militias-in-soleimanis-
wake-idUSKBN20520Y. 
 
177. “Treasury Sanctions Key Hizballah, IRGC-QF Networks in Iraq,” 
U.S. Treasury Department, November 13, 2018, https:/ /home.
treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm546.  
178. “Tehran-backed Hezbollah steps in to guide Iraqi militias in 
Soleimani’s wake,” Reuters, February 11, 2020, https:/ /www.
reuters.com/article/us-iran-iraq-hezbollah-insight/tehran-
backed-hezbollah-steps-in-to-guide-iraqi-militias-in-soleimanis-
wake-idUSKBN20520Y.  
179. “Treasury Sanctions Key Hizballah, IRGC-QF Networks in Iraq,” 
U.S. Treasury Department, November 13, 2018, https:/ /home.
treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm546. 
180. “Hezbollah’s Precision Guided Missile Project,” IDF, Accessed 
June 17, 2021, https:/ /www.idf.il/en/minisites/hezbollah/
hezbollahs-precision-guided-missile-project/.  
181. “Top Iranian General Hejazi Dies At 65,” Radio Free Europe, 
April 19, 2021, https:/ /www.rferl.org/a/iran-general-hejazi-
dies-/31210721.html.  
182. “Treasury Sanctions Iran’s Envoy in Yemen and University 
Facilitating Recruitment for Qods Force,” U.S. Treasury 
Department, December 8, 2020, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm1205.  
183. John Hudson, Missy Ryan, and Josh Dawsey, “On the Day 
U.S. Forces Killed Soleimani, they Targeted a Senior Iranian 
Official in Yemen,” Washington Post, January 10, 2020, 
https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/
on-the-day-us-forces-killed-soleimani-they-launched-
another-secret-operation-targeting-a-senior-iranian-official-in-
yemen/2020/01/10/60f86dbc-3245-11ea-898f-eb846b7e9feb_
story.html. 
184. “Treasury Sanctions Five Individuals Tied to Iranian Plot to 
Assassinate the Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the United States,” 
U.S. Department of the Treasury, October 11, 2011, https:/ /www.
treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/pages/tg1320.aspx; 
“Treasury Designates Individuals and Entities Fueling Violence 
in Iraq,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, September 16, 2008, 
https:/ /www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/
hp1141.aspx. 
 
185. “IRGC General Mazaher Majidi: Iran Carried Out Retaliatory 
Attacks Against Israeli Weapon Factory, Atomic Facilities, Oil 
Refineries; We Have Dozens Of Hizbullah-Like Forces In Syria, 
Iraq, Yemen, Afghanistan, And Pakistan,” Hamedan TVI (Iran), 
MEMRI, May 7, 2021, https:/ /www.memri.org/tv/irgc-general-
mazaher-majidi-iran-retaliated-against-israel-weapons-factory-
atomic-facilities-oil-refinery-hizbullah-like-forces. 
186. Matthew Levitt, “’Fighters Without Borders’: Forecasting New 

35
Trends in Iran Threat Network Foreign Operations Tradecraft,” 
CTC Sentinel, February 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.
org/policy-analysis/fighters-without-borders-forecasting-new-
trends-iran-threat-network-foreign.  
187. Erika Soloman, “Lebanon’s Hizbollah and Yemen’s Houthis open 
up on links,” Financial Times, May 8, 2015. https:/ /www.ft.com/
content/e1e6f750-f49b-11e4-9a58-00144feab7de.  
188. “Sayyed Nasreallah: Suleimani Revenge Is Long Track, Trump 
Biggest Liar in History of U.S. Presidency,” al-Manar, January 12, 
2020, https:/ /english.almanar.com.lb/913904.  
189. Matthew Levitt, “Fighters without Borders—Forecasting New 
Trends in Iran Threat Network Foreign Operations Tradecraft,” 
CTC Sentinel, February 2020, https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.
org/policy-analysis/fighters-without-borders-forecasting-new-
trends-iran-threat-network-foreign. 

WWW.MEI.EDU
