Nakissa Jahanbani and Suzanne Weedon Levy | April 2022
IRAN AND HEZBOLLAH’S SUPPORT
TO PROXIES OPERATING IN SYRIA
IRAN ENTANGLED



Iran Entangled:
Iran and Hezbollah ’s Support
to Proxies Operating in Syria
Nakissa Jahanbani
Suzanne Weedon Levy
Combating Terrorism Center at West Point
April 2022
Cover Photo: A Hezbollah supporter uses her mobile phone to takes a picture of photo of slain Iranian Revolutionary Guard General Qassem 
Soleimani during a ceremony marking the anniversary of the assassination of Hezbollah leaders, Abbas al-Moussawi, Ragheb Harb, and Imad 
Mughniyeh, and the end of a 40-day Muslim mourning period for Soleimani, in the southern suburb of Beirut, Lebanon, on February 16, 2020. 
(Hassan Ammar/AP Photo)
United States Military Academy
www.ctc.usma.edu
The views expressed in this report are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the Combating 
Terrorism Center, United States Military Academy, Department of Defense, or U.S. Government.

acknowledgments
We are deeply grateful to whose generous support made this report possible. 
We also wish to thank various individuals whose assistance and dedication were 
critical to the completion of this project.
We are thankful to all members of the research team whose efforts contributed to 
the compilation of the data that underpins this report and helped push this project 
to completion. The authors are grateful to Oula Alrifai, Rahma Bayrakdar, and 
Emma Fruchtman for their exceptional research skills, diligence, and hard work 
on the data that underpins this report. We are also grateful to Orchi Banerjee for 
her assistance in finalizing the report. Without each of them, this report would 
not have been possible.
We would like to thank the Combating Terrorism Center’s leadership for their 
support at every stage of this report. A special thanks to Director Lieutenant 
Colonel Sean Morrow, Executive Director Brian Dodwell, Research Director 
Daniel Milton, and Strategic Initiatives Director Don Rassler for their enthusiasm 
and support for this project. We are also appreciative of Muhammad al-`Ubaydi, 
Amira Jadoon, and Audrey Alexander for providing feedback at various points 
during this report’s conceptualization and later writing. The authors are 
especially thankful to Audrey for her insights on understanding the Syrian 
conflict’s complexities.
We are incredibly thankful to the 14 subject matter experts interviewed for this 
study, some of whom prefer not to be named. We are grateful to each of them for 
the time, energy, and effort they gave to our project. 
We are especially grateful for Muhammad al-`Ubaydi and Don Rassler’s feedback 
during the internal review process. Their comments improved this product 
immeasurably. We are also thankful to our external reviewer, Diane Maye Zorri, 
who also provided invaluable feedback that strengthened this report’s overall 
contribution. 
The detailed copyediting provided by Kristina Hummel was of outstanding 
quality and improved the overall report. 
We would also like to thank James Levy for his support during the writing of 
this report. 
About the Authors
Dr. Nakissa Jahanbani is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Social 
Sciences at West Point and a researcher at the Combating Terrorism Center, 
where she focuses on the evolution of Iran’s relationship with its proxies in Syria 
and Iraq. A separate vein of her research studies states’ support of terrorist and 
insurgent organizations.
Suzanne Weedon Levy is the Research Director of the Project on Violent Conflict 
(PVC) at the University at Albany, where she focuses the behavior of terrorist 
and insurgent non-state actors. Her current project examines extremist groups 
in the United States.
Director
L TC Sean Morrow
Executive Director
Brian Dodwell
Research Director
Dr. Daniel Milton
Distinguished Chair
L TG(R) Dell Dailey
George H. GIlmore Senior Fellow
Prof. Bruce Hoffman
Senior Fellow
Michael Morell
Senior Fellow
Chief Joseph Pfeifer, FDNY (retired)
Class of 1971 Senior Fellow
The Honorable Juan Zarate
Class of 1987 Senior Fellow
GEN(R) Joseph V otel
CONTACT
Combating T errorism Center  
U.S. Military Academy  
607 Cullum Road, Lincoln Hall  
West Point, NY 10996  
Phone: (845) 938-8495  
Web:  www.ctc.usma.edu 
The views expressed in this report are 
those of the authors and not of the United 
States Military Academy, the Department 
of the Army, or any other agency of the 
U.S. Government.
Combating  t errorism  Center
I

table  of  Contents
ExEcutivE  Summary  .................................................................................................... 1
c haptEr  1. i ntroduction  .............................................................................................4
c haptEr  2. m Ethodology  ........................................................................................... 7
     Section 2.1. Selection of Militias for Study ................................................................7
     Section 2.2: Definitions of Variables Collected .......................................................8
     Section 2.3: Notes about Select Groups ......................................................................10
     Section 2.4: Data Collection ...........................................................................................10
     Section 2.5: Defining the Kinetic and Non-Kinetic Support Framework ........ 12
     Section 2.6: Limitations of Study ..................................................................................13
c haptEr  3: Background  on  i ranian  p roxy  i nvolvEmEnt  in  Syria  ................................ 15
    Section 3.1: Brief Historical Overview of Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah’s.........   
    Involvement in Syria .......................................................................................................... 15
    Section 3.2: Utility of Working with Proxy Militias in Syria ............................ 24
    Section 3.3: Iran’s Soft Power Activities in Syria.................................................... 30
c haptEr  4: i ran  and  l EBanESE  h EzB ollah ’S Support  to  p roxiES  o pErating  in  Syria  ...34
    Section 4.1: Investigating Iranian and LH Support for Proxies Active in ...........        
    Syria from 2011 to 2019...................................................................................................... 34
    Section 4.2: Iranian Involvement in Syria Through the Framework of         ........   
    Kinetic and Non-Kinetic Support .................................................................................. 38
    Section 4.3: Notable Aspects of Iranian and LH Support to Proxies  ....................           
    Operating in Syria .............................................................................................................. 52
c haptEr  5: c onclu Sion  and  SEcurity  i mplicationS  .................................................... 64
a ppEndix .................................................................................................................. 70
II

Executive Summary
Syria is a cornerstone of Iran’s national security doctrine.1 While Iran’s alliance with Syria is long-
standing, in the past decade Iran has entangled with Syrian economics, politics, and security 
through a variety of hard and soft power techniques. To Iran, Syria is also a crucial regional ally. Syria 
has geopolitical utility for Iran’s regional strategy and is an avenue through which Iran can exert 
considerable influence. The two countries have an alliance dating back to the early 1980s during the 
regime of Hafez al-Assad. In Syria, Iran can both exert influence in the security sphere through more 
tactical means while also fan a religious and social support base in Syrian society. Iran achieves these 
goals through raising and supporting non-state militant groups in Syria. 
Throughout the Syrian civil war, Iran has provided tactical support to both Syrian military forces 
and proxies2 that serve Iranian interests. To raise proxies, Iran has provided financial incentives to 
potential recruits and leveraged religious narratives, endeavors that have dovetailed with Iran’s broader 
exportation of the velayat-e faqih ideology to Syria.3 Today, Iran’s presence remains entrenched in 
Syria. The Iraq-Syria border is a stronghold for pro-Iranian forces for the movement of fighters, 
weapons, and other goods, such as near the Iraqi border town of al-Qaim.4 In January 2022, Lebanese 
Hezbollah (LH) and other Iranian-backed forces, such as the Fatemiyoun Brigades and Liwa Abu Fadl 
al-Abbas (LAFA), were reportedly acquiring real estate—coercively or through financial incentives—
around Daraya suburb of Damascus.5 In the same month, Iranian-backed militias were reported to 
be smuggling weapons in Deir ez-Zor province.6 U.S. troops remain in Syria, perhaps in part offering 
a counterweight to Iranian influence in the country.7 Iranian and Iranian-backed militias continue to 
pose a significant threat to the U.S. military and its partners in Syria, as exemplified by the October 
2021 drone attacks at al-Tanf garrison.8
This report investigates the nature of Iranian and LH support to proxies operating in Syria from 2011 
to 2019, using a macroscopic lens to note existing patterns of engagement. By examining trends at 
this broad level of analysis, it maps an historical view of the conflict. While the nature of Iran’s proxy 
network is dynamic, it is useful to investigate the network at its (arguably) peak years to understand 
1 Afshon Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2016), p. 205; Mahan Abedin, Iran Resurgent: The Rise 
and Rise of the Shia State (London: C. Hurst & Co., 2019), p. 130; Ariane T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat: Iran’s National Security 
Strategy (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2020), pp. 255, 277-282. 
2 In this report, the term “proxy” refers to a militant group that receives support from the Iranian government, the IRGC or its Quds 
Force, or LH. “Clients” and “surrogates, ” which can denote more enmeshed relationships, is interchangeable with “proxies” in this 
study. For more information, see Afshon Ostovar, “The Grand Strategy of Militant Clients: Iran’s Way of War, ” Security Studies 
28:1 (2018) and Assaf Moghaddam and Michel Wyss, “The Political Power of Proxies: Why Nonstate Actors Use Local Surrogates, ” 
International Security 44:4 (2020): pp. 119-157 .
3 The velayat-e faqih, or “Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist, ” ideology underpins Iran’s system of government, where the clergy are in 
charge of state institutions and governance. For more information, see “What Is V elayat-e Faqih?” Institute for Global Change, March 
20, 2019.
4 “Exploiting Iraqi-Syrian border has served as IRGC focal point for years, ” Diyaruna, February 28, 2021.
5 Nohad T opalian, “Iran-backed militias, Syrian forces seize private homes in Daraya, ” Diyaruna, January 10, 2022. In January 2022, 
Iranian-backed militias attacked U.S. bases in east Syria. See, for example, Michael Knights and Crispin Smith, “Making Sense of 
Militia Attacks in Iraq and Syria in Early 2022, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, January 6, 2022; Jeff Seldin, “US-Led 
Coalition Responds to New Round of Attacks in Syria, Iraq, ” V oice of America, January 5, 2022; and “Pro-Iran militias keep up attacks 
on US military targets in Iraq, Syria, ”  Arab Weekly, January 6, 2022.
6 “SOHR: In front of the Russians…Iranian militias link the east of the Euphrates to the west of Syria, ” Syrian Observatory for Human 
Rights, January 17 , 2022. There are also reports of IRGC troops in Deir ez-Zor province in early 2022. See, for example, Omar Abu 
Layla, “How Iranian Militias Have Swallowed Deir Ezzor, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, February 16, 2022. 
7 Lolita C. Baldor and Robert Burns, “General says US troops to remain in Iraq, ” Military Times, December 9, 2021; Barbara Starr, “US 
officials say humanitarian effort in Syria is another means to counter ISIS, ” CNN, December 3, 2021.
8 “Lead Inspector General Report to the United States Congress - Operation Inherent Resolve: October 1, 2021-December 31, 2021, ” 
U.S. Department of Defense Office of the Inspector General.
1
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

existing and potential future structures and capabilities. This report investigates support from Iranian 
actors—inclusive of the IRGC and its various components, notably the Quds Force (IRGC-QF), as 
well as the Iranian government more generally—and LH through the lens of kinetic and non-kinetic 
assistance. The former refers to joint attacks between the militias and Iranian actors and/or LH, 
personnel placed with militias, and training and weapons provided to militias. Non-kinetic support 
entails funding, logistical support, recruitment and social service assistance, and meetings between 
Iranian actors and/or LH and militias. Looking at these two categories of support provides a more 
holistic snapshot of Iranian influence and capacity-building with proxies in Syria. 
The key questions explored in this report are as follows: 
• During the Syrian conflict, what types of support did Iran provide its proxies? 
• How did Iran’s support to its proxies change over time? 
• How do Iranian actors and LH vary in their support to proxies, if at all? 
Key Findings
Below are the most notable findings from this study. 
Finding 1: Iranian and LH support started with higher volumes of kinetic support, followed by 
increases in non-kinetic support. This pattern potentially indicates a phased rollout of kinetic 
assistance to be replaced with longer-term societal entrenchment efforts. 
• Kinetic support peaked in 2015 to 2017 while non-kinetic peaked in 2017 to 2018. 
• Iran and LH began sending fighters to the conflict in 2011 and 2012. The number of personnel 
increased over time, and both entities faced considerable losses in 2015 and 2016.9 As the conflict 
progressed, there was an emphasis toward supplying non-kinetic support, potentially providing 
the dual benefit of minimizing Iran’s losses while ensuring longer-term involvement in the country. 
Finding 2: When looking at specific kinetic and non-kinetic support, there seems to be a division of 
labor between Iranian actors and LH within the kinetic, but not non-kinetic support. 
• The IRGC and other Iranian actors sent more weapons and personnel (advisors, soldiers, trainers, 
etc.) to militias. 
• Conversely, LH conducted more joint attacks with militias.
• For non-kinetic support, LH mostly met with militia members, but the IRGC and other Iranian 
actors dominated in this specific support, as well as other forms, including funding, logistics, 
recruitment, and social service provisions. 
Finding 3: During the Syrian civil war, training, funding, weapons provisions, and joint attacks were 
among the most common types of support provided by Iranian actors and LH. 
• Of all supports, training was the most often provided, followed by joint attacks and funding.
• Iranian actors provided training, funding, and weapons support the most, while LH took the lead 
in joint attacks. 
Finding 4: Among all Iranian actors, the IRGC was the most prolific in providing a range of supports 
to militias operating in Syria. 
• When looking at specific Iranian actors, the IRGC provided the most kinetic support.  
• Specifically, the IRGC predominantly focused on providing training and funding support. 
• The Quds Force was responsible for 77 out of about 156 cases of IRGC support. The most common 
9 Abedin, p. 138;  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, International Institute for Strategic Studies, May 2020, p. 23; Marie 
Donovan, Nicholas Carl, and Frederick W . Kagan, “Iran’s Reserve of Last Resort, ” American Enterprise Institute, January 1, 2020; 
Garrett Nada, “Iran’s Growing T oll in Syria, ” United States Institute of Peace, October 26, 2015.
2
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

support types provided by the Quds Force were meeting with militia leaders and training. 
Given the unique aspects of the Syrian case and the ongoing nature of Iran’s involvement in that 
country, there are a few implications for this study. The conflict has strengthened various Iranian-
backed forces, particularly Iranian security forces, Lebanese Hezbollah, and proxy groups, notably 
Iraq-based groups operating in Syria, such as Kata’ib Hezbollah.10 This was the first conflict since 
the Iran-Iraq War where the Iranian army (Artesh) and IRGC worked together; and both groups of 
fighters gained considerable experience.11 To justify the conflict, Iran was able to cultivate a religious 
narrative to not only assuage its domestic population but also to bolster proxy fighter recruitment to 
the conflict.12 Relatedly, through this conflict, Iran institutionalized the recruitment of foreign fighters, 
notably the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades from Afghanistan and Pakistan, respectively. Future 
conflicts with Iranian influence may see a similar narrative and fighter mobilization. Additionally, 
there is some concern that Iran may redeploy these fighters to other settings, such as Afghanistan.13  
10  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 291; Michael Knights, “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s 
Other Proxies in Iraq, ” CTC Sentinel 13:10 (2020).
11  T abatabai,  No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 280, 291.
12  Abedin, pp. 138, 141, 148-149; Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, p. 205; T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 278-279; Ali Ansari and 
Aniseh Bassiri T abrizi, “The View From T ehran, ” in Aniseh Bassiri T abrizi and Raffaello Pantucci eds., Understanding Iran’s Role in the 
Syrian Conflict, Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, August 2016, p. 3.
13  See, for example, Amir T oumaj, Candace Rondeaux, and Arif Ammar, “Soleimani’s Shadow: The Fatemiyoun Division & Iran’s Proxy 
Warfare Propaganda, ” New America, last updated July 9, 2021, pp. 69-70; Ali M. Latifi, “‘Phantom force’: Y oung Afghans fighting 
in Syria face uncertain future, ” Middle East Eye, September 26, 2020; Frud Bezhan, “The Return Of Pro-Iranian Militia Fighters T o 
Afghanistan Fuels Fears In Kabul, Washington, ” RFERL, February 7 , 2020; Colin P . Clarke and Ariane T abatabai, “What Will Iran Do 
As the US Negotiates a Withdrawal from Afghanistan?” Defense One, April 6, 2020; Ali Alfoneh, “Afghans fear IRGC may deploy 
Fatemiyoun fighters to Afghanistan, ” Middle East Institute, March 5, 2018.
3
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Chapter 1. Introduction
Militant agents are a primary component of Iranian grand strategy.14 The agents (also called proxies) 
offer Iran several benefits, notably the ability to project power and counter adversaries while 
maintaining some deniability for Tehran.15 Working with proxies aligns with Iran’s forward defense 
national security strategy, which, according to Alex Vatanka, holds that “militarily confronting enemies 
outside of Iran’s borders is preferable to having to face them inside of Iran’s borders.”16 In part designed 
by the late IRGC-Quds Force Commander Major General Qassem Soleimani, forward defense was 
developed to “overcome Iran’s limitations given Tehran’s isolation and lack of access to conventional 
military platforms.”17 Continuing under Soleimani’s successor, Brigadier General Esmail Qaani, the 
proxy model has demonstrated its utility, although it “still reflects Iran’s military weak points.” 18 
Working through proxies comes at a lower cost than engagement by other means.19 For example, in 
many ways, it was more efficient for Tehran to raise and/or bolster local militias in Syria, which have an 
intimate understanding of the sociocultural and physical landscape,20 rather than send Iranian forces. 
Behnam Ben Taleblu remarks on Iran’s proxy strategy throughout the conflict most pointedly: “Iran’s 
support to proxies often takes a needs-based approach, which plays to local training and production 
capabilities, deniability, risk-tolerance, battle-field impact, and more.”21 
In the Syrian conflict’s early years, Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah (LH) raised and supported several 
local militias in Syria. Training and recruitment assistance to these militias persisted throughout the 
conflict. By the same token, Iraq-based proxies—which are more geographically proximate to Syria 
and were training and sending non-Iranian soldiers on behalf of the IRGC—can deploy at a relatively 
lower cost than direct engagement by Iranian forces.22 Toward the former, Iran also directed Iraqi 
groups to Syria in the early years of the conflict. While there was a major retraction in 2014, when the 
Islamic State prominently emerged in Iraq, many of the Iraqi proxies maintained a presence in Syria 
throughout the conflict. Iran also recruited Afghan and Pakistani Shi`a to enlist in the Fatemiyoun 
and Zeinabiyoun Brigades, which were deployed in both 2013 and 2014 to Syria.23
The Syrian civil war was a boon for Iranian proxies, LH, and various Iranian forces alike, as all benefited 
from the combat experience.24 For many Iranian forces, this was their first battle experience since the 
Iran-Iraq War.25 Several analysts have remarked that LH grew in strength and capabilities because 
14  Ostovar, “The Grand Strategy of Militant Clients: Iran’s Way of War. ”
15  Ibid.
16  Alex Vatanka, “Whither the IRGC of the 2020s?” New America, January 2021, p. 8.
17  Ibid., p. 20.
18  Ibid., p. 20.
19  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 290. 
20  Belgin San-Akca, States in Disguise: Causes of State Support for Rebel Groups (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2016), p. 30; Navin 
A. Bapat, “Understanding State Sponsorship of Militant Groups, ” British Journal of Political Science 42:1 (2012): pp. 1-29.
21  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021. 
22  T abatabai,  No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 280. 
23  Phillip Smyth, “Iranian Proxies Step Up Their Role in Iraq, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, June 13, 2014; “ Hame anche 
bayad darbareh doh lashkar fatemiyoun va zeinabiyoun bedaneem [Everything one needs to know about the Fatemiyoun and 
Zeinabiyoun Brigades], ” Defa Press, July 28, 2020; Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, pp. 23, 103-104; Ahmad Shuja 
Jamal, “The Fatemiyoun Army: Reintegration into Afghan Society, ” United States Institute of Peace, March 19, 2019, p. 7 . The first 
Zeinabiyoun fatalities were recorded in July 2014. For more information, see Ali Alfoneh, “Using Syria as a T raining Ground: The Case 
of the Pakistani Zeinabiyoun Brigade, ” Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington, July 17 , 2018. For a backgrounder on the Fatemiyoun 
Brigades, see Jamal.
24  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 291.
25  Ibid., p. 291.
4
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

of fighting during the civil war.26 Even so, LH’s involvement in the conflict undermined its popularity 
with the Lebanese public and the broader Arab world, particularly among Gulf states.27 Notably, the 
conflict fomented an opportunity for Iran—particularly Soleimani as its major architect—to solidify 
a proxy network and a parallel logistical route vis-à-vis a land and air bridge extending from Iraq, 
through Syria and Lebanon to Palestine. It has forced the Iranian state to mature, modernizing its 
military procedures and thinking, and perfecting its “hybrid warfare capabilities.”28 Like their Iranian 
counterparts, the conflict in Syria fostered the proxies’ operational capabilities. 29 Because of their 
involvement, the Iraqi-based proxies swelled in ranks and improved their capacity for training and 
conducting armed conflict.30 
While the purview of this study ends in 2019, recent developments indicate Iran is continuing to 
maneuver itself into Syrian security and politics, likely with Assad’s blessing.31 Since 2019, there have 
been several indications that Iran and LH have not withdrawn from Syria.32 Recent accounts suggest 
that Iranian forces are still present and active in Syria.33 Since 2022, there have been reports of Iranian 
militias active in Syria, such as attacking U.S. forces in the country and smuggling weapons in Deir 
ez-Zor, among other activities.34   
Despite the death of Soleimani, it appears the overall trajectory of his regional proxy network has 
continued even though his successor, Qaani, spent much of his previous tenure focusing on work 
in Afghanistan and other regions.35 However, some have criticized Qaani’s effectiveness at the helm 
of the IRGC proxy network, stating that the Quds Force’s influence over its militias has declined in 
recent years.36 Additionally, as the conflict in Syria waned, many Iraqi-based proxies returned their 
gaze inward, while some Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun fighters have relocated to Iran. 37 Iran has 
indicated that its regional activities—and seemingly, proxy network—are off the table in potential 
future negotiations with the United States under the Biden administration.38 Iranian and Iranian-
backed forces continue to pose a threat to U.S. coalition forces in Syria, as exemplified in several drone 
26  Seth G. Jones, “The Escalating Conflict with Hezbollah in Syria, ” Center for Strategic and International Studies, June 20, 2018; Jesse 
Rosenfeld, “How the Syrian Civil War Has T ransformed Hezbollah, ” Nation, March 30, 2017; Nicholas Blanford, “Though Strengthened 
in Syria, Hezbollah Faces Unprecedented Dangers Within, ” World Politics Review, September 17 , 2019.
27  See, for example, Samia Nakhoul and T om Perry, “Lebanon’s Hezbollah ‘got power but lost the country, ’” Reuters, August 19, 2020, 
and Lizzie Porter, “How the Arab world turned against Hezbollah, ” Prospect, October 5, 2020. 
28  Ariane T abatabai, “Syria Changed the Iranian Way of War, ” Foreign Affairs, August 16, 2019. 
29  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 290-291.
30  Knights, “Back into the Shadows?”
31  Ali Hashem, “IRGC Syrian commander removed ‘upon request from Assad, ’” Al-Monitor, November 15, 2021.
32  Golnaz Esfandiari, “Analysts See Little Change In Iran’s Strategy In Syria, Despite Reports Of Withdrawal, ” RFERL, May 15, 2020; 
Nohad T opalian, “Hizbullah digs in near Syria’s Sayyida Zainab shrine, ” Diyaruna, January 17 , 2022.
33  Waleed Al-Khair, “Locals report major increase in IRGC militia activity in eastern Syria, ” Diyaruna, February 11, 2021; Esfandiari, 
“Analysts See Little Change In Iran’s Strategy In Syria, Despite Reports Of Withdrawal;” Jared Szuba, “Can the US force Iran out of 
Syria? Not likely, former officials say, ” Al-Monitor, December 22, 2020; “SOHR | ‘Reports of reducing Iranian troops in Syria untrue, ’” 
Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, September 7 , 2021; Waleed Abu al-Khair, “‘Little Iran’: IRGC evicts locals in eastern Syria as 
militant enclave expands, ” Diyaruna, March 19, 2021. 
34  “SOHR: In front of the Russians…Iranian militias link the east of the Euphrates to the west of Syria;” Knights and Smith.
35  Ali Alfoneh, “Esmail Qaani: the next Revolutionary Guards Quds Force commander?” American Enterprise Institute, January 11, 2012; 
Bezhan.
36  Faris al-Omran, “IRGC’s Quds Force stalls under Qaani’s lacklustre leadership, ” Diyaruna, November 11, 2021
37  See, for example, T oumaj, Rondeaux, and Ammar, pp. 69-70; “ Hame anche bayad darbareh doh lashkar fatemiyoun va zeinabiyoun 
bedaneem [Everything one needs to know about the two Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun divisions];” and Amir T oumaj, “IRGC-led 
Afghan group holds first ‘international conference’ in Iran, ” FDD’s Long War Journal, September 15, 2020.
38  Golnaz Esfandiari, “Analysts See Little Change In Iran’s Strategy In Syria, Despite Reports Of Withdrawal, ” RFERL, May 15, 2020; 
Szuba.
5
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

attacks in 2021 that were linked to Iranian proxies.39
This report investigates the nature of Iranian and LH support to proxies operating in Syria from 2011 
to 2019, using a macroscopic lens to note existing patterns of engagement. This approach provides an 
extended snapshot of Iranian support trends during several periods in the Syrian civil war, prior to 
major events in 2020, such as the U.S. airstrike against Soleimani, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the 
Taliban takeover of Afghanistan.  
Specifically, this report asks: 
• During the Syrian conflict, what types of support did Iran provide its proxies? 
• How did Iran’s support to its proxies change over time? 
• How do Iranian actors and LH vary in their support to proxies, if at all? 
Overview of Report’s Approach
This study juxtaposes Iranian support to that of LH. By capturing and investigating the two entities in 
tandem, it finds nuances in the division of labor that exists between Iran and LH. This report studies 
Iranian support to 24 militias. While there are many other groups that were found to be linked to 
Iran,40 only militias with a publicly demonstrated, substantial relationship with Iran between 2011 
and 2019 were included.41 Then, support patterns between groups and LH are researched using multi-
language open sources and social media. Relationships were defined as evidence of existing tangible 
support. By virtue of this approach, this study does not include groups that only received support from 
LH, which is evident for some groups known to have links with Iran, such as Harakat Zain al-Abedin, 
among others. The limitation of this approach is discussed at the end of this chapter.
To best study macroscopic trends about support for Iranian-backed militias, the data in this report 
captures the presence of a relationship each year. This method is used for a couple of reasons. First, 
given the discrepancies that exist in open-source research, this approach ensures some standardization 
in analysis. Second, this macro-level view of Iranian proxy sponsorship provides the ability to study 
notable areas of overlap in different types of support. As Iranian strategy is opportunistic, multi-
pronged, and incorporates elements of both hard and soft power, 42 this report studies a variety of 
supports ranging from tactical support, such as joint attacks and weapons provisions, to recruitment 
assistance and logistical support.
Components and Layout 
The report’s methodology follows this introduction and is laid out in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 provides a 
brief yet broad foundation of Iranian involvement in Syria, noting Syria’s relationship with Iran under 
the Shah, the Iran-Iraq War, and the eve of the Syrian civil war. Against the background provided, 
Chapter 4 explores and contextualizes trends in Iranian and LH support to proxies using novel data. It 
concludes by looking at notable aspects of Iranian and LH support to proxies operating in Syria, such 
as by religious affiliation and geographic trends. Chapter 5 concludes with a summary of the results 
and some implications for future work. 
39  “Lead Inspector General Report to the United States Congress - Operation Inherent Resolve: October 1, 2021-December 31, 2021;” 
“U.S.-led coalition shoots down drone in southern Syria, ” Reuters, December 16, 2021; Eric Schmitt and Ronen Bergman, “Strike on 
U.S. Base Was Iranian Response to Israeli Attack, Officials Say, ” New Y ork Times, November 18, 2021.
40  See appendix for a list of groups that were found to have links to Iran, but not substantial enough for inclusion in this study. 
41  See the appendix for a full list of groups that the report researchers found to have links to Iran. 
42  Sanam Vakil, “Understanding T ehran’s Long Game in the Levant, ” Uluslararası Iliskiler [International Relations] 15:60 (2018): pp. 105-
120. 
6
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Chapter 2. Methodology
This section outlines the methodology and data collection process that was used to develop this report. 
In this, it is salient to discuss how militias were selected into the study, the definitions of the variables 
collected, and data collection techniques and caveats, including the nature of the sources. 
Section 2.1. Selection of Militias for Study
To provide an overview, this study had three criteria for inclusion, listed below and explained in greater 
detail in the subsequent section: 
(1) The militia was operating in Syria between 2011 and 2019; 
(2) There is evidence of a demonstrated and tangible relationship between the militia and Iran; 
and
(3) For groups that met the above criteria, several variables could be coded that indicated the 
existence of a functioning entity. 
(1) Militias were included in this study if open-source information indicated they were operating 
in Syria between 2011 and 2019. For this, sources’ tenses and reporting dates were carefully reviewed 
to ensure activity was coded for the appropriate years. 
(2) For inclusion, it was necessary that groups had a demonstrated relationship with Iran. 
Organizations were removed if they were only linked to Iran with non-specific language, such “Iran-
backed,” “linked to Iran,” or “consulted Iran,” and no other supporting information or relationships 
were found. For example, groups such as Mukhtar al-Thiqfi Brigade or Ansar al-Marja’iyah where 
only one support type was found were not included. To ensure a viable comparison of Iranian and 
LH support to proxies operating in Syria, this study consisted exclusively of groups linked to Iran or 
both Iran and LH. Groups found to be linked only to LH and not Iran were not included in the study. 
This decision was made to better analyze differences in support trends for Iranian actors and LH. 
Examples of groups reportedly found to be supported by LH but not Iran included the Imam Mahdi 
Brigade and Harakat al-Imam Zain al-Abidin. Both groups were set up and coordinated by LH but, 
through evaluation of open-source material, were not found to have definitive ties to Iranian entities. 
(3) Finally, the study only includes groups with sufficient data. Put differently, groups needed to 
have several codable variables or relationships that indicated the existence of a functioning entity. 
The authors looked for information on ideological, tactical, and strategic support to be as holistic as 
possible in their investigation. The authors took care to only include groups about which they could 
find sufficient, corroborating sources in English, Persian, and Arabic open sources or groups’ social 
media.
Groups Included
There are 24 groups in this study (see Table 2.1 for a list). 43 There are 316 relationships between 
Iranian entities (including the IRGC, IRGC-QF, and non-specific mentions of Iran, such as the Iranian 
government) or Lebanese Hezbollah and the groups. Of these, 78 were attributed to LH and 238 to 
Iranian actors.44 
43  A list of some groups found to have Iranian support but not included in this study can be found in the report’s appendix.
44  For a related graphic breaking down these numbers, see Figure A6 in the appendix. 
7
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Table 2.1: Groups and Main Areas of Operation45
Operating in Syria Operating in Syria and Iraq 
(Years of Operation in Syria)
Lebanese Resistance Brigades Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq46 (2011-2018)
Liwa al-Sayyida Ruqayya Badr Organization (2013, 2014, 2019)
Liwa al-Quds Harakat al-Nujaba47 (2013-2019)
Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas (LAFA-Umbrella)
Liwa Dhualfiqar (LAFA-Constituent) Jaish al-Muwamal (2016) 
Al-Ghaliboun Khorasan Companies (2014-2016)
Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir Saraya al-Jihad (2015-2018)
Quwat al-Ridha Kata’ib Hezbollah48 (2011-2019)
Fatemiyoun Brigades Promised Day Brigades (2014, 2015)
Zeinabiyoun Brigades Kata’ib al-Ansar al-Wilayah (2015-2016)
Saraya al-Aqidah (2014)
Ansar Allah al-Tawfiya (2017) 
Kata’ib Sayyida al-Shuhada 
(2013-2014, 2016-2018)
Kata’ib al-Imam Ali (2014-2018)
Section 2.2. Definitions of Variables Collected
In order to capture the operational aspects of Iran’s partnerships with militias, the researchers coded 
several variables. It should be noted that several supports listed below could be provided together; 
these instances of overlap were double-coded, but only if provisions for both were clearly stated. For 
example, if the IRGC provided training to a militia, it implies some level of inherit coordination with 
the militia; however, coordination support was not coded unless the source(s) explicitly referenced 
some aspect of planning. 
• Training: Does the group receive training from an Iranian entity or LH? This was coded in the 
direction of provision. Search terms included but were not limited to: train*, camp*, and instruct*. 
For example, when Iran provided training to the Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir militia in 2019, the 
relationship was coded with Iran as the sending entity and the militia as the receiving entity. 49 
This variable also included instances where Iran arranged for the group to be trained elsewhere or 
by another entity.50 Also, if Iran sent IRGC forces to the group’s base for training, this overlapped 
with “Personnel Placement” support (below).
45  Aliases for these groups were also included in search strings. For Iraqi-based groups, if applicable, the brigade number they were in 
within the Hashd al-Shaabi structure was also included. 
46  Brigades, or subgroups that compose the broader group, included are: Liwa Kafil Zaynab, Liwa al-Shaheed al-Qa’id Abu Mousa al-
Amiri, and Saba’ al-Dujail. 
47  Brigades included are: Al-Hamad Brigade, Brigade of Ammar bin Y asir, Golan Liberation Brigade, and Liwa al-Imam al-Hassan al-
Mujtaba. 
48  Brigades include Saraya al-Difa’ al-Sha’abi. 
49  “[The Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps is taking out a batch of leaders training camp east of Homs], ” nedaa-sy.com, January 2, 
2019.
50  For example, in 2016, Iran arranged for fighters from Jaish al-Muwamal to receive sniper training in Iraq, Iran, and Lebanon. For more 
information, see “Iraq: Jaysh al-Muwamal—a new Iranian militia to support Assad, ” Mulhak, August 22, 2016.
8
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

• Joint Attacks: Does the group attack with an Iranian entity or LH? This variable was coded in both 
directions. Search terms included but were not limited to: attack*, target*, bomb*, kill*, fight*, 
fought*, clash*, and martyr*. This variable captures instances when sources stated Iranian or LH 
forces attacked with groups; coordination was not assumed if further detail was not provided (i.e., 
was not explicitly stated in the sources). Specific instances of coordinating attacks were captured 
under “Coordination” support.  
• Funding: Did the group receive funding from an Iranian entity or LH? This variable was coded 
in the direction of provision. (See description of “Training” variable for more information.) Search 
terms included but were not limited to: fund*, finance*, money, dollar*, and sponsor*.
• Coordination: Did the group receive support that could assist operations from an Iranian entity 
or LH? This can include intelligence sharing, transportation, other planning activities, and non-
specific logistic support. Did the group provide such support to an Iranian entity or LH? This 
variable was coded in the direction of provision. (See description of “Training” variable for more 
information.) Search terms included but were not limited to: logistic*, transport*, organize*, 
guide*, and intelligence*. Many sources referred generally to the provision of “logistics” without 
specifics. Additionally, descriptions of militias “following the instructions of ” Iranian actors or 
their involvement in the group’s “planning” as well as militias receiving guidance or military 
advice from Iranian actors were also included under this type of support. While some of this 
support may overlap with “Joint Attacks” or “Training” support, the researchers found enough 
instances that were distinct enough to code “coordination” on its own, and it was coded regardless 
of whether it took place in the context of another type of support. As mentioned in the “Joint 
Attacks” description, overlap was not coded unless specified. 
• Weapons: Did the group receive weapons from an Iranian entity or LH? This variable was coded 
in the direction of provision. (See description of “Training” variable for more information.) Search 
terms included but were not limited to guns, weapons systems, and artillery, among others. 
Descriptions of Iranian actors “equipping” or “providing equipment for” a militia were also coded 
as weapons support. 
• Meetings: Did the group meet with an Iranian entity or LH? Like “Joint Attacks,” this variable was 
coded in both directions. Search terms included but were not limited to: meet*, met*, dialogue*, 
negotiate*, and visit*. Like “Coordination,” some of this might overlap with other variables, and 
like “Training,” this variable encompasses any mentions of meetings between Iranian entities or 
LH and militias, regardless of whether it took place in the context of another type of support.  
• Personnel Placement: Did Iran or LH send any personnel to this militia? This included advisors, 
soldiers, or trainers, among others, from the armed forces or Revolutionary Guard. This variable 
was coded in one direction, from Iran to the group. Search terms included but were not limited to: 
Iran * OR Tehran OR IRGC OR “Revolutionary Guard” OR “Revolutionary Guards” OR Pasdaran* 
OR Sepah* OR Soleimani OR Suleimani OR “Quds” OR “Qods” OR Basij. It should be noted that 
this variable does not focus on the size of the “placement” but rather the presence or absence of 
Iranian forces personnel that were reported to be embedded with proxy units in specific years.
• Recruitment Assistance: Did the group work with an Iranian entity or LH to recruit members? 
This variable was coded in one direction, from an Iranian entity or LH to the group. Search terms 
included but were not limited to: recruit*, enlist*, conscript*, advertise*, and pay*. While some 
elements of recruitment assistance may overlap with social services provision assistance, this 
support captures instances where sources specifically indicated Iranian or LH support during 
the recruitment process as they incentivized and sought to enlist potential fighters to their ranks. 
• Social Services Provision Assistance: Did the group’s social services provision have any Iranian 
or LH involvement? The variable was coded in one direction, from an Iranian entity to the group. 
Social services are any services a group provides to the community free of charge, including but 
not limited to reconstruction, humanitarian relief, trash collection, clinics, donation collections, 
and welfare services. Search terms included but were not limited to: welfare*, educate*, provide*, 
donate*, neighborhood*, and pilgrim*. As previously mentioned, some elements of this variable 
9
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

may overlap with recruitment assistance, as social services may be employed to attract members 
to fight for the groups that provide them. However, this variable only captures instances where 
Iran or LH assisted the group in providing such social services. 
Section 2.3. Notes about Select Groups 
A Note about Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas. As captured in Table 2.1, both the umbrella organization 
for Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas (LAFA) as well as one constituent group, Liwa Dhualfiqar, are included. 
LAFA is best regarded as a consortium of militias where there is a central LAFA organization and 
several constituent militias.51 Only one constituent LAFA group—Liwa Dhualfiqar—was included in 
this study. Other constituent groups are: Liwa al-Imam al-Husayn, Liwa Assad Allah al-Ghalib, Rapid 
Reaction Forces, Khadam al-Sayyida Zaynab, Suquor al-Imam al-Mahdi, and Qaida Quwet Abu Fadl 
al-Abbas.52 They were not added because there was not a sufficient number of observations to meet 
the inclusion criteria (described earlier in this section). The LAFA umbrella organization was included 
as it had a distinctive leadership structure from its constituents.53 
A Note about Iraq-Based Groups and the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades. For 
transparency, it is important to note nuances about the inclusion of the Iraq-based militias and the 
Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades. As indicated by Figure A7 in the Appendix, Fatemiyoun and 
Zeinabiyoun Brigades observations are no more than 16 in a given year, while observations from Iraqi 
groups can be up to half of all observations in a given year. Iraq-based groups have most observations 
in 2011, 2012, and 2015, relative to both Syrian-based groups and the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun 
Brigades. This aligns with existing research that indicates Iraq-based groups came in early in the 
conflict, but some returned to Iraq due to the growing threat of the Islamic State in 2014. 54 Some 
Iraqi groups were present throughout or later in the time period, as indicated in Table A7 (appendix). 
Several Iraqi groups are present in the dataset in 2014, many of which returned to Iraq in that year to 
fight against the Islamic State. However, the dataset in its present form does not capture this nuance, 
though it is discussed in Chapter 3.
Section 2.4. Data Collection
Data Set Arrangement for Trend Analysis. Relationships were coded between militias and Iranian 
actors per group per year. Put differently, each observation is the presence of a relationship between 
a militia and an Iranian actor each year. More specifically, with this approach, even if the IRGC, 
for example, provided weapons to a militia multiple times in 2011, this was recorded as a single 
relationship observation in 2011. 
This provides a uniform analysis of important trends in the data, which is complicated when mining 
from open sources. The ‘true’ number of instances of a relationship each year can be challenging to 
determine due to reporting effects (e.g., how many are observed by sources consulted). This approach 
standardizes the provision of different types of support to understand their potential interactions 
along a uniform scale. Each row represents a single relationship. This means that even if sources 
discussed relationships in tandem, they were coded separately. This was to protect against potential 
inference from sources about support provided in tandem. Limitations of this approach are discussed 
in Section 2.6.  
51  Phillip Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, February 2, 2015, “Appendix 
3, The LAFA Network of Organizations. ”
52  Ibid.
53  Ibid., “Appendix 3, The LAFA Network of Organizations. ”
54  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 23; Smyth, “Iranian Proxies Step Up Their Role in Iraq. ”
10
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

This approach assists in the identification of critical areas for study, such as years and groups in which 
Iran provided multiple types of support or persisted in one type of support. The data allows the authors 
to pinpoint areas for targeted focus to study the conditions under which they existed. Additionally, it 
could be argued that the initial provision of support from a state is the most significant, as it has the 
highest sunk costs for the sponsor.55  
Additionally, the sources utilized in research for this study do not often provide specific dates involving 
the provision of tactical variables (e.g., logistics and weapons), making it difficult to decrease the unit 
of analysis to a month or month-day. By creating this dataset at the annual level, the baseline data 
could be collected efficiently and strategically to inform the best ways on disaggregating the data later, 
with greater temporal specificity. To reiterate, as with most quantitative analytics, this approach is not 
without its limitations, which are discussed in more depth at the end of the next section. 
Coding Process. The coding process occurred in multiple phases. In Phase 1, researchers conducted an 
initial search for each group using English- and Arabic-language open sources. Researchers started in 
either English- or Arabic-language sources. In Phase 2, the sources in other languages were examined, 
building off of the previously coded information. Concurrently, social media information in Arabic 
was collected from various social media accounts and Telegram, and later added to the group coding. 
In Phase 3, the group coding was quality-controlled for rigor of sources and validity of information, 
among other related considerations explained below. 
Types of Sources. The research team used various policy, academic, and news sources. These include 
but are not limited to think-tank reports (e.g., RAND Corporation and the Washington Institute), 
datasets (e.g., Janes Terrorism and Insurgency database), and newspaper sources (e.g., The Guardian). 
Sources were collected from Google searches and NexisUni in English, and from the former in Arabic 
and Persian. Additionally, the research team used the groups’ social media on Twitter, Facebook, or 
Telegram where possible.
The availability of sources is also important. It should be noted that some of the militias are not as well-
known, and so the authors were beholden to the open-source information they could access. Source 
availability also affected how many groups could be included in the dataset. 
To ensure some uniformity across data collection using NexisUni, the authors provided the research 
team with search strings to implement at first, then tasked research assistants to modify those search 
strings to gather appropriate sources. Sample terms for these search strings with variable definitions 
are outlined above. 
Rigor of Sources. Sources’ rigor was also significant in the present study. As this project concerns 
Iranian-backed militias, the authors also included information from Iranian state news media in 
English and Persian. Care was taken to corroborate information in these sources with a second non-
Iranian state media source. If it could not be corroborated, the relationship was coded as “suspected.” 
Sources were also kept or discarded based on general source validity. Additionally, where appropriate, 
a note about the suspected nature of the information was made. Suspected relationships (i.e., 
observations of support between Iranian actors and LH and the militias) are those in which sources 
could not be corroborated or the source indicated the relationship was alleged. In the initial rounds of 
coding, there were more suspected relationships. In the final dataset, not all suspected relationships 
were included. Suspected relationships were removed if that was the only instance wherein the group 
55  Stephen D. Collins, “State-Sponsored T errorism: In Decline, Y et Still a Potent Threat, ” Politics & Policy 42:1 (2014): pp. 135, 150; 
Faruk Ekmekci, “T errorism as War by Other Means: National Security and State Support for T errorism, ” Revista Brasileira de Política 
Internacional 54:1 (2011): pp. 125-141; San-Akca, p. 30.
11
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

and Iran had an existing relationship (of any type). If there was an additional relationship recorded, 
before or after the suspected relationship, that suspected relationship was included, and because of 
the precedent of the connection between the Iranian actor and LH, the nature of the relationship 
was adjusted to confirmed. If there was a precedent for the relationship between Iran and the militia 
group, the researchers felt this lent additional credence to the notion that a relationship exists (and 
therefore is not suspected). 
Some considerations were taken for certain variables. Although more than one source was preferred 
for the data, due to the fine-grained nature of the coding and the groups, oftentimes one source per 
variable was all that was available. This was especially true for certain variables like meetings, logistics, 
and trainings. While this is not ideal, in these instances, the sources’ strength was also considered when 
deciding to keep or remove the coded information. 
Corroborating sources is less important for some types of sources, such as pictures on social media 
depicting meetings where participants can be identified. For example, meeting observations were 
coded from social media posts based on individuals shown in images and mentioned in captions as 
well as the date of the post. Occasionally, no specific date was included with the relevant image or 
described in the article itself. In those cases, the information was stored but not coded. For example, a 
2013 article by Middle East Online published an image of an LAFA leader with the Iranian president.56 
No information on the timeframe of the captured photo was included, and thus, the meeting was not 
coded. 
Use of Interviews. The inclusion of interviews from subject matter experts in academia and policy 
bolstered the findings in this report. Interviews were not used for coding any variables in this study; 
instead, they were conducted after the report’s findings were completed as a way of evaluating and 
adding dimension to those findings. They were used to contextualize trends and the conflict using 
insights not readily available in existing literature. This report does not rely on fieldwork, which may be 
useful in contextualizing the macro-level trends found in this study. However, conducting interviews 
is qualitatively different than engaging in fieldwork. For example, fieldwork may yield insights from 
individuals in government or from those engaged in ground operations countering Iranian proxies. 
Although interviewees may have had some operational expertise, the authors relied primarily on those 
with academic or policy-relevant expertise.  
Section 2.5. Defining the Kinetic and Non-Kinetic Support Framework 
To understand some of the support patterns, it may be useful to employ a parsimonious organizing 
framework. For the purposes of this report, kinetic support consists of materiel and activity relevant to, 
or often used in support of, tactical operations. This includes personnel placement, training, weapons, 
and joint attacks. Non-kinetic support encompasses longer-term support and can be used to enable 
not only operations involving the lethal use of force but also soft-power initiatives, in addition to other 
types of activity. It includes funding, coordination, recruiting, providing social services, and holding 
meetings between Iranian actors and LH and militia members. 
The kinetic and non-kinetic categories can—but do not necessarily—overlap with hard and soft power, 
respectively. Tehran seemingly conflates hard and soft power into a “smart power” approach through 
a combination of both types of measures to further its regional influence.57 However, observing and 
measuring these concepts using open-source research, particularly soft power, can be challenging. 
For this reason, the authors opt to focus on kinetic and non-kinetic support as it is easier to observe 
56  “A Prominent Leader Of Liwa Abu Fadl Al-Abbas, Which is Supported by Iran, is Killed in Syria, ” Middle East Online, July 30, 2017 . 
57  Amin Saikal, Iran Rising: The Survival and Future of the Islamic Republic (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2019), p. 156.
12
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

and measure.  
While these are the parameters utilized in this report, it should be noted that they come with their own 
limitations. First, it is important to note that the authors are aware that without knowing the intended 
purpose behind some supports, such as personnel placement and training, it may be that these types 
of support may not necessarily be kinetic activity. 58 For example, Iran could have sent advisors to 
help proxy groups to enhance their approaches to battlefield or combat trauma. Such support could 
include the physical placement of trainers from Iranian forces in Syria to enhance partner capability 
in that area, for example. Second, there may be some overlap in the kinetic and non-kinetic support 
categories. For example, funding, coordination, and meetings can also affect kinetic objectives. Even 
so, for the purposes of this study, these are categorized as non-kinetic given they can be applicable in 
settings outside of the battlefield. 
Section 2.6. Limitations of Study
The following section outlines several limitations that may exist in this study. 
Use of open sources. This report’s reliance on open sources can yield some potential challenges. First, 
open sources are susceptible to over- and under-reporting. Over-reporting can exist in open sources 
when individuals, events, and/or groups are deemed newsworthy or politically relevant. As such, they 
result in more attention from journalists and analysts alike. By the same token, under-reporting can 
happen when certain entities are not considered as important or journalists do not have access to areas 
due to conflict or other travel restrictions. Additionally, for various reasons, many organizations do 
not wish to advertise their existence and thus strive to make their activity covert. In fact, some groups 
may use aliases to claim attacks or stay covert while achieving their goals.59 Consequently, even if they 
boast a robust operational presence in the Syrian theater, it is difficult to document their activities. 
Shifting allegiances and alliances within and among groups and individuals often make it difficult to 
untangle an organization’s narrative when reviewing primary and secondary open sources. 
Using open sources also can be misleading in the intention or target of support. This is perhaps 
best exemplified with the provision of weapons support. In the dataset, there are several instances 
of Iran providing weapons or weapons-related materiel to proxies operating in Syria, which includes 
both Syrian- and Iraqi-based groups. The authors and research team took great care to only include 
instances where sources explicitly stated specific groups as the recipients of Iranian support. However, 
the muddiness of Iranian weapons proliferation makes this complicated. When Iran provides weapons 
to Iraqi-based groups, for instance, it can be unclear if the weapons are for groups’ use in Iraq, in Syria, 
or being transferred to LH in Syria or Lebanon.60 
The use of open sources also precluded the researchers from accessing material that Iran, Syria, 
or other state actors have chosen not to publicize. This could necessarily include sensitive material 
regarding the Iranian proxy network, including support specifics. Expert interviews were conducted to 
add nuance and detail to the findings in this study, but more in-depth fieldwork, such as interviewing 
various stakeholders, would have been ideal.  
Exclusion of groups that only received support from LH. The inclusion criteria for this study 
included the existence of a demonstrated relationship with Iran. The criteria also excluded groups that 
58  The authors thank Don Rassler for this point.
59  The authors thank Muhammad al-`Ubaydi for this insight.  
60  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021. 
13
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

were only referred to as “Iran-backed” or the like. It also excludes a handful of groups that, according 
to open sources, were reported to have only received support from LH with virtually no demonstrated 
relationship with Iran, such as the Imam Mahdi Brigade or Harakat al-Zain al-Abedin. Like most 
terrorism research, the use of open sources affects this issue. Groups that are only described as being 
backed by LH or as “Iranian-backed” may have a more robust relationship with Iranian entities not 
captured in open sources, and therefore not included in this study. While groups only backed by LH 
are an important subset to investigate, the authors were more interested in understanding trends in 
support for groups with demonstrated Iranian links that were discernable from open sources. Yet, it is 
possible, and arguably even likely, that the exclusion of this subset of groups could change the character 
and/or extent of LH’s impact in Syria. If LH is to be regarded as Iran’s operational partner in Syria (i.e., 
takes directions from Iran but is not involved in decision-making),61 the exclusion of these groups in 
this report can omit an important layer of Iranian proxy support in the country. 
Coding one relationship per variable per year. As previously described, relationships between 
Iran and/or Hezbollah and the Iranian-backed militias are limited to one per variable per year. 
However, data collection at the event-level could have yielded more fine-grained trends. While this 
framework flattens relationships between Iran and militias (i.e., collapses “one relationship” per type 
of support per year) and likely does not reflect the reality of these relationships, the authors found it a 
sufficient compromise given the trade-offs in time and efficiency. One potential downside is the lack 
of attention to magnitude (e.g., number of instances) of certain supports. This can reduce visibility on 
the significance of not only certain support types but also the strength of relationships between certain 
militias and Iranian actors or LH.62  
Annual trends overlook finer trends. Aggregating at the group-year or relationship-year level of 
analysis erases some of the nuance that could be gleaned from weekly, monthly, or even quarterly 
trends. The decision to keep data at the annual level was based on various issues related to open-source 
research that have been previously discussed, including the covert nature of Iranian support in open 
sources.
Not all groups were active for the entire period of study. It is important to note that not all groups 
were active for the entire period, 2011 to 2019. This could affect data reporting and availability in a 
couple of ways. First, groups could have been active for longer than researchers found but not reflected 
as such in the dataset due to under-reporting effects. Similarly, some groups that are more well-known, 
whether due to capabilities and/or newsworthiness, may be over-reported in available sources. 
61  Hanin Ghaddar, “Hezbollah-Iran Dynamics: A Proxy, Not a Partner, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, April 12, 2019; authors’ 
interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021. 
62  The authors thank Don Rassler for his insight regarding this point. 
14
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Chapter 3. Background on Iranian Proxy Involvement in Syria 
This next chapter provides a general review of Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah’s participation in the 
Syrian civil war, both directly and via their creation and support of proxies. While the central focus of 
this report is on the relationship between Iran and the militias it supports in Syria, it is important to 
consider the context of Iran’s activities with the Syrian government and other aspects not evaluated in 
this report. In an effort to assess Iran’s support to proxies in Syria, this background chapter provides, 
in part, a brief historical overview of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s involvement in Syria, which dates 
to the Iran-Iraq War and was further solidified with the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq. 63 This section 
considers the extent of Iranian forces’ (to include Lebanese Hezbollah and Iraqi proxies) involvement 
and supplementary activities in Syria.
Toward that end, it is useful to first review some motivators of Iran’s proxy strategy in Syria64 and 
how asymmetric forces fit into it. Iran’s motivations may be most influenced by: (a) its historical 
relationship with Syrian leadership, (b) Syria’s geopolitical utility for Iranian regional strategy, and (c) 
Tehran’s desire for regional influence. First, Iran has a long-standing relationship with Bashar al-Assad, 
which was initiated when his father was in power.65 Second, and related to the first point, Syria bears 
strategic utility as a crucial link in the land and air bridge connecting Tehran to the Mediterranean.66 
Through Syria, Iran shuttles weapons and other resources to Lebanon and Palestine. 67 Finally, by 
maintaining a foothold in Syria, Iran seeks to quell external influence, be it Israeli, American, or—at 
times—Russian. 68
Working with proxies is a method by which Iran can accomplish its goals in Syria (discussed more in 
the next subsection). Bolstering proxies in Syria—ranging from raising militias to moving militant 
groups from nearby Lebanon and Iraq—provides an opportunity for Iran to consolidate or expand 
its influence into Syria politically, militarily, and culturally.69 Iran’s proxy activities are part and parcel 
of its broader military and national security strategy.70 Yet, much of its military activity is appended 
with cultural and other soft-power initiatives through religious and educational institutions, relief aid, 
and related activities. While often discussed separately, hard and soft power practices are not easily 
disentangled as they mutually reinforce one another. Syria is an excellent case in which to study the 
multidimensional approach Tehran takes to engrain its influence—whether security-related, political, 
or sociocultural. 
Section 3.1. Brief Historical Overview of Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah’s Involvement in Syria
The Islamic Republic of Iran and Syria have a well-established relationship that dates back to the 
1980s, when the two states shared consulates and general political cooperation.71 During the Iran-
63  Ali Soufan, “Qassem Soleimani and Iran’s Unique Regional Strategy, ” CTC Sentinel 11:10 (2018).
64  For an overview of Iranian proxy strategy in Syria, see Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East and Hassan Ahmadian and 
Payam Mohseni, “Iran’s Syria strategy: the evolution of deterrence, ” International Affairs 95:2 (2019): pp. 341-364.
65  Afshon Ostovar, “Iran, Its Clients, and the Future of the Middle East: the Limits of Religion, ” International Affairs 94:6 (2018): p. 1,252.
66  David Adesnik and Behnam Ben T aleblu, “Burning Bridge: The Iranian Land Corridor to the Mediterranean, ” Foundation for the 
Defense of Democracies, June 18, 2019; Abedin, p. 135. 
67  Adesnik and T aleblu.
68  Soufan; Karim Sadjadpour, “Iran’s Unwavering Support to Assad’s Syria, ” CTC Sentinel 6:8 (2013). For more on Iran’s relationship 
with Russia, see John W . Parker, “Between Russia and Iran: Room to Pursue American Interests in Syria, ” Institute for National 
Strategic Studies, January 2019.
69  Ahmadian and Mohseni.
70  Ostovar, “The Grand Strategy of Militant Clients. ”
71  Kamal Alam, “The View from Damascus, ” in T abrizi and Pantucci eds., Understanding Iran’s Role in the Syrian Conflict, pp. 12-14.
15
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Iraq War, the two countries had a primarily tactical relationship.72 According to Ali Soufan, Hafez 
al-Assad closed a crucial oil pipeline to weaken Iraq during the war.73 Over time, their partnership 
became more pronounced for various geopolitical and strategic reasons, including countering Israeli 
influence, Saddam’s Iraq, and the United States’ presence in the region after the 2003 invasion of 
Iraq.74 In many ways, Syria is central to Iranian national security, particularly as an Arab ally, of 
which Iran has few.75 In the decade or so before the Syrian civil war, Iran had a foothold in Syria. The 
two countries traded, but Iran was not Syria’s main importer or exporter of goods.76 In the aftermath 
of Saddam’s government, Iran and Syria had differing opinions about the best form of government 
for Baghdad.77 Even so, both were wary of the United States’ growing reach in the region.78 Syria, as 
an Arab ally, had and continues to have multifold benefits for Iran vis-à-vis influence in and access 
to Lebanon79 and balancing against Israel.80 Notably, in Syria, Iran found an opportunity to export 
its religious ideology. While Assad’s family and the political elite in Syria are Alawite, an offshoot 
of the Ja’afari Shi`a of Iran, Iraq, and other countries, the Syrian government was sympathetic to a 
secular approach.81 Assad’s—and the Alawites community’s—rapport with Iran did not extend to other 
religious and political groups in Syria.82 Even the Alawite ruling class purposely separates itself from 
Shi`ism broadly and the Iranian variant specifically.83 As a Baathist regime, which includes Christians 
and Marxists in its ranks, the Assad government follows secular Arab nationalism, which puts it at 
odds with Iran’s fundamentalist worldview.84 However, because of Assad’s need for Iranian support 
in the early days of the civil war, Iran had opportunities to entrench itself religiously and culturally in 
Syria through religious schools and institutions, among other vehicles.85 Iran was also able to promote 
the narrative that culturally significant Shi`a religious institutions, such as the Shrine of Sayyeda 
Zainab and Shrine of Sayyida Ruqayya in Damascus, were vulnerable to attack. After salafi-jihadi 
groups moved to attack Shi`a shrines, Iran was able to use the narrative of a sectarian conflict to enlist 
foreign recruits.86 The upheaval helped justify Tehran’s presence and mobilize fighters.87 Iran has also 
72  Nakissa Jahanbani, “Beyond Soleimani: Implications for Iran’s Proxy Network in Iraq and Syria, ” Combating T errorism Center 
Perspectives, January 10, 2020.
73  Soufan.
74  Daniel Byman, “Syria and Iran: What’s Behind the Enduring Alliance, ” Brookings Institution, July 19, 2006; Abedin, p. 127; Alam, pp. 
12-13; T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 277 . 
75  Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, p. 205; T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 277; Abedin, p. 130.
76  Alam, p. 15.
77  Ibid., p. 13.
78  Jubin Goodarzi, “Iran and Syria, ” United States Institute of Peace, October 11, 2010; T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 277; 
Soufan.
79  Abedin, p. 135; T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 277; Adesnik and T aleblu.
80  Nader Uskowi, “The Evolving Iranian Strategy in Syria: A Looming Conflict with Israel, ” Issue Brief, Atlantic Council, Scowcroft Center 
for Strategy and Security, September 2018, p. 1; Diane Zorri, Houman Sadri, and David Ellis,  Iranian Proxy Groups in Iraq, Syria, and 
Y emen: A Principal-Agent Comparative Analysis (MacDill Air Force Base, FL: JSOU Press, 2020), p. 53.
81  The authors thank Muhammad al-`Ubaydi for his insight regarding this point. For more information, see Diana Darke, “Is Bashar 
Al-Assad Really the Guardian Angel of Syria’s Minorities?” Middle East Institute, April 12, 2021; Joumanah El Matrah, Hidayet Ceylan, 
Asha Bedar, and Sheikh Abraham Isa Ibrahim; “Introduction to Muslim Diversity: Alawite & Alevi T raditions, ” Australian Muslim 
Women’s Centre for Human Rights, 2014.
82  Zorri, Sadri, and Ellis, p. 53.
83  Ibid., p. 57 .
84  Ibid., pp. 53-54, 57 .
85  The authors thank Muhammad al-`Ubaydi for his insight regarding this point. For more information, see Anchal V ohra, “Iran Is T rying 
to Convert Syria to Shiism, ” Foreign Policy, March 15, 2021; Nakissa Jahanbani, Oula A. Alrifai, and Mehdi Khalaji, “Iran’s Long Game in 
Syria, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, March 29, 2021.
86  Saeid Golkar and Kasra Aarabi, “The View From T ehran: Iran’s Militia Doctrine, ” T ony Blair Institute for Global Change, February 2021, 
p. 42.
87  Authors’ interview, Oula Alrifai, May 2021; authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021.
16
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

leveraged its participation in pro-Assad military campaigns to cement access to regime-controlled 
areas in western Syria to use as coordinating bases for the IRGC and its proxies.88
Like Iran, Lebanese Hezbollah (LH) has a long-standing relationship with the Syrian government, 
which was strengthened during Hafez al-Assad’s rule.89 Both father and son worked with the Lebanese 
organization: LH assisted Syria in realizing its goals in Lebanon, and Damascus helped supply the 
group militarily.90 Relatedly, Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah “shared almost identical political and 
military objectives” in Syria, which, in addition to defending the Assad regime, included securing 
the border with Lebanon, Shi`a communities, and existing logistical and supply routes within the 
country, as well as developing a network of proxies inside Syria.91 Despite LH’s own motivations for 
intervening in Syria, there was likely a high level of coordination between Hezbollah’s leadership and 
the government in Iran.92 In Syria, LH was playing the role of an intermediary between Farsi-speaking 
elements and Arabic-speaking Syrian forces—including proxies.93
Iran had multifold incentives to be involved in Syria. In part, Tehran was potentially excited by the 
prospects of secular, Western-sympathetic governments collapsing during the Arab Spring. 94 In 
September 2012, international players were hedging bets on when Assad would fall, and Iran was likely 
concerned about this development.95 Assad did not have enough ground troops to launch an offensive 
and instead concentrated on a defensive strategy to hold strategically important areas such as the 
coastal and Christian areas.96 According to Ali Alfoneh, “The perceived threat to survival of the Baath 
regime in Syria motivated the Islamic Republic’s reactivation of dormant proxies and mobilization of 
new proxy groups.”97 In late 2012, Iran became directly involved on the ground. Iran’s presence likely 
contributed to a shift in Syrian strategy, as Assad had an influx of resources to dedicate to recapturing 
Homs, which was under siege at the time and necessary to maintaining continuity between the coastal 
areas and Damascus. 98 Toward this, LH was a decisive factor in taking back Homs. 99 Meanwhile, 
Iran mobilized other militias to reinforce areas around Damascus, using the religious narrative of 
protecting Shi`a shrines to do so.100 
Despite this, Iran did not publicly jump to Assad’s aid from the onset of the conflict. In fact, the Iranian 
government was seemingly surprised by the outbreak of protests in Syria in March 2011 and remained 
quiet about the unrest at first.101 There was also some disagreement among Iranian politicians about 
the necessary extent of Iran’s involvement in Syria, given the unpopularity of intervention among the 
88  Carole A. O’Leary and Nicholas A. Heras, “Political Strategy in Unconventional Warfare: Opportunities Lost in Eastern Syria and 
Preparing for the Future, ” Joint Special Operations University, March 2019, p. 64.
89  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 86. 
90  Ibid., p. 86. 
91  Ibid., p. 88. 
92  Authors’ interview, Afshon Ostovar, June 2021. 
93  Authors’ interview, Fred Kagan, June 2021. 
94  Abedin, pp. 135-137 . More notably, Iran framed the events of the Arab Spring as an “Islamist awakening” and a “natural extension of 
the Iranian Islamic Revolution. ” See Abedin, p. 136.
95  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021. 
96  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021; Zorri, Sadri, and Ellis, pp. 54-57 . 
97  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021. 
98  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021.
99  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021.
100  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021.
101  Abedin, pp. 135-137 .
17
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Iranian public and the reputational and physical costs of assisting Assad.102 Some in Rouhani’s circle 
questioned the extent of Iran’s intervention in Syria, but this debate was quashed quickly by supporters 
of the “Axis of Resistance” narrative.103 
In contrast, LH was operational in Syria in the early days of the civil war.104 Some sources report LH 
fatalities in 2011. 105 In the early years of the conflict, LH did not announce its role in Syria, even 
when Iranian leaders began admitting to their involvement, and the delay in acknowledging LH’s 
involvement was due in part to the domestic political reception in Lebanon.106 At the onset, LH justified 
its involvement as ideological—“a necessity to protect Lebanon’s borders, Shi`a villages, and Shi`a 
shrines in Damascus.”107 This notion quickly unraveled with LH’s deployment to the Battle of Aleppo in 
2015, “a shrine-less non-Shi`a city far from the Lebanese border.”108 With LH, Iran instituted a “train-
the-trainer” model, which permitted Iran to remove itself “another degree from the network’s activities 
and thus to lower their costs.”109 LH’s prior experience and activities provided groups with more “know 
how” that, if effective, was able to “produce highly elite, specialized hybrid units capable of fighting 
both state and non-state actors at a lower cost for Iran.”110 However, as a result of and over the course 
of the conflict, LH’s need to fill its ranks led to less ideological training overall for its fighters, according 
to Hanin Ghaddar, who outlines that LH fighters in Syria could be categorized into two groups: (1) one 
of seasoned commanders and fighters, and (2) two new groups of fast recruits and contractors.111 The 
former were LH elites who had fought in 2006 or were recruited in the conflict’s aftermath as full-time 
fighters; they had ideological and military training from LH.112 The latter group of fast recruits received 
military training but not the same level of ideological indoctrination.113 Consequently, they were not 
as well trained as the seasoned fighters and less ideologically oriented; they were mostly deployed as 
foot soldiers.114 Finally, contractors signed a contract for one to two years, mainly motivated by salary 
and not ideology.115  
Iran—notably the IRGC—advised Assad about suppressing the initial protests and managing warfare 
propaganda earlier in 2011.116 LH also assisted the Assad regime in quelling uprisings in the early days 
102  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 278. 
103  Authors’ interview, Alex Vatanka, June 2021. Here, the “Axis of Resistance” refers to both a narrative and a group of actors. 
Immediately after the Islamic Revolution in 1979, the concept of an “Axis of Resistance” had not yet materialized; rather, it existed 
as a rhetorical goal for the new Iranian regime through which to exert regional influence and challenge the regional status quo. In 
recent years, this rhetorical goal has morphed into a tangible collection of state and non-state actors including but not limited to LH, 
Iranian-backed militias in Iraq, the Houthis, and several Palestinian armed groups. In addition to evolving into an actual collection of 
actors, the “Axis of Resistance” is increasingly benefiting from more overt Iranian involvement in the way of military deployments 
and joint military campaigns. This type of support marks a shift from Iran’s prior, less direct support in the way of “covert collusion” 
and “rhetorical support. ” For more information, see Kenneth M. Pollack, “The Evolution of the Revolution: The Changing Nature of 
Iran’s Axis of Resistance, ” American Enterprise Institute, March 2020.
104  Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 216-218. 
105  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 87 .
106  Ibid., pp. 86-87 . 
107  Ghaddar, “Hezbollah-Iran Dynamics: A Proxy, Not a Partner. ”
108  Ibid.
109  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 291. 
110  Ibid., p. 291.
111  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021.
112  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021.
113  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021.
114  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021.
115  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021.
116  Ali Alfoneh and Michael Eisenstadt, “Iranian Casualties in Syria and the Strategic Logic of Intervention, ” Washington Institute for 
Near East Policy, March 11, 2016; Abedin, pp. 137-138.
18
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

of the Syrian civil war.117 In the summer of 2011, Iranian leadership determined that the unrest and 
armed rebellion could possibly topple the Syrian government.118 At this time, Iran began shifting to 
a more active role after dedicating substantial resources, including the deployment of the IRGC-QF, 
even though it was reported that they did not engage in combat until early 2012. 119 While Tehran 
acknowledged its first fatality in January 2012, as the Syrian civil war progressed, their losses became 
“undeniable.”120 
117  Claire Parker and Rick Noack, “Iran has invested in allies and proxies across the Middle East. Here’s where they stand after 
Soleimani’s death, ” Washington Post, January 3, 2020.
118  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 277-279; Abedin, p. 137 .
119  Abedin, p. 138; Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
120  Alfoneh and Eisenstadt. For additional sources, see Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East and Nada.
19
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

 Figure 3.1 Timeline of Major Iranian Support-Related Events During the Syrian Civil War, 
2011-2020
20
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
March 
2011
Unrest 
in Syria.
2011
LH operational in 
Syria, assists in 
suppressing 
uprising.
Summer 2011
Iran concludes 
Assad could fall, 
deployed 
IRGC-QF.
January 2012
IRGC-QF engages in 
combat, 
acknowledges first 
fatality.
2012
Iran establishes 
Fatemiyoun and
Zeinabiyoun 
Brigades.
Late 2012
Iran sends advisors and 
militias to reinforce 
areas around 
Damascus, using the 
religious narrative of 
protecting the Shi`a 
shrines. 
2013
Open-source data shows 
that Iranian-backed Iraqi 
proxies were launching 
attacks in Syria. Salafi-
jihadist groups started 
perpetrating attacks 
against Shi`a shrines. 
2014
Iran forces deploy to 
assist Iraq in fight 
against Islamic State. 
Iran and LH establish 
the National Defense 
Forces. 
2011-2013 
Iran sends various forces, including the Artesh and the 
IRGC’s Ground Forces, to advise, support, and train Syrian 
forces.
2014-2015
IRGC-Basij forces move into Syria. 
2015
Iran loses several IRGC high-
ranking officials. Increases 
recruitment support to proxies in 
Syria to bolster ranks.
2015
Iran is concerned about 
weakening of Assad’s 
regime. Russian 
intervention in fall. 
IRGC-Ground Forces and 
IRGC-QF fighters 
increase the intensity of 
operations in and 
around Aleppo. Overall 
surge of Iranian forces, 
with a high causality 
rate. 
2015-2017
Iranian kinetic proxy support peaks. 
February 
2016
Regular 
Iranian army 
fighters in 
advising roles.
2016
Local Defense Forces 
launched. In May, large 
losses for Iranian-backed 
forces are followed by 
reduced deployments of 
IRGC-Ground Forces to 
Damascus.
2014-2018
Iranian non-kinetic proxy support peaks. 
2018
Iran participates in 
reconstruction 
convention in Syria, 
“Rebuild Syria.” Syrian 
regime naturalizes 
large number of 
Iranians and fighters 
from Iranian proxies. 
2019
Reports 
indicate a 
little over 
1,600 
Hezbollah 
fighters were 
killed over 
the course of 
the Syrian 
conflict. Iran 
participates 
in “Rebuild 
Syria.”
2020
LH and Iranian-backed militias 
sustain losses into 2020. Iran 
and Syria agree to share 
scientific and other academic 
knowledge. Iran pledges to 
assist in rebuilding Syrian 
schools. 
2017
Iran announces 
defeat of Islamic 
State. US airstrike 
against Iranian 
proxies in Homs. 

Between 2011 and the beginning of 2013, as tensions mounted between Assad and anti-Assad factions, 
Iran also sent various forces, including its military, or Artesh, as well as the IRGC’s Ground Forces and 
its Law Enforcement Force to advise the Syrian government and train and support the Syrian army.121 
This was the first time since the Iran-Iraq War that IRGC and Artesh soldiers fought side by side; as the 
conflict progressed, it was evident that the IRGC was the primary force and had some influence over 
the Artesh’s actions.122 The deployment of the Artesh added legitimacy to Iran’s intervention in Syria.123  
Qassem Soleimani, then-commander of the Quds Force and architect of Iran’s regional strategy,124 
potentially saw the Syrian civil war as a chance to enhance Iran’s position and agenda in the region.125 
Over time, Iran was able to use the growing power of jihadi groups in Syria to cultivate a religious 
narrative to further justify its intervention to the Iranian public.126 In the spring of 2013, salafi-jihadi 
groups started perpetrating attacks against Shi`a shrines. Consequently, Iran was able to frame 
defending Assad’s regime as a quest to protect Shi`a shrines against a sectarian enemy.127 This narrative 
was one of the reasons Iran was so successful in recruiting foreign fighters.128 The Fatemiyoun and 
Zeinabiyoun Brigades were involved in the early years of the conflict, likely motivated by Iranian losses 
earlier in the conflict.129 This diversification of forces was a common tactic. Between 2014 and 2015, 
Iran siphoned forces from the domestic-facing IRGC-Basij into Syria, perhaps to compensate for its 
continued entrenchment and losses.130 Specifically, the Basij’s Imam Hossein Battalions sustained 
significant losses in Syria during this time. 131 In 2014, the same year the United States intervened 
in Syria, Iran was likely feeling the pressures of being spread too thin, as Iranian forces were also 
deployed to assist Iraqi troops in retaking Tikrit from the Islamic State.132
By 2015, Iran had suffered the losses of several senior IRGC commanders, and two generals.133 Tehran 
coordinated a substantial recruitment drive in 2015 to bolster its ranks in Syria.134 By that summer, 
Iran once again became concerned about a weakening Assad regime and military following a series of 
battlefield setbacks in northwest Syria.135 Russia intervened in Syria in the fall of 2015, reportedly with 
some maneuvering from Soleimani.136 Concurrently, in late 2015, Iran coordinated a surge of forces 
121  Ansari and T abrizi p. 4; “Appendix: Timeline of Milestones in Iran’s Engagement in the Syrian Civil War, ” in T abrizi and Pantucci eds., 
Understanding Iran’s Role in the Syrian Conflict, p. 51; Abedin, pp. 138-139; Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, “Chapter 
One: T ehran’s Strategic Intent;” Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 205-213.
122  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 280. 
123  Ibid., p. 280.
124  Soufan.
125  Abedin, p. 148.
126  Ibid., pp. 141, 138; Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, p. 205; T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 278-279. 
127  Golkar and Aarabi, p. 42.
128  Abedin, pp. 148-149. 
129  Soufan; Ariane M. T abatabai, “After Soleimani: What’s Next for Iran’s Quds Force?” CTC Sentinel 13:1 (2020); T oumaj, Rondeaux, and 
Ammar, pp. 34-37 .
130  Frederick W . Kagan and Paul Bucala, “Iran’s evolving way of war: How the IRGC fights in Syria, ” American Enterprise Institute, March 
2016; Donovan, Carl, and Kagan; Kristin Dailey, “Iran Has More V olunteers for the Syrian War Than It Knows What to Do With, ” Foreign 
Policy, May 12, 2016; Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 210-213. 
131  Kagan and Bucala; Donovan, Carl, and Kagan, p. 6.
132  Helene Cooper and Eric Schmitt, “Airstrikes by U.S. and Allies Hit ISIS T argets in Syria, ” New Y ork Times, September 22, 2014; Farnaz 
Fassihi, “Iran Deploys Forces to Fight al Qaeda-Inspired Militants in Iraq, ” Wall Street Journal, June 12, 2014.
133  Nada.
134  Nabih Bulos, “Why Iraqis are fighting in Syria; Shiite militiamen see the civil war next door as another front in their own battle with 
Islamic State, ” Los Angeles Times, October 16, 2016. 
135  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 92; Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
136  Alfoneh and Eisenstadt; Soufan.
21
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

to Syria,137 but was able to retract them several months later, due to Russia’s intervention.138 During 
this time, “160 Iranians were reportedly killed and 300 wounded during this brief deployment–a 
remarkably high casualty rate of roughly 5 percent per month.”139 With Russia providing air support, 
pro-Assad forces—including Iran and related proxies—worked to consolidate control over crucial 
highways between Aleppo and Damascus, an endeavor that constituted most of the 2015-2017 strategy 
for the pro-Assad camp.140 In late 2015, IRGC-Ground and Quds Force fighters increased the intensity 
of operations in and around Aleppo, which may have contributed to higher casualty rates for their 
fighters.141 Iran diversified forces after additional losses in 2015, announcing the deployment of regular 
Iranian army fighters in advising roles to Syria in February 2016.142 
The year 2016 also marked the first time Ankara put troops on the ground in Syria, given the increased 
threat on Turkey’s eastern and southern borders.143 As a direct competitor to its interests in the country, 
Iran likely took Turkey’s intervention seriously.144 Devastating losses for Iranian-backed forces in May 
2016 were followed by reduced deployments of the IRGC Ground Forces to Damascus.145 In December 
2016, Assad, backed by Russian airstrikes and Iranian-backed militias, took back Aleppo.146 In the 
weeks before the Astana talks started in Kazakhstan, Russia and Turkey brokered a ceasefire between 
rebels and Assad’s government on December 30.147
137  According to Alfoneh and Eisenstadt, at this time, Iran had allegedly sent some 700 fighters from the IRGC-Quds Force and Ground 
Forces as well as 4,000-5,000 LH fighters. Iran deployed a “surge” of up to 2,500 IRGC troops to Syria in September 2015.
138  Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
139  Ibid.
140  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021. 
141  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, “Chapter One: T ehran’s Strategic Intent;” Nicholas Hargreaves-Heald, “Proving 
Ground: Iran’s Operational Strategy in Syria, ” Small Wars Journal, May 27 , 2018. 
142  Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
143  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021; Francesco Siccardi, “How Syria Changed T urkey’s Foreign Policy, ” Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, September 14, 2021.  
144  Authors’ interview, Colin Clarke, June 2021. 
145  Donovan, Carl, and Kagan, p. 4.
146  “Syria profile – Timeline, ” BBC, January 14, 2019; Amir T oumaj, “Array of pro-Syrian government forces advances in Aleppo, ” FDD’s 
Long War Journal, December 9, 2016; “Syria’s government recaptures all of Aleppo city, ” Al Jazeera, December 22, 2016.
147  Mona Y acoubian, “Syria Timeline: Since the Uprising Against Assad, ” United States Institute of Peace, January 1, 2021; Shaun Walker 
and Kareem Shaheen, “Syria ceasefire appears to hold after rivals sign Russia-backed deal, ” Guardian, December 30, 2016.
22
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Image 1: This image, picturing late IRGC-Quds Force commander 
Major General Qassem Soleimani was shared on the Al-Nujaba Satellite 
Channel’s Telegram account on September 6, 2016, under its 
“Military Media” segment.148 
On the heels of the ceasefire, Russia, Iran, and Turkey initiated the Astana peace talks149 in January 
2017.150 In May, the United States struck Iranian proxies that were encroaching on a de-confliction 
zone near al-Tanf garrison in Homs province.151 Specifically, reports indicated the pro-Iranian forces 
were there to solidify a link in supply routes between Iraq and Syria, a claim that was further bolstered 
when multiple Iranian-made drones were shot down around al-Tanf in June 2017. 152 Pro-Assad 
forces, including Iranian and Iranian-backed ones, had some successful campaigns in 2017, including 
recapturing Palmyra in March and the November capture of Al Bukamal from the Islamic State, the 
latter of which was widely publicized on Axis of Resistance-affiliated media.153 In November, Rouhani 
announced the defeat of the Islamic State.154 
148  T ranslation of caption in graphic: “The Commander Qassem Suleimani inspects different groups of the Islamic Resistance Harakat 
al-Nujaba / Southern Aleppo Suburbs. ”
149  The Astana talks, sponsored by Iran, Russia, and T urkey, ran parallel to the U.S.-sponsored Geneva talks and were intended to 
complement those in Switzerland. The Geneva talks started in 2012 while the Astana process started in 2017 and continue into 2021. 
For a useful overview of both talks until 2017 , see “Syria diplomatic talks: A timeline, ” Al Jazeera, September 15, 2017 . For information 
about Astana talks in 2021, see Josephine Joly, “Astana Peace process: 17th round of talks on Syria begin in Kazakhstan, ” Euro News, 
December 12, 2021.
150  “Syria profile – Timeline;” Y acoubian; “Syria: the Astana peace process, ” France 24, May 9, 2018.
151  Martin Chulov, “US jets attack Iran-backed militiamen in south-eastern Syria, ” Guardian, May 19, 2017 .
152  Julian Borger, “US shoots down second Iran-made armed drone over Syria in 12 days, ” Guardian, June 20, 2017; Ahmad Majidyar, 
“Iranian-Backed Forces Advancing to Southeast Syria despite U.S. Warning, ” Middle East Institute, May 24, 2017; “Al- T anf, Syria, ” 
International Crisis Group, February 3, 2022.
153  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 101; Suleiman Al-Khalidi, “Iranian-backed militias routed in last Syrian militant 
stronghold, ” Reuters, November 12, 2017 .
154  Jamal, p. 6; Sam Meredith, “Iran President Rouhani declares end of Islamic State, ” CNBC, November 21, 2017 .
23
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Despite announcing victory against the Islamic State, Iran continued to be present in Syria in 2018 
and 2019. Throughout 2018, Iran and Israel exchanged attacks on each other’s military targets. 155 
Iran, Russia, and Turkey met on several occasions in 2018 and 2019 to discuss the final front in 
Idlib province.156 Iran’s oil sales to Syria were also spotlighted and sanctioned in 2018 and 2019.157 
Concurrently, Iran also continued its involvement in various non-military initiatives. In both 2018 
and 2019, Tehran participated in a Syrian reconstruction convention, and in 2018, Iran promised to 
build houses near Damascus.158
Section 3.2. Utility of Working with Proxy Militias in Syria 
Although Iran had deployed a substantial number of its own forces, including the Artesh and IRGC, 
it also backed dozens of proxies in Syria. For Iran, working with militant non-state actors has several 
advantages and is a mainstay of its grand strategy. According to Afshon Ostovar, militant clients offer 
Iran five benefits: (1) maintaining independence from foreign powers, (2) exporting its worldview to 
Shi`a kin outside Iran, (3) extending military reach and countering adversaries while maintaining 
some deniability, (4) reducing audience costs of foreign intervention, and (5) partially resolving Iran’s 
need for allies.159 To these, Ariane Tabatabai has added: lowering the material and reputational costs 
of defeat.160 In the context of Syria in particular, proxies offered a more cost-efficient means for Iran 
to achieve its goals in Syria. Yet, Iran “did not have a sufficient population to form domestic agents; 
it had to manufacture them.”161 Outsourcing fighters through proxies insulates Iran from the toll of 
losing people.162 Had Tehran sent in comparable numbers of Iranian forces, the operational, human, 
and reputational cost would have likely been too high.163 In comparison to sending only Iranian forces, 
it was more efficient for Tehran to raise and/or bolster local militias or train and send non-Iranian 
soldiers.164 
While little is known about proxies’ cost to Tehran, sources indicate between $5 to over $15 billion 
to support Assad’s government annually, some of which covers support to proxies. 165 While illicit 
fundraising—such as through oil and narcotics sales, among others—is a backbone of the IRGC’s 
economic activities, it is unclear to what extent these avenues fund militias.166 Iran also likely funds 
groups through oil sales. In November 2018, the U.S. Department of Treasury sanctioned several 
individuals and entities for providing Iranian oil to the Syrian government, seemingly via Russian 
155  Y acoubian.
156  “The Latest: Iran, Russia, T urkey presidents meet in summit, ” Associated Press, September 7 , 2018; Vladimir Soldatkin, T uvan 
Gumrukcu, and Ece T oksabay, “T urkey, Russia, Iran agree steps to ease tensions in Syria’s Idlib despite lingering differences, ” 
Reuters, September 16, 2019.
157  For example, see “U.S. Sanctions Network Supporting Assad, Hezbollah and Hamas, ” The Iran Primer, United States Institute of 
Peace, November 27 , 2018; “Disputed Iranian tanker Adrian Darya I photographed in Syrian port, ” T elegraph, September 7 , 2019.
158  Oula A. Alrifai, “The ‘Rebuild Syria’ Exhibition: Iranian Influence and U.S. Sanctions, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 
September 17 , 2019; Oula Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology: Iran’s Religious and Socioeconomic Activities in Syria, ” Washington 
Institute for Near East Policy, March 14, 2021.
159  Ostovar, “Grand Strategy of Militant Clients. ” 
160  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 290. 
161  Zorri, Sadri, and Ellis, pp. 53-54.
162  Authors’ interview, Afshon Ostovar, June 2021. 
163  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 277-281, 290. 
164  Ibid., p. 280. 
165  Abedin, p. 151; David Adesnik, “Iran Spends $16 Billion Annually to Support T errorists and Rogue Regimes, ” Foundation for Defense 
of Democracies, January 10, 2018; Seth J. Frantzman, “Could Syria become Iran’s ‘Vietnam’?” Jerusalem Post, December 15, 2019; 
Y aghoub Fazeli, “Iran has spent $30 billion in Syria: Prominent MP , ” Al Arabiya, May 20, 2020. 
166  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 269-270. 
24
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

government subsidiaries that went on to fund proxies’ activities in the region. 167Another source 
indicates that Iran also fundraises for proxies through donations from IRGC offices in Iran.168 While 
costs are important, these estimates may be offset by “potential financial gains, as Iran is now in a 
strong position to demand economic and commercial concessions from the Syrian government.”169 
In addition to the financial cost of proxies, Iran’s involvement in Syria has also had a domestic 
cost. At various points in the civil war, Iranian politicians and the domestic public voiced concerns 
about Tehran in Syria and its backing of militias specifically. For example, in 2013, after Rouhani’s 
presidential victory, government officials indicated concern about involvement in Syria, which “could 
prove deleterious to Iran’s financial and ideological capital.”170 Their stance, however, was not favored 
by the Supreme Leader and the IRGC, who worked to quiet this camp while cultivating and spreading 
a national narrative about religious resistance. 171 Later in the conflict, in 2018 and 2019, protests 
erupted in Iranian cities over Tehran’s involvement, calling for Iran’s withdrawal from not only Syria 
but Lebanon and Palestinian territories as well.172 
Like Iran, Hezbollah’s activities in the Syrian civil war have also come at a cost. Some analysts attest 
that Hezbollah’s losses have been considerable but were concealed in large part to quell domestic 
backlash.173 Tracking LH losses throughout the conflict is difficult, as the group has incentives to 
downplay the numbers.174 Seth Jones stated in June 2018 that, “estimates range from several hundred 
to several thousand Hezbollah fighters killed, with the most likely estimates between 1,000 and 2,000 
dead.”175 Other accounts of LH fatalities are consistent with these numbers.176 In 2019, it was reported 
a little over 1,600 Hezbollah fighters were killed in Syria.177 Throughout the conflict, LH’s losses in 
Syria affected Hezbollah’s popularity in Lebanon as well as among Shi`a communities in Syria. 178 
More recently, losses have fomented episodes of unrest among the LH’s support base.179 Both LH and 
Iranian-backed militias sustained losses into 2020.180 
Directing Iraq-Based Militias to Syria. Iran also directed some Iraqi militias to Syria as well, 
167  The funds from this specific instance also reportedly funded Hamas’ activities. For more information, see “U.S. Sanctions Network 
Supporting Assad, Hezbollah and Hamas. ”
168  Adnan Ali, “Syria: the new ‘Fatemiyoun Brigade’ for the battle of the south [ Sooriyeh: ‘Liwa al-Fatemiyon’ jadid mahrkt al-jonoob] ,”  
Al-Araby, February 14, 2015.
169  Abedin, p. 151.
170  Ansari and T abrizi, p. 3.
171  Ibid., p. 3; Abedin, pp. 148-149.
172  Adesnik; Ali Fathollah-Nejad, “Iranians respond to the regime: ‘Leave Syria alone!’” Al Jazeera, May 2, 2018; Faris al-Omran and 
Waleed Abu al-Khair, “Protests rage against Iran’s influence in Syria, ” Diyaruna, December 19, 2019. 
173  Nohad T opalian, “Hizbullah’s human losses in Syria anger base, ” Al-Mashareq, February 14, 2020; Ali Alfoneh, “Hezbollah’s Balancing 
Act Between Syria and Lebanon, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, April 12, 2017 .
174  Ali Alfoneh, “Hezbollah Fatalities in the Syrian War, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, February 22, 2016.
175  Jones, “The Escalating Conflict with Hezbollah in Syria;” Colin P . Clarke, “A Glass Half Empty? T aking Stock of Hezbollah’s Losses in 
Syria, ” Jerusalem Post, October 15, 2017 .
176  Alfoneh, “Hezbollah’s Balancing Act Between Syria and Lebanon;” Jeffrey White, “Hizb Allah at War in Syria: Forces, Operations, 
Effects and Implications, ” CTC Sentinel 7:1 (2014); Clarke, “A Glass Half Empty?”
177  “Exclusive: Hezbollah’s Gains from Syria War Equal Its Losses, ” Asharq al-Awsat, January 12, 2019.
178  Ibid.
179  T opalian, “Hizbullah’s human losses in Syria anger base. ”
180  Joe T ruzman, “Hezbollah and Iranian-backed militias suffer heavy losses fighting in Syria, ” FDD’s Long War Journal, February 5, 2020.
25
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

including Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq and Harakat al-Nujaba, among others.181 Available open-source data 
shows that Iranian-backed Iraqi proxies were launching attacks in Syria as early as 2013, but their 
involvement dated to the previous year. 182 In 2012 and 2013, various Iranian-backed Iraqi groups 
moved forces into Syria,183 initially referred to as the Haydari Force or the Haydariyoun.184 The moniker 
collectively described the fighters from Kata’ib Hezbollah, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, and Kata’ib Sayyid al-
Shuhada (KSS).185
Image 2: This image was sent on the Kata’ib Sayed al-Shuhada (KSS) 
Telegram channel on December 11, 2017, featuring Qassem Soleimani 
(middle) and KSS Secretary General Abu Alaa al-Wala’i (right).
Iranian-backed Iraqi militias were a critical part of Tehran’s strategy in Syria. Iraqi groups’ involvement 
in the Syrian conflict—and against the Islamic State in Iraq—considerably bolstered their capabilities 
and clout.186 Michael Knights remarked that the Iraqi Special Groups transformed militarily—both in 
181  Nakissa Jahanbani, “Reviewing Iran’s Proxies by Region: A Look T oward the Middle East, South Asia, and Africa, ” CTC Sentinel 13:5 
(2020); Michael Knights, “Iran’s Expanding Militia Army in Iraq: The New Special Groups, ” CTC Sentinel 12:7 (2019). For an example 
of reference to the Haydariyoun in Iranian media, see “ Ravayat-e aghab randan takfiri-ha az 500 metri haram hazrat-e zeinab (s) + 
film [The Story of Pushing Back T akfiris 500 Meters from the Shrine of Hazrat Zainab (with Film)], ” Defa Press, November 2, 2020.
182  Jahanbani, “Reviewing Iran’s Proxies by Region. ”
183  Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 216-218; Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “The Return of Iraqi Shi’i Militias to Syria, ” Middle East 
Institute, March 16, 2015. 
184  Knights, “Back into the Shadows?;” Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “The Life of Karar Abd al-Amir al-Shahmani: An Early Iraqi ‘Martyr’ 
in Syria, ” aymennjawad.org, April 17 , 2019. For an example of the Heydariyoun’s discussion in Iranian media, see “ Hadaf-e doshman 
tabdil-e mosul va halab be mahal-e hamleh be marzehaye iran bud [The Enemy’s Goal was to Use Mosul and Aleppo in to Get Closer 
to Iranian Borders], ” Defa Press, January 13, 2016.
185  Knights, “Back into the Shadows?”; Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “The Haydari Force in Syria: A Story from 2013, ” aymennjawad.org, 
April 23, 2019.
186  Knights, “Back into the Shadows?”
26
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


number and in size—because of the Syrian war and the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq.187 For 
example, Kata’ib Hezbollah’s size increased fivefold between 2011 and 2013, partially due to a need 
for a larger Iranian-backed combat force in Syria.188 Much of these forces were recruited from Syrian 
Shi`a as well.189 
Interesting among these are the Sadrist elements called on to supply fighters.190 For example, Liwa 
Dhualfiqar received support from Iran but was also aligned closely and received tactical assistance 
from Liwa al-Youm al-Mawud, or the Promised Day Brigades. 191 Despite Iraqi cleric Muqtada al-
Sadr’s opposition to the intervention in Syria, many of the organizations in the theater claim loyalty to 
him.192 In some cases, despite touting their affiliation with al-Sadr, it is unclear if militias share a real 
connection with the Iraqi leader.193 Using his name and image allows Iran and its proxies to counter al-
Sadr’s objection to intervention in Syria.194 Despite being designated by Iran as a “Sadrist” faction and 
using his image in promotional material, many of these organizations also publicly follow velayat-e 
faqih.195 Phillip Smyth indicates that Sadrist groups had a hand in establishing numerous Iranian-
backed groups operating in Syria and Iraq, including AAH, LAFA, Liwa Dhualfiqar, and potentially 
the Rapid Reaction Forces.196 These organizations illustrate Iran’s ability to support, cooperate, and 
direct militias that follow a different religious leader than Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali 
Khamenei.197
National Defense Forces and Local Defense Forces. By 2014, in an effort to organize their loyal 
local proxies in Syria, Iran, with the assistance of LH, established an umbrella organization: the 
National Defense Forces (NDF).198 The NDF had previously existed in the Syrian security structure 
but had not been activated or mobilized. 199 Before the NDF’s reinstallation, the Assad regime had 
complemented its military security with that of the Shabiha, an Alawite organized crime group that 
was consolidated as a quasi-security service, which was active from the beginning of the conflict.200 The 
creation of an NDF network was a stated objective for Tehran in Syria, per IRGC Brigadier-General 
Hossein Hamadani.201 The NDF was a locally oriented entity composed of civilian volunteers; it was 
not a formal part of the Syrian security infrastructure but a supplementary entity meant to aid the 
Syrian army.202 The NDF initiative did not gain traction in the early years of the conflict, despite the 
personnel, equipment, and funding Iran provided.203
187  Ibid.
188  Ibid.
189  Ibid.
190  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” pp. 24, 28, 39. 
191  “Iranian militias officials announce their participation in the battles of Daraa on the side of the Syrian regime, ” nedaa-sy.com, June 
27 , 2018; Ahed Fadel, “Al-Hadath Channel Angers Iranian Militia in Syria [ Ghanaat ‘al-Hadath’ taghzib milishia eeraneeya fi sooriya] ,”  
Al-Araby, May 20, 2020 (updated); Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” p. 39.
192  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” p. 17 .
193  Ibid., pp. 17 , 18.
194  Ibid., pp. 18, 19.
195  Ibid., pp. 18, 19.
196  Ibid., p. 39. 
197  Phillip Smyth, “Beware of Muqtada al-Sadr, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, October 19, 2016.
198  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 88.
199  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021. 
200  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021; O’Leary and Heras, pp. 4-5; “Syria unrest: Who are the shabiha?” BBC, May 29, 2012. 
201  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 89. 
202  Ibid., pp. 88-89; Goodarzi.
203  Goodarzi.
27
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

In 2016, Iran pivoted to a new approach: the Local Defense Forces (LDF). These were similar to 
the NDF but focused their area of operation in and around Aleppo.204 They were part of the Syrian 
government and not composed of civilian volunteers.205 While the LDF was a joint project between 
the IRGC and the Syrian armed forces, not all of its units worked with the Iranians.206 Through this 
endeavor, Iran was able to embed within the Syrian security structure.207 The financial burden of the 
LDF groups was shouldered by Syria’s foreign allies, such as Iran.208 Iran was also responsible for 
providing provisions and benefits for the injured and killed.209 
The LDF incorporated several groups originally named as part of Syrian Hezbollah, or the Islamic 
Resistance in Syria, including Liwa al-Sayyida Ruqayya and Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir, among others.210 
Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir is the most prominent element of the LDF.211 The earliest mentions of this group 
are in 2012, but it is thought to have been formally founded in 2014.212 It was created with assistance 
from the IRGC with the goal of supporting Syria’s military operations in the Badiya region.213 This 
group offers a representative case of the LDF: it “pledges loyalty to Assad and religious/ideological 
affinity with Iran” without contradiction.214 
Bolstering and Recruiting Fighters to Militias in Syrian Theater. From the onset of the Syrian civil 
war, the IRGC has been involved in training and equipping Assad’s forces and that of local militias. This 
included raising some in addition to recruiting and equipping those that already existed. Additionally, 
the IRGC focused on recruiting non-Iranian soldiers to fight on its behalf in Syria. The Fatemiyoun 
and Zeinabiyoun Brigades were set up in the early years of the conflict, both of which were vital to 
Iranian success in the region, such as in the recapture of Qusayr in 2013 from Syrian rebel forces.215
Iran engaged in more direct proxy recruitment in Syria. In addition to the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun 
Brigades, Soleimani and the Quds Force established the Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas216 and, along with 
Hezbollah, assisted in the formation of Liwa Dhualfiqar.217 Iran actively sought an audience with Liwa 
Dhualfiqar, arranging a visit for its founder in 2013.218 This initial support often resulted in an ongoing 
tactical relationship. In the case of the Fatemiyoun Brigades, Iran also provided funding,219 training,220 
and the use of their own commanders on the Syrian battlefield.221 LH also assisted Iranian forces in 
204  Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “The Local Defense Forces: Regime Auxiliary Forces in Aleppo, ” aymennjawad.org, May 23, 2016.
205  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 93.
206  Ibid., pp. 93-96. 
207  Ibid., pp. 93-95.
208  Ibid., pp. 94-95.
209  Ibid., p. 94.
210  Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “The Think T anks Bark and the IRGC Moves On, ” aymennjawad.org, July 13, 2018.
211  Al- T amimi, “The Local Defense Forces. ”
212  Ibid.
213  Waleed Abu al-Khair, “Former regime defector joins forces with IRGC in Syria desert, ” Diyaruna, July 31, 2017 .
214  Al- T amimi, “The Think T anks Bark and the IRGC Moves On. ”
215  Soufan; T abatabai, “After Soleimani. ” 
216  Ahed Fadel, “WATCH: Iranian militia leader appears in video in Daraa, ” Al Arabiya, July 28, 2018; Hadi Al-Abdullah, “With Russian 
orders, the commander of Abu al-Fadl al-Abbas Brigades was arrested in Damascus, ” hadiabdullah.net, January 28, 2019.
217  Phillip Smyth, “Israel Is the New Front in the Syrian War, ” Foreign Policy, January 28, 2015; Phillip Smyth, “Iran Is Outpacing Assad for 
Control of Syria’s Shia Militias, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, April 12, 2018.
218  Smyth, “Iran Is Outpacing Assad for Control of Syria’s Shia Militias. ”
219  Frantzman.
220  Ahmad Majidyar, “Iran Recruits and T rains Large Numbers of Afghan and Pakistani Shiites, ” Middle East Institute, January 18, 2017 . 
221  Ariel Ben Solomon, “Iranian commanders refuse orders to fight in Syria, report says, ” Jerusalem Post, November 4, 2015.
28
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

establishing and training militias, such as Quwat al-Ridha, Harakat al-Nujaba (HN), and Liwa al-
Sayyida Ruqayya.222 LH was active in raising both Shi`a and non-Shi`a militias. LH-directed groups 
were predominantly composed of Shi`a and Alawite Syrians, but the group also facilitated the creation 
of Christian militias.223 LH has also directly recruited fighters to bolster its own Syrian forces, mainly 
recruiting Syrian residents near Lebanon or among areas that have ties to its Shi`a community. 224 
After the village of Zita, across from Lebanon, was retaken from rebel forces, the rebels were eventually 
absorbed in Hezbollah.225 Despite the trend of pulling from the Shi`a population, there is evidence that 
LH has worked with other minorities. Notably, in 2014, Hezbollah encouraged Christians to “form 
popular committees in Syria and Lebanon based on the ‘Islamic resistance’ model.”226 Furthermore, 
there seemed to be considerable coordination between these committees and Hezbollah.227 
 
Iran used multiple methods of recruitment for its various proxies. This included salary incentives for 
various groups, including the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades.228 Benefits were also offered 
to martyrs’ families. A recruitment ad on Facebook posted by the Zeinabiyoun Brigades in 2015 
stated that “if the recruit is killed in action, his children’s education will be paid for and the family 
will be given pilgrimage trips to Iran, Iraq and Syria every year.” 229 Coercive measures were also 
employed, with fighters presented with the choice of becoming a militia member or facing arrest or 
deportation from Iran. The authors found this tactic most used for recruitment to the Fatemiyoun and 
Zeinabiyoun Brigades.230 In the Fatemiyoun Brigades, individuals were threatened with imprisonment 
or deportation by authorities and offered recruitment into the group as a potential alternative. 231 
For the Zeinabiyoun, some sources attest the IRGC focuses on recruiting Pakistani Shi`a migrants 
and pilgrims, seemingly concentrating on those in lower socioeconomic strata.232 A Pakistani official 
claimed undercover IRGC agents promised employment to Pakistanis who recently arrived in Iran.233 
Some are trafficked into Iran and placed in special detention facilities by the IRGC. 234 The IRGC 
allegedly threatens prisoners with capital punishment, with the potential to avoid it by enlisting in 
222  Phillip Smyth, “How Iran Is Building Its Syrian Hezbollah, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, March 8, 2016; “Harakat 
al-Nujaba… an Iraqi version of Hezbollah, ” Al Jazeera, September 13, 2016; “Iranian Military Bases in Syria, ” Harmoon Center for 
Contemporary Studies, March 29, 2018; Shashank Joshi, “The Views of Non-State Actors, ” in T abrizi and Pantucci,  Understanding 
Iran’s Role in the Syrian Conflict, pp. 25-31.
223  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” p. 27 . 
224  Phillip Smyth, “Lebanese Hezbollah’s Islamic Resistance in Syria, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, April 26, 2018.
225  Ibid.
226  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” p. 47 . 
227  Ibid., p. 47 .
228  T oumaj, Rondeaux, and Ammar; “Iran’s broken promises shatter thousands of lives in Afghanistan, Pakistan, ” Salaam Times, October 
23, 2020; Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 104; Jamal, pp. 7-9; Farzin Nadimi, “Iran’s Afghan and Pakistani Proxies: 
In Syria and Beyond?” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, August 22, 2016; “ Khanevadeh shohada-ye lashkar fatemiyoun 
saheb-e zamin maskooni mishavand [Families of Fatemiyoun Brigades Martyrs T o Become Residential Land Owners], ” Defa Press, 
October 13, 2020.  
229  Babak Dehghanpisheh, “Iran recruits Pakistani Shi’ites for combat in Syria, ” Reuters, December 10, 2015.
230  “T reasury Designates Iran’s Foreign Fighter Militias in Syria along with a Civilian Airline Ferrying Weapons to Syria, ” U.S. Department 
of T reasury, January 24, 2019.
231  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 104. For more examples of coercive recruitment strategies, see Rami Ali, “Beyond 
the Dichotomies of a Coercion and V oluntary Recruitment: Afghan Unaccompanied Minors Unveil their Recruitment Process in 
Iran, ” Stockholm University – Master’s Thesis (2018); Daniel Howden and Metin Kodalak, “The Vulnerability Contest, ” NewsDeeply, 
October 18, 2018; Jamal, pp. 8-9.
232  Abdul Ghani Kakar, “Iran’s Zainabiyoun Brigade steps up recruiting in Pakistan, ” Pakistan Forward, October 5, 2018; Abdul Ghani 
Kakar, “Iran’s Zainabiyoun Brigade sets sights on Pakistani migrants, pilgrims, ” Pakistan Forward, June 20, 2019; “Lashkar-e-Zainab: 
Pakistani Shiite fighters trained in Iran, ” Manoto, December 20, 2017 .
233  Kakar, “Iran’s Zainabiyoun Brigade sets sights on Pakistani migrants, pilgrims. ”
234  Kakar, “Iran’s Zainabiyoun Brigade steps up recruiting in Pakistan. ”
29
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

the Zeinabiyoun.235 The lack of evidence does not necessarily preclude other groups from coercive 
recruitment tactics. The global focus on IRGC-affiliated groups like the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun 
could result in over-reporting. Additionally, due to the often-obscure nature of these tactics, they might 
not be readily apparent for both fighters and investigators. For example, an anonymous source stated 
that although there were acceptable reasons to reject serving with proxies like Liwa al-Quds, many 
joined to avoid being subjected to harsh treatment under pro-Assad forces controlling various areas.236  
While many started out predominantly Shi`a, the fighter bases of many Iranian-backed militias are 
ethnically and religiously diverse. This was a familiar strategy for Iran and their proxies, who have 
engaged with Sunni groups in Syria, Palestine, and elsewhere in the past.237 For instance, the Lebanese 
Resistance Brigades recruited from Druze and Sunni populations, and Liwa al-Quds from Palestinian 
fighters—most of which were Sunni—from refugee camps in Aleppo and Homs provinces in 2016 and 
2017.238 Some groups, such as Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir, are strategic partners for Iran, helping them 
recruit from existing tribes in the region.239 
One of Iran’s most notable forays into proxy recruitment is the founding of the Liwa Abu Fadl Al-Abbas 
(LAFA), a consortium of several militias. One of the first foreign fighter networks to be established in 
Syria, LAFA is mainly populated by Iraqi fighters.240 According to an Iraqi border guard, Iraqi recruits 
were brought to Iran, under the pretenses of religious tourism, to receive training, a financial stipend, 
and air transport before going to Syria.241 LAFA has long been affiliated with the Syrian Republican 
Guard, a Syrian army unit, possibly dating back to 2013.242 
Section 3.3. Iran’s Soft Power Activities in Syria
Against the more military-focused intervention previously described, Iran simultaneously took steps to 
make non-militant incursions into Syria, to solidify its long-term influence. According to Amin Saikal, 
Iran’s bilateral approach to influence was outlined in its 2005 Twenty-Year Vision Document.243 The 
Islamic Republic outlined a “smart power” approach through a combination of hard and soft-power 
measures to further its regional influence.244 Iran’s soft power strategies include: (a) propagating its 
revolutionary ideology to appeal to a wide range of audiences, from religious to secular non-state 
actors; (b) promulgating anti-hegemonic rhetoric (i.e., as a third way against the dual U.S. and Russian 
superpowers); (c) spreading the velayat-e faqih model of Islamic governance; and (d) strengthening 
historical and cultural ties with neighboring countries.245 
Iran enacted “smart power” initiatives through strategic alignments with Shi`a minorities and 
235  Ibid.
236  “Syria: Fact-Finding Mission to Beirut and Damascus, April 2018, ” FAKTA Project, December 14, 2018.
237  Ostovar, “Iran, Its Clients, and the Future of the Middle East. ”
238  “‘The Godfather’ of Liwa al-Quds Militia Killed in Aleppo, ” eldorar.com, November 28, 2016; “The T roubling T riumvirate Ruling Over 
Aleppo, ” Syria Deeply, November 24, 2017; “Liwa al Quds militia Recruits Palestinian refugees of Homs, ” nedaa-sy.com, June 30, 
2017; “Palestinian Militia Assisting Assad in Destruction of Aleppo, ” T ower, September 28, 2016. There are also accounts of the 
group recruiting from Lebanon as well. For more information, see Y ossef Bodansky, “The Evolution of Russian, Syrian, and Iranian 
Actions Against DI’ISH and Jihadist Movements, and T urkish-US Responses, ” Institute for Strategic, Political, Security and Economic 
Consultancy 394 (2016).
239  Jennifer Cafarella and Matti Suomenaro with Catherine Harris, “Russia and Iran Prepare Offensive T argeting U.S. and Partner Forces 
in Eastern Syria, ” Institute for the Study of War, June 25, 2018.
240  Phillip Smyth, “Iraqi Shiite Foreign Fighters on the Rise Again in Syria, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, May 29, 2015.
241  “Iran ‘directly involved’ in recruiting Iraqis to fight in Syria: officials, ” Al-Shorfa, April 26, 2013.
242  Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “Liwa Abu al-Fadl al-Abbas and the Republican Guard, ” ayennjawad.org, March 29, 2018.
243  Saikal, p. 156.
244  Ibid., p. 156.
245  Ibid., pp. 156-159.
30
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

amenable religious and political groups in the regions where it sought influence, including the Middle 
East and Central Asia.246 This has taken many forms. In the 1980s, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei established 
his own seminary in the Sayyeda Zainab shrine. Several hospitals were eventually built nearby, and 
Iran sponsored a radio station to attract pilgrims.247 In 2020, Iran and Syria’s education departments 
agreed to share scientific and other academic knowledge, with Iran also pledging assistance to rebuild 
Syrian schools.248 
Toward this, leading up to and during the civil war, Iran maintained important business, political, and 
cultural relationships with institutions in Syria. For example, Jamiyat al-Bustan,249 currently headed 
by Asma al-Assad, is a charity organization that provides welfare services to Alawites. Financed in part 
by Iran, it has allegedly “recruited more than twenty-five thousand fighters and shabiha (militiamen)” 
to fight for Assad, providing them with $150 average monthly wage.250 The IRGC also reportedly used 
one of its charitable affiliates in Deir ez-Zor to open a scout center to recruit and train child soldiers.251 
In the same province, it combined several different groups under the banner of Jaish al-Qura. 252 
Recruitment efforts were aimed at both rural tribesmen and fighters from cities.253
In 2019, Iran sent some of the most prolific exhibitors to a reconstruction convention in Syria, 
“Rebuild Syria,” which it participated in the previous year as well.254 Oula Alrifai remarked that Iran’s 
participation in these events is an effort to retain justification of its involvement in Syria, as Tehran is 
concerned about losing a “strategic gateway” to Lebanon and Israel, in addition to the use of Syria as 
an arena for relief against U.S. sanctions.255 
Iranian proxies were also involved in soft-power initiatives. Specifically, proxies have invested in 
reconstruction efforts in key towns along the Iraq-Syria border and Euphrates River to drum up 
local support.256 In 2019, there were reports of some Hashd al-Shaabi militias acting as financial 
middlemen on behalf of Iran in Syria.257 For instance, these militias would either provide credit cards 
or funds through PMF-affiliated banks.258 With the help of Shi`a militias, the IRGC was able to retake 
territory near the al-Nuqtah shrine from anti-Assad fighters. As a result, the IRGC had control of 
the shrine’s operations since 2017, including religious ceremonies.259 To justify its expenditures to 
the Iranian public, Tehran has argued that they will benefit significantly from involvement in Syria’s 
reconstruction. Many companies working on rebuilding Syria’s infrastructure are owned or directly 
associated with the IRGC.260 In 2018, Iran agreed to build 200,000 houses near the capital. Recently, 
with the help of local Shi`a businesspeople, Iran was able to construct hotels near the Sayyeda Zainab 
246  Ibid., p. 156.
247  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ”
248  Ibid.
249  The foundation’s name was changed to al-Areen Humanitarian Foundation at the request of Asma al-Assad in summer 2020. For 
more information on the foundation, see Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ”
250  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” p. 25.
251  Waleed Abu al-Khair, “IRGC continues to recruit children in Deir Ezzor, ” Diyaruna, November 14, 2019. 
252  Waleed Abu al-Khair, “IRGC in recruitment drive for Deir Ezzor militia, ” Diyaruna, October 15, 2019. 
253  Ibid. 
254  Alrifai, “The ‘Rebuild Syria’ Exhibition. ”
255  Ibid.
256  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 101. 
257  Oula Alrifai, “What Is Iran Up to in Deir ez-Zour?” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, October 10, 2019.
258  Ibid.
259  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ”
260  Karam Shaar and Ali Fathollah-Nejad, “Iran’s credit line to Syria: A well that never runs dry, ” Atlantic Council, February 10, 2020. 
31
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

shrine for visitors traveling from Iran.261 It is unclear if the profit from large-scale projects such as 
these, many of which never materialized, will be enough to recoup Iran’s expenditures.262 
Some Iranian activities seem to indicate an overall strategy of changing the demography of parts 
of Syria, a notion that is supported by some anecdotal evidence and expert analysis. The Syrian 
government has enacted demographic change policies since the time of Hafez al-Assad. 263 This 
has only continued since the beginning of the conflict. These efforts have persisted through Shi`a 
gentrification projects and have focused on areas around Damascus to protect it against potential rebel 
insurrection.264 Demographic shifts have been orchestrated through Russian- and Iranian-negotiated 
settlements, or reconciliation agreements, and have also included both relocation efforts and more 
coercive efforts, including burning homes and fields.265 More recently, Assad has enacted legislation 
to legalize his control of land across the state, potentially institutionalizing a means by which to 
justify its demographic shifts.266 A Syrian writer in 2015 noted that the Assad government bulldozed 
some Sunni-majority neighborhoods with promises to rebuild them.267 In 2018, the Syrian regime 
“naturalized thousands or even tens of thousands of Iranians, including members of Iran’s Islamic 
Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) and Iran-backed militias like Hezbollah that are deployed in 
southern Syria along the border with Israel.” 268 This tactic is not a new one, as “Syrians who fled 
Damascus and other areas during the seven years of civil war have long complained of demographic 
changes and their areas being taken over, either by the government or by outsiders.”269 One motivation 
for Iran’s demographic change efforts is to uphold its “Useful Syria” strategy, “which entails wresting 
control over a corridor linking Syria’s coastal region with Hezbollah’s strongholds in Lebanon.”270 More 
broadly, it also involves Iran’s desire to ensure influence should Assad be overthrown and maintain 
sympathetic populations between Damascus and the Lebanese border.271 Reports also indicate LH 
engaged in ethnic cleansing in areas along the border, such as al-Qusayr and Qalamoun, in 2013.272 
Additionally, Iran has engaged in missionary work to promote conversions, including financial 
incentives and academic scholarships, among others.273 At least as of early 2021, unspecified Iranian 
forces have offered money to Syrian Sunnis to encourage their conversion to Shi`ism.274 Iran has also 
supported Assad’s demographic shift strategy through the occupation and purchasing of land and 
properties near Shi`a shrines in Aleppo, Damascus, and Deir ez-Zor through Iranian firms, such as 
Jihad al-Binaa.275 LH has reportedly also been involved in land purchases and infrastructure projects 
261  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ” 
262  Shaar and Fathollah-Nejad. 
263  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” p. 29; Hanin Ghaddar, “Iran’s ‘Useful Syria’ Is Practically Complete, ” Washington Institute for Near 
East Policy, September 8, 2016.
264  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” p. 21; Ghaddar, “Iran’s ‘Useful Syria’ Is Practically Complete. ” 
265  Hasan Arfeh, “The institutionalization of demographic change in Syria, ” Atlantic Council, April 4, 2019; Martin Chulov, “Iran 
repopulates Syria with Shia Muslims to help tighten regime’s control, ” Guardian, January 13, 2017 . 
266  Arfeh, “The institutionalization of demographic change in Syria. ” 
267  Seth J. Frantzman and Juliane Helmhold, “Report: Syrian regime grants citizenship to Iranians, Hezbollah fighters, ” Jerusalem Post, 
November 25, 2018.
268  Ibid.
269  Ibid.
270  Ghaddar, “Iran’s ‘Useful Syria’ Is Practically Complete. ” 
271  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” p. 21; Chulov, “Iran repopulates Syria with Shia Muslims to help tighten regime’s control. ”
272  Ghaddar, “Iran’s ‘Useful Syria’ Is Practically Complete. ”
273  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” p. 31.
274  “Operation Inherent Resolve: Lead Inspector General Report to the United States Congress, ” U.S. Department of Defense, March 31, 
2021, p. 70.
275  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” p. 23.
32
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

aimed at assisting in demographic relocation.276 As early as 2012, the Free Syrian Army reported that 
foreign militia fighters from various countries, including Iran, Afghanistan, and Lebanon, settled their 
families in the vicinity of the Sayyeda Zainab shrine in Syria at the IRGC’s instruction, displacing the 
Sunnis that lived there.277 Some of the fighters from Iranian-affiliated groups, such as the Fatemiyoun 
Brigades, settled in and around Damascus after serving. 278 These resettlements and the resulting 
reconstruction could help shape Iran’s entrenchment as the conflict ebbs in the post-conflict era.279 
In places like Daraya and Damascus, Shi`a foreign fighters from Syria, Iraq, and Lebanon and their 
families were relocated to areas from which Sunni families were forcibly removed. 280 Harakat al-
Nujaba “has reportedly overseen the resettlement of 300 such families, who were granted homes and 
$2,000 each.”281 
Summary of Background
As outlined in the previous section, Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah had varying degrees of involvement 
with the Assad government before the civil war, and both traversed the Syrian battlefield at the onset 
and during the conflict. Iran’s involvement came in the form of the IRGC’s Quds Force, Lebanese 
Hezbollah, and army forces. Although it initially sent its personnel in an advisory capacity, Iran forces 
eventually entered combat directly. Iran supplemented this effort by raising and supporting militias 
in Syria while directing others from Iraq. Notable among these efforts is the development of the Local 
Defense Forces, embedded into the Syrian security structure but funded and commanded by Iran. Iran 
combined hard-power intervention with several sociocultural initiatives, including reconstruction 
efforts and implementing demographic shifts. Against this broad background, this report next 
endeavors to look closer at trends in Iranian and LH support to various militias along specific types 
of assistance, including but not limited to providing weapons and training. 
276  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021; Mazen Ezzi, “Lebanese Hezbollah’s Experience in Syria, ” European University Institute, 
Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies, March 13, 2020, pp. 14, 18.
277  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ” 
278  Frantzman and Helmhold.
279  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ” 
280  Ibid., p. 7; Chulov, “Iran repopulates Syria with Shia Muslims to help tighten regime’s control;” Ghaddar, “Iran’s ‘Useful Syria’ Is 
Practically Complete. ”
281  Ghaddar, “Iran’s ‘Useful Syria’ Is Practically Complete. ”
33
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Chapter 4. Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah’s Support to Proxies 
Operating in Syria 
As the United States and other countries continue to encounter Iran in Syria, it is pertinent to study 
previous trends to understand behavior during specific time periods and conditions. 
The following chapter explores Iranian and LH support for proxies active in Syria from 2011 to 2019. 
The discussion begins generally, looking at Iranian versus LH support. It proceeds to discuss Iranian, 
IRGC, and LH support over time before exploring trends along the framework of kinetic and non-
kinetic support. It concludes by analyzing trends in all types of support over time and discussing 
support along the lines of different religious affiliations.    
Moreover, this section endeavors to view Iran’s support in Syria through the framework of kinetic 
and non-kinetic support—and their overlap—before drilling down to understanding trends of more 
specificity. While the tactical aspects of kinetic support are important for obvious reasons, juxtaposing 
trends with less military-orientated forms of involvement, such as sharing logistical information or 
recruitment efforts, is indicative of a multifaceted strategy. Additionally, non-kinetic support may have 
longer-term effects that bear exploring. Relatedly, considering soft-power activities of not only Iran 
but the militias it backs, may be particularly significant as analysts and policymakers alike consider 
Iran’s long-term goals in Syria and its propensity to play the “long game.”282 Further, Iran’s diversity of 
support provides a window into how Iran is working to enhance its influence in Syria and its access 
to resources there through varied means.283 
As a reminder, the term “Iranian actors” indicates any Iranian group (e.g., IRGC, IRGC-Quds Force, or 
the Iranian government); Lebanese Hezbollah is discussed separately. Specific sub-groups, such as the 
IRGC-QF, are mentioned explicitly. Finally, while the researchers took care to cull observations from 
open sources in multiple languages, actors may be incentivized to hide their provision or receipt of 
support.284 For militias, it may be delegitimizing to receive support from an external actor.285 Relatedly, 
it may be strategically beneficial for Iran to downplay providing support to hide the full scope of its 
reach in Syria. 
Section 4.1. Investigating Iranian and LH Support for Proxies Active in Syria from 2011 to 
2019 
Before delving into specific support trends, it is first important to gain broad contours about the entities 
that support militias. Table 4.1.1 shows the primary backers of groups,286 meaning those actors (e.g., 
Iranian actors or LH) that provide the majority of support to different groups in this study. “Primarily 
Iran-Supported” indicates those groups that received more than half of their support relationships 
from Iranian actors (e.g., Iran non-specific, IRGC, etc.). Similarly, “Primarily LH-Supported” are 
groups that received more than half of their support from Hezbollah. “Balanced Support” means that 
groups receive an equal amount support from both Iranian actors and LH. Finally, “No LH Support” 
indicates groups that do not receive any support from Hezbollah. While accounting for potential 
reporting effects due to the use of open sources,287 overall, this table displays that most groups receive 
282  Frantzman. 
283  The authors thanks Don Rassler for this point. 
284  See the methodology chapter for more information about potential under- and over-reporting effects in open-source research. 
285  Niklas Karlén, “T urning off the T aps: The T ermination of State Sponsorship, ” T errorism and Political Violence 31:4 (2019): p. 736.
286  As described in the Methodology section, all groups in this study must have a demonstrated relationship with an Iranian actor at 
some point from 2011 to 2019. For a description of what constitutes a “demonstrated relationship, ” see the appendix.
287  See Chapter 2 for more about potential reporting effects with the use of open sources. 
34
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

backing from both Iranian actors and Lebanese Hezbollah while only a small selection of groups 
receive support primarily from Iran or LH. 
Table 4.1.1 Primary Backers Iranian-Backed Proxies Active in Syria
Primarily Iran-Supported Balanced Support
Saraya al-Jihad Fatemiyoun Brigades (IRGC Affiliate)
Asa’ib Ahl Al-Haq Harakat al-Nujaba
Khorasan Companies Kata’ib Hezbollah
Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir Khorasan Companies
Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas
Primarily LH-Supported Liwa al-Quds
Lebanese Resistance Brigades Liwa al-Sayyida Ruqayya
Quwat al-Ridha Liwa Dhualfiqar (LAFA)
Saraya al‐Aqidah
No LH Support Zeinabiyoun Brigades (IRGC Affiliate)
Al-Ghaliboun
Badr Brigades
Ansar Allah al-Awfiya 
Jaish al-Muwamal 
Kata’ib Sayyida al-Shuhada
Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir
Promised Day Brigades 
Table 4.1.2 provides a first look at support trends for Iranian actors and LH. It shows a yearly count 
of the number of proxy groups active in Syria that received support. While LH provides support to 
fewer groups than Iran, the overall trends are mostly parallel. Figure 4.1.A takes this a step further by 
separating Iranian actors into the IRGC (here, inclusive of the Quds Force) and non-specific Iranian 
actors. The latter category captures references to the Iranian government more generally, or sources 
referenced Iranian support without specifying whether the entity providing said support was the 
IRGC, its Quds Force, or another Iranian military or paramilitary entity.  
35
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Table 4.1.2. Number of Support Observations for Proxy Groups Active in Syria that Received 
Iranian or LH Support by Year
Year Iranian Actors Hezbollah Grand Total
2011 3 2 5
2012 12 2 14
2013 18 7 25
2014 27 8 35
2015 40 14 54
2016 36 16 52
2017 41 13 54
2018 38 8 46
2019 23 8 31
Grand Total 238 78 316
Like Table 4.1.2, Figure 4.1.A indicates that Iran (non-specific), the IRGC, and LH seem to follow 
a similar trajectory but provide different volumes of support. According to the dataset, for most of 
the years between 2011 and 2019, the IRGC was the primary Iranian entity providing support to 
proxies active in Syria. Open-source reporting suggests that LH and the IRGC provided similar levels 
of support early in the conflict, from 2011 to 2014. In 2015, IRGC support started outpacing that 
of LH until 2019, when it evened out. Unsurprisingly, Iranian support increased over time as the 
conflict intensified. It increased from 2015 to 2017 and peaked in 2018. These trends align with the 
conflict’s major developments, including the Battle of Aleppo, which lasted from 2012 to 2016, as well 
as Russian intervention in late 2015.288 Additionally, many Iranian-backed Iraqi militias returned to 
Iraq in 2014 to fight the Islamic State.289 This loss of forces, along with the introduction of Afghan 
and Pakistani recruits, could help explain the 2015 increase. In mid-2017, Iranian president Hassan 
Rouhani declared victory against the Islamic State,290 yet Tehran had comparable levels of involvement 
in Syria the following year (2018). Iranian support declined somewhat in 2019, which could, on 
one hand, be attributed to regional and domestic pressures and/or a decline in media coverage and 
reporting focused on the conflict. Toward the former, by that time, the security situation for the 
Assad government had also arguably stabilized, as the Islamic State and other jihadi groups—while 
still a threat—were no longer an existential threat. 291 With Russia and Turkey’s push for patrol of a 
demilitarized zone in Idlib in late 2018,292 Iran may have sought to focus on maintaining proxy forces 
in Syria that were already seemingly overextended.293 Additionally, increased sanctions targeting the 
288  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, pp. 92-93; Ostovar, “Iran, Its Clients, and the Future of the Middle East: the Limits of 
Religion, ” p. 1,252.
289  Smyth, “Iranian Proxies Step Up Their Role in Iraq. ”
290  Jamal, p. 6. 
291  The authors thank Don Rassler for his insight on this point. See “Timeline: The Rise, Spread, and Fall of the Islamic State, ” Wilson 
Center, October 28, 2019.  
292  Andrew Higgins and Rick Gladstone, “Russia and T urkey Announce Demilitarized Zone in Last Rebel-Held Part of Syria, ” New Y ork 
Times, September 17 , 2018; “Explainer: Why the war in Syria’s Idlib escalated again, ” Reuters, May 9, 2019.
293  It should be noted that data compiled by Michael Knights demonstrates that the strength of Iranian proxies in Iraq increased 
dramatically over the 2019 period. For more information, see Knights, “Iran’s Expanding Militia Army in Iraq” and Knights, “Back into 
the Shadows?” The authors thank Don Rassler for his insight on this point. 
36
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Iranian government that year may have also affected Iran’s decision-making.294 Domestic pressures in 
Iran and in Syria, reflected in increased protests, may have also informed its calculus.295 While outside 
of the scope of this study, recent accounts of Iranian proxy activity in Syria in 2020 bolster the view 
that while the nature of support may be changing, Tehran is still present.296 
These numbers and figures provide some insight into the potential division of labor and/or coordination 
between Iran and LH. According to Afshon Ostovar, there is definitive coordination between LH and 
Iran, as much of Iran’s activities are deployed and/or delegated through LH.297 Analysts often study 
the relationship of LH and Iran with the principal-agent framework. One notable issue for Iran is 
that agents (here, LH and other proxies) can develop agency slack over time, where they act more 
autonomously and diverge from the direction and preferences of the principal (here, Iran).298 Even so, 
of all proxies, LH consistently has the least amount of slack.299 Cooperation between Iran and LH is 
publicly reported and acknowledged by Iranian officials, including IRGC officers.300 There are reports 
of detailed coordination between late Major General Hossein Hamadani, field commander of the 
IRGC-QF in Syria, and Hassan Nasrallah, in mid-January 2012.301 Additionally, Alfoneh’s research 
about Iranian and allied combat fatalities in Syria indicates high levels of coordination between the 
IRGC and LH.302 
294  Alex Vatanka, “Iran 2019: Economic woes and a harsh security crackdown, ” Middle East Institute, December 16, 2019.
295  Ibid.; al-Omran and al-Khair.
296  Esfandiari, “Analysts See Little Change in Iran’s Strategy In Syria. ”
297  Authors’ interview, Afshon Ostovar, June 2021. 
298  Authors’ interview, Diane Zorri, May 2021; Zorri, Sadri, and Ellis, pp. 4-5. 
299  Authors’ interview, Diane Zorri, May 2021.
300  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021. 
301  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021; Gol-Ali Babaei, Peigham-e Mahi-Ha [The Message of the Fish] (T ehran: Sepah-e 
Pasdaran-e Enqelab-e Eslami, 2015), p. 445. 
302  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021; Alfoneh, “Hezbollah Fatalities in the Syrian War. ”
37
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Figure 4.1.A. Iranian and LH Support to Militias Active in Syria, 2011-2019 
Section 4.2. Iranian Involvement in Syria Through the Framework of Kinetic and Non-Kinetic 
Support
In the following section, Iranian support is studied in the context of kinetic and non-kinetic support to 
provide a more parsimonious organizing framework before delving into specifics. See the methodology 
chapter for definitions of this framework.  
Figure 4.2.A depicts Iranian support from 2011 to 2019, differentiating between LH, IRGC, and non-
specific Iranian actors by kinetic and non-kinetic support. 
Broadly put, both kinetic and non-kinetic support increased steadily until 2015; in fact, both nearly 
doubled between 2013 and 2015. At that point, kinetic support remained around the same level for 
the next two years while non-kinetic modestly increased. This pattern could indicate that Iran focused 
on kinetic support as it was ramping up non-kinetic support during the conflict. Alternatively, Iran 
could have taken the time to develop the operational capabilities of its various proxies.303 Non-kinetic 
303  The authors thank Don Rassler for his insight on this point. 
38
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


support increased for most years in the study, with the exception of 2017 and 2019. In 2015, Russia 
became more active in the conflict, providing much-needed air support for al-Assad and Iranian 
forces. It could be that as the pressure came off kinetic supports, Iran focused more on non-kinetic 
support, some of which could be useful for cultivating a long-term presence in Syria. The trends adjust 
from 2015 onward, as an inverse relationship between kinetic and non-kinetic support is evident: As 
kinetic support diminished, non-kinetic increased incrementally until dipping in 2019. 
Specific Iranian actors seem to be more involved in providing certain types of support. Lebanese 
Hezbollah and the IRGC seemed to provide comparable amounts of kinetic support over time. 
Conversely, the IRGC disproportionately provided more non-kinetic support, in comparison to LH. 
To better understand kinetic and non-kinetic patterns in Iranian support, it is beneficial to break down 
trends by type and over time, as shown in Figures 4.2.B and 4.2.C. 
Figure 4.2.A. Kinetic and Non-Kinetic Support for Proxies Active in Syria, 2011-2019
Section 4.2.1. A Breakdown of Kinetic Support Provided to Proxies  
Figure 4.2.B shows the number of proxies active in Syria per year that received Iranian kinetic 
support—joint attacks, personnel placement, training, and weapons—from Iran from 2011-2019. 
The figure differentiates between support provided by LH, IRGC (inclusive of the Quds Force), or 
other Iranian actors. There are two ways to analyze the following trends: over time or by actor. This 
section first discusses support by year before describing specific types. Then, specific providers are 
investigated.
39
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Figure 4.2.B. Number of Iranian Proxies Active in Syria that Receive Kinetic Support by 
Type, 2011-2019
Turning first to an annual evaluation of Figure 4.2.B, a couple of trends are evident. In the early years 
(2011 and 2012), open-source reporting indicated that Iran bolstered its militias with training and 
weapons, most of which was provided by the IRGC, a trend that is consistent with existing research.304 
It should be noted that numbers for 2011 and 2012 are low; any underrepresentation could easily 
have been a function of reporting on the issue. As the fight against Syrian rebels and the Islamic 
State intensified in 2013 to 2015, additional supports and the number of groups that Iran reportedly 
provided kinetic support to grew. From 2013 to 2014, training, joint attacks, and personnel placement 
increased, consistent with what would be expected of a growing battlefield presence. 
304  Abedin, p. 138; Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
40
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


In 2015, there was an uptick across all types of Iranian kinetic supports. This corresponded with a 
recruitment drive and fighter surge from the IRGC-QF, IRGC-Ground Forces, and LH.305 Notably, 
both the number of groups that received training and had Iranian and/or LH personnel placed with 
them increased. In particular, the IRGC doubled the number of militias it was training from the 
previous year, from three to six. In the same year, Iran implemented a major recruitment drive and 
movement of Iranian forces into Syria.306 Iran increased forces to Syria, bringing in fighters from the 
IRGC-Basij as well as from the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades.307 The peak of training and 
personnel placement in 2015 was followed by the height of joint attacks in 2016 and 2017. 
The height of support was from 2015 to 2017. Even though Iranian President Rouhani announced the 
“defeat” of the Islamic State in December 2017,308 Iran continued the provision of kinetic supports in 
the coming years. In 2018, open-source reporting indicated that Iranian and LH forces conducted 
fewer joint attacks but still maintained a similar level of personnel, training, and weapons provision. 
Furthermore, Iran may have been replenishing or protecting it stores: On several occasions through 
the summer of 2018, Israeli airstrikes targeted Iran and its proxies in Syria. 309 In 2019, weapons 
provision increased slightly while training increased. The emphasis on training could be indicative of 
Iran’s desire to focus on maintenance of forces as the conflict in Syria waned in 2019. 
In addition to considering annual trends, there also seems to be a division of labor between Iranian 
actors. Per Figure 4.2.B, LH seemed to be a primarily tactical operator, as it seemed to be more 
involved in joint attacks—and involved to a lesser extent in training. Meanwhile, the IRGC seems to 
primarily play an advise-and-assist, special operations role.310 The IRGC and LH reportedly provided 
training, and to a lesser extent co-attacks, in comparable amounts over time. There are several years in 
which the IRGC and LH trained and launched joint attacks with the same group each year.311 Broadly 
speaking, per the dataset, this seems to be most common for Iraqi-based groups operating in Syria as 
well as a handful of others, including LAFA and Liwa Dhualfiqar. 
In the rest of this section, potential explanations of trends over time and by actor are investigated 
further for each specific type of support.  
Joint Attacks. According to public reporting, the IRGC started launching attacks with militias in Syria 
in 2013 and then again in 2015.312 Iran attested IRGC forces were in Syria since the beginning of the 
conflict in an advisory capacity,313 which aligns with their earliest joint attack in this study’s dataset. 
The IRGC shifted to a more direct operational role in Syria in early 2013.314 In 2017, it conducted joint 
attacks with five groups, a number that dropped in subsequent years. 
In comparison to the IRGC and non-specific Iranian actors, LH disproportionately conducted more 
305  In 2015, Iran had allegedly sent some 700 fighters from the IRGC-Quds Force and Ground Forces as well as 4,000-5,000 LH fighters. 
Iran deployed a “surge” of up to 2,500 IRGC troops to Syria in September 2015. For more information, see Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
306  Bulos.
307  Kagan and Bucala; Donovan, Carl, and Kagan; Dailey; Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 210-213. 
308  Meredith.
309  Ben Hubbard and David M. Halbfinger, “Iran-Israel Conflict Escalates in Shadow of Syrian Civil War, ” New Y ork Times, April 9, 2018.
310  The authors thank Don Rassler for his insight about these two sentences. 
311  For a related visual, see Figure A4 in the appendix. 
312  As a reminder, the term “joint attack” is employed as a neutral descriptor for Iranian and/ or LH and proxy co-launching of attacks. 
While it is conceivably likely that Iranian actors and LH commanded attacks, this term does not necessarily capture Iranian or LH 
command or coordination of the proxies, which is captured in the “Coordination” variable in the following subsection on non-kinetic 
support to militias. 
313  Abedin; Alfoneh and Eisenstadt. 
314  Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 220-229.
41
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

joint attacks with militias from 2011 to 2019. Existing research indicates that LH was launching 
attacks in Syria prior to the IRGC.315 Toward this, combat participation was one of LH’s main goals 
in Syria,316 and it did so by launching attacks on its own317 and with other militias. The data indicates 
that LH attacked alongside two to seven groups per year during this period. LH and the IRGC seemed 
to engage in more joint attacks with the same militias in later years, a trend that picked up in 2016, 
peaked in 2017, and then petered out in 2018 and 2019. 318 Even so, LH still had nearly twice the 
number of joint attacks in 2013 to 2017 compared to other Iranian actors. 319 In looking at this trend 
more broadly, the findings support the notion that there is coordination between LH and Iran, and 
potentially delegation through LH.320
Joint attacks declined substantially in 2018 and 2019. In those years, both the IRGC and LH are 
reported to have only coordinated attacks with the Fatemiyoun Brigades, Harakat al-Nujaba, and Liwa 
Abu Fadl Al-Abbas; additionally, these three groups have intermittently worked with the IRGC since 
2013).321 Continued joint attacks with these specific groups is not surprising, particularly considering 
the Fatemiyoun’s intertwined nature with the IRGC as well as LAFA and Harakat al-Nujaba’s (HN) 
close relationships with Iran.322 However, given HN’s small fighter corps, relative to many other Iraqi 
proxies,323 it bears further discussion as to why Iran may have chosen this group with which to levy 
attacks. 
There are a couple of explanations for Iran and LH’s reliance on HN. First, the group was founded 
in the early years of the civil war with the purpose of supporting IRGC operations in Syria.324 While 
originally founded as an AAH contingent, its leader Akram Kaabi splintered HN into its own outfit in 
2013.325 Kaabi’s long-standing loyalty to Iran is also a major catalyst for its resource-rich partnership 
with Tehran.326 Second, and perhaps most notably, the group has gone on to became one of the most 
consequential Iraqi-Iranian proxies operating in Syria, which has seemingly persisted even after 
Soleimani’s death.327 As one indicator of its breadth of deployments, between 2012 to 2018, the 
315  Jahanbani, “Reviewing Iran’s Proxies by Region. ”
316  Joshi, p. 27 .
317  Jahanbani, “Reviewing Iran’s Proxies by Region. ”
318  For a related visual, see Figure A4 in the appendix.
319  It is important to note that when operationalized as LH and proxy combat fatalities, this finding is different. Ali Alfoneh’s excellent 
and extensive dataset of Iranian and allied combat fatalities in Syria (e.g., IRGC, LH, and proxies) since 2012 indicated that “peaks in 
Hezbollah combat fatalities do not always coincide with peaks in combat fatalities among other allied proxies. There is, however, a 
relatively clear correlation between IRGC and allied proxy combat fatalities. In other words, . . . Iranian proxies died fighting alongside 
or under IRGC command. ” T aken together, the two operationalizations indicate an interesting trend. While LH may launch more joint 
attacks with proxies, it seems more proxy forces suffer combat fatalities with IRGC forces than Hezbollah ones. This potentially 
indicates a difference in operational capacity for proxies when fighting alongside each actor.  
320  Authors’ interview, Afshon Ostovar, June 2021; authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021. 
321  For a related visual, see Figure A4 in the appendix.
322  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, pp. 103-106; Smyth, “Iraqi Shiite Foreign Fighters on the Rise Again in Syria;” “Iran 
‘directly involved’ in recruiting Iraqis to fight in Syria: officials;” authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021; Michael Knights, 
“Profile: Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, April 21, 2021.
323  Knights, “Iran’s Expanding Militia Army in Iraq. ” For example, in comparison, LAFA was said to have anywhere between 4,500 to 
5,000 members in 2018 and 2019. Hatem Al-Falahi, “Iraqi Militias in Syria: Their Role and the Future, ” Al Jazeera (Studies), April 1, 
2019; “Iranian forces and Shia militias in Syria, ” Britain Israel Communications and Research Center, March 2018. Collectively, Iraqi 
proxies operating in Syria are referred to in Arabic as al-Quwwa al-Haydariya, in Persian as the Haydaryiyoun, or in English as the 
Haydari Force. For more on these groups, see Knights, “Back into the Shadows?” and Al- T amimi, “The Haydari Force in Syria. ”
324  Knights, “Profile: Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba. ”
325  Ibid.
326  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021; authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021.
327  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021; authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021. For additional background 
on HN and its significance to Iran, see Knights, “Profile: Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba” and Knights, “Back into the Shadows?” 
42
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

group is estimated to have suffered some of the highest fatalities of any Iranian proxy in Iraq and 
Syria.328 Additionally, the group maintains a strong working relationship with LH, in part indicated 
by HN commander Kaabi’s personal relationship with LH leader Hassan Nasrallah.329 In sum, the 
combination of the group’s strategic utility to Iran and its demonstrated fighting record may have 
contributed to the IRGC and LH’s decision to leverage HN more often in joint attacks. On the other 
hand, however, Iran and LH’s preference for leveraging joint attacks with HN (and similar groups) 
could be due to political reasons rather than military ones.330 
Training. LH and the IRGC seemed to provide training to comparable numbers of militias over time. 
Interestingly, both LH and the IRGC trained the same groups in a year on multiple occasions from 
2011 to 2019.331 While existing research attests LH moved fighters into Syria in 2012,332 the authors’ 
data indicates LH was present on the ground in the previous year training militias.333 Of note, Iran’s 
multinational proxy deployment was due in part to LH’s high level of combat fatalities in the early 
years of the conflict, 2012 to 2014, as well as the IRGC’s wish to provide combat training to proxies.334 
Several studies delve deeper into Iranian training practices and locations.335 Iranian actors’ training 
practices vary. There are accounts of weapons training for rocket launchers, sniper rifles, RPGs, or 
Kalashnikovs, “escape and capture training,” as well as physical endurance and parachuting.336 Iran 
and LH trained militias in various camps in Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon.337 Training was one of the 
LH’s main goals in Syria, particularly early in the conflict.338 The IRGC also trained some groups in 
Iran, such as Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir.339 Others, like Harakat al-Nujaba, receive training at the Iran-
Iraq border at an IRGC camp in Bal Nu.340 Relatedly, Michael Knights stated in 2013 that Iraq-based 
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq and Kata’ib Hezbollah sent fighters to Iran and Lebanon to be retrained and sent 
to Syria.341 
In comparing the training that LH and the IRGC reportedly provided, some militias were only trained 
by the IRGC, such as AAH, Saraya al-Khorasan, and Liwa Dhualfiqar. There were no groups in the 
data that received training from only LH. The Quds Force also trained some fighters in Iran, such 
as in the Imam Ali Facility outside eastern Iran, in Khorasan province, as well as facilities in Syria 
328  Ali Alfoneh, “Iran’s Support of Iraqi Shia Militias Ensures Dependency and Loyalty, ” Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington, 
September 12, 2018.
329  Knights, “Profile: Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba. ”
330  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021. For more information, see Alfoneh, “Iran’s Support of Iraqi Shia Militias Ensures 
Dependency and Loyalty. ”
331  For a related visual, see Figure A4 in the appendix.
332  Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 216-218; Joshi, p. 27 .
333  “Shia militias, the Syrian state, and the battle for Aleppo, ” Janes T errorism & Insurgency Monitor, November 24, 2016.
334  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021.
335  See, for example, Seth Jones, “War by Proxy: Iran’s Growing Footprint in the Middle East, ” Center for Strategic & International 
Studies, March 11, 2019.
336  “Al-Sadr fled to Iran due to assassination fears, ” Asharq Alawsat (English), January 26, 2011; Lara Jakes and Qassim Abdul-Zahra, 
“Shiite militias step up Iraq attacks on US troops, ” Associated Press, June 30, 2011; Abigail Hauslohner and Erin Cunningham, “As 
battle lines shift in Iraq, Sunnis who welcomed the Islamic State fear retribution, ” Washington Post, September 1, 2014; “T unnel 
Commando: Get to know Hezbollah’s elite unit, ” Mako, March 1, 2019.
337  “Iranian Military Bases in Syria. ”
338  Joshi, p. 27 .
339  “T unnel Commando: Get to know Hezbollah’s elite unit;” “Iran-backed fighters prepare fresh assault against ISIS in Eastern Syria, ” 
Al-Masdar News, April 4, 2013; Mona Alami, “Iran’s forces inch deeper into south-western Syria, ” Al-Arab, July 15, 2018.
340  Saleh Hamid, “A report reveals new information about Iranian militias in Syria, ” Al Arabiya, October 11, 2017 .
341  Michael Knights, “Iran’s Foreign Legion: The Role of Iraqi Shiite Militias in Syria, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, June 27 , 
2013.
43
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

and LH’s training facilities in Lebanon.342 Evidence also suggests that the IRGC-Basij conducted 
training. Specifically, a commander of the IRGC-Basij’s Fatehin unit that operated in Tehran and Syria 
mentioned in 2016 that the IRGC “has set up ‘special courses’ for ‘resistance forces,’ which include 
Iranian as well as proxies, for combat in Iraq and Syria.”343 
Personnel Placement. The IRGC and other Iranian actors seemed to provide more personnel 
placement in Syria over time in comparison to LH. As a reminder, this variable does not focus on the 
size of the “placement” but rather the presence or absence of Iranian forces personnel reported to be 
embedded with proxy units in specific years. Nor does it distinguish between the number of personnel 
placed; for example, whether two or 20 IRGC personnel were training a specific militia in 2012, it 
would still appear as a single relationship in that year for that militia. 
The authors’ research only found three occasions wherein Iranian actors and LH had overlaps in 
personnel placement with militias.344 This finding is interesting as the IRGC sent personnel to train 
Syrian state forces in the early years of the civil war,345 yet these graphics do not indicate a pattern of 
concurrent placement of personnel—whether IRGC or LH—with proxies. It may be due to reporting 
effects, as analysts and journalists may not have known the extent of Iranian personnel involvement 
in 2012 and, once uncovered, reported more fully in that year or the next.346 One source indicates that, 
“until April 2016, the total number of IRGC and Iranian paramilitary personnel operating in Syria 
was estimated to be between 6,500 and 9,200.”347 Iran may have sought to downplay its presence at 
the beginning of the conflict and only with subsequent years has the extent of their early involvement 
been revealed.348
Weapons Provisions. The IRGC provided weapons support early on and seemingly placed more 
personnel with militias than LH. Dating back to the 1980s, Iran has long-provided weapons and 
other tactical materiel to LH.349 Open-source research has found that since 2012, Iran has continued 
to provide both LH and asymmetric forces in Syria with weapons via the “land and air bridge” from 
Tehran to Damascus and Lebanon, a logistical route that is vital to Iran’s regional influence.350 For 
the groups based in Syria, LH provided weapons to the Lebanese Resistance Brigades, LAFA, and 
Quwat al-Ridha. Much like personnel placement, LH and IRGC were reported to have provided 
weapons to different groups over time with only one instance of overlap, according to the data.351 Of 
the approximately 30 weapons relationships, only eight could be decidedly attributed to the Quds 
Force, which provided weapons to Khorasan Companies, Kata’ib Hezbollah, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, and 
Fatemiyoun Brigades. 
Taking a closer look at the 11 militias that received weapons support, six were Iraqi-based groups 
operating in Syria, specifically Jaish al-Muwamal, Saraya al-Jihad, Khorasan Companies, Asa’ib Ahl 
al-Haq, Kata’ib Hezbollah, and Harakat al-Nujaba. Generally, analysts have concluded that Iran has 
342  Jones, “War by Proxy. ” 
343  Amir T oumaj, “IRGC to expand Basij special forces, ” FDD’s Long War Journal, October 24, 2016.
344  For a related visual, see Figure A4 in the appendix.
345  Ansari and T abrizi, p. 4; Abedin, pp. 138-139;  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 87; Ostovar, Vanguard of the Imam, pp. 
205-213.
346  See the methodology chapter for more discussion about the potential of reporting effects in this data. 
347  Ansari and T abrizi, p. 5. 
348  Abedin, pp. 135-137; T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 278.
349  “What Is Hezbollah?” Council on Foreign Relations, accessed July 13, 2021; Ansari and T abrizi, pp. 5-6.
350  Adesnik and T aleblu, “Burning Bridge, ” pp. 7 , 9, 10.
351  For a related visual, see Figure A4 in the appendix.
44
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

provided light and heavy weapon to Syrian forces and militias, including rockets, rifles, and antitank 
missiles, among others.352 Iran also provided weapons to Syrian-based Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir in 2018, 
which included armored vehicles.353 Additionally, Iran provided a variety of weapons, including rocket-
propelled grenades and sniper rifles, to Saraya al-Khorasan from 2015 to 2018.354 
Regarding weapons provisions, it is important to note the difficulty in assessing weapons provisions 
to Syrian groups given the nature of Iranian weapons trafficking throughout the region. For instance, 
some weapons or weapons parts, such as those needed to make LH’s rockets into precision-guided 
munitions, are trafficked through Syria to Lebanon. 355 By the same token, some weapons may be 
trafficked to Syrian groups through Iraqi ones.356 This is all to say that it is difficult to demonstrate the 
nature of Iranian weapons support to proxies “given the nature of Iranian weapons proliferation and 
material support to proxies and partners in Iraq and Yemen since at least 2015.”357
Section 4.2.2. A Breakdown of Non-Kinetic Support Provided to Proxies 
The next section details Iranian non-kinetic support to its proxies over time. Figure 4.2.C depicts 
Iranian non-kinetic support—funding, coordination, recruitment, meetings, and social services 
provisions—from 2011 to 2019.
352  Jones, “War by Proxy;” Ansari and T abrizi, pp. 5-6.
353  “Iran-backed fighters prepare fresh assault against ISIS in Eastern Syria. ”
354  “Angry Protestors Storm into Baghdad’s Green Zone Again, ” States News Service, May 20, 2016; “Saraya al-Khorasani: The new 
influence in Iraq, ” Rawabet Center for Research and Strategic Studies, May 8, 2016; Abbas Qaidaari, “Iran’s new group in Iraq: Saraya 
al-Khorasani, ” Al-Monitor, January 11, 2015.
355  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021. 
356  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021. 
357  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021. 
45
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Figure 4.2.C. Number of Iranian Proxies Active in Syria who Received Non-Kinetic Support 
by Type, 2011-2019
Before beginning a discussion of the results, it is important to note that compared to kinetic support, 
the number of observations is relatively low, potentially due to an under-reporting in open sources. The 
insights shared in this section should be viewed with this caveat in mind. A couple of trends are notable. 
Over time, funding support increased. Meetings between Iranian actors and militias peaked in 2016, 
declining in subsequent years. The years 2015 to 2017 still included the most meetings observations in 
the dataset. Changes in the conflict theater over those years—such as Russia’s intervention in 2015 or 
the December 2016 ceasefire358—may have necessitated frequent meetings with proxies. Conversely, 
recruitment and coordination support remained somewhat steady over time, except for a peak in the 
358  “Syria diplomatic talks: A timeline. ”
46
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


latter in 2015. As with kinetic support trends, overall, it seems different actors engaged in support 
to varying extents. For instance, the IRGC seems most active in multiple non-kinetic supports, 
including funding, recruitment, and meetings while LH seemed the most involved in meetings and 
recruitment and occasional involvement in funding and coordination. Non-specific Iranian actors 
were predominantly involved in social service provision, funding, and logistics. 
Funding. The provision of funding is especially interesting. The IRGC and other Iranian actors 
were reported as mostly involved in funding; LH only provided funding to a handful of groups. 359 
Comparatively, LH only provided funds to Syrian-based groups, such as Lebanese Resistance 
Brigades.360 Of the 24 instances of IRGC funding, the Quds Force was reported to be involved in nine. 
There was little overlap in the groups that received support from Iranian actors and LH, save for AAH 
in 2012. Overall, the number of groups providing funding support per year gradually increased, with 
the highest levels from 2016 to 2018. 
Estimates of the overall dollar amount Iran has spent in Syria and provided to its proxies vary widely. In 
2018, the U.S. State Department reported that since 2012, Iran had provided $16 billion for the Assad 
regime and “partners and proxies in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen.”361 A member of Iran’s parliament reported 
in 2020 that since 2011, the country had provided between $20-30 billion to Syria.362 According to 
a 2020 Atlantic Council report, estimates of “military and economic spending in Syria range from 
$30 billion to $105 billion in the first seven years” of the war alone. 363 Although it is difficult to 
find estimates about funding to proxies specifically, as mentioned previously, various reports indicate 
Tehran has spent between $5 and $15 billion on its projects in Syria each year, including proxies.364 It 
could also include the physical and human costs of sending IRGC and Artesh troops. Regardless of the 
specific dollar amount, it is clear that since the start of the Syrian civil war, Iran has spent billions of 
dollars propping up the Syrian regime.365 Funding is one of the most vital forms of assistance a state 
can provide a group.366 It is easily transferrable, in comparison to more involved forms (e.g., training) 
and flexible in its use, such as for purchasing other materials (e.g., weapons), recruitment, or salaries, 
among others.367 With a steady source of funding from a state, groups can dedicate more attention to 
operations.368 In addition, for many militia members a salary or stipend is a requirement for joining, 
and thus, it becomes an indispensable recruitment tool. 369 The low logistical and operational cost 
involved in providing funding could explain the steady increase in observations of funding support 
over time, regardless of fluctuations in troop presence or other material support. This allows Iran to 
have considerable influence on proxies and their operations, while also furthering its own operational 
goals.
 
359  These groups were Lebanese Resistance Brigades, Quwat Radwan, and Asa’ib Ahl Al-Haq.
360  For a related visual, see Figure A5 in the appendix.
361  Golnaz Esfandiari, “Revolutionary Guards Commander Gives Rare Estimate Of Money Iran Spent On Proxies, Military Aid In Region, ” 
RFERL, September 30, 2020.
362  Fazeli.
363  Waleed Abu al-Khair, “Impoverished Iranians bristle at $100 billion price tag for Syria ‘investments, ’” Diyaruna, April 19, 2021. For the 
Atlantic Council report, see Shaar and Fathollah-Nejad.
364  Abedin, p. 151; Adesnik; Frantzman; Fazeli. Iran has allegedly spent $1 billion per year on Iraq’s security forces—likely to include 
support Iranian-backed militias in the Hashd al-Shaabi—since 2014.
365  Abedin, p. 151; Fazeli; Adesnik.
366  Daniel Byman,  Deadly Connections (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), p. 60.
367  Daniel Byman, Peter Chalk, Bruce Hoffman, William Rosenau, and David Brannan, T rends in Outside Support for Insurgent 
Movements (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2001), p. xvii; Byman, Deadly Connections, p. 60.
368  Byman, Deadly Connections, p. 61.
369  Authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021.
47
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

There are instances of Iran making large payments to groups, such as paying approximately $20 
million to establish Jaish al-Muwamal. 370 Other instances include paying salaries directly. Al-
Ghaliboun reportedly offered members $100 a month in cash, distributed via the Iranian embassy 
in Syria.371 While fighters from Iraqi militias in Syria were paid by the Hashd al-Shaabi, those from 
some Syrian-based groups received payments directly from the IRGC.372 Oula Alrifai indicated local 
anti-Assad individuals attested that the Revolutionary Guards’ payments were seemingly orderly and 
reliable, compared to Assad’s “‘chaotic and bankrupt’ security structure.”373 Alrifai further writes that 
the amounts differed based on fighters’ duties: “those who serve in their hometowns receive $100 per 
month, while those who travel to the frontlines receive $150 along with military vehicles, fuel vouchers, 
and miscellaneous spending money.”374 It may be that distributing the money directly to its clients, as 
opposed to delegating the task to LH, also allows Tehran to further secure control over the proxies.375
Coordination. Coordination, which concerned support operations such as intelligence sharing, 
transportation, other planning activities, and non-specific logistic support, rose sharply from 2012 to 
2014, peaking in 2015 and overall decreasing in the years thereafter. Like funding, most of this support 
was provided by Iranian actors, specifically the IRGC. LH was only involved in providing support to 
Kata’ib Hezbollah (KH).376 
The IRGC-QF began engaging in combat early in 2012,377 coinciding with the rise in coordination. 
Being directly engaged in the conflict increases the likelihood of information and intelligence sharing 
and direct coordination with proxies, such as Liwa al-Imam al Baqir and other Iranian proxies, that 
were said to receive instruction from IRGC’s operation center in the Syrian desert.378 In 2015, there 
was both an influx of Iranian forces 379 and an increase in IRGC operations in Aleppo, 380 tracking 
with the peak of coordination support. Of the 19 observations that included coordination support, 
there were the most in 2015 and 2016. Additionally, there were six observations of Iran providing 
transportation between 2013 and 2017. Harakat al-Nujaba recruits reportedly flew out of an Iranian 
airport to Iranian-founded bootcamps south of the Syrian capital.381 Fatemiyoun Brigade members 
also allegedly used Iran Air to enter Syria.382
It is important to note that this variable might be especially subject to under-reporting issues for 
several reasons. The intelligence component is by necessity cloaked, and it may be that Iran chose to 
share intelligence with a select few groups with the understanding they would pass it along to their 
allies. Also, this support is often integrated with many—if not all—other types of tactical and kinetic 
operations. Some active operational coordination may be implied but is not necessarily reported in 
open sources. Much of this type of support is not visible, and thus, information gathering is more 
370  “Iraq: Jaysh al-Muwamal—a new Iranian militia to support Assad. ”
371  Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “Al-Ghalibun: Inside Story of a Syrian Hezbollah Group, ” aymennjawad.org, April 16, 2017 .
372  Alrifai, “What Is Iran Up to in Deir ez-Zour?”
373  Ibid.
374  Ibid.
375  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021. 
376  For a related visual, see Figure A5 in the appendix.
377  Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
378  Al-Khair, “Former regime defector joins forces with IRGC in Syria desert. ”
379  Alfoneh and Eisenstadt.
380  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 23; Hargreaves-Heald.
381  “Iraqi Militant Dragged into Iranian Proxy War in Syria Claims being Deceived, ” Asharq Alawsat (English), August 11, 2017 .
382  “Rep. Roskam Urges T reasury Dept. to Investigate Iran Air T ransport of Militants to Syria On Commercial Aircraft, ” T argeted News 
Service, August 23, 2017 .
48
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

challenging. 
Recruitment Assistance. Compared to other types of support, mentions of recruitment in open 
sources were scarce. Open-source records indicate that the number of observations of recruitment 
support between Iranian entities and proxies remained at similar levels from 2011 and 2019, with 
a small peak in 2018. Unlike funding and logistical support, LH was reported to be less active in 
recruitment assistance, with half (six) as many instances as the IRGC (12). Of the 12 IRGC instances, 
the Quds Force was reported to be in seven. Overall, there was little overlap in the groups that received 
support from Iranian actors and LH, save for Liwa al-Sayyida al-Ruqayya that received support from 
both the IRGC and LH in 2018. 383 For Liwa al-Sayyida Ruqayya, “IRGC and Hezbollah organized 
recruits in a model similar to that of the Iranian Basij.”384 Iran was known to be involved with LAFA’s 
recruitment, which is well-documented in Phillip Smyth’s “Shiite Jihad in Syria” report. 385 In the 
dataset, there were 23 total instances of recruitment support, and Iranian actors provided support in 
a variety of ways. Iran was involved with Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir’s recruitment, persuading recruits 
to convert to Shi`ism.386 Anecdotally, it seems that recruitment is better documented in instances 
wherein an organization is more fully controlled by Iranian actors, rather than an independent entity, 
such as the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades.387
A similar trend holds true for the Lebanese Resistance Brigades (LRB), which is treated, in many 
ways, as an LH affiliate. It was founded by LH in 1997 to recruit non-Shi`a fighters to resist the Israeli 
occupation.388 It has since evolved as a “forward combat force” to support the Syrian regime.389 In the 
dataset, beginning in 2011, LH was documented as supporting the group’s recruitment efforts for 
five years (2011, 2014-2016, and 2019). It is likely that LH supported LRB consistently throughout 
the entire time period, although this was not visible in open sources, as the data shows a conservative 
estimate. Sources point to LRB’s emphasis on targeting specific Lebanese minorities, such as Christians, 
Sunnis, and Druze.390 LH’s lack of recruitment support to additional proxies other than the LRB is 
notable, given the multitude of actors they supported throughout the conflict. 
As mentioned above, recruitment practices for the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades are well 
documented, relative to other militias operating in Syria. The IRGC uses several different tactics 
when recruiting fighters for its Fatemiyoun Brigades, including the promise of money and residency, 
in addition to emphasizing the need for men to defend Shi`a shrines in Syria.391 Many of the same 
motivators are used for Pakistanis recruited into the Zeinabiyoun Brigades, with Pakistani officials 
accusing the IRGC of using coercive techniques to recruit impoverished Pakistani Shi`a.392 
It seems likely that recruitment support is provided simultaneously with monetary support and 
training, or when Iranian actors are directly involved in the creation of a group. For example, Harakat 
383  For a related visual, see Figure A5 in the appendix.
384  “Iranian Military Bases in Syria;” “Get to know the militia ‘ Ja’afari Force, ’ which Iran mobilized in Deraa (videos + pictures), ” Orient 
News, June 22, 2018.
385  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects. ”
386  Richard Spencer, “T urkey clashes with Assad regime in Syria for first time, ” Times, February 21, 2018.
387  Soufan; “US sanctions on Fatemiyoun, Zainabiyoun militias target Iran’s export of unrest, ” Salaam Times, January 29, 2019.
388  Amal Khalil, “Lebanese Resistance Leader: The Saraya Is Here to Stay, ” Al-Akhbar English via Wayback Machine, October 19, 2013.
389  Zambelis, “Hizb Allah’s Lebanese Resistance Brigades. ”
390  White; T ony Badran, “Hezbollah’s Sunni Support Network, ” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, April 7 , 2016.
391  Sune Engel Rasmussen and Zahra Nader, “Iran covertly recruits Afghan Shias to fight in Syria; Shia men from Afghanistan are coaxed 
into war to support Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, Guardian investigation reveals, ” Guardian, June 30, 2016. 
392  Kakar, “Iran’s Zainabiyoun Brigade steps up recruiting in Pakistan. ”
49
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

al-Nujaba (HN) was founded with support from Iran to mobilize Iraqi fighters for participation in the 
Syrian conflict.393 There is a high probability Iran had some influence over the group’s recruitment 
practices, even if it did not participate directly. A former HN fighter recalled finding an enlistment flyer 
in his neighborhood.394 Enticed by the salary, he traveled to headquarters in Baghdad and then to Iran 
itself after which he made his way to an Iranian-founded training camp in the Syrian capital and was 
given light-weapons training by Iranian instructors.395 Although the source does not mention direct 
Iranian involvement in recruitment, their assistance at almost every juncture, from transportation 
to training, strongly suggests at least some peripheral participation. More generally, Iran-backed 
recruitment centers in Syria are reported to offer a competitive stipend, compared to the country’s 
security forces.396 
Meetings. Iranian actors met with the largest number of militias operating in Syria per year between 
2015 and 2018, and in most years, most meetings were conducted by the IRGC. Of the 23 instances of 
IRGC meetings with militias, the Quds Force was involved in 18. One-on-one meetings with proxies 
were a common strategy used by Soleimani to maintain morale and relationships with groups. 397 
In fact, between 2015 and 2016, Soleimani launched an aggressive public relations campaign, 
independent of the proxies, to “burnish his brand” in light of potential criticism following the Islamic 
State’s expulsion from Iraq. 398 This trend is potentially reflected in the numbers of IRGC meetings in 
those years in Figure 4.2.C.
In contrast to all other non-kinetic supports, there was some overlap in the groups that met with both 
Iranian actors and LH, including HN (2015 to 2018), Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir (2017), and Liwa al-
Sayyida Ruqayya (2018).399 LH was active in conducting meetings with militias in eight instances from 
2015 to 2018. The data indicates LH more often met with Syrian-based groups, including Lebanese 
Resistance Brigades and Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir, among others. However, from 2015 to 2018, LH met 
with HN each year. 
Overall, the patterns depicted in Figure 4.2.C fit within the larger context of Iran’s involvement in 
the conflict. The 2015-2018 period included several major events in the Syrian civil war, such as the 
Russian intervention, the December 2016 ceasefire, and the beginning of the Astana talks. 400 The 
constantly changing environment may have necessitated frequent meetings between Iranian actors 
and proxies. Additionally, after Assad’s forces suffered several significant losses, Iran increased its 
ground presence significantly in late 2015, likely affording more opportunities for meetings with its 
proxies as the IRGC re-strategized to ensure the regime did not collapse.401 Russia’s intervention in 
2015 may have also necessitated a level of coordination between Iranian actors and the proxies for the 
subsequent military operations with Russian air support.402 
Additionally, then-IRGC Quds Force commander Soleimani was well known for traveling to meet 
with groups, many of which would publicize the event by publishing images via social and other media 
393  “Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba (The Movement of the Noble of Hezbollah), ” Foundation for the Defense of Democracies.
394  “Iraqi Militant Dragged into Iranian Proxy War in Syria Claims being Deceived. ” 
395  Ibid.
396  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ”
397  Authors’ interview, Afshon Ostovar, June 2021. 
398  Authors’ interview, Afshon Ostovar, June 2021. 
399  For a related visual, see Figure A5 in the appendix.
400  “Syria diplomatic talks: A timeline. ”
401  Authors’ interview, Oula Alrifai, May 2021; Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, pp. 23-24. 
402  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, pp. 24, 92-93; Hargreaves-Heald.
50
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

outlets.403 Meetings in and of themselves signify some interesting aspects. On one hand, they may 
indicate some exchange of knowledge or coordination. Indeed, sources frequently include information 
about high-level cooperation at meetings. For example, a 2018 discussion between Harakat al-Nujaba 
and LH included dialogue about broader security and political topics. 404 Conversely, they can also 
be opportunities for propaganda and morale boosters for the group members, with no military 
cooperation involved. For example, in 2017 Soleimani spent a weekend in Deir ez-Zor, where he was 
photographed with fighters of Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir. 405 This meeting was an indication of their 
embedded relationship, as the Quds Force armed and trained the Syrian militia.406 However, it appears 
this visit was largely intended as opportunity to showcase Iran’s cooperation with the Syrian regime 
after the fall of Al Bukamal and alleged defeat of the Islamic State, as evidenced by the Assad loyalist 
outfits that publicized the visit.407 The decrease in reported meetings after 2019 could be partially the 
result of a shift in Iran’s strategy, wherein the focus is more on involvement in reconstruction efforts 
and providing soft power support to the Syrian state itself.  
Social Services Assistance. Like recruitment, there is relatively little evidence of Iranian-backed social 
service provision in Syria, with only six observations in the dataset. Interestingly, LH was not among 
the actors that provided these services. Despite the lack of support implementing social services, there 
is evidence that proxies are receiving this type of aid from Iran. Operated by LH and the IRGC, Jihad 
al-Binaa is a “key economic and philanthropic” organization in Syria.408 In addition to a multitude 
of other services, Jihad al-Binaa has provided families of the Fatemiyoun Brigades and Harakat al-
Nujaba with housing.409 The data that does exist indicates that much of the support came in the form 
of death benefits for fighters and their families. Iran, via AAH, allegedly provided financial support for 
families in addition to burial costs.410 For both the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades, Iran also 
provided education for the children of martyrs.411 Additionally, Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir members were 
sent to Iran to study at Islamic Sharia College at Tehran University.412 The specifics of these benefits 
are useful to incentivize populations to join the fight in Syria, if only to help their families. 
The lack of social services in the data could be explained by Iranian actors preferring to work directly 
with state institutions to help local populations, to further solidify their role in and control over Syria’s 
future. This is evident in their push to be heavily involved in reconstruction efforts, including via IRGC-
backed businesses.413 Furthermore, Iran has a network of schools in Syria, at least 40 of which existed 
prior to the start of the conflict in 2011, although many were not recognized by Assad’s government.414 
In 2011, the Assad regime allowed Iran to erect Shi`a Islamist schools throughout the country, and 
403  For example, Soleimani was photographed meeting with Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir members during a visit to Deir ez-Zor in November 
2017 . For more information, see “Spotlight on Global Jihad (2-8 November 2017), ” Meir Intelligence and T errorism Information Center.
404  This information is based on an article on HN’s website, which is no longer readily accessible online. For screenshot and translation 
of this article, see the appendix. 
405  “Spotlight on Global Jihad (2-8 November 2017). ” 
406  For example, see “Al-Baqir Brigade a local Shiite militia affiliated with Assad’s forces in Aleppo, ” Enab Baladi, October 31, 2016; “Iran-
backed fighters prepare fresh assault against ISIS in Eastern Syria. ”
407  “Spotlight on Global Jihad (2-8 November 2017). ” 
408  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” pp. 23-24.
409  Ibid.
410  Martin Chulov, “Controlled by Iran, the deadly militia recruiting Iraq’s men to die in Syria, ” Guardian, March 12, 2014.
411  “Pakistani Shias being trained by Iran for a regional fighting force, ” Asian News International (ANI), December 20, 2017 .
412  Amir T oumaj and Romany Shaker, “IRGC-controlled Syrian militia declares jihad against US forces in Syria, ” FDD’s Long War Journal, 
April 13, 2018.
413  Shaar and Fathollah-Nejad.
414  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology, ” p. 11. 
51
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Tehran has worked to repair schools damaged in the war.415 
Section 4.3. Notable Aspects of Iranian and LH Support to Proxies Operating in Syria 
Section 4.3.1. T rends in Iranian and LH Support Along Different Religious Affiliations 
Some analysts indicate that Iranian-backed militias—particularly Iraq-based ones—are loyal to three 
major figures: Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Muqtada al-Sadr, and Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.416 For 
analysis, this report investigates proxies’ loyalty to Khamenei (also referred to as Khomeinist groups in 
this study), Muqtada al-Sadr, or other camps, the last of which includes Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani 
followers and groups belonging to other or no religious affiliations. Exporting the Iranian revolution is 
seemingly part of the strategic mentality of all actors coming out of Iran, and it has been deployed in a 
variety of manners, ranging from establishing religious schools to implementing Shi`ism conversion 
campaigns and working with like-minded partners on the ground.417 Iran works with groups from 
various religious traditions and affiliations for strategic reasons. Through entrenchment with different 
groups, Iran takes measures to maintain influence in Syria. Put differently, shared religious affiliation 
does not seem to be as strategically significant as does the opportunity to maintain a partnership. 
415  Ibid., p. 11.
416  Renad Mansour and Faleh A. Jabar, “The Popular Mobilization Forces and Iraq’ Future, ” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 
April 2017; Inna Rudolf, “From Battlefield to Ballot Box: Contextualizing the Rise and Evolution of Iraq’s Popular Mobilisation Units, ” 
International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation, 2018. 
417  Authors’ interview, Diane Zorri, May 2021. 
52
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Image 3: This image, featuring Abu Alaa al-Wala’I and 
Muqtada al-Sadr, with a picture of Muqtada al-Sadr and 
Grand Ayatollah Muhammad Muhammad-Sadiq al-Sadr 
in the background, was sent on the Kata’ib Sayed al-Shuhada 
Telegram channel on April 27, 2019.418 
A similar logic (i.e., to maintain influence) may exist for conversion programs. As mentioned in 
the background chapter, Iran has engaged in efforts to convert Syrian citizens to Shi`ism, offering 
incentives ranging from free trips to healthcare.419 This strategy, aimed at increasing the number of 
Shiites in Syria, could allow Iran to eventually work as their advocate, ensuring its influence regardless 
of who is in power.420 Additionally, this would provide Iran with a potentially tolerant population 
that can provide operational freedom of action to its proxy forces and the Quds Force. 421 It is thus 
interesting to see if this soft-power entrenchment also extends to Iran’s proxy forces, with efforts to 
buy loyalty from proxies faithful to figures other than Khamenei. 
Militias were coded as part of each camp based on their own statements or from secondary sources. 
418  T ranslation of the caption in graphic: “His Eminence our brother the mujahid Sayid Muqtada al-Sadr is a moon that lights up the 
country’s sky and a distinct feature in the history of the Resistance. We will not allow, under any circumstances, for him to be insulted 
by the Gulf tyrants and the enslaved people, whose sincere words shook their thrones that are built on the skulls of the weak. Hajj 
Abu Alaa al-Wala’I, Secretary General of Kata’ib Sayed al-Shuhada in Iraq. ”
419  V ohra; authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021.
420  V ohra. 
421  Authors’ interview, Jennifer Cafarella, June 2021.
53
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


(See Table 5.1 for the categorizations of each group.) For example, sources state that Kata’ib Hezbollah 
explicitly proclaims allegiance to Ayatollah Ali Khamenei,422 indicating KH as a Khomeinist group. 
During a 2019 interview, Liwa Dhualfiqar’s spokesman directly confirmed the religious authority for 
the majority of its Iraqi members is al-Sadr.423 If sources indicated a proxy was loyal to more than one 
figure, the affiliation was coded based on what the majority of sources recorded. It should be noted 
that it is often difficult to definitively assign a proxy to a specific camp, and these classifications should 
not be considered absolute. For example, although Ansar Allah al-Tawfiya has declared its support for 
Khamenei, it also used Sadrist images in its propaganda.424
Table 4.3.1. Groups by Religious Affiliation
Affiliation Khomeinism Sadrism Other Affiliations
Group 
Names
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq
Badr Organization
Fatemiyoun Brigades
Harakat al-Nujaba
Kata’ib al-Ansar al-Wilayah
Kata’ib al-Imam Ali 
Kata’ib Hezbollah 
Kata’ib Sayyid al-Shuhada
Khorasan Companies
Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas
Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir 
Liwa al-Sayyida Ruqayya
Quwat al-Ridha
Saraya al-Aqidah
Zeinabiyoun Brigades
Ansar Allah al-Awfiya
Jaish al-Muwamal
Liwa Dhualfiqar
Promised Day Brigades
Al-Ghaliboun
Lebanese Resistance 
Brigades
Liwa al-Quds
Saraya al-Jihad
Turning to Figure 4.3.A, overwhelmingly, Iran provided support to groups loyal to Khamenei—a not 
altogether surprising finding. More interesting, however, Iran appears to have phased its support to 
militias loyal to al-Sadr and groups with other religious affiliations active in Syria. Specifically, in 2011, 
Iran provided support to groups loyal to Khamenei and those with other affiliations. There seemed to 
be an overall preference for these two categories (i.e., Khomeinist and other affiliations) for the first two 
years of the conflict. Between 2014 and 2015, support to other groups rose and gradually tapered off in 
2016 to 2019. In 2016, Iran provided about the same support to both al-Sadr loyalist groups and those 
with other affiliations who were active in Syria. Most support was provided to al-Sadr loyalists between 
2014 and 2018, peaking in 2016. Support to Sadrist groups decreased starting in 2017. Additionally, 
Iran provided overall support to Sadrist groups to a lesser extent than it did to groups with other, non-
Khomeinist affiliations.
422  Rafid Fadhil Ali, “Iraq’s Kata’ib Hezbollah Seek Greater Popularity through Threats to Kuwaiti Port Development, ” Jamestown 
Foundation, August 19, 2011; Mansour and Jabar.
423  Aymenn Jawad Al- T amimi, “Liwa Dhu al-Fiqar: Interview, ” aymennjawad.org, April 12, 2019.
424  Phillip Smyth, “Hizballah Cavalcade: Ansar Allah al-Awfiyya: One of Many New Khomeinist Militias in Iraq, ” Jihadology, September 16, 
2014.
54
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Figure 4.3.A. Overall Iranian Support by Religious Affiliation
In looking closer at annual trends in provisions for each religious affiliation, a few findings about 
groups with Sadrist and other loyalties bear mentioning. First, aside from groups loyal to Khamenei, 
the evidence indicated an overall preference for providing kinetic and non-kinetic support to groups 
with other affiliations. There was a slight emphasis toward groups loyal to al-Sadr during the peak of 
the conflict (2015-2017). Even so, support to groups with other affiliations was comparable, peaking 
from 2015 to 2017. Similar trends were apparent for non-kinetic support, to a lesser extent. 
When examining religious affiliation by support type (see Figure 4.3.B), there were few indications of 
potential preference, save for a couple of exceptions.425 First, only Khamenei loyalists received social 
services support from Iran. Separately, groups loyal to al-Sadr did not receive recruitment assistance; 
only Khamenei loyalists and groups with other religious affiliations did. 
425  For related visuals, see Figures A8 and A9 in the appendix.
55
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Figure 4.3.B. Kinetic and Non-Kinetic Support by Year and Religious Affiliation
Iran’s willingness to support and work with proxies that do not exclusively subscribe to Khomeinism—
and therefore velayat-e faqih426—could be a necessary compromise, given Syria’s demographics. In 
neighboring Iraq, Iran has attempted to create a proxy network among Iraqi-Shi`a groups expressing 
a range of Iranian loyalty.427 There, Tehran allegedly works with Sunni groups, such as the Salah al-Din 
Brigades.428 As Iran approaches the use of proxies as a strategic endeavor, it would follow that Tehran 
would not limit itself to partnering only with groups aligned with its velayat-e faqih ideology. Syria is 
not religiously homogeneous, and supporting only those proxies willing to ascribe to velayat-e faqih 
would limit Iran’s potential recruits. 
Iran seemingly does not give preference to groups that follow al-Sadr compared to other affiliations 
and non-Khomeinist groups active in Syria. This seems consistent as Muqtada al-Sadr may be best 
characterized as Iran’s fair-weather friend: Meaning, Iran and al-Sadr have worked together for 
decades, at least since the 2003 invasion of Iraq, 429 yet the relationship between Iran and al-Sadr 
and Sadrist groups has had periods of tension. By way of an anecdotal illustration, in 2016, al-Sadr 
supporters in Iraq participated in anti-Iran chants while destroying the offices of Iranian Shi`a 
groups.430 Al-Sadr apologized, and Iran did not pull its support for his Iraq-based militia groups.431 
Notably, al-Sadr’s preference for non-involvement in the Syrian conflict, which he claims is an “internal 
issue,” could also be exacerbating tensions between Iran and Sadrist groups.432 Conversely, al-Sadr was 
also one of the first Iraqi Shi`a leaders to call for Assad’s resignation.433 Despite this, “Sadrist” groups 
426  As a reminder, the velayat-e faqih, or “Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist, ” is the ideology underpinning Iran’s system of government, 
where the clergy are in charge of state institutions and governance.
427  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, “Chapter Four: Iraq. ”
428  Ibid., “Chapter Four: Iraq;” Nour Samaha, “Iraq’s ‘Good Sunni, ’” Foreign Policy, November 16, 2016.
429  Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, “Chapter Four: Iraq. ”
430  Smyth, “Beware of Muqtada al-Sadr. ”
431  Ibid.
432  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” p. 17 .
433  “Sadr becomes first Iraqi Shi’ite leader to urge Assad to step down, ” Reuters, April 9, 2017 .
56
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


were some of the first in Syria, boasting their connection to al-Sadr via posters and imagery.434 In a 
2019 interview, the spokesman for Liwa Dhualfiqar stated the religious authority for the majority of 
its Iraqi members is al-Sadr, and the Promised Day Brigades were created by al-Sadr himself to fight 
the occupation forces in Iraq.435 Phillip Smyth suggests Iran’s support of groups such as this is at least 
in part an effort to counter any opposition to al-Sadr, as many of the groups that claim affiliation to 
al-Sadr also indicate they are loyal to Iran.436 
Section 4.3.2. Geographic T rends in Iranian and LH Support for Selected Proxies from 2017 to 
2019 
The following section discusses some geographic trends of IRGC, LH, and selected proxies’ operations 
across various provinces from 2017 to 2019. It discusses these trends in juxtaposition with kinetic and 
non-kinetic support. 
Open-source data about operations437 was only collected for LH, the IRGC, and selected proxies.438 
These proxies are: Asa’ib Ahl Al-Haq, Fatemiyoun Brigades, Harakat al-Nujaba, Liwa Abu Fadl al-
Abbas, Kata’ib Hezbollah, Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir, and Liwa al-Quds. 
434  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” pp. 17-19.
435  “Al-Manar TV shows video of group attacking US vehicles in Iraq, ” BBC Monitoring Middle East – Political, May 9, 2010.
436  Smyth, “Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects, ” pp. 17-19. 
437  Data about operations was collected from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data (ACLED) and Janes Intelligence: Clionadh 
Raleigh, Andrew Linke, Håvard Hegre, and Joakim Karlsen, “Introducing ACLED-Armed Conflict Location and Event Data, ” Journal of 
Peace Research 47:5 (2010): pp. 651-660; Janes’ T errorism and Insurgency events database. In this data, “operations” are broadly 
defined to include attacks, movement of troops, and group statements about their operations. From ACLED, this includes attacks 
(e.g., bombing/ explosions, armed assaults, assassinations, kidnapping, explosions/ remote violence), battles, establishment of joint 
bases, and strategic developments (as relevant). From Janes, the following were included: NSAG statements, NSAG attacks, CT 
statements, CT judicial, CT operations, and NSAG actions. A few notes: First, the data was cross-referenced to ensure that events 
were not duplicated across datasets. Second, if event descriptions mentioned two actors (e.g., IRGC and the Fatemiyoun Brigades) 
engaging in the same activity (e.g., a joint movement in a specific location), it was entered twice in the dataset, once under each 
actor. 
438  Data was only collected for these three actors (i.e., IRGC, LH, and selected proxies) primarily because of the scope of this study. 
LH and IRGC forces were overwhelmingly the most prevalent Iranian forces on the ground in Syria. While the Iranian Artesh was 
also present, it was to a lesser extent. Additionally, in the report, the data collected for this project focused on LH and the IRGC, not 
necessarily the Artesh, though some instances were captured under the Iran (Non-Specific) category.
57
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Figure 4.3.C. Overview of IRGC, LH, and Selected Proxies Operations in Syria 
from 2017 to 2019439
                  (a) LH 2017-2019                 (b) IRGC 2017-2019 
(c) Selected Proxies 2017-2019 
Turning to Figure 4.3.C and Table 4.3.2, from 2017 to 2019, the IRGC, LH, and selected proxies, 
unsurprisingly, seemed to operate in similar provinces but at different levels of frequency. LH had the 
highest number of operations overall, in comparison to the IRGC and the selected proxies, seemingly 
underlining Iran’s use of the “train-the-trainer” approach with LH.440 Rural Damascus had the most 
events, followed by Aleppo and Deir ez-Zor. LH operations were concentrated in Rural Damascus and 
Aleppo, while the selected proxies also conducted a high number of operations in Aleppo. The IRGC 
conducted most of its operations in this period in Deir ez-Zor and Hama.
In looking at the trends by province, a few points bear mentioning. All actors conducted operations in 
Deir ez-Zor from 2017 to 2019, which is expected given its location as a strategic crossroads for Iran. In 
the fall of 2017, the Syrian army took full control of the province.441 The province was critical to Iranian 
439  For a graphic that breaks down the data in this figure annually, see Figures A10 (2017), A11 (2018), and A12 (2019) in the appendix. 
440  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, p. 291. 
441  “IS ‘caliphate’ defeated but jihadist group remains a threat, ” BBC, March 13, 2019; “Timeline: the Rise, Spread, and Fall of the Islamic 
State. ” 
58
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


supply routes as Tehran used land routes in Deir ez-Zor to transport weapons shipments between Iraq 
and Syria for several years prior to the start of the Syrian civil war.442 Additionally, after the reduction 
of U.S. forces in Syria at the end of 2019, several hundred troops remained in northeastern Syria, 
with a small contingent in the south at al-Tanf garrison on the border with Iraq and Jordan.443 This 
longer-term presence and resulting familiarity with the terrain and social conditions—as well as the 
placement of U.S. forces—may explain the high operational presence of the IRGC, LH, and selected 
proxies in Deir ez-Zor through 2019. 
Relatedly, some concentration of operations for the different pro-Iranian actors could also have 
corresponded with Iran’s desire to maintain existing or coveted routes of the land and air bridge 
between Tehran and Lebanon. For instance, a vast majority of LH operations were in Rural Damascus, 
which corresponds roughly with the aspirational southern route of the land and air bridge that has 
historically been obstructed by U.S. forces at al-Tanf garrison.444 Conversely, the IRGC concentration 
in Deir ez-Zor could maintain the central route, the only route seemingly open to Iran.445 The proxies’ 
concentration in Aleppo could hold the desired northern one, which is largely closed to Iran due to 
Syrian Democratic Forces’ (SDF) control.446 
Iranian-backed forces succeeded in retaking Aleppo and its environs at the end of 2016, during which 
time there were several Iranian advisors with militias considering how best to conduct the campaign, 
alongside LH and unspecified proxies that reportedly conducted the majority of the fighting.447 The 
significant level of IRGC, LH, and proxy involvement in the Battle of Aleppo may explain some of the 
operational presence of all three entities in Aleppo province at different points through 2019. 
LH’s operational presence in Rural Damascus in 2017 is the most concentrated out of any group 
in any province, in any year. Once again, the group’s prior operational history may provide some 
insight. Specifically, LH intensified its siege over Zabadani, northwest of Damascus, in 2015 to compel 
the surrender of rebel fighters. 448 LH maintained its siege through 2017 (which is reflected in the 
data—a little over 70 observations occurred in the city of Zabadani in that year), until the passage of an 
agreement that effectively left the group in charge of the town’s security apparatus.449 LH’s involvement 
in the Zabadani campaign is potentially one explanation for not only its operational presence in Rural 
Damascus in 2017, but also the significant decrease in its operations from 2017 to 2018, as it focused 
its efforts elsewhere. LH’s interventions in other provinces from Latakia to Damascus were likely most 
important because, “if Assad fell, Iran needed these areas to supply Hezbollah and provide strategic 
depth while being allied with an Alawite-led enclave.”450 
The years 2018-2019 were crucial to holding the recently recovered territory. 451 In 2018, Russian 
442  Authors’ interview, Oula Alrifai, May 2021. 
443  Karen De Y oung, “U.S. will leave up to 600 troops in northeastern Syria to prevent ISIS resurgence, top general says, ” Washington 
Post, November 10, 2019; Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Eric Schmitt, “How the U.S. Military Will Carry Out a Hasty, Risky Withdrawal 
From Syria, ” New Y ork Times, October 15, 2019.
444  Adesnik and T aleblu; Jones, “War by Proxy. ”
445  Adesnik and T aleblu.
446  Ibid.; Jones, “War by Proxy. ”
447  Authors’ interview, Oula Alrifai, May 2021; authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021. 
448  Mazen Ezzi, “Post-Reconciliation Rural Damascus: Are Local Communities Still Represented?” European University Institute, Robert 
Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies, November 27 , 2020, pp. 6-7 .
449  Ibid.
450  Authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021. 
451  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021.
59
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

forces focused on airstrikes in eastern Ghouta and later in Dar’a.452 In the same year, pro-Assad forces 
regained control in Homs and Hama to maintain a line of control with regime-held Damascus. 453 
Previously, Iranian-backed forces had retaken Palmyra (in Homs province) in March 2017, which had 
fallen back into Islamic State control after the government and Russia had recaptured it nearly a year 
before.454 Per the data, of the three actors, the selected Iranian-backed proxies seem to have conducted 
the most operations in Hama and Homs from 2017 to 2019, but just narrowly more so than the IRGC 
and LH, respectively. 
Also in 2018 and 2019, Iran, Turkey, and Russia met on several occasions to strategize operations in 
Idlib province, the last front of the conflict. 455 Despite the significance of Idlib to Tehran, Iranian forces 
stayed out of the province until sometime in 2020.456 The data indicates the IRGC maintained few 
operations there (and only in 2019) while seemingly delegating activities to LH. The annual totals of 
operations decreased over time; there is a noticeable decrease in Hezbollah operations from 2018 to 
2019, which could be due in part to its reported reduction of LH forces in 2019.457 
452  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021; “Eastern Ghouta: What happened and why, ” Al Jazeera, April 14, 2018; “Syria war: 
Thousands flee offensives in Afrin and Ghouta, ” BBC, March 16, 2018; Armenak T okmajyan, “Southern Syria Has Been T ransformed 
Into a Regional Powder Keg, ” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, July 2020, p. 5. 
453  Authors’ interview, David Ellis, June 2021; “Syria’s war explained from the beginning, ” Al Jazeera, April 14, 2018.
454  “Syrian government forces enter Palmyra, drive back Islamic State: monitors, ” Reuters, March 1, 2017 .
455  “The Latest: Iran, Russia, T urkey presidents meet in summit, ” Associated Press, September 7 , 2018; Soldatkin, Gumrukcu, and 
T oksabay.
456  Sasha Ghosh-Siminoff, “What the Cease-fire Means for Idlib Residents, ” Newlines Institute, March 17 , 2020; T oumaj, Rondeaux, and 
Ammar, pp. 64-65.
457  “Hezbollah cut down its forces in Syria: Nasrallah, ” Reuters, July 12, 2019. 
60
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Table 4.3.2. IRGC, LH, and Selected Proxies Operations from 2017-2019
by Province and Year
2017 2018 2019 Grand Total
Aleppo Hezbollah 29 3 32
IRGC 1 1 2
Proxies 44 8 2 54
Ar Raqqah Proxies 2 2
As Suwayda’ Hezbollah 2 2
Proxies 1 1
Damascus Hezbollah 3 3
IRGC 1 1
Proxies 1 1
Dar’a Hezbollah 6 8 4 18
IRGC 2 3 5
Proxies 1 1
Deir ez-Zor Hezbollah 13 5 3 21
IRGC 13 8 14 35
Proxies 7 17 11 35
Hama Hezbollah 3 1 1 5
IRGC 6 4 1 11
Proxies 8 1 1 10
Homs Hezbollah 9 9
IRGC 1 1 2
Proxies 7 2 9
Idlib Hezbollah 1 12 3 16
IRGC 3 3
Proxies 1 1
Quneitra Hezbollah 1 5 6
IRGC 1 1
Rural           
Damascus
Hezbollah 177 1 4 182
IRGC 3 1 4
Proxies 1 3 4
Grand Total 333 87 56 476
While visible operations are important, it is also important to consider the absence of activity. Despite 
its significance to pro-Iranian activity in the later years of the conflict, open-source data did not 
reveal operations458 in the province of Hasakah in northeastern Syria from 2017 to 2019. This may 
458  Refer to footnote 437 at the beginning of this section for the datasets and types of events included in the geographical analysis.
61
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

be due to operational caution on the part of Iranian actors and their proxies. In 2015, Iranian and 
LH forces assisted Assad in securing the city of Qamishli from the Islamic State.459 In later years, the 
lack of operational activity could be attributed in part to the province’s economic and geographical 
significance to Iran. Notably, there are many Syrian oil fields in Hasakah, underscoring its importance 
to Iran for the purpose of alleviating financial strain from sanctions.460 Furthermore, as a bordering 
province with Iraq, Hasakah is crucial to securing the land supply route from Iran to Syria, in the 
event the air bridge fails.461 
Separately, as mentioned previously, Iran supports and collaborates with local tribes. The Baggara 
tribe that supports the Iranian-backed Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir brigade is located in both Hasakah 
and Aleppo provinces.462 Iran also reportedly worked with the al-Magawir tribal militia later in the 
conflict; the militia exercises considerable influence in the city of Qamishli and Hasakah province 
more broadly.463 For the last two years, the majority of Hasakah province has been under the control 
of the SDF.464 Furthermore, the fact that Hasakah-based tribal militias have not clashed with SDF 
in areas under the latter’s control465 may indicate operational hesitancy on behalf of the proxies to 
conduct armed attacks in areas not under pro-regime control. Iranian actors may also exhibit the same 
operational hesitancy and thus be more reliant on proxies, a fact that may be supported by the social 
and financial assistance Iran has provided tribes such as the Baggara.466  
When these geographic patterns are overlaid with information about the kinetic and non-kinetic 
support patterns, some interesting trends are evident (see Table 4.3.3). Overall, there is an emphasis on 
both providing and receiving kinetic support. First, LH seemed to participate in the most operations 
over this period. It did not, however, provide the most support to proxies from 2017 to 2019, but it 
provided twice as much kinetic as non-kinetic support. The IRGC, which trailed behind LH in terms of 
the number of operations, provided the most support to proxies, with a predominant focus on kinetic 
support. Finally, the selected proxies had the lowest number of operations in comparison to LH and 
the IRGC. Additionally, they received a consistent level of kinetic and non-kinetic support over time, 
with an emphasis on the former. 
459  Haian Dukhan and Ammar Alhamad, “Iran’s Growing Network of Influence among Eastern Syrian T ribes, ” Washington Institute for 
Near East Policy, April 6, 2021.
460  Ibid.
461  Authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021. 
462  Daphne McCurdy and Frances Z. Brown, “Stabilization Assistance amid Geopolitical Competition: A Case Study of Eastern Syria, ” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 12, 2021.
463  Dukhan and Alhamad.
464  Eva Kahan and Tishman Jonathan, “Syria Situation Report March 22 – April 19, 2021, ”  Institute for the Study of War, April 23, 2021; 
Khaled al-Khateb, “Syrian government reportedly building tribal force in Hasakah, ” Al-Monitor, April 22, 2021. 
465  Dukhan and Alhamad.
466  McCurdy and Brown.
62
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Table 4.3.3. IRGC, LH, and Proxies Trends in Providing and/or Receiving 
Kinetic and Non-Kinetic Support, 2017-2019
Actor Year Provide: Kinetic Provide: Non-Kinetic 
IRGC 2017 18 11
2018 13 14
2019 8 4
Total 39 29
Hezbollah 2017 10 3
2018 5 3
2019 6 2
Total 21 8
Receive: Kinetic Receive: Non-Kinetic 
Proxies 2017 14 12
2018 16 14
2019 17 7
Total 47 33
63
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Chapter 5. Conclusion and Security Implications
Understanding Iran’s support to militias over the course of the Syrian civil war is crucial, given 
Damascus’ significance in Iran’s national security doctrine and the long civil war. This report 
investigated how Iranian support to its proxies operating in Syria has varied by type from 2011 to 2019. 
While this report employed a macro-level approach to understanding patterns in Iranian patronage to 
different groups, it surveys various supports and the extent to which they were provided year by year. 
Further, to provide a more nuanced understanding of what constitutes “Iranian support,” this study 
categorized relevant sub-state and non-state actors where possible: the IRGC, IRGC-Quds Force, and 
LH. Only when specific actors could not be gleaned would reference to general “Iranian support” be 
invoked. As the data that underpins this report is drawn entirely from open sources, these numbers 
are likely subject to reporting effects, outlined in this report’s methodology chapter.  
In this final section of the report, notable themes and security implications are explored. Before 
beginning this discussion, it is important to note trends could persist due to reporting effects. 
Indicators of support can be challenging to observe or investigate early on during a conflict but may 
become easier to find and report over time due to the increasing exposure of actors involved.
Notable Trends in Iranian-Backed Support to Militias in Syria
Iranian Support to Militias Seemingly Followed a Phased Approach 
The data indicated that kinetic support (i.e., training, personnel placement, joint attacks, weapons 
provisions) peaked in 2015 to 2017 while non-kinetic (i.e., recruitment and social services assistance, 
funding, logistical support, and meetings with militias) peaked in 2017 to 2018. This could indicate a 
shift in Iranian strategy, when Tehran poured in materiel, including personnel, in the conflict’s early 
years. As fighting against the Islamic State deescalated—whether due to gains by Damascus or U.S.-led 
forces—Iran could have adjusted its overall mandate from fighting the opposition or the Islamic State 
to focusing on more soft-power supports.467 These support types, such as cultural and reconstruction 
activities, are integral to cultivating long-term influence among locals. A similar playbook has been 
utilized by Iran in other places like Lebanon.468 In some ways, this phased approach is reminiscent 
of the United States’ operations in Iraq, where kinetic military operations were followed by nation-
building initiatives.469  
It also bears mentioning that ramped-up sanctions under President Trump’s maximum pressure 
campaign could also have affected Tehran’s ability to foot the bill for proxies in the conflict’s later years, 
by devaluing the Iranian Rial and contracting Iran’s GDP, among other factors.470 It is important to 
highlight that, while possible, there is no direct evidence to suggest that the sanctions have stopped 
Iran’s ability to support proxies.471 Even so, proxies continued to underpin Iran’s asymmetric regional 
security policy, and there are only anecdotes in regional press that indicate how sanctions have 
impacted LH and the Iraqi Shi`a militias vis-à-vis their patron, 472 which may have been true for 
their Syrian counterparts as well. While this report’s data indicates an overall reduction in number of 
proxies supported in 2018 and 2019, some supports—such as joint attacks, training, weapons, funding, 
467  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021.
468  Authors’ interview, Hanin Ghaddar, June 2021; authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021. 
469  The authors thank Diane Zorri for this important point. 
470  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021. 
471  Authors’ interview, Alex Vatanka, June 2021; authors’ interview, Colin Clarke, July 2021. 
472  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021.
64
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

coordination, and recruitment—either remained at similar levels or reduced only slightly in the last 
two years, and one (training support) even increased. Iran’s increasing proxy activity may also have 
structural and not just local drivers, according to Taleblu, as Tehran wanted to punch-back against 
the financial strain and “signal that continuing a policy of pressure to impede their regional activities 
would not come cost free.”473 
Proxy Support Was Delegated Among Different Iranian Actors and LH
When comparing Iranian (to include the IRGC and its Quds Force and other nonspecific Iranian 
support) with LH support, some differences are apparent. While Iran and LH were more balanced 
in providing various kinetic supports (including placing personnel, launching joint attacks with 
militias, or providing training or weapons), the actors took up different mantles when providing non-
kinetic support (providing funding, logistical, recruitment, or social services support, or arranging 
in-person meetings). Iran and LH both provided high levels of training support, but the collected 
data reveals Iran focused on providing weapons while LH launched joint attacks with more than 
double the number of groups Iran fought with. This could, in part, be explained by differences in 
capabilities between the two actors—where Iranian actors, in comparison to LH, likely have greater 
access to weapons and their transport—or, more likely, a result of coordination between Iran and LH. 
This trend may be an element of Iranian actors simply coordinating this part, which LH could have 
managed given its considerable abilities and logistic networks throughout the region, but for sundry 
reasons, Iran took point in weapons support.474 Meanwhile, according to the data, LH launched joint 
attacks with more militias, but Iran was reported to have placed more personnel with the groups. This 
apparent division of labor may have directly enabled LH to, over the course of the conflict, become a 
much stronger fighting force. Iran was the main provider for various non-kinetic supports, including 
funding and logistical support. While LH was mostly involved in providing recruitment and meeting 
support, Iran had nearly three times the amount of support observations than LH over the course of 
this study, primarily due to the deployment and activities of the IRGC-QF. The data indicated that 
the Quds Force mostly conducted in-person meetings, many of which were led by the group’s now 
deceased commander, Qassem Soleimani, who was well-known for visiting militias in the battlefield. 
Overall, the IRGC (inclusive of the Quds Force) was the most prolific provider of kinetic and non-
kinetic support to militias operating in Syria. 
The Significance of Soft Power 
Iranian and Iranian-backed militias’ soft power has permeated much of Syrian society. Iran has 
worked to strengthen and build a Syrian Shi`a religious network, providing a variety of religious and 
social services.475 In the context of non-kinetic support, this report examines soft power, namely via 
recruitment and social service provisions support provided to proxies by Iran. Recruitment support 
was generally consistent over time, with a small spike in 2018. Tactics included the use of incentives, 
from residency to financial stipends.476 It is important to note, compared to other types of support, 
there was less information available in open sources regarding recruitment support. This also held 
true for social services support, with only six observations total. Despite this, there is considerable 
evidence of broad Iranian involvement in these types of soft-power initiatives, including participation 
473  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021.
474  This is in part supported by earlier discussion of the level of coordination and division of labor between LH and Iranian actors 
discussed in Chapter 4.  
475  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ”
476  Rasmussen and Nader.
65
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

in reconstruction efforts in Syria477 and the existence of Iran-sponsored recruitment centers.478 These 
specific efforts are indicative of the utility of soft-power initiatives, both to decrease recruit attrition 
via continued benefits and to help Iran and its proxies embed themselves in Syrian communities. 
There is a potential danger in relying on the paradigm of identity politics to understand the nature of 
Iranian support. Iran is much better at exerting soft power to obtain its national interests—despite 
the identities of the areas where it is exerting power.479 If only the lens of shared (sectarian) identity 
is applied to understanding Iran’s interactions with its proxies, a swath of collaborating groups would 
be overlooked, leaving a potential blind spot in an analysis of the Iranian threat network landscape. 
As this study has indicated, Iran backed groups that did not subscribe to its velayat-e faqih worldview, 
such as Sadrist and non-sectarian groups, which is widely documented in the open source. However, 
the findings highlighted that support trends were not consistent for different religious affiliations, 
potentially indicating avenues for disruption. For example, groups loyal to al-Sadr were only seemingly 
preferred during the conflict’s peak (2015 to 2017) and did not receive recruitment assistance, while 
Khamenei loyalists and groups with other religious affiliations did. Furthermore, reports indicate 
that in Deir ez-Zor, Iran has offered financial rewards to Sunni recruits’ families if they converted to 
Twelver Shi`a Islam.480
Security Implications
Given the constraints of open-source research, the data in this report—at least partially—illustrated 
how Iran shifts its approach to providing support to proxies over the course of a prolonged conflict. 
Iran has an ability to adapt to challenging conditions through a “needs-based approach” based on 
risk-tolerance and deniability, among other factors, and strategically leveraging local partners and its 
expansive supply routes.481 This report merely provides some macroscopic evidence of such adaptability 
in changing conflict conditions. 
Looking past the graphs and trends discussed, there are some more practical applications of this 
report’s findings, particularly to forces such as the United States and others, seeking to counter Iran’s 
influence in Syria. There is a need to consider both the strength of Iranian and Iranian-backed forces 
in the context of proxy support to understand their potential pathways forward. While the conflict in 
Syria may be waning,482 it has not altogether ceased, and more recent attacks on Shi`a shrines help 
Iran maintain ideological justifications for not only its involvement in Syria but also its persistent 
proxy recruitment efforts.483 
Countering Iranian Influence in Syria. As Iran continues to compete with Russia, Turkey, and the 
United States not only in Syria but elsewhere in the region, it is important to consider the tools in 
Tehran’s arsenal for countering adversaries and the nature of their use. This is underlined by evidence 
that Iran has transferred rocket and drone technology to their proxies, who are using it to target U.S. 
477  Shaar and Fathollah-Nejad.
478  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology. ”
479  The authors thank Diane Zorri for this important insight. 
480  Alrifai, “In the Service of Ideology;” Oula A. Alrifai and Ali Alleile, “Iran and Russia Are Exploiting America’s Absence in Northeast 
Syria, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, July 29, 2021. 
481  Authors’ interview, Behnam Ben T aleblu, September 2021; authors’ interview, Diane Zorri, May 2021; Iran’s Networks of Influence in 
the Middle East, p. 114. 
482  Ruth Sherlock, “Syria’s Civil War Started A Decade Ago. Here’s Where It Stands, ” NPR, March 15, 2021.
483  Golkar and Aarabi, p. 42.
66
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

coalition forces in Syria and Iraq.484 The Syrian conflict has demonstrated the multifaceted ways in 
which Iran’s proxies can be leveraged as asymmetric hard and soft power tools to undermine Tehran’s 
adversaries. Notably, despite various airstrikes by Israeli and U.S. forces, Iran continues to maintain a 
substantial physical presence in Syria, indicating how deeply it has embedded in both Syrian political 
and societal fabric. However, there are indications that Iran has not ingratiated itself with all Syrian 
political elite, some of whom are reportedly lobbying to push Iran out of Syria.485 
Additionally, the Syrian conflict has seemingly strengthened overall both Iranian forces and some 
proxy groups, according to analysts. The IRGC and Artesh worked together for the first time since the 
Iran-Iraq War and—even while suffering significant losses—their fighters accrued considerable combat 
experience.486 Lebanese Hezbollah and other proxies did as well, notably Hashd al-Shaabi-linked 
Iranian-backed militias based in Iraq.487 While not all Hashd al-Shaabi groups are linked to Tehran, 
those to which Iran provides support are among the most deeply involved in both Iraqi security and 
politics. While Iran’s influence in Baghdad has been challenged in the recent past,488 Iranian-backed 
proxies remain in positions of power in Iraqi politics and within the Hashd al-Shaabi. Separately, 
its successful deployment of proxies in the conflict arguably strengthened Iran’s resolve for its initial 
intervention in the civil war. With the continued survival of Assad’s government with minimal loss of 
Iranian lives, Iran has likely found continued justification for reliance on proxies in future conflicts.489 
Furthermore, Iran has also demonstrated the extent of its proxy network as a realization of its forward 
defense strategy. However, issues with shortages in funding, forces, and other resources highlight a 
vulnerability of this strategy.490  
The IRGC also remains poised to mutually reinforce its gains in both Iraq and Syria. As of 2019, 
the IRGC sought to leverage its political connections in the Kurdistan region of Iraq to ensure 
greater access into Syria, and as a backup to its more commonly used land bridge through Deir ez-
Zor province.491 Relatedly, it is important to consider whether the United States’ maximum pressure 
campaign bore out its intended effects. Even though Iran and its Syrian affiliates dealt with increased 
internal tension, the maximum pressure campaign did not appear to prevent them from continuing to 
fulfill their goals.492 Far from degrading Iran’s support to its proxies, the maximum pressure campaign 
likely reinforced Iran’s reliance on them.493 
The gradation of Iran’s proxy relationships indicates potential for exploiting fissures in and the 
disrupting of Iran-proxy relationships. 494 Proxies, in part, view sponsors as a necessary aspect of 
establishing their capabilities.495 However, sponsors can stop supporting proxies for various reasons, 
484  Andrew Hanna, “Iran’s Drone T ransfers to Proxies, ” United States Institute of Peace, June 30, 2021; Behnam Ben T aleblu, “Redefining 
Iran’s Role in its Latest ‘Shadow War’ Against Israel, ”  National Interest, May 24, 2021; “Lead Inspector General Report to the United 
States Congress - Operation Inherent Resolve: October 1, 2021-December 31, 2021;” “U.S.-led coalition shoots down drone in 
southern Syria;” Phil Stewart, “U.S. warplanes strike Iran-backed militia in Iraq, Syria, ” Reuters, June 28, 2021.
485  Ali Hashem, “IRGC Syrian commander removed ‘upon request from Assad, ’” Al-Monitor, November 15, 2021.
486  T abatabai, No Conquest, No Defeat, pp. 281, 291-292.
487  Ibid., p. 291; Knights, “Back into the Shadows?”; Iran’s Networks of Influence in the Middle East, p. 111. 
488  Alissa J. Rubin, “Iraqis Rise Against a Reviled Occupier: Iran, ” New Y ork Times, November 4, 2019; “Iraq: Anti-government protesters 
denounce pro-Iran crowds, ” Al Jazeera, January 2, 2020.
489  Authors’ interview, Ali Alfoneh, June 2021. 
490  Vatanka, “Whither the IRGC of the 2020s?” pp. 16-18.
491  O’Leary and Heras, pp. 72, 74.
492  Authors’ interview, Jennifer Cafarella, June 2021. 
493  Authors’ interview, Colin Clarke, July 2021.  
494  Authors’ interview, Diane Zorri, May 2021. 
495  Zorri, Sadri, and Ellis, p. 5.
67
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

and proxies may seek backing from other sponsors.496 When there is interest from multiple sponsors, 
proxies can engage in “principal shopping,” which can yield opportunities for intervention.497 In applying 
this, states could extend competing offers of support to poach groups away from Iran. According to 
Jennifer Cafarella, there has been some indication of broad competition between Russia and Iran, with 
Russia cultivating relationships with militias such as Liwa al-Quds.498 Soliciting groups that Iran was 
directly involved in founding versus those that had existed and were courted by Iran requires tailored 
approaches. As the nature of these principal-agent relationships may be fundamentally different, the 
latter groups’ self-interest in material support could provide an opportunity for disruption.
Future of the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades. During the conflict, Iran institutionalized the 
recruitment of foreign fighters. This was in part evidenced by Iraqi fighters fighting for Syrian groups, 
most notably through the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades. Given the recent shift of the United 
States’ role in Afghanistan, it is important to keep track of Fatemiyoun recruitment and deployment. 
The pathways by which Tehran recruits Afghan and Pakistani fighters both inside and outside of 
Iran are plentiful and are focused on vulnerable populations, notably migrants and undocumented 
workers. Ongoing unrest in Afghanistan will likely continue to compel recruits to leave the country 
and/or travel to Iran. There are indications that Iran is attempting to further entrench these recruits 
in the country, even after completing their tours in Syria. Fatemiyoun members allegedly receive a 
document that allows them to move around Iran without fear of deportation and receive a one-year, 
potentially renewable residency permit.499 Additionally, there have been reports of former Fatemiyoun 
fighters living in Mashhad, Iran.500 However, there is a risk that the Fatemiyoun may wither as Tehran 
has not kept most of its promises (in terms of incentives) to former and current fighters, in part 
catalyzed by the financial strain on the Quds Force.501 
However, maintaining the Fatemiyoun Brigades beyond the Syrian conflict and within Iranian borders 
ensures they will be available for deployment elsewhere if the need arises. There is speculation that 
Afghanistan may be the next arena to which Iran deploys the Fatemiyoun.502 Conversely, Iran may 
have eroded the appeal of recruitment to the Fatemiyoun for the Hazara. Should Hazara feel Tehran 
will not protect them against persecution from the Taliban, it is likely they would disengage from the 
group. Additionally, if the Taliban reneges on their promises toward Shi`a in Afghanistan, even if they 
do not directly threaten Iran’s interests, Iran may transition to a more hands-on approach so as to not 
lose its other Shiite clients.503
In terms of future proxy deployment, with the changing conflict in Syria, Iran may seek to deploy 
its affiliated fighters elsewhere, such as Iran, Afghanistan, or to bolster LH efforts against Israel. In 
particular, Assad may feel threatened by some proxies’ rising influence and capabilities throughout 
the conflict.504 At the end of 2021, Tehran removed the IRGC commander in charge of the Syrian 
496  Ibid., p. 5.
497  Ibid., p. 5.
498  Authors’ interview, Jennifer Cafarella, June 2021.
499  Kanishka Nawabi, “Fatemiyoun: Iran’s ‘Good T aliban, ’” T olo News, February 7 , 2021.
500  F J, “Afghan Liwa Fatemiyoun militants and some of their families living in …, ” T witter, January 13, 2020.
501  Authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021. 
502  Omar, “Fatemiyoun fighters disguised as refugees pose ‘grave’ threat to Afghanistan, ” Salaam Times, June 11, 2019; Alfoneh, “Afghans 
fear IRGC may deploy Fatemiyoun fighters to Afghanistan. ”
503  Authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021.
504  Authors’ interview, Diane Zorri, May 2021. 
68
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

theater, reportedly at Assad’s insistence, due to his polarizing effect on Syrian elite.505 Furthermore, 
Syrian leadership is said to be divided regarding Iran’s presence in the country: Assad’s camp seeks 
to show Iran appreciation for its assistance to Damascus during the conflict but without an Iranian 
redeployment.506 Conversely, a second camp purportedly seeks the ouster of Iranian troops as the civil 
war is now over.507 Even so, it is difficult to see a future in which Iranian proxies are not involved in 
Syria. Iran has invested substantial personnel and funds across various sectors, and it would follow 
that it would wish to reap the benefits of its investment, with proxies being just one part of Iran’s 
seeming strategy to maintain its presence in Syria.
A geographic shift in some proxies, such as the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun, may be seen in the 
near future.508 There are growing concerns of Fatemiyoun fighters returning to Iran, whether of their 
own volition or deployed as an Iranian paramilitary force, much like the IRGC.509 Some Fatemiyoun 
fighters were depicted as providing social services in Iran and organizing conferences.510 While similar 
concerns have not arisen to the same extent for the Zeinabiyoun Brigades—the Fatemiyoun’s Pakistani 
counterpart—parallel efforts are possible. 511 The Zeinabiyoun’s future is also unclear, as Tehran has 
not protected the group’s fighters as promised.512 Future efforts to expand this work could study how 
proxies are adjusting their overall operations in Syria as battlefield campaigns wane, whether they 
are being systematically deployed elsewhere, and/or if they will become a permanent fixture in the 
country. Additionally, given the lack of recruitment and social services support provided by Iran, it 
would be enlightening to examine the recruitment process of proxies themselves and whether they 
provide social services. These considerations have long-term implications for Iran’s future in Syria.  
Additionally, there is some concern that Iran could deploy the Fatemiyoun—and even Zeinabiyoun—to 
Afghanistan, potentially following a similar model to the Iraqi Hashd al-Shaabi, where they could help 
further Iranian interests there.513 This is particularly concerning given Qaani’s extensive experience 
working in Afghanistan.514 Iran has also dealt intermittently with the Taliban, and may have enough 
pull with the organization that Tehran’s interests may have space to be partially realized in Kabul. 
Alternatively, with the Taliban’s takeover, Tehran may not want to introduce competing interests in 
Afghanistan; or, on the other hand, have more ability to leverage proxies. In addition to existing 
domestic militant groups, such as the Taliban, the ability of the Fatemiyoun to enter and operate in 
Afghanistan may tilt the potential power vacuum left by the departure of U.S. forces toward Tehran.
505  Hashem; Muhammad Hussein, “Despite his gratitude to Soleimani, Assad is clamping down on Iran’s presence in Syria, ” Middle East 
Monitor Online, January 5, 2022; “Chief IRGC general in Syria was ousted on Assad’s orders – report, ” Jerusalem Post, November 10, 
2021. 
506  Ibid.
507  Ibid. 
508  Authors’ interview, Diane Zorri, May 2021. 
509  Latifi; Bezhan; Clarke and T abatabai; Alfoneh, “Afghans fear IRGC may deploy Fatemiyoun fighters to Afghanistan. ”
510  See, for example, “ Hame anche bayad darbareh doh lashkar fatemiyoun va zeinabiyoun bedaneem [Everything one needs to know 
about the two Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun divisions], ” and T oumaj, “IRGC-led Afghan group holds first ‘international conference’ in 
Iran. ”
511  For example, see Mohammed al-Sulami, “Pro-Iran fighters returning from Syria threaten Pakistan’s security, ” Arab News, September 
7 , 2020.
512  Authors’ interview, Amir T oumaj, August 2021.
513  See, for example, Latifi; Bezhan; Clarke and T abatabai; Alfoneh, “Afghans fear IRGC may deploy Fatemiyoun fighters to Afghanistan. ”
514  Alfoneh, “Esmail Qaani: the next Revolutionary Guards Quds Force commander?”; Bezhan.
69
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Appendix
Groups Found to Receive Iranian and LH Support (Not Coded in Project)  
Ahbab Al-Mustafa Battalion
Ansar al-Marja’iyah 
Fawj al-Imam al-Hujja
Firqat al-Abbas al-Qataliya
Harakat al-Imam Zain al-Abidin 
Harakat al-Muqawama al-Islamiyah
Hizballah al-Abrar
Imam Mahdi Brigade 
Jabha-ye Moqawamat
Jaish al-Imam al-Mahdi al-Muqawama al-Watani al-Aqaidiya fi Suriya 
Kataib al-Fateh al-Mubiin
Kataib al-Muqawama al-Islamiya fi al-Iraq
Kataib al-Zahra
Kataib Rua Allah
Khadam al-Sayyida Zaynab
Liwa al-Sadiqiin
Liwa al-Shabaab al-Rasali
Liwa al-Taff
Liwa al-Tafuf
Liwa Assad Allah al-Ghalib (LAAG)
Liwa Kafil Zaynab
Liwa Sadiqin
Mukhtar al-Thiqfi Brigade 
Ninewa Guards 
Qaida Quwet Abu Fadl al-Abbas (QQAFA)
Quwat al-Shaheed al-Awal
Quwat al-Shahid al-Sadr
Rapid Reaction Forces
Rezwan Forces
Saraya Aqadiiyun
70
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

Iranian and LH Tactical, Strategic, and Personnel Support Provided to Proxies from 2011 to 
2019
Table A1. Tactical
Table A2. Strategic
Table A3. Personnel515
515  It should be noted that Dual Leadership (with LH) is not included in this study. See page 5 of appendix for definition of this variable. 
71
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Figure A4. Iran (Non-Specific), IRGC, and LH Kinetic Support Provided to Groups 
by Type and Year
72
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Figure A5. Iran (Non-Specific), IRGC, and LH Non-Kinetic Support Provided to Groups 
by Type and Year
73
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Iranian Actors and LH Provisions to Proxies
While not pictured in the graphics below, for reference, in the total dataset, there are 316 relationships 
between Iranian entities (including the IRGC, IRGC-QF, and non-specific mentions of the Iranian 
government) or Lebanese Hezbollah and the groups. Of these, 78 were attributed to LH and 238 
from Iranian actors. It should be noted that this includes 12 relationships that are not included in the 
analysis: nine of these are “other” tactical relationships (i.e., those that do not fit within the types of 
support outlined in Section 2.2) and three are dual leadership relationships, in which LH and militias 
shared leadership (which are not analyzed in this report).
Figure A6. Iranian and LH Support to Proxies by Support Type 
Breakdown of Received Support for Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades, Iraqi-Based 
Groups, and Syrian-Based Groups
This graphic below shows the proportion of kinetic, non-kinetic, and other supports that were given 
to the Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades, Iraqi-based groups, and Syrian-based groups (all of 
which operate in Syria). 
Figure A7. Total Observations for Fatemiyoun and Zeinabiyoun Brigades,
 Iraqi-Based Groups, and Syrian-Based Groups Observations by Year
74
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Figure A8. Kinetic Support Trends by Religious Affiliation
Figure A9. Non-Kinetic Support Trends by Religious Affiliation 
75
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Geographic Trends for LH, IRGC, and Selected Proxies, 2017-2019
Figure A10. IRGC, LH, and Selected Proxies Operations in Syria, 2017
(a) IRGC 2017
(b) LH 2017
(c) Proxies 2017
76
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Figure A11. IRGC, LH, and Selected Proxies Operations in Syria, 2018
(a) IRGC 2018
(b) LH 2018 
(c) Proxies 2018
77
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Figure A12. IRGC, LH, and Selected Proxies Operations in Syria, 2019
(a) IRGC 2019
(b) LH 2019 
(c) Proxies 2019
78
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED


Harakat al-Nujaba Article – February 2018
Translation:
February 17, 2018
Sheikh Ka’abi meets with Hezbollah’s Cultural Official in order to discuss the situation in the region
Secretary General of the Islamic Resistance Harakat al-Nujaba Sheikh Akram al-Ka’abi met with 
Hezbollah’s Cultural Officer Sheikh Akram al-Barakat in Lebanon. The two discussed political and 
security developments in the region and ways to support the Islamic Resistance in facing terrorism 
and Zionist aggression […]s
  
79
JAHANBANI / LEVY APRIL 2022IRAN ENTANGLED

