Kata'ib Hezbollah | Mapping Militants Project
Skip to main content
Key statistics
2007
First Recorded Activity
2008
First Attack
2024
Profile Last Updated
Download PDF
LOGIN to download this file
How to Cite
Crenshaw, M., & Robinson, K. (2025). Mapping Militants Project. Rice University. https://doi.org/10.25613/G0K4-WF70
Mapping Militants Project. “Kata'ib Hezbollah.” Last modified
September 21, 2024
. https://mappingmilitants.org/node/427/
Profile Contents
Narrative
Narrative of the Organization's History
Organization
Leadership, Name Changes, Size Estimates, Resources, Geographic Locations
Strategy
Ideology, Aims, Political Activities, Targets, and Tactics
Major Attacks
First Attacks, Largest Attacks, Notable Attacks
Interactions
Foreign Designations and Listings, Community Relations, Relations with Other Groups, State Sponsors and External Influences
Maps
Mapping relationships with other militant groups over time in regional maps
Aleppo
Iraq
Syria
Main Tabs Group
Overview
Formed:
January 1, 2007
Disbanded
: Active
First Attack
: February 19, 2008: KH launched an Improvised Rocket-Assisted Munition (IRAM) at a U.S. base southeast of Baghdad, killing one American civilian (1 killed, unknown wounded).
[1]
Last Attack
: April 22, 2024: KH is believed to have launched a drone strike against the U.S. al-Asad Air Force base in Iraq’s Anbar province.
[2]
There are no reported casualties from the attack.
[3]
While KH has neither confirmed nor denied its involvement, analysts note that attacks against al-Asad base are “almost exclusively associated with (…) Kataib Hezbollah.”
[4]
Additionally, KH is one of the few Iraqi militant groups with an expertise in drone warfare (0 killed, 0 wounded).
Kata’ib Hezbollah (KH) is a Shia Iraqi insurgent group that was founded in 2007. Since August 2020, the group has been led by Ahmad al-Hamidawi. KH received training, logistical support, and weapons from the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC). From 2008-2011, KH directed most of its attacks against U.S. coalition forces in Iraq. The United States designated the groups as a Foreign Terrorist Organization on July 2, 2009. Following the U.S. withdrawal from Iraq in 2011, KH sent a large number of fighters to Syria to support the Assad government. The group is a leading member of the Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF), an umbrella group of Shia militant groups that formed to fight the Islamic State (IS) in Iraq. After the general defeat of IS in Iraq in 2017, KH returned to targeting U.S. forces.
Narrative
Kata’ib Hezbollah (KH) is an Iranian-backed, Iraqi Shia paramilitary organization. Its name can be translated as the “Brigades of the Party of God,” and the group is also known as the Hezbollah Brigades. Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis initially established KH in 2003 as an umbrella organization comprised of five other militant groups: Kata’ib Karbala, Kata’ib Abu al-Fadl al-Abbas, Kata’ib Zeid Ibn Ali, Kata’ib Ali al-Akbar, and Kata’ib al-Sajjad.
[5]
Kata’ib Hezbollah assumed its present form as a centralized group in 2007 when it announced the merger of these five organizations.
[6]
Prior to founding KH, Muhandis was a member of the Badr Organization of Reconstruction and Development (Badr Organization), another Iranian-backed militant group that has operated in Iraq and Syria. In the Badr Organization, Muhandis worked closely with the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and the Lebanese armed group Hezbollah during the Iran-Iraq War and throughout the 1990s.
When Muhandis founded KH in 2007, he retained close ties with Lebanese Hezbollah and the IRGC. Hezbollah provided training in guerilla warfare and weapons for early KH recruits, and many analysts believe that the IRGC was directly involved in KH’s formation.
[7]
Under Muhandis’s leadership, KH established smuggling networks to transfer Iranian weapons and equipment to Iraq, which are likely still in use.
[8]
The United States designated KH as a terrorist organization in 2009.
[9]
KH is a member of the Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF, “Hashd al-Shaabi” in Arabic), which formed in 2014 as part of Iraq’s efforts to counter the Islamic State (IS). PMF is an umbrella group composed of approximately fifty  Iraqi militias, most of which are Shia.
[10]
Lacking a strong military, the Iraqi government partnered with the militias to liberate IS-held territory.
[11]
In 2016, the Iraqi Parliament passed legislation making PMF an official part of the state security apparatus.
[12]
Despite the PMF’s military successes, the umbrella group is often criticized for elevating Shia militias above the Iraqi state and prioritizing Iranian interests. PMF forces have also been condemned for committing atrocities against civilians.
[13]
Though its future is unclear, PMF remains a major political and military actor in Iraq.
[14]
KH founder Muhandis co-founded the PMF and became the organization’s de facto head, which pushed KH into a dominant role.
[15]
KH staffs the PMF’s 45
th
, 46
th
, and 47
th
brigades.
[16]
To increase their numbers without compromising secrecy, KH and other PMF leaders established small, local brigades exclusively dedicated to fighting in Iraq, such as the KH sub-group Saraya al-Difa al-Shabi (KH-SDS) that formed in April 2014.
[17]
KH has pledged loyalty to Ayatollah Khamenei and is one of the most powerful of PMF’s many Iran-backed groups.
[18]
Along with senior commanders of Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq (AAH) and the Badr Organization, KH leaders hold positions on PMF Commission, PMF’s decision-making body.
[19]
While the PMF is nominally subordinate to the Iraqi Prime Minister’s Office, the IRGC exerts significant influence over KH and bankrolls many of its operations
[20]
[21]
Some analysts label KH as a de facto branch of the IRGC.
[22]
2007-2011: Kata’ib Hezbollah targets U.S. coalition forces in Iraq
From 2007 to 2011, KH focused most of its resources on fighting U.S. coalition forces in Iraq. According to U.S. diplomat Ali Khedery, KH was responsible for “some of the most lethal attacks against U.S. and coalition forces throughout the [U.S.-led war in Iraq].”
[23]
The group was particularly known for using deadly roadside bombs and improvised rocket-assisted mortars (IRAMs).
[24]
Initially, KH did not target the Iraqi army or government. However, KH threatened reprisals against the Iraqi government and its forces following the government’s approval of a U.S.-Iraq Security Partnership in November 2008.
[25]
After U.S. troops withdrew from Iraq in 2011, KH refused to heed the Iraqi government’s calls for all militant groups in the country to demilitarize. The group cited ongoing instability in Iraq as justification for its refusal to lay down its arms.
[26]
2012-2017: Kata’ib Hezbollah targets other armed groups in Iraq and Syria
KH’s operations between 2012 and 2017 largely fall into two categories: those broadly against Sunni rebel groups and Sunni-held areas and those against the Islamic State (IS). In Syria, KH operations were equally focused on Sunni rebel groups and IS, while KH’s primary adversary in Iraq was IS.
KH’s general operations in Syria
KH was among the first Iraqi Shia organizations to send troops to support Bashar al-Assad’s government in the Syrian civil war. KH officially announced its presence in Syria in March 2013, but its fighters served earlier in Syrian front groups.
[27]
For example, KH and Asa’ib Ahl al-Haqq (AAH), another major Iraqi Shia paramilitary group, established the front group Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas (LAFA) in 2012. LAFA was almost entirely comprised of Iraqi fighters, but was based in Damascus, Syria.
[28]
In 2013, KH and AAH also formed the front group Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba (HHN).
[29]
Within a year of their formation, LAFA and HHN became virtually independent, and KH began operating in Syria under its own banner against the Iraqi government’s wishes.
[30]
KH’s intervention in the Syrian civil war appears to have been motivated primarily by it’s loyalty to Iran. Though KH propagandists and public figures often stated that the group sought to defend Syrian Shia and Shiite shrines in Syria from sectarian violence, KH’s motives were likely far more politically motivated.
[31]
As a member of Iran’s “Axis of Resistance”, KH and other Iraqi
fasa’il
(Arabic for armed group)
intervened on Assad’s behalf to secure the regime from internal opponents.
[32]
KH is believed to maintain a contingent force of roughly 2,500 fighters in Syria and is also thought to have been an effective combatant.
[33]
In 2014, KH began expanding its activities in Syria after IS seized Mosul, Iraq, and rebel-held Aleppo, Syria. This expansion of KH operations was directed by Iranian IRGC-Quds Force commander, Major General Qassim Suleimani. Suleimani reportedly argued that “the road to liberate Mosul [was] through Aleppo.”
[34]
In cooperation with Hezbollah and the Badr Organization, KH created local militias, such as Fawj al-Imam al-Hijjah near Aleppo, to solidify Syrian Shia control in strategic villages.
[35]
Reports also suggest that KH filled combat roles and executed attacks against Sunni rebel groups as part of Assad’s 2012-2016 siege to retake Aleppo from a litany of jihadist and secular opposition forces.
[36]
By the end of 2015, KH claimed to have sent over 1,000 fighters to Aleppo alone, sustaining only 40 casualties.
[37]
As of June 2024, KH maintains a presence in Syria.
[38]
Additionally, the KH-staffed 45
th
, 46
th
, and 47
th
PMF brigades are stationed in the Jazira and Badia regions, which lie on the Iraq-Syria border.
[39]
KH’s campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq
In Iraq, KH joined the newly established Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF) in 2014. KH founder Muhandis became the de facto head of PMF, propelling KH to a central role in the umbrella group.
[40]
To expand their influence in Iraq, KH and other PMF leaders established small, local brigades exclusively dedicated to fighting in Iraq, such as KH sub-group Saraya al-Difa al-Shabi (KH-SDS).
[41]
In 2014 and 2015, KH and many PMF brigades combined forces to counter the IS advance into the Anbar Province and northern Iraq.
[42]
In June 2014, KH and AAH first recaptured Samarra, Iraq, an important holy site in Shia Islam.
[43]
Then, in August 2014, KH, AAH, and other PMF militias successfully broke the IS siege of Amerli supported by U.S. airpower and Kurdish Peshmerga forces.
[44]
In March 2015, KH played a critical role to retake Tikrit, a city north of Samarra. An estimated 30,000 fighters from KH, PMF, and Iraqi security forces operated in conjunction with Iraqi air support to recapture Tikrit in one of Iraq’s largest offensives against IS up to that date.
[45]
In May 2016, KH, PMF, and Iraqi forces began the campaign to retake Fallujah, Iraq, the largest IS-held city near Baghdad.
[46]
The Iraqi Ground and Air Forces spearheaded the operation, with backing from the United States. Though the U.S. supported these counter-IS operations, it withheld air support from select PMF groups, including KH, in protest of Shia militias entering Sunni cities.
[47]
As a result, PMF leadership and the Iraqi Joint Operations Command released statements assuring that Shia militants would not enter Fallujah.
[48]
Initially, KH and other PMF groups focused on encircling and securing the outskirts of Fallujah.
[49]
But, according to some reports, KH and PMF members wore Iraqi Army uniforms so that U.S. airstrikes would continue in their areas of assault.
[50]
Ultimately, KH was heavily involved in the city's seizure and became a part of its permanent security apparatus.
[51]
In late 2016 and early 2017, KH also played a significant role in Iraq’s operation to retake Mosul in what would become the largest military operation in Iraq since the U.S.-led 2003 invasion.
[52]
To bolster its forces, KH reportedly redirected 2,000 of its fighters from Syria to the Mosul campaign.
[53]
The offensive began in mid-October 2016. Iraqi and Kurdish Peshmerga forces converged on the eastern part of the city with support from Iraqi and U.S. airstrikes.
[54]
KH and PMF forces concentrated on Mosul’s western axis to block IS fighters from escaping to Syria.
[55]
These forces began their offensive with Tal Afar, a smaller city west of Mosul populated mainly by Sunni Muslims and ethnic Turkmen.
[56]
On November 20, 2016, KH and the Badr Organization led PMF militants to completely encircle Tal Alfar with assistance from Kurdish Peshmerga forces.
[57]
By the end of 2016, PMF had taken back dozens of IS-held villages surrounding Tal Afar, and KH claimed it was advancing west to clear the Syrian border region of IS weapons caches.
[58]
In January 2017, Iraqi and Kurdish Peshmerga forces ultimately recaptured eastern Mosul and began to redirect their efforts to the western axis alongside PMF and KH.
[59]
In joint operations backed by U.S. air support, Iraqi forces fully recaptured Mosul by the end of July 2017 and Tal Afar by the end of August 2017.
[60]
In November 2017, under direction from Iran, KH also returned to Syria to assist in liberating the border town Abu Kamal (or Al Bukamal), one of the last IS strongholds.
[61]
The liberation of Abu Kamal carried significant importance for Iran because of its strategic location along the Iranian supply route from Tehran to Lebanon.
[62]
During KH's participation in the campaign against IS, the group indiscriminately targeted Sunni civilians in areas recovered from IS.
[63]
For example, in the months after KH recaptured Samarra, Amnesty International recorded over 107 kidnappings of Sunni men, 30 of which were executed.
[64]
In Tikrit, locals reported that KH systematically burned homes, looted, and kidnapped residents.
[65]
In 2016, Human Rights Watch documented some of the worst violence perpetrated by KH, including torture, executions, and mass “enforced disappearances.”
[66]
Reports find that KH and other Shia militias targeted Sunni civilian populations in “blind revenge” for IS attacks.
[67]
KH continuously denied allegations of indiscriminate violence against Iraq’s Sunni population. In 2015, the Iraqi Interior Ministry opened an investigation into the reported abuses, but no consequences were levied against the group.
[68]
When KH helped seize Fallujah from IS in 2016, it publicly attempted to justify atrocities against Sunni civilians by arguing that the majority of Fallujah’s Sunnis had actively supported IS.
[69]
At the end of 2017, Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi announced victory over IS.
[70]
Drawing upon their growing influence in Iraq, KH and PMF further inserted themselves into local economies and politics. Along with the Badr Organization and other PMF groups, KH sent members to run in local and parliamentary elections. KH and PMF also permanently embedded themselves in Iraq’s security apparatus by establishing offices and checkpoints in areas they had helped liberate. KH leveraged its checkpoints to pillage northern Iraqi cities’ cement and oil industries – especially those of Sunni-majority Baiji and the Turkmen-majority cities of Kirkuk and Tuz Kurmatu.
[71]
2018-2021: Kata’ib Hezbollah returns to targeting U.S. forces
As IS influence declined in late 2018 and early 2019, KH returned its focus to opposing the U.S. presence in Iraq. Although KH tacitly relied on U.S. support in its campaign against IS, KH vehemently maintained its anti-American sentiments. In August 2018, tensions rose between the U.S., Israel, and Iran after Iran transferred short-range ballistic missiles to PMF and KH-controlled areas in Iraq.
[72]
At the beginning of September, PMF member Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq (AAH) fired rockets at the U.S. embassy in Baghdad. The same day, KH allegedly conducted a rocket attack near the U.S. Consulate in Basra, which was evacuated and closed indefinitely.
[73]
In response to these attacks, the U.S. stated that it would hold Iran responsible for attacks carried out by Iran-backed militias. The U.S. State Department also designated the Iranian IRGC as a Foreign Terrorist Organization in April 2019.
[74]
The escalation continued in May 2019 when a drone attack destroyed oil pumps in Saudi Arabia. Although Houthi rebels in Yemen initially claimed responsibility for the attack, U.S. reports concluded that KH likely launched the drones from Iraq. One day after the drone attack, the U.S. State Department removed all non-essential government employees from Iraq.
[75]
From July to September 2019, Israel responded to KH’s escalations against coalition targets with multiple anonymous airstrikes against PMF weapons depots. One of these airstrikes targeted a KH convoy. Israel never publicly claimed responsibility for the strike, but U.S. and Iraqi reports confirmed Israeli involvement.
[76]
KH leader and founder Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis responded by declaring that the U.S. was “the first and last party responsible” for the airstrikes and that PMF would use “all means at its disposal” to defend its interests.
[77]
In late 2019, KH shifted strategies to respond to domestic unrest in Iraq while continuing to counter U.S. influence. Beginning in October, anti-government protestors demonstrated in Baghdad and across Iraq’s southern provinces. Their grievances centered on government corruption and failure to foster economic opportunity and provide public services.
[78]
As the movement progressed, protestors condemned Iran for enabling government corruption and interfering in Iraqi affairs through PMF.
[79]
Iraqi security forces forcefully cracked down on protests with tear gas and live ammunition. Over 100 people died because of the violence in the first six days of demonstrations.
[80]
By January 2020, over 600 protestors had died, with thousands of injuries and an unknown number of arrests and torture cases.
[81]
Early reports suggested that PMF snipers stationed on rooftops were responsible for a significant number of the deaths. Iraqi Interior Ministry spokesman Saad Maan released a statement that Iraqi security forces did not fire on protestors and that all mass shooting deaths were the responsibility of militant groups. PMF spokesman Ahmed Jassim al-Asadi denied any PMF presence. The extent of KH and PMF involvement in the crackdown remains unknown. Nonetheless, the continued escalation of violence only reaffirmed and reemphasized protestors’ demand for the removal of Iranian influence in Iraq.
[82]
Amidst growing domestic discontent, KH worked under the direction of IRGC Major General Qassim Suleimani to refocus attention away from Iranian interference in Iraq. Suleimani's plan was for KH to provoke a U.S. military response and draw Iraqi anger away from Iran. In early October 2019, the IRGC transferred Katyusha rocket launchers and shoulder-fired missiles to KH. In a meeting weeks later, Suleimani tasked KH with forming another low-profile militia that could evade U.S. detection. He also instructed KH leader Muhandis to use KH’s drone capabilities to identify U.S. military and personnel targets in Iraq.
[83]
On December 27, 2019, KH launched a rocket attack on the Iraqi K-1 Air Base near Kirkuk. This attack departed from previous months of indirect fire that targeted Iraqi military bases with a U.S. presence.
[84]
The attack killed an American contractor and wounded multiple U.S. and Iraqi troops.
[85]
Two days later, the U.S. retaliated with airstrikes against three KH bases in Iraq and two in Syria. According to KH, the airstrikes killed at least 24 fighters and destroyed ammunition depots holding rockets and drones.
[86]
KH denied responsibility for the attack near Kirkuk. In response, the group drew upon a surge in anti-U.S. sentiment among Iraqis to incite countrywide demonstrations and dampen the anti-corruption and anti-Iran/PMF tendencies that had been motivating Iraq’s ongoing protest movement.
[87]
Following the airstrikes, KH-led, pro-Iran protesters breached the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad and set fire to perimeter buildings.
[88]
The protestors withdrew after Iraqi Prime Minister Abdul Mahdi denounced the U.S presence in Iraq and promised “dangerous consequences.”
[89]
Escalation continued on January 3, 2020, when the U.S. conducted a drone strike on a convoy carrying IRGC and PMF personnel near Baghdad International Airport. The strike killed KH leader Muhandis and the head of the Iranian IRGC-Quds Force, Major General Qassim Suleimani.
[90]
The strike drew sharp admonition from Iraq and Iran, both of whom condemned the strike as a violation of Iraq’s sovereignty and warned of “harsh retaliation.”
[91]
On January 5, 2020, the Iraqi Parliament passed a resolution calling for the removal of U.S. troops from the country.
[92]
In February 2020, Ahmad al-Hamidawi (Abu Hussein), a KH commander, succeeded Muhandis as secretary-general. Soon after, the U.S. Department of State placed sanctions on al-Hamidawi after labelling him a Specially Designated Global Terrorist.
[93]
Al-Hamidawi was not Muhandis’s chosen successor. The former leader intended for his long-time compatriot Abdul Aziz al-Mohammedawi (Abu Fadak) to lead KH and the PMF in case of his death. Al-Mohammedawi, who was friendly with Qasem Soleimani, was also the favored candidate of the IRGC.
[94]
However, he is reportedly “uncharismatic (…) afraid of public speaking, [and] struggles to build relationships beyond his immediate circle.”
[95]
Moreover, KH is a group that prizes secrecy, but al-Mohammedawi’s tactics are often brash and blatant. These factors pushed KH’s governing Shura Council to select al-Hamidawi over Muhandis’s picked successor.
Later that month, KH nominated al-Mohammedawi, to be the new military leader of the PMF.
[96]
However, several leading figures within KH opposed the nomination, including the new Secretary-General al-Hamidawi and Abu Mustafa al-Sheibani, who runs the Sheibani Network smuggling operation.
[97]
Additionally, several of the Sistani-aligned “shrine units” within the PMF opposed al-Mohammedawi’s nomination, who they believed would expand Iranian influence in Iraq. Irreconcilable divisions emerged between the followers of Iraqi Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani and Iranian Grand Ayatollah Khamenei. Disagreements were heightened because international sanctions and the COVID-19 pandemic reduced Tehran’s ability to support Iraqi militants, thereby weakening the pro-Iran faction. While al-Mohammedawi eventually overcame political challenges and was appointed Chief-of-Staff, in April 2020, the Sistani-aligned shrine unit militias left the PMF.
[98]
As of June 2024, al-Mohammedawi continues to lead the PMF and hold much influence within KH. As PMF Chief-of-Staff, he has reasserted KH’s preeminence within Iraq’s Shia militant movement and greatly expanded PMF control of the government.
[99]
On March 11, 2020, a rocket attack against Camp Taji, a coalition military installation near Baghdad, killed a U.S. soldier, a British soldier, and a U.S. contractor. The attack injured at least twelve others.
[100]
The U.S. held KH responsible for the attack and responded with strikes on five KH weapons sites across Iraq.
[101]
KH, however, did not claim responsibility. Instead, the group issued a statement that called for the responsible party to “be proud” and claim the attack itself.
[102]
Eventually, Usbat al-Thaireen, a new, lesser-known armed group, took responsibility. However, the U.S. claimed that Usbat al-Thaireen was a front for KH and other Iran-backed militias. The U.S. alleged that the group was created to allow PMF plausible deniability for attacks since the PMF technically exists as part of Iraq’s state security forces.
[103]
At the end of March, the Pentagon issued a directive to create plans to destroy KH by targeting group leaders, bases, and weapons. KH responded that any actions by the U.S. would be met by “full force” retaliation against Americans and any Iraqis aiding the U.S.
[104]
In May 2020, Mustafa al-Kadhimi became the new Prime Minister of Iraq. During his first months in office, Kadhimi showed receptivity to the demands of anti-government protestors and openness to taking a stronger stance against Iran-backed militias.
[105]
On June 25, 2020, Kadhimi ordered a raid on a KH base in southern Baghdad, citing intelligence that KH planned to attack the Green Zone, an area that houses Iraqi and foreign government buildings.
[106]
Iraqi security forces detained at least 14 KH members. In response, KH entered the Green Zone, storming a Counter Terrorism Service building to demand their release.
[107]
In a show of force, on June 26
th
, al-Mohammedawi led 150 KH fighters in a dozen armed vehicles to the Prime Minister’s residence in the Green Zone.
[108]
All but one of the KH detainees were released. This incident greatly weakened Kadhimi’s credibility and showcased the strength of the PMF in Iraq, which is .
[109]
Al-Hamidawi released a defiant statement shortly after securing the release of his fighters in which he emphasized KH’s autonomy from the state and its loyalty to Iran-backed Islamic resistance.
[110]
Human rights activists, journalists, and government officials have accused KH of being responsible for the July 2020 assassination of Iraqi researcher and advisor to the PM, Kadhimi Hisham al-Hashimi.
[111]
Hashimi was known to criticize militant groups, including KH, as well as the government for its handling of extremism. He received multiple death threats from KH and other militant groups, but the responsible party remains unclear.
[112]
KH was one of several Iran-backed militias that agreed to a unilateral “ceasefire” on strikes against U.S. diplomatic and military targets in Iraq in October 2020.
[113]
Mohammed Mohie, a spokesman for KH, said that attacks against the U.S. in Iraq would halt while the militias waited for the U.S.-led coalition to detail its timeline for its complete withdrawal from Iraq, but reiterated that “this truce is conditional, and the condition is that we will accept [the U.S.’s] retreat.”
[114]
Mohie added that he was speaking on behalf of the “Iraqi Resistance Coordination Commission,” an umbrella group that reportedly governs the activities of all anti-U.S. militias in Iraq.
[115]
Mohie’s statement on the commission’s behalf suggests that KH wields considerable authority among the Iran-aligned Iraqi militias. However, it is unclear what authority the commission wields over its participants’ activities. In May 2021, the commission issued a statement saying that it rejects the ongoing Iraq-U.S. strategic dialogue and status of forces negotiations and promises to escalate attacks against Coalition installations in Iraq.
[116]
On February 25, 2021, the U.S. conducted an airstrike on an unofficial border crossing and military facility operated by KH and Kata’ib Sayyid al-Shuhada (KSS), another Iraqi militia, near Abu Kamal on the Iraq-Syria border.
[117]
Casualty figures from the strike vary: a KH-affiliated source reported the strike killed one person and severely wounded several others, Reuters reported that the strike killed “at least” 17 people, while the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that the strike killed 22 “militiamen” of unknown affiliation.
[118]
The U.S. airstrike served as retaliation for an attack on February 15, when several 107 mm rockets struck near a coalition-run military base at Erbil International Airport near the Kurdistan Regional Government’s capital of Erbil. The barrage killed a civilian contractor with the coalition and wounded six others.
[119]
A U.S. Defense Department-led investigation into the attack later determined that KH and KSS bore responsibility.
[120]
However, a lesser-known armed group named Awliya al-Dam – a potential affiliate of Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, another Iraqi Shiite militia – had claimed responsibility for the barrage three hours after it took place.
[121]
In May 2021, Iraq’s Counter Terrorism Service (CTS) arrested Qassim Musleh, the PMF operations head for Anbar province and a close affiliate of KH.
[122]
CTS arrested Musleh for his alleged involvement in attacks on Iraqi and coalition military installations as well as the murder of Ihab al-Wazni, an activist who was killed near his home in Karbala earlier that month.
[123]
The arrest was prompted by the popular movement #WhoKilledMe, which exerted pressure on the Iraqi government and even attacked the Iranian consulate in Karbala.
[124]
Attempting to mirror al-Mohammedawi’s victory over Prime Minister Kadhimi the year prior, KH fighters attempted to enter the Green Zone and  demand Musleh’s release.
[125]
This time, however, the Iraqi military prevented the militants from entering the Green Zone.
[126]
In response, KH and other PMF militias publicized doctored footage claiming they had taken command of the Green Zone and freed Musleh.
[127]
This claim was largely believed by local and foreign observers and was re-publicized by international media outlets like the Associated Press and the Washington Post, displaying KH’s information warfare capabilities.
[128]
Iraqi authorities actually released Musleh two weeks later after a high court dismissed  his case due to a “lack of evidence.”
[129]
On July 29, 2021, the commander of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Quds Force (IRGC-QF), Esmail Qaani visited Baghdad and Najaf to convey Ayatollah Khamenei’s new orders to Iraqi militant leaders.
[130]
The visit was necessitated by rapidly escalating hostilities with the U.S., particularly by KH, because lower-level commanders were violating the October 2020 ceasefire and launching drones strikes against U.S. bases.
[131]
The evident lack of discipline and coordination within Iraq’s muqawama (resistance movement) stemmed from the ongoing leadership crisis sparked by Qasem Soleimani and Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis’s deaths in 2020. KH, in particular, had seen infighting between PMF Chief-of-Staff al-Mohammedawi and KH Secretary-General al-Hamiwdawi, reducing organizational efficacy. Initiated by al-Mohammedawi and likely with Iranian backing, al-Hamidawi was ousted in a 14-19 Shura Council vote two days before Qaani’s visit.
[132]
However, the Secretary-General rejected the vote, seriously fracturing the Shura Council. After significant mediation by the IRGC-QF, al-Hamidawi was allowed to retain his position as KH Secretary-General.
[133]
Qaani gave directions to restore discipline, adhere to the ceasefire, and focus on winning Iraq’s October parliamentary election.
[134]
2021-2024: Kata’ib Hezbollah’s Political Involvement
In October 2021, KH’s Harakat Hoquq party (Hoquq Movement) suffered a decisive defeat in the Iraqi parliamentary elections—winning just one of the 32 races it competed in.
[135]
Overall, the Fateh Alliance, PMF’s political coalition, performed poorly, winning only 17 seats compared to the 48 the bloc held in 2018.
[136]
The election reflected changing public opinion toward PMF groups. The popularity formerly enjoyed by KH and other PMF militias during the fight against IS ebbed because of their violent repression of Iraqi protestors and loyalty to Iran.
[137]
The Sadrists, one of the Sistani-aligned shrine units that split from the PMF in 2020, won the most seats in the parliamentary election.
[138]
Led by Moqtada al-Sadr, a cleric from an influential Shia family, they achieved victory by aligning with the Kurdistan Democratic Party and Sunni National Progress Party. However, the Sadrist government was short lived.
Faiq Zaydan, a Muhandis affiliate and Supreme Judicial Court Justice, issued rulings that changed government formation rules from a simple majority (165 seats) to a two-thirds majority (218 seats), forcing the Sadrists to include the Fateh Alliance in the ruling coalition.
[139]
Zaydan also reactivated a 10-year-old case that threatened Kurdistan’s right to independently export oil, threatening the prosperity of al-Sadr’s Kurdish allies.
[140]
The court eventually deemed independent Kurdish oil exports to be illegal, hamstringing the region’s economy.
[141]
Kurdish oil production was also targeted by PMF and IRGC forces, which launched military strikes against Kurdistan.
[142]
In June 2022, just months after a decisive electoral victory, all 73 Sadrists resigned their MP seats in protest.
[143]
Most of the vacated seats went to Fateh Alliance candidates, which gave them enough control over parliament to form a Shia, Iran-friendly government under Prime Minister al-Sudani. In this seat reallocation, KH’s Hoquq Movement gained five seats, now holding a total representation of six MPs.
[144]
As of 2024, al-Sudani still serves as the Prime Minister of Iraq.
Since the beginning of al-Sudani’s term, KH member and PMF Chief-of-Staff Abdul Aziz al-Mohammedawi has taken steps to expand the PMF’s influence over the Iraqi state. One of the ways al-Mohammedawi has achieved this is by using state funds to strengthen the PMF. The militant dominated parliament passed legislation granting PMF fighters state pensions and the right to be prosecuted only in PMF military courts.
[145]
These enhanced benefits have contributed to skyrocketing enlistments for PMF militas, leading to a 95% increase in total registered fighters in 2023.
[146]
Additionally, the al-Sudani government’s 2023 budget includes a $305 million capital injection to the Muhandis General Company (MGC), the PMF conglomerate named after the former KH leader, and a $1.2 million secret expenses fund, a black budget like that given to the Iraqi National Intelligence Service.
[147]
Al-Mohammedawi is also positioning the PMF to take over Iraq’s military command. Prime Minister al-Sudani approved a substantial increase in the number of PMF officer trainees accepted into Iraqi service academies (from 10 to over 400 trainees).
[148]
As PMF head, Al-Mohammedawi nominates KH fighters, as well as trusted affiliates from other PMF militias, to officer training programs. This further cements KH’s influence within the PMF. Additionally, Muhandis planned to establish PMF command colleges, staff colleges, and service academies prior to his death, to attain complete autonomy and supremacy within Iraq’s security apparatus.
[149]
Given al-Mohammedawi’s adherence to Muhandis’ plans so far, this could also be his ultimate objective. The combination of economic and military privileges accrued to the PMF by al-Mohammedawi during the al-Sudani government is the beginning of an IRGC-style organization in Iraq, with KH at the helm through its leadership of the umbrella group.
KH’s Continued Military Activities
In addition to politics, KH has continued to attack the U.S. military presence in Iraq. On August 15, 2022, the al-Tanf military base was struck by two Iranian KAS-04 drones.
[150]
No American casualties were reported. While KH did not claim credit for the attack, it’s considered “the key operator of fixed-wing drones in Iraq.”
[151]
Additionally, the KAS-04 was put on display by Jazira Operations Command units during a PMF parade, indicating that KH was likely behind the attack.
[152]
KH’s hesitance to claim the attack can be pointed to a desire to avoid provoking U.S. counterstrikes in Iraq, which could sour the sympathetic al-Sudani government’s electoral odds.
[153]
On March 27, 2023, KH kidnapped Elizabeth Tsurkov, an Israeli-Russian doctoral student at Princeton, who was conducting research on the Sadrist movement, on suspicion of being a spy.
[154]
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu publicly held KH responsible.
[155]
KH security chief Abu Ali al-Askari, an alias of Hoquq Movement head Hossein Moanes Jabbar al-Hijami, didn’t deny the group’s involvement and merely stated that KH will attempt “to find out the fate of the Zionist prisoner or prisoners in Iraq.”
[156]
However, other militant groups have implicitly or explicitly praised KH for their role in the kidnapping through posts on the social media platform Telegram.
[157]
Despite U.S. pressure against al-Sudani, Tsurkov has not been released as of June 2024.
On May 14, 2023, KH forces fought with Iraq’s Counter Terrorism Service leading to at least two deaths and two injuries, alongside the destruction of several vehicles.
[158]
Both KH and the Counter Terrorism Service are officially entities of the Iraqi government, and their open combat indicates Baghdad’s low degree of control. The next day, KH and Iraqi Federal Police officers exchanged machine gun fire in Albu Aitha, a suburb of Baghdad.
[159]
When the Iraqi Security Media Cell reported the fight, they refrained from condemning KH for the conflict.
[160]
Reaction to the October 7
th
Gaza Crisis
KH Secretary-General, al-Hamidawi, released a statement on October 10, 2023, congratulating the “mujahedin of the Islamic Resistance of Palestine on their great victories” and pledged to assist in the fight against the “Pagans” by preparing “rockets, drones, and special forces” to hit U.S. bases.
[161]
On October 18, in retaliation for the explosion at al-Ahli hospital in Gaza, KH struck the U.S. al-Asad Air Base with two drones.
[162]
The attack resulted in minor injuries for U.S. coalition forces.
[163]
After October 18, KH regularly bombarded U.S. military installations throughout the Middle East. On October 23, Hossein Moanes, the head of the Hoquq Movement, called on the al-Sudani government to remove U.S. forces from Iraq.
[164]
On October 26, 2023, Moanes used his online militant alias, KH security chief al-Askari, to reaffirm KH’s commitment to “a long exhaustion war against the enemy [Israel and its allies].”
[165]
Moanes is the spokesperson for the Special Operations branch of KH. In the aftermath of Muhandis’s death in 2020, KH leadership was divided between Secretary-General al-Hamidawi, who heads Special Operations, and PMF Chief-of-Staff al-Mohammedawi. Immediately following Muhandis’ death, KH suffered from divisive infighting between the two factions.
[166]
However, the leadership dispute has settled into a relatively cooperative “non-hierarchical brotherhood.”
[167]
Continuing the aggressive rhetoric, on November 4, a day before U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken’s visit to Iraq, al-Askari threatened that “Antony Blinken, the son of the Jew, the foreign minister of America if not the Zionist minister of war. His visit is not welcomed in the Iraq of Ali and Hussein (peace be upon them). If he comes, we will face it with unprecedented escalation.”
[168]
Between October 2023 and February 2024, the Islamic Resistance of Iraq, a cover used by many Iran-backed groups, claimed 178 attacks against U.S. bases—of which KH is likely responsible for a significant proportion.
[169]
However, most of these attacks resulted in no fatalities or casualties as they aimed to destroy military assets or harass and demoralize American soldiers. On Christmas day, 2023, however, KH launched a drone strike against U.S. forces in northern Iraq, causing three injuries.
[170]
Within 13 hours of the attack, U.S. retaliatory strikes were conducted against three KH military facilities, likely killing multiple militants.
[171]
On January 28, 2024, KH fired a rocket against Tower 22, a U.S. logistics support base in Jordan that houses 350 Army and Air Force personnel.
[172]
The rocket exploded a container-style housing unit, killing three service members and injuring over 40 others.
[173]
KH denied responsibility for the attack. However, Pentagon Deputy Press Secretary Sabrina Singh pinpointed KH, stating that the attack "has the footprints of Kataib Hezbollah.”
[174]
Given the high payload of the rocket used in the Tower 22 attack, analysts at the Washington Institute conclude that KH tactically decided to kill, not harass, U.S. soldiers.
[175]
KH’s choice of target—a U.S. base in the relatively neutral Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan—was an intentional message to push the U.S. to cease supporting Israel and pressure Jordan to choose a side in the Israel-Hamas conflict.
[176]
However, KH quickly recognized that the attack was taken more seriously by the U.S. than anticipated and plausible deniability would not suffice to protect them from severe retaliation. On January 30, KH Secretary-General al-Hamidawi announced that his organization would suspend “military and security operations against the occupation forces [United States] in order to prevent embarrassment to the Iraqi government.”
[177]
KH leadership hoped that a unilateral ceasefire would appease American officials.
[178]
However, on February 2
nd
, the U.S. retaliated against KH with sweeping strikes on seven militant facilities in Iraq and Syria, destroying 80 of 85 targets.
[179]
On February 7
th
, U.S. forces killed senior KH leader Abu Baqr al-Saeedi in Baghdad.
[180]
Despite significant U.S. actions and criticism from other militant groups, KH has publicly held firm to its unilateral ceasefire—suggesting IRGC involvement.
[181]
From January 30 to April 21, KH did not claim any attacks against U.S. targets. On April 5, 2024, KH secretary general al-Mohammedawi made a public visit to Tehran after an Israeli attack on the Iranian consulate in Damascus which killed IRGC-Quds Force senior commander Mohammad Reza Zahedi.
[182]
Al-Mohammedawi stated that the purpose of his visit was to “renew our covenant [i.e., loyalty to the Supreme Leader] and wait for the Leader’s decision.”
[183]
A few weeks after the visit, on April 21, KH attacked the U.S. al-Asad Air Base in Iraq’s Anbar region.
[184]
No U.S. casualties were reported.
[185]
There is some evidence of grassroots opposition to the ceasefire from KH fighters.
[186]
A KH affiliate group announced on the Telegram social media platform that the al-Assad attack marked the end of the ceasefire.
[187]
A few days later, however, KH officially announced that there was no change to the ceasefire policy.
[188]
The KH statement is likely false, as Iran vowed revenge for Israel’s April 2
nd
attack on its Syrian embassy, which would likely involve unleashing KH and other members of Tehran’s “axis of resistance” against U.S. and Israeli targets.
[189]
Organization
Vertical Tabs
Leadership
Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis
(2007- 2020): Muhandis was the founder of KH and served as its leader until he was killed in a drone strike in January 2020. Before establishing KH, Muhandis was a member of the Shia Islamic Dawa party before he fled Iraq in 1980.
[190]
Muhandis was accused of participating in a 1983 attack against the American and French Embassies in Kuwait and a 1985 assassination attempt against Kuwait’s emir.
[191]
In the 1980s and early 1990s, Muhandis served as the commander of the Badr Organization, which was the militant wing of the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI). Muhandis fought for Iran in the Iran-Iraq War, and he is believed to have held Iraqi and Iranian citizenship.
[192]
Muhandis formed KH in 2007 as the union of five other militant organizations.
[193]
In 2014, he helped establish a second Iraqi Shia militia group, Kata’ib Imam Ali (KIA).
[194]
He briefly served as an MP in the Iraqi Parliament under his given name, Jamal Jaafar Ibrahimi. He also served under Iraq’s national security advisor during the height of IS’s expansion.
[195]
From 2014 until his death in 2020, Muhandis was the commander of KH and the Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF).
[196]
A 2019 report described Muhandis as “the most powerful single actor” within PMF and “in essence an Iranian agent.”
[197]
A 2024 report stated that when he was alive, many Iraqi officials considered Muhandis to be a “more important representative of Iran than the Iranian Embassy.”
[198]
Muhandis was killed in a U.S. drone strike near Baghdad International Airport on January 3, 2020.
[199]
Ahmad al-Hamidawi (alias Abu Hussein)
(2007-present): As of June 2024, al-Hamidawi is the current Secretary-General of KH’s governing Shura Council. He was born in Iraq in 1974 and reportedly joined KH in 2007 as an early member. He was likely trained by the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC), but very little information is available about his activities before 2007. Until 2011, al-Hamidawi planned KH attacks against the U.S. coalition in Iraq. From 2011 to 2014, he led KH fighters in Syria to support the Assad government. He returned to Iraq’s Anbar Province in 2014 to oversee KH operations against IS in the Jurf al-Sakhar region. According to Human Rights Watch, al-Hamidawi likely played a central role in conducting forced disappearances, illegal detentions, and other activities that targeted Sunni civilians in the area.
[200]
In late 2019, al-Hamidawi allegedly organized KH attacks on anti-government protestors in Baghdad and southern Iraqi cities. He reportedly was a key leader of the pro-Iran protest and storming of the U.S. embassy in Baghdad in December 2019.
[201]
In February 2020, al-Hamidawi assumed leadership of KH under the title of Secretary General, succeeding Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis.
Abdul Aziz al-Mohammedawi (alias Abu Fadak)
(c. 2003-present): While little is known about al-Mohammedawi’s early life, some observers identify him as having been a member of the Badr Organization since the late 1980s.
[202]
Through this experience, al-Mohammedawi is believed to have met the future leader of the IRGC’s Quds Force Qassim Suleimani, with whom he later developed a close relationship.
[203]
Al-Mohammedawi fought against U.S. coalition forces from 2004 onward and was reportedly one of KH’s first members.
[204]
He is known by the nickname
al-Khal
– “the uncle” – potentially signifying his stature within KH.
[205]
In February 2020, KH controversially nominated al-Mohammedawi to succeed Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis as the new PMF Chief-of-Staff, which is the effective leader of the umbrella group.
[206]
Several leading figures within KH initially opposed Mohammedawi’s nomination, including current KH leader Ahmad Mohsen al-Hamidawi and prominent KH member Abu Mustapha al-Sheibani.
[207]
Moreover, multiple other factions within the PMF opposed al-Mohammedawi’s nomination, in particular, several of the Sistani-aligned “shrine units”, as they had been expelled from the PMF leadership commission and opposed perceived Iranian influence.
[208]
However, al-Mohammedawi overcame internal opposition and was formally appointed PMF Chief-of-Staff. In January 2021, the U.S. Treasury Department added Mohammedawi to its list of “specially designated nationals” responsible for acts of terrorism, subjecting him to sanctions.
[209]
As of June 2024, analysts have noted that al-Mohammedawi “has thus presided over a period of stability, growth, and now professionalization of the PMF, and he now faces no challengers in this role.”
[210]
Size Estimates
2013: 400 (Washington Institute for Near East Policy)
[212]
2014: 1,000 to 3,000 (Foundation for Defense of Democracies)
[213]
2016: 400 (State Department)
[214]
2016: 10,000 with a ‘core’ of 1,000 (American Enterprise Institute)
[215]
2019: 10,000 with 7,500 in Iraq and 2,500 in Syria (Combating Terrorism Center, USMA West Point)
[216]
Name Changes
Kata’ib Hezbollah has not changed its name, but it is also referred to as the Hezbollah Brigades.
[211]
Its name is sometimes also translated as the “Brigades of the Party of God.”
Resources
KH receives the vast majority of its funding and resources from Iran and Iranian-linked groups, such as Hezbollah. Both Hezbollah Unit 3800 – Hezbollah’s unit dedicated to training Iraqi militant groups—and the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) are believed to have provided KH with extensive training at bases in Iraq, Iran, and Lebanon. Such training is thought to have included instruction in small arms, building and planting improvised explosive devices (IEDs), coordinating and carrying out rocket attacks, and general guerrilla warfare tactics.
[217]
Some sources also suggest that KH militants were sent to Iran and Lebanon for training before being deployed to Syria in 2012 and 2013. This training allegedly taught militants how to adapt the insurgent tactics commonly used in Iraq to the urban street warfare more common in Syria.
[218]
Iran has also supplied KH with extensive weapons and munitions, including the Improvised Rocket Assisted Munitions (IRAMs) that became the hallmark of KH attacks on coalition forces during the Iraq War.
[219]
Some of these weapons may have been brought into Iraq by IRGC-Quds Force operatives. Others were smuggled in either via the smuggling network managed by KH founder Muhandis that linked Iran to Iraq or via a similar network run by Abu Mustapha al-Sheibani, who served as Muhandis’ successor as commander of the Badr Organization.
[220]
KH has used a variety of weaponry. In March 2016, the Long War Journal identified several U.S. military vehicles in a video of a KH convoy. These vehicles included an M1 Abrams Tank, an M88 Recovery Vehicle, a Humvee, and a Medium Tactical Vehicle Replacement (MTVR). The group also appeared to possess three M198 Howitzer artillery guns.
[221]
In the past, KH has also publicized its usage of Mine-Resistant Ambush Protected vehicles (MRAPs) and M113 armored personnel carriers (APCs).
[222]
However, it remains somewhat unclear how U.S.-made vehicles and equipment came into KH’s possession. Some observers have speculated that U.S.-made small arms and military vehicles are frequently stolen from Iraqi government stockpiles and sold on the black market to militias and private buyers.
[223]
In 2019, KH also relied heavily on sophisticated weapons provided by Iran, including drones, Katyusha rocket launchers, and shoulder-fired missiles.
[224]
In 2016, the PMF was integrated into the Iraqi security apparatus: at first via Prime Minister Abadi’s Executive Order 91, then confirmed later that year in the PMF Commission Law.
[225]
Since then, KH fighters have benefited from access to the state budget—they are paid state salaries, pensions, and can only be tried in PMF military courts.
[226]
Additionally, as a PMF member-organization, KH receives funding from the Iraqi state budget. Since the beginning of Prime Minister al-Sudani’s term in 2022, state funding for the PMF has skyrocketed to $2.6 billion per year.
[227]
Since the Iraqi state funds the PMF by headcount, it is unknown how much of the budget KH directly receives. KH contributes only about 10,000 fighters to the PMF’s total estimated force of over 200,000.
[228]
In April 2018, KH also gained a significant amount of financial capital from a $25 million ransom paid by Qatari officials. In 2018, it was estimated that KH allegedly received an estimated $50 million from Iran each year.
[229]
However, more recently, Iranian funding for KH has been significantly reduced due to the effects of sanctions and the COVID-19 pandemic on Iran’s economy.
[230]
In the 2018 parliamentary elections, the PMF’s Fateh Alliance political bloc won 48 of 329 seats.
[231]
The organization leveraged its newfound political power, in addition to its willingness to exercise violence, to pressure the state to grant it a business license. The PMF intended to mimic the IRGC’s Khatam al-Anbia—an economic conglomerate that financially supports the IRGC’s activities beyond its allocated budget.
[232]
Iraqi technocrats, traditional opponents of the PMF, fought bitterly against providing the militia organization with a license, rightly fearing that it would become an economic vehicle for stripping state assets and further entrench Iranian influence within the country.
[233]
However, in November 2022, Prime Minister al-Sudani approved the creation of a PMF economic conglomerate under the name “Muhandis General Company for Construction, Engineering, and Mechanical, Agricultural, and Industrial Contracting”, commonly referred to as the Muhandis General Company (MGC).
[234]
The MGC is named after former KH leader Muhandis and the articles of incorporation designate MGC ownership to the PMF Commission.
[235]
Al-Mohammedawi heads the PMF Commission, granting KH significant control over the MGC.
Al-Sudani also decreed that the MGC would be valued at “100 billion Iraqi dinar ($76 million), of which 90 percent will be transfers of government property (at undisclosed discounts) and just 10 billion dinar ($7.6 million) will be cash.”
[236]
One month after incorporation, the MGC received 1.2 million acres of government land (about half the area of Lebanon) for free.
[237]
PMF militant groups, likely including KH, have launched drone strikes against Saudi Arabia from this territory since its transfer of ownership.
[238]
Moreover, KH and other PMF militias have used the MGC to seize high-value urban real estate, forming personal fiefdoms in Iraq’s major cities.
[239]
Critically, unlike other Iraqi state companies, the MGC can accept asset transfers from the Prime Minister’s Office, including land and capital, without approval from the cabinet or parliament.
[240]
When questioned about the vast freedoms granted to the MGC, an official from the al-Sudani government stated that “The idea is to keep them [the PMF] busy so they do not attack anyone.”
[241]
PMF militias use their control over the state to secure illegal revenue streams. For one, PMF groups steal customs revenue from the Iraqi state within their operational regions. The Iraqi government’s annual total losses from stolen customs revenue by all PMF groups is estimated at $10 billion.
[242]
Additionally, militants’ illegal taxation of Iraqi citizens is reported to yield up to $300,000 per day.
[243]
While undoubtedly profitable, the precise amount KH benefits from these practices are unknown.
Locations
Disclaimer
: This is a partial list of where the militant organization has bases and where it operates. This does not include information on where the group conducts major attacks or has external influences.
KH’s headquarters is reportedly located in the Shia areas of Baghdad, Iraq. The group likely recruits from Iraq’s major metropolitan areas and across the Shia regions of southern Iraq.
[244]
The group has also recruited from Syrian Shia communities to sustain its operations in that country’s civil war.
[245]
KH began fighting against the Islamic State and other Sunni militant organizations in 2013.
[246]
KH cooperated with other PMF groups, regular Iraqi armed forces, and sometimes U.S. forces to combat IS and its allies across central, western, and northern Iraq.  Specifically, KH carried out operations in and around Anbar province and the cities of Samarra, Tikrit, and Mosul. After IS’s general defeat in late 2017, KH refocused its efforts to target the U.S. presence in Iraq, and the group carried out attacks throughout the country. KH has also operated in Syria, where its forces have fought for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and against the IS.
[247]
Although it remains unclear when the first KH fighters arrived in Syria, it is generally believed that the group sent troops to aid the Assad regime as early as 2011.
[248]
Most of KH’s recent activity has been recorded in Iraq, although it continued to hold bases and weapons caches in Syria as of December 2019.
[249]
Strategy
Vertical Tabs
Ideology and Goals
KH is a Shiite Islamist organization that professes Wilayat al-Faqih, or the Guardianship of the Jurist. Formulated by Ayatollah Khomeini, Iran’s first Supreme Leader, Wilayat al-Faqih is a Shiite Islamist theory of governance that seeks to entrust temporal political authority over God’s people entirely to an Islamic jurist (Faqih).
[250]
As with other so-called muqawama groups (“resistance” groups; a term used to distinguish Iran-aligned militants in Iraq), KH recognizes Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, as the group’s marja’ al-Taqlid – a preeminent Shiite spiritual leader that wields considerable authority over his adherents.
[251]
As such, the group and its muqawama counterparts do not recognize Ayatollah Sistani, another prominent Shiite cleric based in Najaf, Iraq, or any other clerics as their source of spiritual guidance. In line with its allegiance to Iran’s Supreme Leader and the principles of the Iranian Revolution, KH seeks to institute a Shia Islamic government in Iraq analogous to Iran’s own theocratic government.
[252]
Given the group’s recognition of Iran’s Supreme Leader Khamenei as its marja’ al-Taqlid, it can be said that the theocratic government KH and its counterparts envision for Iraq would be subservient to but formally independent from Iran.
Political Activities
In 2005, KH founder Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis was elected as a member of parliament (MP) in the Iraqi Parliament under his real name, Jamal Jaafar Ibrahimi. However, in 2007, Muhandis abandoned his political position and fled to Iran after information surfaced regarding his role in planning the 1983 attacks on the American and French Embassies in Kuwait.
[253]
In September 2015, KH and other Shia militias derailed the Iraqi government’s proposed National Guard law, which would have placed PMF militias like KH under more direct government control.
[254]
KH and other Shia groups have also sought to pressure the government into scuttling proposed reforms by ramping up levels of violence on the streets of Baghdad or by threatening to remove their fighters from the front lines against IS.
[255]
In 2019 and 2020, KH escalated domestic political protests and incited violence to pressure the Iraqi government to adopt a more anti-American stance.
[256]
In July 2021, Hossein Moanes Jabbar al-Hijami (hereafter Hossein Moanes) announced KH’s entry into politics under the banner Harakat Hoquq (Arabic for Right’s Movement).
[257]
Harakat Hoquq is a part of the PMF’s Fateh Alliance bloc. In the 2021 election, Hoquq competed in 32 elections, but like the rest of the Fateh Alliance, severely underperformed, winning only one seat.
[258]
Moanes initially refused Hoquq’s singular seat and joined Fateh Alliance’s effort to invalidate the election results.
[259]
KH, the PMF-at-large, and the IRGC waged physical, economic, and legal war against their opponents for months, eventually fragmenting their opponents in the Sairoon Coalition.
[260]
The coalition is led by influential Shia cleric and former PMF member Moqtada al-Sadr. In June 2022, outmaneuvered and slowly deserted by his Sunni and Kurdish allies, al-Sadr resigned all 73 of his party’s seats in protest.
[261]
The subsequent reallocation increased Hoquq’s representation to six MPs and the Fateh Alliance attained a clear majority. With these extra seats, Hoquq contributed to formation of the PMF dominated “Shia Coordination Framework” government under Prime Minister al-Sudani.
[262]
As part of the ruling coalition, KH’s Harakat Hoquq has articulated hardline positions on many issues, including discriminating Sunni Muslims, advocating for invading the U.S. embassy in Baghdad (echoing the 1979 Iran Hostage Crisis), and support for Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
[263]
Targets And Tactics
U.S. forces in Iraq have been a primary target of KH since the group’s founding. Although the group claims to avoid targeting Iraqi civilians, reports indicate that KH has targeted anyone working with the U.S.-backed Iraqi government, as well as Sunni civilians.
[264]
After the U.S. withdrew from Iraq in 2011, KH’s main target shifted from U.S. forces to the Islamic State (IS). U.S. forces returned to Iraq in 2014 to assist with the counter-IS campaign, and KH reportedly cooperated with U.S. troops on some occasions, such as the siege of Amerli.
[265]
However, KH’s rhetoric has remained virulently anti-American.
In late 2018 and early 2019, KH refocused its efforts to undermine U.S. influence in Iraq. The group has targeted U.S. military and diplomatic personnel. It carried out attacks near the U.S. Consulate in Basra in September 2018 and led a march against the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad in December 2019.
[266]
KH also killed a U.S. contractor and wounded multiple U.S. and Iraqi troops in an attack on the Iraqi K-1 Air Base near Kirkuk in late December 2019.
[267]
The U.S. held KH responsible for another attack in March 2020 against a coalition military installation near Baghdad that killed a U.S. soldier, a British soldier, and a U.S. contractor.
[268]
KH has also employed Iranian long-range suicide drones to attack targets both within and outside of Iraq. Most notably, the group is believed to have used drones in attacks against U.S. and coalition military installations across Iraq and a suspected KH-sponsored attack against the Saudi royal palace in Riyadh in January 2021.
[269]
KH has also cooperated with the Iraqi government and other Shia militia forces against IS and its allies in Iraq. The group participated in multiple operations to retake IS-held territory in Iraq. In many of these operations, KH reportedly used indiscriminate force in the fight against IS and even intentionally targeted Sunni civilians.
[270]
Reports have also indicated that KH was involved in violent attacks on civilian anti-government protestors in 2019.
[271]
Beginning as early as 2011, KH was active in Syria, fighting alongside the Assad regime against Syrian opposition groups.
[272]
In addition, KH enlisted the help of Hezbollah to train its members in the urban street fighting tactics often used in Syria.
[273]
Most of KH’s most recent activity has been recorded in Iraq, although it maintains bases and weapons caches in Syria as of December 2019.
[274]
Throughout the U.S. occupation of Iraq (2003-2011), KH was known for its use of roadside bombs and rockets – especially Improvised Rocket-Assisted Munitions (IRAMs) – in its attacks against coalition forces.
[275]
In December 2009, KH conducted a sophisticated cyber-attack, hacking into U.S. Predator drone feeds in Iraq in order to monitor and evade U.S. military operations. This led many to speculate that the organization has a relatively sophisticated cyber unit or specialist working under its command.
[276]
The group has also utilized Iran-backed television channels to solicit donations and increase its recruitment in Iraq.
[277]
In 2019 and 2020, KH has relied heavily on sophisticated weapons provided by Iran, including drones, Katyusha rocket launchers, and shoulder-fired missiles.
[278]
In 2011, Iraqi intelligence officials indicated that KH fighters were paid between $300-$500 per month and that fighters were broken into highly segregated cells within a rigid organizational structure.
[279]
However, in 2016, KH was officially incorporated into the Iraqi security apparatus as an auxiliary military and its fighters are now paid state salaries and pensions.
[280]
Attacks
Disclaimer
: These are some selected major attacks in the militant organization’s history. It is not a comprehensive listing but captures some of the most famous attacks or turning points during the campaign.
February 19, 2008
: KH launched an improvised rocket-assisted munition (IRAM) explosive device at a U.S. military base southeast of Baghdad, killing one U.S. civilian (1 killed, unknown wounded).
[281]
June 4, 2008
: KH conducted an attack meant to target coalition forces but instead killed 18 civilians and destroyed 19 homes. This attack was described in a press release by the U.S. Department of Defense, and its location was not given (18 killed, 29 wounded).
[282]
November 29, 2008
: A KH rocket attack killed 2 U.N. contractors in a rocket attack against a U.N. compound in Baghdad’s Green Zone (2 killed, 15 wounded).
[283]
June 2014
: In summer 2014, KH fought alongside the Iraqi security forces in counter-IS operations in the Anbar province, particularly around the city of Fallujah (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[284]
August 2014
: KH, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haqq (AAH), and other militias affiliated with PMF participated in the Battle of Amerli against Islamic State forces. KH and its allies were assisted by U.S. airstrikes and Kurdish Peshmerga fighters (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[285]
September 2-3, 2015
: 18 Turkish workers were kidnapped in Baghdad by unknown assailants. It is speculated that the kidnappers may have been associated with KH and have received direction from Iran, competing with Turkey for influence in Syria.
[286]
The kidnappers identified themselves as the “Death Squads” and demanded that Turkey end its siege of several Syrian Shia towns.
[287]
Iraqi forces entered an area near a KH office in Baghdad while searching for the Turkish workers. KH gunmen opened fire, killing one and injuring three of the Iraqi troops.
[288]
All 18 Turkish workers were eventually released.
[289]
KH’s involvement in the kidnapping was never confirmed (1 killed, 3 wounded).
May 2016
: KH and other Shia militias affiliated with PMF participated in the Iraqi army’s capture of Fallujah from the Islamic State. KH was among the Shia militias accused of beating and executing dozens of Sunni civilians in the re-captured city (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[290]
February 2017
: KH and other Shia militias affiliated with PMF participated in the Iraqi army’s capture of Mosul from IS (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[291]
December 2017
: KH and other Shia militias affiliated with PMF joined Syrian forces and seized the town of Abu Kamal on the Syria-Iraq border (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[292]
September 2018
: KH allegedly conducted a rocket attack near the U.S. Consulate in Basra, prompting its evacuation and closure (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[293]
May 2019
: KH carried out a drone attack that destroyed oil pumps in Saudi Arabia (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[294]
December 2019
: KH conducted a rocket attack against K-1 Air Base in Kirkuk, Iraq, killing a U.S. contractor. The attack was believed to have been a part of IRGC Major General Qassim Suleimani and KH leader Muhandis’s plan to provoke a U.S. military response in order to redirect Iraqi anger towards the U.S. and away from Iran (1 killed, 6 wounded).
[295]
December 2019
: KH fighters led a mass protest that escalated into an attack on the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad in response to retaliatory U.S. airstrikes against KH bases. Protesters breached and burned perimeter buildings (0 killed, unknown wounded).
[296]
March 2020
: KH reportedly conducted a rocket attack against Camp Taji, a U.S. coalition military installation near Baghdad. Usbat al-Thaireen, allegedly a front for KH, claimed responsibility. The attack was believed to have been in retaliation for the U.S. assassination of KH leader Muhandis in January 2020 (3 killed, 12 wounded).
[297]
February 15, 2021
: KH is believed to have been involved in a rocket attack on a coalition-run military base at Erbil International Airport, killing a civilian contractor with the coalition and wounding six others.
[298]
A U.S. Defense Department-led investigation into the attack later determined that KH and Kata’ib Sayyid al-Shuhada, another Iran-aligned Iraqi militia, bore responsibility (1 killed, 6 wounded).
[299]
January 28, 2024
: KH fired a high-payload rocket against Tower 22, a logistics support base in Jordan that houses 350 U.S. Army and Air Force soldiers.
[300]
The rocket struck a housing unit on the base.
[301]
This was the first attack since the beginning of the Israel-Hamas conflict that killed U.S. service members and the first attack on Jordanian territory (3 killed, 40 wounded).
[302]
Interactions
Vertical Tabs
Designated / Listed
July 2, 2009: The U.S. Department of State designated KH as a Foreign Terrorist Organization.
[303]
July 2,
2009: The U.S. Treasury Department identified Kata’ib Hezbollah and the group’s leader, Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, as entities “threatening the peace and stability of Iraq and the Government of Iraq” under Executive Order 13438. This designation allowed the U.S. to impose certain financial sanctions on the group and associated individuals.
[304]
November 2014: The United Arab Emirates designated KH as a Foreign Terrorist Organization.
[305]
January 13, 2021: The U.S. Treasury Department added KH leader Abdul Aziz al-Mohammedawi to its list of “specially designated nationals” responsible for acts of terrorism, subjecting him to sanctions under Executive Order 13224.
[306]
November 17, 2023: The U.S. Treasury Department added KH commercial development chief Basim Mohammad Hasab al-Majidi, media spokesman Jafar al-Husseini, Shura council member Imad Naji al-Bahadli, senior commander Khalid Kadhim Jasim al-Sukayni, and foreign affairs chief Habib Hasan Mughamis al-Darraji to its list of “specially designated nationals.”
[307]
Community Relations
There is not much information on KH’s relationship with the Shia communities in Iraq. However, the group has been accused on several occasions – both during the U.S. war in Iraq and during the fight against IS – of instigating sectarian violence and cleansing. For example, in 2016, KH allegedly executed hundreds of Sunni civilians after helping to retake Fallujah and Mosul from IS. The militia was accused of similar atrocities in 2014-2015 in Samarra and Tikrit.
[308]
In 2019, KH was accused of firing on civilian anti-government protesters demonstrating against Iranian interference in Iraq.
[309]
Relationships With Other Groups
Since its formation in 2007, KH has maintained close relations with the Lebanese armed group Hezbollah and the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC).  These ties were most likely facilitated by KH founder Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, who fought with the IRGC during the Iran-Iraq war.
[310]
Many sources speculate that the IRGC had a direct role in KH’s founding. Both the IRGC and Hezbollah established bases in Iraq to train and equip KH fighters. These actors have also facilitated the transportation of KH members to Iran and Lebanon for further training.
[311]
In the case of Hezbollah, KH has maintained particularly close ties with Unit 3800, the Hezbollah sub-group dedicated to training Iraqi Shia militias.
In Syria, KH has fought alongside the IRGC, Hezbollah, and many other Iraqi Shia militias. These Shia groups include Asa’ib Ahl al-Haqq (AAH), the Badr Organization, Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba (HHN), and Kata’ib Sayyid al-Shuhada (KSS).
[312]
KH’s relationship with the Badr Organization stems from KH founder Muhandis’s affiliation with the group that predates the establishment of KH. In 1985, Muhandis purportedly joined the Badr Organization’s predecessor group, the Badr Brigades (also known as the Badr Corps). He served as the group’s commander for a time in the late 1980s and early 1990s. While commander of the Badr Brigades, Muhandis’ chief of staff was Haider al-Ameri, the current head of the Badr Organization. After leaving the Badr Brigades, Muhandis reportedly retained close ties with Ameri.
Muhandis is also believed to have maintained connections to his successor at the Badr Brigades, Mustapha al-Sheibani.
[313]
After commanding the Badr Brigades through the 1990s, Sheibani went on to run the infamous Sheibani Network, a smuggling network that transported IRGC funding and munitions from Iran to Iraqi Shia militias (such as AAH and KH) during the Iraq War.
[314]
Following the war’s conclusion, Sheibani went on to command Kata’ib Sayyid al-Shuhada (KSS), an Iraqi Shia militia founded in 2013 by KH and the Badr Organization. KH and KSS retain close ties and reportedly fought together in both Iraq and Syria.
[315]
KH is also believed to have ties to Kata’ib Imam Ali (KIA), a Shia Iraqi militant group founded in July 2014. Although there is little direct evidence of coordination between the two organizations, Muhandis was believed to be a senior figure in KIA. In addition, Muhandis simultaneously served as the head of KH, leading many experts to speculate about the relationship between the two groups.
[316]
KH and Asa’ib Ahl al-Haqq (AAH) also have a long history of coordination. The groups purportedly cooperated against coalition forces in Iraq during the Iraq War and occasionally staged joint attacks. Since the end of the Iraq War, the two groups have fought together in Iraq against the Islamic State (IS) and in Syria alongside pro-Assad forces.
[317]
In June 2013, AAH and KH purportedly co-founded Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba (HHN), an Iraqi Shia militia that remains active in Syria. Both KH and AAH are believed to have maintained close ties with HHN.
[318]
In addition to its role in the formation of KSS and HHN, KH also established several other small Shia militias. In 2012, KH, AAH, the Badr Organization, and other existing Iraqi Shia militias helped establish KH front group Liwa’a Abu Fadl al-Abbas (LAFA) to assist the Assad regime in Syria.
[319]
Beginning in 2013, KH, AAH, and the Badr Organization sent fighters under their own banners to fight in Syria, and LAFA became effectively independent.
[320]
In April 2014, KH also formed Saraya al-Difa al-Shabi (KH-SDS), a KH subgroup and PMF militia explicitly dedicated to fighting IS in Iraq.
[321]
Observers believe that KH has established and used so-called “shadow groups” to further its militant activities. These groups – many of which were formed shortly after the deaths of Qassim Suleimani and Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis in January 2020 – reportedly claim public responsibility for attacks in the more established militias’ stead to create plausible deniability.
[322]
Other major militant groups in Iraq, such as Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq and the Badr Organization, likely use these shadow groups for the same purpose. For example, observers believe KH used this tactic when a new militia group calling itself Usbat al-Thaireen (“The League of Revolutionaries”) announced its existence by claiming responsibility for three separate rocket attacks on U.S.-led coalition forces at Camp Taji and Besmaya Base in March 2020.
[323]
Another notable attack likely perpetrated by KH-affiliated “shadow groups” occurred in January 2021, when a group named Alwiya Waad al-Haq (“The Righteous Promise Brigades”) claimed responsibility for a drone attack on the Saudi royal palace in Riyadh.
[324]
In addition, another group believed to be linked to KH named, Qasem al-Jabbarin (“The Smasher of the Oppressors”), has mounted a campaign of roadside bombings against Iraqi-operated convoys supplying the U.S. and coalition forces in Iraq.
[325]
Observers believe Usbat al-Thaireen, Alwiya Waad al-Haq, and Qasem al-Jabbarin are linked to KH on two main grounds: 1) observed rhetorical alignment between confirmed KH statements and the groups’ attacks’ targets; and 2) the extensive and near-instant coverage KH-affiliated media gave to the groups’ attacks.
[326]
Moreover, some analysts have speculated that KH formed and backs several smaller, generally unarmed militant groups (
firaq
) to conduct lower-level operations in and around Baghdad. Analysts argue that KH uses the
firaq
, some of which are named Raba’ Allah, Ahbab Allah, Al-Zelm al-Khashnah, and Abu Jeddaha, to project power and attack KH opponents in Baghdad – all while maintaining plausible deniability.
[327]
In doing so, the
firaq
have gained a reputation for thuggery and intimidation among Baghdadis, having carried out a series of bombings against liquor stores, attacking workers at a spa, attacking media outlets that are critical of the PMF, and intimidating local activists and protest leaders.
[328]
The
firaq
have also carried out higher-profile attacks against KH’s political opponents. For example, in October, Raba’ Allah attacked and burned the headquarters of the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) after a member of the KDP criticized KH and other PMF groups.
[329]
KH has usually distanced itself from the groups’ activities. However, when Raba’ Allah drew criticism for its participation in a military parade alongside regular members of KH in March 2021, official spokesmen for KH defended the group’s actions as a routine transfer of PMF fighters that “did not require coordination with any other entities,” suggesting closer ties between KH and the
firaq
than many observers had expected.
[330]
KH is also a dominant member of the Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF), an umbrella organization comprised of between 50 and 70 Iraqi Shia militias formed in 2014 to fight the Islamic State.
[331]
Since 2016, the PMF has been nominally under the control of the Iraqi Prime Minister’s Office, but in reality, receives directions from the Iranian IRGC.
[332]
Muhandis was a key founder of the PMF and served as its leader until his death in January 2020.
[333]
Under Muhandis’ leadership, KH rose to preeminence within the PMF, serving as the principle steward of Iranian Shia objectives in Iraq. Since 2020, when Muhandis was killed in a U.S. drone strike, KH’s central position has slightly diminished and rival militias are vying for control. Currently, the other powerful organizations in the PMF are AAH, the Badr Organization, and, more recently, HHN.
[334]
Between 2014 and 2017, KH cooperated with Iraqi forces and Shia militias in Iraq to target the Islamic State. In 2017, IS declined in strength and lost control of large amounts of territory in Iraq and Syria.
[335]
As the threat from IS diminished, KH refocused its efforts to attacking U.S. coalition forces in Iraq. KH also considers some other Iraqi militant groups to be its enemies, including the Sufi-Ba’athist Jaysh al-Rijal al-Tariqa al-Naqshbandia (JRTN) and the Sunni 1920s Revolution Brigades (1920s RB).
[336]
State Sponsors And External Influences
KH maintains a close relationship with Iran and identifies Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, as its spiritual leader. The Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) directs much of KH’s activity and provides a significant amount of the group’s funds and training.
[337]
As a leading member of PMF, KH nominally lies under the authority of the Prime Minister’s Office, coexisting with the Iraqi Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defense as an autonomous auxiliary. Despite efforts to disarm, demobilize, and reintegrate—a process known as DDR—the PMF into the Ministry of Defense, many PMF member-organizations, including KH, operate autonomously and, in many cases, answer to Iran.
[338]
KH also maintains close relations with the Lebanese armed group Hezbollah, another Iranian proxy organization, which has provided both training and funding to KH.
[339]
In Syria, KH has fought alongside the army of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in the Syrian civil war.
[340]
Some reports claim that KH’s relationship with Assad predates the conflict—the Syrian government allegedly allowed KH fighters to use Syria as a smuggling route during the Iraq War.
[341]
As of June 2024, KH continues to be involved in Syria, especially in connection to the Lebanese Hezbollah.
[342]
Additionally, the KH-staffed 45
th
, 46
th
, and 47
th
PMF brigades are stationed in the Jazira and Badia regions, which lie on the Iraq-Syria border, easily allowing the militia to project force into Syria at the bequest of Assad or Hezbollah.
[343]
Footnotes
Footnotes:
[1]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[2]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, Crispin Smith, and Alex Almeida. “Iraqi Militias Hit Two U.S. Sites in Iraq and Syria.” The Washington Institute, April 22, 2024.
[3]
“Drone, Rocket Attacks Targeted US Forces in Iraq, US Officials Say | Reuters.” Reuters, April 23, 2024..
[4]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, Crispin Smith, and Alex Almeida. “Iraqi Militias Hit Two U.S. Sites in Iraq and Syria.” The Washington Institute, April 22, 2024.
[5]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah.” Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium, Date unknown. Web. 6 August 2016; “The naming of Kata’ib Hezbollah (تسمية كتائب حزب الله) Kata’ib Hezbollah, August 21, 2007.
[6]
“The naming of Kata’ib Hezbollah (تسمية كتائب حزب الله) Kata’ib Hezbollah, August 21, 2007. ; Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 3.
[7]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016. ; Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; Fulton, Will, Joseph Holiday & Sam Wyer. “Iranian Strategy in Syria,” Institute for the Study of War, May 2013. Web. July 2016.
[8]
K. Gilbert. “The Rise of Shi’ite Militias And The Post Arab Spring Sectarian Threat,” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, October 2016. Web. July 2016.; Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[9]
" Foreign Terrorist Organizations.” Bureau of Counterterrorism, U.S. Department of State. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[10]
Al-Khafaji, Hayder. “Iraq’s Popular Mobilisation Forces.” London School of Economics and Political Science, November 2019.
[11]
Mansour, Renad and Faleh A. Jabar. “The Popular Mobilization Forces and Iraq’s Future.” Carnegie Middle East Center, April 28, 2017. Accessed August 20, 2020.
[12]
Salim, Mustafa and Missy Ryan. “Iraq gives militias official status despite abuse claims.” The Washington Post, November 26, 2016. Accessed August 21, 2020.
[13]
Mansour, Renad and Faleh A. Jabar. “The Popular Mobilization Forces and Iraq’s Future.” Carnegie Middle East Center, April 28, 2017. Accessed August 20, 2020.; Alaaldin, Ranj, and Vanda Felbab-Brown. “New Vulnerabilities for Iraq’s Resilient Popular Mobilization Forces.” Brookings, February 3, 2022.
[14]
Al-Nidawi, Omar. “The growing economic and political role of Iraq’s PMF.” Middle East Institute, May 21, 2019.
[15]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2020.
[16]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Profile: Kataib Hezbollah.” The Washington Institute, April 1, 2021.
[17]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Accessed August 24, 2020.
[18]
Aarabi, Kasra. “What Is Velayat-e Faqih?” Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, March 20, 2019. Accessed August 21, 2020.
[19]
Moore, Johanna, and Annika Ganzeveld. “The Leadership and Purpose of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” Institute for the Study of War, March 19, 2024 ; Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2020.
[20]
Moore, Johanna, and Annika Ganzeveld. “The Leadership and Purpose of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” Institute for the Study of War, March 19, 2024.
[21]
Reuters Staff. “Inside the plot by Iran’s Soleimani to attack U.S. forces in Iraq.” Reuters, January 3, 2020. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[22]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Profile: Kataib Hezbollah.” The Washington Institute, April 1, 2021.
[23]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[24]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[25]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Global Security, Date unknown. Web. July 2016.
[26]
Bayoumi, Alaa and Leah Harding. “Mapping Iraq’s fighting groups,” Al Jazeera, 27 June 2014. Web. August 2016.
[27]
Fulton, Will, Joseph Holiday & Sam Wyer. “Iranian Strategy in Syria,” Institute for the Study of War, May 2013. Accessed August, 28, 2020.
[28]
Knights, Michael. “Iran’s Foreign Legion: The Role of Iraqi Shiite Militias in Syria.” The Washington Institute, June 27, 2013. Accessed August 26, 2020.
[29]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; K. Gilbert. “The Rise of Shi’ite Militias And The Post Arab Spring Sectarian Threat,” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, October 2016. Web. July 2016.
[30]
Joscelyn, Thomas. “Hezbollah has ‘about 7,000 fighters’ in Syria, US says.” Long War Journal, July 27, 2017. Accessed August 25, 2020; Knights, Michael. “Iran’s Expanding Militia Army in Iraq: The New Special Groups.”
CTC Sentinel 12(7)
(August 2019). 2.
[31]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 3; Fulton, Will, Joseph Holliday, and Sam Wyer. “Iranian Strategy in Syria.” Institute for the Study of War, May 2013. 24; Knights, Michael. “Iran’s Foreign Legion: The Role of Iraqi Shiite Militias in Syria.” The Washington Institute, June 27, 2013.
[32]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 3-4; Fulton, Will, Joseph Holliday, and Sam Wyer. “Iranian Strategy in Syria.” Institute for the Study of War, May 2013. 24; Knights, Michael. “Iran's Foreign Legion: The Role of Iraqi Shiite Militias in Syria.” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, June 27, 2013; Knights, Michael. “Iran’s Expanding Militia Army in Iraq: The New Special Groups.”
CTC Sentinel 12(7)
(August 2019). 1,2.
[33]
Knights, Michael. “Iran’s Expanding Militia Army in Iraq: The New Special Groups.”
CTC Sentinel 12(7)
(August 2019). 2; Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 3.
[34]
“Timeline: the Rise, Spread, and Fall of the Islamic State.” The Wilson Center, October 28, 2019. Accessed August 26, 2020.; Morris, Loveday and Mustafa Salim. “Iran backs Assad in battle for Aleppo with proxies, ground troops,” The Washington Post, October 19, 2015. Accessed August 27, 2020.
[35]
Smyth, Philip. "How Iran Is Building Its Syrian Hezbollah." Washington Institute. March 8, 2016. Accessed July 10, 2018.
[36]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects.” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Accessed August 28, 2020.; Alami, Mona. “What the Aleppo offensive hides.” Al-Monitor, October 23, 2015. Accessed August 28, 2020.; Mroue, Bassem. "Assad Relies on Foreign Fighters in Push to Retake Aleppo." Associated Press, December 10, 2016. Accessed July 10, 2018.; "Iran's Pivotal Role in Aleppo Massacres." Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. December 29, 2016. Accessed July 10, 2018.
[37]
Morris, Loveday and Mustafa Salim. “Iran backs Assad in battle for Aleppo with proxies, ground troops,” The Washington Post, 19 October 2015. Web. August 2016.; Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[38]
Nctc. “National Counterterrorism Center: FTOS.” National Counterterrorism Center | FTOs, September 2022.
[39]
Moore, Johanna, and Annika Ganzeveld. “The Leadership and Purpose of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” Institute for the Study of War, March 19, 2024.
[40]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2020.
[41]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Accessed August 24, 2020.
[42]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Accessed August 24, 2020.
[43]
Rubin, Alissa J. “On the Road to Samarra, Glimpses of Iraq’s New Fractured Reality.” The New York Times, July 9, 2020. Accessed August 24, 2020.
[44]
Coles, Isabel. “Iranians play role in breaking IS siege of Iraqi town.” Reuters, September 1, 2014. Accessed August 28, 2020.
[45]
“Iraq moves against Islamic State in Tikrit.” BBC News, March 2, 2015. Accessed August 28, 2020.
[46]
Ryan, Missy, and Mustafa Salim. "Mixed Iraqi Force Prepares for Push into Militant Stronghold of Fallujah; The Battle for the Western City of Fallujah Will Test Iraq's Ability to Oversee a Disparate Military Force and Protect Citizens against Abuse." Washington Post, May 24, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.; Knights, Michael. "A New Formula in the Battle for Fallujah." Al Jazeera, May 25, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.
[47]
Knights, Michael. "A New Formula in the Battle for Fallujah." Al Jazeera, May 25, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.; Filkins, Dexter. "The Dangers of the Iraqi Coalition Headed Toward Mosul." The New Yorker, October 19, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.
[48]
Martin, Patrick. “The Campaign for Fallujah: May 26, 2016.” Institute for the Study of War, May 27, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.
[49]
Anagnostos, Emily and Patrick Martin. “Iraq Launches the Campaign for Mosul.” Institute for the Study of War, October 17, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.
[50]
Knights, Michael. "A New Formula in the Battle for Fallujah." Al Jazeera, May 25, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.; Filkins, Dexter. "The Dangers of the Iraqi Coalition Headed Toward Mosul." The New Yorker, October 19, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.
[51]
Nasrawi, Salah. “Iraq: Fallujah is liberated, now what?” Al Jazeera, June 30, 2016. Accessed September 1, 2020.
[52]
Salim, Mustafa and Loveday Morris. “Reinforced Iraqi units resume offensive to take Mosul from Islamic State.” The Washington Post, December 29, 2016. Accessed September 3, 2020.
[53]
Anagnostos, Emily, and Patrick Martin. "Iraq Launches the Campaign for Mosul." Institute for the Study of War. October 17, 2017. Accessed July 10, 2018.; Roggio, Bill, and Amir Toumaj. "Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces Close in on Tal Afar." Long War Journal, November 23, 2016. Accessed July 10, 2018.
[54]
Lamothe, Dan, Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Laris Karklis, and Tim Meko. “Battle of Mosul: How Iraqi forces defeated the Islamic State.” The Washington Post, July 10, 2017. Accessed September 3, 2020.
[55]
Toumaj, Amir. “Iraqi PMF attempts to cut off Islamic State in Mosul.” Long War Journal, November 4, 2016. Accessed September 3, 2020.
[56]
Soley, Joan. “Iraq war: Why the battle for Tal Afar matters.” BBC News, August 25, 2017. Accessed September 3, 2020.
[57]
Roggio, Bill, and Amir Toumaj. "Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces Close in on Tal Afar." Long War Journal, November 23, 2016. Accessed September 3, 2020.
[58]
Rasheed, Ahmed and Saif Hameed. “Iraqi Shi’ite forces aim to clear border strip with Syria.” Reuters, December 13, 2016. Accessed September 3, 2020.
[59]
Lamothe, Dan, Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Laris Karklis, and Tim Meko. “Battle of Mosul: How Iraqi forces defeated the Islamic State.” The Washington Post, July 10, 2017. Accessed September 3, 2020.
[60]
Arango, Tim. “Iraq Celebrates Victory Over ISIS in Mosul, but Risks Remain.” The New York Times, July 10, 2017. Accessed September 8, 2020.; Arango, Tim. “ISIS Loses Another City to U.S.-Backed Iraqi Forces.” The New York Times, August 31, 2017. Accessed September 8, 2018.
[61]
Majidyar, Ahmad. “Syrian, Iranian-Led Forces Capture Abu Kamal, Threaten to Confront U.S. and S.D.F.” Middle East Institute, November 8, 2017. Accessed September 9, 2020.
[62]
Majidyar, Ahmad. "Syrian, Iranian-Led Forces Capture Abu Kamal, Threaten to Confront U.S. and S.D.F." Middle East Institute. November 8, 2017. Accessed July 10, 2018.
[63]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[64]
“Iraq: Shia militias ‘killing Sunnis in reprisal attacks’.” BBC News, October, 14, 2014. Accessed August 30, 2020.
[65]
Fordham, Alice. “After Retaking Iraqi City, Shiite Militias Accused of Targeting Sunnis.” NPR, April 7, 2015. Accessed August 30, 2020.
[66]
“Iraq: Ban Abusive Militias from Mosul Operation.” Human Rights Watch, July 31, 2016. Accessed August 31, 2020.; Naylor, Hugh. "Iraqis Trapped in Fallujah Face Twin Peril of Islamic State and Militia Fighters." Washington Post, June 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.; "Iraq: Fallujah Abuses Inquiry Mired in Secrecy." Human Rights Watch. July 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.
[67]
“Iraq: Shia militias ‘killing Sunnis in reprisal attacks’.” BBC News, October, 14, 2014. Accessed August 30, 2020.
[68]
Fordham, Alice. “After Retaking Iraqi City, Shiite Militias Accused of Targeting Sunnis.” NPR, April 7, 2015. Accessed August 30, 2020.
[69]
Morris, Loveday. “Trapped by the Islamic State, Iraqis in Fallujah say they are going hungry, too.” The Washington Post, February 1, 2016. Accessed September 2, 2020.; Naylor, Hugh. "Iraqis Trapped in Fallujah Face Twin Peril of Islamic State and Militia Fighters." Washington Post, June 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.; "Iraq: Fallujah Abuses Inquiry Mired in Secrecy." Human Rights Watch. July 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.
[70]
Ohlers, Alexander. “The Uncertain Furture of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Units.” The Jamestown Foundation, February 8, 2018. Accessed September 9, 2020.
[71]
Gotts, Isadora. “PMU economic offices undermine fragile stability in Mosul.” Al-Monitor, May 27, 2019. Accessed September 8, 2020.; Ohlers, Alexander. “The Uncertain Furture of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Units.” The Jamestown Foundation, February 8, 2018. Accessed September 9, 2020.
[72]
Irish, John and Ahmed Rasheed. “Exclusive: Iran moves missiles to Iraq in warning to enemies.” Reuters, August 31, 2018. Accessed July 28, 2020.
[73]
Calamur, Krishnadev. “Trump’s Latest Warning to Iran Didn’t Come Out of Nowhere.” The Atlantic, September 12, 2018. Accessed Juyl 28, 2020.
[74]
“Designation of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.” Office of the Spokesperson of the U.S. Department of State, April 8, 2019. Accessed September 22, 2020.
[75]
Shaikh, Shaan. “Iranian Missiles in Iraq.” Center for Strategjc and International Studies, December 2019. Accessed July 28, 2020.
[76]
Shaikh, Shaan. “Iranian Missiles in Iraq.” Center for Strategjc and International Studies, December 2019. Accessed July 28, 2020.
[77]
“Iraq paramilitary chief plays down allegation against US.” BBC News, August 22, 2019. Accessed July 28, 2020.
[78]
Rubin, Alissa J. “Iraq in Worst Political Crisis in Years as Death Toll Mounts From Protests.” The New York Times, December 21, 2019. Accessed July 24, 2020.
[79]
“The Iraq protests explained in 100 and 500 words.” BBC News, December 2, 2019. Accessed July 24, 2020.
[80]
Allyn, Bobby. “More Than 100 Killed And Thousands Injured In Anti-Government Protests In Iraq.” NPR, October 6, 2019. Accessed October 1, 2020.
[81]
“Iraq: Protest death toll surges as security forces resume brutal repression.” Amnesty International, January 23, 2020. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[82]
Reuters Staff. “Exclusive: Iran-backed militias deployed snipers in Iraq protests – sources.” Reuters, October 17, 2019. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[83]
Reuters Staff. “Inside the plot by Iran’s Soleimani to attack U.S. forces in Iraq.” Reuters, January 3, 2020. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[84]
“Indirect fire” is used to describe artillery that relies on ballistic trajectories. It does not require a direct line of sight between the firing weapon and the target, which allows for concealment and shooting over obstacles. See Bailey, Jonathan B. A. “Field Artillery and Firepower.” Naval Institute Press, 2004. Accessed September 22, 2020.
[85]
“U.S.-Iran Conflict and Implications for U.S. Policy.” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[86]
Barnes, Julian E. “U.S. Launches Airstrikes on Iranian-Backed Forces in Iraq and Syria.” The New York Times, December 29, 2019. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[87]
Rubin, Alissa J. and Ben Hubbard. “American Airstrikes Rally Iraqis Against U.S.” The New York Times, December 30, 2019. Accessed July 31, 2020.
[88]
“U.S.-Iran Conflict and Implications for U.S. Policy.” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[89]
“US attacks Shia militia: Iraq, Syria, Iran, Russia, Israel react.” Al Jazeera and News Agencies, December 30, 2019. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[90]
“Iran’s Soleimani and Iraq’s Muhandis killed in air strike: militia spokesperson.” Reuters, Web. January 2, 2020. Accessed July 15, 2020.
[91]
“World reacts to US killing of Iran’s Qassem Soleimani in Iraq.” Al Jazeera, January 3, 2020. Accessed August 3, 2020.
[92]
Kittleson, Shelly. “Iraqi armed factions vow revenge for Shiite commanders’ killings.” Al-Monitor, January 5, 2020. Accessed August 3, 2020.
[93]
“State Department Terrorist Designation of Ahmad al-Hamidawi.” U.S. Department of State Office of the Spokesperson, February 26, 2020. Accessed July 31, 2020.
[94]
Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021.
[95]
Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021.
[96]
Davidson, John and Ahmed Rasheed. “Fractures grow among Iraq militias, spell political retreat.” Reuters, April 1, 2020. Accessed August 3, 2020; Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 9.
[97]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 9.
[98]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024.; Alaaldin, Ranj, and Vanda Felbab-Brown. “New Vulnerabilities for Iraq’s Resilient Popular Mobilization Forces.” Brookings, February 3, 2022.; Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021.
[99]
Knights, Michael. “Muhandis Replaced by Not One Man, but Two?” The Washington Institute, January 12, 2022.
[100]
“UK soldier and two Americans killed in rocket attack in Iraq.” BBC News, March 12, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[101]
“Iraq base attack: US retaliatory strikes on Iran-backed fighters.” BBC News, March 13, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[102]
Jaboori, Rafid. “The Leadership and Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah.” The Jamestown Foundation, April 6, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[103]
Loveluck, Lousia and Missy Ryan. “Militia attacks on Americans in Iraq are becoming more audacious. The U.S. us wrestling with how to respond.” The Washington Post, March 28, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[104]
Mazzetti, Mark and Eric Schmitt. “Pentagon Order to Plan for Escalation in Iraq Meets Warning From Top Commander.” The New York Times, March 27, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[105]
Rubin, Alissa J. “Iraq Chooses New Prime Minister, an Ex-Intelligence Chief Backed by U.S.” The New York Times, May 6, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[106]
Salim, Mustafa and Louisa Loveluck. “New Iraqi leader tries to rein in Iran-backed militias, but task proves daunting.” The Washington Post, July 3, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[107]
“Iraqi forces raid Iran-backed Kataib Hezbollah base, 14 arrested.” Al Jazeera, June 26, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[108]
Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021.
[109]
Knights, Michael. “Kataib Hezbollah Is Part of Iraq’s PMF.” The Washington Institute, April 15, 2024.
[110]
Salim, Mustafa and Louisa Loveluck. “New Iraqi leader tries to rein in Iran-backed militias, but task proves daunting.” The Washington Post, July 3, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[111]
Taddonio, Patrice. “Intel Officer: Murder of Hisham al-Hashimi Was Ordered by Shia Militia Kata’ib Hezbollah.” PBS, February 9, 2021; “Iraq killings: Who's behind a series of murders?” BBC, January 27, 2021.
[112]
Rubin, Alissa J. “Killing of Security Analyst Seen as Message to Iraqi Government.” The New York Times, July 7, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[113]
Davison, John. “Iraqi militias say they have halted anti-U.S. attacks.” Reuters, October 11, 2020; Loveluck, Louisa. “Iran-backed militias announce ‘conditional’ cease-fire against U.S. in Iraq.” October 12, 2020.
[114]
Loveluck, Louisa. “Iran-backed militias announce ‘conditional’ cease-fire against U.S. in Iraq.” October 12, 2020.
[115]
Report from “Sabereen News – صابرين نيوز” via Telegram, October 10, 2020.
[116]
Tweet from Hamdi Malik, May 22, 2021.
[117]
Cooper, Helene and Eric Schmitt. “U.S. Airstrikes in Syria Target Iran-Backed Militias That Rocketed American Troops in Iraq.” The New York Times, February 25, 2021; “US carries out air strike against Iran-backed militia target in Syria.” The National, February 26, 2021.
[118]
"US attacks 'Iranian-backed military infrastructure' in Syria." Al Jazeera, February 26, 2021; Stewart, Idrees Ali, Phil. "U.S. air strikes in Syria target Iranian-backed militia – Pentagon." Reuters, February 26, 2021; "Death toll update | 22 militiamen of Iraqi Hezbollah and Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces in US strikes on Syria-Iraq border.” The Syrian Observatory For Human Rights, February 26, 2021.
[119]
Khaleel, Sangar and Jane Arraf. “Rocket Attack in Iraq Kills a U.S. Military Contractor.” The New York Times, February 15, 2021.
[120]
“US carries out air strike against Iran-backed militia target in Syria.” The National, February 26, 2021.
[121]
Knights, Michael. “Rockets over Erbil: How to Respond to an Iraqi Militia Outrage.” The Washington Institute, February 16, 2021.
[122]
“Green is boiling... the battle of "breaking bones" between the government and the Hashd ash-Sha’abi (الخضراء تغلي.. معركة "كسر عظام" بين الحكومة والحشد الشعبي).” Rudaw, May 27, 2021; Barbarani, Sofia. “Questions surround powerful militiaman Muslih’s arrest in Iraq.” Al Jazeera, June 2, 2021.
[123]
Barbarani, Sofia. “Questions surround powerful militiaman Muslih’s arrest in Iraq.” Al Jazeera, June 2, 2021; “Iraq militia commander arrested under ‘anti-terrorism’ law.” Al Jazeera, May 26, 2021.
[124]
Knights, Michael. “Profile: Liwa Al-Tafuf (13th PMF Brigade).” The Washington Institute, February 3, 2024.
[125]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, Alex Almeida, and Hamdi Malik. “Muqawama Fake News Surrounding Qasim Muslih’s Arrest (Part 1): International Zone Claims.” The Washington Institute, May 28, 2021.
[126]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, Alex Almeida, and Hamdi Malik. “Muqawama Fake News Surrounding Qasim Muslih’s Arrest (Part 1): International Zone Claims.” The Washington Institute, May 28, 2021.
[127]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, Alex Almeida, and Hamdi Malik. “Muqawama Fake News Surrounding Qasim Muslih’s Arrest (Part 1): International Zone Claims.” The Washington Institute, May 28, 2021.; Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Muqawama Fake News Surrounding Qasim Muslih’s Arrest (Part 2): Release Claims.” The Washington Institute, May 28, 2024.
[128]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, Alex Almeida, and Hamdi Malik. “Muqawama Fake News Surrounding Qasim Muslih’s Arrest (Part 1): International Zone Claims.” The Washington Institute, May 28, 2021.; Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Muqawama Fake News Surrounding Qasim Muslih’s Arrest (Part 2): Release Claims.” The Washington Institute, May 28, 2024.
[129]
“By a judge’s decision, the release of the Hashd leader Qassim Musleh (بقرار قضائي.. إطلاق سراح القيادي في الحشد قاسم مصلح).” Shafaq News, June 7, 2021.
[130]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Discordance in the Iran Threat Network in Iraq: Militia Competition and Rivalry.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2021.
[131]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Discordance in the Iran Threat Network in Iraq: Militia Competition and Rivalry.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2021.
[132]
Knights, Michael. “Muhandis Replaced by Not One Man, but Two?” The Washington Institute, January 12, 2022.; Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Discordance in the Iran Threat Network in Iraq: Militia Competition and Rivalry.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2021.
[133]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Discordance in the Iran Threat Network in Iraq: Militia Competition and Rivalry.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2021.
[134]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Discordance in the Iran Threat Network in Iraq: Militia Competition and Rivalry.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2021.
[135]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Ameer al-Kaabi. “Profile: The Hoquq Movement.” The Washington Institute, March 15, 2024.; Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[136]
Alaaldin, Ranj, and Vanda Felbab-Brown. “New Vulnerabilities for Iraq’s Resilient Popular Mobilization Forces.” Brookings, February 3, 2022.
[137]
Alaaldin, Ranj, and Vanda Felbab-Brown. “New Vulnerabilities for Iraq’s Resilient Popular Mobilization Forces.” Brookings, February 3, 2022.; Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[139]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[140]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[141]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024.
[142]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[143]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[144]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Ameer al-Kaabi. “Profile: The Hoquq Movement.” The Washington Institute, March 15, 2024.; Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[145]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024.; Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[146]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Extraordinary Popular Mobilization Force Expansion, by the Numbers.” The Washington Institute, June 3, 2023.
[147]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Extraordinary Popular Mobilization Force Expansion, by the Numbers.” The Washington Institute, June 3, 2023.
[148]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[149]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[150]
Knights, Michael. “Kataib Hezbollah’s Role in the August 15 Al-Tanf Attack.” The Washington Institute, August 25, 2022.; Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[151]
Knights, Michael. “Kataib Hezbollah’s Role in the August 15 Al-Tanf Attack.” The Washington Institute, August 25, 2022.; Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Discordance in the Iran Threat Network in Iraq: Militia Competition and Rivalry.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, October 2021.
[152]
Knights, Michael. “Kataib Hezbollah’s Role in the August 15 Al-Tanf Attack.” The Washington Institute, August 25, 2022.
[153]
Malik, Hamdi, and Crispin Smith. “Militias Try to Conceal Iraqi Role in Lethal Strike on American Base.” The Washington Institute, April 3, 2023.
[154]
“Iraq: Release Kidnapped Scholar.” Amnesty International, September 8, 2023.
[155]
Malik, Hamdi. “Militia Propagandists Comment on Tsurkov Kidnapping.” The Washington Institute, July 7, 2023.
[156]
Malik, Hamdi. “Militia Propagandists Comment on Tsurkov Kidnapping.” The Washington Institute, July 7, 2023.
[157]
Malik, Hamdi. “Militia Propagandists Comment on Tsurkov Kidnapping.” The Washington Institute, July 7, 2023.
[158]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Kataib Hezbollah’s Escalating Feud with the Iraqi Security Forces.” The Washington Institute, May 19, 2023.; Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[159]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Kataib Hezbollah’s Escalating Feud with the Iraqi Security Forces.” The Washington Institute, May 19, 2023.
[160]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Kataib Hezbollah’s Escalating Feud with the Iraqi Security Forces.” The Washington Institute, May 19, 2023..
[161]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Kataib Hezbollah and the Gaza Crisis (Part 1): Special Ops in the Lead.” The Washington Institute, November 7, 2023.
[162]
Seligman, Lara. “U.S. Military Shoots down Drones Headed toward Troops in Iraq - Politico.” Politico, October 18, 2023.
[163]
Seligman, Lara. “U.S. Military Shoots down Drones Headed toward Troops in Iraq - Politico.” Politico, October 18, 2023.
[164]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Kataib Hezbollah and the Gaza Crisis (Part 1): Special Ops in the Lead.” The Washington Institute, November 7, 2023.
[165]
Knights, Michael, and Amir al-Kaabi. “Kataib Hezbollah and the Gaza Crisis (Part 2): Israel’s Incursion, Khamenei-Nasrallah Speeches, and Blinken’s Visit.” The Washington Institute, November 7, 2023.
[166]
Knights, Michael. “Muhandis Replaced by Not One Man, but Two?” The Washington Institute, January 12, 2022..
[167]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Kataib Hezbollah and the Gaza Crisis (Part 1): Special Ops in the Lead.” The Washington Institute, November 7, 2023..
[168]
Knights, Michael, and Amir al-Kaabi. “Kataib Hezbollah and the Gaza Crisis (Part 2): Israel’s Incursion, Khamenei-Nasrallah Speeches, and Blinken’s Visit.” The Washington Institute, November 7, 2023.
[169]
Tabler, Andrew J. “Deadly Attack on US Troops in Jordan Marks Major Escalation.” The Washington Institute, January 29, 2024.
[170]
Roeloffs, Mary Whitfill. “What Is Kataib Hezbollah? Iran-Linked Group Blamed for Drone Attack on American Bases-Leading to U.S. Strikes.” Forbes, December 26, 2023.; Madhani, Aamer, and Zeke Miller. “Biden Orders Strikes on an Iranian-Aligned Group after 3 US Troops Injured in Drone Attack in Iraq.” AP News, December 26, 2023.
[171]
Madhani, Aamer, and Zeke Miller. “Biden Orders Strikes on an Iranian-Aligned Group after 3 US Troops Injured in Drone Attack in Iraq.” AP News, December 26, 2023.
[172]
Lopez, C. Todd. “Centcom Kills Kataib Hezbollah Commander Responsible for Strikes against U.S. Forces.” U.S. Department of Defense, February 8, 2024.
[173]
Lopez, C. Todd. “Centcom Kills Kataib Hezbollah Commander Responsible for Strikes against U.S. Forces.” U.S. Department of Defense, February 8, 2024.; Knights, Michael, and Hamdi Malik. “Kataib Hezbollah Secretary-General Tries to Forestall U.S. Strikes.” The Washington Institute, January 30, 2024.
[174]
Lopez, C. Todd. “Centcom Kills Kataib Hezbollah Commander Responsible for Strikes against U.S. Forces.” U.S. Department of Defense, February 8, 2024.; “Who Is Kataib Hezbollah, the Group Blamed for Killing US Troops? | Reuters.” Reuters, January 30, 2024.; Folk, Zachary. “What Is Kataib Hezbollah? Pentagon Deadly Drone Attack against U.S. Base Had ‘footprints’ of Iran-Backed Group.” Forbes, January 31, 2024.
[175]
Tabler, Andrew J. “Deadly Attack on US Troops in Jordan Marks Major Escalation.” The Washington Institute, January 29, 2024.
[176]
Tabler, Andrew J. “Deadly Attack on US Troops in Jordan Marks Major Escalation.” The Washington Institute, January 29, 2024.
[177]
Folk, Zachary. “What Is Kataib Hezbollah? Pentagon Deadly Drone Attack against U.S. Base Had ‘footprints’ of Iran-Backed Group.” Forbes, January 31, 2024.; Knights, Michael, and Hamdi Malik. “Kataib Hezbollah Secretary-General Tries to Forestall U.S. Strikes.” The Washington Institute, January 30, 2024.
[178]
Knights, Michael, and Hamdi Malik. “Kataib Hezbollah Secretary-General Tries to Forestall U.S. Strikes.” The Washington Institute, January 30, 2024.
[179]
Ryder, Pat. “Pentagon Press Secretary Air Force Maj. Gen. Pat Ryder Holds a Press Briefing.” U.S. Department of Defense, February 5, 2024.
[180]
Knights, Michael, and Hamdi Malik. “Abu Baqr Al-Saeedi: Kataib Hezbollah Terrorist, Serving PMF Official.” The Washington Institute, February 7, 2024.; Lopez, C. Todd. “Centcom Kills Kataib Hezbollah Commander Responsible for Strikes against U.S. Forces.” U.S. Department of Defense, February 8, 2024.
[181]
Knights, Michael. “Explaining Apparent Muqawama De-Escalation since January 28.” The Washington Institute, February 7, 2024.
[182]
“Israel Strikes Iran Consulate in Syria’s Capital Damascus: What We Know.” Al Jazeera, April 2, 2024.; Al-Kaabi, Amir, Hamdi Malik, and Michael Knights. “Iraqi PMF Chief of Staff Commits to Fulfill Iranian Supreme Leader’s Plans.” The Washington Institute, April 8, 2024.
[183]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, Hamdi Malik, and Michael Knights. “Iraqi PMF Chief of Staff Commits to Fulfill Iranian Supreme Leader’s Plans.” The Washington Institute, April 8, 2024.
[184]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, Crispin Smith, and Alex Almeida. “Iraqi Militias Hit Two U.S. Sites in Iraq and Syria.” The Washington Institute, April 22, 2024.
[185]
“Drone, Rocket Attacks Targeted US Forces in Iraq, US Officials Say | Reuters.” Reuters, April 23, 2024.
[186]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, Hamdi Malik, and Michael Knights. “Iraqi PMF Chief of Staff Commits to Fulfill Iranian Supreme Leader’s Plans.” The Washington Institute, April 8, 2024.
[187]
Al Jazeera. “Rocket Attack from Iraq Targets US Base in Syria.” Al Jazeera, April 22, 2024.
[188]
Al Jazeera. “Rocket Attack from Iraq Targets US Base in Syria.” Al Jazeera, April 22, 2024.
[189]
“Israel Strikes Iran Consulate in Syria’s Capital Damascus: What We Know.” Al Jazeera, April 2, 2024.
[190]
Beaumont, Peter. “Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis: Iraqi killed in US strike was key militia figure.” The Guardian, January 3, 2020. Accessed October 1, 2020.
[191]
Yuhas, Alan. “Airstrike That Killed Suleimani Also Killed Powerful Iraqi Militia Leader.” The New York Times, January 3, 2020. Accessed October 1, 2020.
[192]
Felter, Joseph and Brian Fishman. ““Iranian Strategy in Iraq: Politics and “Other Means,”” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point Occasional Papers Series, 13 October 2008. Web. July 2016.
[193]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah.” Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium, Date unknown. Web. 6 August 2016.
[194]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[195]
“Hashd deputy Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis: Iran’s Man in Baghdad.” Al Jazeera, January 3, 2020. Accessed September 22, 2020.
[196]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.; Mansour, Renad. “From Militia to State Force: The Transformation of the al-Hashd al-Shaabi,” The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 16 November 2016. Web. August 2016.; Knights, Michael. "How the U.S. Government Should Think About Iraq's Popular Mobilization Forces." The Washington Institute For Near East Policy. May 9, 2019. Accessed May 15, 2019.
[197]
“Iran’s Networks of Influence - Chapter Four: Iraq.” International Institute for Strategic Studies, November 2019. Accessed October 1, 2020.
[198]
Moore, Johanna, and Annika Ganzeveld. “The Leadership and Purpose of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” Institute for the Study of War, March 19, 2024.
[199]
“Iran’s Soleimani and Iraq’s Muhandis killed in air strike: militia spokesperson.” Reuters, Web. January 2, 2020. Accessed July 15, 2020.
[200]
“Ahmad al-Hamidawi.” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Accessed July 22, 2020.
[201]
Dilshad Al-Dalawi, “After his inclusion in the lists of terrorism, “Al-Hamidawi” has a record of crimes in Iraq.” al-Ain, February 28, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[202]
Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021; “Iraq: PMF Names Muhandis’ Successor.” Asharq al-Awsat, February 22, 2020; Naar, Ismaeel. “Meet ‘the uncle’ Abu Fadak, the new head of Iran-backed PMU militias in Iraq.” Al-Arabiya, February 22, 2020.
[203]
Naar, Ismaeel. “Meet ‘the uncle’ Abu Fadak, the new head of Iran-backed PMU militias in Iraq.” Al-Arabiya, February 22, 2020.
[204]
Naar, Ismaeel. “Meet ‘the uncle’ Abu Fadak, the new head of Iran-backed PMU militias in Iraq.” Al-Arabiya, February 22, 2020; Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021.
[205]
Naar, Ismaeel. “Meet ‘the uncle’ Abu Fadak, the new head of Iran-backed PMU militias in Iraq.” Al-Arabiya, February 22, 2020.
[206]
Davidson, John and Ahmed Rasheed. “Fractures grow among Iraq militias, spell political retreat.” Reuters, April 1, 2020. Accessed August 3, 2020; Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 9.
[207]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 9.
[208]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 9; Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021; Alfoneh, Ali. “Succession Crisis in Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” The Arab Gulf States Institute Washington, April 3, 2020.
[209]
“Counter Terrorism Designation Update.” U.S. Treasury Department, January 13, 2021; Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021.
[210]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[211]
"Kataib Hezbollah (Hezbollah Brigades)." Foundation for the Defense of Democracies. Accessed July 9, 2018.
[212]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[213]
“Kataib Hezbollah (Hezbollah Brigades).” Washington, D.C.: Foundation for Defense of Democracies, n.d.
[214]
"Country Reports on Terrorism." State Department. 2016. Accessed July 11, 2018.
[215]
McInnis, J. M. "Iranian Deterrence Strategy and Use of Proxies." Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. November 29, 2016. Accessed July 11, 2018..
[216]
Knights, Michael. “Iran’s Expanding Militia Army in Iraq: The New Special Groups.”
CTC Sentinel 12(7)
(August 2019). 2.
[217]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah.” Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium, Date unknown. Web. 6 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Global Security, Date unknown. Web. July 2016.
[218]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[219]
“US officials name 3 Iraqi militias armed by Iran to kill Yanks,” The International Iran Times, Date unknown. Web. July 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[220]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; Strouse, Thomas. “Kata’ib Hezbollah and the Intricate Web of Iranian Military Involvement in Iraq,” Jamestown Foundation, 4 March 2010. Web. August 2016.
[221]
Weiss, Caleb. "Iraqi Shia Militias Show US-made Equipment on Road to Samarra." Long War Journal, March 4, 2016. Accessed July 10, 2018.
[222]
"Kataib Hezbollah (Hezbollah Brigades)." Foundation for the Defense of Democracies. Accessed July 9, 2018.
[223]
Weiss, Caleb. “Iraqi Shia militias show US-made equipment on road to Samarra.” The Long War Journal, Threat Matrix, 4 March 2016. Web. 3 April 2016; “Iraq: Turning a Blind Eye: The Arming of the Popular Mobilization Units.” Amnesty International, January 5, 2017. 22-25, 33-34.
[224]
Reuters Staff. “Inside the plot by Iran’s Soleimani to attack U.S. forces in Iraq.” Reuters, January 3, 2020. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[225]
“GICJ.” Geneva International Centre for Justice, August 5, 2016.; Al Jazeera. “Iraq’s Parliament Passes Law Legalising Shia Militias.” Al Jazeera, November 26, 2016.
[226]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024.; “Who Is Kataib Hezbollah, the Group Blamed for Killing US Troops? | Reuters.” Reuters, January 30, 2024.
[227]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Extraordinary Popular Mobilization Force Expansion, by the Numbers.” The Washington Institute, June 3, 2023.
[228]
Al-Kaabi, Amir, and Michael Knights. “Extraordinary Popular Mobilization Force Expansion, by the Numbers.” The Washington Institute, June 3, 2023.
[229]
Browne, Gareth. "Qatar Ransom Cash Boosts Iran-backed 'terrorist' Group Ahead of Iraq Elections." The National, April 30, 2018. Accessed July 10, 2018. LexisNexis Academic.
[230]
Davidson, John and Ahmed Rasheed. “Fractures grow among Iraq militias, spell political retreat.” Reuters, April 1, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[231]
Alaaldin, Ranj, and Vanda Felbab-Brown. “New Vulnerabilities for Iraq’s Resilient Popular Mobilization Forces.” Brookings, February 3, 2022.
[232]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Profile: The Muhandis General Company.” The Washington Institute, May 17, 2023.
[233]
Alaaldin, Ranj, and Vanda Felbab-Brown. “New Vulnerabilities for Iraq’s Resilient Popular Mobilization Forces.” Brookings, February 3, 2022.
[234]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024.; Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Profile: The Muhandis General Company.” The Washington Institute, May 17, 2023.
[235]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[236]
Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Profile: The Muhandis General Company.” The Washington Institute, May 17, 2023.
[237]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024. ; Knights, Michael, Crispin Smith, and Hamdi Malik. “Profile: The Muhandis General Company.” The Washington Institute, May 17, 2023.; Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[238]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[239]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[240]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[241]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[242]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024.; Alaaldin, Ranj, and Vanda Felbab-Brown. “New Vulnerabilities for Iraq’s Resilient Popular Mobilization Forces.” Brookings, February 3, 2022.
[243]
Alaaldin, Ranj. “The Popular Mobilization Force Is Turning Iraq into an Iranian Client State.” Brookings, February 2, 2024.
[244]
Strouse, Thomas. “Kata’ib Hezbollah and the Intricate Web of Iranian Military Involvement in Iraq,” Jamestown Foundation, 4 March 2010. Web. August 2016.
[245]
Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel 13(10)
(October 2020). 4.
[246]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[247]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Web. June 2016; Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[248]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; Fulton, Will, Joseph Holiday & Sam Wyer. “Iranian Strategy in Syria,” Institute for the Study of War, May 2013. Web. July 2016.
[249]
“Kataib Hezbollah: Iraq condemns US attacks on Iran-backed militia.” BBC News, December 30, 2019. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[250]
Wimberly, Jason. “Wilayat al-Faqih in Hizballah's Web of Concepts: A Perspective on Ideology.”
Middle East Studies
51(5) (March 2, 2015).
[251]
al-Hashimi, Hisham. “The Popular Mobilization Authority on the sixth anniversary of the Fatwa of Sufficient Jihad (هيئة الحشد الشعبي في الذكرى السادسة لفتوى الجهاد الكفائي).” Rudaw, June 10, 2020; Aarabi, Kasra. “What Is Velayat-e Faqih?” Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, March 20, 2019. Accessed August 8, 2016; Lees Weiss, Jacob. “How Will Khadimi Confront Kata’ib Hezbollah?” Jamestown Foundation, July 15, 2020.
[252]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.; Felter, Joseph and Brian Fishman. “Iranian Strategy in Iraq: Politics and “Other Means,” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point Occasional Papers Series, 13 October 2008. Web. July 2016.; Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[253]
Glanz, James and Marc Santora. “Iraqi Lawmaker Was Convicted in 1983 Bombings in Kuwait That Killed 5,” New York Times, February 7, 2007.
[254]
Adnan, Sinan. “Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iranian Proxies Challenge Iraq’s Proposed National Guard Law.” Institute for the Study of War, September 8, 2015. Accessed August 30, 2020.
[255]
Adnan, Sinan. “Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iranian Proxies Challenge Iraq’s Proposed National Guard Law,” Institute for the Study of War, 8 September 2015. Web. June 2016.
[256]
“U.S.-Iran Conflict and Implications for U.S. Policy.” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.; “US attacks Shia militia: Iraq, Syria, Iran, Russia, Israel react.” Al Jazeera and News Agencies, December 30, 2019. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[257]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Ameer al-Kaabi. “Profile: The Hoquq Movement.” The Washington Institute, March 15, 2024.
[258]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Ameer al-Kaabi. “Profile: The Hoquq Movement.” The Washington Institute, March 15, 2024.
[259]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Ameer al-Kaabi. “Profile: The Hoquq Movement.” The Washington Institute, March 15, 2024.
[260]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[261]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Iraq’s New Regime Change: How Tehran-Backed Terrorist Organizations and Militias Captured the Iraqi State.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 2023.
[262]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Ameer al-Kaabi. “Profile: The Hoquq Movement.” The Washington Institute, March 15, 2024.
[263]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Ameer al-Kaabi. “Profile: The Hoquq Movement.” The Washington Institute, March 15, 2024.
[264]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.; Bayoumi, Alaa and Leah Harding. “Mapping Iraq’s fighting groups,” Al Jazeera, 27 June 2014. Web. August 2016.; “Iraq: Ban Abusive Militias from Mosul Operation.” Human Rights Watch, July 31, 2016. Accessed August 31, 2020.; Naylor, Hugh. "Iraqis Trapped in Fallujah Face Twin Peril of Islamic State and Militia Fighters." Washington Post, June 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.; "Iraq: Fallujah Abuses Inquiry Mired in Secrecy." Human Rights Watch. July 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.
[265]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Web. June 2016.
[266]
Calamur, Krishnadev. “Trump’s Latest Warning to Iran Didn’t Come Out of Nowhere.” The Atlantic, September 12, 2018. Accessed July 28, 2020; “U.S.-Iran Conflict and Implications for U.S. Policy.” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[267]
“U.S.-Iran Conflict and Implications for U.S. Policy.” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[268]
“UK soldier and two Americans killed in rocket attack in Iraq.” BBC News, March 12, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020; “Iraq base attack: US retaliatory strikes on Iran-backed fighters.” BBC News, March 13, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[269]
Knights, Michael and Crispin Smith. “Kataib Hezbollah Leads Drone Warfare Inside Iraq.” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, May 14, 2021.
[270]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[271]
Reuters Staff. “Exclusive: Iran-backed militias deployed snipers in Iraq protests – sources.” Reuters, October 17, 2019. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[272]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; Fulton, Will, Joseph Holiday & Sam Wyer. “Iranian Strategy in Syria,” Institute for the Study of War, May 2013. Web. July 2016.
[273]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[274]
“Kataib Hezbollah: Iraq condemns US attacks on Iran-backed militia.” BBC News, December 30, 2019. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[275]
Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[276]
Strouse, Thomas. “Kata’ib Hezbollah and the Intricate Web of Iranian Military Involvement in Iraq,” Jamestown Foundation, 4 March 2010. Web. August 2016.
[277]
Masi, Alessandria. “Iraqi Shiite Militias Fighting ISIS Are Using Social Media To Recruit Foreign Fighters,” International Business Times, 12 March 2015. Web. August 2016.
[278]
Reuters Staff. “Inside the plot by Iran’s Soleimani to attack U.S. forces in Iraq.” Reuters, January 3, 2020. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[279]
Jakes, Lara, and Qassim Abdul-Zahra. “Shiite militias increase attacks on US troops.” The Associated Press, July 1, 2011.
[280]
“Who Is Kataib Hezbollah, the Group Blamed for Killing US Troops? | Reuters.” Reuters, January 30, 2024.
[281]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[282]
“Operations Continue Against Al Qaeda, Kataib Hezbollah.” U.S. Department of Defense, October 19, 2008. Accessed September 22, 2020.
[283]
Zoepf, Katherine. “Rocket Kills 2 Contract Workers at U.N. Compound in Baghdad.” The New York Times, November 29, 2008. Accessed September 22, 2020.
[284]
Bayoumi, Alaa and Leah Harding. “Mapping Iraq’s fighting groups,” Al Jazeera, 27 June 2014. Web. August 2016.
[285]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Web. June 2016.
[286]
Adnan, Sinan. “Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iranian Proxies Challenge Iraq’s Proposed National Guard Law,” Institute for the Study of War, 8 September 2015. Web. June 2016.
[287]
Yeginsu, Ceylan. “Shiite Militia Releases 16 Turkish Workers Abducted in Iraq.” The New York Times, September 30, 2015. Accessed October 1, 2020.
[288]
Adnan, Sinan. “Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iranian Proxies Challenge Iraq’s Proposed National Guard Law.” Institue for the Study of War, September 8, 2015. Accessed August 30, 2020.
[289]
Yeginsu, Ceylan. “Shiite Militia Releases 16 Turkish Workers Abducted in Iraq.” The New York Times, September 30, 2015. Accessed October 1, 2020.
[290]
“Iraq: Ban Abusive Militias from Mosul Operation,” Human Rights Watch, 31 July 2016. Web. August 2016.
[291]
"Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces Launch Operation Southwest of Mosul." Foundation for the Defense of Democracies. April 29, 2017. Accessed July 10, 2018.; Kenner, David, and Campbell Macdiarmid. "Goodbye, Islamic State. Hello, Anarchy." Foreign Policy. March 24, 2017. Accessed July 10, 2018.
[292]
Roggio, Bill, and Amir Toumaj. "Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces Close in on Tal Afar." Long War Journal, November 23, 2016. Accessed July 10, 2018.
[293]
Calamur, Krishnadev. “Trump’s Latest Warning to Iran Didn’t Come Out of Nowhere.” The Atlantic, September 12, 2018. Accessed Juyl 28, 2020.
[294]
Shaikh, Shaan. “Iranian Missiles in Iraq.” Center for Strategjc and International Studies, December 2019. Accessed July 28, 2020.
[295]
“U.S.-Iran Conflict and Implications for U.S. Policy.” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[296]
“U.S.-Iran Conflict and Implications for U.S. Policy.” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2020. Accessed July 9, 2020.
[297]
“UK soldier and two Americans killed in rocket attack in Iraq.” BBC News, March 12, 2020. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[298]
Khaleel, Sangar and Jane Arraf. “Rocket Attack in Iraq Kills a U.S. Military Contractor.” The New York Times, February 15, 2021.
[299]
“US carries out air strike against Iran-backed militia target in Syria.” The National, February 26, 2021.
[300]
Lopez, C. Todd. “Centcom Kills Kataib Hezbollah Commander Responsible for Strikes against U.S. Forces.” U.S. Department of Defense, February 8, 2024.
[301]
Lopez, C. Todd. “Centcom Kills Kataib Hezbollah Commander Responsible for Strikes against U.S. Forces.” U.S. Department of Defense, February 8, 2024.
[302]
Tabler, Andrew J. “Deadly Attack on US Troops in Jordan Marks Major Escalation.” The Washington Institute, January 29, 2024.
[303]
" Foreign Terrorist Organizations.” Bureau of Counterterrorism, U.S. Department of State. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[304]
“Treasury Designates Individual, Entity Posing Threat to Stability in Iraq.” U.S. Department of Treasury. July 2, 2009. Accessed August 4, 2020.
[305]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[306]
“Counter Terrorism Designation Update.” U.S. Treasury Department, January 13, 2021; Knights, Michael. “The U.S. Designation of Kataib Hezbollah’s Abu Fadak.” The Washington Institute, January 13, 2021.
[307]
“U.S. Treasury Sanctions Iran-Aligned Militias in Iraq.” U.S. Department of the Treasury, November 17, 2023.
[308]
“Iraq: Ban Abusive Militias from Mosul Operation,” Human Rights Watch, 31 July 2016. Web. August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.; Naylor, Hugh. "Iraqis Trapped in Fallujah Face Twin Peril of Islamic State and Militia Fighters." Washington Post, June 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.; "Iraq: Fallujah Abuses Inquiry Mired in Secrecy." Human Rights Watch. July 7, 2016. Accessed July 9, 2018.
[309]
Reuters Staff. “Exclusive: Iran-backed militias deployed snipers in Iraq protests – sources.” Reuters, October 17, 2019. Accessed July 27, 2020.
[310]
Felter, Joseph and Brian Fishman. “Iranian Strategy in Iraq: Politics and “Other Means,” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point Occasional Papers Series, 13 October 2008. Web. July 2016.
[311]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[312]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.; Fulton, Will, Joseph Holiday & Sam Wyer. “Iranian Strategy in Syria,” Institute for the Study of War, May 2013. Web. July 2016.
[313]
“Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.; Felter, Joseph and Brian Fishman. “”Iranian Strategy in Iraq: Politics and “Other Means,”” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point Occasional Papers Series, 13 October 2008. Web. July 2016.; Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[314]
Felter, Joseph and Brian Fishman. “”Iranian Strategy in Iraq: Politics and “Other Means,”” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point Occasional Papers Series, 13 October 2008. Web. July 2016.
[315]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; Knights, Michael. “Iran’s Foreign Legion: The Role of Iraqi Shiite Militias in Syria,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 27 June 2013. Web. June 2016.
[316]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[317]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Web. June 2016.
[318]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[319]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[320]
Smyth, Phillip. “From Najaf to Damascus and onto Baghdad: Iraq’s Liwa Abu Fadl al-Abbas,” Jihadology, 18 June 2014. Web July 2014.; Joscelyn, Thomas. “Hezbollah has ‘about 7,000 fighters’ in Syria, US says.” Long War Journal, July 27, 2017. Accessed August 25, 2020.
[321]
Smyth, Phillip. “The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2015. Web. June 2016.
[322]
Lawlor, Katherine and Nicholas Carl. “Iraqi militant attack on Riyadh could signal a larger shift in Iran’s regional approach.” Institute for the Study of War, January 29, 2021; Knights, Michael. “Back into the Shadows? The Future of Kata’ib Hezbollah and Iran’s Other Proxies in Iraq.”
CTC Sentinel
13(10) (October, 2020.). ; England, Andrew and Chloe Cornish. “Shadowy militants in Iraq complicate US efforts to ease tensions.” Financial Times, February 28, 2021.
[323]
Lawlor, Katherine and Brandon Wallace. “Iran’s Proxies Accelerate Soleimani’s Campaign to Compel U.S. Withdrawal from Iraq.” Institute for the Study of War, April 2, 2020.
[324]
Lawlor, Katherine and Nicholas Carl. “Iraqi militant attack on Riyadh could signal a larger shift in Iran’s regional approach.” Institute for the Study of War, January 29, 2021.
[325]
Knights, Michael and Crispin Smith. “Kataib Hezbollah Leads Drone Warfare Inside Iraq.” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, May 14, 2021.
[326]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Changing of the Guard: New Iraqi Militia Trends and Responses.” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, January 19, 2021; Mamouri, Ali. “Iraqi militias defy government, expand networks and pressure.” Al-Monitor, October 18, 2020; Lawlor, Katherine and Brandon Wallace. “Iran’s Proxies Accelerate Soleimani’s Campaign to Compel U.S. Withdrawal from Iraq.” Institute for the Study of War, April 2, 2020; Lawlor, Katherine and Nicholas Carl. “Iraqi militant attack on Riyadh could signal a larger shift in Iran’s regional approach.” Institute for the Study of War, January 29, 2021.
[327]
Knights, Michael, Hamdi Malik, and Crispin Smith. “Changing of the Guard: New Iraqi Militia Trends and Responses.” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, January 19, 2021; Mamouri, Ali. “Iraqi militias defy government, expand networks and pressure.” Al-Monitor, October 18, 2020.
[328]
“The killing of a liquor store owner south of Baghdad (مقتل صاحب محل لبيع المشروبات الكحولية جنوب بغداد).” As-Sumaria News, December 15, 2020; “Video .. Members of ‘Rab’ Allah’ beat two female workers in a massage center in front of the public in Baghdad (فيديو.. عناصر من "ربع الله" ينهالون بالضرب على عاملتين بمركز مساج أمام الملأ ببغداد).” Shafaq News, November 26, 2020; “Two gunmen shoot with silencers "without fear" ... Details of the assassination attempt on "torment" east of Baghdad (مسلحان يطلقان النار من كواتم "بلا خوف".. تفاصيل محاولة اغتيال "عذاب" شرقي بغداد).” Rudaw, November 26, 2020; Malik, Hamdi. “The Rise of Kata’ib Hezbollah’s Hegemonic ‘Resistance.’” The Washington Institute, December 1, 2020.
[329]
“PMF supporters storm the KDP headquarters building in Baghdad (مؤيدون للحشد الشعبي يقتحمون مبنى الحزب الديمقراطي في بغداد).” Rudaw, October 17, 2020.
[330]
“Rab’ Allah displays heavy weapons in Baghdad and sends ‘threatening messages’ (ربع الله" تستعرض بسلاح ثقيل ببغداد وتوجه "رسائل تهديد).” Shafaq News, March 25, 2021; “After Rab’Allah’s review, Kata’ib Hezbollah sends a message regarding ‘arms control’ (عقب استعراض "ربع الله" الكتائب توجه رسالة بشأن "ضبط السلاح").” Rudaw, March 26, 2021.
[331]
Al-Khafaji, Hayder. “Iraq’s Popular Mobilisation Forces.” London School of Economics and Political Science, November 2019.
[332]
Moore, Johanna, and Annika Ganzeveld. “The Leadership and Purpose of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” Institute for the Study of War, March 19, 2024.
[333]
Dury-Agri, Jessa Rose, Omer Kassim, and Patrick Martin. “Iraqi Security Forces and Popular Mobilization Forces: Orders of Battle.” Institute for the Study of War, December 2017. Accessed August 24, 2020.
[334]
Moore, Johanna, and Annika Ganzeveld. “The Leadership and Purpose of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” Institute for the Study of War, March 19, 2024.; Knights, Michael. “Muhandis Replaced by Not One Man, but Two?” The Washington Institute, January 12, 2022.
[335]
Abdelillah, Bendaoudi. "After the "almost 100 Percent" Defeat of ISIS, What about Its Ideology?" Aljazeera Centre for Studies. May 8, 2018. Accessed May 16, 2019.
[336]
Bayoumi, Alaa and Leah Harding. “Mapping Iraq’s fighting groups,” Al Jazeera, 27 June 2014. Web. August 2016.
[337]
Dury-Agri, Jessa Rose, Omer Kassim, and Patrick Martin. “Iraqi Security Forces and Popular Mobilization Forces: Orders of Battle.” Institute for the Study of War, December 2017. Accessed August 24, 2020.
[338]
“The caliphate strikes back.” The Economist, May 23, 2015. Accessed August 20, 2020; Mansour, Renad. “Networks of power: The Popular Mobilization Forces and the state in Iraq.” Chatham House, February 2021. 16; Mansour, Renad. “More than Militias: Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces are Here to Stay.” War on the Rocks, April 3, 2018.
[339]
Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.; “Kata’ib Hezbollah,” Counter Extremism Project, Date unknown. Web. 8 August 2016.
[340]
Ryan, Missy and Loveday Morris. “The U.S. and Iran are aligned in Iraq against the Islamic State—for now,” The Washington Post, 27 December 2014. Web. August 2016.; Levitt, Matthew and Phillip Smyth. “Kata’ib al-Imam Ali: Portrait of an Iraqi Shiite Militant Group Fighting ISIS,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 5 January 2015. Web. 8 August 2016.
[341]
K. Gilbert. “The Rise of Shi’ite Militias And The Post Arab Spring Sectarian Threat,” International Institute for Counter-Terrorism, October 2016. Web. July 2016.
[342]
Nctc. “National Counterterrorism Center: FTOS.” National Counterterrorism Center | FTOs, September 2022.
[343]
Moore, Johanna, and Annika Ganzeveld. “The Leadership and Purpose of Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces.” Institute for the Study of War, March 19, 2024.