Pamela Ligouri Bunker – IWC Research Contractor
Alma Keshavarz - IWC Research Contractor
Robert J. Bunker – IWC Research Contractor
This subject bibliography is a selection of top resources on Lebanese 
Hezbollah in Latin America and includes journal articles, reports, 
books, sections of websites, and videotaped talks. The dates of the 
material range from 2010 to 2025, encompassing various aspects 
of the terrorist organization and its criminal activities which include 
narcotics trafficking and money laundering. The purpose is to 
provide ready-access resources for the study of Hezbollah and its 
linkages to allied organizations—both states and non-state actors—
in Latin America.
Lebanese Hezbollah is a Shiite Islamist organization established in the early 1980s with 
direct support from the Islamic Republic of Iran, which remains its primary state sponsor, 
through funding, training, and ideological support. Hezbollah has a dual identity: it 
is both a political party with representation in Lebanon’s parliament and a militant 
group that maintains an independent armed wing. Hezbollah is designated—fully or 
partially—as a foreign terrorist organization by a number of countries and international 
bodies, including the United States, the European Union, the United Kingdom, the Gulf 
Cooperation Council, among others. Hezbollah has been a key player in Middle Eastern 
regional conflicts for decades, most notably engaging in full-scale war with Israel in 
2006 which surprised both Israel and the international community. Hezbollah was also 
critical in the Syrian civil war, with thousands of fighters sent in support of the Bashar 
al-Assad regime in alignment with Iranian and Russian interests. Prior to Assad’s fall in 
December 2024, Hezbollah’s operations in Syria allowed the group to expand its military 
experience and regional footprint. 
The events of 7 October 2023, however, changed the landscape of the Middle East when 
Hamas launched an attack against Israel; as Israel began an extended military campaign 
against Hamas in Gaza, Hezbollah and other Iranian-backed groups escalated tensions. 
In response to Hezbollah’s increased involvement, Israel launched a covert operation 
on 17 September 2024, widely referred to as the “pager attack,” involving the remote 
detonation of thousands of pagers and walkie-talkies distributed among Hezbollah units 
Irregular Warfare Terrorism Subject Bibliography 
No. 2: Lebanese Hezbollah in Latin America
1
The views expressed in this research are those solely of the authors based on research and do not reflect 
the policy or views of the Irregular Warfare Center, Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government.

in Lebanon and Syria.1 The attack caused widespread casualties to the organization 
while also serving as a cognitive setback. On 24 September 2024, Israeli airstrikes killed 
Hezbollah’s Secretary General, Hassan Nasrallah, which served as a turning point for 
the organization. His likely successor, Hashem Safieddine, was also killed in an Israeli 
strike on 3 October 2024. With its leadership decimated and operational capabilities 
significantly degraded, Hezbollah’s future as a state-sponsored terrorist organization is 
in question. 
As a result, Hezbollah may consider pivoting more towards insurgent tactics and 
increasing their reliance on illicit networks for funding and survival. One potential 
avenue is Latin America, where Hezbollah has a long-standing presence, particularly in 
the Tri-Border Area (TBA) where Argentina, Paraguay, and Brazil converge. This region 
is known to have served as a hub for Hezbollah’s illicit financial operations, including 
drug trafficking, arms smuggling, and money laundering. A new Tri-Border Area (TBA) 
where Chile, Bolivia, and Peru converge (Witker’s model) has since been identified,2 
as well as an even more recent maritime one, recognized as existing between Maicao, 
Colombia; Punto Fijo, Venezuela; and Colón, Panama3 which offer additional unlawful 
revenue potentials as do other lawless regions in Latin America. The group’s integration 
into transnational criminal networks enables it to generate revenue outside of traditional 
state sponsorship, especially as Iran – its primary sponsor – is facing obstacles of its own. 
Moreover, Latin America’s sizeable Lebanese and broader Arab diaspora offer a potential 
foundation for Hezbollah to exploit.4 These communities are vulnerable to influence 
through familial, religious, and cultural ties. As an Iranian proxy, the organization’s links 
to the Bolivarian Alliance (ALBA) and Venezuela also provide it with additional revenue 
stream opportunities.5 Whether Hezbollah will disarm or evolve into a more covert 
insurgency remains uncertain. However, the group has engaged in large scale terrorist 
violence in Latin America in the past [e.g., the July 1994 Asociación Mutual Israelita 
Argentina (AMIA) bombing] as well as other lesser acts of terrorism, with the potential—
under the right circumstances—to threaten attacks within the United States itself.
1  “WATCH: Pentagon holds daily briefing after Hezbollah pagers explode in Lebanon and Syria.” PBS News. 
17 September 2024, pp. 1-3, https:/ /www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/watch-live-pentagon-holds-briefing-
as-israel-vows-to-halt-hezbollah-attacks.
2  Alma Keshavarz, “Iran and Hezbollah in the Tri-Border Areas of Latin America: A Look at the ‘Old TBA’ 
and the ‘New TBA.’” Small Wars Journal, 12 November 2015, pp 1-12, https:/ /archive.smallwarsjournal.
com/jrnl/art/iran-and-hezbollah-in-the-tri-border-areas-of-latin-america-a-look-at-the-“old-tba”-and-the.
3  Joseph M. Humire, “Hezbollah’s Maritime Tri-Border in Latin America” at the 24th Parliamentary 
Intelligence-Security Forum, Panama City. Center for a Secure Free Society. YouTube, 24 February 2023, 
5:27 Minute Video, https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vgytdh0x1jQ.
4  Warren Bratter, “The Lebanese in Latin America.” Un Poco De Todo. 6 July 2020, pp. 1-4, https:/ /sites.
hofstra.edu/un-poco-de-todo/2020/07/06/the-lebanese-in-latin-america/ and “U.S. Treasury Sanctions 
Latin America-Based Hezbollah Financial Network.” Foundation for Defense of Democracies. 13 
September 2023, p. 1, https:/ /www.fdd.org/analysis/2023/09/13/u-s-treasury-sanctions-latin-america-
based-hezbollah-financial-network/.
5  Jorge Paredes Esteban, Penetration and Influence of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Latin America. 
Herzliya: International Institute for Counter-Terrorism (ICT), June 2023, pp. 1-43, https:/ /ict.org.il/wp-
content/uploads/2023/12/Paredes-Esteban_Penetration-and-Influence-of-the-Islamic-Republic-of-Iran-
in-Latin-America_2023_22_11-1.pdf.
2

Massaab Al-Aloosy, “Insurgency, Proxy, and Dependence: How 
Hezbollah’s Ideology Prevails Over its Interest in its Relationship with 
Iran.” International Journal, Vol. 78, Iss. 1-2, 25 May 2023, pp. 24-40, 
https:/ /journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/00207020231175679 
Annotation: This article sets out to explain why Hezbollah maintains its 
close commitment to Iran even though it has the potential for economic 
and military autonomy. Due to fluctuations in Iranian support because 
of sanctions, Hezbollah has learned to diversify its income globally 
through direct donations and illicit economic activities. Furthermore, 
there is evidence that the transmission of expertise is now from Hezbollah to Iran, with 
its training of the IRGC and the Syrian army rather than the reverse. The author contends 
that it is Hezbollah’s ideological commitment to the concept of velayet-e faqih—with 
the supreme leader in Iran also the supreme leader of Hezbollah—that maintains the 
unwavering connection between the two. Its core belief that Iran is the “nucleus of 
the world’s central Islamic state,” continues to make that state its source of moral and 
ideological support and this is not expected to change.
Massaab Al-Aloosy, The Changing Ideology of Hezbollah. Middle East 
Today Series. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2020, pp. 1-210, https:/ /link.
springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-030-34847-2
Annotation: The work is part of the Middle East Today series and 
traces the changing ideology of Hezbollah—viewed as an insurgent 
movement—from one of religious fervor which seeks to create an 
Islamic (Shia) State in Lebanon, destroy Israel, and liberate Jerusalem 
to one based on more imposed pragmatic objectives. While Israel is 
still the designated enemy and rule of jurisprudence (velayat-e faqih) 
represents central ideological component, the relationship between 
Hezbollah (the client) and Syria (a patron state) have dynamically changed over the 
four periods of the group’s historical evolution—to the point where the client is actively 
helping to ensure the survival of a patron. Additionally, Hezbollah’s integration into the 
Lebanese political system (rather than co-opting it) and active support of Iran (and Shia 
worldwide) provide an additional layer of ideological interdependencies to its activities.
3

Jeremy Arbid, Captured by Captagon? Lebanon’s Evolving Drug 
Economy. Geneva: The Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized 
Crime, May 2017, pp. 1-48, https:/ /globalinitiative.net/analysis/captagon/
Annotation: The Global Initiative (GI) report, with financial support from 
Norway, concerns the evolving drug trade in Lebanon with a focus on 
the production and distribution of Captagon (an amphetamine) which 
represents an estimated $1 billion-dollar illicit regional industry tied to 
Hezbollah and the Assad regime (in Syria). While Captagon seizures 
spiked in 2014, the report downplays Hezbollah’s involvement in this 
activity given lack of data, the byzantine nature of Lebanese and UN politics, and related 
blowback potentials. The report is a follow on to the earlier The Nexus of Conflict and 
Illicit Drug Trafficking: Syria and the Wider Region (GI, November 2017).
János Besanyö, Attila Gulyas, and Darko Trifunovic, “Hezbollah and the 
internet in the twenty-first century.” International Journal of Intelligence 
and Counterintelligence, Vol. 36, No. 3, 2022, pp. 669-685, https:/ /www.
researchgate.net/publication/363681795_Hezbollah_and_the_Internet_
in_the_Twenty-First_Century
Annotation: The authors argue that the internet (as part of a media 
empire) is viewed as one of the three components of Iran’s and 
Hezbollah’s “resistance society” which also encompasses a military 
infrastructure and a network of large-scale civilian institutions. The 
full spectrum of media increasingly leverages the internet (a new 
technology) to shape public opinion, to gain supporters and sympathizers, to raise funds, 
and for information warfare purposes. Cyber-espionage, “Fake News” media camps, 
and Hezbollah links to money counterfeiting and Dark Web transactions (via TOR, I2P, 
Freenet) are also highlighted as part of the picture of their overall internet activities.
Leonardo Coutinho, “The Evolution of the Most Lethal Criminal 
Organization in Brazil– the PCC.” Prism, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2019, pp. 56-
67, https:/ /ndupress.ndu.edu/Media/News/News-Article-View/
Article/1943465/the-evolution-of-the-most-lethal-criminal-organization-
in-brazilthe-pcc/
Annotation: This article explains how the Premeiro Comando da Capital 
(PCC), which originated as a prison gang, became dominant with its 
emphasis on unity and, using a trade union model, was exported to 
other prisons and ultimately to society at large. It then consolidated as 
a “second generation gang,” expanding into the economic arena through drug trafficking 
and bank robbery. Originally denying its existence, the government unwittingly helped 
the group expand by continuing to break up the group and send members to other 
prisons. As it increased in its ability to influence the state and gained transnational ties, 
it became what is known as a “third generation gang.” At that point, it began embracing 
terrorist tactics, ultimately signing a truce which led to formal political involvement as 
members won local elections. As the largest of 27 active gangs in Brazil, it has been 
linked to both FARC and Hezbollah.
4

“Hezbollah.” Diálogo Américas, https:/ /dialogo-americas.
com/?s=Hezbollah
Annotation: Per the site overview, ‘DIÁLOGO is a professional digital 
military magazine published by the U.S. Southern Command’ with the 
addition of images, videos, and other elements. It contains dozens of 
articles focusing on Hezbollah’s involvement in Latin America since March 2019 as well 
as even more involving Iranian activities. More recent Hezbollah articles have focused 
on their recent expansion in Latin America, the likelihood of the group expanding its 
illicit operations to help finance itself after the loss of much of its leadership networks 
in Lebanon, and the increasing threat of terrorist attacks (against Jewish targets) in the 
region (such as Brazil where two Hezbollah operatives were arrested in November 2023).
Dave Dilegge, Alma Keshavarz, and Robert J. Bunker, Eds., Iranian and 
Hezbollah Hybrid Warfare Activities. Small Wars Journal Anthology. 
Bloomington: iUniverse, 2016, pp. 1-780, https:/ /www.amazon.com/
Iranian-Hezbollah-Hybrid-Warfare-Activities/dp/153200866X
Annotation: The anthology contains sixty articles published between 
2007 and 2015 at Small Wars Journal focusing on hybrid warfare 
activities engaged in by Iran and its proxy Hezbollah. The book 
is divided into sections on Iran’s military capabilities and nuclear 
ambitions, Hezbollah’s global operations, Iran and Hezbollah’s 
involvement in the Middle East, Iran and Hezbollah’s activities in Latin 
America. Alma Keshavarz’s discussion of the ‘New Tri-Border Region’ of Latin America 
(based on Witker’s model) is highlighted in Chapter 60 of the publication. In addition to 
this work, SWJ (https:/ /smallwarsjournal.com) and El Centro (https:/ /smallwarsjournal.
com/category/el-centro/0) have numerous post-2015 articles focused on the tri-border 
areas in Latin America and Hezbollah (and Iranian linked) activities in the Western 
hemisphere and other regions of the world.
Omer Dostri, “Hezbollah: A Worldwide Criminal Organization.” Middle 
East Quarterly, Vol. 30, No. 3, Summer 2023, pp. 1-9, https:/ /www.
meforum.org/middle-east-quarterly/hezbollah-a-worldwide-criminal-
organization
Annotation: The work provides a basic overview of the complex 
criminal web that has been developed by Hezbollah over the course of 
decades to generate illicit revenues. It highlights the Iranian-Hezbollah 
partnership that exists and the global nature of the criminal activities 
taking place. Further, various criminal groups Hezbollah is cooperating 
with are discussed, along with key personnel identified who are involved in its criminal 
network tied to the shadowy Organization for External Security (Unit 910), with key 
cases highlighted (including cartel money laundering) which have disrupted its illicit 
economic activities.
5

R.Evan Ellis, “Security Implications for the United States from Iranian 
and HezbollahActivities in Latin America.” SSI Website: HDIAC Webinar. 
18 December 2024, 1:02:46Hour Video, https:/ /ssi.armywarcollege.edu/
SSI-Media/Recent-Publications/Article/4009666/security-implications-
for-the-united-states-from-iranian-and-hezbollah-activiti/
Annotation: This Homeland Defense & Security Information Analysis 
Center (HDIAC) webinar is provided by a research professor with the 
U.S. Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute (SSI) whose expertise 
is on Latin American security. He discusses the activities of Iran and 
Hezbollah, one of its key surrogates, in Latin America within the larger 
global context. Six detailed power point slides are provided with the webinar. One of 
the questions he asks is “Could escalation in [the] Middle East change [the] Hezbollah 
posture in Latin America.” A good historic overview of Hezbollah regional activities is 
provided along with some limited Q&A. Written transcripts of the webinar can also  
be accessed.
Jorge Paredes Esteban, Penetration and Influence of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran in Latin America. Herzliya: International Institute for 
Counter-Terrorism (ICT), June 2023, pp. 1-43, https:/ /ict.org.il/wp-
content/uploads/2023/12/Paredes-Esteban_Penetration-and-Influence-
of-the-Islamic-Republic-of-Iran-in-Latin-America_2023_22_11-1.pdf
Annotation: Written by a Spanish researcher who served as an intern 
with the ICT, the report discusses the motivations for Iran’s penetration 
of Latin America and their overall objectives and strategies, and how 
they maintain their ongoing influence. The religious, political, and 
ideological components of their activities are also noted with the 
incremental recruitment, indoctrination, and proselytizing (Shia conversion) of citizenry 
in targeted areas. This comprehensive overview of Iran’s activities in Latin America 
includes Iran’s ability to leverage the Bolivarian Alliance (ALBA) to further embed itself 
in the region and its use of Hezbollah. The Rabbani network case study further portrays 
how Hezbollah operates as an espionage and intelligence organization leveraging Iranian 
diplomatic and cultural venues and Shia mosques in Argentina.
6


“Hezbollah in Latin America,” Foundation for the Defense of 
Democracies (FDD) Website. Washington, DC, https:/ /www.fdd.org/
issue/iran-in-latin-america/  
Annotation: A keyword search at this website related to “Hezbollah in 
Latin America” produced a listing of work by the FDD going back over 
a decade, ranging from podcasts to policy briefs, from congressional 
testimony to articles in publications such as Foreign Policy and The 
Hill. FDD staff producing these products primarily include Emmanuele 
Ottolenghi along with John Hannah and Juan C. Zarate. Hundreds 
of works focusing on Hezbollah and Iran are also available through 
the website, with a dedicated FDD Iran Program (found under the Projects heading) 
providing ongoing and detailed research and comprehensive policy recommendations. 
Almost all the Hezbollah in Latin America research, however, is pre-7 October 2023—
except for a Spanish podcast on Hamas and Hezbollah in the region (9 March 2024)—
making it less relevant to Hezbollah’s recent shifts in strategy.
Marzia Giambertoni, “Hezbollah’s Networks in Latin America: Potential 
Implications for U.S. Policy and Research.” Santa Monica: RAND, 
31 March 2025, pp. 1-20, https:/ /www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/
PEA3585-1.html
Annotation: This Rand insight piece shows concern for the lack of 
scrutiny regarding Latin America given the shift in U.S. priorities 
toward China and Russia. Collating a variety of academic and investigative reporting 
along with congressional transcripts and governmental documents, it sought to identify 
patterns in Hezbollah’s Latin American operations but found a distinct lack in recent 
congressional attention (ending in 2015), outdated government reports (post-2016), 
limited recent comprehensive academic studies (beyond Rand’s 2023 financing study), 
and “few publicly reported joint operations or intelligence sharing efforts.” Documenting 
Hezbollah operations in at least 12 of the 20 Latin American countries and noting Iranian 
soft power efforts there, the author sees potential for its return to retaliation against 
its enemies in the region, exploitation of cross-border vulnerabilities, manipulation 
of trafficking routes, and utilizing criminal networks for intelligence gathering—all 
of which could directly impact the U.S. and its interests. She finishes with three key 
recommendations to address any such shifts or operations before they come to fruition.
7

Joseph M. Humire, The Middle Eastern Origin of the Venezuela Crisis: 
The strategic threat from Iran, Hezbollah, and the Maduro regime to the 
United States. Washington, DC: The Institute of World Politics. YouTube, 
26 November 2019, 1:02:20 Hour Video, https:/ /www.youtube.com/
watch?v=CdauCQ-9Ulk
Annotation: The brief provides a strategic perspective on the topic of Iran, its proxy 
Hezbollah, and their interactions with the Maduro regime in Venezuela (which is 
essentially a narco-state). Middle Eastern migrations to Latin America (and vice versa), 
key inflection points, and changes in revolutionary thought are highlighted. Venezuela 
has turned itself into an air bridge for Iran and its allies. The speaker is at a podium in the 
video with a PowerPoint slide show on a screen also visible. About twenty minutes of 
Q&A are provided. This is the first time this presentation, which is a variation of a longer 
US and allied governmental non-public brief, has ever been given publicly where it has  
been recorded.
Rex Hudson, Terrorist and Organized Crime Crime Groups in the Tri-
Border (TBA) of South America. Washington, DC: Federal Research 
Division, Library of Congress, July 2003 (Revised December 2010), pp. 
1-87, https:/ /www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library/abstracts/terrorist-and-
organized-crime-groups-tri-border-area-tba-south 
Annotation: This fused open-source report was prepared under an 
interagency agreement between Federal Research Division, Library 
of Congress and the Crime and Narcotics Center Director of Central 
Intelligence (CIA). It primarily spans the 1999 to mid-2003 era, with 
partially updated information later provided through 2010. The report 
focuses on the activities of organized crime, terrorists, and narcotics traffickers in the 
lawless TBA where Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay intersect. This has been popularly 
characterized as a ‘Star Wars Bar’ environment type of criminal enclave, where state 
capacity and oversight are extremely low and this permissive political, social, and 
economic environment is conductive to Hezbollah illicit activities. The work is considered 
an influential primer on the region and the terrorist group (using the Hizballah spelling) 
is extensively covered within it. Further, the Appendix provides detailed information on 
five operatives belonging to Islamic fundamentalist groups (primarily Hezbollah).
8

Joseph M. Humire, The Maduro-Hezbollah Nexus: How Iran-backed 
Networks Prop up the Venezuelan Regime. Washington, DC: The Atlantic 
Council, October 2020, 1-23, https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-
research-reports/issue-brief/the-maduro-hezbollah-nexus-how-iran-
backed-networks-prop-up-the-venezuelan-regime/
Annotation: This Atlantic Council sponsored report unpacks the 
layers by which Hezbollah has shifted its identity in Latin America 
from terrorist group to one of the region’s top five transnational 
criminal organizations. Focusing on Venezuela and its robust diaspora 
population due to waves of immigration from Lebanon and Syria, it outlines three 
major familial clans now assimilated into the Maduro regime’s political apparatus and 
illicit economy. Members of the Saleh and Rada clans operate as financiers while the 
Nassereddines serve as ‘fixers’ (offering deniability) in an interwoven logistical network 
spanning Caracas, Damacus, and Tehran. Policy recommendations include applying 
maximum pressure at all convergence points and delegitimizing Hezbollah both in 
Lebanon and among its diaspora populations. For background and context see  
Joseph M. Humire and Ilan Berman, Eds., Iran’s Strategic Penetration of Latin America 
(Lexington, 2014).
Joseph M. Humire, “Hezbollah’s Maritime Tri-Border in Latin America” 
at the 24th Parliamentary Intelligence-Security Forum, Panama City. 
Center for a Secure Free Society. YouTube, 24 February 2023, 5:27 
Minute Video, https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vgytdh0x1jQ
Annotation: The newest Tri-Border Area (TBA) in Latin America, which is maritime based, 
is highlighted by the speaker at a security forum in Panama. It exists in the Caribbean in 
the intersecting area of Punto Fijo, Venezuela; Maicao, Colombia; and Colón, Panama. The 
speaker, the Secure Free Society (SFS) Executive Director, presents at a podium along 
with maps, images, and documents being shown in the video. He argues that Hezbollah 
is replicating its criminal model as it expands its support networks and leverages its 
diaspora, and, further, now has the ability in the new TBA to engage in money laundering 
in U.S. dollars via Panama.
9

Trevor Johnston et. al, “Appendix D: Lebanese Hezbollah” in Countering 
Violent Nonstate Actor Financing: Revenue Sources, Financing 
Strategies, and Tools of Disruption. Research Report: RRA687-1. Santa 
Monica: RAND, 2023, pp. 219-239, https:/ /www.rand.org/pubs/research_
reports/RRA687-1.html
Annotation: The report, sponsored by the Office of the Deputy Chief of 
Staff, G-3/5/7, U.S. Army, seeks to identify, examine, and provide tools 
to counter Violent Nonstate Actor (VNSA) financing. The appendix case 
study encompasses Hezbollah’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps 
(IRGC) origins, ideological components (based on its tenets and three elements: Shia 
Islam, rule by the jurist, and duty of jihad), financial streams (licit and illicit), the evolution 
of the organization’s financial strategy, and both kinetic and non-kinetic tactics used to 
counter it. Various operations against Hezbollah’s finances are touched upon and as is 
the importance of the Lebanese diaspora to its global operations.
Alma Keshavarz, The Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps: Defining Iran’s 
Military Doctrine. London: Bloomsbury, 2023, pp. 1-226, https:/ /www.
bloomsbury.com/us/iranian-revolutionary-guard-corps-9781350255654/
Annotation: The work is one of the few to specifically focus on the 
Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and its more secretive Qods 
Force which specializes in unconventional warfare activities—more so 
for what it means from a U.S. policy perspective given the author’s first-
hand knowledge of federal governmental institutions. The book covers 
the establishment of the IRGC, its development politically and increasing 
influence within Iran, its relationships and activities with Shia militias and the Hezbollah 
terrorist organization (which it initially founded from personnel sent to Lebanon), and its 
activities in Iraq and Yemen. It also provides an analysis of its hybrid warfare capabilities.
10

Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah’s procurement channels: Leveraging criminal 
networks and partnering with Iran. CTC Sentinel, Vol. 12, Iss. 3, March 
2019, pp. 1-9, https:/ /ctc.westpoint.edu/hezbollahs-procurement-
channels-leveraging-criminal-networks-partnering-iran/
Annotation: Even though it has been traditionally funded and well 
supplied with weaponry by Iran, Hezbollah continues to partner with 
criminal operatives to procure weapons and other equipment for 
its own use as well as sometimes for Iran itself. Using data from US 
investigations over the past 20 years, this article looks at the channels 
for this procurement as well as the role of Iran’s Quds Force in the process. In 2006, 
for example, an operation exposed the way in which—through intermediary criminal 
enterprises—weapons would be mislabeled and shipped to Hezbollah controlled ports 
in Syria. Later, beginning in 2009 and with operational evidence up until 2018, sanctions 
and declining oil prices in Iran led Hezbollah to institute a multitude of illicit financing and 
procurement efforts across the globe—a specific portion of which went directly to Iran. 
These various operations revealed that Hezbollah both opportunistically and proactively 
sought out sensitive technologies (such as GPS missile guidance and specialized UAV 
adaptations) along with replacement weaponry (especially Western-manufactured and 
reliable) for use in Syria. Along both Hezbollah and Quds Force channels, these items 
then moved across Syria and to stockpiles in Lebanon.
Matthew Levitt, “Hezbollah’s Criminal Networks: Useful Idiots, 
Henchmen, and Organized Criminal Facilitators,” in Hilary Matfess and 
Michael Miklaucic, Eds., Beyond Convergence: World Without Order, 
Washington, DC: National Defense University, October 2016, pp. 155-177, 
https:/ /www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GOVPUB-D5-PURL-gpo76875/
pdf/GOVPUB-D5-PURL-gpo76875.pdf
Annotation: In this book chapter, the author outlines Hezbollah’s ‘nodal’ 
method of criminal enterprise. He offers insight into where Hezbollah 
operates as a coherent structure as a terrorist organization and the 
ways in it which leverages a single individual with high-level Hezbollah connections in its 
criminal operations. These operations are intentionally informal, relying on convergence 
points shared by the breadth of criminal networks. Participants range from ‘useful 
idiots’ (small scale criminals who donate part of their profits) to ‘henchmen’ (Hezbollah 
operatives or close associates) and ‘facilitators’ (individuals well-placed and willing to 
open doors for the group’s criminal activities) who provide leverage with other organized 
criminal groups. The lack of a single model serves to obscure both the illicit nature 
of its activities (including narcotics trafficking, arms smuggling, money laundering, 
counterfeiting, and fraud) as well as its liaisons with partners of convenience (such as 
Israeli drug smugglers) which may not play well with supporters. The author suggests 
that—if they can be identified—targeting the super-facilitators would prove a fruitful 
strategy for the U.S.
11

Adriana Marin, The Convergence of Terrorism and Organised Crime: An 
Examination of Hezbollah’s Activities in Latin America from a Crime-
Terror Nexus Perspective. Doctoral Dissertation. Coventry: Coventry 
University, September 2022, pp. 1-279, https:/ /pureportal.coventry.ac.uk/
en/studentTheses/the-convergence-of-terrorism-and-organised-crime-
an-examination-o 
Annotation: The dissertation focuses on Hezbollah operations in the 
Tri-Border Area (TBA) of Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay. It takes a 
modified theoretical “black hole syndrome” approach which allows a 
crime-terror nexus (convergence) to develop outside of failed (fragile) states in lawless 
border zone areas. While the work focuses on criminal entrepreneurship and the 
conditions (drivers) that function as enablers, the specific case study used has value 
for its focus on the specificities of Hezbollah, the investigation of the group’s decision-
making process concerning its operations in the initial TBA, and its involvement in 
organized criminal activities. The study utilized twenty-five semi structured interviews of 
experts and empirical data collection for research purposes.
Demetrios Marinides, Hezbollah in Latin America: A Potential Grey Zone 
Player in Great Power Competition. Perry Center Occasional Paper. 
Washington, DC: National Defense University, September 2021, pp. 1-24, 
https:/ /wjpcenter.org/document/hezbollah-in-latin-america-a-potential-
grey-zone-player-in-great-power-competition/
Annotation: This occasional paper shows how Hezbollah as a hybrid 
terrorist organization serves to bridge different tiers of grey zone 
conflict and thus could play a key role for anti-western powers seeking 
a foothold across Latin America. It outlines the historical context 
of Hezbollah’s infiltration of the initial Tri-Border Area (TBA) of Paraguay, Brazil, and 
Argentina, its strategic shift to Venezuela, and its subsequent move into other free 
trade zones such as the ‘new TBA’ between Chile, Bolivia, and Peru. Its positioning has 
dovetailed with the soft power expansion by Iran which has established diplomatic ties 
and founded mosques and cultural centers across the region. The work holds that Russia 
similarly has made inroads into the region and, while publicly distancing itself from 
Hezbollah, uses its political links to Venezuela—as well as via the Russian mafia and other 
TCOs— through which to engage with the group. The piece concludes that both Iran 
and Russia—via Hezbollah— are now in a position of strength from which to project their 
power against the interests of the U.S.
12

Josh Meyer, “The secret backstory of how Obama let Hezbollah off 
the hook.” Politico. December 2017, pp. 1-61, https:/ /www.politico.com/
interactives/2017/obama-hezbollah-drug-trafficking-investigation/
Annotation: A somewhat sensational but mostly accurate investigative 
journalistic piece on the Drug Enforcement Administration’s operation codenamed 
Project Cassandra which targeted Hezbollah’s global illicit finances and revenues—with  
a focus on cocaine trafficking out of South America—which was shut down by the  
Obama Administration to improve US-Iranian relations to further the Iranian nuclear  
(anti-weapons proliferation) agreement. The top-secret operation ran from 2008 
through 2016 and was supported by thirty U.S. and foreign counternarcotics and security 
agencies. It initially identified Hezbollah’s criminal networks (including the massive West 
African used car money laundering scheme) and then began to increasingly target them 
when it was shutdown.
13
Daniel Odin Shaw, “Beyond necessity: Hezbollah and the intersection 
of state-sponsored terrorism with organized crime.” Critical Studies 
on Terrorism, Vol. 12, Iss. 4, 11 April 2019, pp. 582-604, https:/ /www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17539153.2019.1592074
Annotation: This well-researched academic work seeks to evaluate 
theoretical explanations for the lesser studied phenomenon of ‘state-
sponsored’ terror groups who become involved in organized crime. 
Coming from the position that social movement theory can be fruitfully 
applied to terrorist and organized crime groups as ‘contentious 
collective actors,’ the author finds two basic differential approaches exist explaining their 
behavior: economic necessity vs. opportunities and constraints. Applying these concepts 
to the test case of Hezbollah, the article concludes—with caveats—that four of the five 
causal factors tested for the opportunity-based theory were present whereas necessity-
based factors were poorly substantiated.
Rashmi Singh and Jorge M. Lasmar, Regional Hubs of Illicit Trade: The 
Tri-border Area. Washington, DC: Transnational Crime and Corruption 
Center (TraCCC), May 2024, pp. 1-68, https:/ /traccc.gmu.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2024/11/Final-TBA.pdf
Annotation: A detailed and in-depth study on the initial TBA by two 
leading researchers in Minas Gerais, Brazil which was part of the larger 
Hubs of Illicit Trade Project out of George Mason University. Hezbollah’s 
ongoing presence in the TBA is highlighted in this TraCCC report as well 
as their use of shell-companies for trafficking and laundering purposes 
(Barakat, Farhat, and Hijazi linked networks). The increasing involvement of corrupt 
business elites with Hezbollah is discussed as is the group’s smuggling of cocaine made 
to appear as shisha charcoal. The study makes extensive use of helpful visuals (tables, 
figures, et al) and important distinctions are made concerning key types of licit, grey,  
and illegal commodities distributed through the Tri-Border Region and the illicit goods 
routes utilized.


Southern District of New York, “United States of America v. Adel El 
Zabayar.” Criminal Complaint, 5 March 2020, pp. 1-50, https:/ /www.
justice.gov/usao-sdny/press-release/file/1279391/dl?inline=
Annotation: The Adel El Zabayar complaint details the criminal activities 
he and his network of co-conspirators engaged in, spanning in/about 
1999 through in/about 2020. It levees narco-terrorism conspiracy 
(count one), cocaine importation conspiracy (count two), possessions 
of machineguns and destructive devices (count three), and conspiracy 
to possess them (count four) charges against Hezbollah (and others 
including the Venezuelan leader Maduro Moros and the Cártel de Los Soles) related 
to their ongoing illicit operations taking place in Latin America, the United States, and 
the Middle East. The strategy of “flooding” the U.S. with cocaine is highlighted as is the 
support provided by the FARC and Hamas in this activity.
14
Vice, “How the US Failed to Take Down Narco-terrorism.” War on Drugs 
Series. YouTube. 2 July 2023, 12:26 Minute Video, https:/ /www.youtube.
com/watch?v=6l796cTNGfg
Annotation: An episode in the Vice series ‘The War on Drugs’ which 
focuses on the role that the para-military terrorist group Hezbollah plays in global narco-
trafficking. The Beqaa valley hashish industry, Syrian linked captagon (amphetamine) 
smuggling, and cocaine trafficking out of Latin America are discussed with a focus on 
the DEA’s Operation Titan (2008) which uncovered Hezbollah’s direct links with the 
Zetas cartel and the follow-on multi-year Operation Cassandra, whose success resulted 
in its being shut down by the Obama administration for endangering the Iran nuclear 
deal. The commentator cuts in and out of the fast-paced video with news imagery of 
Hezbollah fighters and its leaders, narcotics, and weaponry, and expert interviews are 
also interspersed within it.
Washington Institute, “John Fernandez: The DEA’s Targeting 
of Hezbollah’s Global Criminal Support Network.” YouTube. 9 
January 2020, 1:18:03 Hour Video, https:/ /www.youtube.com/
watch?v=50G6eFGxuC0
Annotation: The presentation is provided by a supervisory level DEA special agent with 
the Counter-Narco-Terrorism Operations Center (CNTOC) and past CIA Latin America 
intelligence analysis experience. The video offers great context and a recent historical 
overview of DEA targeting of Hezbollah’s global criminal support network. Presentation 
slides are provided highlighting convergence (and related) threats, Lebanese Hezbollah 
(LH), individuals arrested (Project Cassandra), Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC) 
designations, and a snapshot of the LH global criminal support network with a presence 
in Colombia (via the DTOs), Venezuela, and the initial Tri-Border Region identified. About 
a forty-minute Q&A session also took place, including those concerning international 
political nuances, criminal funding amounts, the role of Iranian embassies, and Hezbollah 
sleeper cells in the U.S.
