Atomwaffen Division (AWD) | Program on Extremism | The George Washington University
Skip to main content
Atomwaffen Division (AWD)
Overview
Atomwaffen Division (AWD), or National Socialist Resistance Front, is an international neo-Nazi terrorist organization founded by Brandon Russell in 2015 after announcing its formation on the now-defunct neo-Nazi internet form
IronMarch.org
. AWD has cells across Europe and North America, with most of its members residing in the United States. AWD members are known to have simultaneous memberships and affiliations with other neo-Nazi groups such as The Base, Order of Nine Angles (O9A), and others. Since its founding, AWD members have been implicated in almost a
dozen murders
around the world.
Ideology
Much of AWD’s ideology draws from
James Mason
, a former member of the American Nazi Party (ANP) and leader of the National Socialist Liberation Front (NSLF), whose collection of essays known as
SIEGE
advocated for an all-white American ethnostate through the use of terrorism. Encouraging current and prospective members to read
SIEGE
is known as “Siege-pilling.” AWD also draws inspirational influence from esoteric Nazism and the occult, as their recommended reading list includes works from Savitri Devi, Charles Manson, and David Myatt (aka Anton Long), founder of the Satanic neo-Nazi group
Order of Nine Angles
. Some members of AWD have sympathized with Salafi and jihadist terrorists, often citing their culture of martyrdom and insurgency as inspiration for their tactics and propaganda.
AWD began recruiting young men in 2017 by
canvasing
university campuses such as the University of Chicago, the University of Central Florida, and Boston University, urging students to “join their local Nazis.” In addition to college students, AWD often targets
veterans and current members
of the U.S. military to train recruits in firearms and military tactics.
Prominent Figures
Brandon Russell
First appearing on Iron March in March 2014, founder Brandon Russell made international contact with fellow neo-Nazis from organized groups,
stating
that AWD is “a very fanatical, ideological band of comrades who do both activism and military training.” Growing up in the Bahamas, Russell began
attending
the University of South Florida in 2012 as a nuclear physics student and joined the Florida Army National Guard. Shortly after AWD’s founding, Russell traveled to a neo-Nazi event in Russia in 2015, where he
made contact
with organizations such as Greece’s Golden Dawn, the Nordic Resistance Movement, and designated Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) the Russian Imperial Movement (RIM).
Notable Events and Activities
AWD began recruiting young men in 2017 by canvasing university campuses such as the University of Chicago, the University of Central Florida, and Boston University, urging students to “join their local Nazis.” In addition to college students, AWD often targets veterans and current members of the U.S. military to train recruits in firearms and military tactics.
In May 2017, after the murder of two of Russell’s roommates by fellow AWD member Devon Arthurs, FBI investigators discovered explosive materials in his garage, prompting his arrest and the discovery of multiple rifles, body armor, and thousands of rounds of ammunition. Prosecutors alleged that Russell
planned
to target civilians, synagogues, and nuclear facilities with the explosives. In September 2017, Russell pleaded guilty to possessing an unregistered destructive device and was
sentenced
to five years in prison in January 2018.
AWD members have been linked to nearly a dozen murders and terrorist attack plots. In December 2017,
Nicholas Giampa
shot and killed his girlfriend’s parents over a dispute regarding his neo-Nazi ideology. Giampa
died
in August 2024 while in custody in Virginia. A month later, in January 2018, Samuel Woodward
murdered
Blaze Burnstein, an openly gay Jewish college student in Orange County, California. Woodward allegedly attended multiple AWD events and training camps prior to the murder. On November 15, 2024, Woodward was
sentenced
to life in prison without the possibility of parole.
In February 2023, following his release from prison in August 2021, federal prosecutors
indicted
Russell along with his girlfriend and co-conspirator,
Sarah Beth Clendaniel
, for planning attacks on electric substations in Baltimore, hoping to cause a “cascading failure.” In September 2024, Clendaniel received an
18-year sentence
in federal prison for her role in the plot. In February 2025, Russell was
convicted
of conspiracy to damage an energy facility. On August 7, 2025, Russell was
sentenced
to 20 years in federal prison followed by a lifetime of supervised release.
Atomwaffen's primary propagandist, Patrick Gordon Macdonald, aka "Dark Foreigner," was
arrested
by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) on July 5, 2023, on
charges
of participating in the activity of a terrorist group, facilitating terrorist activity, and commission of an offense for a terrorist group. In April 2025, Macdonald was convicted on all charges and eventually
sentenced
to 10 years in prison for his crimes in September 2025.
Symbology and Iconography
Trefoil
The Atomwaffen flag prominently features the trefoil industrial symbol, representing radiation from an atom. The use of this symbol is reflected in the group's name, which is German for "nuclear weapons."
Totenkopf
Atomwaffen also frequently uses the
totenkopf
, or "death's head" in German. The
totenkopf
underwent multiple iterations throughout Germany history, but was adopted by the Nazi leader Julius Schreck, head of the
Schutzstaffel
(SS), the organization responsible for administering concentration camps during the Holocaust.
Further Reading
Atomwaffen Division -
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC)
Atomwaffen Division -
Anti-Defamation League (ADL)
Atomwaffen Division -
Center on Terrorism, Extremism, and Counterterrorism (CTEC)