 ICCT Policy Brief 
July 2019  
DOI: 10.19165/2019.2.05  
ISSN: 2468-0486   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and 
Rising Far-Right Terrorism in the United 
States  
 
Author: Jacob Ware 
 
 
 
In the past several years, the United States has witnessed a concerning rise in far -right 
extremism and terrorist violence. Attackers in Oak Creek, Charleston, and Pittsburgh 
emerged from an increasingly emboldened radical right, which has grown in size and 
ambition in recent years. The Atomwaffen Division — a small, neo -Nazi terrorist 
organisation— is part of this movement. This Policy Brief tracks the reasons behind the 
American far-right’s rise and increasing turn to terrorism, and warns that the threat is 
likely to imminently worsen. To illustrate this trend, Atomwa ffen’s story is applied as a 
case study. This Policy Brief will conclude with a series of recommendations for 
policymakers looking to understand and address the threat posed by rising violence from 
the far-right. 
 
Keywords: Far-right, neo-Nazi, white supre macism, extremism, terrorism, Atomwaffen 
Division  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
2 
 
 
 
The Atomwaffen Division is a small neo -Nazi terrorist organisation mainly active in the 
United States and responsible for five killings in the past two years.1 The group is part of 
a rising American radical right, which is growing increasingly emboldened and violent, 
with fringe elements that should be taken far more seriously by counter -terrorism 
scholars, law enforcement, and the US government.2 With increasing national numbers, 
growing activity, and a White House that has been reluctant to condemn right -wing 
violence, violent fringes of the radical right pose serious concerns for counter-terrorism 
officials, particularly as political rhetoric ratchets up in preparation for the 2020 
elections. In its own right, Atomwaffen presents a continuing terrorist threat for two 
fundamental reasons: the group’s plainly stated intentions to increase their use of 
violence, and its efforts to recruit from the US military.3 Dramatically improved counter-
terrorism policies, in both the short- and long-term, are urgently needed to counter the 
threat. 
 
Atomwaffen’s rise, and the growth of groups and individuals who share its extremist 
worldview, are best understood against a simpl ified version of McCauley and 
Moskalenko’s pyramid model of radicalisation. In the McCauley and Moskalenko model, 
“from base to apex, higher levels of the pyramid are associated with decreased numbers 
but increased radicalisation of beliefs, feelings, and behaviours.”4 The base, in this case, 
is America’s political right, with its conservative and legally-protected views on abortion, 
immigration, LGBT rights, and the Second Amendment. Like any radicalisation pyramid 
base, this group is made up of mainstream, law-abiding citizens, who engage in peaceful 
political processes, and in no way condone violence or extremism. The middle of the 
pyramid has been fleshed out in recent years, as the so -called alt -right has not only 
proliferated, but has become increasing ly mainstream. Political views previously 
condemned as radical, such as constructing border walls and policies targeted at certain 
religions, are now endorsed and claimed by some of the country’s most powerful 
politicians. 5  Groups such as the Atomwaffen Di vision sit at the summit of the 
radicalisation pyramid. They are the extreme manifestation of the right wing, a violent, 
criminal, fringe movement within the radical right which sees terrorist violence as the 
only solution to its grievances. 
 
By introducing the group, the context in which it exists, and the conditions in which it 
thrives, this contribution will show that the Atomwaffen Division is but one subsection 
of a rising American radical right that is growing in size, viciousness of message, and 
acceptance of violence. 6  The group is living proof that America’s violent extremist 
underbelly is thriving, that political rhetoric emboldens such actors, and that 
condemnation of extremism— or lack thereof— by leaders matters.7 Many scholars have 
told the story of the short- and long-term forces that have shaped the far-right in recent 
memory. It’s time we start telling the story of the far-right’s most violent fringes, and the 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
1 Greg Myre, “Deadly Connection: Neo -Nazi Group Linked To 3 Accused Killers,” NPR , March 6, 2018. 
2 Peter W. Singer, “National Security Pros, It’s Time to Talk About Right -Wing Extremism,” Defense One, February 28, 
2018 
3 See, for example, A.C. Thompson, “An Atomwaffen Member Sketched a Map to Take the Neo -Nazis Down. What Path 
Officials Took Is a Mystery,” ProPublica, November 20, 2018. 
4  Clark McCauley and Sophia Moskalenko, “Mechanisms of Political Radicalization: Pathways toward Terrorism,” 
Terrorism and Political Violence 20 (2008): p. 417. 
5 David Neiwert, Alt-America: The Rise of the Radical Right  in the Age of Trump (New York: Verso, 2017).  
6  See, for example, Neiwert, Alt -America; Vegas Tenold, Everything You Love Will Burn: Inside the Rebirth of White 
Nationalism in America  (New York: Nation Books, 2018); and Daryl Johnson, Right -Wing Resurgenc e: How a Domestic 
Terrorist Threat is Being Ignored (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2012).  
7 See, for example, Stephen Tankel, “Riding the Tiger: How Trump Enables Right -Wing Extremism,” War on the Rocks , 
November 5, 2018; Daniel Byman, “Trump’s Rhetoric Is Raising the Risk of Right -Wing Terrorism,” Slate , January 21, 
2019; and Adam Serwer, “The Terrorism That Doesn’t Spark a Panic,” The Atlantic , January 28, 2019. 

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
3 
 
increasing threat they pose. The particulars of Atomwaffen’s rise are at the heart of this 
tale.  
 
Far-Right Extremism in the United States 
 
The spiritual and ideological origins of right -wing fringe groups in the United States 
reside largely in the post -Civil War period, with the first iteration of the Ku Klux Klan 
(KKK). In its early day s, the Klan attacked emancipated slaves and their supporters, 
seeking to reverse gains they may have made upon the Confederacy’s defeat. The 
original Klan declined in part due to law enforcement pressure; in the early 20th century, 
a second iteration rose and fell again, during a period that saw great social upheaval, 
Prohibition, and restrictions on immigration. After World War II, the KKK revived for a 
third time, spurred on by opposition to the growing civil rights movement. 8 The third 
iteration declined due to internal conflicts and government infiltrations, but the group 
maintains a presence today, with up to 8,000 members spread around the United 
States.9  
 
The Klan has not been the sole voice of right -wing extremism in US history. The second 
half of the 20 th century saw the rise of others on the extreme far -right espousing 
violence. By the 1970s and 1980s, two groups— the Aryan Nations, led by Richard Butler, 
and the National Alliance, led by William Pierce, author of a popular right-wing extremist 
call-to-arms titled The Turner Diaries— claimed a central role. Both groups subscribed to 
neo-Nazi and white supremacist views, and held tense relationships with the 
government. These groups had limited real success, however, and by 1989, “right -wing 
extremism was in trouble.”10 
 
The modern far-right movement was reawakened by two incidents in the 1990s which 
epitomised perceived government overreach into civilian life: Ruby Ridge in 1992 and 
Waco in 1993. At the former, an FBI-led standoff resulted in the deaths of the  wife and 
son of an alleged Aryan Nations member in rural Idaho. In the latter, 82 members of the 
Branch Davidians religious group were killed after the FBI and Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Firearms led a siege on the Davidian compound in Waco, Texas. Soon after 
these events, anti -government hysteria was compounded by the 1994 passage of the 
Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, which imposed background checks on firearms 
purchases. Ruby Ridge, Waco, and the Brady Bill provided a toxic mix of the things right-
wing extremists love the most: “guns, a compound standing in the face of federal agents, 
and religion.”11 Taken together, the three events catalysed a rebirth for the American 
far-right, sparking a national militia uprising, and ensuring the health of the extreme right 
for years to come. 
 
The United States has suffered a string of far- right inspired violence in recent history. 
The most lethal attack occurred on April 19, 1995, when Gulf War veteran and gun 
fanatic Timothy McVeigh detonated a truck bom b under the Alfred P. Murrah Federal 
Building in Oklahoma City, killing 168. McVeigh justified his act as direct revenge for 
government actions at Ruby Ridge and Waco. 12 A year later, in July 1996, Eric Rudolph, 
an anti-abortionist, killed two in the Olympic Park bombing in Atlanta, Georgia. 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
8 Jonathan R. White, “Political Eschatology: A Theology of Antigovernment Extremism,” American  Behavioral Scientist 6 
(February 2001): p. 941. 
9 Southern Poverty Law Center, “Ku Klux Klan.”  
10 White, “Political Eschatology,” p. 944.  
11 Ibid., p. 945. 
12  Lou Michel and Dan Herbeck, American Terrorist: Timothy McVeigh & The Oklahoma City Bombing  (New Yo rk: 
HarperCollins, 2001), p. 277. 

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
4 
 
 
Right-wing extremist violence has continued since the turn of the century, with the 
United States suffering a 1,450% increase in far-right terrorist attacks between 2007 and 
2017.13 Two particularly notorious incidents stand out. In June 2015, white supremacist 
Dylann Roof killed nine worshippers at the Mother Emanuel AME Church in Charleston, 
South Carolina. He released a manifesto calling for a race war, and infamously uttered 
during his rampage that African Americans were raping “our women and are taking over 
our country” and that he “had to do it.” 14 Then, in October 2018, a neo -Nazi attacked 
the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, killing 11 at Shabbat morning 
services. According to reports, he shouted “All Jews must die” as he walked in. 15 Other 
incidents include a failed bombing along the route of the Martin Luther King Jr. Day 
march in Spokane, Washington in January 2011; the August 2012 mass shooting at a Sikh 
temple in Oak Creek, Wisconsin; a June 2014 shooting spree in Las Vegas perpetrated by 
an anti-government extremist married couple; an Islamophobia -motivated stabbing on 
a train in Portland, Oregon in May 2017; the car ramming attack aimed at counter 
protesters at the Unite the Right Rally in Cha rlottesville, Virginia in August 2017; and a 
mass shooting at the Chabad of Poway synagogue in Poway, California in April 2019. 
America has a protracted history of terrorism from the far-right, which shows no sign of 
relenting. 
 
These instances, and the myriad other acts of violence motivated by extreme-right views, 
have been perpetrated by disparate actors emerging from an array of movements and 
networks. There are typically few connections between attackers, with many radicalising 
and plotting their attac ks outside formal groups. 16  Many individuals draw their 
ideologies and inspiration from the Internet, with far -right extremism, like its jihadist 
counterpart, benefiting from the rise of social media and online communities. In fact, 
some violent elements of  the far- right, such as the misogynistic Incel (‘involuntary 
celibate’) movement, exist almost entirely online. 17 In the Internet’s shadowy corners, 
some of the country’s most vulnerable and impressionable individuals find solace, 
engaging others with likem inded, extreme views, and joining them in a spiralling 
radicalisation. Roof, for instance, spent years in Internet “rabbit holes,” finding bogus 
statistics on race and crime to fuel his increasing hatred of African Americans.18 Beyond 
proliferating extremist ideas, the online space has also facilitated violence. As Graeme 
Wood argues, “murder is easier when someone is whispering at you every few minutes, 
telling you the rest of the world deserves what it gets.”19 Social media has revolutionised 
jihad, helping Islamic State followers around the world commit mass murder and achieve 
their dreams of martyrdom. The same trend has concurrently strengthened America’s 
far-right.20 
 
Of late, some of the more vicious activity has come from neo-Nazi organisations, such as 
Atomwaffen. In recent years, the American neo-Nazi landscape has been dominated by 
organisations such as the National Socialist Movement, American Nazi Party, Vanguard 
America, and the now-defunct Traditionalist Worker Party. Though America’s neo-Nazis 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
13 From two attacks in 2007 to 31 in 2017. Seth Jones, “The Rise of Far -Right Extremism in the United States,” CSIS , 
November 7, 2018. 
14 Rachel Kaadzi Ghansah, “A Most American Terrorist: The Making of Dylann Roof,”  GQ, August 21, 2017. 
15 Daniel Byman, “When to Call a Terrorist a Terrorist,” Foreign Policy , October 27, 2018. 
16 Bruce Hoffman, “Back to the Future: The Return of Violent Far-Right Terrorism in the Age of Lone Wolves,” War on the 
Rocks, April 2, 2019. 
17 Abby Ohlheiser, “Inside the Online World of ‘Incels,’ the Dark Corner of the Internet Linked to the Toronto suspect,” 
Washington Post, April 25, 2018 
18 Ghansah, “A Most American Terrorist: The Making of Dylann Roof.”  
19 Graeme Wood, “ISIS Tactics Have Spread to O ther Violent Actors,” Atlantic , April 24, 2018. 
20 See, for example, J.M. Berger, “Nazis vs. ISIS on Twitter: A Comparative Study of White Nationalist and ISIS Online 
Social Media Networks,” GWU Program on Extremism , September 2016. 

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
5 
 
do not subscribe wholly to Nazi ideology as it was expressed in Germany during the 
Second World War, they assume Nazi iconography, revere Adolf Hitler, and propagate 
his views on Judaism and minorities.21 
 
Today’s American neo-Nazi movement rests on a series of conspiracy theories, most 
notably the Zionist Occupied Government (ZOG) theory, which is the idea that the United 
States government has been overtaken by a small group of Jews which controls banks, 
media, and the United Nations; and the white genocide, which holds that white people 
in America are being deliberately replaced by immigrants and black people. America’s 
neo-Nazis also subscribe to David Lane’s 14 Words mantra — “we must secure the 
existence of our people and a future for white children”— and believe in the apocalyptic 
prophecy of a coming Racial Holy War, or RaHoWa. 22 Like many white supremacists in 
America, neo -Nazis also revere Pierce’s The Turner Diaries , in which the hero, Earl 
Turner, overthrows the federal government and eventually sparks a race war. Neo -
Nazism in the United States has frequently sparked violence and terrorism, particularly 
so in recent years.23 Deadly violence, in particular, tends to take place outside of defined 
groups, with a preference instead for what, years ago, white n ationalist leader Louis 
Beam called “leaderless resistance,” a strategy in which adherents operate outside 
formal hierarchies and chains of command. 24 In short, the modern American neo -Nazi 
movement is in good health, and poses an increasing threat to mains tream American 
society.25 
 
Clearly, the US has a long history of far- right extremism and terrorism, as well as a 
resurgent neo-Nazi movement today. It is in this context that we find the Atomwaffen 
Division, an exceedingly violent and thoroughly neo -Nazi faction of the American far-
right. 
 
Introducing Atomwaffen: The Violent Face of 
American Neo-Nazism 
 
The Atomwaffen Division (German for ‘nuclear weapons division’) first went public when 
it was acknowledged by founder Brandon Russell in October 2015. The group had 
developed as a breakaway from the Iron March forum, a fascist online outlet of over 
1,600 users which went down in September 2017. 26 Atomwaffen, or AWD, is estimated 
to have about 60 to 80 members— as well as a large number of “initiates”— mobilised in 
a decentralised hierarchy with up to 20 cells dotted around the country. 27 The group’s 
popularity increased after the 2017 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, VA, where 
neo-Nazis marched openly and gained widespread publicity.28 The group is currently led 
by John Cameron Denton — alias “Rape” — a 25- year-old from Texas who took over 
leadership after Russell was jailed in January 2018 on federal explosives charges.29 
 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
21 See, for example, “Deconstructing the symbols and slogans spotted in Charlottesville,” Washington Post , August 18, 
2017. 
22 Adam Serwer, “White Nationalism’s Deep American Roots,” The Atlantic, April 2019. 
23 See, for example, National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (START),  Ideological 
Motivations of Terrorism in the United States, 1970 -2016 (College Park, MD: START, November 2017), p. 6  
24 Jones, “The Rise of Far-Right Extremism in the United States.”  
25 Ibid. 
26 Southern Poverty Law Center, “Atomwaffen Division.”  
27 Frontline, “Documenting Hate: New American Nazis,” PBS , November 20, 2018.  
28 TSC, “Intelbrief: The Atomwaffen Division (AWD): A Brief Profile,” The Soufan Center , April 4, 2019. 
29 A.C. Thompson, Ali Winston, and Jake Hanrahan, “Inside Atomwaffen As It Celebrates a Member for Allegedly Killing 
a Gay Jewish College Student,” ProPublica , February 23, 2018.  

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
6 
 
In the group’s early days, Atomwaffen members busied themselves with non -violent 
activism. The group’s first public activity involved senior members dispersing anti -
Semitic propaganda around the University of Central Florida, and early YouTube videos 
showed members burning the American flag as well as copies of the Constitution.30 More 
recently, Atomwaffen has held a series of training camps in rural locations, most notably 
a January 2018 “hate camp” in the Nevada desert.31 The camps are intended to prepare 
members for the RaHoWa— “Racial Holy War”— with trainings in guerrilla tactics and the 
use of weapons. Training is often provided by former military servicemen. Atomwaffen 
has also started to grow across the Atlantic. In December 2018, three members of the 
British neo-Nazi Sonnenkrieg Division (German for ‘sun war division’) were arrested for 
threatening to kill “race traitor” Prince Harry. The leaders had been in direct contact with 
senior Atomwaffen members. 32  Atomwaffen has also expanded to Canada 33  and 
Germany,34 and may have had contacts with organisations in Ukraine.35 
 
In terms of its ideology , Atomwaffen subscribes to fairly standard neo -Nazi views. The 
group rails against Jews, minorities, and gays, and describes itself as a “revolutionary 
national socialist organization.” 36 Atomwaffen recruitment drives declare that “joining 
us means serious dedication not only to the Atomwaffen Division and its members, but 
to the goal of Total Aryan Victory,” while former member Devon Arthurs testified that 
“they want to build a Fourth Reich.” 37 Atomwaffen subscribes to the Zionist Occupied 
Government and white genocide conspiracy theories, both central to the American neo-
Nazi ideology. Members believe American democracy has “given way to Jewish 
oligarchies and globalist bankers resulting in the cultural and racial displacement of the 
white race.”38 Some members even adhere to a form of Satanism known as The Order of 
Nine Angles, which is “steeped in neo -Nazi themes that praise Adolf Hitler, promote 
Holocaust denial and identify Jews as the enemy.”39 
 
Like many extremist groups, Atomwaffen’s ideology centres on a key text, in this case 
SIEGE, by neo-Nazi activist James Mason. The book, a 563-page collection of newsletters 
produced by Mason during the 1980s, is required reading for new recruits. SIEGE 
preaches “leaderless, cell -structured terrorism and white revol ution,” and implores 
America’s true neo-Nazis to go underground and begin a guerrilla war against what it 
dubs “The System.”40 As a former member attested, “the group [follows] James Mason’s 
SIEGE like a bible.”41 Atomwaffen distinguishes itself from other neo-Nazi groups active 
in the United States through its open embrace of violence and terrorism. Where others, 
such as Identity Evropa and Vanguard America, prioritise political activism, the 
Atomwaffen Division is “a cadre that fetishizes violence as its core doctrine.”42 
 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
30 Janet Reitman, “All-American Nazis,” Rolling Stone, May 2, 2018.  
31 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
32 Daniel Sandford and Daniel De Simone, “British Neo -Nazis suggest Prince Harry should be shot,” BBC , December 5, 
2018. 
33 Mack Lamoureux and Ben Makuch, “Atomwaffen, an American Neo -Nazi Terror Group, Is in Canada,” VICE , June 19, 
2018. 
34 Martín Steinhagen, “Terrorpropaganda in der Uni -Bibliothek,” Zeit Online, May 25, 2019. 
35  Oleksiy Kuzmenko, “‘Defend the White Race’: American Extremists Being Co -Opted by Ukraine’s Far -Right,” 
BellingCat, February 15, 2019.  
36 Anti-Defamation League, “New Hate and Old: The Changing Face of American White Supremacy,” ADL Center on 
Extremism, p. 52. 
37 Thompson, Winston, and Hanrahan, “Inside Atomwaffen.”  
38 Anti-Defamation League, “Atomwaffen Division (AWD).”  
39 Ibid. 
40 Hatewatch, “Atomwaffen and the SIEGE parallax: how one neo -Nazi’s life’s work is fueling a younger generation,” 
Southern Poverty Law Center, February 22, 2018.  
41 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
42 Hatewatch, “Atomwaffen and the SIEGE parallax.”  

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
7 
 
Atomwaffen draws its inspiration from a lineage of far- right thinkers and terrorists. 
Ideological forebears include well-known neo-Nazis and white supremacists such as the 
aforementioned James Mason, Charles Manson, William Pierce, Joseph T ommasi, and, 
of course, Adolf Hitler. 43 Manson’s “Helter Skelter” race-war prophecy has resonated 
with Atomwaffen members, whose propaganda honours the Manson Family and the 
murders it conducted in 1969.44 Leaked chat logs reveal that Atomwaffen members also 
worship a series of far- right terrorists, including Oklahoma City bomber Timothy 
McVeigh, Charleston church shooter Dylann Roof, and Norwegian mass murderer Anders 
Behring Breivik. 45  Group members have even been in contact with Unabomber Ted 
Kaczynski.46 Atomwaffen members also “venerate” The Order, a 1980s neo-Nazi terrorist 
group led by Robert Mathews, which was responsible for the 1984 murder of Jewish 
radio host Alan Berg.47 Violence, and its celebration, is central to everything Atomwaffen 
says and does:  the group sees “violence as the only vehicle for apocalyptic, racial 
cleansing and the imposition of order over its dystopian perception of the modern 
world.”48 
 
To date, Atomwaffen members have been implicated in five known murders. In May 
2017, two Atomwaffen members, Andrew Oneschuk and Jeremy Himmelman, were 
found dead in an apartment they shared with AWD founder Brandon Russell and fellow 
member Devon Arthurs. Arthurs allegedly killed the two after they mocked his recent 
conversion to Islam. In De cember 2017, 17- year-old Nicholas Giampa, a reputed 
Atomwaffen member who was “fully in thrall to the racist, apocalyptic fantasia of white 
nationalism,” allegedly murdered his girlfriend’s parents after they raised concerns over 
his neo -Nazi views. 49 Giampa had retweeted endorsements of SIEGE and The Turner 
Diaries, and used his social media sites to rail against Jews and LGBT rights. And in 
January 2018, Blaze Bernstein, a 19 -year-old gay Jewish Ivy League student, was found 
dead in California with over 20 stab wounds. The accused murderer, Sam Woodward, an 
Atomwaffen member who had participated in the group’s “hate camps,” was charged 
with a hate crime. After Bernstein’s murder, Woodward was celebrated in online chat 
rooms, hailed by fellow Atomwaffen members as a “one man gay Jew wrecking crew.”50 
Sean Michael Fernandez, leader of Atomwaffen’s Texas cell, praised the attack for its 
strategic value, explaining “we’re only going to inspire more ‘copycat crimes’ in the name 
of AWD. All we have to do is spread our image and our propaganda.”51  
 
Given the seemingly isolated nature of the incidents, it is worth asking: is it terrorism? 
According to Bruce Hoffman, “terrorism” must be political, violent, designed to create 
wide-ranging psychological repercussions, and conducted by a subnational organisation 
or individual. 52 Atomwaffen’s activity is certainly political, perpetrated in the name of 
neo-Nazism. The group has breached the threshold of violence several times. Comments 
following Bernstein’s murder indicate an organisational desire to incite psychological 
fear. And, the group is clearly a subnational actor. To be clear, Atomwaffen has yet to 
coordinate a successful terrorist attack, but its promotion of violence and celebration of 
previous attacks fit with th e far- right’s strategy of “leaderless resistance.” Sporadic, 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
43 SPLC, “Atomwaffen Division.”  
44 Luke O’Brien and Christopher Mathias, “The Maniac Neo-Nazis Keeping Charles Manson’s Race War Alive,” Huffington 
Post, November 21, 2017.  
45 Alexander Epp and Roman Höfner, “The Hate Network,” Der Spiegel , 2018. 
46 Ibid. 
47 Thompson, “An Atomwaffen Member Sketched a Map to Take the Neo -Nazis Down.” 
48 SPLC, “Atomwaffen Division.”  
49 Jessica Schulberg and Luke O’Brien, “We Found The Neo -Nazi Twitter Account Tied To A Virginia Double Homicide,” 
Huffington Post, January 4, 2018.  
50 Thompson, Winston, and Hanrahan, “Inside Atomwaffen.”  
51 Ibid. 
52 Bruce Hoffman, Inside Terrorism 3rd ed. (New York: Columbia Press, 2017), pp. 43 -44 

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
8 
 
uncoordinated, seemingly unrelated attacks allow the group to fly under the radar, as 
they do not attract the attention that a coordinated string of attacks would. 
Nevertheless, with its promotio n of political violence and desire to intimidate those 
communities it sees as its enemies, Atomwaffen is clearly a terrorist organisation, and 
should be treated as such. 
 
Analysis: The Threat Will Likely Get Worse 
 
The extreme far-right poses an increasing terrorist threat for four reasons; it is a growing 
movement, exhibits increasingly violent activity, benefits from broader political 
normalisation of far-right views, and may take advantage of the opportunity offered by 
the 2020 election. These points are discussed in more detail below. 
 
Firstly, the United States is witnessing a growth of the far -right movement, as well as a 
mainstreaming of radical views. The process began under the Obama administration, as 
America’s radical right rallied against the election of a black— and, allegedly, foreign and 
Muslim— President. There was a 600 percent rise in the number of followers of white 
nationalist twitter accounts between 2012 and 2016, with the American far -right far 
more prolific online than its Islamic State counterpart. 53  More interest means more 
radicals, more recruits, and, most likely, more violence. There has also been a 
mainstreaming of extremist ideology. As Daryl Johnson, co-author of a 2009 Department 
of Homeland Security report on the rising threat of right-wing extremism, explained, 
“building a border wall, deporting immigrants, a travel ban on Muslim countries — these 
are themes discussed on white-nationalist message boards and websites for years, now 
being endorsed and talked about at the highest levels of the government.”54 
 
Secondly, not only is far-right rhetoric proliferating, but attacks perpetrated in the name 
of far-right groups and ideologies have intensified. The United States suffered an average 
of 11 right-wing attacks per year between 2012 and 2016; that number jumped to 31 in 
2017.55 According to the Anti -Defamation League (ADL), 70% of all extremism -related 
killings between 2008 and 2017 were perpetrated by adherents to far -right causes, 
significantly more than the 25% perpetrated by Islam ist extremists. 56 The ADL’s 2018 
numbers indicated that 100% of extremism-related attacks in the United States that year 
were perpetrated by assailants professing far- right views.57 And in the 10 days leading 
up to the 2018 midterm election, the United States suffered four major terrorist attacks 
or hate crimes linked to the far- right: a Trump fanatic mailed 16 pipe bombs to senior 
Democratic Party figures, a neo-Nazi killed 11 worshippers in a synagogue in Pittsburgh, 
a white supremacist killed two black sho ppers in Kentucky having failed to enter a 
predominantly black church, and a 40 -year-old adherent to the Incel movement killed 
two women in a Tallahassee yoga studio.58  
 
Thirdly, the far-right poses an increasing terrorism threat because of the political c over 
provided by the White House. During his administration, President Trump has proved 
willing to excuse far -right violence, deflecting blame or avoiding assigning blame 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
53 Reitman, “All-American Nazis.” 
54 Greg Sargent, “Trump’s hate and lies are inciting extremists. Just ask the analyst who warned us,” Washington Post , 
October 29, 2018. 
55 Jones, “The Rise of Far-Right Extremism in the United States.”  
56 ADL, “New Hate and Old,” p. 57.  
57 Anti-Defamation League, “Murder and Extremism in the United States in 2018,” ADL Center on Extremism . 
58 Some have argued that, depending on how you measure right-wing violence, attacks have not actually increased. See, 
for example, Jacob Aasland Ravndal, “Right -wing terrorism and violence may actually have declined,” Washington Post , 
April 2, 2019. 

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
9 
 
altogether.59 The trend began after Charlottesville, where a woman was killed by a neo-
Nazi in a vehicle ramming attack during the Unite the Right rally in August 2017. Trump 
placed “blame on both sides” and referred to a congregation of outspoken and proud 
neo-Nazis and white supremacists as “very fine people.”60 The President has shown little 
indication that he will walk back his tacit support for America’s radical right and its fringe 
elements. In October, when a series of pipe bombs were mailed to senior Democratic 
Party figures, Trump tweeted his support for conspiracy theories suggestin g the bombs 
were liberal hoaxes, and later blamed the attack on a hostile political climate caused by 
the media, saying “[a] very big part of the Anger we see today in our society is caused by 
the purposely false and inaccurate reporting of the Mainstream Media that I refer to as 
Fake News.” 61 In October 2018, President Trump delivered a speech where he called 
himself a “nationalist,” further energizing the country’s radical right.62 
 
Trump’s impact on the far-right was epitomised when lawyers for three Kansas militia 
members who plotted to bomb homes belonging to Somali immigrants tried to argue 
the men should receive lenient terms because they were inspired by the President’s 
“rough-and-tumble verbal pummeling,” which had “heightened the rhetorical stakes for 
people of all political persuasions.” 63 Similarly, in a manifesto published shortly before 
the far- right attack on mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand in March 2019, the 
assailant praised Trump “as a symbol of renewed white identity and common 
purpose.”64 The attacker behind the October 2018 mail bombs, meanwhile, described 
Trump rallies as “like a new found drug.” 65 The fallout from Charlottesville and related 
speeches has led directly to rising recruitment for the movement and has empowered 
America’s right-wing extremists, who are opting for increasingly violent means to spread 
their message, comfortable in the knowledge the President is unlikely to condemn 
them.66 It also makes it more difficult for the rest of the country to respond to terrorism 
with strength and resilience. As Dan Byman has argued, Trump’s rhetoric in the wake of 
violence “[creates] an atmosphere hostile to cooperation after an attack.” 67 Rhetoric 
empowers action, and as long as America’s president finds himself unable to criticise 
those who lash out with real violence in his name, domestic terrorism is likely to worsen.  
 
Finally, the build-up to and fallout from the 2020 Presidential Election could provide the 
heated political climate for extremists to thrive. During the 2016 election, “r hetoric 
empowered extremists not just to angrily revive open expressions of bigotry […] but also 
to open the floodgates of violence inherent in the far -right’s ideology.” 68  Violence 
subsequently spiked after the 2016 election — research indicates it often doe s 
immediately after elections, the impact of “empowerment rather than a sense of 
deprivation”— and likely would again with another Trump win, with a victory signalling 
to America’s extremist right that their agenda and methods are supported around the 
country.69 In turn, this would lead to  further empowerment and more violence. On the 
other hand, a Trump defeat could also lead to increasing violence. Before the 2016 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
59  See, for example, Tankel, “Riding the Tiger: How Trump Enables Right -Wing Extremism;” and Byman, “Trump’s 
Rhetoric Is Raising the Risk of Right -Wing Terrorism.” 
60 Rick Klein, “Trump said ‘blame on both sides’ in Charlottesville, now the anniversary puts him on the spot,” ABC News, 
August 12, 2018. 
61 David Frum, “A President Who Condones Political Violence,” The Atlantic , October 26, 2018.  
62 William Cummings, “'I am a nationalist': Trump's embrace of controversial label sparks uproar,” USA Today , October 
24, 2018. 
63 Andrew Hay, “Kansas militia men blame Trump rhetoric for mosque attack plan,” Reuters , October 30, 2018.  
64 Brenton Tarrant, The Great Replacement: Towards a New Society , March 2019. 
65 Faith Karimi, “Pipe bomb suspect Cesar Sayoc describes Trump rallies as 'new found drug',” CNN , April 24, 2019.  
66 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
67 Byman, “Trump’s Rhetoric Is Raising the Risk of Right-Wing Terrorism.” 
68 Neiwert, Alt-America, p. 293. 
69 Arie Perliger, “Terror isn’t always a weapon of the weak – it can also support the powerful,” The Conversation , October 
28, 2018. 

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
10 
 
election, Trump signalled he may not accept a Hillary Clinton win, saying, “I will totally 
accept” the results “if I win.”70 Should Trump lose, and refuse to accept the results, there 
could be a significant mobilisation of far -right supporters in his favour. 71  Law 
enforcement should closely watch the build -up to, and fallout from, the election, and 
politicians on both sides of the aisle should be prepared to encourage President Trump 
to peacefully relinquish the Presidency should he lose the election. 
 
The Atomwaffen Threat 
 
Returning to the Atomwaffen case study, the group also bears watching closely, for two 
reasons: its public declarations, and its active recruitment from the military. Firstly, 
Atomwaffen poses a continuing terrorist threat because its members have publicly 
declared an intention to intensify their campaign of violence and bro aden it to more 
public targets. 72 In fact, Atomwaffen’s failure to cause a mass -casualty incident so far 
largely results from good police work, rather than a lack of ambition. When searching 
Brandon Russell and Devon Arthurs’ apartment after the latter’s alleged double murder, 
police found traces of the explosive hexamethane triperoxide diamine (HMTD), as well 
as detonators.73 Russell was arrested two days later at a Florida Burger King, found with 
a fellow Atomwaffen member, an AR -15, and over 1,000 rounds o f ammunition. He is 
believed to have been en route to the Turkey Point nuclear power plant, and deputies 
recalled that “when we found all the weapons, we were convinced that we had just 
stopped a mass shooting.” 74  It is still unclear what Russell and his ro ommates were 
plotting with their “bomb-makers workshop.”75 
 
Elsewhere, Michael Lloyd Hubsky, a senior Atomwaffen member from Las Vegas dubbed 
“Komissar,” has claimed to possess a map of the Western states’ power grid, and has 
discussed intentions to attack American infrastructure: “So in any war, you need to cut 
off your enemy’s ability to shoot, move and communicate. You would want to target 
things like: Substations, water filtration plants, etc.” 76 Former member Devon Arthurs 
similarly attested to a desire to attack “power lines, nuclear reactors, [and] 
synagogues.”77 Der Spiegel, which gained access to AWD chat groups, documents violent 
threats such as “Carpetbomb your local refugee center,” “Bombing police stations is 
artistic expression,” and “I want to bo mb a federal building.” 78  In June 2018, one 
Atomwaffen member declared “I don’t understand why people think killing/genocide 
requires justification. Every single genocide was deserved. Every single murder, killing, 
spree, war.”79  
 
A former member, “Bones,” believes that certain AWD members are preparing to 
commit attacks: “I think there are some guys that are actually materialising these plans, 
and most of them we don’t hear from because they’ve gone offline, gone off the grid.”80 
In February 2019, an alleged  Atomwaffen member was arrested on child pornography 
charges, with the FBI admitting the arrest was based on fears he was “mobilizing to 
violence.” The suspect, named Benjamin Bogard, apparently ran a Twitter account which 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
70 Jeremy Diamond, “Donald Trump: ‘I will totally accept’ election results ‘if I win’,” CNN, October 20, 2016.  
71 “Retired Lt. Colonel: Trump's WH departure will be ugly,” CNN , April 24, 2019. 
72 See, for example, Thompson, Winston, and Hanrahan, “Inside Atomwaffen.”  
73 SPLC, “Atomwaffen Division.”  
74 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
75 Ibid. 
76 Thompson, Winston, and Hanrahan, “Inside Atomwaffen.”  
77 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
78 Epp and Höfner, “The Hate Network.”  
79 Ibid. 
80 Ibid. 

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
11 
 
had claimed that the best part of  a gun was “the part that kills 30 babies per trigger 
pull.” 81  Perhaps most ominous is Atomwaffen leader Denton’s own proclamation: 
“Politics are useless. Revolution is necessary.”82 With that goal in mind, “Rape” has been 
imploring members to pool resources to buy rural land, hoping to “get the fuck off the 
grid” and get started on the insurrection. 83 Little is known about Atomwaffen’s real -
world capabilities and its capacity to act on its threats, making law enforcement and 
counter-terrorism even more diffic ult, but the aforementioned “bomb -makers 
workshop” compiled by Russell and his accomplices suggests the group has made efforts 
to transcend the “leaderless resistance” model adopted by previous attackers. 84 With 
Atomwaffen, there is not just a willingness t o commit violence; there may also be a 
capability. Atomwaffen has made little effort to hide its grand intentions; should the 
group succeed, and follow through on its stated objectives, it could pose a fearsome 
terrorist threat. 
 
Secondly, and finally, Atomwaffen actively recruits from the military, seeking out 
servicemen who can provide expertise in firearms and military tactics. Developing links 
with the military has been a deliberate Atomwaffen strategy, and members have 
enrolled specifically to benefit the group; as Devon Arthurs attested, “these people join 
the military specially to get training. To get access to equipment.” 85 American troops 
returning from combat tours and enrolling in militia groups has been seen throughout 
recent history; white supremacist militias experienced spikes after the Vietnam War and 
the Iraq War, and Timothy McVeigh was a Gulf War veteran.86 
 
Atomwaffen’s deliberate pursuit of military members indicates an ominous intent: the 
group wants military experience and professional training on its side for coming attacks 
against civilians and battles with the government. At least seven Atomwaffen members 
have military experience. Founder Brandon Russell was formerly with the National 
Guard, while the rest of the group includes at le ast three active duty servicemen and 
three veterans.87 Atomwaffen member Vasillios Pistolis was thrown out of the Marines 
for his ties to neo-Nazism, and in May 2019, the Huffington Post  exposed an additional 
member, Army Pfc. Corwyn Storm Carver, under military investigation for links with the 
group.88 AWD’s growing connections with the military should be of grave concern to law 
enforcement agencies. Better training and a more militaristic mindset could drive the 
group towards more militant activity, including terrorism. 
 
Recommendations 
 
Pushing back against the rising far -right in the United States will require concerted 
efforts by a range of government agencies, a change in rhetoric by those in charge and, 
no less important, a sense of urgency that actions  must be taken now. Four concrete 
suggestions are made here. In the short-term, the White House must condemn far-right 
violence and increase the resources and attention being paid to it by law enforcement 
and intelligence agencies. In the long -term, the go vernment should strengthen its 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
81 Kelly Weill, “Feds Feared Alleged ‘Neo-Nazi’ Benjamin Bogard Could Be Next Mass Shooter,” Daily Beast, February 28, 
2019. 
82 Thompson, Winston, and Hanrahan, “Inside Atomwaffen.”  
83 Ibid. 
84 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
85 Thompson, “An Atomwaffen Member Sketched a Map to Take the Neo -Nazis Down.” 
86 Kathleen Belew, Bring the War Home: The White Power Movement and Paramilitary Am erica (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2018). 
87 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
88  Christopher Mathias, “Exclusive: Army Investigating Soldier’s Alleged Leadership In Neo -Nazi Terror Group,” 
Huffington Post, May 3, 2019. 

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
12 
 
countering violent extremism programming and pursue two important legislative 
changes: domestic terrorism legislation and gradual gun control. 
 
Firstly, and most urgently, the White House must condemn, in no uncertain terms, the 
rising far- right violence America is experiencing under this administration. In other 
words, we have to be able to call domestic terrorists “domestic terrorists.” Publicly 
acknowledging the impact of the Presidency on America’s domestic terrorism 
landscape— “Trump may not be deliberately trying to enable far -right violence, but his 
rhetoric and actions are having that effect” — and denouncing it would clearly signal to 
the increasingly emboldened radical right that violence will not be tolerated, and that 
terrorists will be pursued to the fullest extent of the law, no different than their Islamist 
counterparts. 89  Additionally, the Republican establishment, including Members of 
Congress and right-wing media, needs to better push back against Trump’s most extreme 
rhetoric. As mentioned, ideas and policies that typically belonged on the radical fringe of 
American pol itics have been normalised by this President: “There’s been a 
mainstreaming of the extremist narratives. Things that were once on the outer fringes 
are now being brought to the forefront by Trump.” 90 The violent extremist fringes are 
paying attention; as James Mason, Atomwaffen’s ideological figurehead, admitted, “with 
Trump winning that election by surprise— and it was a surprise— I now believe anything 
could be possible.”91 America’s political right, including the White House and Congress, 
must be braver in pushing back against extremism, delegitimising it, and returning it to 
the fringes of society. As terrorism expert Jason Blazakis warned, “if that rhetoric 
continues unchecked it will tear the nation asunder.”92 
 
Also in the short term, the government needs to ramp up resources for law enforcement 
agencies combatting domestic terrorism. Right -wing terrorism has been ignored for a 
long time— as Peter Singer has argued, “in America, it is politically savvy to talk strongly 
and repeatedly about terrorism and extr emism, except the version of it that has killed 
the largest number of our fellow citizens over the last decade” — and the problem has 
been allowed to grow as a result.93 More needs to be done at the federal, state, and local 
levels to combat the growing right-wing threat. The UK has already handed its domestic 
intelligence agency MI5 more resources to pursue right-wing extremists; the US should 
follow suit. 94 That said, the FBI has begun to investigate Atomwaffen, speaking with 
former members around the country , and investigating Pittsburgh synagogue shooter 
Robert Bowers’ connection with two neo -Nazi brothers linked to the group. 95 
Furthermore, the Trump administration’s latest counter-terrorism strategy, published in 
2018, included an explicit reference to domestic terrorism, warning of the threat posed 
by “racially motivated extremism, animal rights extremism, environmental extremism, 
sovereign citizen extremism, and militia extremism.” 96 Those are positive steps, which 
must now be built upon. 
 
In the longer term, the US government should improve its countering violent extremism 
(CVE) programming, both through government agencies as well as through partnerships 
with civil society organisations. Conspiracy theories such as ZOG and the white genocide 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
89 Tankel, “Riding the Tiger: How Trump Enables Right-Wing Extremism.” 
90 Sargent, “Trump’s hate and lies are inciting extremists.” 
91 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
92 Jason Blazakis, “American Terrorists: Why Current Laws Are Inadequate for Violent Extremists at Home,” Lawfare, 
December 2, 2018. 
93 Singer, “National Security Pros, It’s Time to Talk About Right-Wing Extremism.”  
94 Jones, “The Rise of Far-Right Extremism in the United States.”  
95 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  
96 White House, National Strategy for Counter -terrorism of the United States of America  (Washington, DC: White House, 
October 2018), p. 10. 

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
13 
 
are central to neo-Nazi ideology and to Atomwaffen’s ability to recruit; breaking those 
narratives is critical to sustained counter- terrorism success, and can likely only be 
achieved through long-term CVE programming. The Trump administration has acted to 
eradicate CVE targeted at right -wing extremism several times; the Department of 
Homeland Security rescinded several Obama -era CVE grants to non -profits focused on 
rehabilitating right -wing extremists, and the administration has even proposed 
rebranding CVE to Countering Islamic Extremism.97 This must urgently be reversed. CVE 
programming is far from perfect, but it can play a critical role in steering vulnerable 
young men and women away from radicalisation and helping rehabilitate those who 
flirted with extremism.98 
 
CVE efforts must include government and non -profits reaching out to the “nonviolent 
wings of the movement” to convince extremists to forego violence and militancy and 
instead choose peaceful and productive political participation.99 Members of groups like 
Atomwaffen may be strongly neo-Nazi but not strongly in favour of violence; mainstream 
society should work to connect with those individuals and protect them from the allure 
of terrorist organisations. A revamped CVE strategy would necessarily require a 
mobilisation of civil society, including through government grants to encourage 
community-level organisations to develop new programs; improved relationships 
between government and at-risk communities; and most importantly, as former Obama 
administration CVE official Eric Rosand articulates, “the adoption of a public health (as 
opposed to a law-enforcement-driven) approach to preventing extremist violence, which 
offers opportunities for multipurpose programming, avoiding stigma, and leveraging 
existing public health resources, including mental health professionals, social workers or 
teachers.”100 Effective CVE could play a crucial role in toppling the summit of McCauley 
and Moskalenko’s radicalisation pyramid, working to bring former radicals back into the 
mainstream and deter further extremism.  
 
Finally, also in the long term, US lawmakers must pursue legislative changes, both to 
legally designate domestic terrorists as “terrorists,” as well as to limit their access to 
firearms. Firstly, lawmakers should develop domestic terrorism legislation to be used to 
prosecute right-wing terrorists. In the US, Islamist extremists— regardless of mobilisation 
to violence— are often prosecuted with the “providing material support to terrorists” 
statute, which applies only to “designa ted foreign terrorists” and does not have an 
equivalent for right-wing extremists.101 When domestic terrorists avoid the “terrorism” 
label, they, as well as their ideologies, also avoid “the terrorist stigma we’ve long 
reserved for foreign jihadist groups.” 102 An equal application of the “terrorism” brand 
across all ideologies would be beneficial for several reasons: it could help stigmatise 
actions and ideologies, in turn deterring copycats; it would avoid alienating Muslim 
communities, which are crucial allies in the fight against jihadism; and it would allow the 
FBI to conduct broader investigations, including into organisations which may have 
inspired lone actor terrorists.103 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
97 “Trump’s Homeland Security department gives right-wing extremists a pass,” Washington Post , August 31, 2017.  
98 See, for example, Jessica Stern, “Mind Over Martyr,” Foreign Affairs 89:1 (January -February 2010): 95 -109; Lorenzo 
Vidino and Seamus Hughes, “Countering Violent Extremism in America,” GWU Center for Cyber and Homeland Security , 
June 2015; and Daniel Koehl er, Understanding Deradicalization: Methods, Tools and Programs for Countering Violent 
Extremism (Abingdon: Routledge, 2016).  
99 Joshua D. Freilich, Steven M. Chermak, and David Caspi, “Critical Events in the Life Trajectories of Domestic Extremist 
White Supremacist Groups: A Case Study Analysis of Four Violent Organizations,” Criminology and Public Policy  8 (2009): 
520. 
100 Eric Rosand, “Responding to the Rise in Domestic Terrorism: Don’t Forget Prevention,” Lawfare , May 26, 2019. 
101 18 USC § 2339A (1994) and 18 USC § 2339B (1996). 
102 Blazakis, “American Terrorists.”  
103 Tankel, “Riding the Tiger.” 

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
14 
 
Domestic terrorism legislation must fulfil two essential requirements: the statute “must 
preserve legitimate free speech while providing an opportunity for a federal agency to 
sanction US citizens.” 104 Sanctions might include exclusion from the financial system, 
material support to terrorism charges for anybody aiding, abetting, or praising  the 
suspect, or removal of any online propaganda disseminated by the individual or their 
organisation. 105  Such legislation would devastate Atomwaffen; the group’s online 
presence would be decimated, and a substantial number of members could be eligible 
for arrest on material support charges related to Blaze Bernstein’s killing. 
 
Additionally, government should work to pass bipartisan gun control legislation to limit 
terrorists’ access to weapons. In the United States, private ownership of firearms is 
enshrined through the Second Amendment and has become an ideological anchor for 
constitutional conservatives. Gun rights are also central to far-right ideology, and, as was 
the case with the Brady Bill, gun control measures are often perceived as the last salvo 
before a tyrannical government turns on its people. 106  Therefore perhaps the most 
difficult and unlikely of these recommendations, the effort to curb terrorists’ access to 
guns must be a bipartisan effort. Republican lawmakers must offer their blessing, and 
push their bases to accept the measures. Lawmakers should push for certain measures 
short of universal gun confiscations which could help reduce the threat, such as 
background checks, waiting periods, and ammunition caps. It has become too easy for 
dangerous people with malicious intentions to acquire military -grade weapons and 
thousands of rounds of ammunition, with almost every American terrorist this century, 
regardless of ideology, facing basically no restrictions when buying their chosen tool for 
mass murder.107 If not for a timely police intercept, Atomwaffen’s Brandon Russell might 
have joined a long list of American mass shooters; it should be up to policymakers, not 
police on the beat, to stop the next domestic terrorist. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Atomwaffen poses a continuing terrorism threat to American cities and should be taken 
seriously by the government and its law enforcement agencies. The group propagates 
some of the most vicious and hateful rhetoric ever seen among domestic extremist 
groups, and should they  follow up on their threats, would wreak havoc on civilian life 
around the country. Coordinated attacks are unlikely — organisationally-plotted attacks 
on the far -right are rare — but the far -right’s preference for leaderless resistance, as 
Mason envisages in SIEGE, makes it likely the group creates and inspires lone -actor 
terrorists. As a former member surmised, “who knows, there could be another Dylann 
Roof in Atomwaffen.”108 But AWD is just one of many similar groups popping up around 
the country. America’s far -right is growing in stature, ambition, and effectiveness, 
fleshing out the middle and top of McCauley and Moskalenko’s radicalisation pyramid, 
and leaving a trail of victims stretching from Pittsburgh to Portland. America is 
approaching a toxic period where increasingly widely-held and violent views, combined 
with an apologist President and his election, will see groups like Atomwaffen, with its 
violent stated intentions and recruitment from the military, present an imminent 
terrorist threat. The government and its law enforcement agencies and lawmakers must 
urgently turn their focus towards far- right extremism, or risk an even bigger terrorism 
problem within America’s own borders. 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
104 Blazakis, “American Terrorists.”  
105 Ibid. 
106 White, “Political Eschatology,” p. 944.  
107 Peter Bergen, United States of Jihad: Investigating America’s Homegrown Terrorist s (New York: Crown, 2016), 286.  
108 Frontline, “Documenting Hate.”  

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
15 
 
Bibliography 
 
“Deconstructing the symbols and slogans spotted in Charlottesville.” Washington Post , 
August 18, 2017. 
 
“Retired Lt. Colonel: Trump's WH Departure will be Ugly.” CNN, April 24, 2019. 
 
“Trump’s Homeland Security Department Gives Right -Wing Extremists a Pass .” 
Washington Post, August 31, 2017. 
 
18 U.S.C. § 2339A (1994) and 18 U.S.C. § 2339B (1996). 
 
Aasland Ravndal, Jacob. “Right -Wing Terrorism and Violence May Actually Have 
Declined.” Washington Post, April 2, 2019. 
 
Anti-Defamation League. “Atomwaffen Division (AWD).” 
 
Anti-Defamation League. “Murder and Extremism in the United States in 2018.” ADL 
Center on Extremism. 
 
Anti-Defamation League. “New Hate and Old: The Changing Face of American White 
Supremacy.” ADL Center on Extremism. 
 
Belew, Kathleen. Bring the War Home: The White Power Movement and Paramilitary 
America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018. 
 
Bergen, Peter . United States of Jihad: Investigating America’s Homegrown Terrorist s. 
New York: Crown, 2016. 
 
Berger, J.M. “Nazis vs. ISIS on Twitter: A Comparative Study of White Nationalist and ISIS 
Online Social Media Networks.” GWU Program on Extremism, September 2016. 
 
Blazakis, Jason. “American Terrorists: Why Current Laws Are Inadequate for Violent 
Extremists at Home.” Lawfare, December 2, 2018. 
 
Byman, Daniel. “Trump’s Rhetoric Is Raising the Risk of Right -Wing Terrorism.” Slate , 
January 21, 2019. 
 
Byman, Daniel. “When to Call a Terrorist a Terrorist.” Foreign Policy, October 27, 2018. 
 
Cummings, William. “'I am a Nationalist': Trump's Embrace of Controversial Label Sparks 
Uproar.” USA Today, October 24, 2018. 
 
Diamond, Jeremy. “Donald Trump: ‘I will Totally Accept’ Election Results ‘If I Win’.” CNN, 
October 20, 2016. 
 
Epp, Alexander, and Roman Höfner. “The Hate Network.” Der Spiegel, 2018. 
 
Freilich, Joshua D., Steven M. Chermak, and David Caspi. “Critical Events in the Life 
Trajectories of Domestic Extremist White Supremacist Groups: A Case Study Analysis of 
Four Violent Organizations.” Criminology and Public Policy 8 (2009): pp. 497-530. 
 

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
16 
 
Frontline. “Documenting Hate: New American Nazis.” PBS, November 20, 2018. 
 
Frum, David. “A President Who Condones Political Violence.” The Atlantic , October 26, 
2018. 
 
Ghansah, Rachel Kaadzi. “A Most A merican Terrorist: The Making of Dylann Roof.” GQ , 
August 21, 2017. 
 
Hatewatch, “Atomwaffen and the SIEGE Parallax: How One Neo -Nazi’s Life’s Work is 
Fueling a Younger Generation.” Southern Poverty Law Center, February 22, 2018. 
 
Hay, Andrew. “Kansas Milit ia Men Blame Trump Rhetoric for Mosque Attack Plan.” 
Reuters, October 30, 2018. 
 
Hoffman, Bruce. “Back to the Future: The Return of Violent Far- Right Terrorism in the 
Age of Lone Wolves.” War on the Rocks, April 2, 2019. 
 
Hoffman, Bruce. Inside Terrorism 3rd ed. New York: Columbia Press, 2017. 
 
Johnson, Daryl. Right -Wing Resurgence: How a Domestic Terrorist Threat is Being 
Ignored. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2012. 
 
Jones, Seth. “The Rise of Far -Right Extremism in the United States.” CSIS , November 7, 
2018. 
 
Karimi, Faith. “Pipe Bomb Suspect Cesar Sayoc Describes Trump Rallies as 'New Found 
Drug'.” CNN, April 24, 2019. 
 
Klein, Rick, “Trump Said ‘Blame on Both Sides’ in Charlottesville, Now the Anniversary 
Puts Him on the Spot.” ABC News, August 12, 2018. 
 
Koehler, Daniel. Understanding Deradicalization: Methods, Tools and Programs for 
Countering Violent Extremism. Abingdon: Routledge, 2016. 
 
Kuzmenko, Oleksiy. “‘Defend the White Race’: American Extremists Being Co-Opted by 
Ukraine’s Far-Right.” BellingCat, February 15, 2019. 
 
Lamoureux, Mack, and Ben Makuch. “Atomwaffen, an American Neo-Nazi Terror Group, 
Is in Canada,” VICE, June 19, 2018. 
 
Mathias, Christopher. “Exclusive: Army Investigating Soldier’s Alleged Leadership In Neo-
Nazi Terror Group.” Huffington Post, May 3, 2019. 
 
McCauley, Clark and Sophia Moskalenko. “Mechanisms of Political Radicalization: 
Pathways Toward Terrorism.” Terrorism and Political Violence 20 (2008): 415-433. 
 
Michel, Lou, and Dan Herbeck. American Terrorist: Timothy McVeigh & The Oklahoma 
City Bombing. New York: HarperCollins, 2001. 
 
Myre, Greg. “Deadly Connection: Neo -Nazi Group Linked To 3 Accused Killers.” NPR , 
March 6, 2018. 
 

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
17 
 
National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism 
(START). Ideological Motivations of Terrorism in the United States, 1970 -2016. College 
Park, MD: START, November 2017. 
 
Neiwert, David. Alt-America: The Rise of the Radical Right in the Age of Trump. New York: 
Verso, 2017. 
 
O’Brien, Luke, and Christopher Mathias. “The Maniac Neo -Nazis Keeping Charles 
Manson’s Race War Alive.” Huffington Post, November 21, 2017. 
 
Ohlheiser, Abby. “Inside the Online World of ‘Incels,’ the Dark Corner of the Internet 
Linked to the Toronto Suspect.” Washington Post, April 25, 2018. 
 
Perliger, Arie. “Terror isn’t always a Wwapon of the Weak –  It Can Also Support the 
Powerful.” The Conversation, October 28, 2018. 
 
Reitman, Janet. “All-American Nazis.” Rolling Stone, May 2, 2018. 
 
Rosand, Eric. “Responding to the Rise in Domestic Terrorism: Don’t Forget Prevention.” 
Lawfare, May 26, 2019. 
 
Sandford, Daniel, and Daniel De Simone. “British Neo-Nazis Suggest Prince Harry should 
be Shot.” BBC, December 5, 2018. 
 
Sargent, Greg. “Trump’s Hate and Lies are Inciting Extremists. Just Ask the Analyst Who 
Warned Us.” Washington Post, October 29, 2018. 
 
Schulberg, Jessica, and Luke O’Brien. “We Found The Neo-Nazi Twitter Account Tied To 
A Virginia Double Homicide.” Huffington Post, January 4, 2018. 
 
Serwer, Adam. “The Terrorism That Doesn’t Spark a Panic.” The Atlantic , January 28, 
2019. 
 
Serwer, Adam. “White Nationalism’s Deep American Roots.” The Atlantic, April 2019. 
 
Singer, Peter W. “National Security Pros, It’s Time to Talk About Right-Wing Extremism.” 
Defense One, February 28, 2018. 
 
Southern Poverty Law Center. “Atomwaffen Division.” 
 
Southern Poverty Law Center. “Ku Klux Klan.” 
 
Steinhagen, Martín. “Terrorpropaganda in der Uni -Bibliothek,” Zeit Online , May 25, 
2019. 
 
Stern, Jessica. “Mind Over Martyr,” Foreign Affairs 89:1 (January -February 2010): 95-
109. 
 
Tankel, Stephen. “Riding the Tiger: How Trump Enables Right-Wing Extremism.” War on 
the Rocks, November 5, 2018. 
 
Tarrant, Brenton. The Great Replacement: Towards a New Society. March 2019. 
 

ICCT Policy Brief                                                            Jacob Ware                 
 
18 
 
Tenold, Vegas. Everything You Love Will Burn: Inside the Rebirth of White Nationalism in 
America. New York: Nation Books, 2018. 
 
Thompson, A.C. “An Atomwaffen Member Sketched a Map to Take the Neo-Nazis Down. 
What Path Officials Took Is a Mystery.” ProPublica, November 20, 2018. 
 
Thompson, A.C., Ali Winston, and Jake Hanrahan. “Inside Atomwaffen As It Celebrates a 
Member for Allegedly Killing a Gay Jewish College Student.” ProPublica , February 23, 
2018. 
 
TSC. “Intelbrief: The Atomwaffen Division (AWD): A Brief Profile.” The Soufan Center , 
April 4, 2019. 
 
Vidino, Lorenzo, and Seamus Hughes. “Countering Violent Extremism in America.” GWU 
Center for Cyber and Homeland Security, June 2015. 
 
Weill, Kelly. “Feds Feared Alleged ‘Neo -Nazi’ Benjamin Bogard Could Be Next Mass 
Shooter.” Daily Beast, February 28, 2019. 
 
White House. National Strategy for Counterterrorism of the United States of America.  
Washington, DC: White House, October 2018. 
 
White, Jonathan R. “Political Eschatology: A Theology of Antigovernment Extremism.” 
American Behavioral Scientist 6 (February 2001): pp. 937-956. 
 
Wood, Graeme. “ISIS Tactics Have Spread to Other Violent Actors.” The Atlantic, April 24, 
2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -Right Terrorism in the United States                 
19 
 
Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far -
Right Terrorism in the United States  
 
 
Jacob Ware 
 
Jacob Ware holds an MA in Security Studies from Georgetown University’s Walsh School 
of Foreign Service. He also holds an MA (Hons) in International Relations and Modern 
History from the University of St Andrews. 
 
 
 

   
 
Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and Rising Far-Right 
Terrorism in the United States        
 
Jacob Ware 
July 2019 
 
About ICCT 
 
ICCT The International Centre for Counter-Terrorism – The Hague (ICCT) is an independent think and 
do tank providing multidisciplinary policy advice and practical, solution -oriented implementation 
support on prevention and the rule of law, two vital pillars of effective counterterrorism. 
 
ICCT’s work focuses on themes at the intersection of co untering violent extremism and criminal 
justice sector responses, as well as human rights -related aspects of counterterrorism. The major 
project areas concern countering violent extremism, rule of law, foreign fighters, country and 
regional analysis, rehabilitation, civil society engagement and victims’ voices.  
 
Functioning as a nucleus within the international counter-terrorism network, ICCT connects experts, 
policymakers, civil society actors and practitioners from different fields by providing a platfor m for 
productive collaboration, practical analysis, and exchange of experiences and expertise, with the 
ultimate aim of identifying innovative and comprehensive approaches to preventing and countering 
terrorism.  
 
 
 
Contact ICCT 
 
T: +31 (0)70 763 0050 
E: info@icct.nl 
 
 
 
 
 
 
