JULY 2025
DRM-2025-U-041457-1Rev  © 2025 CNA Corporation
Russian Concepts of Future 
Warfare Based on Lessons 
from the Ukraine War 
Michael Petersen, Paul Schwartz, and Gabriela Iveliz Rosa-Hernandez 
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A.  
Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.


This document contains the best opinion of CNA at the time of issue. The views, opinions, and 
findings contained in this report should not be construed as representing the official position of the 
Department of the Navy.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.                7/21/2025
This work was created in the performance of Federal Government Contract Number N00014-22-D-7001.
Cover image: Briefing by General of the Army Valery Gerasimov, Dec. 18, 2024. Russian Ministry of Defense.
This document may contain materials protected by the Fair Use guidelines of Section 107 of the 
Copyright Act, for research purposes only. Any such content is copyrighted and not owned by CNA. 
All rights and credits go directly to content’s rightful owner.
Approved by:  July 2025
David Knoll, Research Program Director
Countering Threats and Challenges
Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division
This publication was funded by the Russia Strategic Initiative (RSI), U.S. European Command (EUCOM). The 
views expressed in this publication do not necessarily represent the views of the Department of Defense 
or the United States government. The US EUCOM RSI logo is used with permission.
© 2025 CNA Corporation
Abstract
This paper examines the evolution of Russian thinking about military strategy and conventional 
operations after three years of conflict in Ukraine. It assesses Russian elite military thought 
on combined arms operations, naval surface warfare, and air dominance operations and 
how the country’s strategy and operational concepts should evolve to address changes in 
the character of armed conflict in future wars. Despite significant tactical and technological 
changes, Russian strategic and operational thinking remains largely unchanged from 
approaches adopted before the war. Thus, despite the Ground Forces’ failure to conduct 
effective combined arms maneuver, military elites remain focused on restoring the conditions 
needed to wage future wars of maneuver. Similarly, despite the Russian Federation Navy’s 
failure to maintain control of the Black Sea, Russian naval thinkers are looking for ways to 
offset the asymmetric strike capabilities that led to this outcome. Likewise, Russian air power 
theorists are looking to increase the force size and rely on advanced technology to restore 
the Aerospace Forces’ ability to achieve air superiority and improve long-range precision 
strikes in future wars. Thus, as the Russian military reconstitutes its forces, it will likely do 
so with its existing strategic and operational concepts in mind and without substantial 
innovation. However, it would be unwise to discount the Russian military, which remains 
extremely capable and dangerous despite its many setbacks in Ukraine.


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   i  | www.cna.org   
Executive Summary
This report examines the evolution of Russian 
thinking about military strategy and conventional 
military operations after three years of conflict in 
Ukraine. It assesses Russian elite military thought on 
combined arms operations, naval surface warfare, 
and air dominance operations (including long-range 
precision strike). It probes the thinking of Russian 
military elites on how the country’s military strategy 
and operational concepts should evolve to address 
emerging changes in the character of armed conflict 
in anticipation of future wars.
The study begins with an analysis of Russian 
strategic thought, which forms the foundation for 
Russian warfighting concepts. It then discusses three 
main operational areas: combined arms operations, 
naval surface warfare, and air dominance operations. 
In each of these areas, the Russian military has 
encountered major unexpected challenges during 
the war, including the inability to wage effective 
combined arms offensives, maintain control of the 
Black Sea, and achieve air dominance. The study 
team drew primarily from leading Russian military 
journals, such as Voennaia Mysl’ (Military Thought), 
which are widely read by Russian political and military 
elites. We also consulted materials published by 
leading Russian think tanks and central newspapers 
providing expert coverage of Russian military affairs 
as well as Russian official doctrine. 
Key findings
The report finds that despite significant technological 
advances, which in turn have led to major tactical 
changes in the character of armed conflict (especially 
widespread use of uncrewed systems), Russian 
strategic and operational thinking on conventional 
military operations remains largely unchanged from 
approaches adopted before the war. Instead, for most 
Russian military elites, the war appears to confirm 
prewar conclusions regarding the character of armed 
conflict, despite the unexpected setbacks incurred 
by Russian forces during the war. Consequently, 
Russian views on the character of armed conflict 
have evolved little since the war, and there are no 
signs of any fundamental shifts in Russian strategic 
concepts or operational doctrine.
Russian military elites have chosen to address 
emerging military challenges with a peculiar mixture 
of confirmation bias and technological fetishism. 
In essence, they argue that their concepts were 
correct all along and that the failure of the Russian 
military in Ukraine is mainly due to poor planning 
and operationalization of valid and long-standing 
concepts combined with massive and unforeseen 
Western support for Ukraine. Although poor training 
has also played a role, Russian military thinkers 
have offered little at the operational level of war to 
indicate that systemic improvements in training are 
needed to help resolve these failures. The solution 
to these challenges, they argue, lies in adopting 
advanced technology such as artificial intelligence, 
next-generation uncrewed systems, and appropriate 
tactical innovations. Few if any military experts make 
references to rethinking their wartime strategic or 
operational concepts. 
Russian elite thinking about combined arms 
operations highlights this approach. Military 
thinkers readily acknowledge the inability of Russia’s 
Ground Forces to conduct effective combined 
arms maneuver during the war, characterized by 
rapid breakthrough and exploitation operations 
led by tanks and motorized infantry. But they 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   ii  | www.cna.org   
tend to attribute this outcome to the emergence 
of ubiquitous intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance (ISR) and the proliferation of mass 
and precision fires. These conditions, they claim, have 
led to the emergence of a “transparent battlefield” in 
which Russian formations are unable to concentrate, 
maneuver, and conduct deep operations without 
being instantly detected and targeted by mass 
and precision fires with disabling effect. Yet, far 
from abandoning their prewar doctrine, Russian 
elites are focused mainly on restoring the army’s 
ability to maneuver by increasing the force size and 
suppressing adversary ISR and strike capabilities in 
response to new battlefield conditions.
Likewise, Russian naval experts are grappling with 
the challenges encountered by Russia’s Black Sea 
Fleet during the war and their implications for future 
conflicts at sea. These include the fleet’s failure to 
maintain sea control and the loss of numerous Russian 
warships. Even though Ukraine lacks a traditional 
navy, its armed forces have succeeded in countering 
Russia’s surface fleet using uncrewed surface vessels 
and precision missiles. Yet, despite the seeming 
intractability of these challenges, Russian military 
elites remain focused on restoring the fleet’s ability 
to seize and maintain local sea control and fulfill key 
missions. To achieve this aim, they are advocating 
primarily for tactical and technological measures to 
enhance ship survivability, suppress adversary ISR, 
and counter adversary missile and drone strikes in 
lieu of serious revisions to operational art.
Likewise, the successes and failures of Russia’s 
Aerospace Forces during the war have spurred much 
introspection among Russian air power theorists. 
Yet ideas about Russian air dominance operations 
have not fundamentally shifted away from pre-
2022 themes either. Although Russian writers have 
identified strengths and weaknesses in the Aerospace 
Forces and proposed a variety of responses, they 
have yet to alter their general assessments on the 
character of air warfare, and they have not proposed 
fundamental changes in air strategy, doctrine, 
or concepts. Instead, to address the problems 
encountered in Ukraine for future conflicts, Russian 
air power theorists are focused on increasing the 
force size and relying on advanced technology, to 
include enhancements to Russia’s ground-based 
air defenses and long-range strike capabilities. Yet 
Russian thinking about suppression and destruction 
of enemy air defenses operations remains moribund 
despite the air force’s failure to seize air control over 
Ukraine, with all its attendant consequences.
Implications
Given Russia’s lack of major doctrinal revisions 
at both the strategic and the operational levels, 
Russia continues to frame its strategic competition 
with the West in many of the same ways that it did 
before 2022. It is still preparing for war with the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization with most of the 
same assumptions and ideas in mind. Its theory of 
victory still rests on setting conditions for success 
during the Threatening Period, deploying rapid 
and overwhelming force during the Initial Period, 
imposing costs via strategic defense and long-range 
strikes, maintaining escalation dominance, and 
undermining the adversary’s will to fight. 
The Ukraine war’s protraction, the failure of Russia’s 
strike campaign to break Ukrainian will, and Russia’s 
loss of escalation credibility have had little impact 
on the Russian military’s formulation of ideas. 
Combined arms warfare, the value of naval surface 
operations, the centrality of air dominance, and the 
fundamental war-winning importance of long-range 
precision strike have all proven to be surprisingly 
durable ideas given Russian failures in the war. As 
the Russian military begins to reconstitute over the 
next decade, it will likely do so with these concepts 
in mind. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   iii  | www.cna.org   
Thus, Russian military elites have not embraced 
attritional warfare, nor have they abandoned or 
fundamentally altered naval surface war concepts. 
They continue to rely on long-range precision strike 
as a potentially war-winning capability, embrace 
ground-based air defense as an asymmetric 
advantage, and envision a combined arms maneuver 
force operating on a broken battlefield. Despite the 
armed forces’ record in the war, the Russian military 
remains extremely capable and very dangerous. 
The implications of these ideas for any potential 
adversary are significant. Russia’s reliance on the 
Initial Period of War as a strategic linchpin means 
that nations must continue to develop advanced 
systems capable of providing strategic and tactical 
indications and warning. Operationally, the high 
likelihood of long-range precision attack against 
critical military, economic, and civilian targets 
means that states must take measures to ensure 
increased resilience in the Initial Period of War and 
beyond. Furthermore, Russian theorists are pushing 
for ground operations to be rapid and dynamic, 
so Western military planners should expect their 
adversary to seek to avoid grinding attrition warfare 
in a future conflict. In the maritime domain, Russian 
theorists argue for a combination of dense, active 
near-seas defense combined with long-endurance 
stealthy platforms for use in the far seas. These 
platforms will all be equipped with long-range 
precision strike for offensive and defensive cost 
imposition. 
Consequently, given these projections and assuming 
more limited objectives in a different region (such 
as the Baltic), a Russian military that in five years 
looks and operates similarly to the one in 2025 may 
very well achieve its strategic military objectives in a 
future conflict.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   iv  | www.cna.org   
Table of Contents
Introduction .....................................................................................1
Scope, methodology, and sources ..................................................................................... 2
Structure of the report ............................................................................................................ 4
Strategic Military Concepts .............................................................. 5
Strategic continuities ...............................................................................................................6
Background: prewar Russian military strategy ...........................................................6
Conflict typologies and hybrid warfare ........................................................................8
Conflict periodization .......................................................................................................... 9
Conflict typologies and hybrid war ..................................................................................11
Implications ...............................................................................................................................14
Combined Arms Operations ........................................................... 16
Russian ground operations in Ukraine ...........................................................................17
Russia’s inability to maneuver ............................................................................................18
Causes of the positional deadlock ...................................................................................19
The transparent battlefield ..............................................................................................19
Mass and precision strikes ...............................................................................................20
Proposals for restoring the ability to maneuver .........................................................21
Increased force size ............................................................................................................21
Counter-ISR ...........................................................................................................................22
Firepower suppression ......................................................................................................25
Airborne operations and other measures ..................................................................26
Waging wars of attrition .......................................................................................................28
The shift to an attrition strategy ....................................................................................29
Doubling down on attrition? ..........................................................................................29

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   v  | www.cna.org   
Alternative explanations ...................................................................................................32
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................33
Naval Surface Warfare ....................................................................35
Russian surface operations in Ukraine ............................................................................37
Seizing and maintaining local sea control .....................................................................38
Defending the homeland from a sea attack .................................................................42
Blue-water naval operations ...............................................................................................46
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................50
Air Dominance Operations ............................................................. 52
Successes and failures in the Russia-Ukraine war, 2022–2025 ..............................53
The Initial Period of War in air operations .....................................................................55
Ground-based air defense ...................................................................................................58
Long-range precision strike ................................................................................................60
Suppression and destruction of enemy air defenses and operational deep 
strike .............................................................................................................................................62
C2, ISR-T, dynamic targeting, and COPs ........................................................................65
Future evolution: technology and innovation ..............................................................66
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................71
Implications ...................................................................................72
Figures .......................................................................................... 75
Abbreviations .................................................................................76
References .................................................................................... 77
 

   vi  | www.cna.org   
PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   1  | www.cna.org   
Introduction
This report focuses on the evolution of Russian 
thinking about military strategy and operations after 
three years of high-end conventional warfare in 
Ukraine. It features analysis of Russian elite military 
thought on combined arms operations, naval surface 
warfare, and air dominance operations (including 
long-range precision strike). The report asks, “How 
has the war in Ukraine affected Russian military 
elites’ thinking on specific strategic and operational 
concepts? Will this thinking result in fundamental 
changes to Russian military strategy and operational 
concepts?” The report argues that despite significant 
technological advances that have led to major tactical 
changes in the character of armed conflict (especially 
widespread use of uncrewed systems), Russian strategic 
and operational thinking on conventional military 
operations is largely unchanged from approaches 
adopted before the war. For Russian writers, the Russia-
Ukraine war confirms many of the conclusions made 
about military conflict over the previous two decades 
even though the war has generated unexpected 
setbacks and surprising outcomes.
These conclusions are important because the bulk 
of military analysis on Russia’s operations in Ukraine 
has focused on the tactical level of war, in which there 
has been extraordinary dynamism and innovation. 
The use of uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs) for rapid 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) 
and fire support and as loitering munitions and 
Ukraine’s use of uncrewed surface vehicles (USVs) 
or UAVs to inflict major defeats on the Black Sea 
Fleet have been nothing short of revolutionary. But 
this tactical focus threatens to skew overall Russian 
military assessments by implying that dynamic 
innovation is the norm and the Russian military is 
rapidly becoming a new kind of force.
Shifting the focus from the tactical to the strategic 
and operational reveals that these important 
technical-tactical shifts are taking place within an 
intellectual framework that very closely resembles 
the one in place before the war. This matters 
because these higher-level considerations shape 
the fundamental approach that Russia will likely 
take in a potential regional or global conflict with 
the US or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO). In short, the nature and character of the 
conflict that Russia may fight with NATO is not as 
radically different from pre-Ukraine expectations as 
it may seem at first glance. Although Russia may be 
experiencing a tactical revolution, operational and 
strategic thinking is largely static. This study begins 
to fill this gap in understanding at the strategic and 
especially the operational level of war.
Despite major setbacks, Russian military elites view 
the war as having validated many strategic and 
operational assumptions, including the importance 
of preemption, maneuver, air power, and naval 
combat. Although they acknowledge either tacitly or 
directly that Russia’s military has failed to perform in 
accordance with prewar expectations (and that the 
level of Western support for Ukraine was a surprise), 
they also explicitly argue that much of their prewar 
analysis has been proven correct. Any alterations 
to that analysis since 2022 have been marginal, 
and there have not been any fundamental shifts in 
operational doctrine or strategic concepts. 
Russia’s military challenges emerged early on. 
Ukrainian forces effectively countered Russian 
attempts to wage a multi-axis blitzkrieg campaign 
on the ground, in the air, and at sea designed to 
dislocate the Ukrainian military, decapitate Ukraine’s 
leadership, and occupy large swathes of Ukrainian 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   2  | www.cna.org   
territory. Ukrainian forces not only successfully 
resisted Russian attempts to capture Kyiv but 
also compelled the withdrawal of Russian forces 
from northern Ukraine altogether. Within months, 
Russian forces lost control of the Black Sea, and 
Russian territory fell under Ukrainian attack. Since 
then, the war has devolved into grinding attrition on 
the ground, long-range cost imposition in the air, 
and a maritime campaign that has left the Russian 
Federation Navy (RFN) badly damaged and searching 
for answers. 
Russian military elites acknowledge these setbacks 
but address them with a peculiar mixture of 
confirmation bias and technological fetishism. In 
essence, they argue that they were correct all along 
and the failure of the Russian military in Ukraine is 
due to poor planning and operationalization of valid 
and long-standing concepts combined with massive 
and unforeseen Western support for Ukraine. The 
solution to these challenges, they argue, lies in 
adopting advanced technology such as artificial 
intelligence (AI) and expanding the use of advanced 
uncrewed systems. Few if any military elites make 
references to rethinking their wartime strategic or 
operational concepts, doctrine, or training. 
Ultimately, Russian thinking on the Russia-Ukraine 
war and its impact on future conflict is characterized 
by the dual dynamic of rapid technological-tactical 
innovation and a more torpid, path-dependent 
state of operational and strategic thinking. For all 
the rapid fundamental change happening on the 
ground, the strategic and operational conclusions 
remain relatively static, with changes happening 
only on the periphery. 
1 In this study, we use the operational level of war as a level of analysis. The focus of this level of analysis is the application of 
operational art. We examine operational concepts that are shaped by operational art and inform operational campaign development 
within a strategic framework. For a definition of strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war , see Joint Publication JP-1, Aug. 27, 
2023, Joint Warfighting. 
Scope, methodology, and sources
In June 2024, US European Command’s Russia 
Strategic Initiative commissioned CNA to complete 
a study assessing the potential evolution of Russian 
strategic and operational thought resulting from the 
war in Ukraine. CNA was asked specifically to examine 
published views within Russian military circles about 
the potentially evolving character of modern warfare 
at the strategic and operational levels of war. 
The study focuses primarily on conventional 
warfighting strategy and operational concepts. 1 
Within this broad scope, the study team began with 
an analysis of strategic concepts within which Russian 
operational warfighting theories reside. These 
include evolution of Russian threat perceptions, 
conflict periodization, and conflict characterization 
since 2022. We used these categories to investigate 
Russian understanding of the character of war—how 
war is fought in a specific time and place—since 
2022 and to frame the discussions occurring at the 
operational level of war. 
We then chose three main operational areas—
combined arms operations, naval surface warfare, 
and air dominance operations (including long-range 
strike)—based on availability of sources, broader 
interest to the community of military expertise, and 
being representative of different domains. These 
areas of operational focus and the discussions 
around them lie at the heart of the study. For each 
of these areas, the study team begins by briefly 
describing the state of prewar Russian thought. We 
then examine Russian-language sources to identify 
(1) Russian military elites’ assessments of warfighting 
concepts in these areas after three years of war and 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   3  | www.cna.org   
(2) their prescriptions for how the Russian military 
should address demonstrated shortcomings in the 
future. We then provide the practical implications of 
future warfighting concepts for both Russia and its 
potential adversaries.
The study team collected insights from publicly 
available Russian-language sources, including 
leading professional military journals such as 
Voennaia Mysl’ (Military Thought), Vestnik Akademii 
Voennykh Nauk (Journal of the Academy of Military 
Science), Armeiskii Sbornik (Army Digest) , Morskoi 
Sbornik (Maritime Digest), Arsenal Otechestva (Arsenal 
of the Fatherland) , and Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye 
Sily: Teory I Praktika (Aerospace Forces: Theory and 
Practice). Military academic journals began showing 
the influence of the Russia-Ukraine war in roughly 
mid-2022, and that trend has accelerated through 
the beginning of 2025. We also consulted materials 
published by leading Russian think tanks and central 
newspapers providing expert coverage of Russian 
military affairs. 
To the extent possible, we focused our analysis 
on articles published by Russia’s leading military 
commanders and most influential military scholars. 
For example, we were able to draw on the writings 
of the two most recent commanders in chief of the 
RFN. Moreover, many of the authors consulted for 
this study have published frequently in the leading 
Russian military journals, are cited often, have 
acquired significant influence among the Russian 
military elite community, and are well known to 
Western experts. 
To inform our selection of key themes to be 
covered in this report, we were aided significantly 
by our original selection of three operational 
areas: combined arms operations, naval surface 
warfare, and air dominance operations. These areas 
2 Krisztián Jójárt, “The War Against Ukraine Through the Prism of Russian Military Thought,” Journal of Strategic Studies 47, no. 6–7 
(2024), doi:10.1080/01402390.2024.2414079. Jójárt’s work examines the “transparent battlefield” phenomenon and explores Russian 
thinking on efforts to break the stalemate in Ukraine and overcome challenges in future wars. 
were intentionally selected because of the often-
intractable problems encountered by Russia’s 
armed forces in each of these areas during the war 
in Ukraine. As a result, our research was necessarily 
focused on how Russian elite military thinkers are 
assessing such problems, the extent to which they 
see them as enduring, and the solutions they are 
offering to address them in future wars. Although 
we were unable to cover every theme that has arisen 
in connection with such operations, this approach 
allowed us to focus on those problems that are seen 
as most central to the war as well as the main lines 
of thinking on how Russia should address them in 
anticipation of future conflicts.
There is a robust discussion among Russian military 
elites that reflects the experiences of the Russia-
Ukraine war. As the Swedish Defense University’s 
Krisztián Jójárt put it, “In a country where independent 
war reporting has been criminalized, Russian military 
thinking is thriving.” 2 The discussion among these 
elites reflects a long tradition of open (if sometimes 
circumspect) debate about military issues in Russia 
and fundamentally shapes future strategy, doctrine, 
and operational concepts. The only area that is 
generally off-limits is direct criticism of Russian 
political and senior military officers. However, as 
this study shows, criticism, even if oblique, can and 
does appear on the pages of professional military 
journals. In addition, the writers presented in this 
study are generally the most influential thinkers in 
Russian military circles. They are senior active duty 
or retired officers now ensconced in various General 
Staff research institutions and military academies. In 
Russia, civilian writers are generally less influential, 
but the few chosen for this study are well known 
and either shape thought or capture critical ideas 
addressed by multiple writers.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   4  | www.cna.org   
Official Russian documents, such as the 2022 
Maritime Doctrine and Russia’s official Military 
Encyclopedic Dictionary, were also crucial to this 
study. In select cases, Russian-language sources were 
supplemented by assessments drawn from reliable 
Western sources, including academic journals, think 
tank reports, and other media sources. The sources 
cited are broadly representative of the tenor and 
content of discussions in Russian military circles. 
We note those topics on which there is debate or 
consensus. However, given the limited timeframe in 
which publications, documents, and other sources 
on the war have appeared, most conclusions about 
the future of Russian warfare must be considered 
preliminary. As the conflict enters its fourth year and 
remains unsettled, the conclusions noted are subject 
to change. 
Note that this report is not an examination of 
Russia’s “lessons learned” from the Russia-Ukraine 
war. Although it is, of course, informed by the 
conflict, we focus on the implications for future 
war and do not provide a detailed retrospective of 
operations. In many cases, by describing operational 
shortcomings in the Russia-Ukraine war, Russian 
writers are simultaneously articulating a vision for 
future conflict, and we focus on this articulation. 
This study is also not an examination of the tactical 
level of war or its rapid innovation. This well-studied 
topic has been the focus of many reports published 
by CNA and elsewhere. The study also avoids deep 
discussion of nuclear debates in Russia, a topic that 
has similarly been well covered in the literature on 
Russian military thought. Finally, we make no claims 
to comprehensiveness. There are areas of Russian 
strategic and operational thought that we do not 
discuss in this report. Any effort to cover all these 
warfighting areas comprehensively is beyond the 
resources available to the study team.
Structure of the report
The report begins with an initial section that 
summarizes the state of Russian strategic thought 
since 2022. It provides a high-level overview of how 
Russian military elites are addressing the impact of 
the war in Ukraine at the strategic level of armed 
conflict. Specifically, this section identifies insights 
from Russian military experts regarding the character 
of armed conflict and its impact on Russia’s overall 
military strategy for future conflicts. The section also 
examines the extent to which military elites consider 
it necessary for Russia to revise its overall military 
strategic thinking based on observations of the war 
in Ukraine. 
The next three sections cover the three main 
operational areas that lie at the heart of the study: 
combined arms operations, naval surface warfare, 
and air dominance operations. In each of these 
sections, we assess Russian military elites’ reactions 
to the war in Ukraine and whether they are making 
fundamental changes to operational thought based 
on their observations. Finally, we assess Russian 
military writers’ proposed actions in terms of 
acquiring new capabilities, developing new doctrine, 
and enhancing tactics, techniques, and procedures 
(TTPs) to address these emerging challenges. 
The study concludes with a section highlighting the 
key high-level findings of the report focusing on 
the key lessons learned by Russian military elites 
regarding the future of conventional conflict. This 
section also explores the implications of Russian 
thinking for the future direction of Russia’s armed 
forces by summarizing the measures that Russian 
military elites are proposing to address the many 
problems encountered by the armed forces in 
Ukraine in preparation for future wars. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   5  | www.cna.org   
Strategic Military Concepts
3 Valery Gerasimov, “The Value of Science Is in the Foresight: New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying 
Out Combat Operations,” Military-Industrial Kurier, Feb. 27, 2013, trans. Robert Coalson, htps://www.armyupress.army.mil/portals/7/
militaryreview/archives/english/militaryreview_20160228_art008.pdf. 
 
The Russia-Ukraine war has validated and amplified 
prewar strategic conclusions about relations with 
the West, as well as the nature and forms of modern 
conflict, reached by Russian military theorists 
and many members of the military elite. Despite 
achieving tactical innovations on the battlefield,  
Russia has continued to conceptualize war with 
NATO in much the same way it did before 2022 —
with an emphasis on setting conditions for victory 
in the Threatening Period, deploying rapid and 
overwhelming force in the Initial Period, imposing 
costs via strategic defense and long-range strikes, 
and undermining the adversary’s will to fight as 
the keys to victory. This section addresses the key 
aspects of Russian strategic military thought after 
three years of the Russia-Ukraine war and shows that 
prewar assumptions have proven to be surprisingly 
enduring. 
Since 2022, strategic military thinking in Russia has 
exhibited strong continuity, with change limited 
to the peripheries of core ideas. Despite Russian 
failures in the war, the conflict has not spurred a 
wholesale upending of Russian strategic thought; 
rather, it has simply added some new elements to 
the preexisting interpretive framework articulated 
by Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov more 
than a decade ago. 3 Indeed, for Russian writers, 
the war has proven the efficacy of his theoretical 
framework. They have framed Russia’s “special 
military operation” ( special’naja voennaja operacija 
or SVO) in Ukraine as a feature of a wider so-called 
hybrid Western campaign against Russia that may 
ultimately trigger a direct war with NATO. The fear of 
a shooting war with NATO has been the key driver of 
Russian strategic planning and remains unchanged 
in 2025. 
Russian strategy writers view their nation as being 
locked in an existential conflict with the West that 
has intensified since at least 2022. They frequently 
argue that hybrid war tactics identified in the 
decades before the war are now being implemented 
with greater ferocity by their Western adversaries. 
This slight shift in Russian thinking reflects Russia’s 
response not only to its experience in Ukraine 
but also to perceived shifts in the global strategic 
environment beyond Russia’s relationship with 
the West. As a result, the assumptions governing 
Russian strategy, warfighting doctrine, and escalation 
have remained largely unchanged  even though 
some Russian military thinkers have argued for 
limited revisions to existing doctrine and escalation 
management models that reflect observations from 
the current war. 
The themes presented in the sources covered here are 
representative of common themes in Russian strategic 
thought since February 2022. Military academic 
journals began showing the influence of the Russia-
Ukraine war in roughly mid-2022, and that trend has 
accelerated through 2025. Given this limited period, 
most conclusions about the future of Russian warfare 
must be considered preliminary. As the conflict enters 
its fourth year and remains unsettled, the conclusions 
noted are subject to change. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   6  | www.cna.org   
Strategic continuities 
Background: prewar Russian 
military strategy 
The post–Cold War era featured an intensive period 
of debate among Russian military elites about the 
nature and character of modern war. Over nearly two 
decades, Russian observers came to see the growth 
of long-range precision strike, network-centric 
warfare, and the use of nonmilitary means (especially 
informational and political tools) to achieve military 
objectives as characteristic of modern conflict. 
In response, they developed a military strategy 
that sought to exploit these areas asymmetrically 
against their adversaries. The ability to influence the 
adversary’s political support and leadership decision-
making in the cognitive domain became a particular 
focus of Russian strategy. The use of military force, 
especially “non-contact warfare” featuring rapid 
decision-making leading to standoff strikes against 
critical enemy targets, remained an essential means 
of doing so.4
Two key elements of Russian military thought before 
the full-scale invasion of Ukraine were “active defense” 
(otherwise known as preemption) and escalation 
control.5 For Russian military elites, successfully 
executing both meant the continued development of 
a deep understanding of modern conflict typologies 
and periodization. In Russian thinking, properly 
defining the type of conflict in which a country 
finds itself (see Table 1) is crucial for the purposes 
4 See Michael Kofman et al., Russian Military Strategy: Core Tenets and Operational Concepts, CNA, 2021.
5 Both categories fall under the larger concept of “strategic deterrence,” a topic that has received much attention in recent years and 
falls outside the scope of this study. See, for example, Dima Adamsky, The Russian Way of Deterrence: Strategic Culture, Coercion, and 
War (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2023). 
6 Kofman et al., Russian Military Strategy.
7 Kofman et al., Russian Military Strategy , pp. 8–9. For focused discussion of the initial period in Ukraine, see especially Roger N. 
McDermott and Charles K. Bartles, An Assessment of the Initial Period of War: The Russia-Ukraine War, Part I (Fort Eustis, VA: US Army 
TRADOC, 2023).
8 For further analysis of Russian warfighting and deterrence strategy, see Michael Kofman, Anya Fink, and Jeffrey Edmonds, Russian 
Strategy for Escalation Management: Evolution of Key Concepts, CNA, DRM-2019-U-022455-1Rev, Apr. 2020. 
9 Timothy Thomas, Russian Military Thought: Concepts and Elements, MITRE, 2019, pp. 5–10.
of strategic deterrence. It allows military planners to 
determine the goals and scope of a given conflict and 
the proper application of state power to coerce the 
adversary while controlling escalation.6 
Russia’s understanding of conflict periodization 
is equally crucial. This understanding is based on 
assessments of the political-military situation and 
purportedly allows military leadership to forecast the 
onset of conflict, prepare forces accordingly, and, if 
necessary, conduct preemptive operations. Success 
in the so-called Initial Period of War, described in 
greater detail in the following section, is considered 
crucial to Russia’s overall fortunes in conflict, 
especially because of Russia’s self-assessed capacity 
shortages vis-à-vis NATO, its chief rival.7
Ultimately, Russian military elites, including Chief 
of the General Staff Gerasimov, came to believe in 
a theory of victory predicated on a combination of 
preemptive standoff precision strikes against critical 
targets, active undermining of leadership decision-
making, and quick and decisive military operations, 
all while maintaining escalation dominance 
backstopped by credible nuclear threats. 8 These 
operations were conceived as asymmetric actions 
designed to exploit adversary weaknesses at the 
high end of conflict. The ideas underpinning them 
were almost certainly equally informed by Russian 
elites’ assessments of US military actions in the post–
Cold War era as well as acknowledgment of their 
own weaknesses vis-à-vis NATO. 9 These ideas were 
fundamental to Russian military strategy on the eve 
of Moscow’s invasion in 2022.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   7  | www.cna.org   
Table 1. Russian conflict typologies outlined in 2014
Conflict Type Description 
Military danger State of interstate or intrastate relations characterized by the correlation of factors 
that could, under certain conditions, lead to the appearance of a military threat. 
Military threat State of interstate or intrastate relations characterized by the real possibility of an 
appearance of military conflict between opposing sides as well as a high degree of 
readiness of any state (or group of states) or separatist (terrorist) organizations to 
use military force (armed violence). 
Armed conflict Armed conflict of a limited scale between states (international armed conflict) or 
between opposing sides in the territory of one state (internal armed conflict). 
Local war War in which limited political-military goals are pursued, military actions are 
conducted within the borders of combating states, and the interests (e.g., territorial, 
economic, political) of just these states are primarily affected. 
Regional war War with the participation of several states from one region led by national or coalition 
armed forces during which the sides pursue important military-political goals. 
Large-scale war War between coalitions of states or the largest states of the global society in which 
the sides pursue radical political-military goals. Large-scale war could be the result of 
escalation of an armed conflict, local war, or regional war involving a significant number 
of states from various regions of the world. This war would demand mobilization of all 
available material resources and spiritual forces of the participant states. 
Source: “Russian Federation Military Doctrine [Военная доктрина Российской Федерации],” printed in Rossiyskaya Gazeta, Dec. 30, 
2014, https://rg.ru/2014/12/30/doktrina-dok.html. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   8  | www.cna.org   
Conflict typologies and hybrid warfare 
After three years of war, Russian strategists have 
not changed their assumptions about the global 
security environment. Although Russian writers have 
acknowledged tactical lessons from the Russia-
Ukraine war, the fundamentals of Russian strategy 
and doctrine remain largely unchanged by the 
conflict. The basic preexisting typologies of conflict 
outlined in the 2014 military doctrine (see Table 1) 
have not changed.
Likewise, fundamental threat perceptions and basic 
ideas about hybrid Western aggression remain 
unchanged. Before the Russia-Ukraine war, military 
theorists developed a definition of war that included 
the use of economic, informational, and diplomatic 
tools to produce instability in an adversary nation. 
These measures would also set conditions for the 
introduction of foreign militaries into countries that 
were deemed strategically important to Russia. 10 
Since 2022, Russian thinking has remained centered 
on this perceived pattern of global multidomain 
hybrid aggression underwritten by the US and 
NATO, and Russian writers have frequently portrayed 
the war in Ukraine as an example of this idea and as 
confirmation of their earlier theories. 
For example, in a late 2022 article on the importance 
of psychological resilience in war, Major General 
A. S. Korzhevskiy, who would go on to become 
lieutenant general and deputy chief of the General 
Staff Academy, noted the following:
10 Perhaps the most cited article in this subgenre of Russian strategic writing is S. G. Chekinov and S. A. Bogdanov, “Evolution of 
the Essence and Content of the Concept of ‘War’ in the 21st Century [Эволюция сущности и содержания понятия «война» в XXI 
столетии],” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2017).
11 A. S. Korzhevskiy and I. V. Solvyev, “Mental Confrontation and Problems of Forming a Holistic System of Offensive and Defensive Action 
Within It [ Ментальное противоборство и проблемы формирования целостной системы наступательных и оборонительных 
действий в нем],” Voennaia Mysl’ 11 (Nov. 2022).
12 Korzhevskiy and Solvyev, “Mental Confrontation and Problems of Forming a Holistic System.” 
New spheres of confrontation 
(conflict resolution) have emerged, 
such as economic; informational, 
including scientific, educational and 
cybernetic spaces; conscious (mental, 
cognitive) and others, within which 
it is possible to inflict unacceptable 
damage (defeat) on the opposing 
side without the use of armed force.11 
These ideas mirror prewar Russian thought. Despite 
the catastrophic bloodshed in Ukraine and Russia, 
the use of lethal force remains only one aspect 
of the concept of war in Russian thinking. War is 
viewed as an activity that encompasses the entirety 
of state action and demands a nation, if it is to be 
victorious, to retool itself fundamentally in all areas 
of confrontation noted by Korzhevskiy.12 
Russian military thinkers assume that a direct 
relationship exists between hybrid war, the Russia-
Ukraine war, and potential war with NATO. They claim 
that the SVO is an outgrowth of, not a departure 
from, this assumption. For example, in an echo of 
Chief of the General Staff Gerasimov’s well-known 
2013 article, “The Value of Science Is in Foresight,” 
V. V. Selivanov and Yu. Ilyin argued that the US is 
working to destabilize states around Russia’s borders 
and that “it is highly likely that any military conflict 
on post-Soviet territory could become a prelude to 
a large-scale military conflict between NATO and 
Russia. The armed conflict in Ukraine is, in fact, a 
test of the US (NATO) forces in the implementation 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   9  | www.cna.org   
of this dual scenario.” 13 This sentiment is common 
among Russian military theorists. 
Finally, Russian strategists continue to advocate for 
a comprehensive approach to strategic deterrence, 
one that allows Russia to retain escalation dominance 
at all levels of conflict. Strategic and nonstrategic 
nuclear forces remain their escalation trump card. 
Military elites argue that the underlying purpose of 
these weapons is the application of psychological 
pressure on adversaries and the infliction of 
“unacceptable damage.” They emphasize that the 
foundation of Russia’s deterrence policy remains 
the capability to execute a retaliatory strike under 
any circumstances, even the most adverse, with 
devastating consequences for the aggressor. 14 In 
short, Russian intellectuals remain committed to 
their unique and evolving concept of “strategic 
deterrence.”15 
Conflict periodization 
The war has also reinforced previous Russian 
conclusions regarding conflict periodization, 
especially the importance of the Threatening (or 
Threatened) Period and the Initial Period of War. 
As a result, Russian intellectuals have continued to 
emphasize the critical importance of these periods 
in determining the success or failure of conflict. The 
13 V. V. Selivanov and Yu. D. Ilyin, “Trends in the Development of Means of Armed Struggle in Modern Military Conflicts, Their Influence 
on the Development and Change of Generations of Weapons, Military and Special Equipment [ Тенденции развития средств 
вооруженной борьбы в современных военных конфликтах, их влияние на развитие и смену поколений вооружения, военной 
и специальной техники],” Voennaia Mysl’ 9 (Sept. 30, 2022). 
14 D. A. Palachyov, R. Q. Nogin, and S. V. Kornev, “Possible Approaches to the Development of a Set of Measures to Improve Combat 
Duty in the Strategic Missile Forces in the Current Military-Political Situation [Возможные подходы к разработке комплекса 
мероприятий по совершенствованию боевого дежурства в РВСН в современной военно-политической обстановке],” Voennaia 
Mysl’ 3 (2024).
15 For an extensive discussion of Russia’s concept of escalation, see Kofman, Fink, and Edmonds, Russian Strategy for Escalation 
Management; Gabriela Iveliz Rosa-Hernandez, Anya Fink, and Cornell Overfield, Moscow Does Not Believe in Tears: Russia’s Political-
Military Establishment Debates Credibility of Nuclear Threats and Potential Nuclear Employment,  CNA, DRM-2024-U-038138-1Rev, 
Sept. 2024, https://www.cna.org/reports/2024/09/moscow-does-not-believe-in-tears.
16 “Threatened Period [Угрожаемы Период],” Russian Ministry of Defense Military Encyclopedic Dictionary, https://encyclopedia.mil.
ru/encyclopedia/diconary/details.htm?id=10643@morfDiconary. 
17 A. V. Serzhantov, A. V. Smolovy, and I. A. Terentyev, “Transformation of the Contents of War: Contours of Military Conflicts of the 
Future [Трансформация содержания войны: контуры военных конфликтов будущего],” Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 30, 2022). 
protracted nature of the Russia-Ukraine war has not 
fundamentally altered the importance ascribed to 
these periods. 
Historically, the Threatening Period is broadly 
understood in Russia as the period of “extreme 
aggravation” before conflict. Russian intellectuals note 
that it could feature military deployments, diplomatic 
saber-rattling, malign information campaigns, 
and coercive economic measures. 16 As of 2024, 
the definition and importance of this period have 
remained unchanged. For example, Lieutenant General 
A. V. Serzhantov from the Military Academy of the 
General Staff of the Russian Federation, highlighted 
its importance, noting that “a special role is given to 
the period preceding the start of a military conflict.” 
According to Serzhantov, this special role includes 
attempts to undermine the adversary’s will and shape 
the battlespace for the onset of military operations.17 
Likewise, the Initial Period of War has retained its 
paramount importance in Russian thinking. Poor 
Russian planning and performance during the 
Initial Period and the resulting protracted conflict 
in Ukraine appear to have led strategists to double 
down on the importance of this period—a subtle but 
clear critique of the war’s execution. For example, 
an early 2023 article written by then–Major General 
A. G. Semenov, who was on the verge of being 
promoted to deputy commander of the Aerospace 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   10  | www.cna.org   
Defense Forces, described the Initial Period as 
a “decisive phase not only within the aerospace 
campaign, but also the war as a whole.” Semenov 
argued that the first stage of a large-scale conflict 
would be characterized by a strategically defensive 
aerospace campaign with the goal of denying NATO 
objectives. These objectives, according to Semenov, 
would include a strategic decapitation and disarming 
strike on Russia, including massive strikes at the 
operational level.18 
Valentin Dybov, Yuriy Podgornykh, and Maxim 
Kolodko from the Military Academy of Aerospace 
Defense share Semenov’s concerns. They wrote that 
“the position that the initial period of war should be 
correctly foreseen in peacetime and purposefully 
prepared for remains relevant.” For them, the 
prospect of a surprise attack on Russia is not new, 
and they argued that Russian leadership should 
prioritize preparing to defend Russia from a massive 
aerospace attack via deceptive measures.19 
D. S. Belenkov, A. S. Borisenko, and V. V. 
Sukhorutchenko argued for the following: 
18 A. G. Semenov, Yu. V. Krinitsky, and V. G. Chekhovsky, “Armed Struggle in the Aerospace Theater of Military Operations [Вооруженная 
борьба на воздушно-космическом театре военных действий],” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (Jan. 2023). 
19 Valentin Dybov, Yuriy Podgornykh, and Maxim Kolodko, “Intelligence Reported: The Analysis Failed [Разведка доложила – анализ 
подкачал],” Nezavisimoe Voennoe Obozrenie 3 (2023), https://nvo.ng.ru/concepts/2023-03-02/1_1226_factor.html. 
20 D. S. Belenkov, A. S. Borisenko, and V. V. Sukhorutchenko, “Current Issues of Automation of Strategic Situation Assessment in 
Solving Strategic Deterrence Problems [Актуальные вопросы автоматизации оценки стратегической обстановки при решении 
задач стратегического сдерживани],” Voennaia Mysl’ 8 (2024).
21 Belenkov, Borisenko, and Sukhorutchenko, “Current Issues of Automation of Strategic Situation Assessment.” The authors are from 
the 27th Central Research Institute of the Russian Ministry of Defense. The 27th Central Research Institute has traditionally paid 
considerable attention to the study of strategic deterrence issues. Its research in the 2000s made key contributions to the effort to 
develop automated strategic assessment systems for officials of the General Staff. This system was put on experimental combat duty 
in 2009.
The timely identification of a 
potential enemy’s possible plan of 
action, the disclosure of the fact of 
its preparation for an immediate 
global or nuclear missile strike on 
our country by air and space attack 
means, both conventional and 
nuclear, as well as an assessment of 
the compliance of the actions of the 
Strategic Deterrence Forces with the 
developing situation.20 
Belenkov and colleagues push for the development 
of new analytic tools that harness AI to assess conflict 
escalation dynamics and potential better. 21 This 
push for the use of advanced technology to solve 
pressing military strategic problems is a common 
theme among Russian military elites and one that is 
especially prominent at the operational level of war. 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the proposed solution to a 
rapid NATO surprise attack also remains the same. 
Nikolai Evmenov, the former commander in chief of 
the RFN, wrote in 2023 that the key to victory remains 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   11  | www.cna.org   
“gaining operational initiative at the beginning of a 
military conflict by preempting the opposing side in 
making and implementing a decision.”22 These ideas 
regarding preemption and prevention were built into 
Russian doctrine well before the start of the war.23 
The emphasis on decisive action to inflict 
“unacceptable damage” on the adversary in the 
Initial Period reflects the notion that punishing the 
adversary to undermine decision-making and the 
political will to fight is the key to victory.24 Korzhevskiy 
went as far as to quote Gerasimov’s aphorism: “In 
modern warfare, the winner is not the one who out-
powers his opponent, but the one who changes his 
[opponent’s] mind.”25 At the time, Korzhevskiy was 
probably unaware of the extent to which attrition 
warfare would feature in the Russia-Ukraine war, 
but the sentiment continues to be expressed by 
his fellow writers and is currently manifesting in 
continuous attacks on Ukraine’s power grid and 
civilian infrastructure. These are cost imposition 
measures designed to convince Ukrainians to end 
the conflict on terms acceptable to Russia. Moscow’s 
continuing campaign of punishment reflects the 
notion that its theory of victory in conflict remains 
largely unchanged.
22 Nikolai A. Evmenov, “Main Trends of Change: The Nature and Content of the Military Threats to the Russian Federation from 
Ocean and Sea Directions [ Основные тенденции изменения характера и содержания военных угроз Российской Федерации с 
океанских и морских направлений],” Voennaia Mysl’ 5 (2023). 
23 “Russian First Deputy Defense Minister Gerasimov: ‘Our Response’ Is Based on the ‘Active Defense Strategy’; ‘We Must Act Quickly’ 
to ‘Preempt the Enemy...Identify His Vulnerabilities, and Create Threats of Unacceptable Damage to It,’” MEMRI, Mar. 14, 2019, htps://
www.memri.org/reports/russian-firstdeputy-defense-minister-gerasimov-our-response-based-acve-defense-strategy. 
24 V. A. Kalganov, G. B. Ryzhov, and I. V. Solovyev, “Strategic Deterrence as a Factor in Ensuring National Security of the Russian 
Federation [ Стратегическое сдерживание как фактор обеспечения национальной безопасности Российской Федерации ],” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 8 (Aug. 31, 2022). Russian military thinkers do not usually employ the term center of gravity, but it is adopted here as 
a shorthand to mean a key adversary characteristic whose destruction is key to defeating the adversary. 
25 Korzhevskiy and Solovyev, “Mental Confrontation and Problems of Forming a Holistic System.”
Conflict typologies and hybrid war
Russian military thinkers have made limited changes 
to their established ideas since February 2022, and 
these changes fall within the preexisting strategic 
interpretive framework noted previously. They 
generally agree that the Russia-Ukraine war marks 
a shift in the realization of the theoretical world 
of Gerasimov’s decade-old musings regarding 
conflict escalation, color revolutions, and hybrid 
war. Recent events, they argue, are the natural 
results of the threat that he articulated as early as 
2013. For Russian intellectuals, the war’s reality has 
largely substantiated his observations and offered 
opportunities for their further development. 
For example, Colonel L. A. Prudnikov and 
Lieutenant General A. V. Kuzmenko wrote in 
Military Thought that “in recent years…there [has 
been] a diversification of the nature and content of 
military conflicts towards the creation and practical 
implementation of theories of network, conscious, 
geophysical, informational, hybrid and other wars.” 
These writers contend that Gerasimov was correct, 
but they claim that the hard experience of war has 
shown that he may have underestimated the extent 
of the nonmilitary challenge. The solution, they 
suggest, “requires scientific substantiation of new 
approaches to [threat] neutralization through the 
use of economic, political, informational, spiritual 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   12  | www.cna.org   
and other nonmilitary measures. ” 26 For Prudnikov 
and Kuzmenko, the staggering cost of war may be 
preempted by more forceful and effective nonmilitary 
measures, presumably during the Threatening Period 
or Initial Period. 
The Russia-Ukraine war has also spurred greater 
nuance, new ideas, and potentially important shifts of 
opinion within the accepted interpretive framework. 
Major General (Ret.) A. I. Malishev, a senior researcher 
at the Military Academy of the General Staff, was the 
lead author of a 2023 article arguing that Russia’s 
military doctrine must be updated to reflect current 
aspects of international confrontation. In a clear 
reflection of the Ukraine experience, Malishev et al 
proposed expanding the conflict typology noted in 
Table 1. Among other ideas, they proposed adding 
the variable of “with foreign interference” or “without 
foreign interference” to the category of internal 
armed conflict (see Figure 1 ). The authors also 
proposed the new category of “armed confrontation 
on a limited scale,” which they defined as military 
actions, armed incidents, border armed conflicts, 
and other armed clashes that might occur between 
full peace and high-end war. By implication, these 
additional categories would expand escalation 
possibilities for Russia and its adversaries during the 
Threatening Period before war. 
Furthermore, the concept of hybrid warfare may 
be expanding. Retired Colonel Aleksandr Bartosh, 
a prolific and provocative contributor to Russian 
26 L. A. Prudnikov and A. V. Kuzmenko, “Application of Non-Military Measures in the Interests of Ensuring Russia’s Military Security 
[Применение невоенных мер в интересах обеспечения военной безопасности России],” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2023), p. 7. At the 
time he wrote the article, Kuzmenko was on the faculty of the General Staff Academy and would go on to become the head of the 
“Vostok” group of forces in Ukraine. 
27 Aleksandr A. Bartosh, “Proxy War as a Determining Factor of Military Conflicts in the XXI Century [Прокси-война как определяющий 
фактор военных конфликтов XXI века ],” Voennaia Mysl’ 5 (2023); Aleksandr A. Bartosh, “Escalation Models of Modern Military 
Conflicts [Модели эскалации современных военных конфликтов],” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2024). 
28 Benoit Faucon and Thomas Grove, “Russia Provided Targeting Data for Houthi Assault on Global Shipping,” Wall Street Journal, Oct. 
24, 2024, htps://www.wsj.com/world/russia-provided-targeng-data-for-houthi-assault-onglobal-shipping-eabc2c2b. 
29 Aleksandr Bartosh, “Factors of Surprise Yesterday and Today [Фактор внезапности вчера и сегодня],” Nezavisimoe Voennoe 
Obozrenie 2 (2023); Aleksandr Bartosh, “A Punishing Sword in the Hands of Russia [Карающий меч в руках России],”  Nezavisimoe 
Voennoe Obozrenie 10 (2023).
30 Semenov, Krinitsky, and Chekhovsky, “Armed Struggle in the Aerospace Theater.” 
deterrence debates, has argued for the addition of 
proxy war (Прокси-война) to traditional Russian 
conflict typologies and escalation models, and he 
has attempted to build an escalation model for 
proxy war itself. 27 These models apply primarily to 
what Russians perceive the West to be doing to 
Russia, often citing Western support for Ukraine as a 
key example of the challenges that Russia now faces. 
Theoretically, these models could equally apply to 
what Russia could do to the West, but that has not 
been the main emphasis in Russian military writings on 
proxy war, although Russia’s use of hybrid measures 
has been a frequent topic in discussions on future 
conflicts involving the West. Whether or not proxy 
war is adopted into accepted escalation modeling, 
it is almost certainly a future option for achieving 
Russia’s geostrategic goals. Moscow’s provision of 
targeting intelligence to the Houthis in 2024 is likely 
an outgrowth of this type of thinking. 28 Note that 
Bartosh himself has called for “retaliatory-counter 
strikes” against proxy warfare targets in Ukraine and 
in other countries that support Ukraine.29
There is consensus among Russian theorists that 
direct wars between nuclear powers are unlikely to 
be limited to conventional conflict. Consequently, 
they have reached conclusions similar to those 
drawn by Western thinkers during the Cold War, that 
proxy wars may serve the purpose of contesting the 
adversary’s strategic military goals without bringing 
nuclear powers into direct conflict. 30 At first glance, 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   13  | www.cna.org   
Figure 1. Depiction of updated Russian conflict typologies
Source: A. I. Malishev, V. N. Marducin, and V. Yu. Khakhalev, “Analysis of the Transformation of the Main Categories of 
Military Conflictology in Doctrinal Foundations [Анализ трансформации основных категорий военной конфликтологии в 
доктринальных основах РФ],” Voennaia Mysl’ (2023).


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   14  | www.cna.org   
Russian strategic thinkers may seem to be revisiting 
lessons from the Cold War, which is partially accurate; 
however, they also argue that the contemporary 
difference is that Western leaders have “lost” the fear 
of nuclear war. 31 Consequently, they argue, Russia 
must relearn and update key concepts such as proxy 
war to defend itself while minimizing the chances of 
nuclear holocaust. 
For example, building on Bartosh’s work, M. A. 
Savushkina from the Mikhailovskaya Military Artillery 
Academy wrote the following in 2024:
The legitimization of concepts of 
means and forms of unconventional 
wars at the legal level is an important 
step towards the creation of a set of 
measures to counter proxy war, and 
most importantly, it will contribute to 
the creation of a set of mechanisms 
that will allow Russia to defend from 
such an aggression….Obviously, 
Ukraine is not the only proxy-server 
[sic. “прокси-сервер”] of the West’s 
plans to weaken Russia’s might and 
the destruction of the sociocultural 
and historical foundations of Russian 
statehood. 32 
Importantly, Savushkina also argues that proxy 
war can be used as a preventive (or preemptive) 
measure against other nations.33 However, Bartosh’s 
own influence on the Russian General Staff may be 
limited, and there is not yet consensus regarding the 
emergence of the proxy war ideas in Russia. 
In short, although some Russian military thinkers 
generally advocate for a revision to Russian doctrinal 
and planning documents, they do not argue for 
alterations in the basic assumptions of these 
31 Rosa-Hernandez, Fink, and Overfield, Moscow Does Not Believe in Tears.
32 M. A. Savushkina, “Proxy Warfare as a Phenomenon of Digital Society [Прокси-война как феномен цифрового общества],” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2024).
33 Savushkina, “Proxy Warfare as a Phenomenon of Digital Society.” 
documents. There is currently no strong consensus 
regarding these marginal changes. The discussion 
of possible alterations to conflict typology is 
an important and continuing debate in Russian 
strategic circles and will likely remain so for years. 
In the meantime, the basics of Russian strategy and 
doctrine will likely remain largely the same.
Implications
More than three years into the Russia-Ukraine war, 
there have been no major revisions to Russian 
strategic thought on the nature of modern war. The 
failure of the initial invasion, the grinding attrition of 
trench warfare, and the inability of Russia’s strategic 
strike campaign to break Ukraine’s will to fight have 
not, in Russia’s eyes, exposed any fallacies in its 
prewar theorizing. Most Russian military intellectuals 
contend that the Russia-Ukraine war validates the 
concepts that they developed before Russia’s full-
scale invasion. In their view, nonmilitary aspects 
of Western hybrid warfare were drawing Ukraine 
deeper into NATO’s orbit and posing a threat to 
Russian security that required intervention. They 
consider the war’s protraction to be a result of poor 
planning and execution in the Initial Period and 
evidence of the importance of success during that 
period. Finally, they view Western involvement not 
as an effort to defend Ukraine but rather as a direct 
engagement in conflict with Russia. 
Even though Russia has made tactical innovations 
during the Russia-Ukraine war, it continues to 
prepare for war with NATO in much the same way 
it did before the war. Its theory of victory rests on 
setting conditions for success in the Threatening 
Period, deploying rapid and overwhelming force 
in the Initial Period, imposing costs via strategic 
defense and long-range strikes, and undermining 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   15  | www.cna.org   
the adversary’s will to fight. There is no discussion 
of a fundamental doctrinal shift away from these 
previously established ideas, although these guiding 
concepts continue to evolve, and Russian intellectuals 
may yet build on them as debates continue in that 
strategic community.
The relative stasis of Russian strategic thinking has 
had a downstream effect on the development of 
operational concepts. As the following sections 
demonstrate, Russian intellectuals have not 
jettisoned their ideas on combined arms warfare, 
the value of surface naval operations, the criticality 
of air dominance, or the fundamental war-winning 
importance of long-range precision strike. Typically, 
they argue that their prewar operational theorizing—
to the extent that it took place—was correct. In their 
view, the failures the Russian military has experienced 
during the Russia-Ukraine war were because of poor 
execution, technology that does not support the 
demands of modern conflict, or both of these factors.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   16  | www.cna.org   
Combined Arms Operations
34 See, for example, E. Sukalenko, A. Nagorskiy, and S. Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III [К Вопросу О 
Позиционном Тупике],” Armeiskii Sbornik 9 (2024), p. 191. 
Russia’s Ground Forces (including the ground forces 
(the regular army; Sukhopútnye Voyská), airborne 
forces ( Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska or VDV), and 
naval infantry ( Morskaya pekhota)) have had mixed 
success during ground operations in Ukraine. Except 
at the start of the war, they have failed to conduct 
effective offensive operations, especially combined 
arms maneuver characterized by rapid breakthrough 
and exploitation by tanks and motorized infantry 
supported by artillery. Instead, the Ground Forces 
have been largely relegated to conducting grinding 
offensive operations characterized by continuous 
frontal assaults against fortified Ukrainian positions, 
with incremental gains but high cost in terms of 
personnel and equipment. As a result, Russian 
forces have failed to achieve important strategic or 
operational objectives, such as the capture of Kyiv or 
the Donbas.
On the other hand, with some notable exceptions, 
the Ground Forces have had much greater success in 
conducting defensive operations, especially during 
the summer of 2023, when they effectively blunted 
Ukraine’s large-scale counteroffensive in southern 
Ukraine. In doing so, they capitalized on effective 
use of fortified defensive positions, obstacles, 
and minefields and concerted use of artillery, air-
launched weapons, and loitering munitions to thwart 
advancing Ukrainian army units. They also adroitly 
used mobile reserves to plug gaps in the line during 
Ukrainian breakthrough attempts.
Yet Russia’s inability to engage in effective combined 
arms maneuver has been one of the most concerning 
issues for Russian military elites. The reasons for 
this failure have been the subject of considerable 
internal debate. Russian observers have tended to 
attribute the military’s poor performance on the 
ground to emerging conditions in Ukraine that 
have dramatically constrained both sides’ ability to 
engage in combined arms maneuver. 
Many observers agree that Russia’s lack of sufficient 
numerical superiority has contributed to the Ground 
Forces’ inability to break through Ukrainian lines and 
conduct deep operations. 34 Yet Russian observers 
have given greater weight to conditions on the 
ground, including the emergence of ubiquitous 
battlefield surveillance and the proliferation of both 
old and new forms of mass and precision fires. 
These developments have led to the emergence of 
a “transparent battlefield” in which a broad array 
of reconnaissance strike assets can continuously 
detect, track, and target attacking ground forces. 
Collectively, the rise of these new capabilities has 
sharply curtailed the effectiveness of offensive 
ground operations while dramatically increasing the 
lethality of defensive operations. 
Moreover, most Russian observers see these 
emerging challenges as not specific to the SVO 
in Ukraine. Instead, in their view, these challenges 
reflect more fundamental changes in the character of 
ground warfare based on the growing effectiveness 
of mass and precision strikes, including artillery, anti-
tank guided missiles (ATGMs), UAVs, and electronic 
warfare, combined with airborne and space-based 
reconnaissance. According to one group of scholars, 
evolving conditions on the battlefield have made it 
“practically impossible to plan and conduct…classical 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   17  | www.cna.org   
combined arms operations…in accordance with [long-
standing] principles.”35 Instead, a general equilibrium 
has emerged based on rough parity in each side’s 
forces, firepower, and technical means of armed 
combat, resulting in an enduring positional deadlock 
at the front despite Russia’s ability to maintain fire 
superiority throughout much of the war.36
Russian military leaders and scholars continue to 
grapple with these developments. Most readily 
acknowledge the immense difficulties involved in 
restoring combined arms maneuver given emerging 
conditions on the modern battlefield, which have 
greatly strengthened defensive operations. Yet 
Russian military elites are, by and large, adhering 
to their existing operational concepts and prewar 
strategy, which emphasize blitzkrieg-style combined 
arms maneuver as essential for conducting 
successful ground combat operations. Thus, far from 
abandoning these concepts, Russian military thinkers 
are concentrating their efforts on finding solutions for 
Russia’s failures to wage a war of maneuver in Ukraine 
to allow the restoration of such capabilities in future 
wars. A consensus approach has yet to emerge.
Russian ground operations in 
Ukraine
Russian concerns regarding the army’s inability 
to wage effective combined arms operations in 
future wars have their roots in the Ground Forces’ 
performance during the war in Ukraine. Except during 
the initial phase of the invasion, Russia’s Ground 
Forces have struggled throughout the conflict to 
wage an effective war of maneuver. Instead, they 
have found themselves locked in a protracted war 
35 V. I. Orlyansky, V. P. Gerasimov, and S. N. Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use of Modern 
Intelligence Systems [Проблема маневра войсками в условиях применения противником овременных разведывательных 
систем],” Voennaia Mysl’ 7 (2024), p. 37. 
36 E. Sukalenko, A. Nagorskiy, and S. Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part I [К Вопросу О Позиционном 
Тупике],” Armeiskii Sbornik 7 (2024), p. 184. 
37 Michael Kofman, “The Russia-Ukraine War: Military Operations and Battlefield Dynamics,” in War in Ukraine: Conflict, Strategy, and 
the Return of a Fractured World, ed. Hal Brands (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2024). 
of attrition characterized by grinding offensive 
operations and defensive set-piece battles leading 
at best to limited gains, despite having held the 
initiative since September 2023 following the failure 
of Ukraine’s summer counteroffensive. Although 
Russian forces are making steady albeit limited gains 
on the battlefield, they are doing so at great cost in 
terms of personnel and equipment.
During the first two months of the war, Russian forces 
were able to make rapid gains on several fronts, 
especially in southern Ukraine. Yet early Russian 
successes proved to be an anomaly driven largely 
by the speed and shock of Russian operations and 
the multi-axis nature of Russia’s offensive. Ukrainian 
forces were still mobilizing and deploying during this 
period, leaving gaps in the front that Russian forces 
were able to exploit.37 But as the war progressed and 
Ukrainian forces continued to mobilize, they were 
gradually able to halt Russia’s offensive and stabilize 
the front. However, by then Russia had succeeded 
in creating a land bridge linking western Russia to 
Crimea. By contrast, in northern Ukraine at Kyiv and 
Sumy, Russian forces were compelled to withdraw, 
ceding occupied territory back to Ukraine.
Following the initial period of the invasion, Russia 
reconstituted its forces in eastern Ukraine and launched 
a fresh offensive intended to seize control of the 
Donbas. Despite modest gains at various points along 
the front, Russian forces failed to wage an effective 
war of maneuver. Instead, they were limited to frontal 
assaults across a broad front, incurring heavy losses 
in the process. As a result, Russia’s Ground Forces 
were rapidly depleted, resulting in a further decline 
in offensive capability. Moreover, Russia’s failure to 
mobilize additional combat troops led to a growing 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   18  | www.cna.org   
numerical mismatch with Ukraine, which was rapidly 
mobilizing additional combat personnel throughout 
this period. At the same time, Russian ground units 
incurred massive losses in tanks and armored vehicles 
during the first six months of the war, and their 
advantages in firepower steadily declined because of 
growing ammunition shortages and the provision of 
advanced Western artillery to Ukraine. 
Taking advantage of this growing mismatch on 
the ground, the Ukrainian army launched twin 
counteroffensives at Kharkiv and Kherson in the 
late summer and fall of 2022, briefly converting the 
campaign into a war of maneuver and regaining 
substantial amounts of previously captured Ukrainian 
territory. These setbacks finally drove the Kremlin 
to order a partial mobilization of 300,000 Russian 
reservists in September 2022, which ultimately 
allowed Russia’s Ground Forces to halt Ukraine’s 
offensive and stabilize the front. At this point, the 
campaign reverted to a war of attrition. 
During the winter of 2023, Russian forces shifted to 
the offensive once more but were unable to wage a 
successful campaign of maneuver. Instead, they were 
caught up in grinding offensive operations around 
Bakhmut leading to incremental gains, although they 
eventually succeeded in capturing the city at great 
cost. By February 2023, the offensive had effectively 
culminated. Ukraine, having reconstituted its forces, 
launched its long-anticipated counteroffensive 
in the south in June 2023. Russian defenses held, 
however, and Ukraine lost substantial personnel and 
equipment during the offensive. By September 2023, 
Ukraine’s counteroffensive had run its course.
Following this failed effort, Russian forces once 
again regained the initiative and have held it ever 
since. Yet despite having restored fire superiority at 
38 Vladimir I. Orlyansky, “Integrated Combat System: The Highest Form of Troop Organization [Интегрированная Боевая Система – 
Высшая Форма Организации Войск],” Vestnik Akademii Voennykh Nauk 3 (2024), p. 40. 
39 Orlyansky, “Integrated Combat System,” p. 41; Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under 
Conditions,” p. 37. 
the front, Russian forces have struggled to convert 
their operational advantages into substantial gains 
on the ground. Instead, Russian and Ukrainian 
forces have found themselves locked once again in 
prolonged battles of attrition, wearing each other 
down, even though the trends have been decidedly 
in Russia’s favor. Nevertheless, both sides have found 
themselves trapped in a positional struggle bearing 
a strong resemblance to conditions on the Western 
front during World War I.
Russia’s inability to maneuver
Russia’s inability to conduct offensive ground 
operations and the circumstances that have limited 
them have been as much of a surprise for most Russian 
observers as they have been for those in the West. In 
a recent article published in the prestigious Journal 
of the Academy of Military Science, influential Russian 
military scholar Vladimir I. Orlyansky noted that it 
was unexpected to see the reemergence of trench 
warfare conditions in recent conflicts reminiscent of 
those that prevailed during World War I.38 Moreover, 
this unanticipated development directly contradicts 
prevailing Russian theories of ground warfare, which 
historically rely on maintaining high maneuverability 
of combined arms units. As noted by some Russian 
scholars, this reversal of expectations is mainly due to 
the emergence of a transparent battlefield combined 
with qualitatively new means of destruction intended 
to counter maneuver forces, which have led to the 
stalemate on the battlefield.39
Conditions in Ukraine have also led some observers 
to call into question recent theoretical writings in 
Russian military journals regarding the emergence 
of new forms of ground warfare characterized by 
mobile dispersed forces, the absence of continuous 
fronts, high maneuverability, deep penetrations 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   19  | www.cna.org   
by small, detached units, open flanks, bypassing 
of strongholds, and rapid encirclements. Yet, as 
Orlyansky has noted, such predictions have not held 
up in Ukraine because nothing approaching these 
conditions has been seen on the ground.40 
Although Russian observers agree that conditions in 
Ukraine have prevented both sides from conducting 
effective combined arms maneuver, they do not 
necessarily agree on what Russian forces should do 
to restore maneuverability in future wars. Proposed 
solutions include increasing the force size, countering 
the defender’s airborne and space-based ISR, and 
using overwhelming fire superiority to suppress 
the defender’s artillery and other strike assets at 
the point of attack. Russian military elites have also 
proposed other measures to help prevent deadlock 
at the front in future conflicts, including changes in 
unit organization, enhanced command and control 
(C2), and use of airborne forces to bypass enemy 
defenses at the front. No clear consensus has yet 
emerged on what should be done. 
Causes of the positional deadlock 
The transparent battlefield
As noted previously, many Russian military elites view 
the Ground Forces’ inability to maneuver in Ukraine 
as mainly due to a combination of persistent and 
ubiquitous ISR alongside the growing destructiveness 
of mass and precision fires. According to this view, the 
proliferation of space-based, airborne, and ground-
based ISR platforms has led to the emergence of 
40 Orlyansky, “Integrated Combat System,” p. 40. 
41 Orlyansky, “Integrated Combat System,” p. 41; Farida Kurbangaleeva, “Could Ukraine Launch a New Counteroffensive? [Может Ли 
Украина Пойти На Новое Контрнаступление?],” Republic (Slon), Dec. 14, 2023. 
42 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions,” pp. 37–38. 
43 A. D. Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation: Preliminary Results and Potential Prospects [Два Года Специальной 
Военной Операции: Некоторые Итоги, Вероятные Перспективы],” Vestnik Akademii Voennykh Nauk 87 (2024), p. 58; Vasily 
Mikhailovich Burenok, “On the Prospects for the Development of Weapons, Military and Special Equipment Based on the Experience 
of a Special Military Operation [О перспективах развития вооружения, военной и специальной техники на основе опыта 
специальной военной операции],” Vooruzhenie i Ekonomika 2 (2024), p. 6. 
44 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions,” p. 37. 
a transparent battlefield in which it is increasingly 
difficult for combined arms units to maneuver, 
concentrate for offensive ground operations, and 
conduct attacks without being quickly detected, 
tracked, and targeted by the other side.41
Combined with the proliferation of both new 
and existing forms of kinetic attack, the resulting 
reconnaissance strike networks available to the 
defender have made it possible to defeat typical 
ground targets on the battlefield in near-real-
time conditions.42 As one group of Russian military 
scholars has noted, the experience of using tanks 
in recent operations has demonstrated their high 
vulnerability in transparent battlefield conditions to 
numerous and varied means of destruction by the 
enemy, including mines, artillery, ATGMs, and UAV 
strikes. As a result, long-standing belief in the ability 
of tank formations to serve as the main striking 
component of combined arms operations has been 
seriously shaken by events in Ukraine.43
In one leading study, a group of influential Russian 
military scholars went into considerable detail on 
the problems likely to face Russian maneuver forces 
in future wars because of the persistent, layered 
ISR capabilities available to today’s militaries. 44 
As an example, they cited Ukraine’s access to an 
unprecedented level of Western space-based 
reconnaissance support from more than 50 military 
and 300 commercial satellites. These assets have 
been able to provide near-continuous coverage 
of the battlespace, supplying Ukraine with a broad 
array of data on the location and composition of 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   20  | www.cna.org   
Russian combined arms formations. Satellite ISR 
constellations are expected to increase even more 
rapidly in coming years. Moreover, space-based 
communications networks such as Starlink provide 
new means for the rapid distribution of satellite 
ISR data to forces on the ground. In Ukraine, data 
distributed by Starlink have reportedly been sufficient 
to support near-real-time kinetic strikes against 
Russian ground targets across the battlespace.45
The same article further contended that space-based 
surveillance is being supplemented by a wide range 
of airborne ISR platforms. In Ukraine these include a 
variety of sophisticated Western platforms, such as US 
RC-135 Rivet Joint aircraft operating along Ukraine’s 
border. Such platforms have been used to collect 
substantial amounts of data continuously on Russian 
ground formations at distances of 300 kilometers or 
more inside Ukrainian (including Russian-controlled) 
territory. Western countries are investing heavily 
to expand their airborne ISR capabilities further in 
preparation for future conflicts.46
Going forward, Russian forces must also deal with 
the special challenges posed by UAVs, which can 
continuously collect and transmit data on Russian 
combined arms formations. Used in mass numbers, 
UAVs have now become a key source of real-time 
intelligence for Ukraine’s armed forces, sharply 
reducing Russia’s ability to concentrate forces, move 
to assembly points, and engage in active combat 
operations.47 Moreover, most Russian military elites 
expect that ISR UAVs will play an even greater role 
in countering offensive ground force operations in 
future conflicts as the scale, speed, functionality, 
45 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions,” pp. 37–42. 
46 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions,” pp. 42–43. 
47 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions,” pp. 43–44. 
48 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions, p. 45. 
49 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part I,” p. 184. 
50 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part I,” p. 184. 
sophistication, autonomy, and intelligence of ISR 
UAVs continue to expand.48
Mass and precision strikes
The presence of ubiquitous ISR is only part of the 
story. Another part is the increasing integration of ISR 
into reconnaissance strike networks based on mass 
and precision strike weapons. Russian military elites 
emphasize that the proliferation of ISR and strike 
assets is responsible for effectively undermining 
combined arms maneuver. If reconnaissance strike 
networks are not effectively countered, their growing 
presence could further reinforce the trends toward 
positional deadlock at the front during future conflicts.
Veteran military scholars writing in Armeiskii Sbornik, 
one of Russia’s leading publications on army 
operations, argued that the inability to suppress the 
enemy’s firepower is the factor most responsible 
in modern wars for preventing the attacker from 
concentrating its forces, achieving surprise, and 
conducting breakthrough operations. 49 Thus, 
drawing on lessons from the Soviet era, the inability 
of either side to gain a sufficient advantage in fire 
superiority to suppress the other side’s artillery and 
strike assets is what most accounts for the emergence 
of a positional deadlock.50
Russian observers note that the gradual evolution of 
precision weapons from remotely operated air-to-
surface weapons and UAVs to ATGMs and precision 
artillery has given defenders an unprecedented ability 
to destroy the attackers’ tanks and armored vehicles 
rapidly whenever they attempt to operate in the 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   21  | www.cna.org   
open.51 Moreover, unguided artillery has also acquired 
a high degree of precision because of widespread use 
of automated fire control systems and ISR UAVs, which 
are used to adjust fire.52 Consequently, given roughly 
equivalent forces, when the defender’s ground forces 
are sufficiently supported by artillery, there is virtually 
no option for the attacker to engage in effective 
combined arms maneuver.53 
Thus, a broadly shared view has emerged among 
Russian military elites that the destructive power of 
precision strike weapons and the rise of ubiquitous ISR 
have now fundamentally altered the balance between 
offensive and defensive ground forces in favor of the 
defensive. Moreover, achieving the element of surprise 
has become hugely problematic. 54 Therefore, any 
attempt to break through the adversary’s lines under 
prevailing conditions will likely result in the attacker 
being “leveled by fire strikes and the introduction of 
reserves,” resulting in major losses of the attacker’s 
equipment and personnel.55 
Proposals for restoring the 
ability to maneuver
Russian military elites have proposed several 
potential solutions for restoring the army’s ability to 
maneuver. These include achieving overwhelming 
superiority in personnel and equipment, countering 
enemy ISR, and suppressing enemy strike capabilities. 
Leaders have also proposed various complementary 
51 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” pp. 188–189. This view is shared generally 
by many other Russian military leaders. According to another source, for example, “Over the past few decades, the capabilities for 
massive impact on the enemy with the help of high-precision weapons (HPW) of varying ranges have increased significantly.” See 
Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions,” p. 47. 
52 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” p. 191. 
53 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” pp. 188–189. 
54 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part I,” p. 184; Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and 
Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” p. 191. 
55 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” pp. 188, 191. 
56 E. Sukalenko, A. Nagorskiy, and S. Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III [К Вопросу О Позиционном 
Тупике],” Armeiskii Sbornik 9 (2024), p. 191.
57 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 56. 
measures to improve combined arms operations, 
including enhancing airborne operations and 
improving C2 and force structure. Despite the 
formidable challenges involved in overcoming the 
emerging problems facing the Ground Forces both 
in Ukraine and in future wars, there are few signs 
that Russia is abandoning combined arms maneuver 
(versus, for example, an attrition strategy) as a central 
tenet of Russian military strategy. Instead, Russia 
appears to be doubling down on combined arms 
maneuver, as demonstrated by the many proposals 
offered by Russian military scholars to overcome 
current constraints.
Increased force size
Some Russian military scholars have argued that 
Russia’s Ground Forces in Ukraine are too small and 
therefore insufficient to conduct effective combined 
arms maneuver. For example, in a seminal article 
discussing the persistent deadlock at the front, 
a 2024 article in Armeiskii Sbornik  attributed the 
positional stalemate to Russian leadership’s “strategy 
of exhausting the enemy using extremely limited 
forces without adopting the most effective means 
of armed struggle at its disposal.” 56 Another article 
coauthored by Lieutenant General A. D. Gavrilov 
from the Mozhaisky Military Space Academy blamed 
the situation on prior military reforms, which led to a 
smaller ground force while essentially hollowing out 
the force.57

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   22  | www.cna.org   
In response, some Russian military scholars have 
argued that a substantial increase in force size is 
needed to avoid positional deadlock at the front 
and restore the army’s ability to maneuver in future 
wars. For example, looking back to the beginning of 
the Ukraine invasion, Gavrilov et al recently argued 
that “a large-scale frontal offensive operation 
involving three or four combined arms (tank) 
armies with the support of aviation and naval forces 
would have led to a more rapid (and undoubtedly 
successful) achievement of the goals of the special 
military operation and the end of hostilities.” 58 
These authors clearly view achieving overwhelming 
numerical superiority as a key prerequisite for 
effective combined arms maneuver in future wars. 
Other Russian experts have also argued for an 
increase in force size to restore the army’s ability 
to maneuver. According to another recent article, 
achieving a crushing victory in future wars will 
require both serious efforts to adapt to new combat 
conditions and an inevitable increase in the size of 
the Ground Forces, especially artillery units. 59 There 
is little evidence, however, that these authors are 
advocating for Russia to achieve overall superiority 
in the correlation of forces against the West during a 
future conflict with NATO, a feat that is likely out of 
reach for Russia. These recommendations appear to 
be geared more to achieving numerical superiority 
at the designated point of attack during the Initial 
Period of War.   
Counter-ISR
To address the challenge of ubiquitous surveillance, 
some Russian military elites are arguing for 
58 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 58. 
59 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” p. 192. In making such arguments, 
Russian military elites do not explain how Russia might equip an expanded force with sufficient tanks and ground combat systems to 
support such large-scale combined arms operations. 
60 V. I. Orlyansky, A. A. Gerasimov, and E. V. Bitner, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use of Modern Intelligence 
Systems [Проблема маневра войсками в условиях применения противником овременных разведывательных систем],” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 8 (2024), pp. 19–20. 
61 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Bitner, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” pp. 19–20. 
comprehensive measures to suppress the defender’s 
ISR capabilities as a means to restore the army’s 
ability to maneuver in future wars. According to one 
leading article, the aim of such operations should 
be to “maximally reduce the effectiveness” of the 
defender’s ISR capabilities using a combination 
of both active and passive measures. 60 Given the 
proliferation of space-based, airborne, and ground-
based sensors employed in Ukraine, Russian experts 
acknowledge the sheer magnitude of the task while 
recognizing the need for new capabilities, forms, 
and methods to reverse the growing battlefield 
transparency in future conflicts.
To this end, some Russian military elites are 
advocating for enhanced counterspace operations 
designed to blind, disrupt, and, if necessary, destroy 
enemy reconnaissance and communications 
satellites. These operations could be achieved in 
part through use of direct-ascent anti-satellite 
(ASAT) weapons, such as the A-35 ballistic missile 
defense system used to defend Moscow as well 
as orbital vehicles and other space-based ASAT 
weapons. Such measures could be supplemented by 
directed energy weapons, such as the Peresvet high-
energy laser, to dazzle electro-optical or infrared 
sensors. Russian experts acknowledge, however, that 
effective counterspace operations will also require 
new forms and methods of kinetic, electronic, and 
optical-electronic suppression of enemy space 
communications and weapons control systems 
that have yet to be developed. In the interim, some 
Russian elites have advocated for the use of nuclear 
weapons against adversary satellite constellations 
under appropriate conditions.61

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   23  | www.cna.org   
Countering the defender’s crewed and uncrewed 
airborne ISR platforms is deemed to be as important 
as restoring battlefield maneuver in future conflicts. 
For targeting crewed ISR aircraft and ISR UAVs of 
comparable dimensions (e.g., Switchblade, TB-2 
Bayraktar), some have argued that the military should 
rely on improved versions of Russia’s traditional air 
defense systems, such as the Pantsir and S-400. They 
acknowledge, however, that countering smaller 
multi-rotor ISR UAVs will be a far greater challenge 
in future conflicts because of their growing 
capabilities, their mass employment, and the relative 
ineffectiveness of traditional air defenses.62 
62 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Bitner, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” pp. 20–22. 
63 “Smart Small Calibers in the New Paradigm of War [Умные малые калибры в новой парадигме войны],” Arsenal Otechestva, Dec. 
31, 2024. 
To counter this threat, one recent article highlighted 
the advantages of small-caliber guns (ranging from 
23 to 57 mm shells) to combat small multi-rotor 
UAVs. As the article noted, the advantage of small-
caliber weapons over larger counterparts is the 
large quantities of low-cost ammunition that can be 
made available to bring down UAVs while avoiding 
depletion of advanced air defense weapons (see 
Figure 2 ).63 Others have argued that countering 
smaller ISR UAVs will require developing more 
advanced electronic warfare and new kinds of kinetic 
weapons (e.g., artillery, loitering munitions) to target 
the defender’s UAV forces. 
Figure 2. ZAK-23E counter-UAV anti-aircraft system mounted on BTR-82
Source: “Smart Small Calibers in the New Paradigm of War.”


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   24  | www.cna.org   
New weapons and tactics must also be developed to 
counter ISR UAVs before launch by targeting enemy 
drone forces (i.e., shooting the archer rather than 
the arrow). Recent battlefield successes in Ukraine in 
striking Starlink ground stations were cited as a useful 
precedent. For combined arms maneuver, some 
advocated that it is necessary to mount counter-UAV 
systems on tanks and armored vehicles to provide 
greater force protection as they advance. The Saniya 
first-person view drone suppression system currently 
mounted on Russian tanks in Ukraine was cited as 
an example. Ultimately, however, Russian elites view 
directed energy weapons, including radio frequency 
weapons and high-energy lasers, which can achieve 
kinetic effects, as the key to combating smaller ISR 
UAVs in future wars, especially multi-rotor drones. 
According to this view, directed energy weapons 
have the potential to clear smaller ISR UAVs from the 
skies altogether.64
In addition to directly countering ISR platforms, some 
Russian military experts have advocated for enhanced 
use of electronic warfare capabilities to disrupt and 
paralyze enemy C2 systems and battlefield networks 
to disrupt effective use of ISR. Electronic warfare can 
assist not only in countering the technical means of 
control of enemy reconnaissance strike networks 
but also in protecting Russian command, control, 
computing, communications, cyber, intelligence, 
surveillance, reconnaissance, and targeting (C5ISRT) 
capabilities, creating conditions for effective use 
of Russian military formations. 65 In this respect, 
electronic warfare offers certain advantages over 
kinetic strike weapons because electronic warfare 
64 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Bitner, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” pp. 21–22. 
65 Russian military leaders continue to view electronic warfare as an area of comparative advantage for their armed forces. This view 
is in part a legacy of the Soviet era, during which Russian military leaders invested heavily to develop capabilities and concepts for 
waging “radio-electronic battle” against NATO forces.
66 Y. E. Donskov et al., “Systems Engineering Aspects of Raising the Status of Electronic Warfare Troops [Системно-технические 
аспекты повышения статуса войск радиоэлектронной борьбы],” Voennaia Mysl’ 11 (2024), p. 31. 
67 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Bitner, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” pp. 22–31. 
systems have a theoretically greater strike capacity 
subject to available power supply than artillery, which 
depends on ammunition resupply. Hence, according 
to this view, the role of electronic warfare systems 
in counter-C5ISRT operations is expected to grow 
rapidly as a percentage of total strike operations in 
future wars.66 
Some Russian military experts have argued 
for increased use of passive measures such as 
camouflage and decoys as a complementary 
means to help offset the challenges of ubiquitous 
surveillance in future conflicts. A recent article went 
into detail on this topic, proposing a wide range 
of measures to camouflage Russian ground units, 
including disguising Russian tanks, armored vehicles, 
artillery, C2 nodes, and other fixed field positions 
(see Figure 3). The authors also proposed the use of 
decoys to deceive enemy ISR and draw enemy fires 
to help deplete ammunition. They further advocated 
for large-scale use of camouflage and decoys to 
support mobile weapons platforms during future 
combined arms offensives. They assume that this 
approach will provide greater force protection for 
mobile formations while disguising concentrations 
and restoring the element of surprise. The authors 
acknowledged, however, that adopting passive 
measures will require a major change in strategic 
culture among Russian military leaders, who are 
often disdainful of such measures, as reflected in 
the low levels of training and organization regarding 
their use. Rectifying these deficiencies will require 
continuous creative work by Russian command and 
staff forces.67

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   25  | www.cna.org   
Firepower suppression 
Other Russian military scholars are advocating for 
concentrated use of artillery and reconnaissance 
strike to suppress enemy fires as an alternative (or 
complementary) means of restoring the army’s 
ability to maneuver in future wars. According to this 
approach, achieving overwhelming fire superiority 
at the point of attack to suppress the enemy’s 
firepower, destroy its frontline forces, and enable 
concentrated attack is the key to reestablishing 
combined arms maneuver. Suppressing the 
defender’s firepower will in turn pave the way for 
Russian tank and motorized infantry formations to 
concentrate their forces, advance to the front, and 
68 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part I,” p. 184. 
conduct successful breakthrough operations with 
limited losses of personnel and equipment. Russian 
long-range artillery strikes are also necessary to 
support armored offensives into the enemy’s rear 
areas while preventing the enemy from bringing up 
reserves to seal the breach.68
Harkening back to the Soviet era, one such article 
hinted that carrying out effective combined arms 
attacks might require the re-creation of a mass 
artillery force capable of providing concentrated 
artillery preparation of the battlefield and sustained 
supporting fires to destroy enemy strongpoints and 
fortifications. The authors stated the following: 
Figure 3. New methods of camouflage for tanks and armored vehicles
Source: Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Bitner, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” p. 26. 


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   26  | www.cna.org   
[Having suppressed the defender’s 
main fires, Russian] tanks and 
armored vehicles are capable of 
quickly leading infantry through a 
battlefield stuffed with machine guns 
without catastrophic losses….This in 
turn allows the artillery to concentrate 
its efforts on counter-battery 
combat and support [breakthrough 
operations] with a barrage of fire, 
[to] sharply accelerate their rate of 
advance.69
According to another report, such tactics must be 
further adjusted to account for the proliferation of 
new forms of defensive fire support, including ATGMs, 
UAVs, and precision artillery. As one potential option, 
the authors discussed returning to the Soviet-era 
concept of creating a “mobile fire zone,” which entails 
maintaining a deep and continuing curtain of fire ahead 
of advancing battle formations during breakthrough 
operations. They claim that this approach would be 
effective in suppressing both ATGM units at the point 
of attack and battlefield drones.70 
Another article promoted a return to Soviet-scale 
operations involving use of mass firepower far in 
excess of that being used in Ukraine “to suppress 
all living things in the direction of the offensive” as 
a means to pave the way for a victorious advance in 
future wars (see Figure 4).71 Yet the authors recognized 
that creating a mass artillery force capable of 
69 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part I,” pp. 187–189. 
70 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” pp. 189, 192. 
71 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 58. 
72 Sukalenko, Nagorskiy, and Dubchenko, “On the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part III,” pp. 189–192. 
73 N. G. Mikhailov and A. V. Savitsky, “Development of Military Art and Possible Ways of Further Improvement [Развитие военного 
искусства и возможные пути его дальнейшего совершенствования],” Voennaia Mysl’ 2 (2023), p. 34; Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and 
Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” p. 48. 
74 Although such notions may seem strange to a Western audience, it is important to recognize the central role of VDV in Russia’s 
armed forces and its concept of operations, which has long envisioned using airborne operations to seize and hold key objectives in 
enemy territory, dislocate the enemy’s C2 and logistics, and support a ground force breakthrough at the front indirectly. Such views 
also reflect the substantial investments made by Russian leadership to maintain the VDV as an independent service branch and as an 
elite combat force with some of Russia’s best trained and most competent soldiers. 
carrying out such operations would be an enormous 
undertaking given the sheer scale of Soviet artillery 
forces and shell production. Mass artillery would also 
need to be supported by fundamentally new means 
of reconnaissance and the ability to strike dispersed 
enemy firing positions, using drones and loitering 
munitions, for example, as well as greater reliance on 
precision artillery comparable in accuracy and range 
with the most advanced Western models.72 
Airborne operations and other 
measures
Russian military leaders have also advocated for 
complementary measures to restore the army’s ability 
to maneuver. In this regard, a major recurring theme 
is the potential use of airborne forces (VDV) to help 
break the positional deadlock. For example, recent 
articles have focused on using VDV to complement 
Russian ground forces by bypassing enemy 
fortifications through air mobile operations or troop 
landings behind the enemy’s frontline positions.73 
Recognizing that VDV cannot break the positional 
deadlock on its own, Russian military leaders 
tend to view VDV assaults as a complementary 
means of supporting ground force operations. 74 
As noted in one recent article, although airborne 
assault remains an important element of modern 
operations, currently VDV can only contribute to the 
accomplishment of a combat mission by the main 
elements of the ground forces concentrated at the 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   27  | www.cna.org   
front.75 They can contribute by disrupting enemy 
C2 and logistics operations while threatening the 
enemy’s frontline forces by attacking them from the 
rear. Inserted VDV can also assist in the destruction 
of enemy force groupings while reducing fixed 
targets with support from long-range artillery fire 
and missile strikes.76 Finally, VDV can set up defensive 
positions to protect the flanks of the main body of 
75 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” p. 48. 
76 V. A. Shamanov, V. V. Kulakov, and O. Y. Kashrina, “Directions for Improving Combat Use of the Armed Forces of the Russian 
Federation to Ensuring the Performance of Combat Missions of a Special Military Operation [Направления Совершенствования 
Боевого Применения Вооруженных Сил Российской Федерации По Обеспечению Выполнения Боевых Задач В Ходе 
Специальной Военной Операции],” Izvestiia Rossiiskoi Akademii Raketnykh i Artilleriiskikh Nauk (Feb. 2023), pp. 23–24. 
77 Orlyansky, Gerasimov, and Rudenko, “Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under Conditions of Use,” p. 48; Shamanov, Kulakov, and 
Kashrina, “Directions for Improving Combat Use,” p. 24. 
advancing troops while preventing enemy reserves 
from converging on the point of attack. Although 
there are a surprising number of articles on using 
VDV operations to restore maneuverability, Russian 
military experts concede the difficulties of conducting 
airborne operations in the face of powerful enemy 
air defenses such as those prevailing in Ukraine.77
Figure 4. Russian multiple launch rocket system in action
Source: I. Ilyinskaya, “We Are Russians—God Is with Us [ мы - русские! С нами бог!],” Armeiskii Sbornik 12 (2023), p. 64.


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   28  | www.cna.org   
Russian military experts have also discussed measures 
to improve C2 and the organization of ground force 
military formations as indirect means of helping to 
restore maneuverability on the battlefield in future 
wars. According to experts at the Military Institute 
of the General Staff, existing C2 is unable to keep up 
with the growing speed and complexity of combined 
arms operations because of the proliferation of 
new weapon systems and new forms and methods 
of using them in modern conflicts. C2’s inability to 
keep pace, they contend, has been demonstrated in 
the SVO, in which lack of suitable C2 has made it 
difficult to coordinate the sequenced tactical actions 
involving a wide range of both traditional and new 
combat systems (e.g., UAVs, electronic warfare) 
effectively to break through enemy defensive 
positions. Addressing this problem will require 
creating a fully automated and unified C2 center.78 
Similarly, some Russian military experts have argued 
for new kinds of combined arms formations based on 
a modular approach to match capabilities to mission 
better in future wars. For example, in a recent article 
in Military Thought, two Russian experts argued for 
new kinds of modular motorized rifle formations in 
which various combat support units (e.g., artillery, air 
defense) could be attached to a standard formation 
to carry out whatever missions are required at the 
time. This approach would represent a marked 
improvement over existing “static” formations, which 
the article held are not properly optimized for the 
full range of modern combat missions.79
Battalion tactical groups have proven to be too small 
and difficult to coordinate in modern battlefield 
78 S. I. Muzyakov and V. A. Ulitsky, “Troop Control: History of Development, Current Problems and Possible Ways to Solve Them 
[Управление Войсками: История Развития, Актуальные Проблемы И Возможные Пути Их Решения],” Vestnik Akademii Voennykh 
Nauk 4 (2024), p. 176. 
79 A. A. Pluzhnikov and O. B. Usachev, “Modern Requirements of Combined Arms Formations at the Tactical Level [Современные 
требования к общевойсковым формированиям тактического звена],” Voennaia Mysl’ 5 (2022), pp. 79–80. 
80 Pluzhnikov and Usachev, “Modern Requirements of Combined Arms Formations.” 
81 Pluzhnikov and Usachev, “Modern Requirements of Combined Arms Formations.” 
conditions.80 Such failings have contributed 
significantly to Russia’s inability to maneuver 
in Ukraine because existing combat units were 
unprepared to respond to the full range of combat 
missions that they were required to carry out. Such 
innovations are necessary to address the evolving 
challenges that Russian forces will face on the 
modern battlefield in future wars.81
Waging wars of attrition
Although the writings of Russian military experts 
have concentrated primarily on restoring the army’s 
ability to maneuver, as noted earlier, Russia’s military 
leadership has focused instead on adapting to the 
realities in Ukraine by shifting to a strategy of attrition. 
Given the challenges that Russia’s Ground Forces 
have encountered in Ukraine, including ubiquitous 
surveillance and mass firepower, this focus raises 
questions about whether Russian military leaders are 
preparing to adopt an attrition strategy for future 
wars, perhaps as a hedge against a failure to restore 
the Ground Forces’ ability to maneuver. Yet very little 
information is available on this topic in Russian military 
journals, in part because Russian military elites have 
tended to focus more on novel operational concepts 
and tactical innovations than on fighting bloody and 
unglamorous wars of attrition. 
Still, Russian military experts have occasionally 
addressed this topic indirectly, for example by writing 
on Russia’s long-term plans to increase the force 
size, conduct more effective defensive operations, 
and improve small unit assault tactics. Consequently, 
in assessing how Russia’s military leadership may 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   29  | www.cna.org   
be thinking about a shift to a longer term attrition 
strategy, this section has had to rely more heavily 
on Russian military leaders’ actions in Ukraine—as 
opposed to the writings of Russian military elites—
to draw appropriate conclusions. To the extent 
available, however, such writings have been used to 
supplement the analysis.
The shift to an attrition strategy
In the fall of 2022, after Ukraine had launched 
successful counteroffensives at Kharkiv and Kherson, 
the Kremlin finally acknowledged the need to modify 
its approach to the war to halt further Ukrainian 
advances on the ground. The Kremlin first ordered 
a partial mobilization of 300,000 additional combat 
troops to shore up Russian combat forces in Ukraine. 
Moreover, in the face of repeated Russian failures 
to achieve breakthroughs in the Donbas region, 
including notable reverses at Bakhmut and Vulhedar, 
Russian forces gradually shifted to a strategy 
of attrition. Other factors also likely played into 
Moscow’s decision, including systemic challenges in 
further increasing the force size, extensive losses of 
Russian tanks and armored vehicles, and the failure 
to achieve air superiority.
As one Russian observer recently noted, the main 
purpose of Russia’s attrition strategy is not to cut 
the fronts and encircle and defeat the majority of 
the Ukrainian armed forces but rather to grind 
them down, maximize the destruction of Ukraine’s 
weapons and ammunition, and keep Russian losses 
to a sustainable level. Once Ukrainian forces were 
sufficiently exhausted, conditions would develop to 
bring the war to a successful conclusion.82 Moreover, 
as others have noted, a war of attrition favors Russia 
82 Yaroslav Vyatkin, “Military-Political Forecast for 2024 [Военно-Политический Прогноз На 2024 Год],” Argumenty Nedeli, Jan. 10, 
2024. 
83 Alexandr Golts, Strategic Deadlock: Causes, Consequences, and Possible Ways Out, Stockholm Centre for Eastern European Studies, 
Feb. 26, 2024, p. 2, https://sceeus.se/en/publications/strategic-deadlock-causes-consequences-and-possible-ways-out/. 
because it holds numerical advantages over Ukraine 
in both personnel and equipment.83 Having adopted 
an attrition strategy, Russian forces have been able 
to conduct successful defensive operations and, 
more recently, continuous although costly offensive 
operations designed to wear down Ukrainian forces.
Doubling down on attrition?
Russia’s shift to an attrition strategy during the war 
in Ukraine raises questions about whether Russian 
military leaders are preparing to adopt an attrition 
strategy for future wars. Notwithstanding the many 
proposals made by Russian military elites to restore 
the army’s ability to maneuver (as highlighted in the 
previous section), achieving this objective is hardly a 
given considering the enormous challenges involved 
in suppressing a growing array of ISR systems and 
reconnaissance strike assets expected in future 
wars. Thus, it would be logical for Russian military 
leaders to consider alternative options in preparing 
for future wars, including a longer term strategy of 
attrition. At a minimum, such a strategy could serve 
as a hedge against the army’s failure to restore its 
ability to maneuver.
Whether Russia’s military leaders are considering a 
longer term attrition strategy, one extending beyond 
the conflict in Ukraine, is not yet clear, however. 
Much will depend on whether Russian military 
leaders judge that conditions in Ukraine reflect more 
fundamental changes in the character of ground 
warfare. At a deeper level, the question boils down 
to whether they regard the power balance on the 
battlefield as having shifted to the defensive side 
of the ledger. Thus far, very little has been written 
on this topic in Russian military journals. One recent 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   30  | www.cna.org   
article noted, however, that there is little evidence 
that current conditions on the battlefield are likely to 
change anytime soon.84 
Yet there are some indications that Russia may be 
preparing for protracted conflicts over the longer 
term. For one, Russian leaders have already taken 
measures to place the country on a more sustainable 
war footing, including adopting a covert mobilization 
strategy centered on paying high salaries and benefits 
to attract a steady stream of fresh recruits for the 
battlefield.85 Russia might maintain this approach 
during the postwar period, given its plans to increase 
the number of contract soldiers to 695,000 in total 
after the war. 86 At the same time, Russia has made 
great strides in ramping up defense production, 
including a major increase in production of artillery 
ammunition, which, together with North Korean 
imports, has enabled Russian forces to regain fire 
superiority in Ukraine, a key requirement in future 
wars of attrition.87 The Russian defense industry has 
also expanded the number of tank refurbishment 
centers to allow Russian forces to continue drawing 
on their substantial reserves of tanks in storage. 88 
Russia has also succeeded in radically increasing the 
production of UAVs and electronic warfare systems, 
which have proven critical for sustaining Russia’s 
84 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 62. 
85 Paul Schwartz and Dmitry Gorenburg, Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War, CNA, DRM-2024-U-037996-Rev1, Oct. 2024. 
86 “Russian Military Announces Plan to Expand, Create New Units,” AP News, Dec. 21, 2022, https://apnews.com/article/putin-finland-
sergei-shoigu-ee953abf7f9bf217ccdaa61ec1b35ddd.
87 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 64; Yaroslav Vyatkin, “Russia Wins War of Attrition, but May Change 
Strategy [Россия Выигрывает Войну На Истощение, Но Может Изменить Стратегию],” Argumenty Nedeli, July 17, 2024. Maintaining 
fire superiority would also be necessary for other kinds of operations, including combined arms maneuver, so the fact that Russia has 
been pursuing this objective is not necessarily dispositive on whether Russia is shifting to a strategy of attrition.
88 Golts, Strategic Deadlock, p. 5. 
89 Vyatkin, “Russia Wins War of Attrition;” Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” pp. 59–60, 64; Pavel Denisov, 
“Production of Electronic Warfare Equipment Will Increase Several Times Over [Производство Средств Рэб Возрастет Кратно],” Na 
Strazhe Rodiny, Apr. 21, 2023. 
90 Vyatkin, “Russia Wins War of Attrition.” 
91 International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Russia and Eurasia,” in The Military Balance (Routledge, 2022), p. 193; “Expanded 
Meeting of Defense Ministry Board,” Kremlin, Dec. 19, 2023, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/page/63. 
92 Alexander Khramchikhin, “Moscow Plans to Carry Out Military Reforms [Москва задумала провести военную реформу],” 
Nezavisimoe Voennoe Obozrenie, Jan. 20, 2023. 
attrition strategy in Ukraine. 89 Collectively, these 
measures have allowed Russian forces to maintain 
continuous pressure on Ukraine while inflicting 
enormous damage on Ukrainian forces.90
In addition, Russia’s Defense Ministry previously 
announced long-term plans to increase the size of the 
armed forces from a reported 900,000 total troops at 
the start of the war in 2022 to 1.5 million troops in 
total, which includes a substantial increase in the size 
of the Ground Forces.91 The Ministry of Defense also 
announced plans to convert several brigades back 
to divisions and to form new divisions. According 
to Alexander Khramchikhin, deputy director at 
Russia’s Institute for Political and Military Analysis, 
the latter move indicates a need to fight a larger war 
and presumably one with a long continuous front. 
Moreover, he noted that Russia plans to create five 
new artillery divisions and eight army aviation brigades 
but only three motorized rifle divisions and not a 
single new tank division—a sign of greater reliance 
on artillery, which would support a potential shift 
to positional warfare. Although an expanded force 
would also need to be fully equipped, Khramchikhin 
asserted that equipping an expanded force is more 
feasible now that the Kremlin has placed the defense 
industry on a sustained war footing.92

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   31  | www.cna.org   
Moreover, Russia’s Ground Forces have adopted 
measures to pursue a more effective positional 
defense strategy, as would be needed in future wars 
of attrition. In the summer of 2023, Russian forces 
shifted to a defensive posture to counter Ukraine’s 
planned summer counteroffensive. In preparation, 
Russian military elites published several articles 
on waging an effective positional defense. For 
example, in 2023, former Russian Lieutenant General 
N. G. Mikhailov coauthored an influential article 
noting how Russia’s use of positional defenses with 
multiple echelons had made it possible to defeat 
the German offensive at Kursk. 93 In a similar article, 
military experts at the Zhukov Military Academy, 
led by Colonel General A. V. Romanchuk, also 
recommended a positional defense for countering 
a high-tech numerically superior adversary, with 
Ukraine clearly in mind.94
According to this article, the keys to such operations 
include carefully prepared fortifications backed by 
a defense in depth and adroit use of minefields 
and artillery. A positional defense must be further 
supported by an active defense strategy with 
mobile reserves in the second echelon to counter 
enemy breakthrough attempts using short, sharp 
counterattacks. These would be supported by strikes 
from UAVs, ATGMs, artillery, rotary-wing aircraft, 
loitering munitions, and sabotage operations in 
the enemy’s rear areas. The role of air defense was 
also cited as critical to such operations, preventing 
the attacker from providing close air support for 
breakthrough operations. In the summer of 2023, 
93 Mikhailov and Savitsky, “Development of Military Art,” p. 32. 
94 A. V. Romanchuk and A. V. Shigan, “Prospects for Increasing Efficiency of Army Defensive Operations [Перспективы повышения 
эффективности армейских оборонительных операций],” Voennaia Mysl’ 4 (2023). 
95 Romanchuk and Shigan, “Prospects for Increasing Efficiency.” 
96 Burenok, “On the Prospects for the Development of Weapons,” p. 6. 
97 Romanchuk was directly involved in Russian efforts to counter Ukraine’s summer 2023 counteroffensive. See “Top General Tells 
Putin How Russia Repelled Major Ukrainian Attack, Defence Ministry Says,” Reuters, June 8, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/
europe/top-general-tells-putin-how-russia-repelled-major-ukrainian-attack-defence-2023-06-08/. 
98 Romanchuk and Shigan, “Prospects for Increasing Efficiency.” 
Russian defensive operations closely following this 
prescription proved decisive in blunting Ukraine’s 
counteroffensive, inflicting heavy losses on Ukrainian 
forces in the process.95
Russian military experts have recently advocated 
for measures to enhance defensive operations 
even further in future wars. For instance, one recent 
article argued for the Ground Forces to invest more 
decisively in long-range precision artillery. 96 Such 
investment would enable Russia’s Ground Forces to 
conduct dispersed operations while simultaneously 
engaging in more effective counter-battery fires. 
Likewise, writing in the same Military Thought article 
cited above, Colonel General Romanchuk and 
colleague advocated for further advances in positional 
defense (see Figure 5).97 In lieu of a continuous line of 
fixed fortifications, he and his coauthor argued that 
Russian forces should be distributed more unevenly 
across the front, concentrating at carefully hidden and 
protected strongpoints and transportation hubs. This 
strategy would require fewer troops while making 
them less vulnerable to being bypassed. Less defended 
sectors of the front should be covered instead by 
reconnaissance strike networks, autonomous robotic 
complexes, loitering munitions, and strike UAVs 
and supported by obstacles, barriers, and defensive 
minefields. To counter enemy breakthroughs, 
frontline forces should be further backed by highly 
mobile reserves used to conduct counterattacks, halt 
attempted breakthrough operations, and seal gaps.98 
Arguably, these approaches would be well suited for 
waging a campaign of attrition in future conflicts.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   32  | www.cna.org   
Alternative explanations
Despite these developments, it appears unlikely 
that Russia is committing to a long-term strategy of 
attrition for use in future wars, especially a high-end 
conflict with NATO. For one, Russian leaders have 
offered alternative explanations for current plans 
to expand the force size. For example, in December 
2022, when Russia’s then–Defense Minister Sergei 
Shoigu announced plans to increase the size of the 
armed forces to 1.5 million troops, he expressly cited 
the need to respond to NATO’s planned expansion 
99 “Russian Military Announces Plan to Expand.” 
to include Finland and Sweden. At the same time, 
Shoigu announced plans to establish new military 
formations in western Russia, including an army 
corps to be deployed in Karelia near the border 
with Finland. Russian leaders have also highlighted 
the deployment of additional NATO troops to the 
Alliance’s eastern borders as an increased threat 
that must be countered. 99 These are all strong 
indications that the expansion of Russian forces is 
more of an attempt to counterbalance the expanded 
force posture of the NATO alliance than a method to 
facilitate a strategy of attrition.
Figure 5. Active layered defense approach for defending against future offensive operations
Source: Romanchuk and Shigan, “Prospects for Increasing Efficiency.”


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   33  | www.cna.org   
Moreover, Russian defense intellectuals have shown 
no signs of altering their views regarding the nature 
of a potential high-end conflict with NATO. As noted 
in both the Strategic Military Concepts and Air 
Dominance Operations sections of this report, Russian 
military elites continue to assert that a conflict with 
NATO would be essentially decided during the Initial 
Period of War. They have also indicated on multiple 
occasions that Russian forces would likely escalate 
quickly in the event of such a conflict to deter US 
and NATO forces from conducting a mass aerospace 
attack against Russian territory and to avoid having 
to fight the vastly superior conventional forces of the 
combined NATO alliance.100 In addition, maintaining 
a large conventional force equipped with heavy 
armor and mass firepower capable of combined arms 
maneuver is viewed as having an important deterrence 
value of its own. As noted by longtime Russia observer 
Dmitry Adamsky, “Russian experts believe that to 
restore Russia’s credibility in the conventional realm, 
Russia must rebuild its capabilities to conduct large-
scale combined-arms operations.”101 
For all these reasons, Russia appears unlikely to be 
preparing for a long-term war of attrition against 
NATO. Yet given the unexpected emergence of 
protracted conflict in Ukraine and the intractable 
challenges involved in breaking the current 
stalemate on the ground, Moscow’s adoption of a 
longer term attrition strategy cannot be ruled out 
entirely. For example, the proposed expansion of 
force size is likely seen as a hedge against a future 
protracted conflict with NATO, which could emerge 
if the Initial Period of War fails to prove decisive. In 
that case, Russia can be expected to pursue the same 
asymmetric approaches used in Ukraine, as further 
developed, in a bid to offset NATO conventional 
military superiority and avoid strategic defeat. Such 
an approach will likely involve mass use of drones, 
100 Semenov, Krinitsky, and Chekhovsky, “Armed Struggle in the Aerospace Theater;” Evmenov, “Main Trends of Change.” 
101 Dmitry Adamsky, “Quo Vadis, Russian Deterrence,” International Security 49, no. 3 (2024), p. 61. 
ground-based air defenses, electronic attack, and 
counter-C5ISRT capabilities, all in an attempt to 
even the playing field. These are all common themes 
in recent Russian discourse on high-end conflicts, 
including many of the articles cited in this report.
Conclusion
Russian military elites are grappling with fundamental 
changes in the character of ground warfare as revealed 
during the war in Ukraine. Most published articles 
on the topic tend to attribute the army’s problems 
with combined arms maneuver to the emergence of 
ubiquitous ISR leading to a transparent battlefield 
and the proliferation of mass and precision fires 
that have collectively undermined the army’s ability 
to engage in blitzkrieg-style offensive operations. 
Yet, according to publicly available military journals 
at least, Russian military scholars appear to have 
prioritized restoring the army’s ability to maneuver 
during future wars by overcoming the challenges 
encountered in Ukraine. By contrast, there is little 
thinking about alternative operational concepts in 
case the conditions that first emerged in Ukraine 
prove to be more enduring.  
Moreover, Russian military elites are focusing 
primarily on tactical, technological, and organizational 
solutions for solving the army’s problems with 
combined arms maneuver. They are advocating for 
ways to suppress the space-based and airborne ISR 
platforms that have been so widely used in Ukraine, 
despite the magnitude of the challenge. They are 
looking for means to suppress dispersed artillery and 
ATGMs and the proliferation of loitering munitions 
and attack drones, equally difficult challenges. 
They are also advocating for increasing the size of 
the country’s ground forces and introducing new 
ground formations. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   34  | www.cna.org   
By contrast, there is little emphasis on developing 
new operational concepts for waging more 
effective combined arms operations in future wars, 
although some military elites are advocating for 
novel (or rediscovered Soviet-era) means of using 
concentrated artillery fires to support breakthrough 
operations through fortified defensive lines. There 
has been somewhat more progress on developing 
new operational concepts for engaging in 
defensive ground operations under conditions first 
encountered on the battlefields of Ukraine. 102 At 
the same time, little has been written about waging 
combined arms operations as part of an attrition 
strategy, despite Russia’s shift to such a strategy 
during the ongoing war in Ukraine. Instead, Russian 
elites remain focused on restoring the army’s ability 
to wage a war of maneuver in future conflicts.
102 See, for example, Romanchuk and Shigan, “Prospects for Increasing Efficiency.”

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   35  | www.cna.org   
Naval Surface Warfare
103 Nikolai A. Evmenov, “The Nature of Armed Struggle at Sea and Its Development Trends [Характер вооруженной борьбы на море 
и тенденции ее развития],” Voennaia Mysl’ 12 (2023), p. 7. 
The failures of Russia’s surface forces during 
the war in the Black Sea have generated much 
discussion among Russian military elites. Much of 
the discourse is centered on the novel asymmetric 
challenges encountered by Russia’s Black Sea Fleet 
in connection with Ukrainian sea denial efforts, 
including coastal defense cruise missiles (CDCMs), 
USVs and UAVs, and long-range land-attack missiles 
used collectively to strike Russian naval bases and 
warships. Russian naval experts are also grappling 
with the serious setbacks incurred by the Black Sea 
Fleet during the SVO, including substantial losses of 
Russian surface combatants and the fleet’s inability 
to thwart Ukraine’s effective sea denial campaign, 
which ultimately compelled the withdrawal of 
Russian surface forces to the eastern Black Sea. 
Despite the RFN’s many setbacks in Ukraine, Russian 
military elites have, by and large, continued to adhere 
to prewar concepts regarding the character of naval 
conflict and the nature, role, and importance of 
naval surface operations in Russia’s overall military 
strategy. Despite the complex challenges that the 
Black Sea Fleet has faced in Ukraine, Russian military 
leaders have not questioned the continuing viability 
of surface fleets, whether in confined waters or 
beyond. Employing the surface fleet for local sea 
control, homeland defense, and blue-water naval 
operations remains a critical part of Russian strategic 
thinking. As former RFN Chief Admiral Evmenov 
recently put it, the experience of military conflicts of 
the 21st century shows that armed struggle at sea will 
continue to occupy a key place in future conflicts.103
Russian naval experts are focused on overcoming 
the kinds of asymmetric challenges that Russian 
surface forces have encountered during the Black 
Sea conflict. In the process, they are exploring 
various options for improving the surface 
fleet’s performance in future conflicts, including 
expanding fleet capacity, countering adversary 
ISR, and developing defensive countermeasures 
to the many problems posed by precision missiles 
and robotic (i.e., uncrewed) platforms. Most of 
these options entail applying new tactical and 
technological solutions to the challenges posed by 
robotic systems. By contrast, Russian experts have 
written far less about how to incorporate these new 
capabilities into existing or new operational concepts 
to enhance future naval surface operations. There is 
also a growing consensus to incorporate uncrewed 
systems into the RFN’s own operational concepts for 
both offensive and defensive naval warfare. Aside 
from these tactical and technical innovations, there 
is a strong degree of continuity between pre-2022 
and current thinking about how Russian surface 
forces should operate during future conflicts. As an 
example, Russia’s approach to maritime defense of 
the homeland continues to depend on the forward 
deployment of Russian surface ships in the near sea 
zone to hold US and NATO navy surface ships at risk 
of preemptive attack if they come within striking 
range of Russian territory.
The RFN’s strategic concepts have been largely 
shaped by the potential for a high-end naval conflict 
with the United States and NATO. Since Desert Storm, 
Russian naval theorists have spent enormous energy 
in preparing for such a conflict. They have developed 
new concepts of operations to supplement the fleet’s 
existing concepts, which have long prioritized Russian 
naval operations as an adjunct to the Ground Forces 
by projecting power ashore. Yet growing concerns 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   36  | www.cna.org   
regarding US seaborne air and missile strikes, such 
as those conducted against Iraq in 1991, led Russian 
leadership to include homeland defense against 
attacks from the sea as a key navy mission. At the 
same time, RFN leadership has sought to replicate 
the US Navy’s ability to carry out long-range strikes 
against high-value land targets to bolster Russia’s 
own regional deterrence strategy against potential 
US or NATO aggression.104 
In both cases, Russian naval leaders have pursued 
such objectives out of a clear sense of the 
overwhelming superiority of US and NATO naval 
forces compared to Russia’s own naval forces. 
As current RFN Chief Admiral Alexander Moiseev 
recently put it, “the strategic course of our opponents 
to achieve overwhelming superiority of their naval 
forces…and military dominance in the World Ocean” 
remains a growing military danger for Russia. Such 
concerns are amplified by persistent worries about 
NATO encroachment in the maritime approaches to 
Russia due to an increased presence of US and NATO 
naval forces armed with high-precision weapons. 105 
Such concerns have driven Russian naval thought to 
prioritize strategic defense.
To counter such threats, the RFN maintains an active 
defense strategy in which surface ships operate 
forward to provide a layered defense for the Russian 
homeland against long-range strikes from the sea. 
To supplement this strategy, the RFN has added new 
operational concepts for using surface combatants 
(and submarines) to conduct long-range strikes 
against adversary high-value targets on land to 
enhance regional deterrence. These new RFN 
missions operate alongside the RFN’s traditional 
mission of supporting Russian ground operations.106
104 Russian Maritime Studies Institute, Fundamentals of the State Policy of the Russian Federation in the Field of Naval Operations for 
the Period Until 2030, trans. Anna Davis, 2017. 
105 Alexander A. Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy Potential of Russia Taking into Account the 
Experience of the Special Military Operation in Ukraine [Стратегические требования к развитию военно-морского потенциала 
России с учетом опыта специальной военной операции на Украине],” Voennaia Mysl’ 9 (2024), p. 9. 
106 Russian Maritime Studies Institute, Fundamentals of the State Policy. 
Yet all three missions depend on the continuing 
ability of Russia’s surface fleets to operate in the 
near sea zone adjacent to Russian territory, which in 
turn requires the fleet to seize and maintain local sea 
control. Thus, overcoming the asymmetric challenges 
that Russia’s Black Sea Fleet has encountered 
remains a top priority for the future of Russia’s 
surface fleets, which is why so much of the attention 
in Russian discourse is focused on addressing these 
fundamental challenges. 
At the same time, the RFN seeks to maintain its ability 
to conduct blue-water naval operations to protect 
Russia’s global interests, vindicate claims to great power 
status, project power overseas, and bolster strategic 
deterrence. Russian naval elites are also grappling with 
the challenges of sustaining such operations given 
Russia’s aging fleet of blue-water surface combatants 
and the overwhelming military superiority of US and 
NATO naval forces in the world’s oceans.
The following sections examine in greater detail how 
Russian navy leaders and experts are thinking about 
the RFN’s experiences during the war in Ukraine and 
what these experiences indicate about the character 
and viability of conducting surface operations in 
future conflicts. The first section describes how 
Russia’s Black Sea Fleet has performed during the 
war, highlighting its initial successes and subsequent 
failures in maintaining sea control. The next three 
sections describe the lessons learned by Russian 
naval elites from the war and their conclusions 
regarding the direction of surface operations in 
future wars. These sections also highlight their 
various proposals for shoring up the fleet’s combat 
capabilities and improving its survivability in the face 
of growing asymmetric challenges first encountered 
during the war.  

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   37  | www.cna.org   
The first such section examines Russian thinking 
on how to improve the fleet’s ability to seize and 
maintain local sea control in future conflicts. The 
next section explores how Russian thinking is 
evolving regarding another key mission, defending 
the homeland against seaborne attacks. The third 
section examines Russian discourse regarding the 
future of blue-water naval operations, taking into 
account emerging capabilities and combat methods 
for distant operations in the world’s oceans. A final 
section summarizes the chapter’s key findings.
Russian surface operations in 
Ukraine 
The RFN, and the Black Sea Fleet’s surface forces 
in particular, has had a decidedly poor record in 
Ukraine, gradually losing its ability to maintain 
local sea control while incurring substantial losses 
of Russian warships. This was not initially the case, 
however. During the first two months of the war, 
Russian warships performed ably and according to 
long-standing RFN concepts of operations, seizing 
local sea control, projecting power ashore in support 
of the Ground Forces, and conducting deep strikes 
across Ukrainian territory in pursuit of Russia’s larger 
strategic objectives.
Specifically, at the war’s outset, Black Sea Fleet 
warships deployed forward, seized control of the 
Black Sea in its entirety quickly, conducted local 
and long-range fires ashore, and delivered logistics 
support for advancing Russian ground forces. At the 
same time, Russian amphibious forces rapidly seized 
Snake Island while carrying out an unopposed 
landing near Mariupol. The RFN’s Kalibr-armed 
warships successfully carried out long-range strikes 
against a range of targets across Ukrainian territory. 
Thus, by March 2022, the RFN’s control of the Black 
Sea and its ability to project power into Ukraine were 
at their peak.
Starting in April 2022, however, Ukraine’s armed 
forces struck back, commencing with a series of 
successful CDCM strikes against Russian warships. 
One such strike led to the sinking of Moskva, a 
Russian Slava-class cruiser and the flagship of the 
Black Sea Fleet. As a result of these CDCM strikes, 
Ukrainian forces were able to carve out a sea denial 
zone in the northwestern Black Sea within which 
Russian surface forces were no longer able to operate 
freely. This was a major Ukrainian achievement and 
an early turning point in the war at sea. Over the next 
two years, Ukrainian forces succeeded in gradually 
extending this initial sea denial zone farther to the 
south through a series of USV strikes against Russian 
warships at sea and in port at their local naval bases 
in Crimea.
Ukrainian USV strikes were complemented by a 
series of UAV and land-attack missile strikes against 
Russian naval bases in Crimea, including warships 
in port, air defense systems, and other shore-based 
infrastructure. Over time, Ukraine’s growing ability 
to hold Russian warships at risk both at sea and in 
port deprived them of their sanctuaries, ultimately 
compelling their withdrawal to the eastern Black Sea 
near Novorossiysk. This withdrawal, in turn, allowed 
Ukraine’s armed forces to break Russia’s coastal 
blockade of Ukrainian grain shipments. Over the 
course of the campaign, Russia’s Black Sea Fleet lost 
nearly one-third of its total surface ships. Thus, aside 
from a brief period at the war’s outset, Russian surface 
operations in Ukraine have been a decided failure.
By contrast, Russian Kalibr-armed warships have 
managed to maintain a successful long-range strike 
campaign against high-value targets across Ukraine. 
Kalibr strikes have been far less affected by the 
Black Sea Fleet’s growing vulnerability to Ukrainian 
asymmetric strikes because Kalibr missiles can range 
Ukrainian territory when launched from any point in 
the Black Sea. These missiles have performed ably in 
striking their assigned targets. Yet despite this ability, 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   38  | www.cna.org   
Russian Kalibr missile strikes have had only limited 
effect on the war’s development. The RFN’s long-
range strike campaign has been hindered throughout 
by Russia’s limited missile production capacity and 
Ukraine’s surprising success in intercepting inbound 
Russian cruise missiles.107 As a result, the RFN’s long-
range strike campaign has failed to achieve lasting 
or significant strategic or operational effects.
Russian observers are still coming to terms with the 
many setbacks incurred by Russian surface forces 
in Ukraine. According to one observer, “During the 
SVO, the brilliance and poverty of the Russian navy 
were clearly demonstrated.” The RFN proved to be 
strong in the attack but weak in defense.108 Yet most 
Russian observers have attributed such failures less 
to operational shortcomings than to more concrete 
problems such as capacity limitations, Western ISR 
support for Ukraine, and Ukraine’s mass use of 
robotic platforms. 
Seizing and maintaining local 
sea control 
Russian military elites have spent considerable effort 
in thinking through the RFN’s challenges in seizing 
and maintaining local sea control in the Black Sea. 
The RFN is responsible in general for seizing local sea 
control during local and regional conflicts. Securing 
local sea control is one of the RFN’s primary missions, 
along with other key missions such as defense of the 
homeland and blue-water naval operations. In the 
RFN’s current governing documents, the term sea 
107 Justin Bronk, Nick Reynolds, and Jack Watling, The Russian Air War and Ukrainian Requirements for Air Defence, Royal United 
Services Institute, Nov. 7, 2022, p. 29. 
108 Sergei Marzhetsky, “Future of the Russian Fleet [Будущее Российского Флота],” Obozrenie Armii i Flota 1 (2023), p. 74. 
109 E. Sukalenko, V. Kamarenko, and A. Pasko, “Conquering Sea Dominance as the Main Goal of Using the Navy in Peace and Wartime 
[Завоевание Господства На Море Как Главная Цель Применения Вмф В Мирное И Военное Время],” Morskoi Sbornik 10 (2024), p. 58. 
110 Vladimir S. Kryazhev, “Assessment of the Military-Political and Operational-Strategic Situation in the Russian Fleet Zones [Оценка 
Военно-Политической И Оперативно-Стратегической Ситуации В Зонах Флотов России],” Morskoi Sbornik 2 (2019), pp. 44–45. 
dominance defines a condition in which the RFN’s 
position in the operational zone or designated area 
excludes effective counteraction by the enemy. Sea 
dominance can also be limited to a particular area.109
The contours of the sea control mission vary, however, 
depending on the fleet involved. In the southeastern 
strategic direction, Russia’s Black Sea Fleet has had 
the long-standing mission of seizing control of the 
Black Sea in its entirety during the early stages of 
conflict. Likewise, Russia’s Baltic Fleet is notionally 
responsible for seizing control of the eastern Baltic 
Sea, including the sea lines of communication with 
Kaliningrad. Similarly, Russia’s Northern Fleet is 
responsible for controlling the Barents Sea and other 
Arctic Sea zones to protect Russia’s sub-surface 
ballistic nuclear (SSBN) submarine bastion and 
defend Russian territory against long-range strikes 
from American and British submarines. The Pacific 
Fleet is similarly tasked with controlling the maritime 
approaches to the Russian Far East and protecting 
Russia’s SSBN bastion in the Sea of Okhotsk.110
In conducting local sea control operations, the RFN 
follows well-established principles and operating 
concepts. Many of these were summarized in a 
2016 article by Evgeny Sukalenko, then–deputy 
head of the Department of Operational Art at the 
Military Scientific Center of the Navy. In this article, 
he emphasized that “naval art has developed over 
a long historical period [during which] knowledge 
of armed struggle at sea has been generalized and 
systematized based on the experience of waging 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   39  | www.cna.org   
wars and armed conflicts.” 111 For successful sea 
control operations, prevailing doctrine cited in the 
article calls for the fleets to use a sufficiently powerful 
force grouping to conduct sudden, decisive, high-
tempo offensive actions in the early phases of 
conflict, preempting the enemy to gain superiority 
in operationally important areas and seizing the 
initiative.112 As outlined previously, at the outset of 
the war in Ukraine, Russian naval operations adhered 
generally to these principles. Yet the RFN was unable 
to maintain sea control in the face of asymmetric 
Ukrainian attacks, which led to an expanding sea 
denial zone in the Black Sea.
Despite the RFN’s many setbacks in Ukraine, Russian 
naval elites remain largely committed to their prewar 
concepts of operation for sea control. Writing in 
2023, for example, Admiral Nikolai Evmenov, then–
commander in chief of the RFN, largely repeated 
what Sukalenko had written in 2016. Specifically, 
Evmenov wrote the following: 
Gaining operational initiative [during 
the Initial Period of War by] preempting 
the opposing side in making and 
implementing a decision, [combined 
with the] decisiveness of the actions 
of the naval forces…contributes to the 
formation of a favorable operational 
environment for the successful 
accomplishment of combat missions 
rendering the enemy’s response 
actions ineffective. A rapid change in 
the situation as a result of the maneuver 
of the naval forces…achieving surprise 
in their actions when implementing 
measures to deceive them allows one 
to be one step ahead.113
111 Evgeny Sukalenko, “Modern Principles of Conducting Armed Warfare at Sea [Современные Принципы Ведения Вооруженной 
Борьбы На Море],” Morskoi Sbornik 10 (2016), p. 33. 
112 Sukalenko, “Modern Principles of Conducting Armed Warfare at Sea,” p. 36.
113 Evmenov, “The Nature of Armed Struggle at Sea,” p. 7. 
114 See, for example, Evmenov, “The Nature of Armed Struggle at Sea,” p. 7. 
Although Evmenov was also talking about the 
importance of preemption for other key RFN 
missions, including homeland defense, the 
similarity between his comments and Sukalenko’s 
demonstrates a remarkable continuity in Russian 
operational thinking about sea control.
The RFN’s challenges in maintaining sea control 
in the Black Sea have led some observers to call 
for new concepts. For example, there are calls in 
some quarters for greater attention to joint and 
multidomain operations and asymmetric measures 
and greater reliance on space-based networks in 
supporting naval operations in the near sea zone. 
In addition, some authorities have emphasized 
the growing importance of factors such as 
maneuverability, simultaneity of operations, speed, 
and surprise in creating conditions for seizing and 
exploiting local sea control.114 
There are few indications in the literature that Russia 
is actually moving to integrate these ideas into 
existing Russian operational concepts, however. Plus, 
there are institutional barriers to doing so in some 
cases. For example, improving joint operations will 
be challenging given the military’s recent decision, at 
the behest of Russian naval leadership, to remove the 
RFN from the joint strategic commands established 
during Anatoly Serdyukov’s New Look reforms. 
Russian military leaders are instead focusing on 
developing new means for the RFN to follow through on 
its existing concepts to achieve sea dominance. These 
include measures to counter USVs. As former Russian 
Pacific Fleet Commander Admiral Sergei Avakyants 
recently put it, “There have been no fundamental 
changes in the operational art of using the Navy [as a 
result of the war]. Instead, a new type of weapon has 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   40  | www.cna.org   
appeared (sea drones), which is quite effective, and 
countering it will require new tactical measures.”115 
Increasing fleet capacity is another recurring theme 
in Russian discourse on addressing the kinds of 
challenges that Russia’s Black Sea Fleet has faced 
during the war. According to one recent article by 
naval analyst Sergei Marzhetsky, the Black Sea Fleet 
was sorely lacking in the kinds of ships needed to 
achieve campaign objectives. He recommended, 
therefore, that the RFN follow through on existing 
plans to buy 29 Project 20380 Steregushchy-class 
corvettes for future near sea operations. These 
ships can be used to counter enemy ships and 
submarines, provide artillery support for amphibious 
assaults, and enforce naval blockades—precisely 
what was needed in Ukraine. Marzhetsky went on to 
recommend the purchase of ships of other classes to 
support Russian near sea zone naval operations.116 It 
is doubtful, however, that the RFN can afford such a 
sharp increase in capacity.
The West’s provision of ongoing ISR support for the 
Ukrainian armed forces is also cited as a key factor 
in the outcome of the naval contest in the Black Sea. 
As Admiral Moiseev wrote recently, “The countries 
of the North Atlantic Alliance have deployed their 
entire intelligence potential to service the Ukrainian 
Armed Forces.”117 Consequently, the Black Sea Fleet 
was compelled to operate under conditions in which 
Ukraine received continuous real-time data from 
Western air and space reconnaissance, allowing it to 
track all Black Sea Fleet warships and then target them 
115 Yuri Evstifeev, “A New Paradigm of War Has Come to the Sea [Новая парадигма войны пришла и на море],” Arsenal Otechestva 
4 (2024), p. 65. 
116 Marzhetsky, “Future of the Russian Fleet.”
117 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 11. 
118 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 13. Although such measures might be useful for countering 
USVs, they would be of dubious value in countering US and NATO airborne and space-based ISR.
119 Nikolai A. Evmenov, “Main Factors and Conditions of the Development of Naval Art [Основные факторы и условия развития 
военно-морского искусства],” Voennaia Mysl’ 7 (2023), p. 20. 
120 Sukalenko, Kamarenko, and Pasko, “Conquering Sea Dominance as the Main Goal,” p. 59. 
121 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 13.
for destruction. To address this problem in future 
wars, Moiseev advocated for increasing the fleet’s 
electronic warfare capacity and using camouflage 
for naval platforms and port infrastructure.118 
According to Admiral Evmenov, the RFN also needs 
to increase its ability to target elements of enemy 
reconnaissance systems, electronic intelligence 
(ELINT), and C2 to disrupt situational awareness 
of Russian naval assets and to ensure the required 
degree of information superiority to prevent 
recurrence of the fleet’s struggles in the Black 
Sea. Evmenov did not elaborate, however, on how 
these missions should be carried out. 119 Another 
recent article called for countering adversary ISR 
through more promising methods such as frequent 
maneuvering of naval platforms combined with 
prompt redeployments after naval fire missions.120
Most important, Russian military elites have 
written extensively on countering the asymmetric 
capabilities used by Ukraine to target Russian bases 
and warships. Moiseev recently noted the following:
[Ukrainian forces] relied on the use 
of high-tech robotic strike systems 
of NATO production. For the first 
time, our ships encountered the 
enemy’s mass use of small and low-
visibility unmanned boats [i.e., USVs], 
unmanned underwater vehicles (UUV) 
and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), 
which have demonstrated fairly high 
efficiency.121 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   41  | www.cna.org   
All these capabilities significantly complicated 
the fleet’s ability to carry out its assigned tasks. 
According to Moiseev, addressing this challenge in 
future wars will require a significant increase in the 
defensive capabilities of ships operating at sea as 
well as fleet naval bases (see Figure 6).122 
Specifically, Moiseev argued for concerted efforts 
to improve ships’ ability to defend against UAV 
and USV strikes and anti-ship missiles, including 
hypersonic missiles. Moiseev also argued that 
the RFN needs a radical solution to the issue of 
creating a single information space to detect and 
track enemy inbound strikes. To achieve this goal, 
he claimed that it is necessary to accelerate the 
development of space-based communications and 
reconnaissance satellites. The need to create a single 
122 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 13.
123 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 13. 
information space (in essence, a common operating 
picture (COP)) is a recurring theme in Russian 
military discourse, necessitating improvements in 
information management and C2 systems linking 
sensors with weapon systems.123
Moiseev also advocated for more intensive 
development of Russian robotic platforms capable 
of patrolling designated areas to counter enemy sea 
drones and other surface targets. To improve the 
defense of fleet bases in future conflicts, Moiseev 
argued for accelerated development of new 
equipment to combat enemy robotic complexes, 
including the “creation of stationary and mobile air, 
surface and underwater surveillance systems that 
allow for the timely detection, classification and 
tracking of air and sea robots, along with promising 
Figure 6. Russian layered defense options to defend naval bases against UAV or USV attacks
Source: Russian Ministry of Defense.


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   42  | www.cna.org   
low-risk methods of targeting such platforms.” 124 It 
is worth emphasizing, however, that Moiseev was 
advocating mainly for technological solutions to 
the RFN’s warfighting problems, rather than new 
operational concepts or changes in force design. 
Some observers note that the fleets are already 
adopting new weapons and tactics to counter 
uncrewed platforms, with ships adding crewed 
machine guns, electronic warfare systems, specialized 
radar and sonar systems, and other terminal defense 
measures.125 However, the RFN has yet to develop 
concepts of operations for countering mass use of 
uncrewed systems in future wars. 
Russian military writers are clearly thinking about 
these problems, however. According to military 
expert Dmitry Boltenkov, countering uncrewed 
systems requires comprehensive measures targeting 
them at all stages of their life cycle. Uncrewed 
systems “must be destroyed at their production sites, 
[and] their delivery routes must be monitored” and 
targeted repeatedly. Next, aircraft and helicopters 
must be used to interdict UAVs and USVs as they 
transit to their targets. Ship self-defenses constitute 
the last line of defense.126 These new concepts draw 
on Russia’s experiences in Ukraine and are centered 
on tactics that have proven effective in that conflict.
Yet some Russian military thinkers are less sanguine 
about the prospects for effectively countering 
enemy robotic platforms, at least in the near sea 
zone. Former Vice Admiral Tengiz Borisov noted the 
following:
124 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” pp. 13–14. 
125 Roman Kretsul and Alexey Ramm, “Sea Swarm: How Russian Warships Will Defend Themselves Against Drones,” Defense & Security, 
July 17, 2023. 
126 Evstifeev, “A New Paradigm of War,” p. 65. 
127 Gennady Charodeev, “Vice-Admiral Borisov: Naval Drones Will Replace Submarines and Surface Ships [Вице-адмирал Борисов: 
«Морские дроны заменят подводные лодки и надводные корабли»],” Novye Izvestia, June 19, 2023. 
128 Vladimir S. Kryazhev, “Military Security Issues in Russia at the End of the 20th – Beginning of the 21st Century [вопросы военной 
безопасности россии в конце xx - начале xxi в.],” Morskoi Sbornik 8 (2017), p. 41. 
There are now so many coastal 
missile launchers and aircraft capable 
of carrying anti-ship missiles along 
the shores of the Black and Baltic 
Seas that surface combat ships will 
soon be unable to carry out the tasks 
assigned to them. The seas are being 
shot through and blocked by missile 
launchers and aircraft. Thus, both 
surface ships and submarines are 
becoming an increasingly easy target 
for the enemy.127
However, by all indications, the RFN remains fully 
committed to operating crewed navy vessels in the 
near sea zone for the foreseeable future.
Defending the homeland from a 
sea attack
Events in Ukraine have also called into question 
the RFN’s ability to fulfill another key navy mission: 
defending the Russian homeland against long-
range strikes from the sea. In this respect, potential 
Tomahawk Land Attack Missile (TLAM) strikes 
launched from US Navy ships and submarines against 
the Russian homeland are often cited as among the 
greatest threats to Russia’s national security. 
Writing in 2017, for example, former Vice Admiral 
Vladimir Kyrazhev expressed concern about the 
potential for sudden and massive TLAM strikes from 
US Navy warships to achieve a disarming first strike 
during a crisis with Russia. 128 More recently, current 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   43  | www.cna.org   
RFN Chief Admiral Moiseev cited the permanent 
deployment of large groups of US and NATO naval 
forces equipped with long-range precision weapons 
(strategic non-nuclear sea-based systems) in the 
maritime spaces adjacent to Russian territory as one 
of the main dangers facing Russia. 129 Russia’s 2017 
Naval Doctrine also highlights potential naval strikes 
against the homeland as a persistent threat.130 
To counter this threat, the Naval Doctrine provides 
for “maintaining naval capabilities at a level that 
guarantees deterrence of aggression against [Russia] 
from the oceans and the seas, [including] the ability 
to inflict unacceptable damage on any potential 
adversary.”131 To carry out this mission, the RFN has 
adopted an active defense strategy predicated on 
offshore deployments of Russian surface ships (and 
submarines) into the near sea zones to extend a 
defensive shield farther into the maritime approaches 
to protect Russian territory.132 
These forward-deployed Russian warships are 
tasked with holding US and NATO warships at risk 
to compel them to operate sufficiently far from 
Russian territory to keep them out of TLAM range. 
In anticipation of such operations, current Russian 
doctrine calls for the RFN to maintain a peacetime 
presence of appropriate force groupings either in or 
adjacent to strategically important areas (including 
the near sea zone) to create an immediate threat of 
damage to a potential enemy to reduce the threat 
of armed aggression.133 As an example, one observer 
cited Russia’s 2013 naval deployments in anticipation 
129 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 9. 
130 Russian Maritime Studies Institute, Fundamentals of the State Policy. 
131 Russian Maritime Studies Institute, Fundamentals of the State Policy. 
132 Sukalenko, Kamarenko, and Pasko, “Conquering Sea Dominance as the Main Goal,” p. 57. 
133 Nikolai Evmenov, “The Role and Place of the Navy in Wars and Armed Conflicts [Роль И Место Военно-Морского Флота В Войнах 
И Вооруженных Конфликтах],” Morskoi Sbornik 11 (2022), p. 5.
134 Nikolai Evmenov, “The Presence of the Russian Navy in the World Oceans Is an Imperative of the Times, Ensuring the Military 
Security of the Russian Federation [Присутствие Российского Военно-Морского Флота В Мировом Океане - Императив Времени, 
Обеспечивающий Военную Безопасность Российской Федерации],” Morskoi Sbornik 9 (2021), p. 7.
135 Sukalenko, “Modern Principles of Conducting Armed Warfare at Sea,” pp. 36–37. 
of US seaborne attacks against Syria in retaliation for 
Assad’s chemical weapon attacks. According to this 
author, the deployment of Russian warships near 
Syria’s coastline bought time for the Russian Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs to work out an arrangement with 
the United States to head off the attacks in favor of a 
diplomatic solution.134
To give effect to this strategy, the RFN has developed 
concepts of operations guided by key principles 
highlighted by Sukalenko. These include “maintaining 
sufficient forces with a high degree of readiness in the 
probable areas of upcoming action aimed at specific 
enemy naval groupings” able to carry out strikes on 
Russia. During defensive operations, Russian force 
groupings must act decisively by “occupying the 
most favorable areas of action [and then] engaging 
carriers in fire damage before they reach the lines 
of their use of weapons.” Moreover, such strikes 
must be delivered preemptively (or, if necessary, on 
a retaliatory basis) to create unfavorable conditions 
for the enemy to operate against Russia through 
massive use of its forces, means, and weapons.135 
Yet Russian naval leaders recognize that the RFN 
must carry out such operations under conditions of 
substantial military inferiority with respect to US and 
NATO naval forces. As highlighted by Moiseev, the 
imbalance is present in all the principal operational 
areas of Russia’s fleets. Moreover, Ukraine’s success 
in creating an extended sea denial zone using USVs, 
CDCMs, and other forms of asymmetric attack 
poses a direct threat to Russia’s maritime homeland 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   44  | www.cna.org   
defense strategy, which entails deploying Russian 
warships into the near sea zone at the early stages of 
conflict to ward off US and NATO seaborne attacks. 
According to Moiseev, the methods pioneered by 
Ukraine will significantly complicate the fleet’s ability 
to carry out its assigned tasks in future conflicts 
and will therefore require a significant increase in 
the defensive capabilities of Russian warships from 
uncrewed systems and missile strikes.136 
Despite the increased risks to RFN warships, Russian 
naval leaders and military elites are largely adhering 
to their active defense strategy. In 2024, for example, 
Admiral Moiseev cited the need to increase the 
combat capabilities of the Pacific Fleet to make it 
able to inflict unacceptable damage on enemy naval 
groupings in the Asia-Pacific region. Likewise, in the 
Baltic, he urged the RFN to deploy surface ships 
equipped with high-precision warfare systems in the 
waters of Lake Ladoga near St. Petersburg, replicating 
in the Baltic the RFN’s prior use of the Caspian Sea 
to conduct long-range strikes against Syria and 
Ukraine.137 Thus, rather than modifying their existing 
strategy, RFN leaders are advocating for measures 
to make it more effective. For example, they have 
given no signs of shifting to alternative means for 
defending the homeland from seaborne attack, such 
as increased reliance on Russian naval air power or 
long-distance sea drones to hold adversary warships 
at risk.
Russian military observers are calling for an increase 
in naval warships intended for near sea zone 
operations. One option is to increase the number 
of frigates and corvettes available for near sea zone 
operations significantly to combat enemy surface 
ships and submarines. In addition to Marzhetsky’s 
recommendation to purchase 29 Steregushchy-
136 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” pp. 13, 15–16. 
137 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” pp. 17–18. 
138 Marzhetsky, “Future of the Russian Fleet,” p. 78. 
139 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 15. 
class corvettes, as previously mentioned, Vladimir 
Kryazhev has called for expanded construction of 
Karakurt-class small corvettes armed with Kalibr and 
Oniks anti-ship cruise missiles to help fill the need. 
Marzhetsky further recommended that the RFN 
consider purchasing Chinese Type 56/56A anti-
submarine warfare (ASW) corvettes, which he claimed 
have enabled the Chinese navy to close their near 
sea zone completely to enemy submarines. These 
ships also carry advanced anti-ship cruise missiles 
that can contribute to the maritime homeland 
defense mission. Acquisition of Chinese warships, he 
argued, would provide a rapid solution to the fleet’s 
capacity limitations in the near sea zone because 
the Chinese can produce such ships far more rapidly 
than Russian shipyards. These Chinese ships, he 
argued, can help fill the void until the arrival of 
more powerful ships, such as modernized Gorshkov-
class frigates, which will radically scale up the RFN’s 
precision strike capability (see Figure 7).138 The author 
did not explain, however, how these additional ships 
can better survive the kinds of asymmetric attacks 
carried out by Ukraine.
To address the problem of asymmetric threats, 
some Russian military writers are recommending 
enhancements to ISR to allow the early detection 
of naval threats in the near sea zone. For example, 
Admiral Moiseev recommended improvements in 
situational awareness of the underwater, surface, 
and air situation in the Barents Sea, Kara Sea, and 
other seas of the Arctic zone for early detection of 
approaching threats. 139 Another article advocated 
more generally for a major increase in the quality 
and capabilities of enemy detection and target 
designation systems, especially hydroacoustic 
and sonar, primarily for ship, aviation, space, 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   45  | www.cna.org   
and positional systems. 140 Others have proposed 
enhanced use of UAVs for aerial reconnaissance; 
these could be used to detect and track enemy UAVs 
as well as enemy warships approaching striking range 
of Russian territory. Yet as recently as 2019, noted 
naval expert Vladimir Kryazhev frankly admitted that 
the RFN needed to increase its ability to detect and 
target threatening enemy vessels several times over, 
a situation that surely persists.141
Other naval experts are advocating for improvements 
in long-range strike to hold approaching warships 
at risk at increasing ranges. For example, Evmenov 
recently argued that long-range anti-ship cruise 
140 Kryazhev, “Assessment of the Military-Political and Operational-Strategic Situation,” p. 45.
141 Kryazhev, “Assessment of the Military-Political and Operational-Strategic Situation,” p. 45. 
142 Nikolai A. Evmenov, “Features of the Development of Naval Weapon Systems Taking into Account the Transformation of Armed 
Combat at Sea [Особенности Развития Систем Вооружения Вмф С Учетом Трансформации Вооруженной Борьбы На Море],” 
Morskoi Sbornik 11 (2024), p. 43. 
missiles are changing the character of naval warfare 
by ensuring the navy’s ability to destroy enemy 
warships using long-range multivector strikes as they 
approach the coast. To increase penetrating power, 
Evmenov argued for use of multichannel guidance 
systems based on radar, optical-electronic, passive 
ELINT, and other means to prevent jamming and other 
countermeasures. To facilitate such strikes, he called 
for greater reliance on space-based ISR and UAVs.142 
Other Russian military writers have been similarly 
calling for increasing the effectiveness of space-
based reconnaissance of the maritime domain and 
enhanced target designation through deployment of 
new satellites, ground facilities, and communications 
Figure 7. Project 22350 Admiral Gorshkov-class frigate
Source: “Russian Frigate Admiral Gorshkov,” Reddit, accessed Mar. 1, 2025.


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   46  | www.cna.org   
networks.143 At the same time, Evmenov foresees the 
fleet being able to form temporary or permanent 
dynamic reconnaissance strike complexes in real 
time to conduct concentrated strikes on adversary 
surface ships using dispersed forces.144
Russian military writers are also advocating for 
increased use of uncrewed systems for sea denial, 
drawing on the lessons learned in Ukraine. Although 
not expressly tied to defending against seaborne 
attacks, robotic platforms would provide an 
additional means to deny US and NATO warships 
access to the maritime approaches to Russia. For 
example, Moiseev argued for intensive development 
of robotic systems (UAVs, USVs, and others) to 
perform reconnaissance, strike, and defensive tasks, 
including electronic countermeasures for the RFN.145 
Likewise, Evmenov argued recently that UAVs can 
be used to defeat enemy naval groupings while 
disrupting enemy ocean and sea transportation. He 
also stated that use of long-distance strike UAVs 
will provide enhanced reconnaissance in the near 
and far sea zones while allowing the destruction of 
enemy warships in both the open oceans and the 
coastal zone.146 However, drone warfare is a complex 
and rapidly developing area in Russia, and the RFN is 
still grappling with the challenges of developing new 
concepts of operations for application to maritime 
homeland defense and other maritime threats. It 
is too early to tell, therefore, how many of these 
recommendations will actually be implemented. 
Yet given Russia’s enduring naval deficiencies and 
extended coastlines, defending the homeland from 
seaborne long-range strikes will likely remain a 
formidable challenge for years to come.
143 V. Bychkov and V. Sherkashin, “Maritime Space Reconnaissance and Target Designation System [система морской космической 
разведки и целеуказания],” Morskoi Sbornik 2 (2021). 
144 Evmenov, “The Nature of Armed Struggle at Sea,” p. 9. 
145 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 13. 
146 Evmenov, “Features of the Development of Naval Weapon Systems,” p. 43. 
Blue-water naval operations
Russian naval observers are also giving much thought 
to the future of Russian blue-water naval operations, 
although they are drawing only tangentially on the 
lessons learned in Ukraine. The RFN continues to 
maintain a substantial blue-water naval force and to 
deploy this force regularly into the world’s oceans. 
Russia’s fleet of blue-water surface combatants 
comprises a combination of modern frigates and 
corvettes operating alongside an older fleet of 
cruisers, destroyers, and auxiliary vessels dating back 
to the Soviet era, many of which have been previously 
refurbished to extend their operating life. The bulk 
of Russia’s blue-water fleet is concentrated in the 
Northern and Pacific Fleets, although some ships 
from the Baltic Fleet have also conducted distant 
out-of-area deployments. Thus, aside from the loss 
of the Slava-class cruiser Moskva in the Black Sea in 
2022, Russia’s blue-water surface fleet has thus far 
emerged largely intact from the war in Ukraine. 
The Kremlin has long viewed blue-water naval 
operations as an essential component of Russian 
naval strategy and a symbol of Russia’s great power 
status. Russia’s blue-water imperative is codified in 
the country’s 2017 Naval Doctrine. Section 10 of that 
doctrine assigns the navy the task of maintaining a 
naval presence in the World Ocean to show the flag 
and coordinate military cooperation with foreign 
partners. Section 13 requires the navy to ensure the 
safety of Russian maritime activities globally while 
maintaining a naval presence in the World Ocean 
to show the flag and demonstrate Russia’s military 
capabilities to the rest of the world. Section 24 tasks 
the navy with helping to manage the escalation of 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   47  | www.cna.org   
armed conflicts in territories of strategic importance 
for Russia across the world.147
Recent writings confirm that Russia has not given 
up on its global naval aspirations. For example, 
influential RFN Captain Aleksey Koryakovtsev 
recently highlighted the role of the navy as an 
instrument for global power projection. He noted 
that the navy has been used many times over the 
years to assert influence during regional crises, such 
as the Iran-Iraq war. Naval forces have also been 
used to secure Russia’s commercial interests on the 
high seas and protect Russian trade shipments and 
offshore mineral rights.148
Russian blue-water missions include counterpiracy 
operations in the Indian Ocean, extended logistics 
support for the Assad regime in Syria, and joint naval 
exercises with Chinese warships. During crises or 
conflicts, Russia’s blue-water ships have been used 
to reinforce the other fleets through the interfleet 
transfer of warships.149 Russian leadership clearly sees 
the country as having a blue-water naval imperative. 
Russian naval observers thus far have tended to 
discount the risks associated with asymmetric attacks 
of the kind used in Ukraine when it comes to blue-
water operations. Some argue that the threat from 
sea drones and CDCMs is mainly a problem in the 
near sea zone or in closed-in seas, at least for now. 
For example, former Russian Pacific Fleet Commander 
Tengiz Borisov noted recently, “At the moment, USVs 
are limited in speed and seaworthiness, depend on 
weather conditions, and can be effectively used 
147 Russian Maritime Studies Institute, Fundamentals of the State Policy. 
148 Aleksey A. Koryakovtsev, “The Role of the Navy in Ensuring Security Interests of the Russian Federation [Роль Военно-Морского 
Флота в обеспечении безопасности национальных интересов Российской Федерации],” Voennaia Mysl’ 12 (2023), pp. 11, 15. 
149 Evmenov, “The Nature of Armed Struggle at Sea,” p. 8. 
150 Evstifeev, “A New Paradigm of War,” p. 65. 
151 Marzhetsky, “Future of the Russian Fleet,” pp. 76–77. 
152 Marzhetsky, “Future of the Russian Fleet,” p. 78. 
[only] in closed theaters of military operation.” 150 
Consequently, the country’s political and military 
leaders have not bothered to alter their operational 
concepts in response to Ukraine regarding out-of-
area naval deployments.
They are, however, considering the addition of 
new surface platforms to bolster their blue- water 
naval capability over the longer term, along with 
new long-range strike capabilities. For example, 
Marzhetsky recently recommended that the RFN 
acquire additional Gorshkov-class frigates to serve 
as the main workhorse for operations in the far sea 
zone and open oceans. These multirole ships already 
host the latest land-attack, anti-ship strike, air 
defense, and ASW capabilities. Marzhetsky has also 
argued for completing conversion of Russia’s aging 
fleet of Udaloy-class ASW destroyers (two ships have 
already been converted) into multirole warships by 
adding long-range strike capability and modern 
ASW and air defense systems.151 
To compensate for Russia’s limited shipbuilding 
capability, Marzhetsky further proposed that the 
RFN consider purchasing 10 Chinese Type 54 guided 
missile frigates, which the People’s Republic of China 
currently produces in large numbers. These ships, he 
claimed, would allow the RFN to close out both the 
near and far sea zones rapidly to potential enemies.152 
In another recent article, Russian naval experts 
advocated for building up the country’s capacity 
to mobilize civilian vessels, including oceangoing 
ships, to provide distant sealift capacity in the event 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   48  | www.cna.org   
of future conflicts. 153 The topic of acquiring new 
basing to support Russian blue-water operations still 
surfaces occasionally in Russian military discourse. 
For example, Moiseev argued recently for the 
establishment of a Russian naval base in Southeast 
Asia given the importance of Russia’s trade and 
energy exports with the region.154
Nevertheless, Russian military leaders understand 
that today the RFN’s out-of-area deployments must 
be conducted under permissive conditions, either 
during peacetime or in remote conflicts, such as 
153 Alesker I. Ismailov, Vladimir V. Puchnin, and Alexey Y. Sysuev, “Problems of Mobilization Support of the Russian Navy and Possible 
Ways to Resolve Them [Проблемы мобилизационного обеспечения российского Военно-Морского Флота и возможные пути 
их разрешения],” Voennaia Mysl’ 12 (2022). 
154 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 17. 
the war in Syria. Russian warships must be able to 
project power without high risk of counterattack 
because of the overwhelming superiority of US and 
NATO surface forces in nearly all strategic directions 
(see Figure 8).
By contrast, during a high-end conflict with a superior 
naval adversary, such as the US Navy, Russian 
fleet commanders will almost certainly keep their 
surface ships close to the Russian mainland where 
they can operate under protection of shore-based 
air defenses, layered naval minefields, and coastal 
Figure 8. Ratios of Russian vs. US and Allied naval forces in key strategic directions
Source: Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 16.


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   49  | www.cna.org   
missile systems. 155 Simply put, without significant 
changes to surface concepts of operations and ISR 
support, Russian naval leaders recognize that their 
surface combatants currently lack the survivability 
to operate in the world’s oceans against a high-end 
adversary such as the US Navy. There is little evidence 
of any change in this thinking since 2022. Thus, 
during high-end conflicts, Russian naval leaders are 
likely to cede blue-water naval operations to their 
more survivable fleet of nuclear submarines.
Still, some Russian military leaders are projecting 
that Russia’s surface forces will play a more active 
role during future conflicts in the world’s oceans 
as their ability to project power using long-range 
missiles and uncrewed systems expands over time. 
In 2023, for example, former RFN Chief Admiral 
Evmenov identified an increase in the spatial 
coverage of high-precision long-range sea-based 
land-attack weapons against targets deep inside 
enemy territory as one of the main trends in the 
development of armed conflict at sea. In this regard, 
some observers have noted the addition of long-
range hypersonic missiles to the Gorshkov frigate 
to provide extended strike capability during out-of-
area deployments. According to President Vladimir 
Putin, the deployment of ships armed with the new 
Tsirkon missile will allow the RFN to respond with 
lightning speed to anyone encroaching on Russia’s 
sovereignty from the near or far sea zones or the 
world’s oceans.156
Others predict that naval drones will play an 
increasing role in blue-water naval operations as 
155 Kryazhev, “Military Security Issues in Russia,” p. 45.
156 Maxim Kirpichnikov, “‘Zircons’ Have Entered the Work Ocean [Цирконы” Вышли В Мировой Океан],” Na Strazhe Rodiny, Jan. 13, 
2023. 
157 Evmenov, “The Nature of Armed Struggle at Sea,” p. 9. 
158 Evmenov, “Features of the Development of Naval Weapon Systems,” p. 44. 
159 Evgeny A. Kovalenko, “The Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Armed Conflicts [Применение Беспилотных Летательных 
Аппаратов В Ходе Войн И Вооруженных Конфликтов],” Morskoi Sbornik 8 (2023), p. 2. 
160 Evmenov, “Features of the Development of Naval Weapon Systems,” p. 46. 
their technology develops. As Evmenov has noted, 
a key trend in armed conflicts at sea is the growing 
ability for the simultaneous complex use of marine 
robotic systems in all physical environments, 
leading to a significant boost in the capabilities of 
detection, control, and destruction systems.157 More 
recently, he has argued for use of low-observable 
long-range UAVs that can be launched from either 
land or sea to find and target enemy warships in 
the open oceans. 158 If used en masse, such systems 
could provide the RFN with a more survivable power 
projection capability that could be used in the 
world’s oceans during a high-end conflict. Another 
recent article suggested that long-range one-way 
attack drones, such as the Russian Geranium used 
in Ukraine, could be used effectively against ships 
in open oceans. 159 These drones would need to be 
provided with accurate targeting data, however, 
along with real-time updates. 
Evmenov has also argued for autonomous underwater 
mine-laying systems for use in remote ocean areas.160 
According to another article, the development of 
large marine uncrewed underwater vehicles could 
offer a new means for conducting blue-water anti-
surface warfare operations. The article cited as an 
example the emergence of ultra-large marine drones 
such as the US-based Orca, which weighs 80 tons and 
has a range of 6,500 nautical miles. The Orca is also 
a multirole combat system capable of laying mines, 
conducting anti-ship and ASW operations, and 
performing other missions in the world’s oceans. For 
its part, Russia is reportedly developing the Surrogat, 
a 40-ton uncrewed underwater vehicle designed for 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   50  | www.cna.org   
theater ASW operations.161 However, platforms such 
as Surrogat have yet to enter serial production, and 
concepts of operations and employment for these 
systems are still in the early stages of development. 
Former Vice Admiral Borisov went even further, 
predicting that uncrewed systems will eventually 
replace traditional naval fleets for future missions in 
all areas of the world’s oceans.162
Russian experts recognize, however, that long-range 
missile and drone attacks will need to be supported 
by enhanced over-the-horizon targeting to be 
effective. Some experts see an increased role for 
aerospace operations in support of the navy based on 
the expansion of orbital reconnaissance, navigation, 
communications, and electronic warfare for both 
the fleets and low-flying, ballistic, and hypersonic 
missiles.163 Yet such systems either do not yet exist or 
have been deployed only in small numbers (e.g., the 
Liana satellite constellation). Moreover, as systems 
emerge, the RFN will still need to devise suitable 
concepts of operations and employment. 
Admiral Moiseev recently raised a more ominous 
possibility to strengthen Russia’s strategic deterrence 
capabilities in the world’s oceans: equipping Russia’s 
general-purpose naval forces with nonstrategic 
nuclear weapons. Such weapons could be used 
against large adversary naval groupings in the open 
oceans where the risk of collateral damage remains 
low, thereby making them ideal for limited use. 164 
Despite such notions, over the short term at least, 
Russian blue- water operations will have to make 
do with continuing deployments under permissive 
conditions of Russia’s aging Soviet-era blue-
water fleet supplemented by a limited number of 
modern frigates. Moreover, given the recent shift 
to producing blue-water frigates and corvettes, it 
161 Evstifeev, “A New Paradigm of War,” pp. 67, 69. 
162 Charodeev, “Vice-Admiral Borisov: Naval Drones Will Replace Submarines and Surface Ships.” 
163 Evmenov, “The Nature of Armed Struggle at Sea,” p. 9. 
164 Moiseev, “Strategic Requirements for the Development of the Navy,” p. 20. 
appears increasingly unlikely that Russia will invest 
heavily to upgrade its Soviet-era cruisers and 
destroyers further as they approach the end of their 
useful service lives.
Conclusion
Russian naval theorists are drawing important lessons 
from the Black Sea Fleet’s experiences in Ukraine. 
They are also reaching preliminary conclusions 
regarding the implications of those experiences 
for future wars. They are grappling especially with 
the setbacks incurred by Russia’s Black Sea Fleet 
due to Ukraine’s successful sea denial campaign 
against Russian warships and naval bases using 
CDCMs, USVs, and land-attack missiles and how 
best to counter these asymmetric threats. Thus far, 
Russian naval theorists remain focused primarily on 
developing tactical and technological solutions to 
the many maritime challenges encountered during 
the war. These include devising measures to shore 
up ship-based defensive systems, adopting new 
tactics to increase survivability, improving drone 
surveillance and electronic countermeasures, and 
expanding airborne ISR and strike capabilities to 
interdict UAVs and USVs while in transit. 
RFN leaders are also planning to accelerate 
incorporation of more advanced UAVs and USVs into 
the navy’s existing order of battle as part of a long-
term effort to create a hybrid fleet based on a mix of 
crewed and uncrewed systems. They are also looking 
to bolster the fleet’s long-range strike capabilities by 
adding hypersonic weapons and enhanced over-
the-horizon targeting. They are further advocating 
for development of robotic platforms for distant 
operations in the world’s oceans.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   51  | www.cna.org   
Yet at the operational level of war, Russian theorists 
have offered relatively few options to modify the 
RFN’s existing strategic approaches and operational 
concepts. Rather, the RFN’s main prewar combat 
missions remain largely unchanged. Moreover, 
aside from initial efforts to explore new concepts for 
employing or countering UAVs and USVs, the RFN’s 
operational concepts for carrying out these missions 
have undergone relatively few modifications. Instead, 
as noted above, the fleets are focused on acquiring 
new frigates and corvettes, adopting new weapon 
systems, and devising TTPs to restore the fleet’s 
ability to maintain local sea control, carry out the 
homeland defense mission, and bolster the fleet’s 
blue-water naval capabilities. 
Moreover, there is little evidence (in Russian military 
journals at least) that naval experts are considering 
alternative approaches for achieving these key navy 
missions in case emerging asymmetric capabilities 
prove more difficult to overcome and more enduring 
than currently envisioned. Aside from some 
preliminary discussions on new operational concepts 
for countering drones, Russian prewar concepts have 
remained largely unchanged. Given the foregoing, 
the RFN should be expected to operate largely as it 
has in the recent past, including in Ukraine, and in 
accordance with prewar operational concepts.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   52  | www.cna.org   
Air Dominance Operations
165 “Air Dominance [Господство В Воздухе],” Russian Ministry of Defense Military Encyclopedic Dictionary, https://xn--d1abichgllj9dyd8a.
xn--90anlfbebar6i.xn--p1ai/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.htm?id=5512@morfDictionary. 
The successes and failures of Russia’s Aerospace 
Forces (Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye Sily or VKS) made 
up of the air force, air and missile defense forces, and 
space forces, in the Russia-Ukraine war have spurred 
much introspection among Russian air power 
theorists and advocates. Despite this recent ferment, 
the ideas circulating in discourse about Russian 
air dominance operations have not fundamentally 
shifted from pre-2022 themes. Although Russian 
writers have identified strengths and weaknesses in 
their own forces and proposed a variety of responses, 
they have not altered their general assessments on 
the character of air warfare, nor have they proposed 
fundamental changes in air 
strategy, doctrine, or concepts. Their assessments in 
public literature remain tied to pre-2022 assumptions 
and conclusions. To address the problems identified 
in Ukraine, Russian air power theorists resort to 
arguments about increasing force size and relying 
on advanced technology to solve the air force’s 
problems going forward. Therefore, despite some 
potential adjustments in force size and technological 
capability, the character of Russian air operations in 
a future theoretical NATO conflict is unlikely to be 
radically different from that of current air operations 
in Ukraine.
Air dominance operations have occupied a critical 
space in Russian military thinking since World War II. 
According to the Russian Defense Ministry, the term 
refers to the following: 
Such an air situation…in which the 
balance of forces of the opposing 
sides in the air and the conditions of 
operations of [armed forces’] aviation 
allow [aircraft] to successfully carry 
out assigned combat missions, and 
the troops (forces) of other types 
and branches of the Armed Forces—
to carry out assigned tasks, without 
encountering effective counteraction 
from the enemy’s air attack weapons 
and air defense systems.165
Air dominance operations include strike operations, 
integrated air defense, air-to-air combat, and 
suppression of enemy air defenses (SEAD) and 
destruction of enemy air defenses (DEAD). 
For decades, modern Russian air dominance 
operations have been largely conceived in the context 
of US and NATO operations. First, Russian theorists 
presumed that they were preparing for a conflict 
with these rivals. They looked to the US and NATO 
experience in the Balkans, Iraq, and Afghanistan for 
insights regarding their rivals’ preferred way of war 
and clues about how they might adopt the successful 
aspects of US operations. This analysis led them to 
prioritize acquisition and intellectual theorization 
that focused on the employment of ground-
based air defense and long-range precision strike 
weapons. As a result, Russian Aerospace Forces have 
developed world-class ground-based air defense 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   53  | www.cna.org   
and long-range precision strike weapons, but at 
the expense of rigorous theorizing on other aspects 
of air operations. Air-to-air operations, SEAD and 
DEAD, and air strikes at operational depths remain 
underdeveloped even after three years of war. 
Operational insights regarding air-to-air combat 
have received little attention in Russian military 
operational journals, perhaps because the war has 
featured mostly desultory long-distance (beyond 
visual range) air-to-air encounters by aircraft that 
prefer to avoid flying into the adversary’s weapons 
engagement zone.166 
To the extent that Russia’s own experiences with 
air dominance operations informed concept 
development, they were largely measured against 
the standard set by Russia’s rivals. Air operations 
in Chechnya and Georgia were largely considered 
unsophisticated and unprofessional by Western 
standards.167 To many Russians (and some Western 
analysts), the Syria intervention beginning in 2015 
seemed to announce Russian Aerospace Forces’ 
ascension as a rival to Western air forces. However, 
operations there masked fundamental differences in 
the nature of the conflict between anti-regime forces 
and a potential conflict with NATO.168 
166 For example, the journal Aerospace Forces: Theory and Practice is the Air Force Academy’s academic journal, but its articles mainly 
focus on highly theoretical modeling or more esoteric technological issues such as side-lobe radar reflections or determination of 
missile impact radii. Operational insights from air-to-air combat in Ukraine are virtually nonexistent on its pages. 
167 Anatoly Tsyganok, “The Use of Forces and Means of Electronic Warfare in Wars and Conflicts of the XXI Century [Применение сил 
и средств РЭБ в войнах и конфликтах ХХI века],” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, Sept. 20, 2019.
168 Michael Simpson et al., Road to Damascus: The Russian Air Campaign in Syria, 2015-2018, RAND, 2022. 
169 Justin Bronk, “Air Power and Aerial Platforms,” in Assessing Russian Plans for Military Regeneration:  Modernization and 
Reconstitution Challenges for Moscow’s War Machine (Chatham House, 2024), p. 24. 
170 Michael Peck, “Russia’s Fearsome S-400 Air-Defense Missiles Are Getting Unexpected Missions as Moscow Struggles in Ukraine,” 
Business Insider, May 25, 2023, https://www.businessinsider.com/russia-using-s400-air-defense-missiles-to-attack-ground-
targets-2023-5. 
Successes and failures in the 
Russia-Ukraine war, 2022–2025
Russia’s Aerospace Forces have a highly mixed 
record in Ukraine. On one hand, their force of strike 
fighters has not lived up to expectations. Except for a 
short period at the beginning of the war, the Russian 
air force has failed to suppress or destroy Ukrainian 
air defenses, establish air superiority, and establish 
the ability to operate over Ukrainian-held territory. 
As a result, air-to-air engagements have also not 
yielded decisive results. Indeed, Russia has suffered 
significant losses, and the use of tactical aircraft in 
Ukraine can generally be considered a failure.169
On the other hand, ground-based air defenses have 
performed reasonably well in the face of unexpected 
challenges from the Ukrainians. Just as Russian 
tactical aircraft have struggled to operate successfully 
over Ukrainian territory, Ukrainian crewed aircraft 
have also failed to operate successfully in the skies 
above Russian-held territory. And although Ukraine 
has successfully executed attacks against critical 
strategic Russian targets, particularly with uncrewed 
systems, Russian integrated air defense has likewise 
been battle-tested, conducting numerous successful 
defensive operations. Ground-based air defenses 
have even made contributions in a land-attack role 
against high-value targets.170

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   54  | www.cna.org   
Finally, VKS bomber aircraft have made significant 
strategic contributions to Russia’s war effort, striking 
energy-generation facilities, critical C2 nodes, and 
vital economic targets using standoff cruise missile 
strikes and conducting terrorizing attacks on civilian 
infrastructure such as apartments and office buildings. 
Accuracy challenges that emerged early in the war 
have been largely resolved. Conventional strikes by 
these strategic assets have generated tremendous 
stress on Ukrainian resilience and exacted enormous 
human and economic costs. Nonetheless, it is 
critical to note that all targets serviced by Russian 
bombers are fixed in place and immobile, a point 
that underlines a crucial operational challenge with 
dynamic targeting that Russian air power advocates 
have failed to resolve. In addition, Russian political 
and military leadership has not yet achieved its 
strategic goal of inflicting a level of punishment that 
forces Ukraine to end the war on terms acceptable 
to Russia. 
The limited ability of the VKS to have a decisive 
strategic effect was not entirely unforeseen before 
the conflict. A February 2022 article by retired 
Colonel Mikhail Khodarenok, whose last post was 
in the General Staff’s Main Operational Directorate, 
sounded a dire warning about air operations:
171 Giulio Douhet was an Italian general and one of the early 20th century’s most important and vocal advocates of strategic air power. 
Mikhail Kodarenok, “Forecasts of Bloodthirsty Political Scientists [ Прогнозы кровожадных политологов],” Nezavisimoe Voennoe 
Obozrenie, Feb. 3, 2022, https://nvo.ng.ru/realty/2022-02-03/3_1175_donbass.html. Khodarenok also tartly commented, “The armed 
conflict with Ukraine at the present time fundamentally does not meet the national interests of Russia. Therefore, some overexcited 
Russian experts would be better off forgetting about their self-indulgent fantasies. And in order to prevent further reputational losses, 
never remember them again.”
Sometimes in the Russian expert 
community it is claimed (by fans 
of the Douhet doctrine) that since 
hypothetical military actions in 
Ukraine will take place under 
conditions of complete dominance of 
Russian aviation in the air, the war will 
be extremely short-lived and will end 
in the shortest possible time.
At the same time, it is somehow 
forgotten that the armed formations 
of the Afghan opposition did not 
have a single aircraft or a single 
combat helicopter during the conflict 
of 1979–1989. And the war in that 
country lasted for 10 years. The 
Chechen fighters did not have a 
single aircraft either. And the fight 
against them lasted for several years 
and cost the federal forces a lot of 
blood and victims.171

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   55  | www.cna.org   
Khodarenok’s warning points to a history of air 
power failure, one in which the war in Ukraine 
may prove yet another chapter. But what explains 
Russia’s performance in the air war? This question 
has received much attention, and productively 
so, by Western air operations specialists. Russian 
explanations tend to focus on tactical and technical 
issues rather than questions about Russian strategy, 
operational art, or concepts of operations.172 
But according to Anatoly Sinikov, a retired air force 
colonel and professor at the General Staff Academy, 
there is a deeper problem that cannot be repaired 
by more training or better capabilities. He noted that 
most of the last three decades of Russian thought 
has been marked by an erosion of operational art in 
air combat operations. The result is a set of immature 
concepts of operation characterized by improper 
understanding of the value of coordinated joint air 
operations; underestimation of the complexities 
of modern command and control, intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance (C2ISR); and 
insufficient planning leading to operational failure. 
“An analysis of theoretical provisions, as well as the 
results of modeling armed struggle in aerospace,” 
Sinikov wrote, “indicates that there is currently no 
developed theory of operational art in this area.”173
Sinikov’s explanation sheds light on a crucial gap 
in Russian thinking on the use of air power at the 
operational level of war. Despite nearly two decades 
of military modernization and three years of high-
intensity combat, the VKS lacks the foundation in 
172 See, for example, Justin Bronk, Russian Combat Air Strengths and Limitations: Lessons from Ukraine, CNA, Apr. 2023, https://www.
cna.org/reports/2023/05/russian-combat-air-strengths-and-limitations. 
173 Anatoly A. Sinikov, “Contribution of Scientists of the Military Academy of the General Staff to the Development of the Theory of 
Operational Art of the Aerospace Forces (on the 190th Anniversary of the Founding of the Military Academy of the General Staff of 
the Russian Armed Forces) [ Вклад ученых Военной академии Генерального штаба в развитие теории оперативного искусства 
Воздушно-космических сил (к 190-летию со дня основания ВАГШ ВС РФ)],” Voennaia Mysl’ 11 (Nov. 30, 2022), p. 134. Sinikov is a 
retired air force colonel, doctor of military science, and head of a research laboratory at the General Staff Academy. 
174 A. Ulanov, “The Face of Future War [Облик Войн Будущего],” Armeiskii Sbornik 11 (Nov. 30, 2022). 
operational art to develop sufficient concepts of 
operations or employment for much of the modern 
aircraft that it has built. Three years into the Russia-
Ukraine war and more than two years after the 
publication of Sinikov’s article, much of the thinking 
surrounding air dominance operations remains either 
stagnant or unable to proceed past the problem 
identification stage, and it relies on technological 
solutions to problems that might otherwise be 
addressed through concept development. As such, 
Russian operational thinking about the uses of air 
power has evolved little in response to outcomes in 
the Russia-Ukraine war. 
The Initial Period of War in air 
operations
As noted in in the Strategic Military Concepts section, 
critical strategic concepts that were developed 
before the war and that frame the development of 
operational concepts largely remain in place. The 
most important of these regarding air dominance 
operations is the criticality of the Initial Period of 
War. Despite the Russia-Ukraine war’s protraction, 
most Russian strategists still argue that wars are 
most likely to be won and lost in the Initial Period. 
This view is especially predominant among air power 
theorists. Moreover, the dominant operational focus 
of the Initial Period of War remains especially fixed on 
the aerospace domain, including aerospace combat 
power sourced from the maritime domain. 174 Yu. V. 
Krinitsky and V. G. Chekhovsky wrote the following:

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   56  | www.cna.org   
The first and decisive phase of a 
large-scale military conflict is the 
aerospace phase. [By destroying 
enemy aerospace elements and 
infrastructure] the aerospace troops 
and forces will not provide for 
someone, but will do the main thing—
create a turning point in the military 
conflict. At most, they will force the 
enemy to stop military actions and sit 
down at the negotiating table. At a 
minimum, they will create a “delta” of 
time sufficient to bring the extreme, 
nuclear argument into the war.175
Likewise, a 2023 Military Thought article noted the 
following: 
Preemptive massive air strike by the 
air force and air defense armies and 
the long-range air defense command 
with long-range precision weapons 
against state and military command 
and control facilities, zonal air 
defense and missile defense systems, 
fixed-position nuclear missile 
systems, airfields for strategic and 
tactical aircraft carriers, and enemy 
naval targets [are considered] new 
(promising) methods of using units 
and subdivisions armed with strike 
and multifunctional [aircraft].176 
175 Yu. V. Krinitsky and V. G. Chekhovsky, “Spheres of Armed Struggle and Theaters of Military Operations [ Сферы вооруженной 
борьбы и театры военных действий],” Voennaia Mysl’ 9 (Sept. 30, 2022). Krinitsky has written extensively on aerospace operations 
and is one of Russia’s most well-known authors on the topic. He and Chekhovsky have extensive contacts among senior officers in 
the Aerospace Forces. 
176 Oleg Yermolin, Nikolay Zubov, and Mikhail Fomin, “Use of Strike Aviation of the Aerospace Forces in Military Conflicts of the Future 
[Применение ударной авиации Воздушно-космических сил в военных конфликтах будущего],” Voennaia Mysl’ 2 (2023), p. 21. At 
the time of the article, Yermolin was the director of the research institute at the Yuri Gagarin Air Force Academy and Zubov and Fomin 
were senior researchers in the institute. 
177 Semenov, Krinitsky, and Chekhovsky, “Armed Struggle in the Aerospace Theater,” p. 20. 
Prewar ideas surrounding the Initial Period of War 
have had remarkable staying power. Ideas focusing 
on massive preemptive air strikes by Russian 
Aerospace Forces are still centerpieces in Russian 
strategic thinking, and there is a general consensus 
among air power advocates that aviation formations 
armed with long-range precision weapons are the 
most effective force for delivering a first strike. 
Conversely, Russian intellectuals have long observed 
US operations and understand that rapid, decisive 
air attack at the onset of war is also essential for 
their adversary’s success and that defeating these 
attacks is crucial. The overriding concern for Russian 
theorists is the potential of a surprise attack from 
the aerospace domain. The goals of such an attack, 
according to Russian defense intellectuals, include 
massed decapitation strikes on national C2 and the 
strategic nuclear force carried out by group and 
single strikes at the tactical level (see Figure 9). “This 
is a decisive phase not only within the air-space 
campaign, but also the war as a whole,” wrote then–
Major General A. G. Semenov.” 177 When he wrote 
this, Semenov was on the verge of being promoted 
and becoming deputy commander of the aerospace 
defense forces; his opinion has carried tremendous 
weight in that community.
Concerns about the United States’ Prompt Global 
Strike (PGS) capability have remained a significant 
driver in Russian thinking about the Initial Period of 
War. PGS is a US Defense Department–wide effort 
to develop conventional hypersonic boost-glide 
vehicles capable of precision strike anywhere on earth 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   57  | www.cna.org   
within an hour.178 Given the rapidity of this capability, 
which is not yet fully developed in the United States, 
Russian writers view it as yet more confirmation that 
the United States seeks a rapid global strike weapon 
capable of preemptively destroying an adversary’s 
ability to attack. 
Indeed, PGS attacks for the purposes of “disarming” 
Russian nuclear forces have received much attention 
in Russian strategic and operational literature since 
2022. For example, a 2024 issue of the General Staff 
journal Armeiskii Sbornik noted the following: 
178 Congressional Research Service, Conventional Prompt Global Strike and Long-Range Ballistic Missiles: Background and Issues, July 16, 2021.
179 A. Petrov and D. Stolyarov, “Neutralizing Prompt Global Strike [H ейтрализуя быстрый глобальный удар ],” Armeiskii Sbornik 8 
(Aug. 2024), p. 64. 
Currently, the existing and prospective 
air and space attack weapons of the 
US and NATO in accordance with the 
concept of Prompt Global Strike are 
planned for rapid and sudden use in 
the first strike echelons to destroy 
command and control posts and 
launchers of the Strategic Missile 
Forces grouping in almost all their 
deployment areas.179 
Figure 9.  The system of armed struggle in a large-scale war
Source: Semenov, Krinitsky, and Chekhovsky, “Armed Struggle in the Aerospace Theater.”


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   58  | www.cna.org   
These concerns are also widely held among senior 
military leaders beyond the VKS. For example, in 
2023, then–Commander in Chief of the RFN Nikolai 
Evmenov called out the US Navy’s development 
of Prompt Conventional Strike as a particularly 
concerning threat that required immediate 
attention.180 Given this near-obsessive concern with 
a US preemptive attack, Russian leadership has 
continued to emphasize the requirement to blunt 
and defeat such attacks.
Ground-based air defense
Fears of preemptive attack continue to drive the 
bulk of Russian air power thinking into integrated 
air defense operations centered on ground-based 
air defense. Semenov argued that the first stage of a 
large-scale conflict with NATO would be characterized 
by a defensive aerospace campaign aimed at denying 
NATO objectives in the opening phase of conflict. 
“Repelling an aerospace attack in the initial period 
of a large-scale war,” Semenov continued, “is an 
independent and primary strategic task.”181
Thus, air defense operations occupy a central place 
in Russian thinking about air power. Russia has long 
relied primarily on the extensive ground-based 
component of its integrated air defense system 
(IADS) to control the air in any conflict with NATO 
forces. In this sense, the Russia-Ukraine war has both 
proven the value of this approach to air defense 
and highlighted areas requiring improvement, such 
as Identification of Friend or Foe aircraft. 182 But 
overall, Russian writers are generally positive in their 
assessments of the performance of ground-based air 
defense systems and largely approach improvements 
180 See, for example, Nikolai Evmenov, “Prompt Conventional Strike Is the US Navy’s Contribution to the Larger Joint Concept of Prompt 
Global Strike [Основные тенденции изменения характера и содержания военных угроз Российской Федерации с океанских и 
морских направлений],” Voennaia Mysl’ 5 (May 2023). 
181 Semenov, Krinitsky, and Chekhovsky, “Armed Struggle in the Aerospace Theater,” p. 21. 
182 N. N. Litvinov, “Promising Areas in Introduction of Artificial Intelligence in Air Defense Systems [ Перспективные Напрвления 
Внедрения Искусстевенного интеллекта в Системах Иротивовоздушной Обороны],” Vestnik Akademii Voyennykh Nauk 4/89 (2024).
183 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 59.
to these systems as a means of doubling down on a 
competitive advantage. 
Fundamental conceptual changes are largely viewed 
as unnecessary. Indeed, for some Russian observers, 
ground-based air defense operations have proven to 
be so valuable that the very future of air combat may 
be driven by activities on the ground. One outcome 
of the war in Ukraine, they argue, is that air defense 
systems have triumphed over crewed aircraft, 
marking a reversal of a decades-long trend in favor 
of crewed aircraft over ground-based air defense. “It 
seems quite convincing,” runs one typical argument, 
“to judge the end of a long historical period of 
unpunished dominance of manned aircraft over the 
battlefield, which, without a doubt, will require a 
radical revision of the very foundations of the use of 
the air force at the operational and tactical levels.”183 
Put another way, Russian theorists contend that they 
have won an air power bet by placing their chips on 
ground-based air defense. 
Finally, the major success enjoyed by ground-
based air defenses in Ukraine has severely reduced 
the importance of air-to-air engagements both 
within the conflict itself and in recent Russian 
theory on air power (see Figure 10). Both sides are 
extremely reticent to cross into the ground-based 
weapons engagement zones, which makes air-to-air 
engagements comparatively rare, often inconclusive 
affairs. Writing on air-to-air engagements is similarly 
rare and inconclusive and tends to focus on highly 
theoretical or esoteric technical-tactical issues. Based 
on the comparative absence of articles relating to 
air-to-air combat, Russian air power thinking heavily 
biases in favor of ground-based air defense. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   59  | www.cna.org   
Judging by results in the skies over Ukraine, these 
observations will likely be crucial in driving the 
future of Russian air technology and tactics.184 Future 
Russian thinking will almost certainly continue to 
emphasize the criticality of ground-based air defense, 
which may have a salutary effect on strike operations 
by driving future tactical and technological thinking 
on uncrewed systems; continued cruise, hypersonic, 
and ballistic missile development; and penetrative 
technologies. There is little evidence that Russian 
intellectuals are addressing issues surrounding SEAD 
and DEAD. 
There is another secondary effect of the presumed 
dominance of ground-based air defense over crewed 
184 Hunter Stoll, John Hoehn, and William Courtney, “Air Defense Shapes War Fighting in Ukraine,” Real Clear Defense, Feb. 22, 2024, 
https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2024/02/22/air_defense_shapes_warfighting_in_ukraine_1013615.html. 
185 V. G. Kazakov and A. N. Kiryushin, “Air Strike: Evolution of Structure in Light of Current Military-Technical Achievements [Aвиационный 
удар: эволюция структуры в свете актуальных военно-технических достижений],” Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 2023). 
aircraft. Russian thinking appears to be moving away 
from deep strikes using crewed aircraft and toward 
long-range precision weapons, including long-range 
UAVs. There are some indications that crewed aircraft 
may fulfill other roles, such as extending radar fields 
of view and filling gaps in ground-based defense. 185 
Air strikes remain an important consideration in 
Russian military theory but mostly at the tactical 
level and subordinate to ground operations along 
the front line. Conceptual advances covering deep 
strikes by crewed aircraft are few, perhaps in part 
because of the acknowledged challenges presented 
by ground-based air defense. Instead, long-range 
systems are assuming a larger role in Russian 
thinking about deep strike operations.
Figure 10. BUK M3 surface-to-air missile system employed in Ukraine
Source: “The Buk-M3 SAM System Is the Central Link of the Echeloned Air Defense System [ЗРК «Бук-М3» – центральное звено 
эшелонированной ПВО],” National Defense, June 30, 2024.


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   60  | www.cna.org   
Long-range precision strike
Before the Russia-Ukraine war, the Russian Defense 
Ministry made herculean efforts to develop and field 
a multidomain system of long-range precision strike. 
This system includes a combination of ground-based 
ballistic and cruise missiles, air-launched cruise 
missiles (mounted on long-range, intermediate-
range, and short-range strike aircraft), and sea-
based land-attack cruise missiles. It was designed 
to fulfill doctrinal requirements to destroy critically 
important targets at standoff ranges for conducting 
decapitation strikes and for escalation management 
or as part of a cost-infliction strategy. These systems 
received extensive and successful battle-testing in 
Syria in 2015 and have been a cornerstone of Russia’s 
campaign in Ukraine. 
At the start of the war, Russia used these weapons 
against strategic air defense sites and critical 
infrastructure targets in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Kramatorsk, 
Odesa, and other cities. Boryspil, Kyiv’s international 
airport, was the recipient of multiple strikes, for 
example. These strikes were all part of a purported 
effort to secure control of the skies, degrade and 
destroy Ukrainian C2, and decapitate the government 
in Kyiv.186 When they failed, Russia’s standoff strike 
strategy shifted to cost imposition and punishment. 
Power-generation infrastructure, hospitals, and 
other civilian targets fell under attack in an effort to 
convince Ukrainian citizens that continuing the war 
was not worth the cost. 
Like much of Russia’s performance in the war, long-
range precision strikes have had a mixed record. 
From a technological perspective, Russian long-
range strike assets (missiles and drones) have largely 
186 “Russia Attacks Wide Range of Targets in Ukraine,” Kyiv Independent, Feb. 24, 2022, https://kyivindependent.com/russia-attacks-
wide-range-of-targets-in-ukraine-live-updates/.
187 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 57.
188 S. Dronov, “Features of Aviation Tactics in Modern Combat Operations and Ways to Improve Them [Особенности тактики авиации 
в современных боевых действиях и пути ее совершенствования],” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2024), p. 21.
performed as expected (although there were evident 
targeting and accuracy challenges with some air-
launched cruise missiles that were subsequently 
resolved). Kalibr land-attack cruise missiles, in 
particular, have proven their efficacy. Despite 
their generally good technological performance, 
precision missiles have failed to achieve the strategic 
goal of knocking Ukraine out of the war because of 
Ukraine’s dogged determination and resilience and 
successful air defense operations, Russian production 
limitations, and the perceived need within Russia to 
conserve resources for the possibility of a NATO war, 
which diminished the stocks available to be launched 
against Ukraine.
Russian conclusions regarding the effectiveness 
and future potential of long-range precision strike 
are almost uniformly positive, especially regarding 
those strikes undertaken during the Initial Period of 
War. According to some estimates, more than 800 
ground- and air-based ballistic and cruise missiles 
were used in the first two weeks of operation. 
Weapons employed included the full suite of 
multidomain long-range capabilities, including the 
Kinzhal air-launched ballistic missile, which had 
been experimental until that moment. Initial success 
“inspired reasonable optimism.”187 As a result, Air 
Force Commander in Chief Colonel General Sergey 
Dronov sees an increasingly important role for long-
range precision weapons, “which [have] changed the 
nature of conducting air and missile defense.”188 
The course of the war has done nothing to alter this 
optimism, nor to shake the core assumption that 
long-range strike warfare will be essential to victory 
in future war. A team of authors led by V. V. Andreev 
argued the following:

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   61  | www.cna.org   
To achieve political and strategic 
goals, the emphasis will be on “non-
contact” warfare and the widespread 
use of various high-precision “smart” 
weapons systems of various purposes 
and locations. The “non-contact” nature 
of military action itself will involve the 
destruction or incapacitation of the 
enemy at long distances long before 
combat contact.189 
A successful initial campaign might even mean 
preventing the adversary’s ground troops from 
deploying to defensive positions. 190 This opinion, 
often nested within assumptions about the Initial 
Period of War, is widespread among Russian writers.
Standoff strike also occupies a central place in the 
continuing phase of war beyond the Initial Period. 
If a standoff strike campaign is required, Russian 
experts note that the prioritization of targets may 
shift. According to Serzhantov, one of Russia’s most 
influential theorists of war, “The initial impact will 
be focused on the political leadership of the state, 
then on its life support systems, subsequently on 
the infrastructure, economy, population and, finally, 
armed forces .”191 Russian intellectuals generally 
agree that use of precision weapons will become 
more widespread in future conflicts and that these 
weapons’ use against fixed ground targets will play a 
central role in resolving other challenges such as air 
dominance. “In the near future,” said a 2023 article, 
“high-precision weapons of various classes will play 
189 V. V. Andreev et al., “Features of the Use of Aviation Groups in Military Conflicts of the Future [Особенности применения 
группировок авиации в военных конфликтах будущего],” Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 2022). The authors go on to write that enemy C2 
nodes will have the highest targeting priority.
190 Serzhantov, Smolovy, and Terentyev, “Transformation of the Contents of War,” p. 29. 
191 Serzhantov, Smolovy, and Terentyev, “Transformation of the Contents of War,” p. 29. 
192 Yermolin, Zubov, and Fomin, “Use of Strike Aviation of the Aerospace Forces,” p. 25.
193 “How a Special Operation in Ukraine Changed Russian Weapons and the Military-Industrial Complex [ Как спецоперация на 
Украине изменила русское оружие и оборонно-промышленный комплекс],” TASS, Feb. 22, 2023, https://tass.ru/armiya-i-
opk/17115401. 
194 Yu. M. Zverev, “Military Security of Kaliningrad Oblast and Strengthening the Role of the Exclave Region in Ensuring Russia’s 
National Security [ Военнаяа Безопаность Калинниградской Области И Уциление Роли Ексклавного Региона В Обеспечении 
Национальной Безопасности России],” Vestnik Akademii Voennikh Nauk 4/89 (2024), p. 56.
a primary role in achieving air supremacy.” 192 Given 
that Ukraine’s ability to relocate its aircraft rapidly 
mitigated the damage of Russian strikes, the evidence 
for this assertion is unclear. Nevertheless, the 
emphasis on long-range strike may also be read as an 
admission that achieving air supremacy via air-to-air 
means alone is not achievable in the next decade.
An important and definitive technological evolution 
in Russian long-range precision strike has been the 
growing use of long-range UAVs. Before the conflict, 
most discussions of long-range strike centered on the 
use of cruise missiles or short-range ballistic missiles. 
The expansive prewar Russian literature on UAVs 
focused on their use for ISR and as communications 
relays. But the war has ultimately expanded Russian 
thinking on the topic. The purchase and production 
of Iranian Shahed drones has dramatically enhanced 
Russia’s ability to carry out these strikes. At the 
same time, on the tactical level of war, loitering 
munitions such as Lancet and Kub drones have had 
a major impact on the battlefield. Denis Fedutinov, 
an uncrewed systems specialist at the think tank 
Caspian Institute for Strategic Studies, said, “We can 
say that a certain turning point has occurred in the 
attitude of the domestic military toward this type of 
weapon, and now we, albeit belatedly, are beginning 
to make up for lost time by using the positive 
properties inherent in these systems.”193 The evident 
effectiveness of UAV operations in long-range 
precision strike has led to calls to deploy them to 
strategically exposed regions such as Kaliningrad.194

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   62  | www.cna.org   
In the end, the Russian experience in Ukraine has 
served to confirm the biases of many Russian air power 
theorists. However, there have been few attempts 
as of 2025 to grapple with evident holes in their 
existing theories. Mikhail Kodarenok’s missive about 
the problems of relying solely on air power to win 
wars appears to have been largely ignored as Russian 
intellectuals double down on preexisting thought. 
Suppression and destruction 
of enemy air defenses and 
operational deep strike
During the immediate lead up to the conflict in 
Ukraine, Russian ISR assets were able to accurately 
identify and map Ukrainian air defense systems, 
which made no effort to avoid detection. As a 
result, Russian missile strikes and electronic attacks 
against air defense sites were reasonably successful. 
According to a recent CNA study, Russian joint forces 
accurately engaged more than 75 percent of sites in 
the first days of the invasion. Standoff missile strikes 
were followed by tactical aviation, especially Su-34 
fighter bombers, which were able to engage targets 
nearly 200 miles into Ukraine. 195 However, once the 
Initial Period passed and Russian assets were unable 
to conduct unchallenged ISR mapping, Russian 
efforts against enemy ground-based air defenses 
began cascading into failure. 196 Since then, the VKS 
has proven inadequate to the task, and SEAD and 
DEAD operations have largely failed over the course 
of the war. 
The Russian air force approaches the question of 
SEAD and DEAD differently from the United States. 
195 Bronk, Russian Combat Air Strengths and Limitations, pp. 4–5. 
196 Frequent relocation of Ukrainian air defense has also played a major role in this outcome.
197 Valentin Dybov and Yuri Podgornykh, “There Is No Comprehensively Developed Theory of Aerospace Defense Yet [ Всесторонне 
проработанной теории ВКО пока нет],” VKO 6 (2015), http://www.vko.ru/oboronka/vsestoronne-prorabotannoy-teorii-vko-poka-net. 
198 Igor Semenchenko and Oleg Falichev, “Russian Aerospace Forces Have Gained Air Superiority, Not Dominance [ ВКС России 
завладели превосходством, а не господством в воздухе],” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye  9 (Mar. 17, 2023), p. 10. 
Semenchenko was a major general of aviation and adviser to the Russian Federation Council Committee on Defense and Security.
Historically, threat perceptions in the Initial Period 
of War drove Russian air power theorists to put a 
higher priority on air defense than on SEAD and 
DEAD operations. Most theorists focused on denying 
their adversaries the ability to conduct air operations 
at tactical, operational, and strategic depths. They 
spent less time considering how best to roll back 
IADS as a precursor to a long-term strike campaign. 
As Russian airpower writers have noted, “It can be 
assumed that in the general concept of aerospace 
defense, the main semantic load still falls on the 
concept of ‘defense.’”197 
Historically, the result has been a cognitive bias 
that favors ground-based air defense over SEAD 
and DEAD. Moreover, until relatively recently, 
Russia lacked significant long-range precision strike 
capabilities—including modern penetrating strike 
aircraft—that might be required to destroy modern 
ground-based air defenses. In short, the urgent 
perceived need to defend against a NATO preemptive 
attack cast a long shadow over efforts to conduct 
SEAD and DEAD in support of offensive operations. 
Inability to suppress or destroy air defenses has had 
the knock-on effect of severely diminishing Russia’s 
ability to conduct an air campaign at operational 
depths in Ukraine. “It is for this reason,” wrote 
General Igor Semenchenko, “that Russian aviation 
cannot yet operate deep inside Ukrainian territory 
and provides support to Russian groups of units only 
on the battlefield and on a limited scale.”198
To the extent that Russia has a developed SEAD 
doctrine, it hinges on the concept of “Overcoming 
Air Defense” (“Преодоление ПВО”). The Russian 
Defense Ministry defines this concept in part as “a 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   63  | www.cna.org   
set of measures and combat operations of aviation, 
electronic warfare systems and various weapons 
aimed at reducing the effectiveness of enemy 
air defense systems and ensuring the successful 
completion of missions by aviation.”199 A subcategory 
of Overcoming Air Defense is “Breakthrough” 
(“Прорыв”). In short, this is the effort to suppress or 
destroy IADS “in designated flight strip(s)  and in the 
areas of action of strike (landing) groups by specially 
allocated aviation forces, as well as fire damage 
and electronic warfare means of interacting troops 
(forces).”200 
The critical point in these definitions is that Russian 
thinking on SEAD focuses almost entirely on the 
point of attack—air defenses are suppressed and 
destroyed only in “strips” across the front line and 
at the local point of attack. Prominent military 
analyst Aleksander Timokhin noted that Ukraine’s 
decentralized air defense system capitalizes on 
weaknesses in Russian SEAD theory by distributing 
sensors and shooters across wide swathes of territory, 
diluting the effectiveness of any focused efforts at 
the point of attack. This dilution, in turn, does not 
allow an operational deep strike campaign to unfold 
because it does not effectively eliminate ground-
based air defense. Timokhin argued the following: 
199 “Overcoming Air Defense [Преодоление ПВО],” Russian Ministry of Defense Military Encyclopedic Dictionary, https://encyclopedia.
mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.htm?id=9329@morfDictionary. 
200 “Breakthrough [Прорыв],” Russian Ministry of Defense Military Encyclopedic Dictionary, https://энциклопедия.минобороны.рф/
encyclopedia/dictionary/details_rvsn.htm?id=9461@morfDictionary. Author’s emphasis.
201 Aleksander Timokhin, “Air Defense Suppression from World War II to Ukraine [Подавление ПВО: От Второй Мировой До Украины 
Аэрокосмическое обозрение],” Aerokosmicheskoye Obozreniye 4 (2023), p. 39.
The defeat of the enemy’s air defense 
is carried out as a measure to support 
the air strike and only in the zone of 
this strike and the flight to the target 
and back….Aviation must carry out 
combat missions without defeating 
the entire enemy air defense, striking 
only those of its objects that interfere 
with a specific attack.201 
Unlike in the United States, where joint forces are 
used to conduct SEAD and DEAD systematically 
theaterwide, in Russia, air power thinkers have 
historically focused almost entirely on tactical efforts 
at the point of attack, not systematic operations across 
the theater. The effect of this focus is twofold: strike 
aircraft tend to be subordinated to the immediate 
tactical needs of a ground operation and does not 
allow for a strike campaign to unfold because it is 
ineffective against disaggregated mobile IADS such 
as those in Ukraine. 
Russian air power thinkers are also proposing 
structural changes to the Russian joint force to 
address this problem. For example, Timokhin 
argued that the problem is “unsolvable” short of 
fundamental reorganizational measures that allow 
the air force to conduct independent operations 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   64  | www.cna.org   
that are not subordinated to the needs of ground 
troops.202 There is currently no sign that any such 
reorganization is being planned for the post-Ukraine 
era. On the contrary, deepening integration of the 
VKS into joint operations is a common refrain.203 
Indeed, despite increased attention, Russian thinking 
on SEAD and DEAD operations has made little 
progress in the war even in military circles. Dronov’s 
survey of air operations in the war made only 
oblique mention of “suppressing (disrupting) the 
zonal-object air defense and missile defense system 
across the entire depth of the theater of operations.” 
He offered few details or solutions for how to do 
so. He did note, however, the structural challenges 
identified by Timokhin: 
Against the background of the actions 
of the Ground Forces, strike aviation 
is assigned (for various objective 
and subjective reasons) an auxiliary 
role….Strike aviation practically does 
not perform tasks in the operational 
depth of enemy troops to destroy 
communication facilities (bridges, 
crossings, railway junctions, trains 
with troops and equipment).204 
Given Dronov’s seniority, this structural reform—
removing the VKS from a joint construct that effectively 
subordinates it to the Ground Forces—may be a topic 
of debate in the future, but serious efforts at change 
do not appear to be afoot in early 2025.
The VKS is also seeking to solve modern SEAD 
challenges by falling back on advanced technology 
202 Timokhin, “Air Defense Suppression from World War II to Ukraine,” p. 39.
203 Kazakov and Kiryushin, “Air Strike: Evolution of Structure.”
204 Dronov, “Features of Aviation Tactics in Modern Combat Operations,” p. 21.
205 Although Russia advertises these pods’ ability to conduct electronic attack (jamming), there is some indication that the jamming 
pods are used only for self-protection of the aircraft, not electronic suppression of radars required for SEAD and DEAD. Piotr Butowski, 
Russia’s Warplanes: Russian-Made Military Aircraft and Helicopters Today (Harpia Publishing, 2015), pp. 85–86.
206 Bronk, Russian Combat Air Strengths and Limitations. 
rather than updating operational concepts. Its 
approach to this problem in recent decades has 
largely been to use small packages of modern 
combat aircraft such as Su-35s and Su-34s with 
modular ELINT sensor and jamming pods to locate 
and possibly suppress local air defense radars. 205 
The VKS has also made uneven attempts to develop 
specialized ELINT-gathering aircraft but with much 
less success. Since early 2022, there has been very 
little discussion of operational art and concepts of 
operations associated with SEAD and DEAD that do 
not rely on standard doctrine. In specialized domestic 
literature, the need for military aviation to conduct a 
targeted and systematic fight against enemy ground-
based air defense throughout the entire theater of 
operations—a fundamentally different proposition 
from current Russian doctrine—has received almost 
no attention.
After three years of conflict, there remains a 
disconnect between operational requirements 
and the development of concepts and TTPs that 
would allow the air force to conduct SEAD and 
DEAD successfully. Without this thinking, training 
on new TTPs is also far in the future. Russian strike 
training remains rudimentary and focused largely on 
scripted exercises that do little more than reinforce 
traditional techniques that emphasize rigid tactical 
execution. The Russian air force also does not have an 
equivalent to the US Red Flag air combat exercise in 
which new concepts might be tested.206 In short, the 
less effective concepts of Overcoming Air Defense 
and Breakthrough will likely remain in place in the 
near- and mid-term and will likely restrict Russia’s 
ability to develop effective SEAD and DEAD. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   65  | www.cna.org   
C2, ISR-T, dynamic targeting, 
and COPs
Across the spectrum of air dominance operations, 
from ground-based air defense to SEAD operations 
and long-range strike, Russian writers acknowledge 
the challenges of C2; intelligence, surveillance, 
reconnaissance, and targeting (ISR-T); and 
establishing a joint COP. In air operations, the 
end result is a fundamental inability to conduct 
dynamic targeting and battle damage assessment 
consistently and effectively. Although the problem 
is less pronounced at the tactical level because of 
the use of uncrewed systems to support artillery, 
it becomes far more significant at operational and 
strategic levels.
Indeed, Russia’s vaunted “reconnaissance-strike 
complex,” which has received so much attention 
from Western and Russian writers alike over the last 
decade, has shown itself to be decidedly lacking in 
the ability to conduct dynamic targeting and destroy 
targets when they are on the move. Although great 
strides have been made at the tactical level of 
war via the use of UAVs, Russia has not been able 
to mount large-scale air operations capable of 
combining effective ISR, rapid C2, and responsive, 
dynamic strike. In addition, although the use of 
UAVs has improved matters, effective battle damage 
assessment remains a significant challenge in large-
scale air operations. 
Russia’s long-range reconnaissance-strike complex 
has been neither sensitive to emergent targeting 
requirements nor flexible enough to attack such 
207 The odd case of the Ukrainian LST Yuriy Olefirenko proves the point. Early in the war, this lumbering Cold War–era ship bombarded 
Russian positions in Kherson from within sight of the coastline and then escaped without facing any counterattack. Later, a Russian 
aerial drone located the vessel, but with neither ships nor aircraft available to attack it, the Russian military resorted to an artillery 
bombardment from which the vessel escaped unscathed. A land-attack cruise missile finally destroyed it in port a year later. 
Michael Petersen, “Russian Navy and Naval Platforms,” in  Assessing Russian Plans for Military Regeneration: Modernization and 
Reconstitution Challenges for Moscow’s War Machine (Chatham House, 2024), p. 34. 
208 Joint Publication 3-60, Sept. 28, 2018, Joint Targeting, pp. ix–x.
targets when they appear. 207 All of the targets of 
Russia’s standoff precision strike weapons have 
been fixed in position and frequently locatable on a 
map or a global positioning system. Although this is 
not a problem when targeting critical infrastructure, 
it badly diminishes Russia’s ability to strike emerging 
high-value or high-priority targets that may 
fundamentally affect strategic outcomes. 
That is, all of Russia’s deep strikes are the result 
of deliberate, not dynamic, targeting. Deliberate 
targeting processes produce planned targets that 
are known to exist in the operational environment. 
Dynamic targeting focuses on targets of opportunity 
that are unplanned or unanticipated and requires 
robust ISR combined with agile C2. 208 The need 
for dynamic targeting can emerge from several 
sources. An adversary unit may suddenly pose a 
danger to friendly forces, or it may unexpectedly 
present a lucrative but fleeting opportunity for 
advantage. Identifying and striking these targets 
requires persistent and thoroughgoing ISR, rapid 
C2 mechanisms, and leadership decision-making 
flexibility. 
Beyond the forward line of its own troops, Russian 
writers recognized even before the war that these 
traits are in short supply in their own reconnaissance-
strike complex. A 2021 article published in Military 
Thought made the tacit admission that Russia 
is still lagging in the development of a wide 
variety of platforms, including “advanced fixed-
wing and rotary, low-altitude and stratospheric, 
reconnaissance and reconnaissance-strike, fighter 
and jammer, and relay and radar surveillance and 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   66  | www.cna.org   
guidance UAVs.”209 In late 2022, Anatoly A. Sinikov, the 
outspoken critic of the state of Russian operational 
art, pointed out that one of Russia’s fundamental 
problems with air operations is “underestimation of 
communications, intelligence and control issues in 
the preparation and implementation of operations, 
due to shortcomings in the development of the 
technical base of components of the theory and 
practice of military art.” 210 Thus the problem is 
twofold: lack of technological development and a 
failure of operational art to comprehend the modern 
battlefield in the air. Despite the major—and largely 
successful—effort to recapitalize Russian military 
capabilities under President Putin, critical faults 
remain in ISR-T and C2.
Remedying this problem is a major focus area 
moving forward, with improved C2 receiving the 
most emphasis. Importantly, these discussions focus 
almost exclusively on technological solutions while 
ignoring human factors such as decision flexibility. 
For decades, VKS pilots have operated under the 
tight command of ground-control or air-control 
intercept personnel. 211 This situation shows no 
evidence of evolving because virtually all Russian 
analysis focuses on technological solutions to 
information flow challenges rather than retooling 
concepts of operations and employment. 
209 S. N. Kurilov, A. N. Kiryushin, and Yu. N. Moiseyev, “Current Problems of Air Forces Tactics and Ways to Solve Them [Современные 
проблемы тактики Военно-воздушных сил и пути их решения],” Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 2021), p. 22. 
210 Sinikov, “Contribution of Scientists of the Military Academy of the General Staff,” p. 134. 
211 Bronk, “Air Power and Aerial Platforms,” p. 24. 
212 Gavrilov et al., “Two Years of a Special Military Operation,” p. 61.
213 “Shoigu: ‘The Russian Armed Forces’ Command and Communications System Will Be Improved Using AI Technologies [ Шойгу: 
‘систему управления и связи ВС РФ усовершенствуют с применением технологий ИИ’],” TASS, Jan. 10, 2023, https://tass.ru/
armiya-i-opk/16766161.
214 Aleksandr Ananyev, Kirill Ivannikov, and Artem Chernysh, “Efficiency of the Reconnaissance Aviation Complex [ Эффективность 
разведывательного авиационного комплекса],” Armeiskii Sbornik 3 (2022). 
215 I. P. Churkin, “Development of the Combat Control System for Aviation in the Arctic Zone of Responsibility for Air Defense [Развитие 
системы боевого управления авиацией в Арктической зоне ответственности за противовоздушную оборону],” Voennaia Mysl’ 
4 (Apr. 2023).
For example, a typical argument in favor of better 
C2 holds that “without fast and highly organized 
data transmission systems, none of the projects for 
the development of weapons systems, forms and 
methods of using military and other formations in 
future wars is, in principle, possible.” 212 Likewise, 
then–Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu argued in 
2023, “We need to improve the management and 
communications system. For these purposes, we will 
actively use artificial intelligence technologies.” 213 
The widely accepted solution to C2ISR problems that 
hinder dynamic targeting is faster, more accurate 
information transmission. Comparatively, evidence 
of serious thought given to concepts of operation that 
enhance dynamic targeting capabilities is sparse. 214 
If air power theorists in Russia are discussing 
decentralizing C2 and giving pilots more authority 
(and training) to engage targets dynamically, those 
conversations are not happening in public Russian 
military journals. There is little evident appetite for 
such decentralization.215
Future evolution: technology 
and innovation
Shoigu’s notion of using AI to improve Russia’s 
combat performance highlights a key point. There 
is clear reliance on technological innovation as the 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   67  | www.cna.org   
solution to Russia’s warfighting problems in dynamic 
long-range targeting, SEAD and DEAD, C2-ISR, and 
even ground-based air defense. Most Russian elites 
are largely ignoring solutions that might be found 
in operational art and concept development. This 
departure point is resulting in three overall trends 
in thinking about the future of air operations: 
(1) expanding acknowledgment of the increased 
importance of multimission aircraft, (2) expanding 
and accelerating Russia’s reconnaissance-strike 
complex via the use of uncrewed systems, and (3) 
including the use of AI in analysis and C2. Of note, 
these public conclusions about the evolutionary 
direction of future air operations do not include 
discussions about reforming how the VKS fights. 
Indeed, instead of considering changes to concepts 
and doctrine, the force is leaning heavily into 
technological solutions that allow the VKS to execute 
existing concepts better. 
A key trend in thinking about air operations is the 
move away from specialized combat aircraft and 
toward the development of future multimission 
combat aircraft. 216 Late Cold War Soviet combat 
aircraft development was characterized by narrow 
tactical combat aviation specialization into strike 
fighters, interceptors, air superiority fighters, and 
other mission-specific platforms. Contemporary 
216 E. A. Linnik, D. V. Mitrofanov, and V. I. Stuchinsky, “Patterns and Principles of Developing Operational Requirements for the 
Structure and Composition of Aviation Groupings in the Strategic (Operational) Direction [Закономерности и Принципы Разрботки 
Оперативных Трбований к Струтруктуре и Составу Группиировки Авиации на Стратегическом (Операцинном) Направлении],” 
Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye Sily: Teoriya I Praktika 31 (Sept. 2024), p. 10.
217 Yermolin, Zubov, and Fomin, “Use of Strike Aviation of the Aerospace Forces,” p. 21. Some Soviet-era specialized ISR platforms have 
reportedly been considered for service in Ukraine, but there is no evidence that they have systematically appeared over the battlefield. 
Thomas Newdick, “Soviet-Era M-55 Spy Plane May Be Headed to Support the War in Ukraine,” The War Zone, Nov. 21, 2023, https://
www.twz.com/soviet-era-m-55-spy-plane-may-be-headed-to-war-in-ukraine.
218 Central Intelligence Agency, Soviet Air Defense Aviation: Training and Operations , https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/
DOC_0000969825.pdf. 
219 S. I. Makarenko and I. E. Afonin, “Modeling of Combat Aviation Operations and Assessment of Their Effectiveness: Analysis of 
Works, Models, Current Research Directions [Моделирование боевых действий авиации и оценки их эффективности – анализ 
работ, моделей, актуальных направлений исследований],” Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye Sily: Teoriya I Praktika 32 (2024). 
220  Linnick, Mitrofanov, and Stuchinsky, “Patterns and Principles of Developing Operational Requirements;” Bronk, Russian Combat 
Air Strengths and Limitations. 
Russian writers largely agree that modern aircraft 
such as the Su-35 multirole aircraft collapse these 
distinctions. A typical example of this thinking is 
found in a 2023 article in Military Thought by Colonel 
Oleg Yermolin, the director of the Russian Air Force 
Academy’s Research Center. After describing the 
various roles performed by modern aircraft in 
Ukraine, he concluded, “It is highly likely that we 
can talk about the integration of attack and bomber 
aviation into one type—strike aviation.” 217 
This increased emphasis on the development of 
multimission aircraft is widespread. It has led to calls, 
particularly from air force training and education 
institutions, for more intensive and longer training 
periods for pilots and senior air force leadership. 
However, Soviet and Russian air force training 
programs have consistently fallen short of providing 
their pilots with the ability to exploit fully the most 
advanced aircraft in the force since at least the early 
1970s.218 Training events remain heavily scripted affairs 
that offer few opportunities for experimentation even 
though there is no shortage of proposals for training 
that models tactical engagements.219 As of 2025, there 
remains a significant gap between air power theorists’ 
calls for more training and the force’s willingness and 
ability to follow through.220 The result is that even if the 
Aerospace Forces continue to transition to multirole 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   68  | www.cna.org   
aircraft while concepts of operation and employment 
remain underdeveloped, training programs will almost 
certainly be inadequate to the task unless they are 
massively altered from their current form. Related 
skills required for long-range strike, dynamic targeting, 
and SEAD and DEAD will continue to languish even as 
fighter technology improves. 
The war has also accelerated thinking about hybrid 
(crewed and uncrewed) air units. Before the war, 
Russian development in this regard focused on 
the “Okhotnik” (“Hunter”) uncrewed combat aerial 
vehicle (UCAV) (see Figure 11 ). The intent was to 
deploy the UCAV either independently or with 
advanced fighter aircraft as a “loyal wingman.” The 
221  Thomas Newdick, “Russia’s S-70 Hunter Drone Was Armed When Shot Down by Friendly Fighter Over Ukraine,” The War Zone, 
Oct. 7, 2024, https://www.twz.com/air/russias-s-70-hunter-drone-was-armed-when-shot-down-by-friendly-fighter-over-ukraine. 
Okhotnik has been deployed only twice in Ukraine, 
but the war has expanded thinking in Russia about 
the possible uses of uncrewed aerial systems (UASs), 
including for SEAD, reconnaissance, air-to-air 
combat, and strike operations.221 
UAS platforms that were imagined solely as 
reconnaissance aircraft before the war are now 
broadly being considered for expanded lethal 
purposes. Russian strategists generally agree on 
the value of UASs as part of a hybrid (crewed and 
uncrewed) reconnaissance-strike complex. Yermolin 
argued in 2023 that to improve the effectiveness of 
strike operations, it is necessary to deploy specialized 
reconnaissance and strike UAVs across the air force: 
Figure 11. The Okhotnik UCAV flies with a Russian Su-57 combat aircraft
Source: Screenshot captured from Russian Ministry of Defense website video.


Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   69  | www.cna.org   
[These platforms should be] capable 
of operating both independently 
and as part of mixed tactical groups 
of manned and unmanned aircraft….
Already today, and especially in the 
future, reconnaissance aviation as 
a type of OTA [operational-tactical 
aviation] will organizationally 
transform into aviation formations 
of reconnaissance and strike aircraft 
in manned and unmanned versions, 
solving tasks at both operational and 
strategic levels.222
The central challenge of this hybrid force structure 
is that it risks overloading pilots with too much 
information and too many responsibilities. As retired 
air force Colonel Nikolay P. Zubov noted, “The use 
of AI in the interests of intelligent support of aircraft 
crews when they solve tactical tasks of UAV control 
is due to the fact that in a combat situation, they 
experience an information and intellectual load close 
to the limit of their physiological capabilities.” 223 
Specifically, Zubov advocated for the use of AI in six 
applications for hybrid formations:
 ● Air defense supported by UAVs 
 ● Low-altitude flights to overcome air defense 
 ● Air-to-air combat against enemy air defense 
fighters
 ● Search and targeting of specific objects
 ● Repeated approaches to targets and 
maneuvering to exit the combat area 
222 Yermolin, Zubov, and Fomin, “Use of Strike Aviation of the Aerospace Forces,” p. 20. 
223 Nikolay P. Zubov, “Possibilities of Using Artificial Intelligence in Tactical Tasks of Controlling Unmanned Aerial Vehicles by Crews of 
Aviation Complexes [Возможности применения искусственного интеллекта в тактических задачах управления беспилотными 
летательными аппаратами экипажами авиационных комплексов],” Voennaia Mysl’ 4 (2022), p. 89. 
224 Dronov, “Features of Aviation Tactics in Modern Combat Operations,” p. 21.
225 “Russia ‘Shot Down Its Own Planes,’” BBC, July 9, 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/8142999.stm. 
 ● Continual scanning of the information space 
when flying along return routes
Tellingly, however, Zubov and other advocates 
propose the use of AI at the tactical level of war. 
Use of AI for developing concepts of operation 
for SEAD, strike, and other functions that reside at 
levels above the tactical does not appear in public 
professional literature. In any case, the net effect of 
the growth of multimission aircraft combined with 
uncrewed systems is a massively increased burden 
on human pilots. This burden is not being matched 
with improved training that might allow Russia to 
improve its chances of success in the air warfare 
areas noted above.
The war has also shown that Russia’s attempts 
to develop a functional COP to improve its C2 of 
forces have fallen short. For example, the inability of 
ground-based air defenses to generate a COP that 
allows them to distinguish between friendly and 
enemy aircraft has led to several failures that have 
caught senior leaders’ attention. Colonel General 
Dronov’s survey of the war called out friendly fire 
as an “unfavorable factor” in Russian air operations. 
He noted a need for “improving the identification 
system in the Russian air force in order to eliminate 
the prerequisites for the loss of aircraft from ‘friendly 
fire.’”224 The clear implication here is that, despite the 
overall success of Russian ground-based air defense 
forces, they shot down enough friendly aircraft that 
the chief of the air force took notice and called it out 
in public. This has been an area of concern for the 
air force since at least 2008, when ground-based air 
defenses shot down as many as six friendly combat 
aircraft.225 Russian ground-based air defenses, it 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   70  | www.cna.org   
might be said, are perhaps too successful at shooting 
down aircraft.
Similar to the challenge of hybrid force structure, the 
most common proposed solution to the Aerospace 
Forces’ COP and C2ISR challenges is the integration 
of AI into operations. Russian military scientists 
have dedicated several studies to the use of AI in 
air operations to coordinate intelligence gathering, 
increase the pace of processing and analysis, and 
provide decision-makers with improved awareness, 
a greater variety of options, and faster decision 
timelines.226 There have also been studies suggesting 
how AI might improve air defense. Suggested paths 
forward include sending the missile radar feed to an 
AI engine to generate a database that allows quicker 
target acquisition, identification, and engagement 
and using AI to scan the electronic environment for 
jamming, anticipate high-interference frequencies, 
and adjust away from them dynamically. In addition, 
Russian writers propose using AI to discern false 
targets from real ones in dense air strikes and to 
improve diagnostics and maintenance.227 
Russian writers envision a future military that can use 
these tools to efficiently manage multiple streams of 
intelligence collection, rapidly fuse analysis, and then 
create a COP that is distributed throughout the force 
in near real time. (Note that this was the vision for 
the Russian National Defense Management Center, 
so the investments in the center have not paid off in 
ways envisioned by the Ministry of Defense.) Dronov 
articulated the massive scope of the challenge:
226 S. A. Antipova, V. V. Labets, and M. P. Filiyaev, “Conceptual Foundations for the Application of Artificial Intelligence Technologies 
in the Logistics System of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation [ Концептуальные основы применения технологий 
искусственного интеллекта в системе материально-технического обеспечения Вооруженных Сил Российской Федерации],” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 7 (2023); A. Ulanov, “On Possible Areas of Application of Artificial Intelligence in Automation Systems of the Air 
Defense and Missile Defense Forces of the Russian Aerospace Forces [ О возможных направлениях применения искусственного 
интеллекта в комплексах средств автоматизации войск ПВО-ПРО ВКС России],” Armeiskii Sbornik 2 (2022).
227 Litvinov, “Promising Areas in Introduction of Artificial Intelligence in Air Defense Systems.” Adaptive frequency hopping technology 
is well into development and has the potential to be adopted at scale more quickly than other technologies. See, for example, 
Pascal Thiele et al., “Machine Learning Based Prediction of Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum Signals,” 2023 IEEE 34th Annual 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2023.
228  SV Dronov, “Features of Aviation Tactics in Modern Combat Operations and Ways to Improve Them [Особенности тактики 
авиации в современных боевых действиях и пути ее совершенствования].” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2024).
The main areas of improvement of the 
control system are the creation and 
ensuring the effective functioning of 
a single intelligence and information 
space by ensuring the reliable 
functioning and widespread use 
of global satellite navigation and 
communication systems that form 
the combat control field in the 
theater of military operations (TVD); 
groupings of reconnaissance artificial 
earth satellites for conducting 
electronic, radar and imagery 
reconnaissance; ground (surface) and 
air reconnaissance forces and assets; 
air elements of reconnaissance and 
strike complexes (RUK), including 
the A-50 aircraft, airborne control 
posts and UAVs, combat control and 
communication signal repeaters; 
systems of automated control points 
in subdivisions, units, formations and 
associations of branches and arms 
of the armed forces; ground points 
for receiving and processing space 
and air reconnaissance information; 
automated   planning    systems    
for the use of precision weapons, 
development of combat and flight 
missions, located in headquarters 
and command posts for various 
purposes.228

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   71  | www.cna.org   
Russia’s evident inability to achieve this via uncrewed 
means is notable, and the calls for the use of AI to 
do so will almost certainly increase. Senior Russian 
officials point out that AI is already being used in the 
conflict, but given Dronov’s 2024 critique, it is not 
clear that the use of AI is bearing as much fruit as 
experts had hoped.229 
Conclusion
Russian air power theorists are making clear 
observations about the Aerospace Forces’ experience 
in Ukraine, but those observations are not being 
translated into doctrinal adjustments or new 
operational concepts for the future battlefield. In 
many cases, their observations regarding air power 
are largely serving to confirm prior assumptions 
about the character of war and reinforcing rather 
than challenging previous decades of air power 
thinking. The practical result is that there is almost 
no effort, at least in public writing, to reshape that 
doctrine—and therefore training and TTPs—in ways 
that might lead to more success in future wars. In 
short, Russian Aerospace Forces will likely operate in 
the future much as they are today.
Part of the reason is the parlous, even poor, state 
of Russian operational art regarding certain aspects 
of air power employment. As early as a decade 
ago, and perhaps earlier, Russian writers were 
noting shortcomings in conceptual thinking about 
complicated challenges such as dynamic targeting 
and SEAD. That thinking, which might have asked 
hard questions and forced discussions about 
operational innovation, does not appear to have 
matured even after more than three years of the 
Russia-Ukraine war.
229  “Denis Manturov Held a Session on the Use of Artificial Intelligence to Enhance the Combat Capabilities of Weapons and Control 
Systems [Денис Мантуров провёл сессию по применению искусственного интеллекта для наращивания боевых возможностей 
вооружения и систем управления],” Government of Russia, Jan. 31, 2025, http://government.ru/news/54105/.
 
Instead, Russian air power analysts almost uniformly 
tend to focus on technological solutions to 
challenges that might also be addressed by making 
changes in standing training and TTPs: information 
flows are sped up via automation while human 
initiative is downplayed, and aircraft are equipped 
with more sophisticated technologies but concepts 
for employing that technology remain undeveloped. 
As a result, although the Aerospace Forces may 
become more technologically advanced, their 
ability to exploit the full benefits of that technology 
will likely remain limited. This is consistent with 
prewar Russian analysis that tended to focus on 
technological advances but did not consider the 
necessary doctrinal and other changes necessary to 
exploit that technology. 
There are modest indications that this situation 
may shift in the future, but it is too early to tell 
when this change may occur or how extensive it 
may be. Observers such as Commander of the Air 
Force Sergey Dronov, Anatoly Sinikov at the General 
Staff Academy, and Aleksander Timokhin, whose 
influence comes from his larger public presence and 
platform, have begun discussions regarding concept 
development and structural reform. By and large, 
however, Russian military scientists are emphasizing 
technological advancements to improve a set of 
fundamental assumptions about the nature and 
character of war that remain wedded to pre-2022 
conclusions. Most writers within and outside the VKS 
are focused on learning lessons to improve tactics 
and weapon systems but do not see the need for 
major reforms of previous conclusions. As a result, 
the air power doctrine remains largely unchanged 
from early 2022. Russian intellectuals are doubling 
down on the importance of ground-based air 
defense and, despite its evident strategic failures, 
long-range precision strike.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   72  | www.cna.org   
Implications
This study argues that despite the many setbacks 
incurred in Ukraine and the rapid pace of 
technological and tactical innovation, Russian military 
leaders are largely adhering to the country’s prewar 
military strategic and operational concepts. Instead 
of revising or updating operational concepts in light 
of setbacks in the war with Ukraine, they are relying 
on advanced technology to apply existing ideas onto 
a 21st-century battlefield. Indeed, Russian military 
writers generally see the war in Ukraine as validating 
conclusions reached about the nature of armed 
conflict over the past two decades. They frequently 
(and often obliquely) imply that the failure of the 
military to achieve victory is essentially a failure to 
acknowledge and apply their ideas properly.
Russia continues to frame its strategic competition 
with the West in many of the same ways it did before 
2022. Likewise, it is preparing for war with NATO with 
most of the same assumptions and ideas in mind. 
Its theory of victory still rests on setting conditions 
for success in the Threatening Period, deploying 
rapid and overwhelming force in the Initial Period, 
imposing costs via strategic defense and long-range 
strikes, maintaining escalation dominance, and 
undermining the adversary’s will to fight. The Russia-
Ukraine war’s protraction, the failure of Russia’s 
strike campaign to break Ukrainian will, and Russia’s 
loss of escalation credibility seem to have had little 
impact on Russian military’s formulation of ideas. 
At the operational level of war, this relative stasis 
of strategic thinking is mirrored by the dogged 
resilience of important prewar operational concepts. 
Combined arms warfare, the value of naval surface 
operations, the centrality of air dominance, and the 
fundamental war-winning importance of long-range 
precision strike have all proven to be surprisingly 
durable ideas given Russian failures in the war. As 
the Russian military begins to reconstitute over the 
next decade, it will likely do so with these concepts 
in mind.
For all the transatlantic community’s interest in the 
employment of uncrewed systems, the rebirth of 
attritional warfare, and nuclear saber-rattling, Russian 
thinkers have not jettisoned most of the ideas in place 
at the strategic and operational levels of war before 
2022. Western policy-makers, military planners, and 
analysts would do well to bear in mind that the war 
in Ukraine, at least in 2025, has not changed Russia’s 
basic military operational conclusions. Military elites 
have not embraced attritional warfare, nor have 
they abandoned or fundamentally altered naval 
surface war concepts. They continue to rely on long-
range precision strike as a potentially war-winning 
capability, to embrace ground-based air defense 
as an asymmetric advantage, and to envision a 
combined arms maneuver force operating on a 
broken battlefield.
Despite the armed forces’ mixed record in the war, 
the Russian military remains extremely capable and 
very dangerous. For example, Russia’s ability to 
combine aerial uncrewed ISR with artillery strikes 
provides it with tremendous tactical fires flexibility. 
Given a more limited set of strategic objectives in a 
different geographical region (such as the Baltic), a 
military that in five years looks and operates similarly 
to the one in 2025 may very well achieve its strategic 
objectives in a future conflict. 
The implications of these ideas for any potential 
adversary are significant. Russia’s reliance on the 
Initial Period of War as a strategic linchpin means that 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   73  | www.cna.org   
nations must continue to develop advanced systems 
capable of providing strategic and tactical indications 
and warning. The ability to quickly generate forces and 
keep them at a high state of readiness for prolonged 
periods will likewise be crucial if Russia believes it 
is sliding from the Threatening Period to wartime. 
Russia will also likely increase its use of proxies against 
Western targets and wage war with every instrument 
of state power, including informational, economic, 
and diplomatic means.
Operationally, the high likelihood of long-range 
precision attacks against critical military, economic, and 
civilian targets means that states must take measures 
to ensure increased resilience in the Initial Period 
of War and beyond. Furthermore, Russian theorists 
are pushing for ground operations to be rapid and 
dynamic, so Western military planners should expect 
Russia to seek ways to avoid grinding attrition warfare 
in a hypothetical future conflict. Notably, as Western 
militaries begin to plan for the prospect of protracted 
attritional war, Russian thinkers remain wedded to the 
idea of a short, sharp conflict. 
In the maritime domain, Russian theorists argue for 
a combination of dense, active near-seas defense 
combined with long-endurance stealthy platforms 
for operations in far seas and off enemy coastal 
areas. All these platforms will be equipped with long-
range precision strike for the purposes of offensive 
and defensive cost imposition. The former threaten 
European and Indo-Pacific allied homelands. 
Cracking these “bastions” will require exquisite ISR, 
penetration, and fires capabilities. The latter present 
a grave strategic threat to the US homeland. On 
the other hand, Russian challenges with closing an 
over-the-horizon dynamic targeting cycle, especially 
over great distances at sea, means that the RFN will 
likely struggle to successfully complete long-range 
engagements against mobile targets at sea.
Indeed, Russia’s continued adherence to concepts 
that it has had trouble executing at the operational 
level of war presents its adversaries with 
opportunities. For example, because Russian strike 
planning at operational depth will likely remain 
heavily centralized, it will also likely lack the ability to 
conduct dynamic targeting consistently. Maneuver 
concepts such as the US Air Force’s agile combat 
employment, the US Navy’s distributed maritime 
operations, and the US Marine Corps’ expeditionary 
advanced base operations will likely, at least in 
the medium term (roughly 10 years), exploit these 
Russian shortcomings if they are executed well.
By contrast, Russian ground-based air defenses will 
require Western planners to accept high levels of risk 
to suppress and destroy them. On the other hand, 
poor Russian SEAD and DEAD doctrine presents 
an opportunity for increased NATO investment 
in mobile surface-to-air missile systems such as 
National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile Systems 
and various Marine Corps systems such as the 
Medium-Range Intercept Capability and Marine 
Air Defense Integrated System. Given Russian SEAD 
shortcomings, these systems may have a high 
survivability rate and free airborne platforms from 
defensive counter-air requirements. 
The comparative lack of operational innovation 
and the persistence of established concepts in the 
military academies and research institutes may 
also be a sign of a deep chasm between frontline 
combat units and the Defense Ministry’s military 
theorists. The furious tactical innovation at the front 
has not been matched by strategic or operational 
innovation in the military’s centers of thought. 
Possible explanations range from innovation born of 
desperate necessity at the front lines to the mundane 
institutional failures of the Russian military to exploit 
the hard-won local lessons across a geographically 
dispersed military. 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   74  | www.cna.org   
Of course, this lack of innovation does not mean that 
Russian intellectuals are avoiding hard questions 
about the war or that the Russian military is not a 
learning organization. Quite the opposite. Russian 
military leaders have not been afraid to criticize the 
conduct of the war, and the effort to “learn lessons” 
is vigorous and ongoing. It does imply, however, 
that there is a significant aspiration-capability gap 
in the Russian military. On the battlefield, this gap 
translates into serious operational shortcomings 
in critical warfighting areas. Because this gap goes 
beyond technological solutions and may require 
fundamental changes in how the Russian military 
executes military operations, it is unlikely to be 
settled soon.
Ultimately, among Russian military leaders who write 
about such things, neither theories of modern warfare 
nor the operational concepts designed to achieve 
success in modern war have fundamentally changed. 
Whether this lack of change is attributable to self-
interest, selection bias, or other factors is beyond the 
scope of this study. But Western military planners and 
policy-makers would be wise to keep in mind that the 
tremendous attention paid during the war to tactical 
and technological innovation, although important, 
can obscure this fundamental point.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   75  | www.cna.org   
Figures
Figure 1. Depiction of updated Russian conflict typologies .............. 13
Figure 2. ZAK-23E counter-UAV anti-aircraft system mounted on  
BTR-82 ..........................................................................................23
Figure 3. New methods of camouflage for tanks and armored  
vehicles ......................................................................................... 25
Figure 4. Russian multiple launch rocket system in action ............... 27
Figure 5. Active layered defense approach for defending against future 
offensive operations .......................................................................32
Figure 6. Russian layered defense options to defend naval bases 
against UAV or USV attacks ............................................................41
Figure 7. Project 22350 Admiral Gorshkov-class frigate .................. 45
Figure 8. Ratios of Russian vs. US and Allied naval forces in key 
strategic directions ........................................................................ 48
Figure 9. The system of armed struggle in a large-scale war ............ 57
Figure 10. BUK M3 surface-to-air missile system employed in  
Ukraine ......................................................................................... 59
Figure 11. The Okhotnik UCAV flies with a Russian Su-57 combat 
aircraft ...........................................................................................68

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   76  | www.cna.org   
Abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
ASAT anti-satellite
ASW anti-submarine warfare
ATGM anti-tank guided missile
C2 command and control
C2ISR command and control, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
C5ISRT command, control, computing, communications, cyber, intelligence,  
surveillance, reconnaissance, and targeting
CDCM coastal defense cruise missile
COP common operating picture
DEAD destruction of enemy air defenses
ELINT electronic intelligence
IADS integrated air defense system
ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
ISR-T intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, and targeting
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
PGS Prompt Global Strike
RFN Russian Federation Navy
SEAD suppression of enemy air defenses
SSBN sub-surface ballistic nuclear (submarine)
SVO special’naja voennaja operacija (special military operation)
TLAM Tomahawk Land Attack Missile
TTPs tactics, techniques, and procedures
UAS uncrewed aerial system
UAV uncrewed aerial vehicle
UCAV uncrewed combat aerial vehicle
USV uncrewed surface vehicle
VDV Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska (Russian airborne forces)
VKS Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye Sily (Russian Aerospace Forces)

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   77  | www.cna.org   
References
Adamsky, Dima. The Russian Way of Deterrence: 
Strategic Culture, Coercion, and War. Palo Alto, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 2023.
Adamsky, Dmitry. “Quo Vadis, Russian Deterrence.” 
International Security 49, no. 3 (2024). 
“Air Dominance (Господство В Воздухе).” Russian 
Ministry of Defense Military Encyclopedic 
Dictionary. https://xn--d1abichgllj9dyd8a.
xn--90anlfbebar6i.xn--p1ai/encyclopedia/
dictionary/details.htm?id=5512@
morfDictionary. 
Ananyev, Aleksandr, Kirill Ivannikov, and Artem 
Chernysh. “Efficiency of the Reconnaissance 
Aviation Complex [Эффективность 
разведывательного авиационного 
комплекса].” Armeiskii Sbornik 3 (2022).
Andreev, V. V., N. S. Kriventsov, D. P. Pahmelkin, and 
A. I. Antipov. “Features of the Use of Aviation 
Groups in Military Conflicts of the Future 
[Особенности применения группировок 
авиации в военных конфликтах будущего].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 2022). 
Antipova, S. A., V. V. Labets, and M. P. Filiyaev. 
“Conceptual Foundations for the Application 
of Artificial Intelligence Technologies in the 
Logistics System of the Armed Forces of the 
Russian Federation [Концептуальные основы 
применения технологий искусственного 
интеллекта в системе материально-
технического обеспечения Вооруженных 
Сил Российской Федерации].” Voennaia 
Mysl’ 7 (2023).
Bartosh, Aleksandr. “Factors of Surprise Yesterday 
and Today [Фактор внезапности вчера и 
сегодня].” Nezavisimoe Voennoe Obozrenie, 
no. 2 (2023).
Bartosh, Aleksander. “A Punishing Sword in the 
Hands of Russia [Карающий меч в руках 
России].” Nezavisimoe Voennoe Obozrenie 10 
(2023).
Bartosh, Aleksandr A. “Escalation Models of Modern 
Military Conflicts [Модели эскалации 
современных военных конфликтов].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2024).
Bartosh, Aleksandr A. “Proxy War as a Determining 
Factor of Military Conflicts in the XXI Century 
[Прокси-война как определяющий фактор 
военных конфликтов XXI века].” Voennaia 
Mysl’ 5 (2023).

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   78  | www.cna.org   
Belenkov, D. S., A. S. Borisenko, and V. V. 
Sukhorutchenko. “Current Issues of 
Automation of Strategic Situation Assessment 
in Solving Strategic Deterrence Problems 
[Актуальные вопросы автоматизации 
оценки стратегической обстановки 
при решении задач стратегического 
сдерживани].” Voennaia Mysl’ 8 (2024).
“Breakthrough [Прорыв].” Russian Ministry of 
Defense Military Encylopedic Dictionary. 
https://энциклопедия.минобороны.
рф/encyclopedia/dictionary/details_rvsn.
htm?id=9461@morfDictionary. 
Bronk, Justin. “Air Power and Aerial Platforms,” 
in Assessing Russian Plans for Military 
Regeneration: Modernization and 
Reconstitution Challenges for Moscow’s War 
Machine. Chatham House, 2024, 23–28. 
Bronk, Justin. Russian Combat Air Strengths and 
Limitations: Lessons from Ukraine. CNA. Apr. 
2023. https://www.cna.org/reports/2023/04/
Russian-Combat-Air-Strengths-and-
Limitations.pdf.
Bronk, Justin, Nick Reynolds, and Jack Watling. The 
Russian Air War and Ukrainian Requirements 
for Air Defence. Royal United Services 
Institute. Nov. 7, 2022. 
Burenok, Vasily Mikhailovich. “On the Prospects 
for the Development of Weapons, Military 
and Special Equipment Based on the 
Experience of a Special Military Operation 
[О перспективах развития вооружения, 
военной и специальной техники на основе 
опыта специальной военной операции].” 
Vooruzhenie i Ekonomika 2 (2024).
Butowski, Piotr. Russia’s Warplanes: Russian-Made 
Military Aircraft and Helicopters Today (Harpia 
Publishing, 2015).
Bychkov, V., and V. Sherkashin. “Maritime Space 
Reconnaissance and Target Designation 
System [система морской космической 
разведки и целеуказания].” Morskoi Sbornik 
2 (2021).
Central Intelligence Agency. Soviet Air Defense 
Aviation: Training and Operations. 
https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/
DOC_0000969825.pdf.
Charodeev, Gennady. “Vice-Admiral Borisov: Naval 
Drones Will Replace Submarines and Surface 
Ships [Вице-адмирал Борисов: ‘Морские 
дроны заменят подводные лодки и 
надводные корабли’].” Novye Izvestia. June 
19, 2023. 
Chekinov, S. G., and S. A. Bogdanov. “Evolution 
of the Essence and Content of the Concept 
of ‘War’ in the 21st Century [Эволюция 
сущности и содержания понятия «война» 
в XXI столетии].” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2017): 
29–43.
Churkin, I. P. “Development of the Combat Control 
System for Aviation in the Arctic Zone of 
Responsibility for Air Defense [Развитие 
системы боевого управления авиацией 
в Арктической зоне ответственности за 
противовоздушную оборону].” Voennaia 
Mysl’ 4 (Apr. 2023).
Congressional Research Service. Conventional 
Prompt Global Strike and Long-Range Ballistic 
Missiles: Background and Issues. July 16, 2021.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   79  | www.cna.org   
“Denis Manturov Held a Session on the Use of 
Artificial Intelligence to Enhance the Combat 
Capabilities of Weapons and Control Systems 
[Денис Мантуров провёл сессию по 
применению искусственного интеллекта 
для наращивания боевых возможностей 
вооружения и систем управления].” 
Government of Russia. Jan. 31, 2025. http://
government.ru/news/54105/.
Denisov, Pavel. “Production of Electronic Warfare 
Equipment Will Increase Several Times Over 
[Производство Средств Рэб Возрастет 
Кратно].” Na Strazhe Rodiny. Apr. 21, 2023. 
Donskov, Y. E., R. S. Anosov, Yu. N. Yarigin, 
and D. M. Former. “Systems Engineering 
Aspects of Raising the Status of Electronic 
Warfare Troops [Системно-технические 
аспекты повышения статуса войск 
радиоэлектронной борьбы].” Voennaia Mysl’ 
11 (2024). 
Dronov, S. “Features of Aviation Tactics in Modern 
Combat Operations and Ways to Improve 
Them [Особенности тактики авиации в 
современных боевых действиях и пути 
ее совершенствования].” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 
(2024).
Dybov, Valentin, and Yuriy Podgornykh. “There 
Is No Comprehensively Developed Theory 
of Aerospace Defense Yet [Всесторонне 
проработанной теории ВКО пока нет].” 
VKO 6 (2015). http://www.vko.ru/oboronka/
vsestoronne-prorabotannoy-teorii-vko-poka-
net.
Dybov, Valentin, Yuriy Podgornykh, and Maxim 
Kolodko. “Intelligence Reported: The 
Analysis Failed.” Nezavisimoe Voennoe 
Obozrenie 3 (2023). https://nvo.ng.ru/
concepts/2023-03-02/1_1226_factor.html.
Evmenov, Nikolai. “The Presence of the Russian 
Navy in the World Oceans Is an Imperative 
of the Times, Ensuring the Military Security 
of the Russian Federation [Присутствие 
Российского Военно-Морского Флота В 
Мировом Океане - Императив Времени, 
Обеспечивающий Военную Безопасность 
Российской Федерации].” Morskoi Sbornik 9 
(2021).
Evmenov, Nikolai. “Prompt Conventional Strike Is 
the US Navy’s Contribution to the Larger Joint 
Concept of Prompt Global Strike [Основные 
тенденции изменения характера и 
содержания военных угроз Российской 
Федерации с океанских и морских 
направлений].” Voennaia Mysl’ 5 (May 2023). 
Evmenov, Nikolai. “The Role and Place of the Navy 
in Wars and Armed Conflicts [Роль И Место 
Военно-Морского Флота В Войнах И 
Вооруженных Конфликтах].” Morskoi Sbornik 
11 (2022)
Evmenov, Nikolai A. “Features of the Development 
of Naval Weapon Systems Taking into 
Account the Transformation of Armed 
Combat at Sea [Особенности Развития 
Систем Вооружения Вмф С Учетом 
Трансформации Вооруженной Борьбы На 
Море].” Morskoi Sbornik 11 (2024). 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   80  | www.cna.org   
Evmenov, Nikolai A. “Main Factors and Conditions 
of the Development of Naval Art [Основные 
факторы и условия развития военно-
морского искусства].” Voennaia Mysl’ 7 
(2023). 
Evmenov, Nikolai A. “Main Trends of Change: The 
Nature and Content of the Military Threats to 
the Russian Federation from Ocean and Sea 
Directions [Основные тенденции изменения 
характера и содержания военных угроз 
Российской Федерации с океанских и 
морских направлений].” Voennaia Mysl’ 5 
(2023).
Evmenov, Nikolai A. “The Nature of Armed Struggle 
at Sea and Its Development Trends [Характер 
вооруженной борьбы на море и тенденции 
ее развития].” Voennaia Mysl’ 12 (2023). 
Evstifeev, Yuri. “A New Paradigm of War Has Come 
to the Sea [Новая парадигма войны пришла 
и на море].” Arsenal Otechestva 4 (2024).
“Expanded Meeting of Defense Ministry Board.” 
Kremlin. Dec. 19, 2023. http://en.kremlin.ru/
events/president/news/page/63. 
Faucon, Benoit, and Thomas Grove. “Russia 
Provided Targeting Data for Houthi Assault 
on Global Shipping.” Wall Street Journal. Oct. 
24, 2024. htps://www.wsj.com/world/russia-
provided-targeng-data-for-houthi-assault-
onglobal-shipping-eabc2c2b. 
Gavrilov, A. D., I. V. Grudinin, D. G. Maiburov, and 
V. A. Novikov. “Two Years of a Special Military 
Operation: Preliminary Results and Potential 
Prospects [Два Года Специальной Военной 
Операции: Некоторые Итоги, Вероятные 
Перспективы].” Vestnik Akademii Voennykh 
Nauk 87 (2024).
Gerasimov, Valery. “The Value of Science Is in the 
Foresight: New Challenges Demand Rethinking 
the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out 
Combat Operations. ” Military-Industrial 
Kurier. Feb. 27, 2013. Translated by Robert 
Coalson. htps://www.armyupress.army.mil/
portals/7/militaryreview/archives/english/
militaryreview_20160228_art008.pdf.
Golts, Alexandr. Strategic Deadlock: Causes, 
Consequences, and Possible Ways Out. 
Stockholm Centre for Eastern European 
Studies. Feb. 26, 2024. https://sceeus.se/
en/publications/strategic-deadlock-causes-
consequences-and-possible-ways-out/. 
 “How a Special Operation in Ukraine Changed 
Russian Weapons and the Military-Industrial 
Complex [Как спецоперация на Украине 
изменила русское оружие и оборонно-
промышленный комплекс].” TASS. Feb. 22, 
2023. https://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/17115401.
International Institute for Strategic Studies. 
“Russia and Eurasia.” In The Military Balance. 
Routledge, 2022.
Ismailov, Alesker I., Vladimir V. Puchnin, and 
Alexey Y. Sysuev. “Problems of Mobilization 
Support of the Russian Navy and Possible 
Ways to Resolve Them [Проблемы 
мобилизационного обеспечения 
российского Военно-Морского Флота и 
возможные пути их разрешения].” Voennaia 
Mysl’ 12 (2022). 
Joint Publication JP-1. Aug. 27, 2023. Joint 
Warfighting. 
Joint Publication 3-60. Sept. 28, 2018. Joint 
Targeting.

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   81  | www.cna.org   
Jójárt, Krisztián. “The War Against Ukraine 
Through the Prism of Russian Military 
Thought.” Journal of Strategic Studies 47, no. 
6–7 (2024): 801–831. doi:10.1080/01402390.2
024.2414079.
Kalganov, V. A., G. B. Ryzhov, and I. V. Solovyev. 
“Strategic Deterrence as a Factor in Ensuring 
National Security of the Russian Federaon 
[Стратегическое сдерживание как фактор 
обеспечения национальной безопасности 
Российской Федерации].” Voennaia Mysl’ 8 
(Aug. 31, 2022).
Kazakov, V. G., and A. N. Kiryushin. “Air 
Strike: Evolution of Structure in Light of 
Current Military-Technical Achievements 
[Авиационный удар: эволюция структуры 
в свете актуальных военно-технических 
достижений].” Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 2023).
Khramchikhin, Alexander. “Moscow Plans to Carry 
Out Military Reforms [Москва задумала 
провести военную реформу].” Nezavisimoe 
Voennoe Obozrenie. Jan. 20, 2023. 
Kirpichnikov, Maxim. “‘Zircons’ Have Entered the 
Work Ocean [Цирконы” Вышли В Мировой 
Океан].” Na Strazhe Rodiny. Jan. 13, 2023. 
Kodarenok, Mikhail. “Forecasts of Bloodthirsty 
Political Scientists [Прогнозы кровожадных 
политологов].” Nezavisimoe Voennoe 
Obozrenie. Feb. 3, 2022. https://nvo.ng.ru/
realty/2022-02-03/3_1175_donbass.html. 
Kofman, Michael. “The Russia-Ukraine War: Military 
Operations and Battlefield Dynamics.” In War 
in Ukraine: Conflict, Strategy, and the Return 
of a Fractured World. Edited by Hal Brands. 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2024, 99–120. 
Kofman, Michael, Anya Fink, Dmitry Gorenburg, 
Mary Chesnut, Jeffrey Edmonds, and Julian 
Waller. Russian Military Strategy: Core Tenets 
and Operational Concepts. CNA. 2021.
Kofman, Michael, Anya Fink, and Jeffrey Edmonds. 
Russian Strategy for Escalation Management: 
Evolution of Key Concepts. CNA. DRM-2019-
U-022455-1Rev. Apr. 2020.
Koryakovtsev, Aleksey A. “The Role of the Navy in 
Ensuring Security Interests of the Russian 
Federation [Роль Военно-Морского Флота в 
обеспечении безопасности национальных 
интересов Российской Федерации].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 12 (2023). 
Korzhevskiy, A. S., and I. V. Solvyev. “Mental 
Confrontation and Problems of Forming 
a Holistic System of Offensive and 
Defensive Action Within It [Ментальное 
противоборство и проблемы 
формирования целостной системы 
наступательных и оборонительных 
действий в нем].” Voennaia Mysl’ 11 (Nov. 
2022): 32–42.
Kovalenko, Evgeny A. “The Use of Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles in Armed Conflicts [Применение 
Беспилотных Летательных Аппаратов В 
Ходе Войн И Вооруженных Конфликтов].” 
Morskoi Sbornik 8 (2023). 
Kretsul, Roman, and Alexey Ramm. “Sea Swarm: 
How Russian Warships Will Defend 
Themselves Against Drones.” Defense & 
Security. July 17, 2023. 
Krinitsky, Y. V., and V. G. Chekhovsky, “Spheres 
of Armed Struggle and Theaters of Military 
Operations [Сферы вооруженной борьбы и 
театры военных действий].” Voennaia Mysl’ 
9 (Sept. 30, 2022). 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   82  | www.cna.org   
Kryazhev, Vladimir S. “Assessment of the Military-
Political and Operational-Strategic Situation 
in the Russian Fleet Zones [Оценка 
Военно-Политической И Оперативно-
Стратегической Ситуации В Зонах Флотов 
России].” Morskoi Sbornik 2 (2019). 
Kryazhev, Vladimir S. “Military Security Issues in 
Russia at the End of the 20th – Beginning 
of the 21st Century [вопросы военной 
безопасности россии в конце xx - начале 
xxi в.].” Morskoi Sbornik 8 (2017). 
Kurbangaleeva, Farida. “Could Ukraine Launch a 
New Counteroffensive? [Может Ли Украина 
Пойти На Новое Контрнаступление?].” 
Republic (Slon). Dec. 14, 2023. 
Kurilov, S. N., A. N. Kiryushin, and Y. N. Moiseyev. 
“Current Problems of Air Forces Tactics 
and Ways to Solve Them [Современные 
проблемы тактики Военно-воздушных сил 
и пути их решения].” Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 
2021).
Linnik, E. A., D. V. Mitrofanov, and V. I. Stuchinsky. 
“Patterns and Principles of Developing 
Operational Requirements for the Structure 
and Composition of Aviation Groupings 
in the Strategic (Operational) Direction 
[Закономерности и Принципы Разрботки 
Оперативных Трбований к Струтруктуре 
и Составу Группиировки Авиации 
на Стратегическом (Операцинном) 
Направлении].” Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye 
Sily: Teoriya I Praktika 31 (Sept. 2024).
Litvinov, N. N. “Promising Areas in Introduction of 
Artificial Intelligence in Air Defense Systems 
[Перспективные Напрвления Внедрения 
Искусстевенного интеллекта в Системах 
Иротивовоздушной Обороны].” Vestnik 
Akademii Voyennykh Nauk 4/89 (2024).
Makarenko, S. I., and I. E. Afonin. “Modeling of 
Combat Aviation Operations and Assessment 
of Their Effectiveness: Analysis of Works, 
Models, Current Research Directions 
[Моделирование боевых действий авиации 
и оценки их эффективности – анализ 
работ, моделей, актуальных направлений 
исследований].” Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye 
Sily: Teoriya I Praktika 32 (2024).
Marzhetsky, Sergei. “Future of the Russian Fleet 
[Будущее Российского Флота].” Obozrenie 
Armii i Flota 1 (2023).
McDermott, Roger N., and Charles K. Bartles. An 
Assessment of the Initial Period of War: The 
Russia-Ukraine War, Part I. Fort Eustis, VA: US 
Army TRADOC, 2023.
Mikhailov, N. G., and A. V. Savitsky. “Development 
of Military Art and Possible Ways of Further 
Improvement [Развитие военного искусства 
и возможные пути его дальнейшего 
совершенствования].” Voennaia Mysl’ 2 
(2023). 
Moiseev, Alexander A. “Strategic Requirements for 
the Development of the Navy Potential of 
Russia Taking Into Account the Experience 
of the Special Military Operation in Ukraine 
[Стратегические требования к развитию 
военно-морского потенциала России 
с учетом опыта специальной военной 
операции на Украине].” Voennaia Mysl’ 9 
(2024).

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   83  | www.cna.org   
Muzyakov, S. I., and V. A. Ulitsky. “Troop 
Control: History of Development, Current 
Problems and Possible Ways to Solve Them 
[Управление Войсками: История Развития, 
Актуальные Проблемы И Возможные Пути 
Их Решения].” Vestnik Akademii Voennykh 
Nauk 4 (2024). 
Newdick, Thomas. “Russia’s S-70 Hunter Drone Was 
Armed When Shot Down by Friendly Fighter 
Over Ukraine.” The War Zone. Oct. 7, 2024. 
https://www.twz.com/air/russias-s-70-hunter-
drone-was-armed-when-shot-down-by-
friendly-fighter-over-ukraine.
Newdick, Thomas. “Soviet-Era M-55 Spy Plane May 
Be Headed to Support the War in Ukraine.” 
The War Zone. Nov. 21, 2023. https://www.
twz.com/soviet-era-m-55-spy-plane-may-be-
headed-to-war-in-ukraine.
Orlyansky, V. I., A. A. Gerasimov, and E. V. Bitner. 
“Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under 
Conditions of Use of Modern Intelligence 
Systems [Проблема маневра войсками 
в условиях применения противником 
овременных разведывательных систем].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 8 (2024).
Orlyansky, V. I., V. P. Gerasimov, and S. N. Rudenko. 
“Problems of Maneuvering Troops Under 
Conditions of Use of Modern Intelligence 
Systems [Проблема маневра войсками 
в условиях применения противником 
овременных разведывательных систем].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 7 (2024).
Orlyansky, Vladimir I. “Integrated Combat System: 
The Highest Form of Troop Organization 
[Интегрированная Боевая Система – 
Высшая Форма Организации Войск].” 
Vestnik Akademii Voennykh Nauk 3 (2024).
“Overcoming Air Defense [Преодоление ПВО].” 
Russian Ministry of Defense Military 
Encyclopedic Dictionary. https://encyclopedia.
mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.
htm?id=9329@morfDictionary.
Palachyov, D. A., R. Q. Nogin, and S. V. Kornev. 
“Possible Approaches to the Development of 
a Set of Measures to Improve Combat Duty 
in the Strategic Missile Forces in the Current 
Military-Political Situation [Возможные 
подходы к разработке комплекса 
мероприятий по совершенствованию 
боевого дежурства в РВСН в современной 
военно-политической обстановке].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 3 (2024).
Peck, Michael. “Russia’s Fearsome S-400 Air-
Defense Missiles Are Getting Unexpected 
Missions as Moscow Struggles in Ukraine.” 
Business Insider. May 25, 2023. https://www.
businessinsider.com/russia-using-s400-
air-defense-missiles-to-attack-ground-
targets-2023-5. 
Petersen, Michael. “Russian Navy and Naval 
Platforms.” In Assessing Russian Plans for 
Military Regeneration. Chatham House, 2024, 
29–35. 
Petrov, A., and D. Stolyarov. “Neutralizing Prompt 
Global Strike [Hейтрализуя быстрый 
глобальный удар].” Armeiskii Sbornik 8 (Aug. 
2024). 
Pluzhnikov, A. A., and O. B. Usachev, “Modern 
Requirements of Combined Arms Formations 
at the Tactical Level [Современные 
требования к общевойсковым 
формированиям тактического звена].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 5 (2022).

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   84  | www.cna.org   
Prudnikov, L. A., and A. V. Kuzmenko. “Application 
of Non-Military Measures in the Interests 
of Ensuring Russia’s Military Security 
[Применение невоенных мер в интересах 
обеспечения военной безопасности 
России].” Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (2023).
Romanchuk, A. V., and A. V. Shigan. “Prospects 
for Increasing Efficiency of Army Defensive 
Operations [Перспективы повышения 
эффективности армейских оборонительных 
операций].” Voennaia Mysl’ 4 (2023): 23–26. 
Rosa-Hernandez, Gabriela Iveliz, Anya Fink, and 
Cornell Overfield. Moscow Does Not Believe in 
Tears: Russia’s Political-Military Establishment 
Debates Credibility of Nuclear Threats and 
Potential Nuclear Employment. CNA. DRM-
2024-U-038138-1Rev. Sept. 2024. https://
www.cna.org/reports/2024/09/moscow-does-
not-believe-in-tears.
“Russia Attacks Wide Range of Targets in Ukraine.” 
Kyiv Independent. Feb. 24, 2022. https://
kyivindependent.com/russia-attacks-wide-
range-of-targets-in-ukraine-live-updates/.
“Russia ‘Shot Down Its Own Planes.’” BBC. 
July 9, 2009. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
europe/8142999.stm.
“Russian First Deputy Defense Minister Gerasimov: 
‘Our Response’ Is Based on the ‘Active 
Defense Strategy’; ‘We Must Act Quickly’ 
to ‘Preempt the Enemy...Identify His 
Vulnerabilities, and Create Threats of 
Unacceptable Damage to It.’” MEMRI. Mar. 14, 
2019. htps://www.memri.org/reports/russian-
firstdeputy-defense-minister-gerasimov-our-
response-based-acve-defense-strategy. 
Russian Maritime Studies Institute. Fundamentals 
of the State Policy of the Russian Federation 
in the Field of Naval Operations for the Period 
Until 2030. Translated by Anna Davis. 2017. 
“Russian Military Announces Plan to Expand, Create 
New Units.” AP News. Dec. 21, 2022. https://
apnews.com/article/putin-finland-sergei-
shoigu-ee953abf7f9bf217ccdaa61ec1b35ddd. 
Savushkina, M. A. “Proxy Warfare as a Phenomenon 
of Digital Society [Прокси-война как 
феномен цифрового общества].” Voennaia 
Mysl’ 1 (2024).
Schwartz, Paul, and Dmitry Gorenburg. Russian 
Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War. 
CNA. DRM-2024-U-037996-Rev1. Oct. 2024. 
Selivanov, V. V., and Yu. D. Ilyin. “Trends in the 
Development of Means of Armed Struggle in 
Modern Military Conflicts, Their Influence on 
the Development and Change of Generations 
of Weapons, Military and Special Equipment 
[Тенденции развития средств вооруженной 
борьбы в современных военных 
конфликтах, их влияние на развитие и 
смену поколений вооружения, военной 
и специальной техники].” Voennaia Mysl’ 9 
(Sept. 30, 2022): 29–44. 
Semenchenko, Igor, and Oleg Falichev. 
“Russian Aerospace Forces Have Gained 
Air Superiority, Not Dominance [ВКС 
России завладели превосходством, а не 
господством в воздухе].” Nezavisimoye 
Voyennoye Obozreniye 9 (Mar. 17, 2023).

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   85  | www.cna.org   
Semenov, A. G., Yu. V. Krinitsky, and V. G. 
Chekhovsky. “Armed Struggle in the 
Aerospace Theater of Military Operaons 
[Вооруженная борьба на воздушно-
космическом театре военных действий].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 1 (Jan. 2023): 19–27.
Serzhantov, A. V., A. V. Smolovy, and I. A. Terentyev. 
“Transformation of the Contents of War: 
Contours of Military Conflicts of the Future 
[Трансформация содержания войны: 
контуры военных конфликтов будущего].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 6 (June 30, 2022): 19–30.
Shamanov, V. A., V. V. Kulakov, and O. Y. Kashrina. 
“Directions for Improving Combat Use of 
the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation 
to Ensuring the Performance of Combat 
Missions of a Special Military Operation 
[Направления Совершенствования Боевого 
Применения Вооруженных Сил Российской 
Федерации По Обеспечению Выполнения 
Боевых Задач В Ходе Специальной 
Военной Операции].” Izvestiia Rossiiskoi 
Akademii Raketnykh i Artilleriiskikh Nauk (Feb. 
2023). 
“Shoigu: ‘The Russian Armed Forces’ Command 
and Communications System Will Be 
Improved Using AI Technologies [Шойгу: 
‘систему управления и связи ВС РФ 
усовершенствуют с применением 
технологий ИИ’].” TASS. Jan. 10, 2023. 
https://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/16766161.
Simpson, Michael, Adam Grissom, Christopher 
Mouton, John P. Hodges, and Russell Hanson. 
Road to Damascus: The Russian Air Campaign 
in Syria, 2015-2018. RAND. 2022. 
Sinikov, Anatoly A. “Contribution of Scientists of the 
Military Academy of the General Staff to the 
Development of the Theory of Operational 
Art of the Aerospace Forces (on the 190th 
Anniversary of the Founding of the Military 
Academy of the General Staff of the Russian 
Armed Forces) [Вклад ученых Военной 
академии Генерального штаба в развитие 
теории оперативного искусства Воздушно-
космических сил (к 190-летию со дня 
основания ВАГШ ВС РФ)].” Voennaia Mysl’ 11 
(Nov. 30, 2022). 
“Smart Small Calibers in the New Paradigm of War 
[Умные малые калибры в новой парадигме 
войны].” Arsenal Otechestva. Dec. 31, 2024. 
Stoll, Hunter, John Hoehn, and William Courtney. 
“Air Defense Shapes War Fighting in 
Ukraine.” Real Clear Defense. Feb. 22, 
2024. https://www.realcleardefense.com/
articles/2024/02/22/air_defense_shapes_
warfighting_in_ukraine_1013615.html. 
Sukalenko, E., A. Nagorskiy, and S. Dubchenko. “On 
the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part I [К 
Вопросу О Позиционном Тупике].” Armeiskii 
Sbornik 7 (2024).
Sukalenko, E., A. Nagorskiy, and S. Dubchenko. “On 
the Question of Positional Deadlock – Part 
III [К Вопросу О Позиционном Тупике].” 
Armeiskii Sbornik 9 (2024).
Sukalenko, E., V. Kamarenko, and A. Pasko. 
“Conquering Sea Dominance as the Main 
Goal of Using the Navy in Peace and Wartime 
[Завоевание Господства На Море Как 
Главная Цель Применения Вмф В Мирное 
И Военное Время].” Morskoi Sbornik 10 
(2024). 

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   86  | www.cna.org   
Sukalenko, Evgeny. “Modern Principles of 
Conducting Armed Warfare at Sea 
[Современные Принципы Ведения 
Вооруженной Борьбы На Море].” Morskoi 
Sbornik 10 (2016).
Thiele, Pascal, Laura Bernadó, David Löschenbrand, 
Benjamin Rainer, Christoph Sulzbachner, 
and Maria Leitner. “Machine Learning Based 
Prediction of Frequency Hopping Spread 
Spectrum Signals.” 2023 IEEE 34th Annual 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor 
and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2023, 1–6.
Thomas, Timothy. Russian Military Thought: 
Concepts and Elements. MITRE. 2019.
“Threatened Period [Угрожаемы Период].” 
Russian Ministry of Defense Military 
Encyclopedic Dictionary. htps://encyclopedia.
mil.ru/encyclopedia/diconary/details.
htm?id=10643@morfDiconary.
Timokhin, Aleksander. “Air Defense Suppression 
from World War II to Ukraine [Подавление 
ПВО: От Второй Мировой До Украины 
Аэрокосмическое обозрение].” 
Aerokosmicheskoye obozreniye 4 (2023).
“Top General Tells Putin How Russia Repelled Major 
Ukrainian Attack, Defence Ministry Says.” 
Reuters. June 8, 2023. https://www.reuters.
com/world/europe/top-general-tells-putin-
how-russia-repelled-major-ukrainian-attack-
defence-2023-06-08/.
Tsyganok, Anatoly. “The Use of Forces and Means 
of Electronic Warfare in Wars and Conflicts of 
the XXI Century [“Применение сил и средств 
РЭБ в войнах и конфликтах ХХI века].” 
Nezavisimaya Gazeta. Sept. 20, 2019.
Ulanov, A. “The Face of Future War [Облик Войн 
Будущего].” Armeiskii Sbornik 11 (Nov. 30, 
2022). 
Ulanov, A. “On Possible Areas of Application of 
Artificial Intelligence in Automation Systems 
of the Air Defense and Missile Defense 
Forces of the Russian Aerospace Forces [О 
возможных направлениях применения 
искусственного интеллекта в комплексах 
средств автоматизации войск ПВО-ПРО 
ВКС России].” Armeiskii Sbornik 2 (2022).
Vyatkin, Yaroslav. “Military-Political Forecast for 
2024 [Военно-Политический Прогноз На 
2024 Год].” Argumenty Nedeli. Jan. 10, 2024. 
Vyatkin, Yaroslav. “Russia Wins War of Attrition, but 
May Change Strategy [Россия Выигрывает 
Войну На Истощение, Но Может Изменить 
Стратегию].” Argumenty Nedeli. July 17, 2024. 
Yermolin, Oleg, Nikolay Zubov, and Mikhail Fomin. 
“Use of Strike Aviation of the Aerospace 
Forces in Military Conflicts of the Future 
[Применение ударной авиации Воздушно-
космических сил в военных конфликтах 
будущего].” Voennaia Mysl’ 2 (2023). 
Zubov, Nikolay P. “Possibilities of Using Artificial 
Intelligence in Tactical Tasks of Controlling 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles by Crews 
of Aviation Complexes [Возможности 
применения искусственного интеллекта 
в тактических задачах управления 
беспилотными летательными аппаратами 
экипажами авиационных комплексов].” 
Voennaia Mysl’ 4 (2022).

Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 
   87  | www.cna.org   
Zverev, Yu. M. “Military Security of Kaliningrad 
Oblast and Strengthening the Role of 
the Exclave Region in Ensuring Russia’s 
National Security [Военнаяа Безопаность 
Калинниградской Области И Уциление 
Роли Ексклавного Региона В Обеспечении 
Национальной Безопасности России].” 
Vestnik Akademii Voennikh Nauk 4/89 (2024).

   88  | www.cna.org   
PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Russian Concepts of Future Warfare Based  
on Lessons from the Ukraine War 

This report was written by CNA’s Strategy, Policy, Plans, and 
Programs Division (SP3).
SP3 provides strategic and political-military analysis informed by regional expertise to support 
operational and policy-level decision-makers across the Department of the Navy, the Office of the 
Secretary of Defense, the unified combatant commands, the intelligence community, and domestic 
agencies. The division leverages social science research methods, field research, regional expertise, 
primary language skills, Track 1.5 partnerships, and policy and operational experience to support 
senior decision-makers.
Any copyright in this work is subject to the Government’s Unlimited Rights license as defined in DFARS 252.227-7013 and/or 
DFARS 252.227-7014. The reproduction of this work for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited. Nongovernmental users 
may copy and distribute this document noncommercially, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice is reproduced in 
all copies. Nongovernmental users may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the 
copies they make or distribute. Nongovernmental users may not accept compensation of any manner in exchange for copies.
All other rights reserved. The provision of this data and/or source code is without warranties or guarantees to the Recipient 
Party by the Supplying Party with respect to the intended use of the supplied information. Nor shall the Supplying Party be 
liable to the Recipient Party for any errors or omissions in the supplied information.
This report may contain hyperlinks to websites and servers maintained by third parties. CNA does not control, evaluate, endorse, 
or guarantee content found in those sites. We do not assume any responsibility or liability for the actions, products, services, 
and content of those sites or the parties that operate them.

About CNA 
CNA is a not-for-profit analytical organization dedicated to the safety and security of the nation. With nearly 
700 scientists, analysts, and professional staff across the world, CNA’s mission is to provide data-driven, 
innovative solutions to our nation’s toughest problems. It operates the Center for Naval Analyses—the 
federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) of the Department of the Navy—as well as the 
Institute for Public Research. The Center for Naval Analyses provides objective analytics to inform decision-
making by military leaders and ultimately improve the lethality and effectiveness of the joint force. The 
Institute for Public Research leverages data analytics and sophisticated methods to support federal, state, 
and local government officials as they work to protect the homeland, the American people, and industry.
www.cna.org
DRM-2025-U-041457-1Rev   © 2025 CNA Corporation