DRM-2024-U-037996-1Rev  © 2024 CNA Corporation
OCTOBER 2024
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A.  
Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.
Russian Military Mobilization 
During the Ukraine War  
Evolution, Methods, and Net Impact
Paul Schwartz and Dmitry Gorenburg 
with contributions by Olga Thomas

Abstract
This paper examines Russian military mobilization efforts in the decades leading up to and during the war in Ukraine. 
The paper first highlights the evolving nature of Russia’s mobilization strategy from the Soviet era to the 2008 New 
Look reforms, finding that the strategy shifted significantly based on changes in the country’s geopolitical position, 
economic and financial conditions, underlying demographics, and expectations regarding future wars. Next, the paper 
examines Russia’s efforts to reform the mobilization process from 2008 to the eve of the Russia-Ukraine war, when 
Russia disbanded the Soviet-era mass mobilization force in favor of a permanent brigade structure. Most of the paper 
concentrates on Russian efforts to mobilize additional combat personnel to sustain the war effort in Ukraine. It finds 
that the Kremlin resorted to several “covert” mobilization methods to generate additional combat troops while seeking 
to avoid the mass mobilization of Russian reservists before ultimately calling for partial mobilization in September 
2022. Finally, the paper examines how Russia sustained combat power through the end of 2023 before summarizing 
mobilization’s effects on Russian forces in Ukraine and the larger war effort. Russia has found ways to sustain its forces 
in Ukraine through a series of ad hoc yet relatively effective methods of mobilization.
This document contains the best opinion of CNA at the time of issue. The views, opinions, and findings contained in this 
report should not be construed as representing the official position of the Department of the Navy.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.        10/2/2024
This work was created in the performance of Federal Government Contract Number N00014-22-D-7001.
Cover image: Cadet training at the Alexander Nevsky Military University, Voennye komissariaty Rossii (Apr. 2024).
This document may contain materials protected by the Fair Use guidelines of Section 107 of the Copyright Act, for 
research purposes only. Any such content is copyrighted and not owned by CNA. All rights and credits go directly to 
content’s rightful owner.
Approved by:  October 2024
 
David Knoll, Research Program Director 
Countering Threats and Challenges Program 
Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division
© 2024 CNA Corporation
Request additional copies of this document through inquiries@cna.org. 
This publication was funded by the Russia Strategic Initiative, U.S. European 
Command. The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily represent 
the views of the Department of Defense or the United States government.


Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   i  | www.cna.org   
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine met with 
unexpectedly stiff resistance from Ukrainian armed 
forces, causing Moscow’s multi-axis offensive into 
Ukrainian territory to founder quickly. The conflict 
then shifted to southeastern Ukraine, where it 
devolved into a large-scale war of attrition. Russia’s 
military reversals in Ukraine resulted in massive 
losses of Russian combat personnel, which drove 
the Kremlin to pursue a wide range of mobilization 
activities to replenish Russian combat forces in 
Ukraine. These included recruiting additional 
contract soldiers, expanding private military 
contractors, forming regional volunteer battalions, 
deploying Chechen militias, forcibly mobilizing 
Ukrainian separatists in the Donbas region, and—
most important—activating Russian reservists. 
This paper examines Russia’s military mobilization 
measures during the ongoing war in Ukraine. To 
provide context, the first section of this paper 
examines the historical role played by mobilization 
in Russian military strategy, including during the 
Soviet period. It also evaluates Russian efforts to 
reform the mobilization process from the beginning 
of the New Look reforms through the eve of the 
Ukraine invasion. The following section assesses 
the many measures used by Russia to mobilize 
additional combat troops for the war in Ukraine, 
seeking to replace its growing battlefield losses and 
achieve some semblance of victory. The last section 
sets forth the study’s key findings and discusses 
the future direction of Russian military mobilization 
based on lessons learned during the war. The key 
findings of this paper are as follows:
• Russia’s mobilization strategy has 
undergone significant changes over the 
past several decades because of changes in 
borders, geopolitical position, prospective 
adversaries, buffer zones, political will, and 
expectations regarding future conflict.
  During World War II, Russia maintained 
a large standing army backed by equally 
large mobilization echelons to counter 
the German Wehrmacht massed directly 
on its borders.
  During the Cold War, Russia leveraged its 
control of Eastern and Central Europe to 
maintain a large standing army forward 
deployed on the East German border 
to buy time to mobilize partially staffed 
cadre divisions farther to the rear.
  This mass mobilization army was 
maintained following the collapse of 
the Soviet Union until the Georgia war, 
after which it was disbanded in favor of 
a permanent readiness force based on 
fully staffed brigades. This decision was 
made to better prepare for local wars 
on Russia’s periphery and was based on 
expectations that a war with the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization would likely 
be short because of escalation risks. 
  As a hedge, Russia developed a nascent 
mobilization capability from 2014 to 
2022, although it was still a work in 
progress at the time of Russia’s 2022 
invasion of Ukraine.
• Russia faced three main problems associated 
with these decisions in light of the ongoing 
war in Ukraine:
  First, Russia may have made the wrong 
decision when it disbanded the Soviet-
era mass mobilization army without 
creating a viable alternative because it 
failed to anticipate becoming involved 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   ii  | www.cna.org   
in the kind of large-scale war of attrition 
that it is now waging in Ukraine.
  Second, because Russia failed to invest 
in an alternative mobilization capacity, 
when Putin finally ordered partial 
mobilization in September 2022, Russia 
lacked the mobilization mechanisms 
and structure to mobilize effectively, 
resulting in a chaotic, ad hoc effort.
  Third, despite efforts to create a 
nascent mobilization capacity, Putin 
was unwilling to order mobilization 
during the initial phase of war because 
of concerns over the associated political 
costs. Ordering a partial mobilization 
would have been inconsistent with the 
Kremlin’s characterization of the war as a 
“special military operation” to be carried 
out by Russia’s standing army without 
disrupting the general populace.
• These constraints led Putin to favor a 
“covert mobilization” strategy for much 
of the war, supplemented by his call for 
partial mobilization in September 2022. 
Thus, mobilization unfolded in three phases 
during the conflict:
  An initial covert mobilization phase, 
which took place from February to 
September 2022. During this phase, 
Russia resorted to a wide range of 
measures to mobilize additional combat 
troops for the battlefield while avoiding 
the mass mobilization of Russian 
reservists at all costs.
  A second phase centered on partial 
mobilization, which lasted from 
September 2022 to January 2023. During 
this phase, Putin finally ordered partial 
mobilization, calling up 300,000 Russian 
reservists when his depleted forces 
came under intense pressure due to 
Ukrainian counteroffensives at Kherson 
and Kharkiv. 
  A return to covert mobilization methods, 
highlighted by three principal lines of 
effort: recruiting additional combat 
personnel by the Wagner Group 
and other Russian private military 
contractors, recruiting additional 
contract soldiers for Russia’s regular 
armed forces, and recruiting additional 
volunteers for a wide range of Russian 
irregular forces.
• During the initial phase, Russia relied on 
a patchwork of mobilization measures to 
recruit or impress into service additional 
combat troops needed to support the war 
effort. These included efforts to recruit 
additional contract soldiers, establish 
volunteer battalions, mobilize separatist 
forces in the Donbas, form new Chechen 
militia units, activate Russian Combat Army 
Reserve active reserve units, and recruit 
additional private military contractors. 
Russia used a combination of conscription 
and voluntary recruiting methods—
involving a corresponding mix of coercion 
and voluntary cooperation—with varying 
degrees of success. 
• During phase two, Russia ordered the 
partial mobilization of Russian reservists. 
Partial mobilization was an ad hoc, chaotic 
affair with many problems due to both 
lack of proper preparations and loss of 
mobilization capacity during the war. These 
included inaccurate reservist registries, 
reliance on manual processes, and large-
scale efforts to evade call-up. Russia also 
lacked the necessary bases, military trainers, 
and equipment stores to properly train 
and equip newly mobilized reservists. 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   iii  | www.cna.org   
Nevertheless, partial mobilization generated 
300,000 combat troops for the war effort, 
and they proved instrumental in stabilizing 
the battlefront. 
• During the third phase, the Kremlin returned 
to the covert mobilization methods adopted 
during phase one but with greater success, 
having applied lessons learned during earlier 
mobilization efforts. The Kremlin concentrated 
on three principal lines of effort:
  First, the Wagner Group was given 
free rein to pursue large-scale 
prisoner recruiting, which proved 
highly successful in delivering tens 
of thousands of combat troops for 
operations near Bakhmut. 
  Second, Russia secured tens of 
thousands of additional volunteers 
for both existing and new regional 
volunteer formations and other irregular 
combat units. 
  Finally, and most important, after 
refining its approach, Russia successfully 
recruited at least tens of thousands of 
additional contract soldiers by providing 
high salaries and benefits and using 
carefully targeted messaging to appeal 
to the sense of duty and patriotism held 
by many Russian military-aged men. 
• Russian mobilization efforts have had 
mixed effects on Russian forces in the 
field. Reliance on such a wide range of 
mobilization measures undermined unity 
of effort and resulted in a patchwork of 
regular and irregular combat units at the 
front, leading to coordination problems 
and a fragmented chain of command. The 
influx of poorly trained personnel also led 
1  Riley Bailey et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, October 25, 2023,” Institute for the Study of War, Oct. 25, 2023, 
https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-october-25-2023. 
to a general degradation in the quality of 
Russian combat forces, which drove Russian 
military leaders to favor continuous infantry 
assaults over more sophisticated combined 
arms operations. These assaults contributed 
to further Russian battlefield losses, thereby 
perpetuating an insatiable demand for more 
combat troops. 
• Mobilization has been sufficient to allow 
Russian forces to blunt Ukraine’s summer 
2023 counteroffensive and more recently 
to achieve gains at Avdiivka. The Kremlin’s 
revised covert mobilization strategy has thus 
far been good enough to sustain Russian 
forces on the battlefield without the need 
for a second wave of mobilization. However, 
if Russia were to incur serious reversals 
on the battlefield akin to those it suffered 
during the Kharkiv counteroffensive, the 
Kremlin could very well feel compelled to 
resort to a second wave of mobilization.
• There are early indications that Russia is 
planning to revise its mobilization strategy 
based on lessons learned during the Russia-
Ukraine war. The Kremlin recently decided 
to build and maintain a larger standing 
army to reduce the country’s reliance on 
mobilizable reserves. Specifically, Russia’s 
armed forces will increase from 1.15 million 
troops to 1.5 million troops in total. The 
additional forces will be used to form a new 
army corps, 7 additional motorized rifle 
divisions, and 19 new brigades over the 
course of 2024.1 
• This force expansion will be achieved by 
increasing the number of contract soldiers 
to 695,000 without a corresponding increase 
in conscription. To this end, the Kremlin 
also recently announced plans to recruit 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   iv  | www.cna.org   
an additional 400,000 contract soldiers in 
2024. It appears highly unlikely that Russian 
military leaders will be able to achieve these 
lofty ambitions given the many difficulties 
that Russia has encountered in keeping 
pace with its ongoing battlefield losses. Yet 
these pronouncements offer an early view 
of how Russia is thinking about a revised 
mobilization strategy over the near- to mid-
term in light of its experiences in Ukraine.
Russia’s mobilization strategy 
evolved through trial, error, 
and adaptation, resulting 
in a diverse force plagued 
by coordination issues and 
diminished quality. 


Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   v  | www.cna.org   
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................1
Structure of the paper ............................................................................................................. 2
Scope, methodology, and sources ..................................................................................... 3
The History of Soviet and Russian Military Mobilization .......................5
The Soviet Union’s WWII mobilization system ..............................................................6
Cold War–era mobilization plans ........................................................................................9
The Afghan War .......................................................................................................................10
The post-Soviet period .........................................................................................................11
Addressing constraints ..........................................................................................................12
Effect of threat perception on mobilization plans .....................................................14
The 2009 military reform’s effect on mobilization .....................................................14
Russian Mobilization During the War in Ukraine ...................................17
Covert mobilization ................................................................................................................17
Introduction ...........................................................................................................................17
Contractors ............................................................................................................................19
LNR/DNR mobilization efforts ........................................................................................23
Private military contractors ..............................................................................................24
Chechen militias ...................................................................................................................27
Volunteer battalions ...........................................................................................................29
BARS units ..............................................................................................................................31
Partial mobilization .................................................................................................................33
Decision to mobilize ...........................................................................................................34
Resistance to mobilization ...............................................................................................35
Procedural and implementation issues ......................................................................36

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   vi  | www.cna.org   
Geographic and sectoral disparities .............................................................................37
Inadequate training and equipment ............................................................................37
End of mobilization and net effect ...............................................................................39
Return to mobilization by other means .........................................................................40
Introduction ...........................................................................................................................40
Private military contractors ..............................................................................................41
Irregular volunteers ............................................................................................................45
Contractor recruiting ..........................................................................................................46
Net effect of mobilization on Russian forces in Ukraine ......................................51
Key Findings and Conclusions .......................................................................53
References..............................................................................................................58
 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   1  | www.cna.org   
INTRODUCTION
2  Phil Stewart, “CIA Director Estimates 15,000 Russians Killed in Ukraine War,” Reuters, July 20, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/
world/europe/cia-director-says-some-15000-russians-killed-ukraine-war-2022-07-20/.   
3  For purposes of this review, mobilization is defined as the structures, methods, and processes used by the Russian armed forces 
to scale up their combat forces from standing peacetime levels to the levels required to sustain large-scale combat operations in 
Ukraine. The term also includes ongoing efforts to replenish Russian combat forces in Ukraine and sustain Russian combat power 
as casualties continue to mount. The definition is intended to be expansive, encompassing a range of activities used to generate 
additional combat troops for the Russia-Ukraine war, whether assigned to Russian regular forces, such as the Ground Forces, Naval 
Infantry, or Airborne Forces, or the many irregular combat units that have been used in Ukraine, including private military contractors, 
volunteer battalions, and Chechen militias. Mobilization also includes the activation of Russian military reservists, which is a narrower 
but more commonly used definition of the term. 
Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine met 
with unexpectedly stiff resistance from Ukrainian 
armed forces, causing Moscow’s multi-axis offensive 
into Ukrainian territory to founder rapidly. During 
the first two months of the war, Russia suffered 
extensive battlefield casualties as its initial invasion 
force proved highly vulnerable to Ukrainian 
countermeasures. After Russian forces withdrew 
from around Kyiv and reconcentrated in the Donbas 
region, the conflict devolved into a grinding large-
scale war of attrition, generating massive additional 
losses for Russian combat personnel. By July 2022, 
Central Intelligence Agency Director William Burns 
estimated that Russian casualties had already 
reached 15,000 killed and 45,000 wounded.2
The magnitude of Russian battlefield casualties 
in Ukraine drove the Kremlin to pursue a wide 
range of mobilization activities in an attempt to 
replenish Russian combat forces in Ukraine. These 
included recruiting additional contract soldiers, 
deploying private military contractors, forming 
regional volunteer battalions, expanding Chechen 
militias, forcibly mobilizing Ukrainian separatists 
in the Donbas region, activating Russian Combat 
Army Reserve (BARS) combat personnel, and, 
most important, enacting a large-scale “partial 
mobilization” of Russian military reservists. 
Such measures were only partially successful in 
replenishing Russian combat forces in Ukraine and 
restoring Russian military power. Continuing high 
casualty rates have generated repeated cycles 
of mobilization and further attrition, which have 
left Russian forces at the front precariously thin 
throughout the war. By late summer 2022, Russian 
forces had become so depleted that they were 
especially vulnerable to Ukrainian counteroffensives 
launched at that time. 
Throughout the war, however, Russia has managed 
to generate sufficient combat troops to sustain the 
war effort. Most recently, the influx of reinforcements 
was sufficient to allow Russian forces to blunt the 
2023 Ukrainian counteroffensive and preserve their 
previous gains in Ukraine. So how did Russia manage 
to achieve these successes?
Structure of the paper
To address this question, this paper examines 
Russian military mobilization activities, methods, and 
processes used during the ongoing war in Ukraine. 3 
To set the stage for this discussion, the first section 
of this paper explores the role of mobilization in 
Russian military strategy. The first part of this section 
examines the history of mobilization during the 
Soviet and post-Soviet eras up to the beginning of the 
New Look reforms in 2008. It examines how Russian 
mobilization changed over this period in response 
to the country’s changing internal conditions and 
geopolitical situation. 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   2  | www.cna.org   
The second part of this section examines Russian 
efforts to reform the mobilization system from the 
start of the New Look reforms in 2008 to the eve of the 
Ukraine invasion in 2022. It examines disbandment 
of the Soviet-era mass mobilization system following 
Russia’s uneven military performance during 
the Georgia war. Transitioning to a force based 
on permanent readiness brigades represented 
a fundamental shift in Russia’s mobilization 
strategy. However, the need to maintain a modified 
mobilization capability also influenced Russian 
thinking during this period, leading to additional 
reforms to restore some degree of mobilization 
capability. Yet these reforms were still very much 
a work in progress in February 2022 when Russia 
invaded Ukraine.
The second section of the paper provides an in-
depth assessment of Russia’s ongoing mobilization 
efforts during the Russia-Ukraine war. It examines 
the various mobilization efforts undertaken by Russia 
during the conflict, ranging from the recruitment 
of additional contract soldiers to the deployment 
of irregular Chechen militias. The applicable review 
period for this paper runs from February 24, 2022 
(the date of the invasion) through December 31, 
2023. For each line of effort, the paper describes 
the particular force structure being mobilized or 
replenished, the reasons why Russia chose to pursue 
that line of effort, the methods used to recruit or 
mobilize additional combat troops, and the net 
effect on Russian combat forces in Ukraine. This 
section of the paper is structured so that each part 
offers different insights into Russia’s mobilization 
methods and processes.
The first part of this section examines Russian 
mobilization efforts from February to September 
2022, during what is called the covert mobilization 
period. During this phase of the conflict, Russia 
adopted a wide range of measures to generate 
additional combat troops for its forces in Ukraine 
while purposely avoiding the large-scale call-up of 
military reserves. This part provides a broad view of 
the many measures used by the Kremlin to generate 
additional combat troops by covering six separate 
lines of effort pursued by Russian leadership to 
mobilize and recruit new combat troops. This part 
is intended to illustrate the decentralized nature of 
Russian mobilization efforts as well as the country’s 
reliance on a wide range of both regular and irregular 
combat forces in Ukraine.
The second part examines Russia’s response to 
President Vladimir Putin’s September 2022 decree 
ordering a partial mobilization of hundreds of 
thousands of Russian reservists. Although partial 
mobilization was both chaotic and technically 
challenging, the generation of 300,000 combat 
troops played a major role in restoring Russian 
combat power in Ukraine. This part offers an in-
depth review of partial mobilization while providing 
a detailed assessment of the many challenges that 
Russia faced in carrying it out as well as the ultimate 
successes achieved. It also emphasizes the heavy 
political costs incurred by the Kremlin in ordering 
partial mobilization, which triggered substantial 
political backlash and significant emigration.
The third part examines alternative Russian 
mobilization efforts both during and after completion 
of partial mobilization, providing a more focused 
assessment of Russian mobilization during 2023. It 
focuses its assessment on the three most important 
mobilization lines of effort undertaken by Russian 
leadership during 2023: the continued mobilization 
of combat personnel by Russian private military 
contractors, most notably the Wagner Group; efforts 
to recruit additional volunteers for the many irregular 
combat units deployed in Ukraine; and efforts to 
recruit additional contract soldiers for Russia’s regular 
armed forces, which became the most important 
Russian mobilization effort during 2023. Although 
Russia continued to rely on a variety of other methods 
to generate additional combat power, these three 
measures were the principal lines of effort in 2023.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   3  | www.cna.org   
The final section of the paper sets forth the study’s 
key findings and conclusions. It also describes lessons 
learned by Russia in effectively mobilizing combat 
power during the war. This section concludes by 
briefly discussing Russia’s plans to expand its military 
and the viability of such plans.
Scope, methodology, and sources
The foregoing assessments were driven by a series 
of research questions based on discussions with 
the sponsor:
• How has Russia’s mobilization strategy 
evolved over the past several decades? 
What factors have driven changes in Russia’s 
mobilization strategy?
• What measures did Russian leaders take 
to develop a viable mobilization strategy 
during the period from the 2008 New Look 
reforms to the eve of the invasion? How 
effective were those preparations?
• During the Russia-Ukraine war, what 
measures has Russia taken to scale up 
its peacetime combat forces for armed 
conflict with Ukraine and sustain Russian 
combat power in Ukraine? How has Russia’s 
approach to mobilization evolved over 
time? What particular lines of effort has 
Russia pursued?
• For each line of effort, what specific 
measures did Russian leaders take to bolster 
their combat forces in Ukraine, why did they 
pursue such measures, how successful were 
these measures, and what was the net effect 
of the measures on the battlefield?
• How well have Russian mobilization efforts 
as a whole met Russia’s troop requirements 
on the battlefield? In what ways have they 
strengthened Russia’s war effort, and in 
what ways have they undermined it?
• How sustainable are Russia’s current 
mobilization efforts likely to be over the 
near term as the conflict continues? Under 
what conditions is the Kremlin likely to 
resort to a second wave of mobilization?
• What lessons have Russian leaders learned 
from their experience with mobilization 
during the Russia-Ukraine war? To what 
extent is Russia likely to modify its 
mobilization strategy over the near- to mid-
term in light of these lessons learned?
To address these questions, the project team 
systematically collected relevant data covering both 
the pre-war period and the relevant review period 
for the war in Ukraine (i.e., February 2022 through 
December 2023). For the pre-war period, the 
research team relied heavily on data from the Soviet 
and post-Soviet periods, including Russian military 
journals, local media reports, in-depth analyses, 
and other scholarly works. For the war in Ukraine, 
the project team systematically reviewed daily and 
weekly reports on the war (especially those compiled 
by groups such as the Institute for the Study of War 
and Rochan Consulting) while supplementing these 
sources with articles, reports, and other analytical and 
specialized materials drawn from a variety of sources. 
These resources included primary and secondary 
Russian-, English-, and Ukrainian-language sources, 
open-source media reporting, social media, official 
documents and statements, journals, think tank 
reports, and Western and Ukrainian declassified 
intelligence reports. 
The collected data were then subdivided into various 
categories, each of which corresponded with an 
individual line of effort pursued by Russia to mobilize 
additional combat troops for the war effort. Next, 
the project team collected additional data to expand 
the research and develop greater confidence in the 
initial findings. In the process, the collected data 
were validated using applicable rules of evidence and 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   4  | www.cna.org   
other indicia of reliability. For example, preference 
was given to the following: objective reporting from 
credible sources, reports that were corroborated, 
admissions by Russian sources of shortcomings in 
mobilization efforts, detailed reporting, and well-
reasoned and in-depth analyses from recognized 
experts in the field.
The paper’s focus is Russia’s efforts to shore up its 
“combat forces” in Ukraine as opposed to its internal 
security forces. For this reason, the paper excludes 
coverage of Rosgvardia (Russia’s national guard), 
Ministry of Interior forces, and Federal Security 
Service FSB security forces (such as the Russian Coast 
Guard). Even though these forces have played a role 
at times in Russian combat operations in Ukraine, 
their main mission is defending the homeland, 
addressing the country’s internal security problems, 
and pacifying occupied territories. 
For the same reason, the paper excludes coverage 
of Russian conscription efforts during the Russia-
Ukraine war. Even though conscription is an important 
tool for maintaining the total force size of Russia’s 
regular armed forces, Russian conscripts are generally 
prohibited by Russian law from being committed to 
armed combat except in the case of a full military 
mobilization or a declaration of martial law. 
Absent such declarations, conscripts are required 
by law to be used solely within the borders of the 
Russian Federation. Although several hundred Russian 
conscripts were sent into battle during the initial 
invasion, once this became publicly known, deployed 
conscripts were quickly withdrawn from the front and 
have since been largely withheld from Russian combat 
operations in Ukraine. Hence, ongoing conscription 
efforts do not directly support Russia’s efforts to 
replenish its combat forces in Ukraine.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   5  | www.cna.org   
THE HISTORY OF SOVIET AND 
RUSSIAN MILITARY MOBILIZATION
4  During the run-up to the 2022 invasion of Ukraine, Russia also drew forces from various units across the country. But in this case, 
such efforts were carried out in accordance with pre-war planning, in which brigades and divisions were each expected to force 
generate one to two battalion tactic groups. By contrast, during the wars in Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Georgia, Russian leaders had 
to scrape together forces in an ad hoc manner from existing partially staffed cadre units across the country. 
Mobilization does not occur in a vacuum. Rather, how 
a country plans for mobilization and how it actually 
mobilizes for armed conflict are a function of many 
factors, including demographics; economic, industrial, 
and financial constraints; political will and political 
cohesion; existing force structure; and overall military 
doctrine. Mobilization strategy is also dependent on a 
country’s strategic posture, the geopolitical conditions 
that it faces, and, most important, the kinds of wars 
that it is preparing to fight.
In Russia’s case, its mobilization strategy has 
undergone substantial revisions over the years 
as the country’s internal and external conditions 
have changed. The Soviet Union’s pre–World War 
II mobilization strategy was designed for a country 
facing a large and well-equipped German army 
without a suitable buffer zone separating the two 
forces. This situation required Russia to maintain a 
large standing army on its western border with an 
even larger set of rapidly mobilizable cadre divisions 
deployed at varying distances to the rear. 
During the Cold War period, the Soviet Union’s 
armed forces were able to forward deploy in 
Central Europe, affording them greater time to 
mobilize in the event of conflict with the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). This situation 
necessitated a change in approach centered on 
maintaining permanent ready forces near the East 
German border supplemented by partially staffed 
mobilization cadres at varying levels of readiness. 
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the 
loss of its Eastern European empire, Russian forces 
lost most of their strategic depth, necessitating 
further revisions to Russia’s mobilization strategy. 
However, because of the chaotic conditions facing 
Russia in the 1990s and internal resistance to large-
scale military reforms, the country failed to make the 
required changes to its mobilization strategy until 
2008, in the aftermath of the Georgia War. 
Russia’s mobilization strategy, which was designed 
primarily for a large-scale war with Germany and 
later NATO, proved repeatedly to be poorly suited 
to the kinds of wars that the Soviet Union and later 
Russia actually fought. The war in Afghanistan, the 
two Chechen wars, and the Georgia war all posed 
serious challenges to Russia’s mobilization strategy 
because its standing army, which was heavily reliant 
on partially staffed cadre divisions, was unable to 
muster enough troops to effectively fight these small 
wars without improvised measures, such as drawing 
forces from units across the country. 4 Thus, in each 
case, the existing mobilization system was incapable 
of supporting the kind of rapid deployment required.
The Kremlin’s growing recognition of these 
deficiencies finally drove it to make radical changes 
to Russia’s mobilization strategy starting in 2008 as 
part of the New Look reforms. The disbandment of 
the mass mobilization system in favor of permanent 
ready combat brigades that could be rapidly 
deployed was the most notable outcome of these 
reforms. However, the system that emerged would 
prove once again to be poorly suited to the kind of 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   6  | www.cna.org   
large-scale protracted war that Russia finds itself 
waging in Ukraine. 
Given the long-term evolution of Russian 
mobilization strategy, a review of Russia’s historical 
experience with mobilization and its evolving 
mobilization capabilities and strategies is warranted 
to provide useful context for understanding 
Russia’s mobilization approaches in Ukraine and 
the challenges that it has faced during the ongoing 
conflict. The first parts of this section examine 
Russia’s experience with mobilization during the 
Soviet and post-Soviet periods up through the 
end of the Georgia war. The following subsections 
evaluate changes made to the mobilization system 
under the New Look reforms together with efforts 
to create a complementary mobilization strategy 
before the Ukraine invasion. As this section will show, 
many of the approaches adopted by Russia during 
previous mobilization efforts as well as the problems 
that it encountered have reemerged in relation to 
Russian mobilization efforts during the current war 
in Ukraine.
The Soviet Union’s WWII 
mobilization system
Although the experience of World War II is usually 
considered to play a foundational role in Soviet 
and subsequent Russian military thinking, the most 
influential Soviet military theorists, such as Alexander 
Svechin and Vladimir Triandafillov, wrote their key 
texts in the period leading up to that war. They initially 
focused on developing war plans and strategies aimed 
at defending the Soviet Union against revanchist 
5  David Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War, 1924–1942: A Survey,” Journal of Soviet Military Studies 5, no. 3 (1992), p. 325.
6  Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War,” p. 330. Russia would return to these themes during the ongoing war in Ukraine by 
forming new combat units staffed and equipped by the regions as well as units based on specific nationalities, such as Chechen and 
Cossack forces.
7  S. V. Lipitsky, “Voennaia reforma 1924–1925 godov” [The military reforms of 1924–1925], Kommunist no. 4 (Mar. 1990), p. 106.
8  Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War,” pp. 328–29. During the Russia-Ukraine war, Russia would deploy analogous forces, 
namely BARS units that during peacetime were made up of part-time military reservists who continued to hold full-time civilian jobs 
but who could be mobilized in time of war.
Eastern European successor states such as Poland 
and Romania, possibly backed by major Western 
European powers. These plans required a relatively 
modest mobilization capacity. 5 Nevertheless, this 
period was significant because it was the first Soviet 
experience with planning for mobilization, and it set 
the stage for future developments.
During the late 1920s and early 1930s, the Soviet 
military developed a mobilization capacity based on 
territorial and militia forces that were responsible for 
training conscripts and reservists during peacetime. 
These trainees could then be incorporated into the 
regular military in the event of a major war. Sixty 
percent of infantry divisions were territorial militia 
units, generally staffed and maintained by specific 
regions located in the country’s interior. In addition, 
one division and three regiments were based on 
specific nationalities rather than territories. 6 Only 
those infantry divisions located in border areas were 
maintained at full staffing. 7 During this period, all 
male citizens aged 19 to 40 were subject to military 
service, which officially included two years of training 
followed by five years of regular service and then 
reserve duty. In practice, conscripts served two to 
four years, depending on the military branch, and 
were thereafter granted furlough and moved into the 
reserve. Those who were conscripted into territorial 
units received three months of training during the 
first year of service and one to two months per 
year thereafter while continuing to live in their own 
homes and maintaining their civilian employment. 8 
Territorial units were maintained at three manning 
levels, with first-line divisions staffed at 20 percent 
during peacetime, second-line divisions at 5 percent, 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   7  | www.cna.org   
and third-line divisions consisting of just a few 
permanent cadre units that would lead any leftover 
reserve personnel. Cadre units in the regular military 
were also not fully staffed, with first-line divisions 
staffed at 33 percent and second-line divisions at 5 
percent, the same level as the second-line territorial 
divisions. War plans included a mobilization calendar 
that would in theory ensure “a smooth transition from 
peacetime to wartime footing,” allowing the Soviet 
state to more than double the size of its military in 
the event of a war.9 In other words, mobilization was 
expected to occur gradually during the early stages 
of hostilities.
As the global political situation deteriorated in the 
late 1930s, the Soviet Union identified Germany 
and Italy as the most likely and serious threats and 
determined that a much larger peacetime army was 
required to counter the growing danger of large-scale 
war. The 1938 war plan called for full mobilization 
before the start of hostilities rather than the prior 
plan for a more gradual mobilization. The plan more 
than doubled the overall size of the mobilizable 
force “from under 200 divisions in the 1920s to well 
over 400 by 1941.”10 This increase in size and speed 
of potential mobilization required more complex 
mobilization planning and led to a transition to a fully 
cadre-based military that provided much greater 
mobilization capacity starting in the mid-1930s. 
Given the much greater threat perception in the 
late 1930s, the Soviet military recognized that its 
existing territorially based force generation system 
was inadequate. As one Russian analyst highlighted, 
9  Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War,” pp. 329–30.
10  Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War,” p. 336.
11  I. B. Pavlovsky, Sukhoputnye voiska SSSR [The ground forces of the USSR] (Moscow, 1985), pp. 65–68.
12  Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War,” p. 341.
13  S. A. Tiushkevich, ed., Sovetskie vooruzhennye sily [The Soviet Armed Forces] (Moscow, 1978), p. 236.
14  Russian use of covert (concealed) mobilization has been a continuing theme during the ongoing war in Ukraine.
15  Albert Z. Conner, “Soviet Ground Force Mobilization Potential: Lessons of the Past and Implications for the Future,” Journal of 
Soviet Military Studies 1, no. 2 (1988), p. 217.
“One of the main reasons [for this inadequacy] was 
that the temporary manpower of territorial units and 
formations at short muster already [was] not in a 
condition to master the new complex technology and 
learn how to employ it in ever-changing conditions.”11 
As a result of this analysis, the Soviet military began 
to shift to a fully cadre-based system in 1937 and had 
phased out all territorial divisions and nationality-
based units by January 1939. The legal basis for this 
transformation included a new law that increased the 
term of military service to three years and provided 
for better training. At the same time, “the military 
district system was reformed to improve efficiency in 
processing military manpower.”12 The new manning 
system retained three levels of readiness, with 
first-line divisions at 50 percent strength during 
peacetime, second-line divisions at 36 percent, and 
third-line divisions described as reserves that would 
form during mobilization. 13 These changes allowed 
the Soviet military to grow in size from 1.5 million 
personnel at the start of 1938 to 4.2 million by the 
end of 1940. 
As fears of war accelerated from 1939 through the 
first half of 1941, the Soviet military undertook a 
concealed partial mobilization that then transitioned 
into full-scale wartime mobilization after the German 
invasion on June 22. 14 During the first stage of this 
effort, the military increased its manpower above 
regular peacetime strength by retaining the 1916 
birth cohort in active service and partially mobilizing 
men of the 1913–1920 birth cohorts who were not 
already serving. 15 A second secret mobilization  
 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   8  | www.cna.org   
was carried out in the spring of 1941, including 
additional mobilization of men from the 1913–1920 
birth cohorts, “the accelerated induction of two-
thirds of the 1922 and one-half of the 1921 year 
groups and the cancellation of all furloughs.” 16 At 
least 30 divisions were moved from interior military 
districts to border regions between April and June 
1941. In addition, 800,000 reservists were called 
up for service starting in late May. By the time of 
the German invasion, 56 divisions and 2 brigades 
were in the immediate vicinity of the border, with 
52 divisions located 50 to 100 kilometers from the 
border. Another 62 divisions were held in reserve 
100 to 400 kilometers from the border.17 
The Soviet mobilization system on the eve of World 
War II not only planned for the deployment of troops 
to the front before the outbreak of hostilities and in 
the early stages of the war but also focused on the 
need to rotate personnel every four to eight months 
during a long war. This system required “timely and 
uninterrupted training of called-up contingents.” 18 
To achieve this goal, the 1938 law on universal 
military service created several military training 
programs and implemented military training among 
the population. This system provided basic training 
to 14 million men before the start of the war.19 
The Soviet military underestimated the timing, speed, 
and scale of the German offensive and misjudged 
the locus of Germany’s attack, which resulted in the 
serious military defeats of the early period after the 
16  Conner, “Soviet Ground Force Mobilization Potential,” p. 218.
17  Andreĭ Antonovich Grechko and Dmitriĭ Fedorovich Ustinov, eds., Istorii vtoroi mirovoi voiny 1939–1945, T-3 [History of the Second 
World War, vol. 3] (Moscow, 1974), p. 441.
18  R. A. Savushkin, Razvitie sovetskikh vooruzhennykh sil I voennogo iskusstva v mezhvoennyi period 1921–1941 gg [The development 
of the Soviet Armed Forces and military art in the interwar period] (Moscow: Lenin Military-Political Academy, 1989), p. 6.
19  Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War,” p. 345.
20  Ukrainian forces and their Western backers have at times underestimated Russia’s ability to mobilize additional combat personnel 
to sustain its forces during the current war in Ukraine.
21  Conner, “Soviet Ground Force Mobilization Potential,” p. 218.
22  A. G. Khor’kov, “Nekotorye voprosy strategicheskogo razvertyvaniia Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh Sil v nachale Velikoi Otechestvennoi 
voiny” [Some questions of the strategic deployment of the Soviet Armed Forces at the beginning of the Great Patriotic War], Voenno-
istoricheskii zhurnal no. 1 (Jan. 1986), p. 13.
23  A. I. Evseev, “Manevr strategicheskimi rezervami v pervom periode Velikoi Otechestvennoi voiny” [The maneuver of strategic 
reserves in the first period of the Great Patriotic War], Voenno-istoricheskii zhurnal no. 3 (Mar. 1986), pp. 12–14.
German invasion. At the same time, the German 
military underestimated the significance of the Soviet 
mobilization system, largely disregarding third-line 
divisions with their insignificant peacetime staffing 
in its assessments of Soviet military strength. 20 
Given that German planners believed that they 
could achieve the military objectives of Operation 
Barbarossa in approximately four months, they also 
believed that the Soviet Union would be unable 
to generate additional forces before its defeat. As 
it turned out, the Soviet military fielded 291 new 
divisions and 94 new brigades between June 22 
and December 1, 1941, because of rapid full-scale 
mobilization of personnel. Approximately 100 of the 
291 “new” divisions were existing third-line divisions 
that were brought to full strength and transferred 
to the front, and close to 200 divisions were formed 
from scratch purely from mobilized personnel. This 
mobilization was carried out by calling up all physically 
fit men aged 20 to 35 over a six-month period at a 
rate at which newly forming units could absorb the 
personnel.21 An additional 50 new divisions were 
formed in 1942, and another 67 divisions were re-
formed with mobilized personnel to replace those 
lost at the front.22 This process continued as the war 
went on, with another 42 divisions and 44 brigades 
formed in 1943, although at a slower rate because by 
this point the Soviet Union had achieved numerical 
superiority. After 1943, the Soviet military stopped 
creating new units, with fresh conscripts being used 
to refresh existing units.23 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   9  | www.cna.org   
According to military historian David Glantz, these 
waves of newly mobilized forces “put at the disposal 
of the [High Command] sizeable fresh strategic 
reserves after each operational disaster and provided 
staying power for the Red Army.”24 This mobilization 
allowed the Soviet military to compensate for its 
initial failure to reach mobilization targets, assessed 
as being caused by “an inadequate amount of trained 
reserves, especially officers, an inadequate amount of 
reserve armament and equipment, and an inadequate 
transportation system.”25 Even though the speed 
of the German advance overwhelmed the Soviet 
military repeatedly in the early months of the war and 
prevented existing mobilization plans from being fully 
implemented as designed, the Red Army was able to 
adapt to the situation, modify its plans on the fly, and 
eventually stop the German advance by exploiting the 
numerical advantage of its large population.26 
Cold War–era mobilization plans
At the conclusion of World War II, the Soviet military 
undertook an organized demobilization effort that 
by its conclusion at the end of 1947 had reduced 
the size of the military by 70 percent, from more 
than 10 million to just 3 million personnel. 27 The 
effort involved a rapid increase in the number 
of military districts, with each district organizing 
the demobilization effort on its own territory. The 
demobilization took place “in six stages beginning 
with the 13 oldest year groups.”28 
24  Glantz, “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and War,” p. 352.
25  Conner, “Soviet Ground Force Mobilization Potential,” p. 225.
26  Russian forces have likewise demonstrated a remarkable ability to improvise new mobilization methods on the fly during the 
ongoing war in Ukraine, albeit with mixed success.
27  Военный Энциклопедический Словарь  [Military Encyclopedic Dictionary] (Moscow: Ministry of Defense of the USSR, 1983), 
pp. 227–28.
28  Conner, “Soviet Ground Force Mobilization Potential,” p. 219.
29  David Isby, “Uncle Joe’s Last Army: Stalin’s Post-War Army and Its Lessons for Gorbachev’s Post-Cold War Army and Russia’s 
Post-Soviet Army,” Colloquium on Contemporary History, Dec. 18, 1991, no. 6, https://www.history.navy.mil/research/library/online-
reading-room/title-list-alphabetically/s/stalins-cold-war-military-machine.html#isby.
30  Conner, “Soviet Ground Force Mobilization Potential,” p. 227.
31  Department of Defense, Soviet Military Power, 6th ed., Mar. 1987, p. 96.
At the same time, the military developed a plan to 
rapidly restore itself to its wartime manning level of 
10 million. The Soviet Army “positioned a number of 
cadre formations forward, in their zone of occupation 
in Germany.” It also reduced the number of units in a 
way that allowed subsequent rapid expansion. Indeed, 
“many divisions became the component regiments of 
other divisions in 1945–1948 but had the potential to 
be reconstituted as a division on mobilization.”29 
This mobilization plan involved several phases. In the 
first phase, support troops, including all conscripts 
serving their 2 years of mandatory military service, 
would be sent to the front in the first 5 days after 
mobilization was declared. The first set of reserves 
would be mobilized within 30 days, including the recall 
of all reserves 3 or fewer years from their mandatory 
service. This phase would bring the total active force to 
more than 6 million personnel. In the next phase, which 
would last 120 to 150 days after the start of mobilization, 
reserves up to age 35 would be called up and rear 
service and training establishments would be deployed 
to the front, bringing the total force strength to more 
than 10 million.30 This plan remained more or less in 
place into the late 1980s, when the US Department of 
Defense’s Soviet Military Power publication assessed 
that the Soviet Union could quickly mobilize up to 9 
million active reservists who had been trained within 
the last 5 years to bring reduced-strength units, cadre 
units, and mobilization bases consisting of inactive 
equipment sets to full strength within 60 days.31

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   10  | www.cna.org   
These phases interlock with the three levels of 
combat readiness described in Soviet-era General 
Staff Academy lecture materials on combat 
readiness. The first level, described as constant 
readiness, represents normal routines such as 
regular training and exercises of peacetime units. 
The second level, called increased combat readiness, 
includes personnel being recalled to garrisons, leave 
being canceled, and exercises being used as cover 
for covert partial mobilization. The third level, called 
full combat readiness, includes full mobilization of 
all personnel “with the aim of bringing units to their 
full combat strength.”32 
The Afghan War
Although the Soviet military did not conduct a 
general mobilization at any point before or during the 
Afghan War, it did conduct some limited mobilization 
activities related to the deployment of the so-called 
Limited Contingent of Soviet Forces to Afghanistan 
in December 1979. This mobilization was necessary 
because during the Cold War few Soviet units were 
at a high state of readiness. 33 A recently published 
article in the authoritative military journal Military 
Thought analyzes this experience and suggests some 
lessons for current Russian military operations and 
32  John Yurechko, “The Soviet Combat Readiness System,” Journal of Soviet Military Studies 1, no. 2 (1988), pp. 235–37.
33  Rod Thornton, Military Modernization and the Russian Ground Forces (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2011), p. 12, https://
press.armywarcollege.edu/monographs/577/.
34  V. E. Kalugin, S. V. Kukharskiy, and V. M. Svatalov, Историческая роль и результаты работы организационно-мобилизационных 
органов при подготовке и применении соединений и воинских частей Вооруженных Сил СССР на территории Демократической 
Республики Афганистан [The historical role and results of the work of organizational and mobilization bodies in the preparation and 
use of formations and military units of the USSR Armed Forces on the territory of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan], Voennaya 
Mysl (Jan. 2024), pp. 122–30.
35  Kalugin, Kukharskiy, and Svatalov, Историческая роль и результаты работы организационно-мобилизационных органов 
при подготовке и применении соединений и воинских частей Вооруженных Сил СССР на территории Демократической 
Республики Афганистан [The historical role and results of the work of organizational and mobilization bodies in the preparation and 
use of formations and military units of the USSR Armed Forces on the territory of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan], p. 124.
36  By contrast, the prohibition on using Russian conscripts for combat missions has served as an important constraint on Russian 
mobilization efforts during the current war in Ukraine.
37  Kalugin, Kukharskiy, and Svatalov, Историческая роль и результаты работы организационно-мобилизационных органов 
при подготовке и применении соединений и воинских частей Вооруженных Сил СССР на территории Демократической 
Республики Афганистан [The historical role and results of the work of organizational and mobilization bodies in the preparation and 
use of formations and military units of the USSR Armed Forces on the territory of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan], p. 127.
planning.34 In the run-up to the Soviet intervention, 
five divisions were brought to full readiness. At the 
time of deployment, the military did not announce 
a mobilization but instead conducted “individual 
mobilization events…under the guise of training 
exercises.”35 Forces from the Turkestan and Central 
Asian military districts were brought to full readiness, 
including calling up more than 55,000 reservists to 
serve in the 40th army. 
Because there was no prohibition on combat service 
for conscripts, the bulk of the initial force of 120,000 
personnel consisted of conscripts undergoing their 
regular two-year service commitment.36 As it became 
clear that the war would extend for a long period, the 
question of troop rotation gained prominence. Initially, 
soldiers were selected for service in Afghanistan from 
the general population of conscripts after completing 
six months of basic training. Starting in 1982, soldiers 
selected for service in Afghanistan were provided 
with additional training to account for the battlefield 
conditions in Afghanistan.37
The nature of the mobilization revealed shortcomings 
that have relevance for the Russian military’s 
mobilization effort in attacking Ukraine. The hidden 
nature of the mobilization meant that commanders 
and military commissariats thought that the effort 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   11  | www.cna.org   
was simply an exercise and focused on meeting 
deployment numerical and timeline targets rather 
than assuring the quality of deployed personnel. 
As a result, once the real nature of the operation 
was revealed, a sizeable percentage of personnel 
turned out not to be combat capable and had to be 
replaced. In addition, because personnel were being 
drawn primarily from reserves living in Central Asia, 
most of whom had fulfilled their conscription service 
in construction troops rather than in the regular 
forces, there were gaps in many needed positions. 38 
There have been certain parallels to this situation 
during the current war in Ukraine, in which Russian 
leaders have likewise resorted to covert mobilization 
methods giving highest priority to generating large 
numbers of combat troops—often at the expense of 
troop quality.
The post-Soviet period 
The collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in 
serious upheaval in the Soviet/Russian military. The 
combination of insufficient funding, withdrawal from 
Eastern Europe, and loss of military prestige in the 
aftermath of the withdrawal from Afghanistan caused 
havoc in the Russian military’s manpower system. 
The Russian military suffered serious manpower 
shortages throughout the 1990s, resulting primarily 
from the inability of the conscription system to 
meet its manpower targets. The breakdown of the 
system was the result of a decline in prestige in 
military service, leading to both a growth in legal 
deferments and outright draft evasion. Even though 
the Russian military was simultaneously executing a 
38  Kalugin, Kukharskiy, and Svatalov, Историческая роль и результаты работы организационно-мобилизационных органов 
при подготовке и применении соединений и воинских частей Вооруженных Сил СССР на территории Демократической 
Республики Афганистан [The historical role and results of the work of organizational and mobilization bodies in the preparation and 
use of formations and military units of the USSR Armed Forces on the territory of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan], p. 125.
39  Charles J. Dick, “A Bear Without Claws: The Russian Army in the 1990s,” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 10, no. 1 (1997), p. 4.
40  Robert W. Duggleby, “The Disintegration of the Russian Armed Forces,” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 11, no. 2 (1998), p. 
16.
41  Christopher C. Locksley, “Concept, Algorithm, Indecision: Why Military Reform Has Failed in Russia Since 1992,” The Journal of 
Slavic Military Studies 14, no. 1 (2001), p. 9.
drawdown plan aimed at decreasing the overall size 
of the military, the manning system proved unable 
to meet the lower target quotas. As a result, regular 
units could be staffed at only 60 percent manning 
throughout the decade.39
The 1993 Russian law on military service exempted 
more than three-quarters of the draft-age population 
from conscription for educational, medical, and 
family reasons, among others. In addition, for those 
who did not fall into one of the exemption categories, 
enforcement of conscription notices was quite lax, 
making evasion a relatively low-cost proposition. 
Many of the personnel who were conscripted were 
unfit or barely fit for service because of poor fitness 
levels or mental health issues. The educational 
deferments in particular ensured that the most 
capable young men did not enlist. 40 The manpower 
shortfalls made it difficult for the Russian military 
to find enough personnel to fight what was by its 
standards a relatively small war in Chechnya. The 
Russian government’s response was to extend the 
term of service for conscripts from 18 to 24 months, 
which further increased draft avoidance.41 
Given these problems with regular staffing of the 
military, the prospect of mobilization of additional 
personnel for contingencies became a remote 
fantasy during the 1990s. Throughout this period 
and until the start of the 2008 New Look reforms 
discussed in the next part of this section, the Russian 
military formally retained the Soviet model of 
military mobilization: a large standing army staffed 
by conscripts with virtually no professional enlisted 
personnel and centralized planning for mobilization 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   12  | www.cna.org   
of reserves in the event of a large-scale war. The 
combination of widespread conscription avoidance 
with general disarray in military planning caused 
by loss of qualified personnel in the General Staff, 
rampant corruption among those who remained, 
and an overall absence of military funding resulted 
in the collapse of the reserve system necessary to 
allow the mobilization model to function.42 
The system depended on regular training of reserve 
personnel to maintain their readiness to deploy 
if called upon. This training was not possible in an 
environment in which even the standing military did 
not have the financial resources to adequately feed 
and house their personnel, much less train them.43 In 
addition, the mobilization system depended on the 
authoritarian Soviet political system’s ability to track 
its population through meticulous recordkeeping 
and the housing registration system known as 
propiska, which controlled where people lived. This 
system had also collapsed in the 1990s; deregulation 
of the housing market meant that a large percentage 
of the population no longer lived at the address 
where they were officially registered.44 
Russian military mobilization plans did not change 
significantly in the first decade of the 2000s. On 
paper, the Russian military remained committed 
to the notion of working with a combination of a 
standing army at high readiness manned primarily by 
conscripts together with a large number of skeleton 
units that essentially consisted of warehouses of 
equipment cared for by a small cadre of officers. 
These units would theoretically be filled out with 
reserves in the event of a mass mobilization, with the 
officers taking command of these newly mobilized 
42  Andrew Radin et al., The Future of the Russian Military: Russia’s Ground Combat Capabilities and Implications for U.S.-Russia 
Competition, Appendix D: Military Personnel Policy (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2019), p. 59, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_
reports/RR3099.html. 
43  Stephen J. Blank, “Valuing the Human Factor: The Reform of Russian Military Manpower,” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 12, 
no. 1 (1999), pp. 64–93.
44  “The Residence Permit System (Propiska),” in Russian Federation: Ethnic Discrimination in Southern Russia,  Human Rights Watch, 
Aug. 1998,  https://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports98/russia/srusstest-04.htm. Problems caused by insufficient training of Russian 
military reservists and inaccuracies in Russian mobilization registries reemerged during the current war in Ukraine.
troops. In reality, such a system remained unworkable 
for the same reasons as during the 1990s.
Addressing constraints
Although mobilization plans played a major role in 
the Soviet and, to a lesser extent, post-Soviet Russian 
militaries, the Soviet experience shows that these 
plans were constrained by several factors. In World 
War II, the one case in which full-scale mobilization 
was actually implemented, these constraints 
affected all aspects of the mobilization system, 
including manpower, availability of equipment, and 
transportation. The biggest constraint for the system 
at the onset of World War II was the capacity of the 
rail system, which limited the number of troops that 
could be brought to the front and played a role in the 
development of the wave mobilization system that 
characterized all Soviet and post-Soviet mobilization 
plans. Although there was no shortage of manpower 
in the Soviet Union before the start of World War II, 
the relatively short period between the formulation 
of mobilization plans in 1938 and the start of the 
war in 1941 meant that there was a dearth of fully 
trained reserves, which somewhat slowed the speed 
with which mobilized units could be sent to the front. 
Limitations on production of military equipment also 
contributed to delays in mobilization of units to the 
front during this period.
During the Cold War period, the Soviet government 
sought to address all three of these constraints. It 
established a robust training program to ensure that 
an adequate supply of reasonably trained personnel 
would be available. It created large forward-
deployed storehouses of military equipment along 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   13  | www.cna.org   
the western border and in Eastern Europe to both 
ensure adequate supply and reduce transportation 
bottlenecks. It also expanded railroad networks and 
developed a specialized force of railroad troops 
dedicated to maintaining these networks 45 to 
alleviate transportation bottlenecks.
Throughout the Soviet period, the military was 
acutely aware of the economic costs of maintaining 
a large standing military. Keeping large numbers 
of working-age men in the military meant that 
they were not available for jobs in factories and 
agriculture, resulting in shortages in necessary 
goods (including potentially military equipment) in 
the short term and decreased economic production 
in the medium to long term. At the same time, the 
Soviet leadership believed that a relatively large 
military was needed to deter aggression, initially 
from Germany and then from the United States and 
its NATO and Asian allies during the Cold War. The 
answer to this dilemma was to maintain a relatively 
sizeable standing military force while ensuring that a 
much larger force could be raised relatively quickly 
through rapid mobilization. 
Most Soviet and post-Soviet Russian enlisted 
personnel were conscripts rather than professional 
soldiers. This focus on conscription had multiple 
benefits. In the immediate term, it reduced expenses 
for maintaining the force because conscripts did not 
have to be paid more than a token stipend and did 
not require more than basic barracks-style housing. 
In the longer term, a conscript-based standing 
military allowed the mobilization system to function 
because demobilized conscripts served as the basis 
for the reserve force. Basing the Soviet military on 
a conscription model was also perceived as having 
45  Emily Ferris, Russia’s Railway Troops: The Backbone Sustaining Russian Military Force Posture, CNA, Apr. 2023, https://www.cna.org/
reports/2023/04/russias-railway-troops.
46  Rod Thornton, “Military Organizations and Change: The ‘Professionalization’ of the 76th Airborne Division,” The Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 17, no. 3 (2004), pp. 449–74.
47  “Putin (Again) Announces End of Compulsory Military Service in Russia,” Warsaw Institute Russia Monitor, Apr. 19, 2019, https://
warsawinstitute.org/putin-announces-end-compulsory-military-service-russia/; Thornton, “Military Organizations and Change,” p. 453.
benefits in terms of inculcating patriotic values in 
the population and building a Soviet identity among 
citizens from a wide range of ethnic groups and 
geographic locations. This goal was largely behind 
the elimination of ethnically based units in the 1930s 
and continued to play an important—although 
usually only implicitly discussed—role throughout 
the Cold War period.
In the post-Soviet period, the constraints caused by 
the economic collapse and political chaos brought 
about the effective collapse of the military mobilization 
system. As described previously, although the Russian 
military retained Soviet-era mobilization plans after the 
collapse of the Soviet Union, these became essentially a 
fiction in the 1990s. In addition, negative public attitudes 
toward the military in general and conscription in 
particular resulted in serious manpower shortfalls even 
among the standing army. These factors pushed the 
military to begin to consider shifting to a professional 
military or, anticipating insufficient volunteers to serve 
in such a military, at least a mixed manning model.46 
Vladimir Putin proposed such a shift as early as 2001 
but was constrained by a combination of insufficient 
funding and resistance among an older generation of 
military leaders who believed that a mass mobilization 
military was needed for contingency planning and that 
conscription was therefore required to provide basic 
military training to potential future reserves.47 Although 
professionalization did not progress much beyond 
a few token units in the early 2000s, the increasing 
understanding that manpower shortages would serve 
as an enduring constraint created conditions for 
subsequent efforts to move away from dependence on 
conscription and from the mass mobilization military. 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   14  | www.cna.org   
Effect of threat perception on 
mobilization plans 
During both World War II and the Cold War, the 
Soviet military planned for large-scale, long-duration 
wars, first against Germany and then against the 
United States and its allies. These were the kinds of 
wars that required not only large-scale mobilization 
but also the ability to sustain repeated waves of 
mobilization over a period of months or years. In the 
end, these were not the types of wars that the Soviet 
Union fought. The Afghanistan war was of even 
longer duration but on a much smaller scale and in a 
very different geographic environment, one that was 
poorly suited to the mass frontal warfare envisaged 
by Soviet military planners. It not only highlighted 
the value placed by Soviet military planners on 
covert mobilization but also showed that gaps in 
organization of deployment of personnel persisted 
despite decades of planning. 
In the initial post-Soviet period, the Russian military 
continued to plan for large-scale warfare despite 
an absence of potential adversaries. The experience 
of fighting a series of smaller local and regional 
wars in Chechnya and Georgia in the 1990s and 
early 2000s highlighted the mismatch between the 
organizational structure of the Russian military and 
its likely missions. The Russian military also had to 
come to terms with the inadequacy of thinking that 
“any lead-up to…a war would involve a prior buildup 
of tension that would allow time for the mobilization 
of reservists.” 48 As military planners began to 
recognize the need to adapt to a threat environment 
that encouraged a focus on mobility of military forces 
rather than large frontal warfare, they decided on a 
reform that scrapped the mass mobilization military. 
48  Thornton, Military Modernization and the Russian Ground Forces, p. 11.
49  Roger N. McDermott, “The Restructuring of the Modern Russian Army,” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 22, no. 4 (2009), pp. 
485–501.
50  Charles K. Bartles, “Defense Reforms of Russian Defense Minister Anatolii Serdyukov,” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 24, no. 
1 (2011), pp. 55–80.
The next section addresses the effect of this reform 
on Russian mobilization planning.
The 2009 military reform’s effect 
on mobilization
On October 14, 2008, Defense Minister Anatoly 
Serdyukov announced that the Russian military 
would undergo a radical restructuring during the 
next four years. The main elements of the reform 
were to include a cut in the total number of military 
personnel, especially officers, and a transformation 
of the military’s organization to a permanent 
readiness model with fully staffed units. This reform 
suggested that the Russian government had 
decided to dismantle the Soviet mass mobilization 
military model because this model was based on 
maintaining numerous units that were essentially 
just warehouses filled with vast caches of outdated 
and unneeded weapons overseen by an equally 
vast number of officers with very little battlefield 
training and no combat experience. 49 These officers 
and weapons were the remains of an army inherited 
from the Soviet Union designed to fight NATO on 
the European plains and were judged to have served 
no functional purpose since the end of the Cold War. 
As described in a previous section, in that system 
the reserve was composed of former conscripts who 
had completed their mandatory military service. 
They were then transferred to the active reserve 
and subject to occasional call-ups that tested 
mobilization capabilities. During these exercises, 
they were assigned to so-called cadre units that 
were otherwise essentially unstaffed.50
These cadre units were disbanded in the 2009 
reform, “as there was a belief that resources were 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   15  | www.cna.org   
being wasted on maintaining a mass mobilization 
capability to the detriment of bringing active units up 
to full levels of operational readiness.”51 Furthermore, 
“the mass-mobilization structure of the armed forces 
meant that even dealing with limited local wars on 
Russia’s borders required the leadership to call at 
least a partial mobilization,” which in turn generated 
domestic unrest. 52 In other words, although 
mobilization was required for military effectiveness, 
it was no longer politically feasible, so the Russian 
leadership decided to scrap it. This aspect of the 
reform was implemented relatively quickly and 
largely ended the Russian military’s dependence 
on mass mobilization to fight future wars. Under 
Serdyukov, the numerous military units that existed 
mostly on paper and could take up to one year to 
become combat ready were eliminated, and the 
military began a gradual transition to a structure 
based on fully staffed units that could mobilize in 
less than a week.53 
The mobilization system was not entirely dismantled, 
however. Instead, the Defense Ministry decided to 
establish a smaller but more prepared operational 
reserve with an initial target of 700,000 personnel. 54 
Originally, this reserve was to be staffed by some of 
the 60,000 junior officers who were to be dismissed 
from active service as part of the overall reform effort. 
51  Lester W. Grau and Charles K. Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground 
Forces (Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016), p. 15.
52  Andrew Monaghan, Russian State Mobilization: Moving the Country on to a War Footing, Chatham House, May 2016, p. 12, https://
www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/publications/research/2016-05-20-russian-state-mobilization-monaghan-2.pdf.
53  James A. Marshall, “Russia’s Struggle for Military Reform: A Breakdown in Conversion Capabilities,” The Journal of Slavic Military 
Studies 27, no. 2 (2014), pp. 189–209.
54  Aleksandr Golts, Voennaia Reforma i Rossiiskii Militarizm [Military reform and Russian militarism] (St. Petersburg: Norma, 2019), p. 143.
55  Monaghan, Russian State Mobilization, p. 23.
56  V. A. Odrinsky, Новая система подготовки и накопления военнообученных граждан, пребывающих в запасе, и нахождение 
их в резерве [A new system to train and accumulate trained reservists and their service in the reserves], Voennaia Mysl (Sept. 2008), 
pp. 43–47.
57  Grau and Bartles, The Russian Way of War, p. 16.
58  Golts, Voennaia Reforma i Rossiiskii Militarizm [Military reform and Russian militarism], p. 195.
59  Aleksei Ramm, Пора вернуть резерв в строй [It is time to return the reserve to the formation], Voenno-promyshlennyi kurier, Oct. 
8, 2014. 
In the end, the Russian military decided to establish 
this new operational reserve while also retaining 
the traditional large strategic reserve for potential 
mass mobilization. Initial planning suggested that 
the reformed reserve system would be based on 
a US model, with both active and inactive reserve 
components. The goal was to have 80,000 to 100,000 
personnel in the active reserve. 55 Personnel in the 
active reserve would conduct annual two-week 
training exercises and receive monthly stipends.56 As 
Grau and Bartles note, “The intent [was] to maintain 
a cadre of officers and enlisted soldiers who regularly 
train[ed] with particular active units; in the event of 
their unit’s mobilization, the reservist would be called 
to duty to provide support or backfill as needed.” 57 
However, this idea fell out of favor with the military 
leadership and was terminated in 2014.58 
As US models increasingly fell out of favor in Russia 
after Serdyukov was replaced as defense minister by 
Sergei Shoigu, the Russian military looked into building 
out territorial defense units as an operational reserve, 
a model that it had last used in the early 1930s. 59 
This system was in favor during the late 2010s, and 
two territorial defense battalions and one regiment 
with a total of 5,000 personnel were set up on a trial 
basis and staffed by a professional reserve cadre. This 
program did not continue, however, and the primary 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   16  | www.cna.org   
focus of territorial defense battalions turned to civil 
defense rather than military mobilization.60 
Overall, mobilization systems in the Russian 
military in the period from 2009 to 2021 have been 
characterized as afflicted by a high level of disarray. 
Military and civilian leaders have continuously 
disagreed about how to structure the reserve, leading 
to a lack of clarity in mobilization structures. Because 
of this disarray, the Russian military expended little 
effort on organizing and training its potentially 
available reserve force during this period.61 Although 
at the end of the 2010s the Russian military reserve 
had more than 2 million former conscripts on paper, 
only 10 percent of them had received any kind of 
refresher training after completing their initial terms 
of service.
To remedy this reserve force shortfall, in 2021 the 
Russian military formed the BARS, a return to the 
volunteer active reserve model proposed more than 
10 years earlier. In this model, reservists sign three-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60  Radin et al., The Future of the Russian Military, p. 58.
61  Radin et al., The Future of the Russian Military, p. 58.
62  Стань резервистом [Become a reservist], Rossiiskoe voennoe obozrenie, Oct. 31, 2021.
63  Sam Cranny-Evans, “Understanding Russiaʼs Mobilisation,” RUSI, Sept. 28, 2022, https://www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/
publications/commentary/understanding-russias-mobilisation. 
64  Kateryna Stepanenko, Frederick W. Kagan, and Brian Babcock-Lumish, “Explainer on Russian Conscription, Reserve, and 
Mobilization,” Institute for the Study of War, Mar. 5, 2022, https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/explainer-russian-
conscription-reserve-and-mobilization.
year contracts, are paid, and participate in regular 
training 2 to 3 days per month plus 20 days once per 
year while maintaining their civilian employment. As 
in the United States, in the event of a mobilization, 
these reservists would form separate military units 
rather than integrate into existing active-duty units. 
When mobilized, BARS units were designed to 
protect and defend critical military and government 
facilities, maintain law and order in populated areas, 
and provide assistance to evacuees, allowing regular 
military units to concentrate on warfighting. 62 BARS 
was initially organized in the Southern Military 
District, where 38,000 reservists had supposedly 
been inducted by October 2021, with an additional 
9,000 in the Central Military District. Other reports 
suggested that these were target numbers and 
that it would take three years to reach this strength 
level.63 Overall, the Russian Ministry of Defense 
(MOD) announced a target of 100,000 members of 
BARS, but how many it was able to recruit before the 
invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 is unclear.64 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   17  | www.cna.org   
RUSSIAN MOBILIZATION DURING 
THE WAR IN UKRAINE 
65  James Beardsworth, “Russia Scrambles for Soldiers amid Ukraine War Manpower Shortage,” Moscow Times, May 23, 2022, https://
www.themoscowtimes.com/2022/05/23/russia-scrambles-for-soldiers-amid-ukraine-war-manpower-shortage-a77750. 
66  Michael Kofman and Rob Lee, “Not Built for Purpose: The Russian Military’s Ill-Fated Force Design,” War on the Rocks, June 2, 2022, 
https://warontherocks.com/2022/06/not-built-for-purpose-the-russian-militarys-ill-fated-force-design/. 
67  Jonas Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In: Russian Military Manning, Manpower and Mobilisation in the Light of Russia’s War in 
Ukraine, FOI, FOI-R—5461—SE, Mar. 2023, p. 17. 
68  Jonathan Tepperman, “Why Russia Is Losing: Gen. David Petraeus on the War in Ukraine,” The Octavian Report, Mar. 23, 2022, 
https://octavian.substack.com/p/why-russia-is-losing-get-david-petraeus; Quint Forgey, “Putin Sends ‘Nearly 100 Percent’ of Russian 
Forces at Border into Ukraine,” Politico, Mar. 7, 2022, https://www.politico.com/news/2022/03/07/putin-russia-combat-forces-
ukraine-00014699. 
Covert mobilization
Introduction 
As the preceding section showed, mobilization 
reforms were still very much a work in progress at 
the beginning of the Ukraine invasion on February 
24, 2022. At the same time, Russia’s assembled 
invasion force was poorly suited to conduct the kind 
of large-scale ground campaign required to subdue 
Ukraine, the second-largest country in Europe with 
a sprawling landmass and a large ground force of 
its own. With just 150,000 combat troops, Russia’s 
invasion force lacked sufficient combat power to carry 
out such an ambitious campaign. 65 Consequently, 
during the actual event, Russian forces proved 
incapable of subduing Ukrainian forces, displacing 
the Zelensky regime, and occupying large parts of 
Ukrainian territory as originally planned.
Moreover, Russia’s aggressive campaign plan, which 
envisioned a fast-moving, multi-axis blitzkrieg 
across five separate fronts, magnified Russian troop 
shortages by dissipating Russia’s available forces, 
leaving Russian mechanized forces insufficiently 
concentrated to achieve the kinds of sustained 
breakthroughs needed to accomplish Russia’s 
objectives. At the same time, inadequate infantry 
left Russian forces highly vulnerable to effective 
Ukrainian counterattacks.66
Faced with such challenges, Russia’s hoped-
for blitzkrieg rapidly culminated, with the war 
gradually devolving into a grinding war of attrition 
that inflicted increasingly large losses on Russian 
ground forces. Russian casualties were especially 
high during the first two months of the war, lending 
greater urgency to the need for adjustments 
in strategy. 67 Although Russian leaders were 
committing their available reserves, the Kremlin 
soon realized that it needed to do more to address 
the rapidly deteriorating situation. 68
Consequently, in April 2022, the Kremlin withdrew 
Russian forces from around Kyiv and reconcentrated 
them in the Donbas region for further offensive 
operations. By then, Russian leaders were struggling 
to address the many problems that had emerged with 
Russian combat operations. As a result, when Russia 
renewed offensive operations in the Donbas in April 
2022, it incurred massive additional casualties while 
achieving modest results. As operations intensified 
over the next several months, Russia’s increasing 
battlefield losses led to a growing imbalance of 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   18  | www.cna.org   
forces on the ground in favor of the Ukrainian Armed 
Forces, which had been continually mobilizing 
additional personnel. 
At this point, Russia was still able to offset its 
growing troop shortages on the ground by relying 
on its overwhelming superiority in mass firepower. 
However, after Ukrainian forces began using the US 
High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS)in 
June 2022, Russia lost its advantages in firepower, 
forcing it to abandon combined arms operations 
more and more in favor of sustained infantry assaults. 
Yet the latter were even more manpower intensive, 
resulting in even more casualties among Russian 
combat troops. Russia’s growing battlefield losses 
finally reached an inflection point in September 
2022, when Ukrainian forces launched successful 
counteroffensives at both Kherson and Kharkiv, 
achieving breakthroughs and recapturing significant 
portions of Russian-occupied territory.
Despite Russia’s growing losses on the ground, 
Putin remained completely unwilling to call for 
the mobilization of Russian military reservists, 
even though doing so was the most surefire way 
to generate additional combat troops. He was 
clearly concerned that such a move might lead to 
widespread unrest among the Russian people with 
uncertain consequences for his regime.
One of the main reasons that Putin was unwilling to 
call for mobilization was that he had launched the 
war assuming a quick victory and had done virtually 
nothing to prepare the Russian people for a prolonged 
struggle. Instead, he had entered into a tacit bargain 
with them, proclaiming that he was undertaking a 
special military operation while strongly implying 
69  Michael Kimmage and Maria Lipman, “What Mobilization Means for Russia: End of Putin’s Bargain with the People,” Foreign 
Affairs, Sept. 27, 2022, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/russian-federation/what-mobilization-means-russia. 
70  Georgi Kantchev, Evan Gershkovich, and Yuliya Chernova, “Fleeing Putin, Thousands of Educated Russians Are Moving Abroad,” 
Wall Street Journal, Apr. 10, 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/fleeing-putin-thousands-of-educated-russians-are-moving-
abroad-11649583003. 
71  Tim Lister and Josh Pennington, “Russia Is Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine. Prior Experience 
Isn’t Always Required,” CNN, July 29, 2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/07/29/europe/russia-recruits-volunteer-battalions-ukraine-
war-cmd-intl/index.html. 
that the war would be conducted exclusively using 
Russia’s standing armed forces. 69 In return, Putin 
hoped to gain if not outright support for the war 
at least the Russian peoples’ general acquiescence. 
Yet even Putin refraining from mobilization was 
insufficient to avert a wave of Russian émigrés, with 
tens if not hundreds of thousands of people electing 
to leave the country.70 
Faced with such political constraints, Putin decided 
instead to embark on what is best termed a “covert 
mobilization” campaign to replenish Russian forces 
at the front. The campaign was “covert” in the sense 
that it was intended to minimize disruption among the 
Russian populace by avoiding unpopular measures 
such as forced conscription. Instead, Russia used a 
range of ad hoc measures to generate additional 
combat troops, measures that were designed to 
target elements of the populace who were either 
most willing to be recruited or least able to resist. 71 
The covertness explains the lack of domestic unrest 
in response to Russia’s mobilization efforts. 
The Kremlin’s covert mobilization approach 
encompassed a variety of measures, including 
attempts to attract additional contract soldiers to serve 
in the regular armed forces, forced mobilization of 
separatist troops in the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s 
Republics (LNR/DNR), expanded use of Chechen 
militias through the formation of new combat units, 
and a mass recruiting drive to generate “volunteer 
battalions” in regions across Russia. In addition, 
Russian leaders elected to mobilize Russia’s ready 
reserve troops serving in Russian BARS formations. 
However, these methods proved woefully inadequate 
to replenish Russia’s ground forces.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   19  | www.cna.org   
There is significant irony in the foregoing. First, 
having abandoned the Soviet-era mass mobilization 
model in 2008, Russia found itself in precisely the 
kind of large-scale war of attrition that it was least 
prepared to fight. As a result, Russia lacked the 
means to mobilize sufficient forces to wage such 
a large-scale conflict. Second, even though Russia 
had taken steps during the reform period to build 
an alternative mobilization capacity, at the very 
moment it was most needed, Putin lacked the will to 
use it, at least during this phase of the war.
Contractors
The recruitment of additional contract soldiers was an 
important component of Russia’s covert mobilization 
efforts during the initial phase of the war. Soldiers 
serving under a contract made up most of the initial 
invasion force, and they remain the backbone of 
Russian combat forces in Ukraine. Russian contractors 
traditionally serve under long-term contracts that are 
two to three years in duration.72 
Contractors typically account for roughly 70 percent 
of the total enlisted personnel in the Russian 
armed forces, with conscripts making up the other 
30 percent. 73 The percentage of contractors in 
the Ground Forces has tended to be lower. For 
example, in 2019, contractors made up just 53 
percent of enlisted personnel in the Ground Forces.74 
Contractors—especially those who reenlist—typically 
receive substantially more training than do Russian 
conscripts, including in-depth training on advanced 
72  Those reenlisting for their third and subsequent terms typically sign five-year contracts. 
73  Kofman and Lee, “Not Built for Purpose.” 
74  Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In, p. 43. 
75  Natalya Piskunova, “Contract Service,” Boevaia vakhta, May 27, 2022, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/77531325. 
76  Beardsworth, “Russia Scrambles for Soldiers amid Ukraine War Manpower Shortage.” 
77  Совет Федерации одобрил законопроект о повышении возраста граждан, поступающих на военную службу по контракту 
[The Federation Council approved a bill to raise the age of citizens entering military service under a contract], Moskovskaya Pravda, 
May 25, 2022, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/77417008; Rochan Consulting, “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 23-29 May 2022,” 
Issue 92, May 29, 2022. 
78  “Foreign Citizens Serving in the Russian Army Under Contract to Be Able to Obtain Citizenship of Russia Under a Simplified 
Procedure,” Duma.ru, Sept. 20, 2022, http://duma.gov.ru/en/news/55276/. 
weapon systems. 75 By contrast, conscripts serve 
for only one-year terms, leading to high turnover 
rates. As a result, much of the military’s collective 
experience and institutional knowledge reside in the 
contractor ranks.
Under current Russian law, conscripts cannot be 
deployed outside the country, which precludes their 
being used in actual combat operations. Given this 
stricture, contract soldiers have borne the brunt 
of the fighting in Ukraine, incurring exceptionally 
heavy losses in the process. Although estimates vary, 
according to British officials, by May 2022 nearly 
one-third of the 150,000 Russian troops who initially 
invaded Ukraine had been either killed or wounded.76  
In response, from March to September 2022, Russian 
leaders made a concerted effort to recruit additional 
contract soldiers to replenish the force. To support 
this effort, Russian leaders adopted a series of 
legal measures to make recruiting new contractor 
personnel easier. In May 2022, the Duma adopted a 
new law abolishing the age limit for those entering 
military service for the first time to expand the pool 
of potential candidates with sought-after technical 
skills.77 In September 2022, the Duma passed 
legislation offering Russian citizenship to foreign 
nationals after serving under a contract for at least 
one year; previously, three years of military service 
were required.78
To make service more attractive, in May 2022, Russian 
leaders began to increase incentives to encourage 
new enlistments, which included offering substantial 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   20  | www.cna.org   
payments for new recruits while decreasing the 
length of military contracts. 79 For example, the 
MOD began offering large salaries to those willing 
to sign short-term military contracts, typically of 
three to six months’ duration. In Tula, those opting 
for three-month contracts were offered roughly 
170,000 rubles ($2,900) a month, nearly four times 
the average local salary.80 Before the war, contractors 
typically received about 64,900 rubles ($1,100) per 
month, according to the Washington Post.81 Potential 
recruits were also offered hefty enlistment bonuses. 
In Chechnya, for example, new recruits were offered 
bonuses of 300,000 rubles ($5,200) to sign short-term 
79  Rochan Consulting, “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 23-29 May 2022.”  
80  We have included several references in this report to amounts paid to Russian fighters who have been recruited, impressed into 
service, or otherwise mobilized to participate in the ongoing war effort. These amounts are often stated in both rubles and dollars. 
In every case, the amounts stated in the underlying source documents have been restated without modification, with the aim of 
providing a general sense of the amounts paid to Russian fighters participating in the war and how those amounts may have evolved. 
No attempt has been made to reconcile these reports or to adopt a standard ruble-dollar conversion rate. 
81  Natalie Colarossi, “Russia Offering Soldiers Signing Bonuses in Desperate Plea for Manpower,” Newsweek, May 23, 2022, https://
www.newsweek.com/russia-offering-soldiers-signing-bonuses-desperate-plea-manpower-1709226; “Russia Turns to Recruiting 
Trucks, Big Wages to Woo Volunteer Soldiers,” Reuters, Sept. 18, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/russia-turns-recruiting-
trucks-big-wages-woo-volunteer-soldiers-2022-09-18/. 
82  Beardsworth, “Russia Scrambles for Soldiers amid Ukraine War Manpower Shortage.” 
83  Yury Baranyuk, “Wanted: Contract Soldier. Good Pay. Bonus for Destroying Ukrainian Tanks,” RFE/RL, June 10, 2022, https://www.
rferl.org/a/russia-soldier-recruitment-ukraine-war/31892914.html. 
84  Baranyuk, “Wanted: Contract Soldier.” 
contracts.82 In some regions, recruiters also promised 
bonuses for “heroic acts” such as “destroying a tank, 
a plane, [or] an armored personnel carrier.”83
At the same time, Russian federal and local officials 
began aggressively promoting contract service to obtain 
new recruits (Figure 1). Likewise, military commissariats 
began posting help wanted ads for military service 
on major job search websites and social media. One 
such advertisement was seeking “grenade launchers,” 
people who fire “rocket-propelled grenades, and 
grenades with shaped charges…[at] enemy armored 
vehicles and suppress firing points.”84 
Contractors—especially those 
who reenlist—typically receive 
substantially more training 
than do Russian conscripts, 
including in-depth training on 
advanced weapon systems.


Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   21  | www.cna.org   
Recruiters also began converting trucks into mobile 
recruiting centers to gain better access to potential 
contractor candidates ( Figure 2 ). Russian recruiters 
at times resorted to more nefarious means to meet 
increasingly stiff recruiting quotas. Commissariats in 
several regions began delivering unofficial summonses 
to military-age men that were designed to look like  
 
 
85  Anastasia Stogney et al., “‘If You Are a Sniper from God, God Ordered You to Participate’: Hidden Mobilization Began in Russia,” 
BBC Russia, May 13, 2022, https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-61434395. 
86  Valentin Lazarev, “Военкомат опроверг принудительную вербовку срочников в Тверской области на спецоперацию” [The 
Military Registration and Enlistment Office has denied the forced recruitment of conscripts in the Tver Region for a special operation], 
ridus.ru, Aug. 29, 2022, https://www.ridus.ru/voenkomat-oproverg-prinuditelnuyu-verbovku-srochnikov-v-tverskoj-oblasti-na-
specoperaciyu-388193.html. 
conscription notices. The men who appeared were 
then pressured to sign a military contract.85
By the same token, Russian officials ramped up 
efforts to pressure active conscripts to sign long-
term contracts. 86 In August 2022, for example, 
Russian military officers began coercing conscripts 
who were approaching the end of their mandatory  
terms into signing military contracts. Reportedly,  
 
Figure 1.  Russian contractor recruiting poster (My History/My Heroes/My Soul/My Country/My Path)
Source: Russian MOD. 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   22  | www.cna.org   
one unit went further by locking conscripts into a 
room without windows or water to coerce them into 
signing a military contract.87
The Russian effort to recruit additional combat 
personnel under short-term contracts was more of 
a stopgap measure than a serious effort to replace 
long-term contractors lost on the battlefield. Given 
the urgent need for more troops, new contractors 
typically received as little as three to seven days of 
training before being sent to the front, a far cry from 
traditional contractor training. 88 Fresh recruits were 
often used as cannon fodder—assigned to assault 
units and then rushed into battle, where they often 
suffered significant casualties.
87  Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 29,” Institute for the Study of War, Aug. 29, 2022, 
https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-29. 
88  Mason Clark et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 21,” Institute for the Study of War, June 21, 2022, https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-june-21. 
89  “Непонятно, чё может быть. Петербуржцев зовут на службу по контракту, запугивая мобилизацией” [It’s not clear what 
could be. Petersburgers are called to serve under contract, pressured to mobilize], Fontanka.ru, Aug. 13, 2022, https://www.fontanka.
ru/2022/08/13/71568227/?isPreview=1. 
90  Sergio Miller, “Russia’s Conscripts Problem,” Wavell Room, Sept. 23, 2022, https://wavellroom.com/2022/09/23/russias-conscripts-problem/. 
Although reliable estimates are hard to find, Russian 
efforts to recruit contractors in sufficient numbers 
to balance battlefield losses fell short of the mark. 
As one local military recruiter admitted, the unit 
that he supported had deployed just three or four 
new contract soldiers to Ukraine by mid-August. 
Although other candidates expressed interest, they 
often failed to complete their documentation, mainly 
because interest in contract service had declined 
significantly since the invasion.89 Likewise, according 
to other reports, despite increased pay and benefits, 
commissariats struggled to recruit new contract 
servicemembers.90 Although we were unable to find 
actual figures for the number of soldiers signing new 
contracts since the war began, evidence suggests 
Figure 2. Mobile enlistment office
Source: Russian MOD, included in Beardsworth, “Russia Scrambles for Soldiers amid Ukraine War Manpower Shortage.” 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   23  | www.cna.org   
that the numbers were relatively small—although 
increasing—during this phase. In August 2022, the 
United Kingdom (UK) Ministry of Defense issued a 
statement that the Russian military was recruiting 
very few new contract servicemembers. 91 By August 
2022, however, the Kremlin had commenced a large-
scale recruiting campaign to increase enlistment of 
new contract servicemembers.92 
LNR/DNR mobilization efforts
The mobilization of pro-Russia Ukrainian separatist 
forces in the LNR/DNR likewise played a prominent 
role in Russia’s covert mobilization campaign during 
the initial phases of the war. Putin relied heavily on 
LNR/DNR separatist forces to support the Russian war 
effort and LNR/DNR leaders to generate additional 
troops as battlefield losses mounted. Putin felt that 
he could count on LNR/DNR leaders to support 
mobilization because they were so heavily dependent 
on the Kremlin to remain in power. This situation was a 
legacy of the 2014 Ukraine crisis when Moscow helped 
to establish the LNR and DNR as semiautonomous 
republics under de facto Russian control. 93 Before 
the invasion, these forces grew into a separatist army 
supplied with heavy equipment from Russia.94 
91  Miller, “Russia’s Conscripts Problem.” 
92  Michael Starr, “Russia Is Expanding Its Military—but Source of Recruits Unclear—UK,” Jerusalem Post, Aug. 29, 2022, https://www.
jpost.com/breaking-news/article-715744. 
93  Filip Bryjka, “The Involvement of Irregular Armed Groups in the Russian Invasion of Ukraine,” Polish Institute of International Affairs, 
Bulletin No. 59, Apr. 11, 2022, https://pism.pl/publications/the-involvement-of-irregular-armed-groups-in-the-russian-invasion-of-ukraine. 
94  Bryjka, “The Involvement of Irregular Armed Groups in the Russian Invasion of Ukraine.” LNR/DNR forces would later be 
redesignated as the First and Second Army Corps, reporting to the Russian Eighth Army within the Southern Military District. 
95  Regina Gimalova and Igor Burdyga, “Mobilization and Conscription: How Donetsk Is Surviving the War in Ukraine,” Deutsche Welle 
Russia, Apr. 26, 2022, https://www.dw.com/ru/vojna-mobilizacija-prizyv-kak-doneck-perezhivaet-vtorzhenie-v-ukrainu/a-61581026; 
Жизнь здесь катится в хреновую сторону [Life here is going in a bad direction], Meduza, July 6, 2022, https://meduza.io/
feature/2022/07/06/zhizn-zdes-katitsya-v-hrenovuyu-storonu. Reports vary about the precise start and end dates of each mobilization 
wave, indicating that to some degree, forced mobilization took place more or less continuously. 
96  Gimalova and Burdyga, “Mobilization and Conscription”; В ‘ДНР’ и ‘ЛНР’ объявлена всеобщая мобилизация [General 
mobilization announced in DPR and LPR], Deutsche Welle Russia, Feb. 19, 2022, https://www.dw.com/ru/v-dnr-objavili-vseobshhuju-
mobilizaciju/a-60839410. 
97  Gimalova and Burdyga, “Mobilization and Conscription.” 
98  Жизнь здесь катится в хреновую сторону [Life here is going in a bad direction]. 
99  “Russia Now Holds Night Ambushes to Forcibly Send Donbas Men to Ukraine War,” Euromaidan Press, Aug. 19, 2022, https://
euromaidanpress.com/2022/08/19/russia-now-holds-night-ambushes-to-forcibly-send-donbas-men-to-ukraine-war/. 
To sustain the war effort, the Kremlin pressured 
LNR/DNR leaders to undertake at least three waves 
of forced mobilization before September 2022, 
impressing thousands of local residents into military 
service.95 The first wave commenced on February 19, 
just before the invasion, when LNR/DNR leaders called 
up thousands of men with prior military experience 
for combat training. 96 Days later, mobilization was 
expanded to include all men aged 18 to 27, including 
those without prior military experience.97 Right from 
the start, however, LNR/DNR leaders encountered 
widespread resistance, with local residents bribing 
officials and even going into hiding to evade call-
up.98 As a result, the first wave of mobilization failed 
to meet leadership objectives. 
After Russia reconcentrated its efforts in the Donbas 
region in early April, LNR/DNR forces began to 
incur heavy losses as fighting intensified, which led 
separatist leaders to launch new waves of forced 
mobilization over the next several months. During 
another wave, which ran from April to May 2022, 
conscription efforts intensified, with local authorities 
conducting regular street patrols to round up 
potential conscripts in an attempt to mobilize an 
additional 26,000 “reservists.”99 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   24  | www.cna.org   
After the second wave ended, mobilization subsided 
for a time. However, in August 2022, as combat 
losses mounted, authorities launched a third wave 
of forced mobilization, including renewed street 
patrols and planned raids to ferret out those still in 
hiding. Authorities also imposed mobilization quotas 
on state-owned enterprises, netting significant 
additional troops in the process.100 
Thus, despite sustained efforts to evade call-up, 
forced mobilization of LNR/DNR forces was relatively 
successful, yielding tens of thousands of additional 
combat troops for separatist forces. According to the 
Eastern Human Rights Group, by mid-June, as many 
as 48,000 LNR/DNR residents had been pressed 
into service, although estimates vary. 101 They were 
used to establish new LNR/DNR combat units and 
replenish depleted units.
Yet despite succeeding quantitatively, LNR/
DNR forced mobilization generated troops of 
consistently low quality. To meet quotas, local 
leaders often resorted to questionable practices, 
such as conscripting older residents and those with 
serious medical issues. 102 In addition, mobilized 
troops typically received only limited training 
and substandard equipment. According to one 
source, this “mass of untrained, unequipped and 
unmotivated people was [then] thrown into the 
[assaults] on Volnovakha, Mariupol and Maryinka” 
against Ukrainian troops dug into well-fortified 
positions and armed with the latest NATO weapons, 
suffering heavy casualties in the process.103
100  “Russia Now Holds Night Ambushes to Forcibly Send Donbas Men to Ukraine War.” According to the human rights group Zmina, 
the Alchevsk metallurgical plant received a quota to furnish 1,700 men for mobilization on top of previous mobilization quotas of 
1,000, 500, and 400 workers during prior mobilization waves.  
101  Жизнь здесь катится в хреновую сторону [Life here is going in a bad direction]. 
102  Kateryna Stepanenko, Grace Mappes, and Frederick W. Kagan, “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 20,” Institute for 
the Study of War, Aug. 20, 2022, https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-20. 
103  Жизнь здесь катится в хреновую сторону [Life here is going in a bad direction]. 
104  “A Mercenaries’ War: How Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine Led to a ‘Secret Mobilization’ That Allowed Oligarch Evgeny Prigozhin to 
Win Back Putin’s Favor,” Meduza, July 14, 2022, https://meduza.io/en/feature/2022/07/14/a-mercenaries-war. 
105  “Experts Have Assessed How Many People Prigozhin Can ‘Recruit’ to His PMC and What His Political Future Is,” Strana Today, Jan. 30, 
2023, https://strana.today/news/423512-mobilizatsionnyj-potentsial-chvk-vahner-i-perspektivy-evhenija-prihozhina-analitika.html. 
Private military contractors
Russian leadership also turned to private military 
contractors (PMCs) early on, most notably the Wagner 
Group, as a means to shore up Russian combat forces 
during the covert mobilization phase. The Wagner 
Group helped bolster Russian forces in Ukraine 
significantly, especially around Bakhmut. For its part, 
Russia’s Redut PMC, which is closely associated with 
Russia’s MOD, played a prominent role both during 
the initial invasion and later in the war. However, 
during initial fighting near Kyiv, Redut was largely 
incapacitated and was quickly withdrawn to Russia 
(for more details on Redut, see the section on PMCs 
under Return to Mobilization by Other Means).104
The Kremlin did not initially plan for Wagner to 
have a major role in Russian combat operations 
in Ukraine. 105 After Russian regular forces failed to 
achieve a breakthrough in the Donbas, however, the 
Kremlin turned to the Wagner Group for additional 
combat power. This decision was made for several 
reasons. First, Wagner mercenaries had played a 
significant role in the Donbas region since 2015 and 
thus were familiar with the local terrain. Second, their 
leader, Yevgeny Prigozhin, maintained close ties with 
Putin and had shown a willingness to take on difficult 
tasks. Third, Wagner PMCs had gained significant 
combat experience outside of Russia, especially in 
Syria, Libya, and sub-Saharan Africa. As a result, the 
Wagner Group had acquired a growing reputation 
inside Russia as an elite combat force, allowing it to  
 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   25  | www.cna.org   
maintain its own recruiting network at a time when 
Russia struggled to mobilize additional troops.106 
The Kremlin began deploying Wagner PMCs to the 
Donbas region in late March 2022, and they were 
committed to combat starting in April. In May and 
June 2022, Wagner mercenaries enjoyed significant 
battlefield success, playing a key role in capturing 
Popasna and in the drive toward Bakhmut. These 
early successes led the Kremlin to give Wagner 
an expanded role in Ukraine along with increased 
operational independence. Wagner soon became 
one of Russia’s main strike forces in the Donbas.107
During the first few months of the campaign, Wagner 
had only a few thousand troops in Ukraine, including 
a core group of approximately 1,500 highly qualified 
specialists. At this stage, Wagner troops consisted 
almost entirely of former Russian contractors and 
conscripts. For the officers’ corps, Wagner gave 
preference to recruiting experienced combat 
veterans.108 As operations progressed, however, 
and as Wagner’s losses mounted, the group took 
additional measures to replenish its forces. In July, 
Wagner sent an unspecified number of its forces 
from Libya and Syria to Ukraine.  That same month, 
the Kremlin gave the Wagner Group carte blanche to 
enlist new volunteers in large numbers.109 
106  Jakub Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. The Wagner Group in the Russia-Ukraine War, Centre for Eastern Studies, OSW Commentary 
511, Apr. 28, 2023, https://www.osw.waw.pl/sites/default/files/OSW_Commentary_511.pdf. 
107  “A Mercenaries’ War”; Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. 
108  “Experts Have Assessed How Many People Prigozhin Can ‘Recruit’ to His PMC and What His Political Future Is”; Adam Potočňák 
and Miroslav Mareš, “Russia’s Private Military Enterprises as a Multipurpose Tool of Hybrid Warfare,” Journal of Slavic Military Studies 
35, no. 2 (2022), p. 194. 
109  “A Mercenaries’ War”; “Special Online Briefing with General Stephen J. Townsend Commander, U.S Africa Command (U.S AFRICOM),” 
US Department of State, July 26, 2022, https://www.state.gov/special-online-briefing-with-general-stephen-j-townsend-commander-
u-s-africa-command-u-s-africom/; Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. 
110  Karolina Hird et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, July 24,” Institute for the Study of War, July 24, 2022, https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-july-24. 
111  Magdalena Ickiewicz-Sawicka, “History, Structure and Management of Private-State Military Groups—Legionnaires and 
Wagnerians,” Internal Security 15, no. 1 (2023), p. 172. 
112  Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. 
113  Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 30,” Institute for the Study of War, Aug. 30, 2022, 
https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-30. 
In July 2022, Wagner launched a significant recruiting 
drive, and over the next two months, it focused its 
efforts on recruiting volunteers to serve under short-
term contracts, using advertising and other means 
(see Figure 3 ). In July 2022, for example, Wagner 
was actively recruiting volunteers in the Tyumen 
region to sign one-year contracts for deployment 
to Ukraine. 110 Prospective recruits were offered 
generous salaries ranging from $1,500 to $4,000 
per month, depending on former military rank. New 
recruits were permitted to keep their former military 
ranks, and their families were promised substantial 
death and disability benefits.111 
Prigozhin’s efforts to maintain a sense of esprit de corps 
among Wagner personnel contributed significantly 
to the group’s success in attracting new recruits. 112 
Ultimately, Wagner was able to recruit a few thousand 
additional troops to serve under short-term contracts, 
with a large number coming from economically 
depressed regions of the Russian Federation. Thus, 
by the end of August, Wagner core mercenaries had 
grown to roughly 4,500 to 5,000 personnel.113 
Around the same time, Prigozhin was given the green 
light to recruit Russian prisoners for the Wagner 
Group. Initial recruiting efforts began in July, and the 
first set of prisoners arrived at the front the same 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   26  | www.cna.org   
month.114 By September 2022, prisoner recruiting 
had risen significantly, based partly on personal 
visits that the charismatic Prigozhin made to various 
prisons. Russian prisoners were offered monthly 
salaries of about $1,400 and full amnesty after six 
months’ service.115 Prisoners had to meet minimal 
health requirements, but the nature and extent of 
114  Yulia Krasnikova, ЧВК Вагнера вербует заключенных колоний Петербурга для поездки на Донбасс [PMC Wagner 
recruits prisoners from St. Petersburg colonies to travel to Donbass], Важные Истории, July 4, 2022, https://istories.media/
reportages/2022/07/04/chvk-vagner-verbuet-zaklyuchennikh-kolonii-peterburga-dlya-poezdki-na-donbass-idti-v-avangarde-
pomogat-obnaruzhivat-natsistov/. 
115  Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut; Pjotr Sauer, “We, Thieves and Killers, Are Now Fighting Russia’s War,” Guardian, Sept. 20, 2022, 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/20/russia-recruits-inmates-ukraine-war-wagner-prigozhin. 
116  Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. 
117  Sergey Goryashko et al., “‘There Was Such a Flood of Them That No One Expected.’ How Prisoners React to Calls to Join Wagner 
PMC,” BBC Russia, Sept. 7, 2022, https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-62934135; Sauer, “We, Thieves and Killers, Are Now Fighting 
Russia’s War.” 
118  Potočňák and Mareš, “Russia’s Private Military Enterprises as a Multipurpose Tool of Hybrid Warfare,” pp. 194–95; Kateryna 
Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 21,” Institute for the Study of War, Aug. 21, 2022, https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-21. 
their crimes were largely disregarded.116 According to 
a Russian human rights group, Wagner had recruited 
7,000 to 11,000 prisoners by mid-September.117
Wagner mercenaries traditionally underwent combat 
training at Molkino, home of the 10th Special 
Mission Brigade, or at Russia’s Spetsnaz University 
in Chechnya. 118 Wagner combat veterans often 
Figure 3.  Mural depicting Wagner Group mercenaries
Source: Зачем Кремлю Группа Вагнера? [Why does the Kremlin need the Wagner Group?], Voice of America, Mar. 27, 2023, 
https://www.golosameriki.com/a/7023749.html.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   27  | www.cna.org   
worked as instructors at Wagner training camps. 119 
By contrast, newly recruited prisoners were typically 
given as little as one week of training on infantry 
assault tactics.120
From August to September 2022, the addition of 
core mercenaries coupled with a mass influx of 
newly recruited prisoners significantly helped to 
shore up Wagner forces in the Donbas. During this 
period, the Wagner Group became the backbone 
of Russian assault efforts in and around Bakhmut 
and Soledar. In typical fashion, experienced Wagner 
combat personnel planned and oversaw continuous 
infantry assaults carried out by recruited prisoners. 
Experienced Wagner combat personnel followed 
these assaults with succeeding waves of attacks.121
Despite such efforts, Russian forces failed to capture 
Bakhmut during this period while incurring heavy 
losses in the attempt, especially among newly 
recruited prisoners. Entire units were destroyed in 
sustained frontal assaults against prepared Ukrainian 
positions.122 Nevertheless, Wagner managed to tie 
down significant Ukrainian forces, preventing them 
from joining the Ukrainian counteroffensive at 
Kharkiv, which helped Russia buy time to mobilize 
its forces and eventually stabilize the front.123
Chechen militias
Russia also relied to some extent on Chechen militias 
(Kadyrovtsy) to bolster Russian regular forces in 
Ukraine during the covert mobilization period. The 
119  “Experts Have Assessed How Many People Prigozhin Can ‘Recruit’ to His PMC and What His Political Future Is.” 
120  Sauer, “We, Thieves and Killers, Are Now Fighting Russia’s War.” 
121  Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. 
122  “Experts Have Assessed How Many People Prigozhin Can ‘Recruit’ to His PMC and What His Political Future Is.” 
123  Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. 
124  Emma Graham-Harrison and Vera Mironova, “Chechnya’s Losses in Ukraine May Be Leader Ramzan Kadyrov’s Undoing,” Guardian, Mar. 
22, 2022, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/22/chechnyas-losses-in-ukraine-may-be-leader-ramzan-kadyrovs-undoing. 
125  “Chechens Fighting in Ukraine: Putin’s Psychological Weapon Could Backfire,” The Conversation, Mar. 18, 2022, https://
theconversation.com/chechens-fighting-in-ukraine-putins-psychological-weapon-could-backfire-179447. 
126  Sergey Kozlov, “Ramzan Kadyrov Is Forming a New Regiment,” Defense & Security, July 18, 2022, https://dlib.eastview.com/
browse/doc/78838841; Sam Cranny-Evans, “The Chechens: Putin’s Loyal Foot Soldiers,” RUSI, Nov. 4, 2022, https://www.rusi.org/
explore-our-research/publications/commentary/chechens-putins-loyal-foot-soldiers. 
Kadyrovtsy are Chechen paramilitary forces originally 
formed under the leadership of Akhmat Kadyrov 
after he joined sides with Russia during the Second 
Chechen war. His son, Ramzan Kadyrov, who currently 
controls Chechnya, inherited control over the 
Kadyrovtsy after his father’s death in 2004. Following 
Russia’s victory in Chechnya, the Kadyrovtsy became 
a critical instrument of regime control.
Kadyrov, a longtime Putin ally, receives substantial 
funding and support from the Kremlin and significant 
autonomy as well. In return, Kadyrov is expected to 
maintain stability in Chechnya and support Putin’s 
policies. Kadyrov remains highly dependent on the 
Kremlin for his continuing survival and prosperity, 
which makes him a reliable ally for the Kremlin who 
is willing to make troops available to support Putin’s 
foreign adventures.124
The Kadyrovtsy are a capable militia based originally 
on a core cadre of battle-hardened soldiers who 
fought in the two Chechen wars, although most of 
them have since retired. Although they technically fall 
under Russia’s national guard, Rosgvardia, they are 
commanded by Kadyrov.125 On the eve of the Russia-
Ukraine war, Chechen forces comprised a mix of both 
paramilitary and security forces, including motorized 
rifle units, riot control troops, and an elite special 
forces unit. At the time, the 141st Motorized Rifle 
Regiment was the only force equipped for combined 
arms operations. Other Chechen units were lightly 
armed and better geared for rear area security.126 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   28  | www.cna.org   
During the initial months of the invasion, elements 
from the foregoing units participated in the initial drive 
toward Kyiv.127 They suffered significant casualties, 
however, without achieving their objectives and were 
subsequently withdrawn. Starting in March, Chechen 
forces were instrumental in achieving the reduction 
of Mariupol. 128 The Kadyrovtsy initially deployed 
roughly 1,200 troops to Ukraine, although by August 
2022 hundreds more were fighting in Ukraine.129 
By late spring 2022, as Russian losses mounted, 
Putin turned to Kadyrov for additional forces. 
He responded by announcing formation of a 
new motorized rifle regiment (the 78th (Akhmat) 
Motorized Rifle Regiment) in July 2022. 130 This new 
all-volunteer force was to comprise four separate 
battalions of 500 troops each.131
The Chechen leader reportedly faced challenges 
recruiting enough volunteers to staff the new 
units and had to offer high salaries and substantial 
enlistment bonuses to get people to join. In 
September 2022, Chechen recruiters were reportedly  
 
 
 
127  Graham-Harrison and Mironova, “Chechnya’s Losses in Ukraine May Be Leader Ramzan Kadyrov’s Undoing.” 
128  Cranny-Evans, “The Chechens.” 
129  Mansur Mirovalev, “The Real Role of Pro-Russian Chechens in Ukraine,” Al Jazeera, Aug. 18, 2022, https://www.aljazeera.com/
news/2022/8/18/the-real-role-of-pro-russian-chechens-in-ukraine. 
130  Cranny-Evans, “The Chechens.” 
131  Cranny-Evans, “The Chechens.” 
132  Huileng Tan, “Russia’s Military Is Offering Signing Bonuses 4 Times as Big as Monthly Salaries to Recruit Soldiers amid a Manpower 
Crunch in the Ukraine War,” Business Insider, May 24, 2022, https://www.businessinsider.com/russia-offers-soldiers-signing-bonuses-
ukraine-war-manpower-crunch-2022-5. 
133  “Chechen Authorities Using Threats and Blackmail to Recruit Soldiers for Ukraine—Investigation,” Moscow Times, June 15, 2022, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/77996364?searchFor=Chech*+battalion*+Ukraine; Manon Fuchs, “On Chechen Soldiers in 
Ukraine,” InkStick, Sept. 9, 2022, https://inkstickmedia.com/on-chechen-soldiers-in-ukraine/. 
134  Cranny-Evans, “The Chechens”; Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, September 11,” Institute 
for the Study of War, Sept. 11, 2022,  https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
september-11. 
135  Lister and Pennington, “Russia Is Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine”; Fuchs, “On Chechen 
Soldiers in Ukraine.” Russian news agency TASS put the figure even higher, claiming that as many as 20,000 Chechen combatants 
had taken part in the campaign as of November 2022, with 9,000 troops currently on the front line. See “Kadyrov Reveals Number of 
Chechen Fighters Involved in Ukraine Special Operation,” TASS, Nov. 15, 2022, https://tass.com/society/1537039. 
offering 300,000 rubles ($5,200) per month for those 
enlisting in the new regiment, plus a signing bonus 
of one month’s salary.132 
When these incentives proved insufficient, Chechen 
authorities resorted to more coercive measures to 
get people to enlist in the new “volunteer” battalions, 
including intimidation, blackmail, and threats of 
torture. In one case, a prospective recruit was 
reportedly imprisoned on fabricated criminal charges 
until he signed a contract. Still, many Chechens 
willingly joined the Kadyrovtsy to fight in Ukraine.133
Although exact numbers are difficult to come by, 
the deployment of the Chechen 78th Motorized 
Rifle Regiment and additional volunteers likely 
provided between 2,000 and 3,500 additional 
troops to the Russian order of battle in Ukraine. 134 
By September 2022, an estimated 8,000 Chechen 
troops were reportedly fighting in Ukraine, mainly 
around Mariupol, Severodonetsk, and other parts of 
Luhansk province.135

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   29  | www.cna.org   
Chechen troops’ performance in Ukraine was mixed, 
however. Chechen forces in existence before the 
war reportedly fought well. In Mariupol, when DNR 
combat units were struggling to advance in dense 
urban neighborhoods, Kadyrov’s forces managed to 
make progress, forcing Ukrainian forces to retreat.136 
By contrast, the newly created motorized rifle 
battalions were less distinguished, in part because 
of insufficient training. Other Chechen units have 
primarily performed rear-areas functions, which are 
significantly less challenging.137 
Integrating Chechen troops with Russian regular 
military units proved challenging for Russian military 
leadership because the Chechen chain of command 
runs directly through Kadyrov. Effective integration 
has been undermined by persistent feuding between 
Chechen commanders and the Russian military and 
intelligence services.138 Nevertheless, Chechen forces 
have contributed significantly to the Russian war 
effort in Ukraine, although not enough to materially 
alter the balance on the ground.
136  Cranny-Evans, “The Chechens”; Бойцы уже скоро освободят Мариуполь от националистов [Soldiers will soon liberate Mariupol 
from nationalists], Vecherniaia Moskva, Apr. 8, 2022, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/75832805. 
137  Kozlov, “Ramzan Kadyrov Is Forming a New Regiment”; Taz Ali, “What Is the Vostok-Akhmat Battalion? The Chechen ‘TikTok 
Warriors’ Helping Russia in Ukraine After Wagner Exit,” inews.co.uk, Aug. 16, 2023, https://inews.co.uk/news/world/vostok-akhmat-
battalion-chechen-tiktok-warriors-russia-ukraine-wagner-exit-2548342. 
138  Graham-Harrison and Mironova, “Chechnya’s Losses in Ukraine May Be Leader Ramzan Kadyrov’s Undoing”; “Chechens Fighting 
in Ukraine.” 
139  Специальная добровольческая операция: Как регионы формируют подразделения для участия в СВО на Украине [Special 
volunteer operation: How regions form units to participate in the Northern Military District in Ukraine], Kommersant, Aug. 8, 2022,  
https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/5501970. 
140  Lister and Pennington, “Russia Is Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine”; Rochan Consulting, 
“Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 8-14 August 2022,” Issue 145, Aug. 14, 2022. 
141  Aleksandr Stepanov, “Volunteer Territorial Defense Battalions Are Being Formed in Russian Provinces to Deploy to a Special 
Military Operation in Ukraine,” Defense & Security, Aug. 17, 2022, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/79555480; Kateryna 
Stepanenko, “Russian Volunteer Units and Battalions,” Institute for the Study of War, July 16, 2022, https://www.understandingwar.
org/backgrounder/russian-volunteer-units-and-battalions. 
Volunteer battalions
To further shore up Russian forces in Ukraine, the 
Kremlin made a concerted effort beginning in June 
2022 to recruit fresh “volunteer battalions” across the 
country to support ongoing operations in Ukraine.139 
The Kremlin reportedly wanted all 85 Russian oblasts 
to recruit volunteer battalions for the war in Ukraine, 
although not every oblast participated.140
Formation of volunteer battalions ramped up 
significantly in July and August, drawing inspiration 
from Kadyrov’s earlier decision to form a new all-
volunteer motorized Chechen regiment. By August, 
new units were being formed on a near-daily 
basis.141 The drive to recruit volunteer battalions 
largely eclipsed efforts to recruit fresh contractors 
because of Russian citizens’ widespread reluctance 
to join regular army units after the major reversals 
in Ukraine. 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   30  | www.cna.org   
Volunteer battalions were composed of troops 
drawn exclusively from the local populace in each 
oblast, who were supposed to train together and 
later serve together in Ukraine. It was believed that 
units comprising local countrymen would be easier to 
recruit and have greater cohesion.142 Each volunteer 
battalion was given a designated mission spanning 
the gamut from combat (e.g., tank, motorized rifle) 
to combat support (e.g., signals and logistics). 143
Recruiting drives were led by regional administrations 
with the support of local veterans’ groups who often 
appealed to the patriotism of the local populace. 
Eligibility requirements were fairly lax, however. In 
most regions, for example, prior military service was 
not required. 144 By contrast, in Tatarstan, the local 
battalion accepted only men who had previously 
served in the military.145 
Although new recruits were motivated by a variety of 
factors, in most cases high pay was the most important 
factor.146 Monthly salaries varied by region, ranging 
from 130,000 to 300,000 rubles per month ($2,100 
to $5,000), up to 10 times the local salary. 147 New 
volunteers often received signing bonuses that were 
142  Специальная добровольческая операция: Как регионы формируют подразделения для участия в СВО на Украине [Special 
volunteer operation: How regions form units to participate in the Northern Military District in Ukraine]. 
143  For example, the region of Bashkiria generated two motorized rifle battalions, including a naval infantry battalion named after 
Minigali Shaimuratov, a Red Army military leader during the Great Patriotic War, and an airborne battalion named after Alexander 
Dostavlatov, a combat veteran of the Second Chechen war. See Специальная добровольческая операция: Как регионы формируют 
подразделения для участия в СВО на Украине [Special volunteer operation: How regions form units to participate in the Northern 
Military District in Ukraine]. 
144  Stepanenko, “Russian Volunteer Units and Battalions.” 
145  Lister and Pennington, “Russia Is Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine.” 
146  Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In, p. 19. 
147  “Russian Regions Form 40 Volunteer Battalions—Kommersant,” Moscow Times, Aug. 8, 2022, https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2022/08/08/russian-regions-form-40-volunteer-battalions-kommersant-a78528. 
148  Lister and Pennington, “Russia Is Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine.” 
149  Специальная добровольческая операция: Как регионы формируют подразделения для участия в СВО на Украине [Special 
volunteer operation: How regions form units to participate in the Northern Military District in Ukraine]. 
150  Stepanenko, “Russian Volunteer Units and Battalions.” 
151  “Volunteer Battalions / Dobrovolcheskij Batalon,” globalsecurity.org, accessed Dec. 27, 2023, https://www.globalsecurity.org/
military/world/russia/volunteer-bn.htm. 
152  Lister and Pennington, “Russia Is Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine.” 
typically equal to the first month’s salary. Although 
they had to sign MOD contracts, the contracts 
were fairly short, ranging from 4 to 12 months. 148 
Local regions were responsible for providing clothing 
and individual equipment, and the MOD and armed 
forces provided ammunition and weapon systems 
for the new battalions. 149 Likewise, the MOD paid 
monthly salaries, and the regions paid enlistment 
bonuses.150 During initial formation, each volunteer 
battalion was assigned to a regular Russian military 
unit where new recruits would undergo training. For 
example, the “Tigr Battalion,” formed in Primorsky 
Krai, was attached to the 155th Guards Marine 
Brigade (a naval infantry unit) based in Vladivostok, 
which made its training staff and ranges available to 
train the new battalions.151
The plan was for each volunteer battalion to have 
400 men. Thus, assuming all 85 oblasts participated, 
this effort would yield 34,000 additional troops. 152 
Ultimately, however, recruiting fell well short of this 
objective; not every oblast participated, and those 
that did were often unable to recruit enough troops 
to fully staff each battalion. For example, the Perm 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   31  | www.cna.org   
Krai battalion reportedly recruited just 90 people, 
enough for a single company.153 According to Novaya 
Gazeta, by August 2022, 33 Russian oblasts had 
formed a total of 52 volunteer battalions, well short 
of 85 Russian oblasts in total.154 Volunteer recruiting 
efforts tended to concentrate on poorer, non–
Russian ethnic regions, however, where financial 
incentives carried the greatest weight.155 
Several volunteer battalions were later combined 
to form the 3rd Army Corps, which was intended to 
bolster Russian forces in the Donbas. Although on 
paper the 3rd Army Corps was a powerful formation 
with more than 10,000 troops, in reality it was a hollow 
force staffed by aging, poorly trained volunteers. 
Thus, when it was rushed to the front in September 
to help blunt Ukraine’s Kharkiv counteroffensive, 
the 3rd Army Corps incurred heavy losses before 
abandoning its equipment and joining the general 
retreat.156 Other volunteer units “were scattered to 
fill gaps [in the] Kherson, Kharkiv, Melitopol, and 
Mariupol regions,” where they often performed 
poorly while suffering high casualties.157
153  Karolina Hird et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 24,” Institute for the Study of War, Aug. 24, 2022, https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-24. 
154  “Infantry Is Worse than Bondage,” Novaya Gazeta, Aug. 10, 2022, https://novayagazeta.eu/articles/2022/08/10/pekhota-pushche-nevoli. 
155  Lister and Pennington, “Russia Is Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine.” 
156  Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 10,” Institute for the Study of War, Aug. 10, 2022, 
https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-10; Kateryna Stepanenko et al., 
“Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 5,” Institute for the Study of War, Aug. 5, 2022, https://www.understandingwar.
org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-5; David Axe, “The Russians Spent Months Forming a New Army 
Corps. It Lasted Days in Ukraine,” Forbes, Sept. 15, 2022,  https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2022/09/15/the-russians-spent-
months-forming-a-new-army-corps-it-lasted-days-in-ukraine/?sh=94ed52456e60. 
157  ChrisO_wiki (@ChrisO_wiki), “However, the Ukrainian counter-offensives at the end of August meant that the original plan was 
abandoned,” Post, X, Nov. 8, 2022, https://twitter.com/ChrisO_wiki/status/1590040745414918144; Karolina Hird et al., “Russian 
Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 18,” Institute for the Study of War, Aug. 18, 2022, https://understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-august-18. 
158  “We Were Nothing to Them: Russian Volunteer Reservists Return from War Against Ukraine Feeling Deceived,” RFE/RL, Aug. 
12, 2022, https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-volunteers-ukraine-treatment-minimal-training-war/31985377.html; Anastasia Tenisheva, 
“Glory Hunters or Gold Diggers? The Shadowy World of Russia’s ‘Volunteers’ Fighting in Ukraine,” Moscow Times, Jan. 15, 2023,  
https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2023/01/15/glory-hunters-or-gold-diggers-the-shadowy-world-of-russias-volunteers-fighting-
in-ukraine-a79766. 
159  Cranny-Evans, “Understanding Russia’s Mobilisation”; “Russia’s Project BARS—How State Employees Were ‘Conned’ into 
Volunteering for Putin’s War,” Kyiv Post, Nov. 7, 2023, https://www.kyivpost.com/post/23753. 
160  Tenisheva, “Glory Hunters or Gold Diggers?” 
161  Боевой Армейский Резерв Страны – БАРС [Combat army reserve of the country—BARS], Temryuk District, Dec. 10, 2021, https://
www.temryuk.ru/presscenter/news/boevoy-armeyskiy-rezerv-strany-bars-/. 
BARS units
Although Russia refrained from ordering a full 
mobilization during the covert mobilization period, 
Russian leaders did mobilize and deploy BARS units 
during this period. As noted previously, BARS units 
were intended to serve as a ready reserve system akin 
to the active reserve system in the United States. 158 
Before the Russia-Ukraine war, BARS reservists 
signed three-year contracts with the MOD, received 
small monthly salaries, and took part in regular 
military training and exercises while retaining their 
civilian jobs.159 
In times of war, BARS reservists were subject to being 
mobilized to participate in combat operations. 160 
Unlike in the US system, however, BARS recruited 
only those who were already members of Russia’s 
reserves, having completed their military service 
terms.161 Thus, new BARS recruits did not need to 
undergo basic training.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   32  | www.cna.org   
Following the creation of BARS, the MOD did very 
little to actively promote it until August 2021, during 
the run-up to the war in Ukraine.162 At that point, the 
MOD launched a major recruiting drive (BARS-21) in 
the hope of recruiting 80,000 to 100,000 BARS troops 
in total.163 Although hard numbers are unavailable, 
BARS recruiting efforts fell well short of their targets. 
For example, one Russian city reported that even 
though it had planned to recruit 220 people, only 20 
people signed up.164 
During the initial phase of the war, approximately 
10,000 BARS reservists were reportedly called up to 
serve in Ukraine. Mobilized BARS servicemembers 
were assigned to BARS units that were deployed 
to locations across the theater. After BARS forces 
incurred significant combat losses in Ukraine, Russian 
leaders made significant efforts to recruit additional 
combat personnel for BARS units. In this case, 
however, rather than recruiting additional active 
reservists, Moscow sought to recruit fresh volunteers 
for immediate full-time employment to the conflict. 
The Union of Donbas Volunteers, a quasi-official 
organization established by Alexander Boradai, who 
formerly headed Russian-backed forces in the DNR, 
played an instrumental role in such recruiting efforts, 
focusing on enlisting veterans of the 2014–2021 
conflict in the Donbas. Such efforts initially targeted 
former officers and enlisted soldiers who were 
already eligible to join BARS. According to official 
Russian recruiting notices, BARS accepted enlisted 
recruits up to 42 years of age and former officers up 
to 57 years of age. However, these rules were later 
relaxed, with many BARS enlisted personnel joining 
as late as age 50.165
162  “We Were Nothing to Them.” 
163  Stepanenko, Kagan, and Babcock-Lumish, “Explainer on Russian Conscription, Reserve, and Mobilization.” 
164  Stepanenko, Kagan, and Babcock-Lumish, “Explainer on Russian Conscription, Reserve, and Mobilization.” 
165  “We Were Nothing to Them.” 
166  “We Were Nothing to Them.” 
167  “We Were Nothing to Them”; Tenisheva, “Glory Hunters or Gold Diggers?” 
168  Karolina Hird et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 24, 2023,” Institute for the Study of War, Mar. 24, 2023, 
https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-march-24-2023. 
Monthly salaries for those volunteers who joined 
BARS full-time after the conflict broke out varied 
depending on region. New volunteers from Tatarstan 
were promised 205,000 rubles ($3,365) a month, plus 
bonuses and combat pay. By contrast, one recruit 
from the Rostov region reportedly received a salary 
of 330,000 rubles ($5,420) each month. In many cases, 
however, BARS reservists did not receive all that they 
were promised. Another BARS recruit reported that 
his unit had received aging army uniforms and rusty 
rifles, which they had to repair themselves.166
At the beginning of the invasion, several BARS 
units were reportedly mobilized and sent to the 
front. Over time, BARS units expanded such that 
by the end of 2022, at least 20 separate BARS 
units with approximately 10,000 combat personnel 
were operating in Ukraine. 167 BARS battalions later 
evolved into a patchwork of both regular combat 
units and irregular forces such as PMCs and 
members of volunteer battalions. Although several 
BARS battalions remain attached to the Russian 
MOD, others are affiliated with groups such as the 
Union of Donbas Volunteers. In addition, some 
BARS units are now made up exclusively of PMCs, 
such as Convoy, which is led by former Wagner 
Group leader Konstantin Pikalov. 168 Thus, BARS has 
evolved significantly from an active reserve system 
to a broader military structure designed to mobilize 
additional personnel through various channels to 
support the war effort.
The deployment of BARS units to Ukraine and their 
subsequent expansion provided a modest but 
significant boost to Russian combat capabilities, serving 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   33  | www.cna.org   
as yet another channel for Russia’s covert mobilization 
campaign. BARS units allowed the Kremlin to draw 
upon Russia’s large repository of veteran military 
reservists as well as former separatist fighters from the 
Donbas region. BARS recruiting thus complemented 
efforts to recruit less experienced troops to serve in 
volunteer battalions. On the other hand, BARS units 
comprise mainly older soldiers and increasingly those 
without military experience. BARS demonstrated anew 
the highly decentralized, often-competing patchwork 
of Russian covert mobilization efforts used to replenish 
Russian forces during the campaign.
Partial mobilization
By September 2022, the shortcomings of the 
Kremlin’s covert mobilization efforts were becoming 
increasingly clear. The gradual infusion of additional 
combat troops from contractor recruiting efforts, 
the formation of volunteer battalions, growing 
reliance on PMCs, and LNR/DNR forced mobilization 
efforts was insufficient to replace the heavy combat 
losses that Russia had sustained during the Russia-
Ukraine war. Although estimates vary, according 
to an August 2022 US intelligence report, Russian 
forces had incurred a staggering 70,000 to 80,000 
casualties during the first six months of the war, 
including 15,000 to 20,000 deaths.169 
The growing shortage of combat infantry was 
especially problematic. Because of prior force design 
decisions, Russia entered the war with insufficient 
infantry forces to conduct effective combined arms 
operations.170 Russia’s infantry shortages grew even 
169  Yevgenia Albats, “Six Months of War: What Putin Wanted; What Putin Got,” Moscow Times, Sept. 1, 2022, https://dlib.eastview.com/
browse/doc/79894968. 
170  Kofman and Lee, “Not Built for Purpose.” 
171  Rob Lee and Philip Wasielewski, “Russia’s War in Ukraine: Critical Vulnerabilities to Russia’s Military Operations and Systems,” 
Foreign Policy Research Institute, June 30, 2023, https://www.fpri.org/article/2023/06/russias-war-in-ukraine-critical-vulnerabilities-
to-russias-military-operations-and-systems/. 
172  For details on Russia’s fragmented chain of command, see Mark Galeotti, Pavel Baev, and Graeme P. Herd, Militaries, Mercenaries, 
Militias, and Morale and the Ukraine War, Marshall Center, Nov. 15, 2022, https://www.marshallcenter.org/sites/default/files/
files/2022-11/SCSSFY23_%232Summary.pdf. 
worse during the grinding battles of attrition in the 
Donbas region following Russia’s withdrawal from 
Kyiv. The military’s situation was further aggravated 
by Russia’s growing reliance on continuous infantry 
assaults to spearhead offensive operations as its 
ability to conduct mechanized operations declined.171 
Russia’s decision to rely on covert mobilization (in 
lieu of actual mobilization) contributed significantly 
to its growing battlefield problems. As noted above, 
covert mobilization did not generate enough forces 
to replenish Russian forces in Ukraine. Moreover, 
because of overreliance on different mobilization 
methods, Russian forces became a patchwork of both 
regular and irregular forces encompassing contract 
soldiers, Kadyrovtsy, Wagner PMCs, BARS units, and 
volunteer battalions, among others. Coordinating 
such a diverse set of forces proved challenging 
because of parallel chains of command, incompatible 
training and equipment, and ethnic discord, which 
led to poor coordination, internal friction, and 
operational ineffectiveness.172 In addition, increased 
reliance on poorly trained soldiers serving under 
short-term contracts undermined both the quality 
and stability of Russian forces in the field.
The bill for Russia’s growing personnel shortages 
(and infantry shortages in particular) finally came due 
in September 2022 when Ukrainian forces launched 
successful counteroffensives in both the Kherson 
and Kharkiv regions. Rapid Ukrainian breakthroughs 
resulted in substantial losses of Russia-occupied 
territory and significant combat losses for Russian 
forces. The Kharkiv counteroffensive in particular 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   34  | www.cna.org   
posed a serious threat to Russian forces in the 
region, risking their collapse, a situation that finally 
drove Putin to declare a partial mobilization. 
Decision to mobilize
In the face of Russia’s growing troop shortages 
and Russian defeats at both Kherson and Kharkiv, 
the Kremlin finally decided to order “partial 
mobilization” in late September 2022. 173 Putin said 
that the decision to mobilize was necessary to 
secure Russian control of the LNR/DNR and protect 
against Western plans to inflict a military defeat on 
Russia.174 Defense Minister Shoigu likewise defended 
partial mobilization as a means “to stabilize the 
situation, protect new territories, and conduct 
further offensive operations.” 175 The consensus 
among Western leaders, however, was that Russia 
mobilized to compensate for its large-scale troop 
losses in Ukraine.176
On September 21, Putin formally announced that he 
had ordered a partial mobilization of Russian reserves 
173  Dara Massicot, “What Russia Got Wrong: Can Moscow Learn from Its Failures in Ukraine?,” Foreign Affairs, Mar./Apr. 2023, https://
www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/what-russia-got-wrong-moscow-failures-in-ukraine-dara-massicot; Ekaterina Vorobeva, “How Putin’s 
Partial Mobilization Turned into Total Mobilization of Migrants,” Russian Analytical Digest 21, no. 288 (Nov. 2022), p. 2,  https://www.
ssoar.info/ssoar/bitstream/handle/document/86966/ssoar-russanald-2022-288-vorobeva-How_Putins_Partial_Mobilization_Turned.pdf
?sequence=1&isAllowed=y&lnkname=ssoar-russanald-2022-288-vorobeva-How_Putins_Partial_Mobilization_Turned.pdf. 
174  Что получит и что потеряет Путин от объявленной им мобилизации [What Putin will win and lose from mobilization], BBC 
Russia, Sept. 21, 2022, https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-62978727. 
175  “Video: Vladimir Putin Spoke at an Expanded Meeting of the Defense Ministry Board Held at the National Defense Control Centre 
on Frunzenskaya Street,” Kremlin.ru, Dec. 21, 2022, http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/70159. 
176  Karl Ritter, “Putin Orders Partial Military Call-Up, Sparking Protests,” AP News, Sept. 21, 2022, https://apnews.com/article/russia-
ukraine-putin-donetsk-f64f9c91f24fc81bc8cc65e8bc7748f4; Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In, p. 18. 
177  “Address by the President of the Russian Federation,” kremlin.ru, Sept. 21, 2022, http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/69390. 
178  “Russia Issues Partial Mobilisation Order, EU Slams Putin’s Desperation,” France24, Sept. 21, 2022, https://www.france24.com/en/
europe/20220921-live-putin-announces-partial-mobilisation-in-russia. 
179  Vorobeva, “How Putin’s Partial Mobilization Turned into Total Mobilization of Migrants,” p. 2. 
180  Stepanenko, Kagan, and Babcock-Lumish, “Explainer on Russian Conscription, Reserve, and Mobilization.” 
181  Ekaterina Shulman, “Posting on Mobilization Decree,” Telegram channel: “ESchulmann,” Sept. 21, 2022, https://t.me/
eschulmann/4874. 
182  “Is the Mobilization in Russia Complete? Understanding the Statements of Putin, Peskov and the Ministry of Defense,” Meduza, 
Nov. 1, 2022, https://meduza.io/cards/tak-zavershena-mobilizatsiya-v-rossii-ili-vse-taki-net. 
183  “Russian Military Announces Plan to Expand, Create New Units,” AP News, Dec. 21, 2022, https://apnews.com/article/putin-
finland-sergei-shoigu-ee953abf7f9bf217ccdaa61ec1b35ddd. 
184  See, for example, James Beardsworth, “Explainer: What Does Russia’s ‘Partial Mobilization’ Mean?,” Moscow Times, Sept. 21, 2022, 
https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2022/09/21/explainer-what-does-russias-partial-mobilization-mean-a78854. 
during a televised broadcast.177 Although the decree 
itself did not list any numbers, Shoigu set a target 
to mobilize 300,000 troops for the war in Ukraine. 178 
According to the decree, mobilization would be 
targeted at military reservists between the ages of 25 
and 35 with either prior military experience or a military 
specialty of importance to the war effort.179 However, 
the decree exempted former soldiers who had served 
recently along with fathers of three or more children 
and those with criminal records. 180 The decree also 
authorized defense workers to defer military service 
for the duration of their employment.181
According to Russian authorities, all mobilized 
servicemembers would be given the same status as 
soldiers serving under a contract in the Russian Armed 
Forces.182 In addition, mobilized servicemembers 
would receive a salary of about 195,000 rubles ($2,800) 
per month, nearly five times the national average.183 
At the time, Russia had more than 2 million people 
in the reserves, including former contractors, 
conscripts, and retired officers. 184 However, the vast 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   35  | www.cna.org   
majority (around 90 percent) had received little or 
no additional training since leaving the military.185 
Putin’s decree also included other provisions designed 
to address Russian troop shortages, such as a stop 
loss order to prevent contract soldiers serving on 
short-term contracts from leaving the front at the end 
of their terms.186 This provision essentially locked all 
contract soldiers serving under short-term contracts 
into service indefinitely.187 The decree also contained 
criminal penalties for contract servicemembers who 
refused to participate in the war.188 
Putin’s mobilization decree also specified how 
mobilization was to be carried out. It designated the 
MOD to set mobilization quotas and deadlines for 
each of the Russian Federation’s constituent regions. 
The decree also directed regional governors to carry 
out mobilization in their respective regions. 189 Each 
region in turn established a local draft commission to 
oversee mobilization in that particular region.190 Local 
commissariats carried out mobilization by issuing the 
necessary call-up orders and handling intake. 
185  Beardsworth, “Explainer: What Does Russia’s ‘Partial Mobilization’ Mean?” 
186  Lawrence Freedman, “All the Tsar’s Men: Why Mobilization Can’t Save Putin’s War,” Foreign Affairs, Sept. 23, 2022, https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/all-tsars-men. 
187  Pavel Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia: 2023 Spring Conscripts and Volunteers,” Eurasia Daily Monitor 20, no. 94 (June 12, 2023), 
https://jamestown.org/program/tricky-recruiting-in-russia-2023-spring-conscripts-and-volunteers/. 
188  “‘Mobilization’ and ‘Wartime’ Were Added to the Russian Criminal Code. What and Who Does This Threaten?,” BBC Russia, Sept. 
20, 2022, https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-62974676. This provision closed a previous loophole that contractors had used to 
evade service at the front by arguing that they were not obligated to deploy to an undeclared war (i.e., a “special military operation”). 
189  Zoya Sheftalovich, “Full Text of Putin’s Mobilization Decree—Translated,” Politico, Sept. 21, 2022, https://www.politico.eu/article/
text-vladimir-putin-mobilization-decree-war-ukraine-russia/. 
190  Nikolai Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency,” Russia.Post, Oct. 27, 2022, https://russiapost.info/
politics/demonstration. 
191  Vorobeva, “How Putin’s Partial Mobilization Turned into Total Mobilization of Migrants”; Ritter, “Putin Orders Partial Military Call-
Up, Sparking Protests.” Reportedly, however, antimobilization protests across Russia failed to gain momentum. 
192  Yulia Sapronova and Elena Tofanyuk, Россию после 21 сентября покинули около 700 000 граждан [About 700,000 citizens left 
Russia after 21 September], Forbes Russia, Oct. 4, 2022, https://www.forbes.ru/society/478827-rossiu-posle-21-sentabra-pokinuli-
okolo-700-000-grazdan. 
193  Sapronova and Tofanyuk, Россию после 21 сентября покинули около 700 000 граждан [About 700,000 citizens left Russia after 
21 September]. 
194  Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency.” 
Resistance to mobilization
From the start, Putin’s announcement of partial 
mobilization was deeply unpopular among large 
sections of the Russian populace. Anti-mobilization 
protests erupted across the country despite stiff 
new laws imposing up to 15 years’ imprisonment 
for criticizing the military or the war. According to 
a Russian human rights group, more than 1,200 
protesters were arrested.191 
The mobilization order also triggered a mass 
exodus, with up to 700,000 people electing to leave 
Russia during the two-week period following Putin’s 
decree.192 At one point, departing reservists were 
so numerous that they formed long lines at various 
border checkpoints. 193 To avoid call-up, many 
resorted to bribing officials to get their draft notices 
canceled or their names removed from official 
registries. Others sought to obtain deferments by 
enrolling in a university or obtaining employment 
with a major information technology company.194

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   36  | www.cna.org   
Most important, mobilization undermined Putin’s 
popularity among the Russian populace while 
also changing the country’s outlook on the war. 
According to a poll by the independent Levada 
Center, in September, 44 percent thought the war 
should definitely continue, but by October, just 
36 percent thought the same. 195 Moreover, many 
Russians began to openly criticize the president 
for his handling of the war. 196 Sliding poll numbers 
reflected a general decline in support for the war as 
it began to personally affect a larger proportion of 
the population.197 
Procedural and implementation issues
Problems with the government’s handling of partial 
mobilization also emerged quickly. In multiple 
cases, people were called up for mobilization even 
though they fell outside the parameters of Putin’s 
mobilization order. Despite clear instructions to 
mobilize people with prior military experience 
and important technical skills, local and regional 
commissariats in some areas began issuing blanket 
call-up orders in an effort to meet their quotas. 198 
In several cases, commissariats conscripted the 
elderly, those with disabilities, and people without 
prior military service, as well as students and others 
195  “Conflict with Ukraine: October 2022,” Levada Center, Nov. 1, 2022, https://www.levada.ru/en/2022/11/01/conflict-with-ukraine-
october-2022/. 
196  Egor Maksimov, Надеется, что Путин ему скажет: “Нет-нет, ты мне нужен!” [He hopes that Putin will tell him: “No, no, I need 
you!”], Current Time, Feb. 10, 2023, https://www.currenttime.tv/a/nadeetsya-putin-ostanovit-i-skazhet-ty-mne-nuzhen-pochemu-
chvk-prigozhina-perestala-verbovat-zekov/32264288.html. 
197  “Conflict With Ukraine: October 2022.” 
198  Andrew Bowen, Russia’s War in Ukraine: Military and Intelligence Aspects, Congressional Research Service, Sept. 14, 2023, https://
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47068. 
199  Vorobeva, “How Putin’s Partial Mobilization Turned into Total Mobilization of Migrants,” p. 2. 
200  Rochan Consulting, “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 19-25 September 2022,” Issue 175, Sept. 26, 2022. 
201  Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency.” 
202  Polina Ivanova, Max Seddon, and Daria Mosolova, “They Grabbed Whoever They Could: Putin’s Draft Puts More Strain on Russian 
Businesses,” Financial Times, Nov. 29, 2022, https://www.ft.com/join/licence/f33933e3-2aca-474c-be1d-36154f4f6b0e/details?ft-
content-uuid=893b76bd-b58e-4ae4-a5d5-12d45d825cec. 
203  Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In, p. 21. 
204  Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In, p. 21. 
expressly exempted from mobilization. 199 Notices 
were also addressed to citizens who had long been 
dead, confirming that the reservist database had not 
been maintained properly.200
Although Putin’s decree exempted the defense 
industry from mobilization, local recruiters continued 
to send call-up notices to defense workers, which led 
to frantic lobbying by industry executives attempting 
to shield their workforce from mobilization, albeit 
with mixed success.201 Regional authorities also took 
more aggressive measures to meet their induction 
quotas, such as handing out conscription notices at 
places of business, public squares, local markets, the 
metro, and even border crossings.202
In short, mobilization efforts were often chaotic, 
inflicting great hardship on significant portions of 
the Russian populace while leading to inefficiencies 
and delays. These problems were soon highlighted 
by the Russia media, leading to increased pressure 
on the Kremlin and eventually prompting an official 
response. For example, Margarita Simonian, the 
editor of state-controlled RT, publicly blamed military 
commissariats for the chaotic state of mobilization.203 
Putin himself weighed in—although he acknowledged 
that problems had occurred, he blamed them on 
outdated registries and use of old forms.204

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   37  | www.cna.org   
Geographic and sectoral disparities
In addition, the burden of mobilization tended to fall 
disproportionately on rural areas, small towns, and 
ethnic minorities. 205 Whereas urban professionals 
were more likely to avoid mobilization by moving 
overseas or obtaining an employer exemption, ethnic 
and religious minorities were usually not that lucky.206 
As a result, there were vast disparities in the 
mobilization rates in different regions. According 
to one Asian nongovernmental organization, 
mobilization rates were six times higher in regions 
close to the Mongolian border than they were in 
western Russia. Likewise, indigenous people in 
Russia’s far north were reportedly “rounded up 
[wholesale] in their villages,” with enlistment officers 
handing out “summonses to anyone they met.”207 
Likewise, approximately 7,000 and 6,000 reservists 
were mobilized in Ryazan and Kaliningrad, 
respectively, both outlying areas, constituting 
approximately 2.5 percent of the total military-age 
men in these regions. The proportion called up in 
Sevastopol, Crimea, likewise reached 3 percent of all 
men between 18 and 50 years of age. By contrast, 
in Moscow and St. Petersburg, where options for 
evasion were greater, only 0.3 to 0.7 percent of men 
aged 18 to 50 were called up. 208 Disparities also 
emerged between employees of large enterprises 
and employees of small businesses, with the 
205  Keir Giles, Russia’s Military Plans and Demographic Reality, Part 2 , Chatham House, Apr. 2023, p. 10, https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/377557567_Russia’s_Military_Plans_and_Demographic_Reality_Part_Two?_
tp=eyJjb250ZXh0Ijp7InBhZ2UiOiJwdWJsaWNhdGlvbiIsInByZXZpb3VzUGFnZSI6bnVsbH19. 
206  Peter Weber, “Russia’s ‘Catastrophic’ Missing Men Problem,” The Week, May 9, 2023, https://theweek.com/russia/1017914/
russias-catastrophic-missing-men-problem. 
207  Weber, “Russia’s ‘Catastrophic’ Missing Men Problem.” 
208  Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency.” 
209  Ivanova, Seddon, and Mosolova, “They Grabbed Whoever They Could.” 
210  Kofman and Lee, “Not Built for Purpose.” 
211  Michael Starr, “Russian Mobilized Troops Poorly Trained, Lack Proper Gear for War—Western Intel,” Jerusalem Post, Sept. 29, 2022, 
https://www.jpost.com/international/article-718458. 
212  Andrew Bowen, Russia’s War in Ukraine: Military and Intelligence Aspects, Congressional Research Services, Sept. 14, 2023, https://
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47068. 
213  Bowen, Russia’s War in Ukraine; Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, September 13,” Institute 
for the Study of War, Sept. 13, 2022,  https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
september-13. 
former enjoying significantly better protection from 
mobilization than the latter.209 
Inadequate training and equipment
The Russian military also had enormous problems 
absorbing, training, and equipping the large 
numbers of activated reservists who began flowing 
into training centers following Putin’s mobilization 
order. Only about 10 percent of registered reservists 
had received any additional training following their 
discharge from service, and in many cases that 
training had taken place years earlier. 210 As a result, 
most reservists were in urgent need of combat 
training. Thus, despite the Kremlin putting a positive 
spin on military preparations for newly mobilized 
personnel (see Figure 4), local training garrisons were 
wholly unprepared to handle the resulting influx 
of activated reservists because they lacked both 
experienced personnel to train them and equipment 
to outfit them properly.211
At the time, local training camps were facing a severe 
shortage of both officers and senior contractor 
personnel able to train activated reservists because 
most of them had been sent to the front. 212 The 
shortage of military trainers was further exacerbated 
by competing demands to train both newly formed 
volunteer battalions and conscripts inducted during 
the spring and fall recruiting cycles.213

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   38  | www.cna.org   
Most important, training was cut short for many 
incoming reservists because of the urgent need for 
troops at the front to counter ongoing Ukrainian 
counteroffensives. In many cases, inductees were 
quickly sent to the front with as little as a few days’ 
training, where they often incurred heavy losses. 214 
Those lucky reservists who were spared from this 
ordeal typically received more training and were 
eventually used to form new units or reconstitute 
depleted units.215
214  Christina Lu, “Who Is Fighting Putin’s War?,” Foreign Policy, Oct. 18, 2022, https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/10/18/russia-war-
mobilization-ukraine-putin-training/. 
215  Bowen, Russia’s War in Ukraine. 
216  Pjotr Sauer, “The Army Has Nothing: New Russian Conscripts Bemoan Lack of Supplies,” Guardian, Oct. 20, 2022, https://www.
theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/20/the-army-has-nothing-new-russian-conscripts-bemoan-lack-of-supplies. 
217  Nikolai Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency,” Oct. 27, 2022, https://russiapost.info/politics/
demonstration. 
Mobilization efforts were further undermined by 
serious shortages of functioning military equipment. 
In many cases, activated reservists were given an 
aging rifle and a poorly fitting uniform but little else. 
Many had to buy their kit themselves, ranging from 
thermal underwear to body armor. One reservist 
reportedly painted his rifle just to cover up the rust.216 
As a result, some regional authorities worked 
with local businesses to purchase equipment for 
newly mobilized servicemembers, often at heavily 
inflated costs. 217 In other cases, the responsibility 
Figure 4.  Putin visits Ryazan to check on preparations for newly mobilized soldiers
Source: Russian MOD.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   39  | www.cna.org   
for purchasing basic necessities fell on the wives 
and families of activated servicemembers, which 
also drove prices up. 218 For example, the price of 
body armor jumped from 7,000 rubles in January to 
135,000 rubles in October, a near 20-fold increase, 
because of higher demand. 219 In some regions, 
local officials furnished additional items ranging 
from drones, radio communications, electronics, 
night vision devices, and laser and optical detection 
devices to proper uniforms, outdoor equipment, 
medicine, hygiene products, food, building 
materials, and even vehicles.220 Such measures were 
insufficient, however, to fully equip newly mobilized 
servicemembers, many of whom were dispatched to 
the front without adequate equipment. 
End of mobilization and net effect
On October 28, just five weeks after mobilization 
was announced, Shoigu reported to Putin that 
partial mobilization had ended successfully. 221 
Commissariats halted further draft notices the 
same day, resuming their premobilization functions 
instead.222 On November 4, Putin publicly proclaimed 
that mobilization had been a success, generating an 
additional 300,000 troops for the military. He added 
that 49,000 of them had already been sent to the 
front and were engaged in armed combat.223 
By all accounts, partial mobilization had proven 
to be a chaotic affair. Early on, the system proved 
incapable of absorbing, training, and equipping 
the vast number of newly mobilized troops. 224 
218  Sauer, “The Army Has Nothing.” 
219  Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency.” 
220  Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency.” 
221  Встреча с Министром обороны Сергеем Шойгу [Meeting with Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu], kremlin.ru, Oct. 28, 2022, http://
kremlin.ru/events/president/news/69703. 
222  “Is the Mobilization in Russia Complete?” 
223  Andrew E. Kramer, “Russia Sends Ill-Trained Draftees into Combat amid Losses, Analysts Say,” New York Times, Nov. 4, 2022, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/04/world/europe/russia-ukraine-conscripts-combat.html. 
224  Petrov, “Mobilization as a Demonstration of the Regime’s Inefficiency.” 
225  Mike Eckel, “Don’t Call It Mobilization: Across Russia, Military Recruiters Send Out New Orders,” RFE/RL, Mar. 16, 2023, https://
www.rferl.org/a/russia-mobilization-recruitment-ukraine/32321587.html.
The machinery of mobilization performed poorly, 
mainly because the country had failed to implement 
appropriate reforms during the pre-war period. 
As a result, the system had to be reformed on the 
fly. Over time, however, Russian military leaders 
made various adjustments, leading to a gradual 
improvement in the mobilization process. For one, 
despite having to rush tens of thousands of newly 
mobilized personnel to the front, Russia held back 
most mobilized personnel and provided them with 
more extended training. In addition, Russian military 
leaders established better training courses over time 
for newly mobilized personnel.225 They also gradually 
expanded the capacity to handle the influx of newly 
mobilized troops.  
Early on, however, newly mobilized troops were often 
sent to the front without sufficient training, where they 
served as cannon fodder, suffering heavy casualties 
in the process. There were numerous reports, for 
example, of mobilized servicemembers being forced 
to launch repeated infantry assaults without adequate 
training. In short, the infusion of thousands of poorly 
trained reservists contributed to a general decline in 
the quality of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Yet despite all the problems, partial mobilization 
successfully delivered on its main objective, 
generating sufficient combat troops to replenish 
Russia’s frontline forces. In December 2022, Putin 
announced that of the approximately 300,000 
troops raised through mobilization, 80,000 were 
sent directly to the front, another 70,000 would 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   40  | www.cna.org   
play a defensive role and support logistics, and the 
remaining 150,000 would undergo further training.226 
The mass influx of freshly mobilized troops proved 
instrumental in helping to halt the ongoing Ukrainian 
counteroffensives and stabilize the front lines. 
Return to mobilization by other 
means
Introduction
Following the September 2022 announcement 
of partial mobilization, Russian military leaders 
spent the next few months absorbing all the newly 
mobilized reservists. The flow of fresh troops also 
helped Russia finally bring a halt to the ongoing 
Ukrainian counteroffensives at Kharkiv and Kherson. 
After the initial rush to send troops to the front 
to stem these twin Ukrainian counteroffensives, 
Russian leaders held some of the newly mobilized 
troops in reserve, sending additional soldiers to the 
field incrementally. According to one report, by early 
November 2022, 80,000 newly mobilized troops had 
already been dispatched to Ukraine. 227 The gradual 
influx of 300,000 additional combat troops was 
sufficient for Russia to achieve greater balance and 
stability on the battlefront in Ukraine. 
Russian troop shortages persisted across the 
battlespace, however, especially in the Bakhmut area, 
where the Wagner Group remained on the offensive, 
sustaining high losses and thus an ongoing need for 
fresh troops to replenish the forces. This situation 
226  Bowen, Russia’s War in Ukraine. 
227  “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 7-13 November 2022,” Rochan Consulting, Issue 198, Nov. 14, 2022. 
228  Helene Cooper, Eric Schmitt, and Thomas Gibbons-Neff, “Soaring Death Toll Gives Grim Insight into Russian Tactics,” New York 
Times, Feb. 2, 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/02/us/politics/ukraine-russia-casualties.html. 
229  Eckel, “Don’t Call It Mobilization.” 
230  Eckel, “Don’t Call It Mobilization.” 
231  январь-февраль будет тяжёлым [January–February will be difficult], Verstka, Jan. 12, 2023, https://verstka.media/priznaki-novoy-
mobilizacii?tg_rhash=86cf5f61f61288. 
drove Wagner to engage in an intensive campaign 
during the fall and winter period to recruit additional 
prisoners to staff assault squads and former military 
personnel to augment its core cadre of combat 
mercenaries. These recruiting drives took place in 
parallel with the military’s own efforts to complete 
partial mobilization.
Russian losses continued to mount, however, as 
the campaign progressed in early 2023, creating 
a growing need for additional combat troops. By 
February 2023, nearly 200,000 Russian troops had 
reportedly been killed or wounded or had gone 
missing in Ukraine, according to Western sources.228 
This number was subsequently confirmed in March 
2023 by a US State Department spokesperson, who 
characterized Russian casualties as catastrophic.229
Faced with such losses and with a Ukrainian spring 
offensive looking increasingly imminent, Russian 
military leaders felt compelled to boost troop 
levels again in early 2023. 230 Initially, the Kremlin 
appeared to be seriously considering a second wave 
of mobilization. According to Ukrainian intelligence, 
beginning in January 2023, Russian officials adopted 
a series of measures to support a second wave of 
mobilization. These measures included changes in 
mobilization laws, increases in readiness of military 
training, and measures to verify the credentials 
of Russian reservists, restrict external travel, and 
modernize the registration system.231
Ultimately, however, Putin decided against a second 
wave of mobilization, fearing a public backlash based 
on the people’s response to the September 2022 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   41  | www.cna.org   
partial mobilization.232 Instead, the Kremlin pursued 
other courses of action, including most prominently 
the expansion of volunteer recruiting of irregular forces 
and the large-scale recruitment of contract soldiers 
for Russia’s regular armed forces. These were not the 
only options that Russia pursued, but they were the 
most important ones. Combined with PMC recruiting, 
these three principal lines of effort proved sufficient 
to raise enough troops to avoid another round of 
mobilization.233 Nevertheless, facing a protracted 
war of attrition and pressured by the 2023 Ukrainian 
counteroffensive, Russia has continued to struggle to 
address persistent shortages of combat manpower.234
Private military contractors
Despite partial mobilization, the Wagner Group 
maintained an intensive recruiting campaign 
throughout the fall and winter period. Putin likely 
gave Wagner permission to continue recruiting efforts 
while Russia’s regular armed forces were struggling 
to absorb the hundreds of thousands of newly 
mobilized personnel. This decision was made in part 
because of Wagner’s successful record of advancing 
at the front when Russia’s regular combat units 
were unable to make much headway. 235 Moreover, 
Wagner’s prisoner recruiting efforts had proven to 
be a useful channel for mobilizing additional combat 
personnel. At the same time, Wagner could make use 
of its own training personnel, thereby augmenting 
the hard-pressed training resources of Russia’s 
regular armed forces.236
232  “Moscow’s Army Recruitment Drive Hits 2023 Target Early, Mayor Says,” Moscow Times. Nov. 15, 2023, https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2023/11/15/moscows-army-recruitment-drive-hits-2023-target-early-mayor-says-a83121. 
233  Anton Bayev and Yelizaveta Surnacheva, “Investigation: Russia Violates Promises of Pay, Pardons for Contract Soldiers,” RFE/RL, 
Nov. 8, 2023, https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-systema-investigation-contract-soldiers-pay-pardons-promises-broken/32676712.html. 
234  Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia.” 
235  “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 13-19 March 2023,” Rochan Consulting, Issue 92, Mar. 20, 2023. 
236  Kateryna Stepanenko and Frederick W. Kagan, “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, February 26, 2023,” Institute for the Study 
of War, Feb. 26, 2023, https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-february-26-2023. 
237  Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In, p. 21. 
238  Yulya Krasnikova, “The Prigozhin Method: Inside Wagner Group’s Russian Prison Recruitment,” WorldCrunch, Nov. 20, 2022, 
https://worldcrunch.com/war-in-ukraine/prigozhin-wagner-group-prisons. 
Consequently, in the fall of 2022, the Wagner Group 
intensified efforts to mobilize additional combat 
personnel. These efforts included a second, more 
intensive wave of prisoner recruiting over the fall 
and winter period. Prigozhin also increased efforts 
to recruit additional combat personnel among 
the general populace for Wagner’s core cadre of 
combat mercenaries.
Wagner’s efforts to recruit additional prisoners were 
aided by a new law that Putin signed in November 
2022 that specifically authorized mobilization of 
those convicted of serious crimes, a practice that had 
technically been prohibited previously. 237 The terms 
of prisoner recruiting remained largely unchanged 
during the second wave. Prisoners continued to 
receive combat pay of approximately 100,000 rubles 
($1,600) per month and promises of clemency after 
six months’ service at the front. In the event of 
death, prisoners would receive the title of “Hero of 
Russia,” and their families were promised lump sum 
payments of 5 million rubles.238 
During this period, Prigozhin became more actively 
involved in prisoner recruiting, visiting prisons 
throughout Russia and making personal appeals to 
assembled prisoners (see Figure 5 ). In November 
2022, for example, Prigozhin visited a penal colony in 
the Chelyabinsk region, making a spectacular entry 
via helicopter, where he told a group of prisoners 
why they should join Wagner. He started by telling 
them that Russia’s regular army was no good, filled 
with drinking and drug taking and troops quick 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   42  | www.cna.org   
to retreat under fire. If they enlisted in Wagner, 
however, they would be joining an elite force with a 
successful combat record in Ukraine.239
During that same visit, Prigozhin expressed a 
preference for prisoners convicted of crimes such 
as murder and robbery because these crimes were 
good indicators of the kind of strong will needed to 
survive at the front. He candidly explained that the 
work was dangerous because he was only recruiting 
troops for assault squads. Although he promised 
them three weeks’ training, most would receive just 
one week of training before being sent to the front.240 
239  Krasnikova, “The Prigozhin Method.” 
240  Krasnikova, “The Prigozhin Method.”
241  “Russia’s Wagner Group Opens Dozens of Recruitment Centers,” Moscow Times, Mar. 10, 2023,  https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2023/03/10/russias-wagner-group-opens-dozens-of-recruitment-centers-a80450. 
Wagner prisoner recruiting would continue until 
February 2023, when Prigozhin abruptly announced 
a halt to the practice, apparently under pressure 
from the MOD, which had decided to pursue its 
own prisoner recruiting campaign.241 Before prisoner 
recruiting was halted, however, Wagner had 
successfully recruited 40,000 additional prisoners 
since the announcement of partial mobilization, a 
notable contribution to Russia’s mobilization efforts.  
In parallel, Prigozhin ramped up efforts to recruit 
additional combat mercenaries from the general 
populace for Wagner’s core cadre of PMCs (see Figure 
6). In doing so, he prioritized recruiting experienced 
combat veterans to serve as training instructors, 
Figure 5.  Prisoner recruiting by someone appearing to be Yevgeny Prigozhin
Source: Alya Ponomareva, Воевать будут и зэки, и дети. Блогеры о вербовке заключенных на войну [Both prisoners and 
children will fight. Bloggers about recruiting prisoners for war], Radio Svoboda, Sept. 16, 2022, https://www.svoboda.org/a/
voevatj-budut-i-zeki-i-deti-blogery-o-verbovke-zaklyuchennyh-na-voynu/32036729.html.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   43  | www.cna.org   
weapons experts, and combat specialists. 242 Faced 
with growing battlefield losses, however, Wagner 
was forced to relax its recruiting standards, including 
the need for prior combat experience.243 On the other 
hand, new mercenaries received far better training 
and pay than fresh prisoner recruits.
To secure new candidates, Wagner made extensive use 
of its national recruiting network and social media. At 
one point, Wagner used pithy advertising on Telegram 
to recruit prospective candidates. For example, one 
242  Мобилизационный потенциал ЧВК Вагнер и перспективы Евгения Пригожина. Аналитика [Ukrainian experts estimated how 
many people Prigozhin can “call up” to his PMC and what his political future is], Strana Today, Jan. 30, 2023, https://strana.today/
news/423512-mobilizatsionnyj-potentsial-chvk-vahner-i-perspektivy-evhenija-prihozhina-analitika.html. 
243  Мобилизационный потенциал ЧВК Вагнер и перспективы Евгения Пригожина. Аналитика [Ukrainian experts estimated how 
many people Prigozhin can “call up” to his PMC and what his political future is].
244  Raphael Parens, “Wagner Group Redefined: Threats and Promises,” Foreign Policy Research Institute, Jan. 30, 2023, https://www.
fpri.org/article/2023/01/wagner-group-redefined-threats-and-responses/. 
245  “Russia’s Wagner Group Opens Dozens of Recruitment Centers.”
246  “Wagner Reportedly Opens Mercenary Recruitment Centers at Russian Sports Clubs,” RFE/RL, Mar. 5, 2023, https://www.rferl.
org/a/wagner-recruitment-russia-sports-clubs-ukraine-war/32301711.html. 
ad highlighted an opportunity to take a “3-month 
business trip to Ukraine.”244 Starting in March, after 
prisoner recruiting had been halted, Wagner intensified 
its efforts to recruit new mercenaries, opening Wagner 
recruitment centers in 42 Russian cities. 245 Prigozhin 
also launched targeted recruiting drives at sporting 
clubs and martial arts centers.246
Collectively, Wagner Group recruiting became an 
important vehicle for Russia’s ongoing mobilization 
efforts. Between September 2022 and January 2023, 
Figure 6. Wagner Group recruiting poster
Source: Ai.geba/Shutterstock.com.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   44  | www.cna.org   
Wagner recruited an estimated 40,000 prisoners and 
at least 10,000 additional combat mercenaries.247
Newly recruited prisoners and—to a lesser extent—
new PMCs were often used as cannon fodder, 
forced to conduct continuous infantry assaults 
while suffering heavy losses in the process. 248 
Nevertheless, Wagner played a major role in tying 
down Ukrainian troops during the fall of 2022 and 
winter of 2023, affording Russia time to complete 
partial mobilization. 249 Wagner Group forces were 
also instrumental in the capture of Bakhmut in May 
2023 following a grueling nine-month battle.250 
After the Battle of Bakhmut, however, Wagner 
Group forces were withdrawn from the front, with 
most being relocated to Belarus. At the time of the 
withdrawal, Wagner reportedly had only 20,000 
troops remaining.251 In June 2023, Prigozhin launched 
his now-famous coup attempt, culminating in his 
death in a plane crash in late August. Since then, the 
Wagner Group has had only a limited role in Russia’s 
ongoing mobilization efforts. 
More recently, the Kremlin has been turning to other 
PMC groups, such as Pobeda and Redut, to sustain 
247  Русь сидящая: из 50 тысяч заключенных, завербованных ЧВК Вагнера, на фронте остались только 10 тысяч [Sitting Rus: Out 
of 50 thousand prisoners recruited by Wagner PMC, only 10 thousand remained at the front], Meduza, Jan. 23, 2023, https://meduza.
io/news/2023/01/23/rus-sidyaschaya-iz-50-tysyach-zaklyuchennyh-zaverbovannyh-chvk-vagnera-na-fronte-ostalis-tolko-10-
tysyach-ostalnye-libo-pogibli-libo-dezertirovali; Мобилизационный потенциал ЧВК Вагнер и перспективы Евгения Пригожина. 
Аналитика [Ukrainian experts estimated how many people Prigozhin can “call up” to his PMC and what his political future is]. 
248  Tim Lister, Frederik Pleitgen, and Victoria Butenko, “Deadly and Disposable: Wagner’s Brutal Tactics in Ukraine Revealed by 
Intelligence Report,” CNN, Jan. 26, 2023, https://edition.cnn.com/2023/01/23/europe/russia-wagner-tactics-report-ukraine-intl/
index.html?fbclid=IwAR0BTxtBBU_qF0Rb6mYneNwV7knBnoItBd7sjKJTCUFvXnB6-Fj8KBTG_QY. 
249  Ber, From Popasna to Bakhmut. 
250  “Russia Says Ukrainian City of Bakhmut Captured,” Reuters, May 21, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/russias-wagner-
claims-bakhmut-kyiv-says-situation-critical-2023-05-20/. 
251  Adam Taylor, “How Russia Learned from Mistakes to Slow Ukraine’s Counteroffensive,” Washington Post, Sept. 8, 2023, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/09/08/russia-ukraine-defense-counteroffensive/. 
252  Мобилизационный потенциал ЧВК Вагнер и перспективы Евгения Пригожина. Аналитика [Ukrainian experts estimated how 
many people Prigozhin can “call up” to his PMC and what his political future is]. 
253  “The Redut Ruse: Inside Russia’s Fake Private Mercenary Company Fighting In Ukraine,” RFE/RL, accessed Feb. 20, 2024, https://
www.rferl.org/a/redut-fake-russia-gru-pmc-ukraine/32708853.html.
254  Хитрість Редут [Cunning redoubt], Radio Svoboda, Dec. 2, 2023, https://www.radiosvoboda.org/a/chvk-redut-gru-skhemy-
systema/32708817.html. 
combat power in Ukraine. Both groups are closely 
associated with Shoigu.252 Redut is probably the best 
known of the two, although technically it is not a 
private military company at all. Instead, it has been 
characterized as a state program disguised as a PMC 
created and managed by the Russian MOD and the 
Main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff of 
the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (GRU) to 
help recruit people for the war in Ukraine.253
Redut is a composite force made up of at least 
20 Russian armed formations of various kinds, 
including groups such as Tiger, Lynx, Wolves, 
Veterany, Nevsky, Espanyola, and the St. George 
Brigade. Redut groups are composed primarily 
of volunteers from various sources. For example, 
Veterany is made up of former policemen, FSB, 
soldiers, and security forces. Whereas some Redut 
groups recruit directly, others rely on outside 
groups to aid in recruiting, including most notably 
the aforementioned Union of Donbas Volunteers. 254 
Estimates of Redut’s total size range from 7,000 to 
25,000 total volunteers depending on the source. 
Redut is especially attractive to recruits willing 
to sign six-month contracts as an alternative to 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   45  | www.cna.org   
indefinite service in the regular army. Redut salaries 
range from 110,000 to 220,000 rubles ($1,200 to 
$2,500) per month, up to three times the average 
Russian salary. For these reasons, Redut has 
proven to be effective at bolstering Russia’s overall 
mobilization efforts. 255
Irregular volunteers 
Russian leaders continued to rely heavily on 
volunteer recruiting for irregular combat units during 
the second year of the war. As mentioned previously, 
during the initial covert mobilization period, Russia 
recruited additional combat personnel from across 
the country to serve in volunteer battalions. These 
volunteer formations were considered irregular forces 
and were intended to supplement Russian regular 
combat units that carried out the bulk of the fighting. 
In many ways, this recruiting was a continuation of 
efforts to recruit volunteer battalions during the first 
year of the war, especially in the summer of 2022. 
These earlier efforts were suspended in September 
2022 following Putin’s decision to order partial 
mobilization.256 In early 2023, however, as Russian 
losses continued to mount, officials turned once 
more to volunteer recruiting as a supplemental 
source of fresh combat troops. Volunteer recruiting 
appealed in particular to those who wished to serve 
but were disinclined to join Russian regular forces. 
Unlike contract soldiers, volunteers were not subject 
to Putin’s stop loss order and could thus leave service 
at the end of their contracts.
255  “Хитрість Редут” [Cunning redoubt]. 
256  “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, February 26, 2023.”
257  Dmitry Makarov, Добровольцы становятся контрактниками [Volunteers become contract workers], Flag Family, June 16, 2023, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/86313170. 
258  Makarov, Добровольцы становятся контрактниками [Volunteers become contract workers]. 
259  Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 8, 2023,” Institute for the Study of War, Mar. 8, 2023, 
https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-march-8-2023.
260  “New Volunteer Battalions Are Being Formed in the Khabarovsk Territory,” Vostok Today, June 26, 2023, https://vostok.today/46517-
v-habarovskom-krae-formirujut-novye-dobrovolcheskie-batalony.html. 
261  “An Elite Regiment Will Be Created in the Moscow Region to Be Sent to the Northern Military District Zone,” RIA Novosti, Nov. 20, 
2023, https://ria.ru/20231115/svo-1909628049.html. 
262  Karolina Hird et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 6, 2023.” 
Russian leaders adopted additional measures to aid 
in recruiting irregular volunteers, including a new law 
recognizing volunteer formations as official military 
units so they could more effectively use official 
MOD channels for provisioning resources.257 Another 
measure extended regular social benefits to volunteers 
serving at the front and included a stipulation that 
volunteers sign individual contracts with the MOD 
or their volunteer formations to obtain the necessary 
legal status.258 Putin himself became more actively 
involved in the effort, acknowledging prior legal and 
financial problems with volunteer recruiting while 
committing to address them to make volunteer 
service more attractive. 259 Volunteer compensation 
was also maintained at a high level and even increased 
in some regions. For example, new volunteers were 
offered salaries of 300,000 rubles ($3,450) per month 
in the Khabarovsk Krai region.260 In November 2023, 
the Moscow region began offering signing bonuses 
of 1 million rubles ($11,200) for those enlisting in a 
new elite volunteer unit.261
Buoyed by such measures, volunteer recruiting 
ramped up sharply starting in March 2023 as Russian 
forces were increasingly depleted during near-
continuous combat operations in the Donbas.262 Such 
efforts included targeted advertising on the social 
media platform Telegram to entice candidates to join 
existing volunteer battalions. Some regions also set 
up mobile recruitment centers to attract volunteers. 
There was a key difference between this campaign 
and the 2022 volunteer recruiting drives, however. 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   46  | www.cna.org   
Whereas earlier recruiting efforts were focused 
primarily on staffing for new volunteer battalions, 
the 2023 campaign focused on replenishing existing 
volunteer battalions and supporting formation of 
other irregular forces, including BARS units, Cossack 
battalions, and PMCs.
Russian regions formed several new volunteer 
formations beginning in March 2023. These included 
new volunteer battalions in Dagestan, Bashkortostan, 
Kursk, Nizhny Novgorod, and other regions. 263 The 
Republic of Bashkortostan became a key actor, 
establishing several new volunteer battalions in 2023, 
including the Sergei Zorin volunteer tank battalion, 
which was successfully operating in Ukraine as of 
December 2023, and Vatan, a special forces unit 
formed in April 2023. 264 These units and others 
were later incorporated into a Bashkir volunteer 
regiment. Other regions also formed new volunteer 
formations, including Khabarovsk Krai, Kursk, and 
Ulyanovsk oblasts. Russian authorities also formed 
new cross-regional volunteer formations for the 
first time, including the Siberia battalion, which 
comprised Cossacks from Siberia, the Far East, and 
Central Russia.265 
263  Shamil Khairullin, “Dagestan: Popular Support for the Special Operation Is Growing,” Krasnaia Svezda, Dec. 6, 2023, https://dlib.
eastview.com/browse/doc/94194200. 
264  Nikolay Netunaev, Вести в номер [Lead to the room], Ural’skie voennye vesti, Dec. 1, 2023, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/
doc/94183672; “Volunteer Detachment of Bashkortostan Vatan,” bashinform.ru, Apr. 12, 2023, https://www.bashinform.ru/news/
svo/2023-04-12/dobrovolcheskiy-otryad-bashkirii-vatan-prisoedinitsya-v-svo-k-svoim-zemlyakam-3216558. 
265  Третий добровольческий казачий батальон сформируют в ближайшее время [The Third Volunteer Cossack Battalion will be 
formed in the near future], TASS, Apr. 21, 2023, https://tass.ru/obschestvo/17579471. 
266  Evgeniy Balitsky, Евгений Балицкий: Добровольческий батальон Запорожской области и отряд БАРС-32 имени Павла 
Судоплатова до 4 ноября проводит контрактирование добровольцев по упрощенной процедуре [The volunteer battalion of 
the Zaporozhye Region and the BARS-32 detachment named after Pavel Sudoplatov are contracting volunteers using a simplified 
procedure until November 4], zp-news.ru, https://zp-news.ru/society/2023/10/31/234714.html. 
267  Избежавший санкций уральский миллиардер Алтушкин финансирует штурмовой батальон Минобороны [Ural billionaire 
Altushkin, who escaped sanctions, finances the assault battalion of the Ministry of Defense], Moscow Times, Apr. 5, 2023, https://www.
moscowtimes.ru/2023/04/04/izbezhavshii-sanktsii-uralskii-milliarder-altushkin-finansiruet-shturmovoi-batalon-minoboroni-a38930. 
268  Медведев сообщил о 385 тыс. поступивших на службу в ВС РФ контрактников и добровольцев [Medvedev reported 
about 385 thousand contract soldiers and volunteers who entered service in the RF Armed Forces], Izvestya, Oct. 25, 2023, https://
iz.ru/1595026/2023-10-25/medvedev-soobshchil-o-385-tys-postupivshikh-na-sluzhbu-v-vs-rf-kontraktnikov-i-dobrovoltcev. 
269  Российские военные сообщили более чем о 40 добровольческих формированиях [Russian military reported more than 40 
volunteer formations], Interfax, June 10, 2023, https://www.interfax.ru/russia/905738. 
Volunteer recruiting also ramped up for other 
irregular combat units, such as the Sudaplatov 
battalion, which had been formed earlier in 
the Russia-occupied Zaporizhzhia oblast and 
subsequently attached to a BARS unit.266 Likewise, in 
April 2023, Ural billionaire Igor Altushkin, the owner 
of Russian Copper, sponsored formation of the Ural 
volunteer battalion.267 
Collectively, Russian efforts to recruit additional 
troops for irregular volunteer formations proved 
reasonably effective in 2023, yielding a reported 
80,000 new volunteers by October 2023, according 
to former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev. 268 
Although this figure may be somewhat inflated, the 
Russian MOD had earlier reported that more than 
40 volunteer formations were actively involved in 
the Russia-Ukraine war. 269 There is little doubt that 
recruiting for volunteer formations made a sizable 
contribution to Russian mobilization efforts in 
Ukraine in 2023.
Contractor recruiting
In addition to increased reliance on PMCs and 
volunteer battalions, the main pillar of Russia’s 
mobilization efforts during 2023 was the recruitment 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   47  | www.cna.org   
of additional contract soldiers to bolster the country’s 
regular armed forces in Ukraine. Contractor recruiting 
continued from September 2022 through March 
2023. According to a Ukrainian intelligence officer, 
Russia was enlisting around 20,000 troops per month 
through contractor recruiting and other means during 
that period. 270 Contractor recruiting ramped up 
significantly starting in March 2023 when the Kremlin 
launched a major drive intended to reconstitute 
Russian combat forces in Ukraine by recruiting 
additional contract servicemembers. The plan called 
specifically for the enlistment of 400,000 additional 
contract soldiers through a nationwide recruiting 
effort.271 The Kremlin hoped that contractor recruiting 
would serve as an effective alternative means to 
sustain Russian combat forces in Ukraine without the 
need for a second wave of mobilization.
In preparation for this effort, the government 
adopted several new laws to help facilitate contractor 
recruitment. Russian authorities began offering 
one-time enlistment bonuses for new contractors in 
certain cases, something that had become standard 
practice for volunteer battalions.272 In 2023, the MOD 
announced a reduction in the initial contract term from 
two years to one, although many contract soldiers had 
270  рф щомісяця вдається мобілізувати близько 20 тисяч осіб [Russian Federation manages to mobilize about 20,000 people every 
month], Ukrainian Ministry of Defense Main Directorate of Intelligence, Mar. 21, 2023, https://gur.gov.ua/content/rf-shchomisiatsia-
vdaietsia-mobilizuvaty-blyzko-20-tysiach-osib.html. 
271  Igor Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers], URA.ru, Mar. 10, 2023, https://ura.news/articles/1036286412; “Results of the Year with Vladimir Putin,” 
kremlin.ru, Dec. 14, 2023, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/72994. 
272  Есть Такая Профессия [There is such a profession], Russian Ministry of Defense, May 10, 2023, https://ric.mil.ru/Novosti/
item/489973/. 
273  Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia.” 
274  Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia.”
275  Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia.”
276  Eckel, “Don’t Call It Mobilization.” 
277  Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers]. 
278  Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers]; “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 27, 2023,” Institute for the Study of War, Mar. 27, 2023, 
https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-march-27-2023. 
279  Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers]. 
been previously allowed to sign short-term contracts 
as well.273 The requirement for new contract soldiers 
to have already completed a term of conscription or 
relevant technical or professional education was also 
eliminated.274 To encourage foreign nationals to sign 
up, on May 10, 2023, the government reduced the 
term of military service required to obtain Russian 
citizenship from five years to one while simplifying 
the nationalization process.275
Reflecting its importance, the new campaign was 
overseen by former president Dmitry Medvedev.276 In 
preparation for the campaign launch, Medvedev began 
holding teleconferences with regional governors in 
February 2023.277 The Kremlin also assigned recruiting 
quotas for each region. For example, the Sverdlovsk 
and Chelyabinsk regions were each assigned quotas of 
10,000 new contractors by the end of 2023. For Perm, 
the quota was 9,000, and Moscow reportedly received a 
quota of 27,000 contractors.278 Local commissariats were 
given primary responsibility for recruiting new contract 
soldiers. They in turn were directed to assist regional 
governors, who were responsible for disseminating 
information and supporting local recruiting efforts. This 
division of labor was intended to avoid the internal 
conflict that had plagued prior recruiting efforts.279

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   48  | www.cna.org   
The contractor recruiting drive was officially launched 
in March 2023. As an initial step, regional authorities 
began sending out notices to draft-aged men asking 
them to update their personal contact information 
in military registries. 280 In Udmurtia, these inquiries 
created quite a stir, leading the regional governor to 
offer reassurances that authorities were not preparing 
for a new round of mandatory mobilization.281 Other 
regions experienced similar turmoil in response to 
such notices.
The program was centered on two main pillars, 
both designed to make military service more 
attractive. The first involved a carefully targeted 
mass information campaign to increase the appeal 
of military service. The second entailed plans to offer 
substantially increased salaries and financial benefits 
to further incentivize contractor enlistment.282
The mass information campaign got underway 
in earnest in late March 2023. 283 Reportedly, 
special propaganda teams attached to the military 
commissariats were assigned to manage local 
outreach in each region. 284 Authorities used a 
variety of channels to disseminate advertising for 
the new campaign, including official websites, local 
newspapers, and social media. 285 Military recruiters 
280  Eckel, “Don’t Call It Mobilization.” 
281  Eckel, “Don’t Call It Mobilization.”
282  Farida Rustamova, “How Russian Officials Plan to Recruit 400K New Contract Soldiers in 2024,” Faridaily, Dec. 23, 2023, https://
faridaily.substack.com/p/how-russian-officials-plan-to-recruit?utm_source=post-email-title&publication_id=774882&post_
id=139988197&utm_campaign=email-post-title&isFreemail=true&r=44inp&utm_medium=email. 
283  Rustamova, “How Russian Officials Plan to Recruit 400K New Contract Soldiers in 2024.”
284  Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers]. 
285  Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers]. 
286  “Putin Orders Russian Military to Boost Troop Numbers by 170,000,” Guardian, Dec. 1, 2023, https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2023/dec/02/putin-orders-russian-military-to-boost-troop-numbers-by-170000. 
287  Rustamova, “How Russian Officials Plan to Recruit 400K New Contract Soldiers in 2024.” 
288  “$4,000 to Fight: What Russia’s Military Recruitment Looks Like,” RFE/RL, Apr. 15, 2023, https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-military-
recruitment-photos-moscow/32363946.html. 
289  Amanda Macias and Natasha Turak, “Putin Says Nuclear Weapons Transferred to Belarus; Ukraine ‘Will Be Equal to NATO Allies,” 
CNBC, June 19, 2023, https://www.cnbc.com/2023/06/16/russia-ukraine-live-updates.html. 
290  Anton Troianovski et al., “‘Aren’t You a Man?’: How Russia Goads Citizens Into the Army,” New York Times, Aug. 23, 2023, https://
www.nytimes.com/2023/08/23/world/europe/russia-war-military-recruitment-campaign.html?searchResultPosition=1. 
also made cold calls to potential recruits while working 
at local universities and social service agencies to 
reach students and unemployed workers. 286 Mobile 
recruiting trucks were also used to expand the reach 
of local commissariats (see Figure 7).
In parallel, Russian authorities began offering higher 
monthly salaries for contractor personnel. New 
recruits were initially offered a starting salary ranging 
from 200,000 to 300,000 rubles ($2,200 to $3,300) 
per month, depending on region, roughly three to 
four times the average monthly salary.  Candidates 
in Moscow and nearby regions were offered even 
more attractive financial terms. 287 In Moscow, for 
example, recruiting brochures promised salaries of 
up to 340,000 rubles ($4,160) per month for those 
taking part in the special military operation.288 
In some regions, new recruits were offered one-
time enlistment bonuses of up to 195,000 rubles 
($2,390). Candidates in some regions were offered 
additional bonuses for destroying Ukrainian tanks, 
helicopters, and other weapon systems, or for 
the rate of advances on the ground. 289 One ad 
promised additional benefits such as property 
tax exemptions, household utility allowances, and 
vouchers for vacation resorts. 290 In some regions, 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   49  | www.cna.org   
bonuses increased even further as the recruiting 
drive progressed. In November 2023, for example, 
Moscow began offering prospective recruits a lump 
sum bonus of 1 million rubles ($10,790) to sign a 
new contract.291
Despite such measures, Russian authorities faced 
serious challenges in meeting their recruiting 
targets. As the war progressed, fewer and fewer 
people were willing to sign contracts solely for 
patriotic reasons. Recruiting messages that focused 
on the Kremlin’s official rationale for the invasion 
played a diminishing role in contractor recruiting. 
As one official reportedly put it, “The people who 
went to war for patriotic reasons have run out.” 292 
The MOD also faced growing competition from 
291  “The Ministry of Defense Is Raising Rates,” Telegram channel: “Mobilization News,” Nov. 6, 2023, https://t.me/mobilizationnews/16304, 
cited in Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 6, 2023,” Institute for the Study of War, Nov. 
6, 2023, https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-november-6-2023.
292  Troianovski et al., “‘Aren’t You a Man?’”; Rustamova, “How Russian Officials Plan to Recruit 400K New Contract Soldiers in 2024.”   
293  Troianovski et al., “‘Aren’t You a Man?’” 
294  Troianovski et al., “‘Aren’t You a Man?’”   
Russian industry, which, because of a national labor 
shortage, offered increasingly attractive salaries for 
new personnel without the attendant combat risks. 
To offset such challenges, Russian recruiters engaged 
in targeted messaging campaigns to increase the 
appeal of enlistment. Such messaging involved 
promoting a warrior image among potential Russian 
candidates and comparing army life favorably to the 
bleak local conditions facing many candidates. 293 
As the New York Times noted, “The appeal to 
masculinity [was] pervasive, attempting to tap into 
deeply entrenched expectations of duty and service 
[among] Russian males.”294 Patriotism remained an 
important factor in contractor recruiting, especially 
outside the largest Russian cities.
Figure 7. Russian contractor recruiting truck
Source: Russian MOD, included in Beardsworth, “Russia Scrambles for Soldiers amid Ukraine War Manpower Shortage.”

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   50  | www.cna.org   
Contractor recruiting was also expanded beyond 
traditional populations of young Russian men. 
Russian officials recruited heavily in Crimea, 
reportedly mobilizing as many as 60,000 residents 
for the war in Ukraine. 295 They also targeted foreign 
volunteers by launching contractor recruiting drives 
targeting citizens from Central Asia, Cuba, Armenia, 
and even Nepal. 296 Moreover, after Wagner was 
forced to halt prisoner recruiting, the Russian MOD 
continued the practice, recruiting about 15,000 
additional prisoners for the Russian armed forces.297
According to Russian officials, the contractor 
recruiting drive exceeded all expectations. In 
December 2023, Shoigu claimed that 490,000 contract 
servicemembers and volunteers had been recruited 
since the start of the year. 298 Putin claimed that the 
army had recruited 500,000 contract soldiers so there 
would be no need for a new round of mobilization.299 
According to Medvedev, volunteers accounted for 
about 21 percent of those who enlisted during 2023. 
Thus, if Shoigu’s headline figure of 490,000 troops is 
to be believed, the Russian armed forces successfully 
recruited 387,000 contract servicemembers in 2023.
There are strong reasons to believe that Russian 
official numbers have been substantially inflated, 
295  Karolina Hird et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment July 31, 2023,” Institute for the Study of War, July 31, 2023, https://
www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-july-31-2023.   
296  Ministry of Defence (@DefenceHQ), “Latest Defence Intelligence update on the situation in Ukraine – 03 September 2023,” Post, 
X, Sept. 3, 2023, https://twitter.com/DefenceHQ/status/1698212159715459238?s=20; “A Small Country Far from Ukraine Is Sending 
Hundreds to War, on Both Sides,” New York Times, Oct. 20, 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/20/world/asia/ukraine-russia-
nepal.html; “Why Russia Is Luring Foreign Fighters,” Newsweek, Sept. 7, 2023, https://www.newsweek.com/russian-military-lures-
foreign-fighters-ukraine-war-1825057.  
297  Новые Гвардейцы Шойгу: Убийца, Насильник, Вор-Рецидивист [Shoigu’s new guards: Murderer, rapist, repeat offender], June 
15, 2023, https://verstka.media/novye-gvardejcy-shojgu. 
298  Rustamova, “How Russian Officials Plan to Recruit 400K New Contract Soldiers in 2024.” 
299  Andrew Roth and Pjotr Sauer, “Putin Says No Peace Until Russia’s Goals in Ukraine Achieved,” Guardian, Dec. 14, 2023, https://
www.theguardian.com/world/2023/dec/14/vladimir-putin-peace-russia-ukraine-president. 
300  Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia.” 
301  Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia.”
302  Luzin, “Tricky Recruiting in Russia.”
303  Troianovski et al., “‘Aren’t You a Man?’” 
304  Kateryna Stepanenko et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, September 12, 2023,” Institute for the Study of War, Sept. 
12, 2023. 
however. For one, Russian officials have in some 
cases contradicted their own figures. For example, 
Medvedev gave two different figures for the total 
number of soldiers recruited between January 1 and 
May 2023 (117,400 versus 134,000, respectively). 300 
Second, Russian officials took measures that likely 
artificially inflated contractor recruiting totals. For 
example, because of Putin’s stop loss order, Russian 
soldiers serving on short-term contracts were usually 
compelled to sign new contracts when their original 
terms expired.301 
Likewise, the Russian MOD made efforts to transition 
volunteer formations, Chechen militias, and PMCs to 
contractor status, which may have artificially inflated 
contractor recruiting totals. 302 Most important, 
there is little evidence of such a mass influx of new 
contractor personnel in Ukraine. As military analyst 
Dara Massicot noted in August 2023, “Soldiers are 
not being relieved or regularly rotated on the front, 
suggesting there is still a manpower problem.” 303 
In addition, there were insider reports that some 
Russian factions were promoting a second wave 
of mobilization as late as September 2023, further 
evidence that contractor recruiting likely fell short of 
its targets.304

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   51  | www.cna.org   
Nonetheless, the 2023 contractor recruitment 
drive was still quite effective. The Kremlin was able 
to maintain sufficient troops on the ground to 
mount an effective resistance to Ukraine’s summer 
counteroffensive without resorting to a second 
round of mobilization. By the same token, during 
the summer and fall timeframe, contractor recruiting 
and other measures were sufficient to allow Russia 
to maintain enough forces at the front to hold on to 
previous gains. As noted by the UK Defense Ministry, 
despite previous losses, by spring 2023 Russia was 
still able to maintain some 200,000 troops in Ukraine, 
roughly the same number that it had at the start of 
the invasion.
Net effect of mobilization on Russian 
forces in Ukraine
As the foregoing discussions have shown, since 
the initial invasion, Russia’s military mobilization 
program has been a haphazard and at times highly 
chaotic affair based on a series of poorly coordinated 
individual lines of effort of varying degrees of 
success. These include recruiting additional contract 
soldiers, forming volunteer battalions, forcibly 
mobilizing separatist forces in the Donbas, deploying 
new Chechen militia units, activating BARS units, 
recruiting PMCs, and, most important, mobilizing 
hundreds of thousands of Russian reservists.
Although definitive numbers are not available, it is 
possible to develop a rough estimate of the total 
305  See, for example, Seth G. Jones, Russia’s Ill-Fated Invasion of Ukraine: Lessons in Modern Warfare, CSIS Brief, June 2022, p. 6. 
306  Mark F. Cancian, “Russian Casualties in Ukraine: Reaching the Tipping Point,” CSIS, Mar. 31, 2022, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
russian-casualties-ukraine-reaching-tipping-point; Kjellén, Bringing the Soldier Back In, p. 15. 
307  Jonathan Landay, “U.S. Intelligence Assesses Ukraine War Has Cost Russia 315,000 Casualties—Source,” Reuters, Dec. 12, 2023, 
https://www.reuters.com/world/us-intelligence-assesses-ukraine-war-has-cost-russia-315000-casualties-source-2023-12-12/; “US 
Says Russia Has Suffered 315K Casualties in Ukraine,” The Hill, Feb. 16, 2024, https://thehill.com/policy/defense/4472378-russia-
315k-casualties-ukraine-us/. 
308  Jack Watling and Nick Reynolds, “Russian Military Objectives and Capacity in Ukraine Through 2024,” RUSI, Feb. 13, 2024, https://
www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/russian-military-objectives-and-capacity-ukraine-through-2024.
309  “The Kremlin Got Its 300,000 Troops. But How Did Russian Society Fare?,” Christian Science Monitor, Oct. 31, 2022, https://www.
csmonitor.com/World/Europe/2022/1031/The-Kremlin-got-its-300-000-troops.-But-how-did-Russian-society-fare. 
number of Russian combat troops mobilized through 
these lines of effort based on estimates of other key 
measures made during the war. According to various 
sources, the Kremlin committed about 190,000 
soldiers to the initial invasion. 305 However, that 
force included roughly 50,000 members of Russian 
security forces and Rosgvardia, Russia’s national 
guard forces. Thus, actual Russian combat forces 
during the initial invasion have been estimated at 
approximately 140,000 troops in total.306
Based on a declassified US intelligence report 
released in December 2023, Russia has incurred 
approximately 315,000 total casualties since the 
war’s inception, including both those killed in action 
and those seriously wounded.307 According to recent 
reporting by the Royal United Services Institute, 
which has been reliably reporting on the war 
throughout, Russian forces in Ukraine comprised 
around 470,000 troops in total as of the beginning 
of January 2024.308
It is generally agreed that partial mobilization added 
approximately 300,000 combat troops to Russian 
forces in Ukraine, although many were held in reserve 
for several months. 309 Assuming that the foregoing 
numbers are reasonably accurate, Russia was able 
to successfully mobilize about 645,000 additional 
combat troops through both partial mobilization 
and other means. Assuming the validity of these 
totals, Russia mobilized an additional 345,000 
troops through the various covert mobilization 
efforts employed since the war began. Notably, in 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   52  | www.cna.org   
September 2023, Putin claimed that the Russian 
army had recruited 270,000 additional troops over 
the previous six months, excluding the 300,000 
obtained through partial mobilization. Although in 
absolute terms Putin’s numbers are roughly in line 
with those stated above, given the duration and 
variation in mobilization methods used by Russia 
throughout the war, Putin’s claim to have mobilized 
270,000 troops in just six months appears to be 
significantly overstated.
These numbers should be taken with a large grain 
of salt given the wide range of competing estimates 
made throughout the war. Nevertheless, they are 
generally congruent with the findings in this report 
if we discount the Kremlin’s more expansive claims 
of having recruited 490,000 contract soldiers and 
80,000 volunteers in 2023. Those numbers would 
have to be substantially lower, assuming the relative 
accuracy of the other estimates in this section.
In any event, Russian covert mobilization efforts have 
been sufficient to allow Russia to maintain enough 
forces at the front to both blunt the Ukrainian 
counteroffensive and, more recently, conduct 
sustained offensive operations around Avdiivka 
without resorting to another round of partial 
mobilization. That in itself is compelling evidence 
that Russia’s covert mobilization efforts have thus 
far been successful in delivering large numbers of 
additional combat troops to support the war effort. 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   53  | www.cna.org   
KEY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
Russian mobilization has undergone significant 
revisions during the past several decades as the 
underlying conditions that the country is facing 
have changed. In particular, changes in Russia’s 
mobilization strategy have been closely linked 
to changes in the country’s borders, geopolitical 
situation, prospective adversaries, buffer zones, 
political will, and, most important, internal 
projections of the kinds of wars that it is most likely 
to face. During the World War II era, Russia elected 
to maintain a large standing army combined with 
equally large layered mobilization echelons to meet 
the challenge of the Wehrmacht massed directly on 
its borders. During the Cold War, Russia was able 
to leverage its large Eastern and Central European 
buffer zones to maintain a sizable standing army 
on its borders with NATO backed by a series 
of partially staffed cadre divisions deployed in 
echelons at various distances from the fronts. This 
forward-based approach was intended to buy time 
for Russia to mobilize additional combat personnel.
Because of resistance to reforms and outright inertia, 
the same mobilization structure was maintained 
during the post-Soviet era up until the end of the 
2008 Georgia war. At that point, the Soviet-era 
mass mobilization army was finally disbanded and 
replaced with a permanent readiness force based on 
fully staffed combat brigades. This action was taken 
mainly because Russia expected that it would no 
longer need to fight a large-scale protracted ground 
conflict given the nature of the contingencies that it 
was most likely to face (exemplified by the wars in 
Georgia and Chechnya). The Kremlin believed that 
those wars had shown that what was needed most 
was a high-readiness force that could be committed 
quickly to conflicts arising on the country’s periphery. 
At the same time, Russian leaders expected that a 
large-scale conflict with NATO would not last very 
long because of the potential for rapid escalation up 
to and including the nuclear level. Thus, maintaining 
a large standing army was no longer seen as 
necessary for a NATO contingency either. As a hedge, 
Russia’s standing army was to be backstopped by a 
call for either full or partial mobilization in the event 
of a protracted large-scale conflict with NATO (or 
possibly China). 
There were three ironies associated with these 
decisions. First, as events in Ukraine have shown, 
Russia may have made the wrong bet when it shifted 
away from the Soviet-era mass mobilization army in 
favor of a permanent readiness force. The Kremlin 
failed to anticipate the kind of large-scale protracted 
war of attrition that it is now fighting in that country; 
this kind of war requires a substantially larger 
standing army coupled with a large mobilization 
capability. Although the Soviet-era mass mobilization 
army was likely not the right model either, Russia’s 
decision to rely on a permanent readiness force 
that was not adequately supported by an effective 
mobilization system has been problematic for the 
war in Ukraine. This new approach may have been 
justified for purposes of fighting “new generation 
wars” that were expected to be short, intense, and 
reliant on precision strike, air superiority, and rapid 
maneuver on the ground. However, reliance on a 
smaller permanent ready force without an adequate 
mobilization capability left the country facing severe 
manpower shortages once it became embroiled in a 
large-scale war of attrition.
Second, Russia failed to invest in the necessary 
reforms to develop a viable partial mobilization 
capability. For example, Russian efforts to create an 
active reserve system (i.e., BARS) fell well short of the 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   54  | www.cna.org   
Kremlin’s goals because of inadequate investment 
and therefore contributed only marginally to the 
war effort in Ukraine. As a result, when Putin finally 
ordered a partial mobilization, Russia had to develop 
the necessary mobilization machinery on the fly 
while the conflict continued to rage. This task was 
made more difficult because by then Russian forces 
had incurred such heavy casualties that they had 
dissipated much of their mobilization capacity, 
having lost large numbers of experienced military 
trainers in Ukraine and a large percentage of their 
best frontline combat equipment.
Finally, Putin was unwilling to call for mobilization 
even after it became clear that he needed to do 
so, mainly because of political constraints. Issuing 
a partial mobilization decree at the start of the war 
would have been deeply inconsistent with his vision 
of a quick and decisive special military operation 
conducted entirely with Russia’s standing army 
without disrupting the rest of the country. This 
consideration was so important for Putin that even 
after the invasion went off track, he was unwilling to 
order a partial mobilization until September 2022, 
nearly seven months into the war, when his forces 
came under heavy duress. 
In lieu of a true mobilization involving the activation 
of Russian reservists, Putin elected instead to employ 
a covert mobilization strategy for much of the war 
(“covert” in the sense that it was designed to be less 
visible and to some extent more legitimate to the 
Russian people). This approach caused mobilization 
to unfold in three phases, commencing with an initial 
covert mobilization phase that lasted from February 
to September 2022. During this period, the Kremlin 
employed a diverse array of measures designed 
to mobilize additional combat troops for the war. 
The second phase, which was centered on partial 
mobilization, lasted from September 2022 through 
approximately January 2023. During this phase, 
Putin finally declared a partial mobilization that 
involved the activation of hundreds of thousands of 
Russian reservists after his forces came under intense 
pressure from the twin Ukrainian counteroffensives 
at Kherson and Kharkiv. The third phase (which 
partially overlapped the second) ran from January 
2023 through December 2023, the end of the study’s 
review period. During phase three, the Kremlin 
returned to its covert mobilization strategy. 
During the initial “covert mobilization” period, Russia 
relied on a patchwork of mobilization measures to 
sustain its hard-pressed combat forces at the front. 
Each of these methods focused on a particular 
segment of the population, and each had its own 
comparative advantages for the segment being 
targeted. For example, contractor recruiting appealed 
most to those wishing to join the regular military, 
albeit on a short-term basis, but contractor recruiting 
was not very successful during phase one because of 
the deterrent effect of reports of high casualties at 
the front. By contrast, forced mobilization of LNR/
DNR separatists relied primarily on coercion made 
possible because of the high dependence of Donbas 
separatist leaders on Kremlin support and a populace 
less able to resist. Covert mobilization during this 
phase of the conflict was generally insufficient to 
offset Russian losses in Ukraine. Although precise 
numbers are hard to come by, covert mobilization 
efforts during phase one likely yielded no more than 
a third of the estimated 345,000 troops generated 
by Russia through covert mobilization measures 
throughout the conflict.
By contrast, partial mobilization during phase two, 
although chaotic, was far more successful. Partial 
mobilization faced many problems due to both 
lack of proper preparations and loss of capacity to 
mobilize during the war. These included inaccurate 
reservist registries, reliance on manual processes, 
inadequate training and equipment, and large-
scale efforts to evade call-up. Nevertheless, partial 
mobilization generated 300,000 combat troops 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   55  | www.cna.org   
for the war effort at a time when Russian forces 
desperately needed them, and these troops were 
instrumental in stabilizing the battlefront.
During the third phase, the Kremlin returned to the 
covert mobilization methods adopted during phase 
one, albeit with greater success, having applied 
lessons learned during earlier mobilization efforts. 
During this phase, the Kremlin concentrated on 
three principal lines of effort: contractor recruiting, 
enlistment of irregular volunteers, and expansion of 
PMCs.310 The effort to recruit additional contractor 
personnel was the most important mobilization 
measure, with Russia demonstrating learning by 
refining its approach. This new approach included 
substantially higher salaries, a carefully targeted 
messaging campaign to appeal to prospective 
recruits, and coercive measures to supplement 
voluntary recruiting. Collectively, efforts during 
phase three likely accounted for approximately two-
thirds of the estimated 345,000 additional troops 
generated through covert mobilization efforts 
during phases one and three combined.
Russia’s mobilization efforts have had a mixed effect 
on its forces in the field. The Kremlin’s reliance 
on such a wide range of mobilization measures 
undermined unity of effort and resulted in a 
patchwork of combat forces including both regular 
and irregular units, which led to poor cohesion, 
coordination problems, and a fragmented chain of 
command. Moreover, Russia’s ad hoc approach to 
mobilization resulted in a general degradation in the 
quality and capability of its combat forces in Ukraine 
because the insatiable need for fresh combat troops 
drove local commissariats to send a never-ending 
stream of poorly trained and equipped soldiers to 
310  Russia continued to pursue a wide range of additional measures during phase three, including several of the methods used 
during phase one as well as other methods, among them recruiting volunteers in Russia’s near abroad and from countries such as 
Nepal and Turkey. 
311  “An Interview with General Valery Zaluzhny, Head of Ukraine’s Armed Forces,” Economist, Dec. 15, 2022, https://www.economist.
com/zaluzhny-transcript. 
the front. This decline in troop quality contributed 
to a decline in the quality of battlefield tactics; this 
vast pool of poorly trained personnel was used 
primarily to conduct sustained infantry assaults 
because they lacked the proper training to conduct 
effective combined arms operations. Yet the large 
casualties resulting from mass infantry assaults 
have further fueled Russia’s demand for additional 
combat troops. Nevertheless, mobilization has 
successfully delivered where it was needed most, 
proving sufficient to sustain Russian combat 
power in Ukraine. Mobilization was instrumental 
in allowing Russia to blunt Ukraine’s summer 2022 
counteroffensive and—more recently—to make 
significant gains against Ukrainian forces at Avdiivka. 
Mobilization thus helped Russia’s military turn the 
tide of the war by providing sufficient reinforcements 
to alter its course during 2023. As noted in December 
2022 by General Valery Zaluzhny, then commander 
of Ukraine’s armed forces, “Russian mobilization 
has worked. It is not true that their problems are 
so dire that these people will not fight. They will. A 
tsar tells them to go to war, and they go to war.” 311 
This statement remains as true today as it was in 
December 2022.
Whether Russia’s covert mobilization efforts will 
prove sufficient for Putin to avoid a second wave 
of mobilization remains to be seen. We can draw 
relevant conclusions based on the findings of 
this study. Throughout the war, the Kremlin has 
gone out of its way to avoid calls for mobilization. 
It failed to call for mobilization until its troops 
were placed under heavy pressure by the twin 
Ukrainian counteroffensives at Kharkiv and Kherson. 
Moreover, when Putin did finally order mobilization 
in September 2022, the measure proved politically 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   56  | www.cna.org   
costly for him, triggering internal dissent and a 
mass exodus of Russian citizens from the country. 
Therefore, Putin is making a concerted effort to avoid 
a second wave of mobilization. Instead, Russia has 
been spending enormous sums to provide inflated 
salaries and financial benefits for newly recruited 
personnel. If anything, the Kremlin’s desire to avoid 
another politically divisive mobilization wave is 
even more important today, given the upcoming 
2024 presidential elections. Thus far, Putin has been 
able to get away with this approach because covert 
mobilization has been sufficient to sustain Russia’s 
combat power and preserve its gains at the front. 
Even so, the stakes in the war for Russia and for 
Putin’s regime are equally high. Thus, if Russian 
forces face another major setback akin to what they 
faced during the Kharkhiv counteroffensive or if they 
become so depleted that they become vulnerable to 
such an attack, Putin could very well call for a second 
wave of mobilization.312
We can also draw some preliminary conclusions 
regarding the effect of the war on Russia’s future 
mobilization strategy. There are early indications 
that Russia is planning to revise its mobilization 
strategy based on lessons learned during the 
conflict. For example, Russian leaders recently 
decided to maintain a larger standing army to reduce 
the country’s reliance on mobilizable reserves. 
Specifically, in December 2022, Shoigu announced 
plans to expand the size of the military from 1.15 
million troops to 1.5 million troops in total. 313 The 
312  Some assessments indicate that a second wave of mobilization is likely as long as Russia’s personnel losses persist. See, for 
example, Mike Eckel, “In Ukraine, Russia’s Military Has a Manpower Problem. Now It’s Becoming A Political Problem,” RFE/RL, Nov. 21, 
2023, https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-manpower-problem-protests-politics/32694046.html. 
313  Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers]. 
314  Медведев сообщил о 385 тыс. поступивших на службу в ВС РФ контрактников и добровольцев [Medvedev reported about 
385 thousand contract soldiers and volunteers who entered service in the RF Armed Forces]. 
315  Sergeev, Российские власти готовятся к набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers].
316  Kramer, “Russia Sends Ill-Trained Draftees into Combat amid Losses, Analysts Say.” 
317  Rustamova, “How Russian Officials Plan to Recruit 400K New Contract Soldiers in 2024.” 
armed forces reportedly plan to use these additional 
forces to form a new army corps, 7 additional 
motorized rifle divisions, and 19 new brigades over 
the course of 2024.314
Shoigu claims that the new plan does not imply any 
“significant expansion of conscription” but will rely 
instead on gradually recruiting more volunteers. 
Specifically, the Kremlin plans to increase the 
number of contractors from approximately 400,000 
contract servicemembers immediately before the 
war to 695,000 in coming years. By then, contractors 
are expected to make up nearly half of the new force 
size.315 The Kremlin also recently announced plans 
to recruit an additional 400,000 troops in 2024. 316 
Such efforts will likely require continued payment of 
high salaries and benefits as well.317 It appears highly 
unlikely that Russian military leaders will achieve 
these lofty ambitions because mobilization is barely 
keeping up with Russia’s ongoing battlefield losses. 
At the same time, Russia’s military leadership 
continues to modify mobilization structures and 
processes to address problems that have emerged 
during the war. In addition to digitizing and updating 
registries of Russian reservists and military-aged men, 
the military has taken other measures to strengthen 
mobilization processes and capacity, including 
improving the military logistics system and the 
structure of military commissariats. In addition, the 
Main Organizational and Mobilization Directorate 
of the General Staff has created a multilevel 

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   57  | www.cna.org   
management system under the National Defense 
Management Center to oversee mobilization efforts. 
It has also created new military-political bodies with 
expanded mobilization authorities. A unified system 
of military control of weapons and military and 
special equipment (VVST) has also been created to 
aid in equipping newly mobilized troops.318 Whether 
Russia will pursue more fundamental changes in 
its mobilization apparatus and strategy remains 
to be seen, and these questions likely will not be 
addressed until after the war. These activities and 
pronouncements are nonetheless an early indication 
of how Russia is thinking about a revised mobilization 
strategy over the near- to mid-term in light of its 
experiences in Ukraine. 
Finally, it is important to emphasize that Russia has 
yet another card to play when it comes to mobilizing 
combat personnel for a protracted, high-end conflict 
with NATO, namely the option of calling for “full 
mobilization” of the country’s manpower resources. 
As its name suggests, a full mobilization would 
entail mobilizing Russian reservists at a scale that 
potentially far exceeds that seen during the current 
war in Ukraine. According to one recent report, 
the Kremlin can currently draw upon a reserve 
mobilization force of more than 2 million former 
soldiers who have served within the last several 
years.319 A call for full mobilization would also entail 
placing the country’s economy on a greater war 
footing, including the large-scale mobilization of 
Russian industry to support the war effort. Although 
a full mobilization would almost surely exceed 
Russia’s capacity to absorb and train newly mobilized 
personnel on short notice, if past performance is any 
indication, Russia can be expected to scale up its 
mobilization and training efforts over time, absent 
political constraints.
318  Yulia Kozak, В Авангарде Строительства И Развития Вооружённых Сил [At the forefront of the construction and development 
of the Armed Forces], Krasnaia Zvezda, Mar. 6, 2024, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/95960271.
319  “‘Partial Mobilization’ of Russian Reservists—A Sign of Putin’s Desperation?,” France24, Sept. 21, 2022, https://www.france24.com/
en/europe/20220921-partial-mobilisation-of-russian-reservists-may-reveal-putin-s-desperation.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   58  | www.cna.org   
REFERENCES
“$4,000 to Fight: What Russia’s Military Recruitment 
Looks Like.” RFE/RL. Apr. 15, 2023. https://
www.rferl.org/a/russia-military-recruitment-
photos-moscow/32363946.html.   
“Address by the President of the Russian 
Federation.” kremlin.ru. Sept. 21, 2022. http://
kremlin.ru/events/president/news/69390.   
Albats, Yevgenia. “Six Months of War: What Putin 
Wanted; What Putin Got.” Moscow Times. Sept. 
1, 2022. https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/
doc/79894968.    
Ali, Taz. “What Is the Vostok-Akhmat Battalion? The 
Chechen ‘TikTok Warriors’ Helping Russia in 
Ukraine After Wagner Exit.” inews.co.uk. Aug. 
16, 2023. https://inews.co.uk/news/world/
vostok-akhmat-battalion-chechen-tiktok-
warriors-russia-ukraine-wagner-exit-2548342.   
Axe, David. “The Russians Spent Months Forming a 
New Army Corps. It Lasted Days in Ukraine.” 
Forbes. Sept. 15, 2022. https://www.forbes.
com/sites/davidaxe/2022/09/15/the-russians-
spent-months-forming-a-new-army-corps-it-
lasted-days-in-ukraine/?sh=94ed52456e60.   
Bailey, Riley, Angelica Evans, Nicole Wolkov, 
Karolina Hird, and Frederick W. Kagan. 
“Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 
October 25, 2023.” Institute for the Study 
of War. Oct. 25, 2023. https://www.
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
october-25-2023. 
Balitsky, Evgeniy. Евгений Балицкий: 
Добровольческий батальон Запорожской 
области и отряд БАРС-32 имени Павла 
Судоплатова до 4 ноября проводит 
контрактирование добровольцев по 
упрощенной процедуре [The volunteer 
battalion of the Zaporozhye Region and 
the BARS-32 detachment named after Pavel 
Sudoplatov are contracting volunteers using 
a simplified procedure until November 4]. 
zp-news.ru. Oct. 31, 2023. https://zp-news.ru/
society/2023/10/31/234714.html.   
Baranyuk, Yury. “Wanted: Contract Soldier. Good 
Pay. Bonus for Destroying Ukrainian Tanks.” 
RFE/RL. June 10, 2022. https://www.rferl.
org/a/russia-soldier-recruitment-ukraine-
war/31892914.html.    
Bartles, Charles K. “Defense Reforms of Russian 
Defense Minister Anatolii Serdyukov.” The 
Journal of Slavic Military Studies 24, no. 1 
(2011): 55–80.
Bayev, Anton, and Yelizaveta Surnacheva. 
“Investigation: Russia Violates Promises of 
Pay, Pardons for Contract Soldiers.” RFE/RL. 
Nov. 8, 2023. https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-
systema-investigation-contract-soldiers-pay-
pardons-promises-broken/32676712.html.   
Beardsworth, James. “Explainer: What Does Russia’s 
‘Partial Mobilization’ Mean?” Moscow Times. 
Sept. 21, 2022. https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2022/09/21/explainer-what-does-
russias-partial-mobilization-mean-a78854.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   59  | www.cna.org   
Beardsworth, James. “Russia Scrambles for Soldiers 
amid Ukraine War Manpower Shortage.” 
Moscow Times. May 23, 2022. https://www.
themoscowtimes.com/2022/05/23/russia-
scrambles-for-soldiers-amid-ukraine-war-
manpower-shortage-a77750.    
Ber, Jakub. From Popasna to Bakhmut. The Wagner 
Group in the Russia-Ukraine War. Centre 
for Eastern Studies. OSW Commentary 511. 
Apr. 28, 2023. https://www.osw.waw.pl/sites/
default/files/OSW_Commentary_511.pdf.   
Blank, Stephen J. “Valuing the Human Factor: The 
Reform of Russian Military Manpower.” The 
Journal of Slavic Military Studies 12, no. 1 
(1999): 64–93.
Bowen, Andrew. Russia’s War in Ukraine: Military 
and Intelligence Aspects. Congressional 
Research Service. Sept. 14, 2023. https://
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/
R47068.   
Bryjka, Filip. “The Involvement of Irregular Armed 
Groups in the Russian Invasion of Ukraine.” 
Polish Institute of International Affairs. 
Bulletin No. 59. Apr. 11, 2022. https://pism.
pl/publications/the-involvement-of-irregular-
armed-groups-in-the-russian-invasion-of-
ukraine.   
Cancian, Mark F. “Russian Casualties in Ukraine: 
Reaching the Tipping Point.” CSIS. Mar. 31, 
2022. https://www.csis.org/analysis/russian-
casualties-ukraine-reaching-tipping-point. 
“Chechen Authorities Using Threats and Blackmail 
to Recruit Soldiers for Ukraine—Investigation.” 
Moscow Times. June 15, 2022. 
“Chechens Fighting in Ukraine: Putin’s Psychological 
Weapon Could Backfire.” The Conversation. 
Mar. 18, 2022. https://theconversation.
com/chechens-fighting-in-ukraine-putins-
psychological-weapon-could-backfire-179447.   
ChrisO_wiki (@ChrisO_wiki). “However, the 
Ukrainian counter-offensives at the 
end of August meant that the original 
plan was abandoned.” Post. X. Nov. 8, 
2022. https://twitter.com/ChrisO_wiki/
status/1590040745414918144.
Clark, Mason, Kateryna Stepanenko, George Barros, 
and Grace Mappes. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, June 21.” Institute 
for the Study of War. June 21, 2022. https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-
offensive-campaign-assessment-june-21.  
Colarossi, Natalie. “Russia Offering Soldiers 
Signing Bonuses in Desperate Plea for 
Manpower.” Newsweek. May 23, 2022. 
https://www.newsweek.com/russia-offering-
soldiers-signing-bonuses-desperate-plea-
manpower-1709226.
“Conflict with Ukraine: October 2022.” Levada 
Center. Nov. 1, 2022. https://www.levada.
ru/en/2022/11/01/conflict-with-ukraine-
october-2022/.   
Conner, Albert Z. “Soviet Ground Force Mobilization 
Potential: Lessons of the Past and Implications 
for the Future.” Journal of Soviet Military 
Studies 1, no. 2 (1988): 213–20.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   60  | www.cna.org   
Cooper, Helene, Eric Schmitt, and Thomas Gibbons-
Neff. “Soaring Death Toll Gives Grim Insight 
into Russian Tactics.” New York Times. Feb. 2, 
2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/02/
us/politics/ukraine-russia-casualties.html.   
Cranny-Evans, Sam. “The Chechens: Putin’s 
Loyal Foot Soldiers.” RUSI. Nov. 4, 2022. 
https://www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/
publications/commentary/chechens-putins-
loyal-foot-soldiers.   
Cranny-Evans, Sam. “Understanding Russiaʼs 
Mobilisation.” RUSI. Sept. 28, 2022. https://
www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/
publications/commentary/understanding-
russias-mobilisation. 
Department of Defense. Soviet Military Power, 6th 
ed. Mar. 1987.
Dick, Charles J. “A Bear Without Claws: The Russian 
Army in the 1990s.” The Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 10, no. 1 (1997): 1–10.
Duggleby, Robert W. “The Disintegration of the 
Russian Armed Forces.” The Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 11, no. 2 (1998): 1–24.
Eckel, Mike. “Don’t Call It Mobilization: Across 
Russia, Military Recruiters Send Out New 
Orders.” RFE/RL. Mar. 16, 2023. https://www.
rferl.org/a/russia-mobilization-recruitment-
ukraine/32321587.html.
Eckel, Mike. “In Ukraine, Russia’s Military Has a 
Manpower Problem. Now It’s Becoming a 
Political Problem.” RFE/RL. Nov. 21, 2023. 
https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-manpower-
problem-protests-politics/32694046.html.
“An Elite Regiment Will Be Created in the Moscow 
Region to Be Sent to the Northern Military 
District Zone.” RIA Novosti. Nov. 20, 2023. 
https://ria.ru/20231115/svo-1909628049.html.
Evseev, A. I. “Manevr strategicheskimi rezervami v 
pervom periode Velikoi Otechestvennoi voiny” 
[The maneuver of strategic reserves in the first 
period of the Great Patriotic War]. Voenno-
istoricheskii zhurnal no. 3 (Mar. 1986).
“Experts Have Assessed How Many People Prigozhin 
Can ‘Recruit’ to His PMC and What His Political 
Future Is.” Strana Today. Jan. 30, 2023. https://
strana.today/news/423512-mobilizatsionnyj-
potentsial-chvk-vahner-i-perspektivy-evhenija-
prihozhina-analitika.html.    
Ferris, Emily. Russia’s Railway Troops: The Backbone 
Sustaining Russian Military Force Posture. 
CNA. Apr. 2023. https://www.cna.org/
reports/2023/04/russias-railway-troops.
“Foreign Citizens Serving in the Russian Army Under 
Contract to Be Able to Obtain Citizenship of 
Russia Under a Simplified Procedure.” Duma.
ru. Sept. 20, 2022. http://duma.gov.ru/en/
news/55276/.   
Forgey, Quint. “Putin Sends ‘Nearly 100 Percent’ 
of Russian Forces at Border into Ukraine.” 
Politico. Mar. 7, 2022. https://www.politico.
com/news/2022/03/07/putin-russia-combat-
forces-ukraine-00014699.   
Freedman, Lawrence. “All the Tsar’s Men: Why 
Mobilization Can’t Save Putin’s War.” 
Foreign Affairs. Sept. 23, 2022. https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/all-tsars-men.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   61  | www.cna.org   
Fuchs, Manon. “On Chechen Soldiers in Ukraine.” 
InkStick. Sept. 9, 2022. https://inkstickmedia.
com/on-chechen-soldiers-in-ukraine/.   
Galeotti, Mark, Pavel Baev, and Graeme P. Herd. 
Militaries, Mercenaries, Militias, and Morale 
and the Ukraine War. Marshall Center. 
Nov. 15, 2022. https://www.marshallcenter.
org/sites/default/files/files/2022-11/
SCSSFY23_%232Summary.pdf.   
Giles, Keir. Russia’s Military Plans and 
Demographic Reality, Part 2. Chatham 
House. Apr. 2023. https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/377557567_Russia’s_
Military_Plans_and_Demographic_
Reality_Part_Two?_tp=eyJjb250ZXh0 
Ijp7InBhZ2UiOiJwdWJsaWNhdGlvbiIsInByZXZ 
pb3VzUGFnZSI6bnVsbH19.
Gimalova, Regina, and Igor Burdyga. “Mobilization 
and Conscription: How Donetsk Is Surviving 
the War in Ukraine.” Deutsche Welle Russia. 
Apr. 26, 2022. https://www.dw.com/ru/vojna-
mobilizacija-prizyv-kak-doneck-perezhivaet-
vtorzhenie-v-ukrainu/a-61581026.
Glantz, David. “Soviet Mobilization in Peace and 
War, 1924–1942: A Survey.” Journal of Soviet 
Military Studies, 5, no. 3 (1992): 323–62.
Golts, Aleksandr. Voennaia Reforma i Rossiiskii 
Militarizm [Military reform and Russian 
militarism]. St. Petersburg: Norma, 2019.
Goryashko, Sergey, Anastasia Platonova, Andrey 
Zakharov, and Olga Prosvirova. “‘There Was 
Such a Flood of Them That No One Expected.’ 
How Prisoners React to Calls to Join Wagner 
PMC.” BBC Russia. Sept. 7, 2022. https://www.
bbc.com/russian/features-62934135.
Graham-Harrison, Emma, and Vera Mironova. 
“Chechnya’s Losses in Ukraine May Be Leader 
Ramzan Kadyrov’s Undoing.” Guardian. Mar. 
22, 2022. https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2022/mar/22/chechnyas-losses-in-
ukraine-may-be-leader-ramzan-kadyrovs-
undoing.    
Grau, Lester W., and Charles K. Bartles. The Russian 
Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and 
Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces. 
Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016.
Grechko, Andreĭ Antonovich and Dmitriĭ Fedorovich 
Ustinov, eds. Istorii vtoroi mirovoi voiny 1939–
1945, T-3 [History of the Second World War, 
vol. 3]. Moscow, 1974.
Hird, Karolina, George Barros, Grace Mappes, and 
Mason Clark. “Russian Offensive Campaign 
Assessment July 31, 2023.” Institute for the 
Study of War. July 31, 2023. https://www.
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-
offensive-campaign-assessment-july-31-2023.
Hird, Karolina, Grace Mappes, Angela Howard, 
Nicole Wolkov, George Barros, and Frederick 
W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive Campaign 
Assessment, March 24, 2023.” Institute for 
the Study of War. Mar. 24, 2023. https://
www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
march-24-2023.  

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   62  | www.cna.org   
Hird, Karolina, Grace Mappes, Layne Philipson, 
George Barros, and Frederick W. Kagan. 
“Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 
July 24.” Institute for the Study of War. July 
24, 2022. https://understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-
assessment-july-24.   
Hird, Karolina, Kateryna Stepanenko, George Barros, 
and Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, August 24.” Institute 
for the Study of War. Aug. 24, 2022. https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-
offensive-campaign-assessment-august-24.   
Hird, Karolina, Kateryna Stepanenko, Grace Mappes, 
Nicole Wolkov, and Frederick W. Kagan. 
“Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 
March 6, 2023.” Institute for the Study of War. 
Mar. 6, 2023. https://www.understandingwar.
org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-
campaign-assessment-march-6-2023.   
Hird, Karolina, Layne Philipson, Angela Howard, 
Katherine Lawlor, George Barros, and 
Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, August 18.” Institute 
for the Study of War. Aug. 18, 2022. https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-
offensive-campaign-assessment-august-18.   
Ickiewicz-Sawicka, Magdalena. “History, Structure 
and Management of Private-State Military 
Groups—Legionnaires and Wagnerians.” 
Internal Security 15, no. 1 (2023): 165–79.   
“In Russia They Began to Create a New 
Mobilization System.” Nezavisimya 
Gazeta. Dec. 24, 2021. https://www.ng.ru/
armies/2021-12-24/11_8335_army5.html.   
“Infantry Is Worse than Bondage.” Novaya Gazeta. 
Aug. 10, 2022. https://novayagazeta.eu/
articles/2022/08/10/pekhota-pushche-nevoli.   
“An Interview with General Valery Zaluzhny, Head of 
Ukraine’s Armed Forces.” Economist. Dec. 15, 
2022. https://www.economist.com/zaluzhny-
transcript.   
“Is the Mobilization in Russia Complete? 
Understanding the Statements of Putin, Peskov 
and the Ministry of Defense.” Meduza. Nov. 1, 
2022. https://meduza.io/cards/tak-zavershena-
mobilizatsiya-v-rossii-ili-vse-taki-net.   
Isby, David. “Uncle Joe’s Last Army: Stalin’s Post-
War Army and Its Lessons for Gorbachev’s 
Post-Cold War Army and Russia’s Post-Soviet 
Army.” Colloquium on Contemporary History. 
Dec. 18, 1991, no. 6. https://www.history.navy.
mil/research/library/online-reading-room/
title-list-alphabetically/s/stalins-cold-war-
military-machine.html#isby.
Ivanova, Polina, Max Seddon, and Daria Mosolova. 
“They Grabbed Whoever They Could: 
Putin’s Draft Puts More Strain on Russian 
Businesses.” Financial Times. Nov. 29, 2022. 
https://www.ft.com/join/licence/f33933e3-
2aca-474c-be1d-36154f4f6b0e/details?ft-
content-uuid=893b76bd-b58e-4ae4-a5d5-
12d45d825cec.   
Jones, Seth G. Russia’s Ill-Fated Invasion of Ukraine: 
Lessons in Modern Warfare. CSIS Brief. June 
2022.    

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   63  | www.cna.org   
“Kadyrov Reveals Number of Chechen Fighters 
Involved in Ukraine Special Operation.” 
TASS. Nov. 15, 2022. https://tass.com/
society/1537039.   
Kalugin, V. E., S. V. Kukharskiy, and V. M. Svatalov. 
Историческая роль и результаты работы 
организационно-мобилизационных 
органов при подготовке и применении 
соединений и воинских частей 
Вооруженных Сил СССР на территории 
Демократической Республики Афганистан 
[The historical role and results of the work 
of organizational and mobilization bodies in 
the preparation and use of formations and 
military units of the USSR Armed Forces on 
the territory of the Democratic Republic of 
Afghanistan]. Voennaya Mysl (Jan. 2024): 
122–30.
Kantchev, Georgi, Evan Gershkovich, and Yuliya 
Chernova. “Fleeing Putin, Thousands of 
Educated Russians Are Moving Abroad.” 
Wall Street Journal. Apr. 10, 2022. https://
www.wsj.com/articles/fleeing-putin-
thousands-of-educated-russians-are-moving-
abroad-11649583003.    
Khairullin, Shamil. “Dagestan: Popular Support for 
the Special Operation Is Growing.” Krasnaia 
Svezda. Dec. 6, 2023. https://dlib.eastview.
com/browse/doc/94194200.   
Khor’kov, A. G. “Nekotorye voprosy strategicheskogo 
razvertyvaniia Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh Sil v 
nachale Velikoi Otechestvennoi voiny” [Some 
questions of the strategic deployment of 
the Soviet Armed Forces at the beginning of 
the Great Patriotic War]. Voenno-istoricheskii 
zhurnal no. 1 (Jan. 1986).
Kimmage, Michael, and Maria Lipman. “What 
Mobilization Means for Russia: End of Putin’s 
Bargain with the People.” Foreign Affairs. 
Sept. 27, 2022.  https://www.foreignaffairs.
com/russian-federation/what-mobilization-
means-russia.    
Kjellén, Jonas. Bringing the Soldier Back In: Russian 
Military Manning, Manpower and Mobilisation 
in the Light of Russia’s War in Ukraine. FOI. 
FOI-R—5461—SE. Mar. 2023.
Kofman, Michael, and Rob Lee. “Not Built for 
Purpose: The Russian Military’s Ill-Fated Force 
Design.” War on the Rocks. June 2, 2022. 
https://warontherocks.com/2022/06/not-
built-for-purpose-the-russian-militarys-ill-
fated-force-design/.    
Kozak, Yulia. В Авангарде Строительства И 
Развития Вооружённых Сил [At the forefront 
of the construction and development of 
the Armed Forces]. Krasnaia Zvezda. Mar. 
6, 2024. https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/
doc/95960271.
Kozlov, Sergey. “Ramzan Kadyrov Is Forming a 
New Regiment.” Defense & Security. July 
18, 2022. https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/
doc/78838841.
Kramer, Andrew E. “Russia Sends Ill-Trained 
Draftees into Combat amid Losses, Analysts 
Say.” New York Times. Nov. 4, 2022. https://
www.nytimes.com/2022/11/04/world/europe/
russia-ukraine-conscripts-combat.html.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   64  | www.cna.org   
Krasnikova, Yulia. ЧВК Вагнера вербует 
заключенных колоний Петербурга для 
поездки на Донбасс [PMC Wagner recruits 
prisoners from St. Petersburg colonies 
to travel to Donbass]. Важные Истории. 
July 4, 2022. https://istories.media/
reportages/2022/07/04/chvk-vagner-verbuet-
zaklyuchennikh-kolonii-peterburga-dlya-
poezdki-na-donbass-idti-v-avangarde-
pomogat-obnaruzhivat-natsistov/.  
Krasnikova, Yulya. “The Prigozhin Method: Inside 
Wagner Group’s Russian Prison Recruitment.” 
WorldCrunch. Nov. 20, 2022. https://
worldcrunch.com/war-in-ukraine/prigozhin-
wagner-group-prisons.    
“The Kremlin Got Its 300,000 Troops. But How 
Did Russian Society Fare?” Christian Science 
Monitor. Oct. 31, 2022. https://www.csmonitor.
com/World/Europe/2022/1031/The-Kremlin-
got-its-300-000-troops.-But-how-did-
Russian-society-fare.    
Landay, Jonathan. “U.S. Intelligence Assesses 
Ukraine War Has Cost Russia 315,000 
Casualties—Source.” Reuters. Dec. 12, 
2023. https://www.reuters.com/world/us-
intelligence-assesses-ukraine-war-has-cost-
russia-315000-casualties-source-2023-12-12/.
Lazarev, Valentin. Военкомат опроверг 
принудительную вербовку срочников в 
Тверской области на спецоперацию [The 
Military Registration and Enlistment Office has 
denied the forced recruitment of conscripts 
in the Tver Region for a special operation”]. 
ridus.ru. Aug. 29, 2022. https://www.ridus.
ru/voenkomat-oproverg-prinuditelnuyu-
verbovku-srochnikov-v-tverskoj-oblasti-na-
specoperaciyu-388193.html.    
Lee, Rob, and Philip Wasielewski. “Russia’s War in 
Ukraine: Critical Vulnerabilities to Russia’s 
Military Operations and Systems.” Foreign 
Policy Research Institute. June 30, 2023. 
https://www.fpri.org/article/2023/06/russias-
war-in-ukraine-critical-vulnerabilities-to-
russias-military-operations-and-systems/.    
Lipitsky, S. V. “Voennaia reforma 1924–1925 
godov” [The military reforms of 1924–1925]. 
Kommunist no. 4 (Mar. 1990).
Lister, Tim, Frederik Pleitgen, and Victoria Butenko. 
“Deadly and Disposable: Wagner’s Brutal 
Tactics in Ukraine Revealed by Intelligence 
Report.” CNN. Jan. 26, 2023. https://edition.
cnn.com/2023/01/23/europe/russia-
wagner-tactics-report-ukraine-intl/index.
html?fbclid=IwAR0BTxtBBU_qF0Rb6mYneNwV
7knBnoItBd7sjKJTCUFvXnB6-Fj8KBTG_QY.   
Lister, Tim, and Josh Pennington. “Russia Is 
Recruiting Thousands of Volunteers to 
Replenish Its Ranks in Ukraine. Prior 
Experience Isn’t Always Required.” CNN. July 
29, 2022. https://www.cnn.com/2022/07/29/
europe/russia-recruits-volunteer-battalions-
ukraine-war-cmd-intl/index.html.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   65  | www.cna.org   
Locksley, Christopher C. “Concept, Algorithm, 
Indecision: Why Military Reform Has Failed 
in Russia Since 1992.” The Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 14, no. 1 (2001): 1–26.
Lu, Christina. “Who Is Fighting Putin’s War?” Foreign 
Policy. Oct. 18, 2022. https://foreignpolicy.
com/2022/10/18/russia-war-mobilization-
ukraine-putin-training/.   
Luzin, Pavel. “Tricky Recruiting in Russia: 2023 
Spring Conscripts and Volunteers.” Eurasia 
Daily Monitor 20, no. 94 (June 12, 2023). 
https://jamestown.org/program/tricky-
recruiting-in-russia-2023-spring-conscripts-
and-volunteers/.   
Macias, Amanda, and Natasha Turak. “Putin Says 
Nuclear Weapons Transferred to Belarus; 
Ukraine ‘Will Be Equal to NATO Allies.’” 
CNBC. June 19, 2023. https://www.cnbc.
com/2023/06/16/russia-ukraine-live-updates.
html.  
Makarov, Dmitry. Добровольцы становятся 
контрактниками [Volunteers become contract 
workers]. Flag Family. June 16, 2023. https://
dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/86313170.   
Maksimov, Egor. Надеется, что Путин ему скажет: 
“Нет-нет, ты мне нужен!” [He hopes that 
Putin will tell him: “No, no, I need you!”]. 
Current Time. Feb. 10, 2023. https://www.
currenttime.tv/a/nadeetsya-putin-ostanovit-
i-skazhet-ty-mne-nuzhen-pochemu-
chvk-prigozhina-perestala-verbovat-
zekov/32264288.html.   
Mappes, Grace, Karolina Hird, Layne Philipson, 
and Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, March 27, 2023.” 
Institute for the Study of War. Mar. 27, 
2023. https://www.understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-
assessment-march-27-2023.   
Marshall, James A. “Russia’s Struggle for Military 
Reform: A Breakdown in Conversion 
Capabilities.” The Journal of Slavic Military 
Studies 27, no. 2 (2014): 189–209.
Massicot, Dara. “What Russia Got Wrong: Can 
Moscow Learn from Its Failures in Ukraine?” 
Foreign Affairs (Mar./Apr. 2023). https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/what-russia-got-
wrong-moscow-failures-in-ukraine-dara-
massicot.
McDermott, Roger N. “The Restructuring of the 
Modern Russian Army.” The Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 22, no. 4 (2009): 485–501.
“A Mercenaries’ War: How Russia’s Invasion of 
Ukraine Led to a ‘Secret Mobilization’ That 
Allowed Oligarch Evgeny Prigozhin to Win 
Back Putin’s Favor.” Meduza. July 14, 2022. 
https://meduza.io/en/feature/2022/07/14/a-
mercenaries-war.   
Miller, Sergio. “Russia’s Conscripts Problem.” Wavell 
Room. Sept. 23, 2022. https://wavellroom.
com/2022/09/23/russias-conscripts-problem/.    
Ministry of Defence (@DefenceHQ). “Latest 
Defence Intelligence update on the situation 
in Ukraine – 03 September 2023.” Post. X. 
Sept. 3, 2023. https://twitter.com/DefenceHQ/
status/1698212159715459238?s=20.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   66  | www.cna.org   
“The Ministry of Defense Is Raising Rates.” Telegram 
channel: “Mobilization News.” Nov. 6, 2023. 
https://t.me/mobilizationnews/16304.
Mirovalev, Mansur. “The Real Role of Pro-
Russian Chechens in Ukraine.” Al Jazeera. 
Aug. 18, 2022. https://www.aljazeera.com/
news/2022/8/18/the-real-role-of-pro-russian-
chechens-in-ukraine.   
“‘Mobilization’ and ‘Wartime’ Were Added to the 
Russian Criminal Code. What and Who Does 
This Threaten?” BBC Russia. Sept. 20, 2022. 
https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-62974676.
Monaghan, Andrew. Russian State Mobilization: 
Moving the Country on to a War Footing. 
Chatham House. May 2016. https://www.
chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/
publications/research/2016-05-20-russian-
state-mobilization-monaghan-2.pdf.
“Moscow’s Army Recruitment Drive Hits 2023 
Target Early, Mayor Says.” Moscow Times. 
Nov. 15, 2023. https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2023/11/15/moscows-army-recruitment-
drive-hits-2023-target-early-mayor-
says-a83121.   
Netunaev, Nikolay. Вести в номер [Lead to the 
room]. Ural’skie voennye vesti. Dec. 1, 
2023. https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/
doc/94183672.
“New Volunteer Battalions Are Being Formed in 
the Khabarovsk Territory.” Vostok Today. 
June 26, 2023. https://vostok.today/46517-
v-habarovskom-krae-formirujut-novye-
dobrovolcheskie-batalony.html. 
Odrinsky, V. A. Новая система подготовки и 
накопления военнообученных граждан, 
пребывающих в запасе, и нахождение 
их в резерве [A new system to train and 
accumulate trained reservists and their service 
in the reserves]. Voennaia Mysl (Sept. 2008): 
43–47.
Parens, Raphael. “Wagner Group Redefined: Threats 
and Promises.” Foreign Policy Research 
Institute. Jan. 30, 2023. https://www.fpri.org/
article/2023/01/wagner-group-redefined-
threats-and-responses/.   
“‘Partial Mobilization’ of Russian Reservists—A 
Sign of Putin’s Desperation?” France24. 
Sept. 21, 2022. https://www.france24.com/
en/europe/20220921-partial-mobilisation-
of-russian-reservists-may-reveal-putin-s-
desperation.
Pavlovsky, I. B. Sukhoputnye voiska SSSR [The 
ground forces of the USSR]. Moscow, 1985.
Petrov, Nikolai. “Mobilization as a Demonstration 
of the Regime’s Inefficiency.” Russia.Post. 
Oct. 27, 2022. https://russiapost.info/politics/
demonstration.   
Piskunova, Natalya. “Contract Service.” Boevaia 
vakhta. May 27, 2022. https://dlib.eastview.
com/browse/doc/77531325.    
Potočňák, Adam, and Miroslav Mareš. “Russia’s 
Private Military Enterprises as a Multipurpose 
Tool of Hybrid Warfare.” Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 35, no. 2 (2022): 181–204.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   67  | www.cna.org   
“Putin (Again) Announces End of Compulsory 
Military Service in Russia.” Warsaw Institute 
Russia Monitor. Apr. 19, 2019. https://
warsawinstitute.org/putin-announces-end-
compulsory-military-service-russia/.
“Putin Orders Russian Military to Boost Troop 
Numbers by 170,000.” Guardian. Dec. 1, 2023. 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/
dec/02/putin-orders-russian-military-to-
boost-troop-numbers-by-170000.   
Radin, Andrew, Lynn E. Davis, Edward Geist, Eugeniu 
Han, Dara Massicot, Matthew Povlock, Clint 
Reach, Scott Boston, Samuel Charap, William 
Mackenzie, Katya Migacheva, Trevor Johnston, 
and Austin Long. The Future of the Russian 
Military: Russia’s Ground Combat Capabilities 
and Implications for U.S.-Russia Competition, 
Appendix D: Military Personnel Policy. Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND, 2019. https://www.rand.
org/pubs/research_reports/RR3099.html.
Ramm, Aleksei. Пора вернуть резерв в строй [It is 
time to return the reserve to the formation]. 
Voenno-promyshlennyi kurier. Oct. 8, 2014.
“The Residence Permit System (Propiska).” In 
Russian Federation: Ethnic Discrimination in 
Southern Russia. Human Rights Watch. Aug. 
1998. https://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports98/
russia/srusstest-04.htm.
“Results of the Year with Vladimir Putin.” kremlin.
ru. Dec. 14, 2023. http://en.kremlin.ru/events/
president/news/72994.   
Ritter, Karl. “Putin Orders Partial Military Call-Up, 
Sparking Protests.” AP News. Sept. 21, 2022. 
https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-
putin-donetsk-f64f9c91f24fc81bc8cc65e8bc7
748f4.
Rochan Consulting. “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 23-
29 May 2022.” Issue 92. May 29, 2022.
Rochan Consulting. “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 
8-14 August 2022.” Issue 145. Aug. 14, 2022.     
Rochan Consulting. “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 19-
25 September 2022.” Issue 175. Sept. 26, 2022.   
Rochan Consulting, “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 
7-13 November 2022.” Issue 198. Nov. 14, 
2022.   
Rochan Consulting. “Ukraine Conflict Monitor – 13-
19 March 2023.” Issue 92. Mar. 20, 2023.   
Roth, Andrew, and Pjotr Sauer. “Putin Says 
No Peace Until Russia’s Goals in Ukraine 
Achieved.” Guardian. Dec. 14, 2023. https://
www.theguardian.com/world/2023/dec/14/
vladimir-putin-peace-russia-ukraine-
president.   
“Russia Issues Partial Mobilisation Order, EU 
Slams Putin’s Desperation.” France24. Sept. 
21, 2022. https://www.france24.com/en/
europe/20220921-live-putin-announces-
partial-mobilisation-in-russia.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   68  | www.cna.org   
“Russia Now Holds Night Ambushes to Forcibly 
Send Donbas Men to Ukraine War.” 
Euromaidan Press. Aug. 19, 2022. https://
euromaidanpress.com/2022/08/19/russia-
now-holds-night-ambushes-to-forcibly-send-
donbas-men-to-ukraine-war/.    
“Russia Says Ukrainian City of Bakhmut Captured.” 
Reuters. May 21, 2023. https://www.
reuters.com/world/europe/russias-wagner-
claims-bakhmut-kyiv-says-situation-
critical-2023-05-20/.
“Russia Turns to Recruiting Trucks, Big Wages to 
Woo Volunteer Soldiers.” Reuters. Sept. 18, 
2022. https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/
russia-turns-recruiting-trucks-big-wages-
woo-volunteer-soldiers-2022-09-18/.   
“Russian Military Announces Plan to Expand, Create 
New Units.” AP News. Dec. 21, 2022. https://
apnews.com/article/putin-finland-sergei-
shoigu-ee953abf7f9bf217ccdaa61ec1b35ddd.   
“Russian Regions Form 40 Volunteer Battalions—
Kommersant.” Moscow Times. Aug. 8, 
2022. https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2022/08/08/russian-regions-form-40-
volunteer-battalions-kommersant-a78528.   
“Russia’s Project BARS—How State Employees Were 
‘Conned’ into Volunteering for Putin’s War.” 
Kyiv Post. Nov. 7, 2023. https://www.kyivpost.
com/post/23753.   
“Russia’s Wagner Group Opens Dozens of 
Recruitment Centers.” Moscow Times. Mar. 
10, 2023. https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2023/03/10/russias-wagner-group-
opens-dozens-of-recruitment-centers-a80450.   
Rustamova, Farida. “How Russian Officials Plan 
to Recruit 400K New Contract Soldiers 
in 2024.” Faridaily. Dec. 23, 2023. https://
faridaily.substack.com/p/how-russian-
officials-plan-to-recruit?utm_source=post-
email-title&publication_id=774882&post_
id=139988197&utm_campaign=email-
post-title&isFreemail=true&r=44inp&u
tm_medium=email.   
Sapronova, Yulia, and Elena Tofanyuk. Россию 
после 21 сентября покинули около 700 000 
граждан [About 700,000 citizens left Russia 
after 21 September]. Forbes Russia. Oct. 4, 
2022. https://www.forbes.ru/society/478827-
rossiu-posle-21-sentabra-pokinuli-okolo-700-
000-grazdan.    
Sauer, Pjotr. “The Army Has Nothing: New Russian 
Conscripts Bemoan Lack of Supplies.” 
Guardian. Oct. 20, 2022. https://www.
theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/20/the-
army-has-nothing-new-russian-conscripts-
bemoan-lack-of-supplies.   
Sauer, Pjotr. “We, Thieves and Killers, Are Now 
Fighting Russia’s War.” Guardian. Sept. 
20, 2022. https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2022/sep/20/russia-recruits-inmates-
ukraine-war-wagner-prigozhin.   
Savushkin, R. A. Razvitie sovetskikh vooruzhennykh 
sil I voennogo iskusstva v mezhvoennyi period 
1921—1941 gg  [The development of the 
Soviet Armed Forces and military art in the 
interwar period]. Moscow: Lenin Military-
Political Academy, 1989.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   69  | www.cna.org   
Sergeev, Igor. Российские власти готовятся к 
набору 400 тысяч контрактников [Russian 
authorities are preparing to recruit 400 
thousand contract soldiers]. URA.ru. Mar. 10, 
2023. https://ura.news/articles/1036286412.
Sheftalovich, Zoya. “Full Text of Putin’s Mobilization 
Decree—Translated.” Politico. Sept. 21, 2022. 
https://www.politico.eu/article/text-vladimir-
putin-mobilization-decree-war-ukraine-
russia/.   
Shulman, Ekaterina. “Posting on Mobilization 
Decree.” Telegram channel: “ESchulmann.” 
Sept. 21, 2022. https://t.me/eschulmann/4874.   
“A Small Country Far from Ukraine Is Sending 
Hundreds to War, on Both Sides.” New York 
Times. Oct. 20, 2023. https://www.nytimes.
com/2023/10/20/world/asia/ukraine-russia-
nepal.html.
“Special Online Briefing with General Stephen J. 
Townsend Commander, U.S Africa Command 
(U.S AFRICOM).” US Department of State. 
July 26, 2022. https://www.state.gov/special-
online-briefing-with-general-stephen-j-
townsend-commander-u-s-africa-command-
u-s-africom/.
Starr, Michael. “Russia Is Expanding Its Military—but 
Source of Recruits Unclear—UK.” Jerusalem 
Post. Aug. 29, 2022. https://www.jpost.com/
breaking-news/article-715744.   
Starr, Michael. “Russian Mobilized Troops Poorly 
Trained, Lack Proper Gear for War—Western 
Intel.” Jerusalem Post. Sept. 29, 2022. https://
www.jpost.com/international/article-718458.     
Stepanenko, Kateryna. “Russian Volunteer Units and 
Battalions.” Institute for the Study of War. July 
16, 2022. https://www.understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-volunteer-units-and-
battalions.   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, and Frederick W. Kagan. 
“Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 
February 26, 2023.” Institute for the 
Study of War. Feb. 26, 2023. https://www.
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
february-26-2023.   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Frederick W. Kagan, and 
Brian Babcock-Lumish. “Explainer on Russian 
Conscription, Reserve, and Mobilization.” 
Institute for the Study of War. Mar. 5, 
2022. https://www.understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/explainer-russian-conscription-
reserve-and-mobilization.
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Grace Mappes, Angela 
Howard, Layne Philipson, and Frederick 
W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive Campaign 
Assessment, August 29.” Institute for 
the Study of War. Aug. 29, 2022. https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-
offensive-campaign-assessment-august-29.   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Grace Mappes, and 
Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, August 20.” Institute 
for the Study of War. Aug. 20, 2022. https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-
offensive-campaign-assessment-august-20.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   70  | www.cna.org   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Grace Mappes, Karolina 
Hird, Nicole Wolkov, Christina Harward, 
and Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, September 12, 2023.” 
Institute for the Study of War. Sept. 12, 
2023. https://www.understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-
assessment-september-12-2023.    
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Grace Mappes, Layne 
Philipson, and Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian 
Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 21.” 
Institute for the Study of War. Aug. 21, 2022. 
https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
august-21.    
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Karolina Hird, George Barros, 
Grace Mappes, and Frederick W. Kagan. 
“Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 
August 30.” Institute for the Study of War. 
Aug. 30, 2022. https://understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-
assessment-august-30.   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Karolina Hird, Grace Mappes, 
and Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, September 11.” 
Institute for the Study of War. Sept. 11, 2022. 
https://understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
september-11.   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Karolina Hird, Katherine 
Lawlor, George Barros, and Frederick 
W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive Campaign 
Assessment, September 13.” Institute for 
the Study of War. Sept. 13, 2022. https://
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
september-13.     
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Karolina Hird, Riley 
Bailey, Christina Harward, and Frederick 
W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive Campaign 
Assessment, November 6, 2023.” Institute 
for the Study of War. Nov. 6, 2023. https://
www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
november-6-2023.
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Katherine Lawlor, Angela 
Howard, Layne Philipson, Karolina Hird, 
George Barros, and Frederick W. Kagan. 
“Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 
August 10.” Institute for the Study of War. 
Aug. 10, 2022. https://understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-
assessment-august-10.
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Layne Philipson, Karolina 
Hird, Katherine Lawlor, Angela Howard, 
and Frederick W. Kagan. “Russian Offensive 
Campaign Assessment, August 5.” Institute for 
the Study of War. Aug. 5, 2022. https://www.
understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-
offensive-campaign-assessment-august-5.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   71  | www.cna.org   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Riley Bailey, Grace Mappes, 
George Barros, Layne Philipson, and 
Mason Clark. “Russian Offensive Campaign 
Assessment, March 8, 2023.” Institute for 
the Study of War. Mar. 8, 2023. https://
www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/
russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-
march-8-2023.   
Stepanenko, Kateryna, Riley Bailey, Nicole Wolkov, 
George Barros, and Mason Clark. “Russian 
Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 13, 
2023.” Institute for the Study of War. June 13, 
2023. https://www.understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-
assessment-june-13-2023.
Stepanov, Aleksandr. “Volunteer Territorial Defense 
Battalions Are Being Formed in Russian 
Provinces to Deploy to a Special Military 
Operation in Ukraine.” Defense & Security. 
Aug. 17, 2022. https://dlib.eastview.com/
browse/doc/79555480.
Stewart, Phil. “CIA Director Estimates 15,000 
Russians Killed in Ukraine War.” Reuters. July 
20, 2022. https://www.reuters.com/world/
europe/cia-director-says-some-15000-
russians-killed-ukraine-war-2022-07-20/. 
Stogney, Anastasia, Ilya Barabanov, Elizaveta Fokht, 
and Sofia Samokhina. “‘If You Are a Sniper 
from God, God Ordered You to Participate’: 
Hidden Mobilization Began in Russia.” BBC 
Russia. May 13, 2022. https://www.bbc.com/
russian/features-61434395.   
Tan, Huileng. “Russia’s Military Is Offering Signing 
Bonuses 4 Times as Big as Monthly Salaries 
to Recruit Soldiers amid a Manpower Crunch 
in the Ukraine War.” Business Insider. May 24, 
2022. https://www.businessinsider.com/russia-
offers-soldiers-signing-bonuses-ukraine-war-
manpower-crunch-2022-5.
Taylor, Adam. “How Russia Learned from Mistakes 
to Slow Ukraine’s Counteroffensive.” 
Washington Post. Sept. 8, 2023. https://www.
washingtonpost.com/world/2023/09/08/
russia-ukraine-defense-counteroffensive/.   
Tenisheva, Anastasia. “Glory Hunters or Gold 
Diggers? The Shadowy World of Russia’s 
‘Volunteers’ Fighting in Ukraine.” Moscow 
Times. Jan. 15, 2023. https://www.
themoscowtimes.com/2023/01/15/glory-
hunters-or-gold-diggers-the-shadowy-
world-of-russias-volunteers-fighting-in-
ukraine-a79766.   
Tepperman, Jonathan. “Why Russia Is Losing: Gen. 
David Petraeus on the War in Ukraine.” The 
Octavian Report. Mar. 23, 2022. https://
octavian.substack.com/p/why-russia-is-losing-
get-david-petraeus.
Thornton, Rod. Military Modernization and the 
Russian Ground Forces. Carlisle, PA: Strategic 
Studies Institute, 2011. https://press.
armywarcollege.edu/monographs/577/.
Thornton, Rod. “Military Organizations and Change: 
The ‘Professionalization’ of the 76th Airborne 
Division.” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 
17, no. 3 (2004): 449–74.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   72  | www.cna.org   
Tiushkevich, S. A., ed. Sovetskie vooruzhennye sily 
[The Soviet Armed Forces]. Moscow, 1978.
Troianovski, Anton, Alina Lobzina, Sarah Kerr, and 
Natalie Reneau. “‘Aren’t You a Man?’: How 
Russia Goads Citizens into the Army.” New 
York Times. Aug. 23, 2023. https://www.
nytimes.com/2023/08/23/world/europe/
russia-war-military-recruitment-campaign.
html?searchResultPosition=1.   
“US Says Russia Has Suffered 315K Casualties in 
Ukraine.” The Hill. Feb. 16, 2024. https://
thehill.com/policy/defense/4472378-russia-
315k-casualties-ukraine-us/.     
“Video: Vladimir Putin Spoke at an Expanded 
Meeting of the Defense Ministry Board Held 
at the National Defense Control Centre on 
Frunzenskaya Street.” Kremlin.ru. Dec. 21, 
2022. http://kremlin.ru/events/president/
news/70159.   
“Volunteer Battalions / Dobrovolcheskij Batalon.” 
globalsecurity.org. Accessed Dec. 27, 2023. 
https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/
russia/volunteer-bn.htm.  
“Volunteer Detachment of Bashkortostan Vatan.” 
bashinform.ru. Apr. 12, 2023. https://
www.bashinform.ru/news/svo/2023-04-
12/dobrovolcheskiy-otryad-bashkirii-
vatan-prisoedinitsya-v-svo-k-svoim-
zemlyakam-3216558.   
Vorobeva, Ekaterina. “How Putin’s Partial 
Mobilization Turned into Total Mobilization 
of Migrants.” Russian Analytical Digest 21, no. 
288 (Nov. 2022): 2–4. https://www.ssoar.info/
ssoar/bitstream/handle/document/86966/
ssoar-russanald-2022-288-vorobeva-How_
Putins_Partial_Mobilization_Turned.pdf?se
quence=1&isAllowed=y&lnkname=ssoar-
russanald-2022-288-vorobeva-How_Putins_
Partial_Mobilization_Turned.pdf.
“Wagner Reportedly Opens Mercenary Recruitment 
Centers at Russian Sports Clubs.” RFE/RL. 
Mar. 5, 2023. https://www.rferl.org/a/wagner-
recruitment-russia-sports-clubs-ukraine-
war/32301711.html.   
Watling, Jack, and Nick Reynolds. “Russian Military 
Objectives and Capacity in Ukraine Through 
2024.” RUSI. Feb. 13, 2024. https://www.
rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/
commentary/russian-military-objectives-and-
capacity-ukraine-through-2024.
“We Were Nothing to Them: Russian Volunteer 
Reservists Return from War Against Ukraine 
Feeling Deceived.” RFE/RL. Aug. 12, 2022. 
https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-volunteers-
ukraine-treatment-minimal-training-
war/31985377.html.
Weber, Peter. “Russia’s ‘Catastrophic’ Missing Men 
Problem.” The Week. May 9, 2023. https://
theweek.com/russia/1017914/russias-
catastrophic-missing-men-problem.   
“Why Russia Is Luring Foreign Fighters.” Newsweek. 
Sept. 7, 2023. https://www.newsweek.com/
russian-military-lures-foreign-fighters-
ukraine-war-1825057.

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   73  | www.cna.org   
Yurechko, John. “The Soviet Combat Readiness 
System.” Journal of Soviet Military Studies 1, 
no. 2 (1988): 231–42.
Боевой Армейский Резерв Страны – БАРС 
[Combat army reserve of the country—BARS]. 
Temryuk District. Dec. 10, 2021. https://
www.temryuk.ru/presscenter/news/boevoy-
armeyskiy-rezerv-strany-bars-/.   
Бойцы уже скоро освободят Мариуполь от 
националистов [Soldiers will soon liberate 
Mariupol from nationalists]. Vecherniaia 
Moskva. Apr. 8, 2022. https://dlib.eastview.
com/browse/doc/75832805.   
В Авангарде Строительства И Развития 
Вооружённых Сил [At the forefront of the 
construction and development of the Armed 
Forces]. Krasnaia Zvezda. Mar. 6, 2024. https://
dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/95960271.
В ‘ДНР’ и ‘ЛНР’ объявлена всеобщая 
мобилизация [General mobilization 
announced in DPR and LPR]. Deutsche 
Welle Russia. Feb. 19, 2022. https://www.
dw.com/ru/v-dnr-objavili-vseobshhuju-
mobilizaciju/a-60839410.   
Военный Энциклопедический Словарь [Military 
Encyclopedic Dictionary]. Moscow: Ministry of 
Defense of the USSR, 1983.
Встреча с Министром обороны Сергеем Шойгу 
[Meeting with Defense Minister Sergei 
Shoigu]. kremlin.ru. Oct. 28, 2022. http://
kremlin.ru/events/president/news/69703.   
Есть Такая Профессия [There is such a profession]. 
Russian Ministry of Defense. May 10, 2023. 
https://ric.mil.ru/Novosti/item/489973/.   
Жизнь здесь катится в хреновую сторону 
[Life here is going in a bad direction]. 
Meduza. July 6, 2022. https://meduza.io/
feature/2022/07/06/zhizn-zdes-katitsya-v-
hrenovuyu-storonu.
Медведев сообщил о 385 тыс. поступивших 
на службу в ВС РФ контрактников и 
добровольцев [Medvedev reported 
about 385 thousand contract soldiers and 
volunteers who entered service in the RF 
Armed Forces]. Izvestya. Oct. 25, 2023. https://
iz.ru/1595026/2023-10-25/medvedev-
soobshchil-o-385-tys-postupivshikh-na-
sluzhbu-v-vs-rf-kontraktnikov-i-dobrovoltcev.   
Избежавший санкций уральский миллиардер 
Алтушкин финансирует штурмовой 
батальон Минобороны [Ural billionaire 
Altushkin, who escaped sanctions, finances 
the assault battalion of the Ministry of 
Defense]. Moscow Times. Apr. 5, 2023. 
https://www.moscowtimes.ru/2023/04/04/
izbezhavshii-sanktsii-uralskii-milliarder-
altushkin-finansiruet-shturmovoi-batalon-
minoboroni-a38930.  
Непонятно, чё может быть. Петербуржцев 
зовут на службу по контракту, запугивая 
мобилизацией [It’s not clear what could 
be. Petersburgers are called to serve under 
contract, pressured to mobilize]. Fontanka.
ru. Aug. 13, 2022. https://www.fontanka.
ru/2022/08/13/71568227/?isPreview=1.   

Russian Military Mobilization During the Ukraine War
   74  | www.cna.org   
Новые Гвардейцы Шойгу: Убийца, Насильник, 
Вор-Рецидивист [Shoigu’s new guards: 
Murderer, rapist, repeat offender]. Verstka. 
June 15, 2023. https://verstka.media/novye-
gvardejcy-shojgu.   
Российские военные сообщили более чем о 40 
добровольческих формированиях [Russian 
military reported more than 40 volunteer 
formations]. Interfax. June 10, 2023. https://
www.interfax.ru/russia/905738.   
Русь сидящая: из 50 тысяч заключенных, 
завербованных ЧВК Вагнера, на фронте 
остались только 10 тысяч [Sitting Rus: Out 
of 50 thousand prisoners recruited by Wagner 
PMC, only 10 thousand remained at the front]. 
Meduza. Jan. 23, 2023. https://meduza.io/
news/2023/01/23/rus-sidyaschaya-iz-50-
tysyach-zaklyuchennyh-zaverbovannyh-chvk-
vagnera-na-fronte-ostalis-tolko-10-tysyach-
ostalnye-libo-pogibli-libo-dezertirovali.
рф щомісяця вдається мобілізувати близько 
20 тисяч осіб [Russian Federation manages 
to mobilize about 20,000 people every 
month]. Ukrainian Ministry of Defense Main 
Directorate of Intelligence. Mar. 21, 2023. 
https://gur.gov.ua/content/rf-shchomisiatsia-
vdaietsia-mobilizuvaty-blyzko-20-tysiach-osib.
html.   
Совет Федерации одобрил законопроект 
о повышении возраста граждан, 
поступающих на военную службу по 
контракту [The Federation Council approved 
a bill to raise the age of citizens entering 
military service under a contract]. Moskovskaya 
Pravda. May 25, 2022. https://dlib.eastview.
com/browse/doc/77417008.
Специальная добровольческая операция: Как 
регионы формируют подразделения для 
участия в СВО на Украине [Special volunteer 
operation: How regions form units to 
participate in the Northern Military District in 
Ukraine]. Kommersant. Aug. 8, 2022. https://
www.kommersant.ru/doc/5501970.   
Стань резервистом [Become a reservist]. Rossiiskoe 
voennoe obozrenie. Oct. 31, 2021.
Третий добровольческий казачий батальон 
сформируют в ближайшее время [The Third 
Volunteer Cossack Battalion will be formed in 
the near future]. TASS. Apr. 21, 2023. https://
tass.ru/obschestvo/17579471.   
Хитрість Редут [Cunning redoubt]. Radio 
Svoboda. Dec. 2, 2023. https://www.
radiosvoboda.org/a/chvk-redut-gru-skhemy-
systema/32708817.html.    
Что получит и что потеряет Путин от 
объявленной им мобилизации [What Putin 
will win and lose from mobilization]. BBC 
Russia. Sept. 21, 2022. https://www.bbc.com/
russian/features-62978727.   
январь-февраль будет тяжёлым [January–
February will be difficult]. Verstka. Jan. 12, 
2023. https://verstka.media/priznaki-novoy-
mobilizacii?tg_rhash=86cf5f61f61288.   

This report was written by CNA’s Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division (SP3).
SP3 provides strategic and political-military analysis informed by regional expertise to support operational and policy-
level decision-makers across the Department of the Navy, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the unified combatant 
commands, the intelligence community, and domestic agencies. The division leverages social science research methods, 
field research, regional expertise, primary language skills, Track 1.5 partnerships, and policy and operational experience 
to support senior decision-makers.
Any copyright in this work is subject to the Government’s Unlimited Rights license as defined in DFARS 252.227-7013 and/or DFARS 252.227-
7014. The reproduction of this work for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited. Nongovernmental users may copy and distribute this document 
noncommercially, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice is reproduced in all copies. Nongovernmental users may not use technical 
measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies they make or distribute. Nongovernmental users may not accept 
compensation of any manner in exchange for copies.
All other rights reserved. The provision of this data and/or source code is without warranties or guarantees to the Recipient Party by the Supplying 
Party with respect to the intended use of the supplied information. Nor shall the Supplying Party be liable to the Recipient Party for any errors or 
omissions in the supplied information.
This report may contain hyperlinks to websites and servers maintained by third parties. CNA does not control, evaluate, endorse, or guarantee content 
found in those sites. We do not assume any responsibility or liability for the actions, products, services, and content of those sites or the parties that 
operate them.
ABOUT CNA  
CNA is a nonprofit research and analysis organization dedicated to the safety and security of the nation. It operates the 
Center for Naval Analyses—the federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) of the Department of the 
Navy—as well as the Institute for Public Research. CNA develops actionable solutions to complex problems of national 
importance. With nearly 700 scientists, analysts, and professional staff, CNA takes a real-world approach to gathering 
data. Its unique Field Program places analysts on aircraft carriers and military bases, in squad rooms and crisis centers, 
working side by side with operators and decision-makers around the world. CNA supports naval operations, fleet 
readiness, and strategic competition. Its non-defense research portfolio includes criminal justice, homeland security, 
and data management.

www.cna.org
DRM-2024-U-037996-1Rev  © 2024 CNA Corporation