DOP-2024-U-038956-1Rev   © 2024 CNA Corporation
SEPTEMBER  2024
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A.  
Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.
The Central Brain of the Russian  
Armed Forces  
The Modern Russian General Staff in Institutional Context
Julian G. Waller and Dmitry Gorenburg

Abstract
The Russia Strategic Initiative at US European Command tasked CNA with providing a primer on the Russian General 
Staff for a public audience. The General Staff is perhaps the most important warfighting institution in the Russian Armed 
Forces, acting both as the planning “brains” of the Russian military and also as its operational-strategic headquarters. 
This paper covers the formal structure of the Russian General Staff, its institutional relationships with other military-
bureaucratic institutions in Russia, its role in civil-military relations, its historical evolution, and its special role during 
wartime. It also offers multiple interpretations of the General Staff’s significance in military decision-making, considering 
the dynamics of political and policy influence in Russia and the role of the General Staff in developing military and 
political-military doctrine. This paper also raises the issue of the Russian General Staff chief’s incumbency and leadership 
continuity in light of the 2024 cabinet reshuffle.
CNA’s Occasional Paper series is published by CNA, but the opinions expressed are those of the author(s) and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of CNA. The views, opinions, and findings contained in this report should not be construed as 
representing the official position of the Department of the Navy.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.        9/13/2024
This work was created in the performance of Federal Government Contract Number N00014-22-D-7001.
Cover image: A Meeting of the Board of the Ministry of Defense with Sergei Shoigu at the Russian National Defense 
Management Center, May 25, 2023. VPK News.
This document may contain materials protected by the Fair Use guidelines of Section 107 of the Copyright Act, for 
research purposes only. Any such content is copyrighted and not owned by CNA. All rights and credits go directly to 
content’s rightful owner.
Approved by:  September 2024
 
David Knoll, Research Program Director 
Countering Threats and Challenges Program 
Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division
© 2024 CNA Corporation
Request additional copies of this document through inquiries@cna.org. 
This publication was funded by the Russia Strategic Initiative, U.S. European 
Command. The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily represent 
the views of the Department of Defense or the United States government.


The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   i  | www.cna.org   
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
In light of the ongoing Russia-Ukraine war and 
renewed research interest in command and control, 
military decision-making, and the dynamics of 
Russian civil-military relations, the Russia Strategic 
Initiative at US European Command tasked CNA with 
providing a primer on the Russian General Staff for 
a public audience. This occasional paper provides a 
digestible introduction to the Russian General Staff. 
The General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian 
Federation is the most central warfighting institution 
in the Russian Armed Forces, acting both as the 
planning “brains” of the Russian military and also 
as the operational-strategic headquarters. Although 
the administrative, bureaucratic, procurement, 
logistical, and training functions of the Russian 
Ministry of Defense (MOD) are massive (as are the 
research, development, and production roles of the 
Russian military-industrial complex), the Russian 
General Staff ultimately plans and executes wartime 
operations alongside theater and operational 
direction commanders. 
Despite the constant potential for internal 
bureaucratic tensions within Russia’s sprawling 
military institutions, the Russian General Staff has 
safeguarded its role as an intellectual hub and as the 
key war-planning, war-executing, and operational-
strategic decision-making body in the ecosystem of 
major institutions that make up the Russian military. 
It has successfully defended its prerogatives to plan 
and execute war-making on behalf of the minister 
of defense and his principal in the Kremlin against 
bureaucratic infighting and is tightly integrated 
with both the regional military districts and wartime 
theater and operational commands. 
Furthermore, the General Staff has thrived under 
its longtime leader, Chief of the General Staff (CGS) 
Valeriy Gerasimov, despite challenges both before 
and after the onset of the Russia-Ukraine war. It 
is also well positioned to remain the key decision-
influencing, war-planning, and operational-strategic 
locus of energy within the Russian Armed Forces 
for the foreseeable future—despite the fact that 
former defense minister Sergei Shoigu (Gerasimov’s 
longtime ally) has been removed from his position. 
The longevity of CGS Gerasimov, who has been 
serving since 2012, has helped maintain the General 
Staff’s position within the military-bureaucratic 
hierarchy and has likely furthered centralization 
dynamics. Whether the General Staff may be 
reformed or decision-making shifted to Joint 
Strategic Commands, theater commander, or other 
parts of the MOD upon Gerasimov’s retirement 
remains an open question. 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   ii  | www.cna.org   
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction .....................................................................................1
Overview of the Russian General Staff ...............................................3
Formal structure and primary tasks ...................................................................................3
Relationship with other military-bureaucratic institutions ........................................8
Role in civil-military relations and regime politics .......................................................9
Historical evolution................................................................................................................... 9
Role of the General Staff during wartime ......................................................................10
The tenure of the chief of the General Staff .................................................................11
The Weight of the General Staff ...................................................... 13
The General Staff and military decision-making .........................................................13
The General Staff and political influence .......................................................................13
The General Staff and doctrinal influence .....................................................................14
Conclusion .....................................................................................16
Appendix A: Tasks of the General Staff ............................................17
Appendix B: Recommended Reading ............................................. 19
English-language sources ....................................................................................................19
Russian-language sources ...................................................................................................20
Abbreviations .................................................................................22
References .................................................................................... 23

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   1  | www.cna.org   
INTRODUCTION
1  For a full list of these longer treatments, see the English-language section of Appendix B: Recommended Reading.
The General Staff of the Armed Forces of the 
Russian Federation (i.e., the Russian General Staff) 
is the central warfighting institution in the Russian 
Armed Forces, acting both as the planning “brains” 
of the Russian military and also as the operational-
strategic headquarters. Although the administrative, 
bureaucratic, procurement, logistical, and training 
functions of the Russian Ministry of Defense (MOD) 
are massive (as are the research, development, 
and production roles of Russian military-industrial 
complex), the Russian General Staff ultimately plans 
and executes wartime operations alongside theater 
and operational direction commanders. 
This CNA occasional paper introduces the structure, 
the functions, and both the formal and de facto roles 
of the Russian General Staff. The audience for this 
paper is tripartite: (1) those who are unfamiliar with 
the Russian General Staff’s existence or workings, 
(2) those who seek a shorter form summary and 
analytic perspective on the Russian General Staff 
than is available in the existing literature, and (3) 
those looking for a synthesis of the latest research 
and views on the Russian General Staff from both 
Western and Russian-language analysts. 
We have divided this paper into two sections. In the 
first, we provide a general overview of the Russian 
General Staff, which we intend to serve as a useful 
resource for researchers, analysts, and observers who 
need a quick reference to the major components and 
functions of the institution. This section of the paper 
covers the formal structures of the Russian General 
Staff, its relationship with other military-bureaucratic 
institutions within Russia, its role in civil-military 
relations, its historical evolution, and its special role 
during wartime. 
In the second section, we provide additional 
perspectives on whether and in what ways the 
Russian General Staff influences Russia’s political-
military decision-making processes and outcomes by 
looking at its institutional role within the MOD, the 
Russian military ecosystem, and the Russian political-
military order. We specifically examine how the 
General Staff acts and asserts itself as an institution 
for military decision-making while considering the 
dynamics of political and policy influence in Russia 
and where it sits in developing military and political-
military doctrine. We also examine how incumbency 
and leadership continuity have influenced the 
chief of the General Staff (CGS)—the single most 
important uniformed figure in the Russian military 
and second only to the minister of defense and the 
Russian president as supreme commander-in-chief 
of the armed forces. 
We conclude with a set of key insights on the 
General Staff and implications for policy-makers in 
Western states. 
We intend this occasional paper to be easily digestible 
to analysts looking for a quick primer on the Russian 
General Staff as well as a short-form introduction 
to current debates within Russia surrounding the 
institution’s place, activities, and relevance within 
the Russian military. We focus particularly on recent 
changes and the importance of wartime conditions. 
Much longer treatments of the Russian General Staff 
exist elsewhere and inform the paper throughout.1
In developing this paper, we referenced a set of 
existing secondary sources on the Russian General 
Staff in English and in Russian, supplementing them 
as needed by official Russian government documents 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   2  | www.cna.org   
and journalistic accounts. 2 We rely extensively 
on open-source reporting in a descriptive and 
ideographic manner. In the second section, we bring 
in theoretical perspectives on decision-making, 
institutional influence, and regime politics, but we 
do not rely on a single overarching framework. 
Overall, this paper focuses on the role of the Russian 
General Staff as a key intellectual hub and as the 
key war-planning, war-executing, and operational-
strategic decision-making body in the ecosystem of 
major institutions that make up the Russian military. 
This impressive institution has safeguarded its core 
role within the Russian MOD and broader military 
decision-making space while slowly innovating 
through internal modernization related to command 
and control (C2) and operational-strategic command. 
All the while, it has successfully defended its 
prerogatives to plan and execute war-making on 
behalf of the minister of defense and the supreme 
commander-in-chief against bureaucratic rivals and 
is tightly integrated with both the regional military 
districts and the wartime theater and operational 
commands. It has thrived under CGS Gerasimov, 
despite challenges both before and after the onset 
of the Russia-Ukraine war, and it is well positioned to 
remain the key decision-influencing, war-planning, 
and operational-strategic locus of energy within the 
Russian Armed Forces for the foreseeable future. 
2  For a list of key Russian language documents, leader statements, and analytic pieces on the General Staff, see the Russian-
language section of Appendix B: Recommended Reading. 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   3  | www.cna.org   
OVERVIEW OF THE RUSSIAN 
GENERAL STAFF 
3  The Russian term is Ob’edinyonnoye Strategicheskoe Komandovanie (OSK) and is often referred to generically as military districts. 
4  Alexis A. Blanc et al., The Russian General Staff: Understanding the Military’s Decisionmaking Role in a “Besieged Fortress, ” RAND, 
Mar. 2023, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1233-7.html, p. vi. 
The Russian General Staff is a long-standing 
institution within the Russian Armed Forces, having 
existed in one form or another since the 18th century 
while providing continuity from the imperial period 
through the Soviet era and into the present day. In 
this section, we provide a descriptive overview of the 
Russian General Staff as of summer 2024, illustrating 
its formal structure, its relationship to other military-
bureaucratic institutions within the Russian MOD, and 
its place in the broader ecosystem of state institutions 
within Russia’s authoritarian political order. 
Formal structure and primary tasks
The Russian General Staff is the organizational and 
substantive centerpiece of a C2 structure that is 
among the flattest and simplest that the Russian 
military has had in modern times. It executes C2 
directly over Russia’s strategic forces, while the Joint 
Strategic Commands (JSCs) direct conventional 
forces with oversight from the General Staff. 3 The 
JSCs, also known as military districts, are shown in 
Figure 1. The General Staff is responsible for drafting, 
coordinating, and executing the military’s long-term 
force development plans in coordination with the 
service headquarters. 
The General Staff is headed by the CGS, who holds 
command authority over the whole of the Russian 
Armed Forces alongside the minister of defense and 
the Russian president in his constitutional role as 
supreme commander-in-chief. The CGS also serves 
as the first deputy minister of defense and in the 
modern era is understood to maintain a mutually 
supportive and symbiotic relationship with the 
defense minister.4 
The CGS is formally subservient to and directly 
appointed by the president, yet as first deputy 
minister of defense, the CGS also holds a hierarchical 
position underneath the minister of defense. In 
this way, the CGS holds two potentially competing 
positions within the political-military hierarchy, 
although in both cases, the CGS ultimately does not 
have the final word on decision-making beyond the 
operational-strategic level. 
In addition to C2 and operational-strategic 
planning, the General Staff is tasked with theorizing, 
conceptualizing, operationalizing, and implementing 
operational control and military planning 
requirements for the Russian Armed Forces over the 
short, medium, and long term. It does so through 
institutions within its specialized directorates as well 
as other research institutions associated with the 
General Staff. 
This function is meant to guide and assist the service 
headquarters (i.e., ground forces, naval forces, 
aerospace forces, strategic rocket forces, airborne 
forces, and special operations forces), which focus 
on recruiting and developing officers, planning 
future force employment, and planning weapons 
systems development in coordination with the 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   4  | www.cna.org   
defense industrial base.5 In other words, the General 
Staff performs the functions of both the US Office of 
the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Staff, as well 
as some tasks assigned to combatant commands in 
the US system. 
The General Staff is administratively divided into a 
set of directorates: 
• Main Operations Directorate (Glavnoe 
operativnoe upravlenie—GOU)
• Main Directorate (Glavnoe upravlenie—
traditionally known as GRU but formally 
known as GU)
5  On the Russian military-industrial complex, see, for example, Mathieu Boulègue, “Russia’s Military-Industrial Complex and Military 
Innovation,” in Assessing Russian Plans for Military Regeneration: Modernization and Reconstitution Challenges for Moscow’s War 
Machine, ed. Mathieu Boulègue et al. (Chatham House, July 2024), pp. 44–52,  https://www.chathamhouse.org/2024/07/assessing-
russian-plans-military-regeneration/07-russias-military-industrial-complex-and. 
• Main Organization and Mobilization 
Directorate (Glavnoe organizatsionno-
mobilizatsionnoe upravlenie—GOMU)
• Main Communications Directorate (Glavnoe 
upravlenie svyazi—GUS)
• National Defense Management Center 
(Natsional’nyi Tsentr Upravleniya Oboronoi 
RF—NTsUO)
• Operational Training Directorate (Upravlenie 
operativnoi podgotovki—UOP)
• Directorate of Electronic Warfare 
Troops (Upravlenie nachal’nika voisk 
radioelektronnoi bor’by—UNVRB)
Figure 1. Russia’s military districts, February 2024
Source: “Map of Military Districts of Russia 2024,” Wikimedia Commons, Feb. 26, 2024, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:Map_of_Military_districts_of_Russia_2024.svg.
Leningrad Military District
Moscow Military 
District
Eastern Military District
Central Military District
Southern Military District

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   5  | www.cna.org   
• Military Topographic Directorate (Voenno-
topograficheskoe upravlenie—VTU)
• Directorate for the Construction and 
Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems 
(Upravlenie stroitelstva i razvitiya sistemy 
bespilotnykh letatelnykh apparatov—
USRSBLA)
• 8th Directorate (State Secret Protection 
Service of the Armed Forces)
• Archive Service 
Underneath or outside of the primary directorates, 
other military institutions also exist within the 
General Staff’s purview, including the Military 
Academy of the General Staff (and its Center for 
Military-Strategic Studies), the Military Band Service, 
and Russia’s Special Operations Forces. 
These directorates are not meant to be of equivalent 
importance but rather to reflect distinct tasks and 
functions within the General Staff. Some are headed 
by two- or three-star flag officers, including the 
GRU or the GOU, whereas others are responsible 
for purely administrative functions or have highly 
specific and technical roles (such as the UNVRB or 
USRSBLA). Figure 2 notes the general organizational 
chart for the major directorates. 
The GOU is one of the most important directorates 
for warfighting, given that it is the “leading military 
command body that solves problems of planning 
and command and control of troops” and that it 
“transforms all decisions and instructions of the 
military-political leadership of the country into the 
6  Sergei Rudskoi, “In the Center of the Defense of the Country [В центре обороны страны],” Krasnaya Zvezda, Feb. 19, 2021, http://
redstar.ru/v-tsentre-oborony-strany/. 
7  See, for example, Mark Phythian and David Strachan-Morris, “Intelligence & the Russo-Ukrainian War: Introduction to the 
Special Issue,” Intelligence and National Security 39, no. 3 (2024), pp. 377–85; Mark Galeotti, “GRU: Military Intelligence,” Mayak 
Intelligence, Apr. 2021; and Mark Galeotti, “The Intelligence and Security Services and Strategic Decision-Making,” George C. Marshall 
European Center for Security Studies, Security Insights, May 2019, https://www.marshallcenter.org/sites/default/files/files/2019-09/
SecurityInsights_30_Galeotti_May2019.pdf. 
8  Vitalii Tsymbal and Vasilii Zatsepin, “New System of Management of Russian Defense: Reform or Imitation? [Новая система 
управления обороной России: Реформа или имитация],” Ekonomicheskoe Razvitie Rossii 22, no. 5 (2015): 80–83, https://cyberleninka.
ru/article/n/novaya-sistema-upravelniya-oboronoi-rossii-reforma-ili-imitatsiya.
form of directives, combat orders and orders, and 
promptly communicates them to the troops,” in 
the words of GOU head Sergei Rudskoi. 6 It shares 
this task with the NTsUO, which implements and 
coordinates in real time. Meanwhile, the GRU is one 
of the most aggressive intelligence institutions in 
Russia, with considerable reach in areas of active 
combat (such as Ukraine or Syria), among Wagner 
Group enterprises in sub-Saharan Africa, and in active 
operations against Western targets.7 Appendix: Tasks 
of the General Staff reproduces the formal task list of 
the General Staff in Russian legislation. 
The dominant role of the General Staff in the 
Russian military is to provide the military with some 
insulation from bureaucratic rivalries among the 
service branches and between theater commands. 
The General Staff’s vertical planning and resource 
distribution process shapes the Russian military’s 
long-term force structure and procurement priorities 
in an efficient manner, promoting policy consistency 
over time. This system, in theory, is designed to 
allow the General Staff to overcome bureaucratic 
resistance to make hard strategic and organizational 
choices at a structural level. 
The C2 system of the General Staff is run though 
the NTsUO, which was set up by the MOD in 2014 
to modernize and streamline operational decision-
making and coordination efforts. The NTsUO serves 
as the central peacetime and wartime command 
post and situation center, is a physical location in 
Moscow from which the execution of military plans 
takes place, and also is a coordinating military-
bureaucratic entity.8 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   6  | www.cna.org   
Below the NTsUO structure, corresponding subordinate 
posts have been set up at every level down to the 
brigade. These posts include strategic control centers 
within each service, independent combat arm and 
regional defense centers within each JSC headquarters, 
territorial defense centers in operational formations, 
and command posts at the division and brigade levels.9 
The NTsUO’s place in the broader chain of command 
for combat operations is shown in Figure 3.
9  Tsymbal and Zatsepin, “New System of Management of Russian Defense.”
10  Tsymbal and Zatsepin, “New System of Management of Russian Defense.”
The NTsUO consists of three main components: the 
Center for Daily Activities, the Center for Combat Control, 
and the Center for Control of Strategic Nuclear Forces. 
It allows senior military leadership to direct combat 
operations and monitor the military’s daily activities, 
including training, readiness, budget execution, and 
facilities maintenance and construction. During a major 
war, nearly all government internal security operations 
are assigned to the jurisdiction of the NTsUO as well.10 
Figure 2. Organizational chart of the Russian General Staff 
Source: CNA, updated from Alexis A. Blanc et al., The Russian General Staff: Understanding the Military’s Decisionmaking Role in a 
“Besieged Fortress,” RAND, Mar. 2023, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1233-7.html. 
Note that the head of the Main Directorate is an admiral.
a Arrested in May 2024.
Figure 2: Organizational Chart of the General Staff 
Chief of the
General Staff
Main Organization  
and Mobilization
Directorate, Deputy  
Chief of the  
General Staff
Main Operations
Directorate, First  
Deputy Chief of  
the General Staff
Main
Communications
Directorate, Deputy  
Chief of the  
General Staff
Main Directorate,
Deputy Chief of 
the General Staff
National Defense
Management Center
Operational
Training
Directorate
Directorate  
of Electronic
Warfare Troops
Directorate for
the Construction
and Development
of Unmanned
Aerial Systems
Military
Topographic
Directorate
Archive
Service
8th Directorate
First Deputy Chief  
of the General Staff
Valerii Gerasimov
General of the Army
Evgenii Burdinskii
Colonel-General
Sergei Rudskoi
Colonel-General
Vadim Shamarina
Lieutenant General
Igor Kostyukov
Colonel-General
Stanislav 
Gadzhimagomedov
Lieutenant General
Fanil Sarvarov
Major General
Yurii Lastochkin
Lieutenant General
Aleksandr 
Novikov 
Major General
Aleksandr 
Zalizniuk
Eduard
Paderin
Andrei 
Kolovanov
Major General
Nikolai Bogdanovskii
Colonel-General

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   7  | www.cna.org   
Although little is known publicly about the NTsUO’s 
operations during the current Russia-Ukraine war, 
analysts have viewed it as a major contributor to 
Russian victory during the Syrian Civil War. 11 During 
this conflict, it served as a management center 
11  See, for example, Blanc et al., The Russian General Staff; Michael Kofman, “Syria and the Russian Armed Forces: An Evaluation of 
Moscow’s Military Strategy and Operational Performance,” in Russia’s War in Syria: Assessing Russian Military Capabilities and Lessons 
Learned, ed. Robert E. Hamilton, Chris Miller, and Aaron Stein (Foreign Policy Research Institute, 2020). 
12  Blanc et al., The Russian General Staff, p. 46. 
that furthered coordination efforts and connected 
the MOD, combat forces in theater, and political 
principals in the Kremlin together. One report 
described the NTsUO as a “whole-of-government 
management center.”12 
Figure 3. Russian chain of command for combat operations 
Source: CNA, derived from Roger N. Dermott and Charles K. Bartles, The Russian Military Decision-Making Process & Automated 
Command and Control, German Institute for Defense and Strategic Studies, Oct. 2020, https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/345212545_The_Russian_Military_Decision-Making_Process_Automated_Command_and_Control. 
Figure 1: Russian Armed Forces Chain of Command for Combat Operations
Command of  
combat operations
Tactical/ 
Operational
Source: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345212545_The_Russian_Military_Decision-Making_Process_Automated_Command_and_Control
President Supreme  
Commander-in-Chief
Ministry of Defense
Chief of General Staff
Chief of Operations
CDR of centrally 
controlled forces
Strategic nuclear, 
Airborne, Military 
Transport Aviation
Regional level of 
federal ministries, 
services and agencies
Local level of 
federal ministries, 
service and agencies
temporary 
interministerial 
presence
permanent 
interministerial 
presence
General Staff
Directorate
Military support  
structures
Operational/ 
Strategic
National Defense 
Management Center
Ministry of Defense
Joint Strategic 
Command
CDR higher-level 
large formations
Joint Strategic 
Command HQ
Military 
District HQ
Civil-military  
coordination
Strategic
Other federal 
ministries, service 
and agencies
Military 
District
Chief of local 
defense staffs
The Assessed Chain of Command for Combat Operations
subordinated to: supports: coordination with:

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   8  | www.cna.org   
Relationship with other military-
bureaucratic institutions
The General Staff has previously been described as 
“the brain of the Russian army.”13 What this means in 
practice is that the General Staff (alongside theater 
commanders and the JSCs) is tasked with developing 
military doctrine, force development and training 
concepts, and operational planning, whereas other 
parts of the military structure are responsible for 
other aspects of the functioning of the military, 
such as budgeting, procurement, and training. 
The General Staff is also responsible for combat 
readiness and force mobilization—tasks that have 
become especially crucial during wartime.
The leadership of the MOD and the General Staff 
currently work in a smooth and complementary 
relationship, but this was not the case during Russia’s 
post-Soviet military history. Rather, the 1990s and 
early 2000s were characterized by frequent and 
long-lasting internal conflicts between the minister 
of defense and the CGS caused by an unclear 
division of responsibilities and subsequent efforts by 
both figures to attain primacy. These conflicts were 
particularly visible between Minister of Defense Igor 
Sergeev and CGS Anatoly Kvashnin in the late 1990s 
and between Anatoly Serdyukov and Yuri Baluyevsky 
from 2007 to 2008. The earlier conflict was rooted 
in different visions of military development between 
Sergeev, who sought primacy for the strategic rocket 
forces, and Kvashnin, who preferred to focus on the 
ground forces.14 
In this case, Kvashnin emerged victorious, with 
Sergeev being replaced by Sergei Ivanov, a longtime 
Putin insider. To date, Sergeev was the last Russian 
13  Steven J. Main, “The ‘Brain’ of the Russian Army: The Centre for Military-Strategic Research, General Staff (TsVSI GSh), 1985–2000,” 
The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 13, no. 3 (2000), p. 47.
14  Nikolai Sokov, “The Nuclear Debate of Summer 2000,” NTI Report (June 2004), www.nti.org/analysis/articles/nuclear-debate-
summer-2000/.
15  Chloe Arnold, “Russia: Resignation Signals Trouble Within Defense Ministry,” RFE/RL, Mar. 27, 2008, https://www.rferl.
org/a/1079697.html . 
16  See, for example, discussion in Blanc et al., The Russian General Staff.
defense minister who was career uniformed military, 
with all subsequent defense ministers having been 
civilians—possibly out of a desire to reduce internal 
conflicts within the military elite over strategic and 
political-military issues. Meanwhile, the later conflict 
between Baluyevsky and Serdyukov was rooted 
in different visions for the future development of 
the armed forces; this conflict resulted in not only 
Baluyevsky’s dismissal but also the restructuring of 
the General Staff.15 
As part of the Serdyukov military reform, the 
duplication of responsibilities between the General 
Staff and the MOD proper (and therefore intra-
bureaucratic stresses within the Russian Armed 
Forces) has been eliminated, with the General Staff 
focusing on strategic planning and operations. Since 
the 2009 reform, the General Staff has had primary 
decision-making authority over military planning 
and warfighting, whereas other parts of the MOD 
and other services have generally overseen basic 
training, support functions, and, in the case of the 
military services, implementation of plans developed 
by the General Staff. Notably, although the minister 
of defense is the primary political contact on the 
military side of Russia’s civil-military relationship, the 
CGS is the official actually tasked with developing 
and executing military operations at the strategic 
and operational-strategic level, thus de facto running 
any given military action.16 
Given the centrality of the ground forces in the 
Russian military, the leadership of the General Staff 
primarily consists of officers from the ground forces, 
which means that other services, and especially the 
Navy and the Air Force, generally have less influence 
in the General Staff.

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   9  | www.cna.org   
Role in civil-military relations and 
regime politics
Although the General Staff as an organization 
performs analytical and planning roles for the 
Russian military, the CGS has for many years had a 
more politically prominent role. Since the advent of 
civilian defense ministers early in Vladimir Putin’s 
presidency, the CGS has de facto been the highest 
ranking military officer in the Russian military. As 
such, the CGS has played a pivotal role in providing 
the military perspective on security issues that are 
key to the political leadership. 
At the same time, given the strict subordination 
of the military to civilian rule and the Russian 
military’s overall culture of avoiding direct 
participation in politics, the CGSs do not make 
direct public pronouncements on government 
decisions regarding security issues or the use of 
force. Furthermore, as far as is known, they have 
also refrained from privately conveying positions 
on these issues to the political leadership, focusing 
instead on more practical aspects of potential 
military operations, including their feasibility and 
options for how they might be carried out. To the 
extent that the military leadership has provided 
a point of view to the political leadership on the 
wisdom of various policy choices, these views have 
been conveyed by the minister of defense rather 
than the CGS.
After many years of conflictual relations between 
defense ministers and CGSs, the period since 2008 has 
been characterized by smooth and cordial relations 
between Sergei Shoigu and Valeriy Gerasimov—the 
top civilian and military officials in the MOD and 
General Staff, respectively. Anatoly Serdyukov and 
CGS Nikolay Makarov worked together to carry 
out the New Look Reforms from 2009 to 2012, 
17  Kirill Shamiev, Understanding Senior Leadership Dynamics Within the Russian Military, Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, July 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/understanding-senior-leadership-dynamics-within-russian-military. 
18  William E. Odom, The Collapse of the Soviet Military (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998).
with Serdyukov focusing on the organizational 
and financial aspects, as well as providing top 
cover, while Makarov focused on the specifics of 
military reorganization. Sergei Shoigu and Valery 
Gerasimov had a similar division of responsibilities, 
though focused more on reestablishing stability and 
increasing effectiveness within the military forces 
rather than pushing through further reforms.17 
The replacement of Shoigu by Andrei Belousov 
in the spring of 2023 has raised the question of 
whether CGS Gerasimov will soon be replaced as 
well, though for the moment Putin has indicated 
that he will remain in place. Regardless of whether 
Gerasimov remains or is replaced by a new CGS, by 
all indications, the CGS will continue to refrain from 
direct involvement in the political sphere and will 
focus instead on running military operations.
Historical evolution
The functions of the Russian military’s General Staff 
have remained remarkably consistent since the 
early days of the Red Army. The General Staff was 
described as the “brain” of the Soviet military as 
early as the 1920s. During World War II, the General 
Staff was given operational control of the military, 
and it has retained this function during wartime ever 
since. Assessing the post-WWII military-bureaucratic 
landscape, Odom noted, “After the war it became 
the most powerful centre for virtually all aspects of 
military planning, operations, and determination of 
resource requirements.”18 
During the Soviet period, the General Staff was 
responsible for virtually all military planning, 
including the development of war plans, whereas the 
minister of defense and his staff were responsible 
primarily for setting policy direction, which was then 
implemented by the General Staff and the services. 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   10  | www.cna.org   
After the breakup of the Soviet Union and the 
establishment of a separate Russian army, the 
General Staff largely retained the responsibilities 
that it had during the Soviet period. These 
responsibilities included strategic defense planning, 
operational planning, C2 in both peacetime and 
wartime, recruitment and mobilization planning, and 
planning for weapons and equipment procurement. 
The services then implemented many of the plans 
developed by the General Staff, either on their own 
or with the General Staff. 
Lack of clarity regarding their respective roles 
and responsibilities resulted in recurring conflicts 
between the General Staff and the minister of 
defense, which were especially prominent in the 
late 1990s and early 2000s. Russia addressed these 
conflicts by making changes to the role of the 
General Staff, implemented as part of the 2009 New 
Look Reform. 
The changes turned the General Staff more clearly into 
a strategic planning body, removing any ambiguity 
over whether it was responsible for combat training 
or various support functions. At the same time, the 
formerly independent GRU was incorporated within 
the General Staff, giving the General Staff a direct 
role in overseeing intelligence operations as well. 19 
The role of the General Staff has remained largely 
unchanged since the 2009 reform.
Role of the General Staff during 
wartime
Since the start of Russia’s war against Ukraine, the 
General Staff has played a key role in war planning. 
It is responsible for overall planning of how the 
19  Note that the GRU was formally renamed the GU (Main Directorate, Glavnoe upravlenie) in 2010. President Putin is on record 
suggesting that the old name could be restored, although there has been no movement on this since first suggested in 2018. 
20  Mykhaylo Zabrodskyi et al., Preliminary Lessons in Conventional Warfighting from Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February–July 2022, 
Royal United Services Institute, Nov. 2022, https://www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/special-resources/preliminary-
lessons-conventional-warfighting-russias-invasion-ukraine-february-july-2022. 
21  Julian G. Waller and Cornell Overfield, Wartime Russian Civil-Military Relations: Dimensions, Tensions, and Disruptions, CNA, DRM-
2024-U-038041-Final, July 2024. 
war is being conducted, including overall strategy, 
mobilization plans, coordination with defense 
industry to ensure the procurement of necessary 
weapons and equipment, and various other aspects 
of operational planning. 
During the initial period of war, no single operational 
commander was responsible for the overall war 
effort, which in effect meant that the General Staff 
was responsible for coordination among the multiple 
military district headquarters that were prosecuting 
different geographic parts of the war. 20 In later 
periods, a single commander was appointed for the 
war effort. During some periods, the CGS served as 
the overall commander of the war effort, whereas at 
other times, the operation was headed by a separate 
senior officer. This was the case most notably during 
General Sergei Surovikin’s installation as commander 
of the Joint Grouping of Forces in the areas of the 
Special Military Operation from October 2022 to 
January 2023.21
Except for the period during which General Aleksandr 
Dvornikov, the commander of the Southern Military 
District, was commanding the operation, the staffing 
for the operational command likely came primarily 
from the General Staff. Operational command was 
definitely staffed by the General Staff beginning 
in January 2023, when CGS Gerasimov was put in 
charge of the operation while concurrently retaining 
his position as CGS.
The tenure of the chief of the 
General Staff
The Russian General Staff has had unusual continuity in 
its chief over the last decade. Multiple interpretations 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   11  | www.cna.org   
have been offered for the continued tenure of CGS 
Gerasimov. This issue has gained greater prominence 
given that his firm ally, former minister of defense 
Shoigu, was removed from the MOD in May 2024. 
The three primary arguments are as follows: 
• Regime politics. Gerasimov is personally 
loyal to Putin, and in such a system, this 
loyalty is rewarded. Prigozhin’s Rebellion 
in June 2023 helped to remind the political 
leadership of the importance of regular 
military institutions as more reliable bastions 
of loyalty and order. 
• Bureaucratic politics. Gerasimov is a keen 
bureaucratic actor and has allies in the 
military-bureaucratic elite beyond just the 
minister of defense. These alliances ensure 
his safety because other patronal networks 
within the Russian Armed Forces and the 
wider political ecosystem can provide cover 
and justification for his maintenance. 
• Status quo interpretations. The ongoing 
war renders his departure untenable, even 
if a shakeup would be desirable. Shoigu’s 
transfer was sufficiently disruptive to make 
the idea of also changing the CGS—at least 
immediately—unpalatable. 
Gerasimov’s longevity has been a subject of interest 
for some time. According to Alexis A. Blanc et al.:
The political weight of Gerasimov, as the chief 
of the General Staff, has grown over time. This 
influence appears to be driven primarily by two 
factors. First, similar to Leonid Brezhnev, Putin’s 
decision to militarize Russian foreign policy 
inherently makes the advice and professional 
expertise of the General Staff and chief of the 
General Staff relatively more prominent. Second…
22  Blanc et al., The Russian General Staff, p. 95. 
23  For further discussion of the MOD’s crisis of legitimacy during the Russia-Ukraine war, see Waller and Overfield, Wartime Russian 
Civil-Military Relations.
the relatively successful operations in Ukraine 
and Syria showed that the armed forces can be 
a useful foreign policy tool that contributes to 
Russia’s position in the global arena.22
Yet the Russia-Ukraine war suggests a more 
complicated picture for the CGS, who has had 
to deal with the downstream effects of failing to 
achieve victory in the regime-change operation 
that was originally conceptualized and planned in 
February 2024. Indeed, both the minister of defense 
and the CGS would be symbolically castigated by the 
president in spring 2022 and would later be subject to 
delegitimization by a chorus of war correspondents 
and the irregular forces of PMC Wagner during 2022 
and 2023.23 
Nevertheless, CGS Gerasimov has survived in his 
position as far as July 2024, lasting longer than 
Shoigu. He is by far the longest serving CGS in 
Russia’s post-Soviet history (as shown in Figure 4 ) 
and has successfully managed to not only retain 
his post but also oversee the modernization of the 
General Staff and continue its central role in Russia’s 
military-bureaucratic institutional ecosystem. 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   12  | www.cna.org   
Figure 4. Chiefs of staff of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, 1992‒2024 
Source: CNA.
Figure 3: Timeline of Chiefs of Staff of the Russian General Staff (1992-2024)
Russian Armed Forces (1992–Present)
1990
2000
2010
Viktor Dubynin
Army General
Russian Ground Forces
(1943–1992)
Took office: June 10, 1992
Left office: November 22, 1992
Time in office: 165 days
Viktor Samsonov
Army General
Russian Ground Forces
(born 1941)
Took office: October 18, 1996
Left office: May 22, 1997
Time in office: 216 days
Yuri Baluyevsky
Army General
Russian Ground Forces
(born 1947)
Took office: July 19, 2004
Left office: June 3, 2008
Time in office: 3 years, 320 days
Valery Gerasimov
Army General
Russian Ground Forces
(born 1955)
Took office: November 9, 2012
Left office: Incumbent
Time in office: 11 years, 229 days
Mikhail Kolesnikov
Army General
Russian Ground Forces
(1939–2007)
Took office: November 22, 1992
Left office: October 18, 1996
Time in office: 3 years, 331 days
Anatoly Kvashnin
Army General
Russian Ground Forces
(1946–2022)
Took office: May 22, 1997
Left office: July 19, 2004
Time in office: 7 years, 58 days
Nikolai Makarov
Army General
Russian Ground Forces
(born 1949)
Took office: June 3, 2008
Left office: November 9, 2012
Time in office: 4 years, 159 days
Source: Wikipedia (lol) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_of_the_General_Staff_(Russia) 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   13  | www.cna.org   
THE WEIGHT OF THE GENERAL STAFF
24  S. G. Spiridonov and S. E. Adamis, “A Methodological Approach to Substantiating the Rational Organizational Structure of Military 
Command and Control Bodies [Методический подход к обоснованию рациональной организационной структуры органов 
управления войсками],” Voenaya Mysl no. 7 (2024), pp. 98–104.
25  See also Clint Reach et al., Russian Military Forecasting and Analysis: The Military-Political Situation and Military Security in Strategic 
Planning, RAND, RR-A198-4, June 2022, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA198-4.html.
As described earlier, the Russian General Staff 
is a core institution within the Russian military. 
Nevertheless, some uncertainty remains about all the 
ways in which the General Staff influences political-
military decision-making processes and outcomes 
in Russia. This section provides a brief discussion of 
three dimensions to this question: military decision-
making, political influence, and doctrinal influence. 
The General Staff and military 
decision-making
The General Staff’s importance in military decision-
making is the most straightforward and clear, as we 
have already discussed. Without replicating that 
discussion, we emphasize that the General Staff is 
formally tasked with operational-strategic decision-
making, in coordination with theater commanders 
and the JSC administration. To this end, the NTsUO C2 
system was designed specifically to support the top-
down command structure traditionally preferred by 
the Russian Armed Forces, with General Staff officers 
equipped to think operationally and strategically 
while field officers work at the tactical level and defer 
to the hierarchy for major decisions. 
Thinking on the military role of the General Staff 
continues to evolve in Russia, with an overall 
emphasis on continued centralization. However, this 
emphasis is to some degree running up against the 
day-to-day military realities of the current war, which 
often require localized decision-making. Russian-
language military science publications have not 
produced much new public work on the operations 
of the General Staff since the onset of the Russia-
Ukraine war, with a few exceptions. 
One article from 2024 focuses on technical 
approaches to coordinating C2, describing the 
need for a “network theory” approach to help 
undergird C2 efforts across the military to “allow 
combining reconnaissance, surveillance, navigation, 
identification, target designation, guidance systems, 
combat platforms and combat command and control 
systems in a single information space.” 24 In doing 
so, it emphasizes the importance of a centralized 
hierarchy in a “pyramidal configuration,” a clear set 
of tasks and goals, and proportional distribution 
of implementing points in the organizational tree 
relative to a small set of core decision-makers and 
task-setters. 
This piece is instructive because it aligns with the 
general approach of the General Staff toward military 
decision-making overall—as a problem of systems 
that can be solved scientifically through organization 
and process in a centralized fashion.25 
The General Staff and political 
influence 
The question of how much political influence the 
General Staff has in Russia’s authoritarian system is 
less clear. Although previous general staffs, such as 
the Prussian and German General Staffs of the 19th 
and early 20th century, were often important political 
actors within certain militarized polities, the same is 
not true in Russia. No doubt this difference is largely 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   14  | www.cna.org   
because of the successful maintenance of civilian 
control over the military, as well as the foregrounding 
of the minister of defense role as the most important 
bridging figure between the uniformed military 
and political decision-makers in the Kremlin (the 
president, the presidential administration, and the 
Security Council most specifically).26 
Therefore, the General Staff does not have direct 
political influence and largely has to work through 
other actors or by shaping the decision-making space 
through decisions relevant to the capabilities and 
design of the Russian Armed Forces. Nevertheless, 
the General Staff has been able at times to exert 
influence through the defense minister through 
connections with unofficial war correspondents in 
civil society, through retired military officers in the 
Duma or Federation Council (especially those who 
sit on parliamentary committees relevant to national 
security, military affairs, and financial decisions), 
and through the GRU, which at times has had direct 
channels to the Russian political leadership.27 
Finally, the CGS personally has a direct channel to 
the president but is unlikely to use it other than for 
operational military matters. This is because of the 
minister of defense’s premier position in the civil-
military relationship vis-à-vis the president, his 
place on the Security Council, and his place in the 
Cabinet of Ministers in the government.28 Put simply, 
the minister of defense is much more integrated 
into political and political-military structures and 
26  For further discussion on Russia’s evolving wartime civil-military relationship, see Waller and Overfield, Wartime Russian Civil-
Military Relations. 
27  Galeotti, “The Intelligence and Security Services and Strategic Decision-Making.” See also changing regulations on C2 issues as 
well as questions about private military companies working through the Russian State Duma throughout the wartime period—for 
example, Angelica Evans et al., “Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, July 23, 2024,” Institute for the Study of War, July 23, 
2024, https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-july-23-2024; “Head of Russia’s 
State Duma Defense Committee Says There’s No Reason to Ban Wagner Group,” Meduza, June 25, 2023, https://meduza.io/en/
news/2023/06/26/head-of-russia-s-state-duma-defense-committee-says-there-s-no-reason-to-ban-wagner-group. 
28  Waller and Overfield, Wartime Russian Civil-Military Relations. 
29  Blanc et al., The Russian General Staff, p. 97. 
30  Anya Fink, The General Staff’s Throw-Weight: The Russian Military’s Role in and Views of US-Russian Arms Control, CNA, IRM-2024-
U-037906-Final, Mar. 2024, https://www.cna.org/reports/2024/03/russian-military-role-in-us-russian-arms-control. 
networks, whereas the CGS is more likely to demur 
or act in a more restrained, advisory capacity.
Certain policy matters have important General Staff 
input. For example, as Blanc et al. note: 
The General Staff continues to have a substantial 
role in the preparation of official positions and 
recommendations for Russian government 
delegations to international negotiations on 
security and arms control matters. The General 
Staff analyzes and plans negotiations and, in 
cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
prepares the “draft directives” for Russian 
representatives engaged in the talks. Thus, the 
General Staff serves as an advisory body to the 
MOD and government more broadly.29 
Elsewhere, Fink notes that the General Staff has an 
important place at the table in nuclear and arms 
control issues, not least because the CGS is one of 
three officials with access to the codes controlling 
Russia’s nuclear arsenal.30 
The General Staff and doctrinal 
influence
The General Staff plays a key role in developing 
military doctrine for the Russian military. This role 
includes not just the operational use of military 
forces but also the wartime organization of the entire 
state. According to statements by CGS Gerasimov, 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   15  | www.cna.org   
these plans include strategic deterrence measures 
that go beyond the purely military to all aspects of 
national power (diplomatic, informational, military, 
and economic). In addition, the General Staff has 
included considerations of civil defense, crisis 
management, and internal stability in its planning 
efforts along these lines. 
According to Gerasimov, this form of planning 
requires close cooperation between the General Staff, 
the Federal Security Service (FSB), the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs (MVD), and the Ministry of Emergency 
Situations (MChS). 31 The FSB, MVD, and MChS are 
all part of the power or security bloc of the Russian 
government, making the General Staff institutionally 
networked across the range of coercive agencies 
beyond the MOD itself. The establishment of the 
Information Operations Troops as a separate unit 
within the General Staff has given the General Staff 
authority over planning in the cyber and information 
warfare domains as well. 
In the purely military realm, the General Staff has 
in recent years focused doctrinal innovation on the 
effect of the use of long-range weapons in wartime, 
both in conflict and as part of deterrence efforts using 
conventional weapons. It has also paid a great deal 
of attention to the role of the space domain in future 
warfare. Even more recently, it has focused on the role 
of uncrewed systems and resulting shifts in wartime. 
All of these aspects of doctrinal innovation are likely 
to be included in future editions of Russia’s official 
Military Doctrine, a document that was last updated 
in 2014. At that time, Russia’s overall geopolitical 
situation was very different from the present day, as 
was the nature of its military capabilities. 
31  Gerasimov, “The Role of the General Staff.” 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   16  | www.cna.org   
CONCLUSION 
The Russian General Staff is an intellectual hub as 
well as the key war-planning, war-executing, and 
operational-strategic decision-making body in the 
ecosystem of major institutions that make up the 
Russian military. It has successfully defended its 
prerogatives to plan and execute war-making on 
behalf of the minister of defense and his principal in 
the Kremlin, and it is tightly integrated with both the 
regional military districts and wartime theater and 
operational commands. It has thrived under CGS 
Gerasimov, despite challenges both before and after 
the onset of the Russia-Ukraine war, and it is well 
positioned to remain the key decision-influencing, 
war-planning, and operational-strategic locus of 
energy within the Russian Armed Forces for the 
foreseeable future. 
Reviewing the de jure and de facto roles, functions, 
and operations of the Russian General Staff allows 
us to lay out the decision-making and operational-
strategic core to the Russian Armed Forces overall. 
Several points can be brought to bear here: 
• The General Staff has retained and perhaps 
gained in its central role as the key 
conceptual, coordinating, and organizational 
institution within the Russian Armed Forces. 
This role has been notably influenced by the 
introduction of the NTsUO and its successful 
testing during the Syrian Civil War. More 
research is necessary to determine how the 
NTsUO has operated during the Russia-
Ukraine war, but such information may be 
inaccessible for open-source research for 
some time. 
• The longevity of CGS Gerasimov has 
been helpful for maintaining the General 
Staff’s position within the military-
bureaucratic hierarchy and has likely 
furthered centralization dynamics. Whether 
the General Staff may be reformed or 
decision-making shifted to JSCs, theater 
commanders, or other parts of the MOD 
upon Gerasimov’s retirement remains an 
open question. 
• Policy-makers in the US and among 
partners and allies require a useful and 
comprehensive look at the General Staff, 
not least because of its primary role 
in prosecuting and implementing the 
operational and strategic direction of the 
ongoing Russia-Ukraine war. Efforts to 
disrupt components of the General Staff, 
including the NTsUO, through cyber or 
other means of pressure, may add to 
stresses on the Russian Armed Forces within 
its central nervous system. 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   17  | www.cna.org   
APPENDIX A: TASKS OF THE 
GENERAL STAFF
32  Updated list as of February 2024; directly translated from President of the Russian Federation, “Decree of the President of the 
RF from 23.07.2013 No. 631 (red. from 26.02.2024) Questions of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation 
[Указ Президента РФ от 23.07.2013 No. 631 (ред от 26.02.2024), Вопросы Генерального штаба Вооруженных Сил Российской 
Федерации],” Feb. 26, 2024, https://legalacts.ru/doc/ukaz-prezidenta-rf-ot-23072013-n-631/.
The following reproduces the official statutory tasks 
of the General Staff as of February 2024 as described 
in Decree of the President of the Russian Federation 
No. 631.32
a) organization of management of the Armed 
Forces;
b) organization of defense planning of the 
Russian Federation;
c) organizing the development of proposals 
for the formation and implementation 
of state policy in the field of defense, 
participation in its implementation;
d) coordination of the actions of the Armed 
Forces, other troops and military formations 
in peacetime when carrying out strategic 
deterrence measures;
e) organizing the planning and 
implementation of measures to build 
the Armed Forces, coordinating the 
development of concepts, plans for the 
construction and development of other 
troops and military formations in the 
interests of defense;
f) organizing the transfer in accordance with 
legislative and other regulatory legal acts of 
the Russian Federation of the Armed Forces, 
other troops, military formations, bodies 
and special formations on the organization 
and composition of wartime, as well as 
ensuring their mobilization deployment;
g) organizing the maintenance of the 
Armed Forces in the necessary readiness 
and monitoring these activities, as well 
as monitoring the state of mobilization 
readiness of other troops, military and 
special forces;
h) management of operational and 
mobilization training of the Armed 
Forces, coordination of operational and 
mobilization training of other troops, 
military and special formations;
i) organizing and conducting activities for 
strategic (operational) support of the Armed 
Forces;
j) organization of intelligence activities in 
the interests of defense and within its 
competence in the interests of the security 
of the Russian Federation;
k) development of the control system of the 
Armed Forces and coordination of the 
development of control systems of other 
troops, military and special formations in 
the interests of defense;
l) organization of communications and 
automated control of the Armed Forces, 
determining the procedure for using and 
planning the use of the radio frequency 
spectrum for defense purposes;
m) planning and organizing organizational 
activities in the Armed Forces, organization 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   18  | www.cna.org   
and implementation of interaction with other 
troops and military formations on the issues 
of carrying out the specified events in them;
n) organization of recruitment of the Armed 
Forces, other troops, military formations, 
bodies and special forces with military 
personnel undergoing conscription military 
service;
o) planning the provision of the Armed Forces 
with the main types of weapons, military, 
special equipment and materiel, as well 
as the accumulation and deployment of 
emergency reserves of these means;
p) no longer in force on April 22, 2020. - Decree 
of the President of the Russian Federation of 
April 22, 2020 N 283;
q) organizing measures to protect state secrets 
in the Armed Forces and federal executive 
bodies and organizations subordinate to 
the Russian Ministry of Defense and control 
over their implementation.
p)

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   19  | www.cna.org   
APPENDIX B: RECOMMENDED 
READING
For ease of reference, we provide here two 
reading lists. First, we offer a selection of the most 
comprehensive English-language works specifically 
on the Russian General Staff and its core operations 
in the last 25 years. These works inform the analytic 
approach and empirical assertions in this paper 
throughout, although direct citations are kept to a 
minimum for brevity. Second, we offer a list of key 
Russian-language documents, leader statements, 
and analytic pieces on the General Staff. 
English-language sources
Blanc, Alexis A., Alyssa Demus, Sandra Kay Evans, 
Michelle Grisé, Mark Hvizda, Marta Kepe, 
Natasha Lander, and Krystyna Marcinek. The 
Russian General Staff: Understanding the 
Military’s Decisionmaking Role in a “Besieged 
Fortress.” RAND. Mar. 2023. https://www.rand.
org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1233-7.html. 
Fink, Anya. The General Staff’s Throw-Weight: The 
Russian Military’s Role in and Views of US-
Russian Arms Control. CNA. IRM-2024-U-
037906-Final. Mar. 2024. https://www.cna.
org/reports/2024/03/russian-military-role-in-
us-russian-arms-control. 
Galeotti, Mark. “The Main Operations Directorate: 
The Head and the Heart of the General Staff.” 
Mayak Intelligence. July 2021. 
Jonsson, Oscar. The Russian General Staff Between 
Soft Warfare and a Hard Place. Phronesis 
Analysis, 2021.
Kokoshin, A. A. “Defense Leadership in Russia: The 
General Staff and Strategic Management in 
Comparative Perspective.” Belfer Center for 
Science and International Affairs. Discussion 
Paper 2002–15. Nov. 2002. https://www.
belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/pantheon_
files/files/publication/kokoshin_nov02.pdf. 
Main, Steven J. “The ‘Brain’ of the Russian Army: 
The Centre for Military-Strategic Research, 
General Staff (TsVSI GSh), 1985–2000.” The 
Journal of Slavic Military Studies 13, no. 3 
(2000): 47–62. 
Main, Steven J. Couch for the MOD of the CGS? The 
Russian Ministry of Defense and the General 
Staff 2001– 2004. Conflict Studies Research 
Centre. May 2004.
McDermott, Roger N., and Charles K. Bartles. The 
Russian Military Decision-Making Process & 
Automated Command and Control. German 
Institute for Defense and Strategic Studies. 
Oct. 2020.  https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/345212545_The_Russian_Military_
Decision-Making_Process_Automated_
Command_and_Control.
Reach, Clint, Alyssa Demus, Eugeniu Han, Bilyana 
Lilly, Krystyna Marcinek, and Yuliya Shokh. 
Russian Military Forecasting and Analysis: 
The Military-Political Situation and Military 
Security in Strategic Planning. RAND. RR-
A198-4. June 2022. https://www.rand.org/
pubs/research_reports/RRA198-4.html. 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   20  | www.cna.org   
Whisler, Greg. “Strategic Command and Control in 
the Russian Armed Forces: Untangling the 
General Staff, Military Districts, and Service 
Main Commands (Part One).” Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 32, no. 4 (2019): 463–484. 
Whisler, Greg. “Strategic Command and Control in 
the Russian Armed Forces: Untangling the 
General Staff, Military Districts, and Service 
Main Commands (Part Two).” Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 33, no. 1 (2020): 89–112. 
Whisler, Greg. “Strategic Command and Control in 
the Russian Armed Forces: Untangling the 
General Staff, Military Districts, and Service 
Main Commands (Part Three).” Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 33, no. 2 (2020): 237–258. 
Russian-language sources
The following documents represent a partial list of 
important Russian-language writing on the General 
Staff that informed this paper. In addition, a variety 
of official documents and institutional descriptions 
can be found at the Russian Ministry of Defense 
website (core site: https://structure.mil.ru and 
https://structure.mil.ru/structure/structuremorf.htm, 
accessed July 23, 2024). 
Baluevskii, Yuri, ed. The General Staff of the Russian 
Military: History and Modernity [Генеральный 
штаб Российской Армии: История и 
современность]. Moscow: Akademicheskii 
Proekt, 2006. 
Fedotov, Igor A. “Directions for the Development 
of the Operational-Strategic Command of 
the Military District at the Present Stage of 
Construction of the Armed Forces of the 
Russian Federation [Направления развития 
оперативно-стратегического командования 
военного округа на современном 
этапе строительства Вооруженных Сил 
Российской Федерации].” Vestnik Akademii 
Voennykh Nauk 4, no. 57 (2016): 65–69. 
Gareev, Makhmut A. “The Role of the Staff in the 
Military Command System [Роль штабов в 
системе военного управления].” Vestnik 
Akademii Voyennih Nauk, no. 1 (2003).
Gerasimov, Valerii V. “The Influence of the 
Modern Nature of the Armed Struggle 
on the Direction of the Construction and 
Development of the Armed Forces of 
the Russian Federation. Priority Tasks of 
Military Science in Ensuring the Country’s 
Defense [Влиянье современного характера 
вооруженной борьбы на направленность 
строительства и развития Вооруженных 
Сил Российской Федерации. Приоритетные 
задачи военной науки в обеспечении 
обороны страны].” Vestnik Akademii Voennyh 
Nauk 62, no. 1 (2018): 16–22.
Gerasimov, Valerii V. “The Role of the General 
Staff in the Organization of the Defense of 
the Country in Accordance with the New 
Regulations on the General Staff, Approved 
by the President of the Russian Federation 
[Роль генерального штаба в организации 
обороны страны соответствии с новым 
положением о генеральном штабе, 
утвержденным президентом российсской 
федерации].” Vestnik Akademii Voennykh 
Nauk, no. 1 (2014): 14–22.

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   21  | www.cna.org   
President of the Russian Federation. “Decree of 
the President of the RF from 23.07.2013 
No. 631 (red. from 26.02.2024) Questions 
of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of 
the Russian Federation [Указ Президента 
РФ от 23.07.2013 No. 631 (ред от 
26.02.2024), Вопросы Генерального 
штаба Вооруженных Сил Российской 
Федерации].” Feb. 26, 2024. https://
legalacts.ru/doc/ukaz-prezidenta-rf-ot-
23072013-n-631/. 
Rudskoi, Sergei. “Generator of Ideas and Plans 
[Генератор идеи и замыслов].” Krasnaya 
Zvezda no. 18 (2018).
Rudskoi, Sergei. “Pulse of the Defense of the 
Country [Пульс обороны страны].” Krasnaya 
Zvezda, no. 17 (2017). 
Shoigu, Sergei. “Speech of the Minister of Defense 
of the Russian Federation General of the 
Army S. K. Shoigu [Выступление министра 
обороны Российской Федерации генерала 
армии С. К. Шойгу].” Vestnik Akademii 
Voennykh Nauk 1, no. 42 (2013). 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   22  | www.cna.org   
ABBREVIATIONS
C2 command and control
CGS chief of the General Staff
GOMU Main Organization and Mobilization Directorate (Glavnoe Organizatsionno-
Mobilizatsionnoe Upravlenie)
GOU Main Operations Directorate (Glavnoe Operativnoe Upravlenie)
GS General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (General’nyy Shtab 
Vooruzhonnykh Sil Rossiyskoy Federatsii)
GRU Main Directorate (Glavnoe Upravlenie—also GU)
GUS Main Communications Directorate (Glavnoe Upravlenie Svyazi)
JSC Joint Strategic Command (OSK— Ob’edinyonnoye Strategicheskoe Komandovanie)
MChS Ministry of Emergency Situations 
MOD Ministry of Defense 
MVD Ministry of Internal Affairs
NTsUO National Defense Management Center (Natsional’nyi Tsentr Upravleniya Oboronoi RF)
FSB Federal Security Service (Federal’naya sluzhba bezopasnosti)
UNVRB Directorate of Electronic Warfare Troops (Upravlenie nachal’nika voisk radioelektronnoi 
bor’by)
UOP Operational Training Directorate (Upravlenie Operativnoi podgotovki)
USRSBLA Directorate for the Construction and Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems 
(Upravlenie Stroitelstva i Razvitiya Sistemy Bespilotnykh Letatelnykh Apparatov)
VTU Military Topographic Directorate (Voenno-Topograficheskoe Upravlenie)

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   23  | www.cna.org   
REFERENCES
Arnold, Chloe. “Russia: Resignation Signals Trouble 
Within Defense Ministry.” RFE/RL. Mar. 27, 
2008. https://www.rferl.org/a/1079697.html.
Blanc, Alexis A., Alyssa Demus, Sandra Kay Evans, 
Michelle Grisé, Mark Hvizda, Marta Kepe, 
Natasha Lander, and Krystyna Marcinek. The 
Russian General Staff: Understanding the 
Military’s Decisionmaking Role in a “Besieged 
Fortress. ” RAND. Mar. 2023. https://www.rand.
org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1233-7.html.
Boulègue, Mathieu. “Russia’s Military-Industrial 
Complex and Military Innovation.” In Assessing 
Russian Plans for Military Regeneration: 
Modernization and Reconstitution Challenges 
for Moscow’s War Machine. Edited by Mathieu 
Boulègue, Justin Bronk, Karolina Hird, Jaclyn 
Kerr, Rob Lee, and Michael B. Petersen. 
Chatham House, July 2024, 44–52. https://
www.chathamhouse.org/2024/07/assessing-
russian-plans-military-regeneration/07-
russias-military-industrial-complex-and. 
Evans, Angelica, Riley Bailey, Nicole Wolkov, 
Kateryna Stepanenko, Davit Gasparyan, 
Karolina Hird, and George Barros. “Russian 
Offensive Campaign Assessment, July 23, 
2024.” Institute for the Study of War. July 23, 
2024. https://www.understandingwar.org/
backgrounder/russian-offensive-campaign-
assessment-july-23-2024. 
Fink, Anya. The General Staff’s Throw-Weight: The 
Russian Military’s Role in and Views of US-
Russian Arms Control. CNA. IRM-2024-U-
037906-Final. Mar. 2024. https://www.cna.org/
reports/2024/03/russian-military-role-in-us-
russian-arms-control. 
Galeotti, Mark. “GRU: Military Intelligence.” Mayak 
Intelligence. Apr. 2021. 
Galeotti, Mark. “The Intelligence and Security 
Services and Strategic Decision-Making.” 
George C. Marshall European Center for 
Security Studies. Security Insights. May 2019. 
https://www.marshallcenter.org/sites/default/
files/files/2019-09/SecurityInsights_30_
Galeotti_May2019.pdf. 
Gerasimov, Valerii V. “The Role of the General 
Staff in the Organization of the Defense of 
the Country in Accordance with the New 
Regulations on the General Staff, Approved 
by the President of the Russian Federation 
[Роль генерального штаба в организации 
обороны страны соответствии с новым 
положением о генеральном штабе, 
утвержденным президентом российсской 
федерации].” Vestnik Akademii Voennykh 
Nauk no. 1 (2014): 14–22. 
“Head of Russia’s State Duma Defense Committee 
Says There’s No Reason to Ban Wagner 
Group.” Meduza. June 25, 2023. https://
meduza.io/en/news/2023/06/26/head-of-
russia-s-state-duma-defense-committee-says-
there-s-no-reason-to-ban-wagner-group.

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   24  | www.cna.org   
Kofman, Michael. “Syria and the Russian Armed 
Forces: An Evaluation of Moscow’s Military 
Strategy and Operational Performance.” 
In Russia’s War in Syria: Assessing Russian 
Military Capabilities and Lessons Learned. 
Edited by Robert E. Hamilton, Chris Miller, and 
Aaron Stein. Foreign Policy Research Institute. 
2020.
Main, Steven J. “The ‘Brain’ of the Russian Army: The 
Centre for Military-Strategic Research, General 
Staff (TsVSI GSh), 1985–2000.” The Journal of 
Slavic Military Studies 13, no. 3 (2000): 47–62.
Odom, William E. The Collapse of the Soviet Military. 
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.
Phythian, Mark, and David Strachan-Morris. 
“Intelligence & the Russo-Ukrainian War: 
Introduction to the Special Issue.” Intelligence 
and National Security 39, no. 3 (2024): 377–85. 
Reach, Clint, Alyssa Demus, Eugeniu Han, Bilyana 
Lilly, Krystyna Marcinek, and Yuliya Shokh. 
Russian Military Forecasting and Analysis: The 
Military-Political Situation and Military Security 
in Strategic Planning. RAND. RR-A198-4. June 
2022. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_
reports/RRA198-4.html.
Rudskoi, Sergei. “In the Center of the Defense of 
the Country [В центре обороны страны].” 
Krasnaya Zvezda (Feb. 19, 2021). http://
redstar.ru/v-tsentre-oborony-strany/.
Shamiev, Kirill. Understanding Senior Leadership 
Dynamics Within the Russian Military. Center 
for Strategic and International Studies. 
July 2021. https://www.csis.org/analysis/
understanding-senior-leadership-dynamics-
within-russian-military. 
Sokov, Nikolai. “The Nuclear Debate of Summer 
2000.” NTI Report. June 30, 2004. www.
nti.org/analysis/articles/nuclear-debate-
summer-2000/.
Spiridonov, S. G., and S. E. Adamis. “A 
Methodological Approach to Substantiating 
the Rational Organizational Structure of 
Military Command and Control Bodies 
[Методический подход к обоснованию 
рациональной организационной структуры 
органов управления войсками].” Voenaya 
Mysl no. 7 (2024): 98–104.
Tsymbal, Vitalii and Vasilii Zatsepin. “New System 
of Management of Russian Defense: Reform 
or Imitation? [Новая система управления 
обороной России: Реформа или имитация].” 
Ekonomicheskoe Razvitie Rossii 22, no. 5 
(2015): 80–83. https://cyberleninka.ru/
article/n/novaya-sistema-upravelniya-
oboronoi-rossii-reforma-ili-imitatsiya.
Waller, Julian G., and Cornell Overfield. Wartime 
Russian Civil-Military Relations: Dimensions, 
Tensions, and Disruptions. CNA. DRM-2024-U-
038041-Final. July 2024. 

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   25  | www.cna.org   
Zabrodskyi, Mykhaylo, Jack Watling, Oleksandr V. 
Danylyuk, and Nick Reynolds. Preliminary 
Lessons in Conventional Warfighting from 
Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February–July 
2022. Royal United Services Institute. Nov. 
2022. https://www.rusi.org/explore-our-
research/publications/special-resources/
preliminary-lessons-conventional-warfighting-
russias-invasion-ukraine-february-july-2022.

The Central Brain of the Russian Armed Forces
   26  | www.cna.org   
This page intentionally left blank.

This report was written by CNA’s Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division (SP3).
SP3 provides strategic and political-military analysis informed by regional expertise to support operational and policy-
level decision-makers across the Department of the Navy, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the unified combatant 
commands, the intelligence community, and domestic agencies. The division leverages social science research methods, 
field research, regional expertise, primary language skills, Track 1.5 partnerships, and policy and operational experience 
to support senior decision-makers.
Any copyright in this work is subject to the Government’s Unlimited Rights license as defined in DFARS 252.227-7013 and/or DFARS 252.227-
7014. The reproduction of this work for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited. Nongovernmental users may copy and distribute this document 
noncommercially, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice is reproduced in all copies. Nongovernmental users may not use technical 
measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies they make or distribute. Nongovernmental users may not accept 
compensation of any manner in exchange for copies.
All other rights reserved. The provision of this data and/or source code is without warranties or guarantees to the Recipient Party by the Supplying 
Party with respect to the intended use of the supplied information. Nor shall the Supplying Party be liable to the Recipient Party for any errors or 
omissions in the supplied information.
This report may contain hyperlinks to websites and servers maintained by third parties. CNA does not control, evaluate, endorse, or guarantee content 
found in those sites. We do not assume any responsibility or liability for the actions, products, services, and content of those sites or the parties that 
operate them.
ABOUT CNA  
CNA is a nonprofit research and analysis organization dedicated to the safety and security of the nation. It operates the 
Center for Naval Analyses—the federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) of the Department of the 
Navy—as well as the Institute for Public Research. CNA develops actionable solutions to complex problems of national 
importance. With nearly 700 scientists, analysts, and professional staff, CNA takes a real-world approach to gathering 
data. Its unique Field Program places analysts on aircraft carriers and military bases, in squad rooms and crisis centers, 
working side by side with operators and decision-makers around the world. CNA supports naval operations, fleet 
readiness, and strategic competition. Its non-defense research portfolio includes criminal justice, homeland security, 
and data management.

www.cna.org
DOP-2024-U-038956-1Rev  © 2024 CNA Corporation