The Russian Way of War | CNA
< Back to Russia Studies Program
The Russian Way of War
CNA’s Russia experts use both language skills and a deep understanding of military operations and strategy to develop insights into Russia’s approach to conflict—in Ukraine and throughout its spheres of influence. The Department of Defense, State Department, Congress and private research institutions have all benefited from these insights
Russian Military Autonomy in a Ukraine Conflict
The Russian military is rapidly fielding new unmanned systems into its branches. This report, written before the invasion of Ukraine, anticipates Russia’s tactical approach to autonomy in the current conflict, based upon lessons learned from that many unmanned systems it has tested in Syria and other theaters.
Russian Military Strategy: Core Tenets and Operational Concepts
How have the theories and practices that underpin Russian military strategy evolved over time?
Russian Military Affairs Reports
Through work generously funded by a grant from the Carnegie Corporation of New York, CNA fills a critical gap in the understanding Russian military affairs.
The Russian Army: Organization and Modernization
Russian Military Expenditure in Comparative Perspective: A Purchasing Power Parity Estimate
Russia’s Black Sea Fleet: Toward a Multiregional Force
Russian Forces in the Western Military District
Russian Military and Dual-Purpose Spacecraft: Latest Status and Operational Overview
Russian-Venezuelan Defense Cooperation
Russian Forces in the Southern Military District
The Russian Air Campaign in Syria: A Preliminary Analysis
The Current State of Russian-Chinese Defense Cooperation
The Russian Navy in the 21st Century: The Legacy and the New Path
In the news: CNA’s Russia and Eurasia Experts on the Russia-Ukraine War
U.S. Intelligence Helped Ukraine Strike Russian Flagship, Officials Say
The New York Times, May 5, 2022
Russia Studies Program Director Michael Kofman comments on Ukrainian forces’ strike against the Moskva, the flagship of Russia’s Black Sea fleet.
Could Russia’s Victory Day be a milestone for the war in Ukraine?
Yahoo! News, April 29, 2022
Analyst Julian Waller speaks at length with Yahoo! News to explain the symbolic meaning of May 9 to Russia, and how it fits in to the current Russia-Ukraine war context.
Drones Have Come of Age in Russia-Ukraine War
Foreign Policy, April 27, 2022
Analyst Sam Bendett sheds light on the role of drones for both the Russian and Ukrainian militaries.
Russia targeting Western weapons shipments in Ukraine as Donbas assault begins
Politico, April 25, 2022
Senior Russia expert Dr. Dmitry Gorenburg comments on the impact on the war of Western weapons shipments to Ukraine.
Russia and Ukraine battle for Donbas
WHYY/PBS/NPR, April 21, 2022
Senior Russia expert Dr. Dmitry Gorenburg joins WHYY’s Radio Times program to discuss the Russian and Ukrainian military forces and their battle for the Donbas region of Ukraine.
Russia readies for major assault on eastern Ukraine, beginning ‘second chapter’ of war
PBS, April 11, 2022
Michael Kofman joins PBS NewsHour to assess the Russian military’s shift in focus to eastern Ukraine, marking the “second chapter” of the Russia-Ukraine war.
How the Russian military may change tactics in Ukraine
WBUR, March 31, 2022
Senior analyst Jeffrey Edmonds joins Here & Now host Scott Tong to discuss the military tactics and strategies of both Russia and Ukraine in the first five weeks of the war.
The Russian Military’s Debacle in Ukraine
The New Yorker, March 11, 2022
In a detailed Q&A with The New Yorker’s Isaac Chotiner, Michael Kofman examines the Russian military’s early strategic errors in the first two weeks of its conflict with Ukraine.
Russian Military Affairs Contacts
Michael Kofman
,
Research Program Director
kofmanm@cna.org
Jeffrey Edmonds
,
Senior Research Scientist Russia Studies Program
edmondsj@cna.org
Samuel Bendett
,
Advisor, Russia Studies Program
bendetts@cna.org
Anya Fink
,
Research Analyst Russia Studies Program
finka@cna.org
< Back to Russia Studies Program