This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
I
JOINT DOCTRINE PUBLICATION 3-40
SECURITY AND STABILISATION: THE 
MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
Joint Doctrine Publication 3-40 (JDP 3-40) dated November 2009
 is promulgated as directed by the Chiefs of Staff
Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Development, Concepts and Doctrine)
CONDITIONS OF RELEASE
This information is Crown copyright and the intellectual prop erty rights for this publication belong exclusively to the 
Ministry of Defence (MOD).  No material or information contained in this publication should be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form outside MOD establishments except as authorised by both the sponsor and the 
MOD where appropriate.
This information may be subject to privately owned rights.
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
II
AUTHORISATION
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is 
responsible for publishing Joint Doctrine Publications (JDPs) 
within a hierarchy of similar publications.  Readers wishing 
to quote JDPs as reference material in other work should 
confirm with the DCDC Doctrine Editor whether the particular 
publication and amendment state remains authoritative.  
Comments on factual accuracy or proposals for amendment 
are welcomed by the Doctrine Editor at:
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Ministry of Defence
Shrivenham 
SWINDON, Wiltshire, SN6 8RF
Telephone number: 01793 314216/7
Military Network:  96161 4216/4217
Facsimile number  01793 314232
Military Network:  96161 4232
E-mail: publications@dcdc.org.uk
DISTRIBUTION
Distribution of JDPs is managed by the Forms and Publications 
Section, DSDA Operations Centre, C16 Site, Ploughley 
Road, Arncott, Bicester, OX25 1LP .  Requests for issue of this 
publication, or amendments to its distribution, should be 
referred to the DSDA Operations Centre.  All other DCDC 
publications, including a regularly updated CD Joint Doctrine 
Disk (containing both JDPs and Allied Joint Publications (AJPs)), 
can also be demanded from the DSDA Operations Centre.
DSDA Help Desk: 01869 256052
Military Network: 94240 2052  
All publications (including drafts) are available to view and 
download on the Defence Intranet (RLI) at: 
www.dcdc.dii.r.mil.uk
This publication is available on the Internet at: 
www.mod.uk/dcdc
JOINT DOCTRINE PUBLICATIONS
The successful conduct of military operations requires an 
intellectually rigorous, clearly articulated and empirically-
based framework of understanding that gives advantage 
to a country’s Armed Forces, and its likely partners, in 
the management of conflict.  This common basis of 
understanding is provided by doctrine.
UK doctrine is, as far as practicable and sensible, consistent 
with that of NATO.  The development of national doctrine 
addresses those areas not covered adequately by NATO; it also 
influences the evolution of NATO doctrine in accordance with 
national thinking and experience.
Endorsed national doctrine is promulgated formally in Joint 
Doctrine Publications (JDPs)
1.   From time to time, Interim 
Joint Doctrine Publications (IJDPs) are published, caveated 
to indicate the need for their subsequent revision in light of 
anticipated changes in relevant policy or legislation, or lessons 
arising from operations.
Urgent requirements for doctrine are addressed in Joint 
Doctrine Notes (JDNs).  JDNs do not represent an agreed 
or fully staffed position, but are raised in short order by 
the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) 
to establish and disseminate current best practice.  They 
also provide the basis for further development and 
experimentation, and a doctrinal basis for operations 
and exercises.  
Details of the Joint Doctrine development process and the 
associated hierarchy of JDPs are to be found in JDP 0-00 Joint 
Doctrine Development Handbook .
Special A4 Edition.
This edition has the same content and paragraph numbering 
but different pagination and layout.
1. Formerly named Joint Warfare Publications (JWPs).
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
III
RECORD OF AMENDMENTS
Amendment Number Date of Insertion Initials
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
IV
FOREWORD 
READING 
JDP 3-40
WHO, HOW 
AND WHY
 
01 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-40  Security  and 
Stabilisation: The Military Contribution provides guidance into 
the way the military should think about their contribution to 
stabilisation.  It is written pr imarily for the military commander 
and staff officer engaged in, or studying, such operations.  It 
fills a gap in our body of professional knowledge.
02 Military forces can be used to assist the delivery of 
securit
y, in order both to prevent de-stabilisation and to 
recover stability.  The focus of JDP 3-40 is on the employment 
of military forces, in the context of an integrated campaign, 
whose purpose is reversing a spiral of instability – a worst 
case.  It addresses the most challenging end of a spectrum 
of objectives – setting conditions for enduring stability.  The 
doctrine recognises that most often we will be working as a 
supporting partner within an alliance or coalition, probably 
led by the US.  However, JDP 3-40 has also been written to 
take account of circumstances where the UK takes a lead 
nation role.
03 The principal military audi ences for JDP 3-40 are the 
instructors and students on Advanced Command and Staff 
Course, Higher Command and Staff Course and Royal College 
of Defence Studies.  It should also be used by instructors 
at our military academies who have a key role in setting 
the intellectual direction of travel for future commanders, 
for it is in the schools and staff colleges that the doctrine 
is inculcated.  It is also designed to help the theatre and 
formation levels of command su ch as in Afghanistan, and 
their interlocutors in Whitehall and the Permanent Joint 
Headquarters (PJHQ).  A wider, but key, readership will be 
civilian partners who want to find out how the military thinks 
and works, and it will be of interest to the wider academic 
community, on whom we rely for constructive criticism 
and intellectual stimulus.  It has been written as a book of 
reference for a wide audience, rather than as a technical 
manual to be read cover-to-cover in one sitting.  A much 
shorter Guide for Security and Stabilisation  published in 
parallel to JDP 3-40 is aimed at those requiring a summary 
of the key ideas.
04 Much use has been made of the body of classic 
Coun
ter-insurgency (COIN) doctrine, most especially that 
espoused by General Sir Frank Kitson (updated during a 
recent personal interview), who framed it so clearly.  Many of 
these ideas endure, and some of the criticism of the last few 
years should perhaps be of failure to implement what was 
already known.  But there have also been profound changes 
in circumstances during that time, not least globalisation.  
Thinking has evolved, and the US Field Manual (FM) 3-24 
Counterinsurgency was a major step in this process as it 
provided a foundation not only fo r the US military, but also for 
all their coalition partners (who need to really understand how 
their major ally now approaches this business).  The UK’s JDP 
3-40 draws from FM 3-24, advice from leaders such as Generals 
Petraeus and Mattis, and writers such as Mr Frank Hoffman, Dr 
David Kilcullen and Dr John Nagl, but it also makes use of work 
by UK leaders and experts such as General Sir Rupert Smith, 
Dr David Betz and the King’s College London Insurgency 
Research Group, Professor Mike Clarke at Royal United Services 
Institute and numerous other non-military sources
2.   In this
way JDP 3-40 blends the old and the new together into a 
single document, distinctive in its own right.
05 In order to make it digestible to such a diverse 
audience JDP 3
-40 is divided into 3 distinct parts, with 
chapters covering the Why, the What  and the How of the 
military contribution to stabilisation.  Much of the critical 
material for the military practitioner is contained in Part 
3. Parts 1 and 2 describe the inter-agency context for the 
use of military forces to deliver the security component of 
stabilisation – the comprehensive approach.  These Parts also 
help to inform a wider, non-military audience as a common 
understanding of the problem and an agreed approach 
to solving it is essential.  Much of this context, such as the 
Stable State Model in Chapter 1, the Societal Relationship in 
Chapter 2, the central role of Influence in Chapter 3 and the 
Operational Guidance in Chapter 4 are fundamental to the 
approach in Part 3 and need to be read by all.  There is some 
repetition, but it has been minimised.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
V
06 Interspersed between the chapters are related stand 
alone essa
ys – commissioned specifically for JDP 3-40 – by 
distinguished experts in areas related to stabilisation.  These 
are not doctrine, but add texture and generate a better 
understanding of the issues.
• Part 1.  Why is the stabilisation of fragile and failed states
important?
• Part 2.  What must be achieved in order to bring about
stabilisation?
• Part 3.  How  should the military commander analyse, 
plan, execute and assess his contribution to stabilisation 
through campaign design and management?
07 The first two Parts require no knowledge of other 
doct
rine or military processes.  The third deals with the 
practical aspects of how a military commander or staff officer 
might put the ideas into practice  and builds on the foundation 
in Parts 1 and 2.  It is assumed that the reader of Part 3 will be 
familiar with the key Joint Doctrine Publications on operations 
and planning
3,  and will have a reasonable level of military 
experience.  JDP 3-40 does not replace other capstone or 
operational doctrine.  Rather it is designed to complement 
it by providing a lens throug h which military thought on 
stabilisation can be focused.  We have deliberately made 
heavy use of vignettes and examples to stimulate thought and 
bring the text to life.  Further supporting essays and reference 
material is available on the internet at www.dcdc.mod.uk 
and Defence intranet (RLI) at www.dcdc.dii.r.mil.uk .  For even 
more detail on COIN refer to Army Field Manual Volume 1 Part 
10. Like all doctrine, although authoritative, JDP 3-40
requires judgement in its application .
08 The aim has been to produce a document written 
in plain E
nglish that is both practical and easy to read, while 
at the same time tackling some of the complex issues that 
come from operating in a multinational, multi-agency 
environment.  The writing team engaged with a wide and 
varied selection of those who have recent experience in this 
area.  In addition to military commanders, both British and 
allied, we consulted academics, civil servants, diplomats, 
politicians and those in the voluntary sector.  In particular, 
b
m
a
m
r
2. See the reading list at Annex 12B
3. JDP 01 Campaigning ; JDP 3-00 Campaign Execution ; JDP 5-00 Campaign Planning .
These will be augmented by JDP 2-00 Intelligence  - due for publication in 2010.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
VI
representatives from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 
the Department for International Development and the cross-
government Stabilisation Unit provided guidance and advice 
in its production and staffing.  As stabilisation is likely to be an 
adversarial process, we have given the adversary a voice in our 
doctrine, of which more below.
09 JDP 3-40 uses three types of box in addition to the 
par
agraph text.  These are:
A Vignette or Quote Box to add understanding and 
texture to the Doctrine.
4 
‘Top Tips’ - Definitions and Factual Information for 
Commanders and Staff.
An Adversary’s View
At various points a red box such as this is used to present 
the view of an adversary.  The adversary used in most 
cases is al-Qaeda. It has been chosen as an example of a 
global, franchised insurgent organisation with genuine 
strategic ambition.  This is but one example of how an 
adversary thinks about their  adversaries and shows they 
have strategic ends, operational ways and tactical means, 
even though they may not be expressed in our military 
language.  The point is that strategy and operational art 
are not confined to conventional militaries and whilst 
stabilisation is about making the population secure, the 
adversary gets a vote.
A number of UNCLASSIFIED sources were used.  The 
main focus is on the letters from Osama bin-Laden to 
‘the American People’ (released to the press in November 
2002), from Abu Musab al-Zarqawi to Osama bin-Laden 
(intercepted in February 2004) and from Ayman al-
Zawahiri to al-Zarqawi (written in July 2005).  These texts 
provide the motivation for action, using logical reasoning 
to convince and to justify the ‘jihad’ attaching Islamic 
meaning to every aspect of the world and the events 
within it.  This material provides an insight to a way of 
thinking, central to which is a very specific world view.  
An example, outlining their phased strategy on which 
the Iraq campaign should be based, taken from the al-
Zawahiri letter to al-Zarqawi reads as follows:
‘So we must think for a long time about our next steps 
and how we want to attain [our long-term goal], and it…
requires several incremental [steps]: The first stage: expel the 
Americans from Iraq.  The second stage: Establish an Islamic 
authority or amirate, then develop it and support it until it 
achieves the level of caliphate…
The third stage: Extend the jihad wave to the secular countries 
neighbouring Iraq. The fourth stage: It may coincide with 
what came before: the clash with Israel…’
10 In learning how to operate in a multi-agency and 
multinational en
vironment we must build relationships across 
it.  Equally, to produce this doctrine we have had to consult 
widely, building similar relationships across government, 
international organisations, NGO and academic communities, 
both at home and abroad.  Some organisations and people 
who have made a particular contribution are acknowledged 
below.  However, the most valuable contributions have been 
made by the numerous servicemen and civilians who have 
shared their operational experience with us either in personal 
interviews or their post-tour reports.
11 Doctrine is not handed down on tablets of stone.  It 
has enduring fe
atures, but it can – must – adapt in the light of 
experience.  JDP 3-40 is a start, but work has already begun on 
the second edition.  A team deploys to Afghanistan shortly to 
hunt lessons and test what works and what does not.  I would 
ask all those with an interest in helping the UK military do this 
demanding work better, to engage with us as we hone our 
thinking, by contacting DCDC -AHFuncDoc@mod.uk.
Maj Gen PR Newton CBE
ACDS DC&D
12 November 2009
4. Many of the vignette, quote and top tips boxes report US Commanders.  This is because
they have held the majority of theatre-commands in multinational, multi-agency 
stabilisation campaigns to date.  Petraeus and McChrystal are obvious examples, but 
equally Richards is widely quoted as a UK example.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
VII
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In learning how to operate in a multi-agency and 
multinational environment we have had to build relationships 
across it.  Equally, to produce this doctrine we have had 
to consult widely, building similar relationships across the 
government, international organisation, NGO and academic 
communities, both at home and internationally.  A small 
selection of the organisations and people who have made 
a contribution, been consulted and provided advice are 
acknowledged below.
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Department for International Development
The Stabilisation Unit
Exeter University
Kings College London
Professor Theo Farrell
Dr Tim Bird*
Dr David Betz 
Dr Stuart Gordon
Transparency International (UK)
Professor Michael Clarke 
Dr Paul Cornish 
Mr Con Coughlan
Dr Russ Glenn
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr Adam Ingram MP
General Sir Frank Kitson
Ms Clare Lockhart
Dr David Matthews – Australian DoD*
Dr Andrew Rathmell
General Sir Rupert Smith
Professor Hew Strachan
Dr David Kilcullen
Professor Colin Gray
Col (Retd) John Wilson
Col (Retd) Michael Crawshaw
* Denotes a permanent member of the writing team
 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

CONTENTS
SECURITY AND STABILISATION: 
THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
Title Page  i
Authorisation and Distribution  ii
Record of Amendments  iii
Foreword: Reading JDP 3-40  iv
Contents  viii
Introduction  xi
Some Reflections on the Dhofar War by the Chief of the Defence Staff xvii
 
PART 1 – STABILISATION 
 
Chapter 1 The International System and the Problem of Fragile and Failed States  
Section I The Role of States in the International System 4
Section II A Framework for Understanding State Fragility 8
Section III Societal Conflicts in Fragile States 10
A Political Perspective by The Right Honourable Adam Ingram MP 12
 
Chapter 2 The Stabilisation of Fragile States   
Section I  Intervening in Fragile States 15
Section II The Evolution of the UK Approach to Stabilisation 17
Section III The UK Approach to Stabilisation 24
Section IV Shaping the Key Conflict Relationship 26
Section V Working with Partners 28
A Diplomat’s Perspective by Sir Jeremy Greenstock 31
 
PART 2 – 
THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION TO STABILISATION 
 
Chapter 3 Influence: The Central Idea  
Section I  Applying Influence within the Campaign 37
Section II The Influence Framework 42
 
Chapter 4 Operational Guidance  
Section I  The Practical Application of Operational Art 46
VIII
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

Section II  Leadership and Legal Requirements 48
Section III Setting the Parameters 52
Section IV An Activity Framework 55
Section V  The Security Principles of Stabilisation 59
Annex 4A  Multinational Force-Iraq, Commander’s Counter-Insurgency Guidance 68
Annex 4B  The Changing Rule of Law: A Case Study for Iraq 2003 to 2009 71
A Military Perspective by General Sir Rupert Smith 74
 
Chapter 5 Security and Security Force Capacity Building  
Section I  Addressing the Drivers of Insecurity 76
Section II Establishing Human Security 79
Section III  Security Force Capacity Building 80
Section IV Countering Adversaries 82
The Military’s Role in Stabilisation by Andrew Rathmell 85
 
Chapter 6 Governance and Institutional Capacity Building  
Section I  Addressing Critical Governance Functions 87
Section II Reforming the Security and Justice Sectors 91
A Governance and State-building Perspective by Clare Lockhart 96
 
Chapter 7 Economic and Infrastructure Development  
Section I  Addressing Critical Development Needs 99
Section II Quick Impact Projects  107
Peace Building and State-building: A Summary of th e Department for International Development  109 
Approach by Joelle Jenny 
 
PART 3 – 
CAMPAIGNING IN STABILISATION  
 
Chapter 8 Intelligence and Understanding  
Section I The Demands of Stabilisation 1 14
Section II  A Systematic Approach 1 16
Section III  Coordination and Applic ation of Intelligence Assets 1 18
Section IV  Organisational Requirements 122
Section V Exploiting Technology 124
Annex 8A  Understanding the Adversary  125
Annex 8B  Command and Control of the Intelligence Process   132
 
Chapter 9 Political and Social Analysis  
Section I  The Nature of the Analysis Process 135
Section II Focusing on Political Analysis 136
Section III How to Conduct Political and Social Analysis 139
Section IV The Output of Analysis 143
Annex 9A Generic Example of Output of Centre of Gravity Analysis  145
Annex 9B Schematic of Conflict Relationships  147
 
Chapter 10 Planning 
Section I  The Planning Environment 151
Section II Planning Techniques 166
Section III  Further Planning Considerations 174
IX
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

Section IV  Integration of the Force 177
Section V  Private Military and Security Companies 184
Annex 10A  The Hierarchy of Plans for UK Operations in Helmand 2005 187
Annex 10B  Advisers and Analysts 188
 
Chapter 11 Execution  
 The Conduct of Operations 
Section I  Shape 192
Section II  Secure 199
Section III Hold 204
Section IV  Develop 205
 
 Measuring Campaign Success  
Section V  Assessment 209
Annex 1 1A Developing Indigenous Forces 214
 
Chapter 12  Anticipate, Learn and Adapt 
Section I The Requirement 219
Section II  Learn and Adapt Cycles 221
Section III  Enabling an Anticipatory, Learning and Adaptive Organisation 225
Annex 12A Force Preparation 226
Annex 12B Reading List 229
 
Lexicon 
Part 1 – Acronyms and Abbreviations 231
Part 2 – Terms and Definitions   233
 
Index  240 
 
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
X
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

XI
Security, Stabilisation and Insurgency
0001 The rules-based international system relies upon 
stability.  Security is the foundati on on which stability is built.  
In a crisis it may have to be fought for.  At the heart of the 
contest for security may be a bloody insurgency.  However, 
defeating an insurgency is merely treating the symptom.  
For real, long-term success, you must address the root 
causes of the instability, and that requires an approach that 
combines economic, governance and security measures; 
a comprehensive approach.  Notions of stabilisation are 
evolving. So too is the concept of comprehensive approaches  
(there is no single template); both are work in progress.
0002 Stabilisation is the process that supports states 
which are entering, enduring or emerging from conflict in 
order to: prevent or reduce violence; protect the population 
and key infrastructure; promote political processes and 
governance structures which lead to a political settlement 
that institutionalises non-violent contests for power; and 
prepares for sustainable social and economic development.  
Its ultimate purpose is to strengthen an existing political order, 
or to reshape it, to become more acceptable to that nation’s 
population and more consistent with the UK’s strategic 
interests.  However, stabilisation is rarely a goal in its own 
right.  Instead, it may be a consequence of intervention for 
other reasons of national interest.  For example, securing a 
INTRODUCTION
THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION 
TO STABILISATION
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
XII
vital resource or restoring security to a region critical to the 
UK.  It will therefore be a necessary and implicit act of most 
interventions, particularly in fragile or failed states.
0003 In one way or another, stabilisation could play a 
part in many future conflicts.  While many of the ideas in 
Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-40 are equally applicable 
in circumstances where there is little external military 
involvement, the purpose of this document is to guide the 
employment of military resources, involving integrated 
security, governance and development efforts to secure a 
political settlement.  Alternative political and military choices 
are not excluded: clearly there will be many situations when 
the Government wishes to retain a degree of strategic choice 
by minimising the UK’s footprint within another state’s 
sovereign territory and instead opt for a policy of diplomacy, 
containment, deterrence or coercion.  Equally, there will be 
situations where the Government elects to intervene and thus 
engage in stabilisation; duri ng and after major combat, for 
example.  The most demanding – but not necessarily most 
likely – of cases occur where there is a violent contest for 
power.  This is the focus of JDP 3-40.
The Long and the Short of Stabilisation
0004  The military has been accused of having a narrow, 
short-term view and a predilection for action.  Often this 
perception arises out of a lack of understanding of the nature 
of the military art.  Where an insurgency is present or is at 
least latent, the contest for security will be a duel, or given the 
range of actors a brawl, between the security forces and their 
adversaries.  It will require the commander to vary tempo, to 
create and exploit opportunities, and to be comfortable with 
uncertainty and risk.  It is a contest in which the judicious 
application of violence and a philosophy of mission command 
are necessary to seize and hold the initiative.  Without 
the ability to impose one’s will on events, stabilisation is 
impossible.  Yet there is no reason to expect that others 
involved in stabilisation should have similar perspectives to 
those of their military colleagues; all will be prisoners of their 
own experience and distinct organisational culture.
0005 The military may have been guilty, too, of failing to 
appreciate the wider contributions made to stabilisation by 
civil agencies.  Stabilisatio n campaigns require endurance 
and patience.  At times observ ing and shaping, rather than 
engaging in aggressive operations, may be the best approach.  
This can be difficult for a military which expects to deliver 
rapid, ideally decisive results; just one of the paradoxes that 
these types of conflict present.
0006  We must not fall into the trap of believing that there 
is some ideal comprehensive fo rmula.  Stabilisation is a 
creative process, not a science. There are, however, some 
keys to maximising the chance of success; for us, for the 
host nation and for the international system that requires 
a secure, stable environment if it is to function.  Critical 
to achieving an enduring solution is to create a single, 
integrated, resilient team.  JDP 3-40 puts this concept at the 
heart of military doctrine.  For several years now the UK has 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
XIII
been developing a comprehensive approach, but there is 
no agreed, institutionalised framework for putting it into 
action.  It does not help that the military has simultaneously 
been wrestling with the need to adapt its own approach 
to the evolving character of conflict in the 21st Century.  
And throughout this period we have been engaged in two 
bloody enterprises in Iraq and Afghanistan.  It is not surprising 
therefore that we have not yet got it right – but we must.  
Defence Strategic Guidance 2008 first provided policy in the 
form of a new Military Task, Mili tary Assistance to Stabilisation 
and Development (MASD) and this doctrine covers the 
circumstances for which the task is designed.
0007 The need for security in stabilisation is non-
discretionary.  That is not to say that a secure environment 
is an end in its own right, but without security nothing 
else can function.  If adversaries can create and maintain a 
climate of fear, our efforts at reconstruction, for example, 
will be frustrated and judged to fail.  This is why taking and 
then holding the security initiative – imposing one’s will 
on a ruthless and determined adversary – entails the use of 
force and offensive action.  This uncomfortable reality cannot 
be avoided.  It does not mean, however, that the military 
contribution is all about seeking the decisive defeat of the 
enemy in battle.  Rather, the ultimate aim for the military 
commander is to make his adversaries irrelevant to such an 
extent that the other agencies can deliver their elements of 
the solution.  It is the delivery of focused, comprehensive 
effect, not purely military effect, which will overwhelm 
adversaries.  It is in this way that all aspects of stabilisation, 
both military and non-military, are fundamentally intertwined.
0008  To succeed in stabilisation requires a military mind 
with a different way of thinking.  In his book Low Intensity 
Operations General Frank Kitson makes the point that:
‘At the root of the problem lies the fact the qualities 
required for fighting conventional war are different from 
those required for dealing with subversion or insurgency; or 
for taking part in peace-keeping operations for that matter.  
Traditionally a soldier is trained and conditioned to be strong, 
courageous, direct and aggressive, but when men endowed 
with these qualities become involved in fighting subversion 
they often find that their good points are exploited by 
the enemy.’
JDP 3-40 does not set out to try to turn service personnel 
into civil servants.  However, it is important to inculcate in 
both the military and the civili ans involved in stabilisation a 
desire to understand each other’s business.  The nature of the 
environment means there will invariably be frictions 
and simply getting right the mechanics of working together 
will not resolve them.  However, failure to do even that will 
be disastrous. 
The Evolving Character of Conflict
0009  Adversaries, both state and non-state, are adapting 
fast to counter the west’s military strengths and our preferred 
way of operating.  Already this adaptation had made our 
assumptions, such as rapid decisive effect , look dated if not 
obsolete.  Smart adversaries in regions with multiple persistent 
systemic problems, using de-centralised command styles and 
an ability to exploit the clutter of heavily populated areas, 
are unlikely to present themselves in sterile battlespace for 
precision attack.  Conflict is less likely to end in clear ‘victory’ 
and it will be our resilience an d institutional agility as much 
as our technological mastery that will define our chances of 
success.  History shows that asymmetry is not ‘new’, but some 
of its modern manifestations are new to us.  Traditionally we 
have referred to a spectrum of conflict, ranging from stable 
peace via humanitarian assistance, to general war.  This 
implied that there are discrete types of conflict with traditional 
‘war’ against near-peers as our professional benchmark.  This 
binary, linear, sequential view overlooked the inevitable 
concurrency and unique challenges posed by conflicts that 
have different characteristics.  Discrete operational themes 
actually overlap and merge.  In one model this is represented 
by a fractured spectrum of concurrent missions, in which 
all types of conflict are shown to exist simultaneously, each 
coming to the surface at certain times.  (See diagram overleaf).
0010 Even this is inadequate to describe the contemporary 
character of conflict.  We now see an increased blurring of 
the distinctions between adversaries and the way they use 
force to achieve political goals.  Future conflict will blend 
‘the lethality traditionally associated with state conflict and the 
fanatical and protracted fervour of irregular warfare’ .
5   This 
complexity requires an alternative, non-linear model.  (See 
diagram overleaf).
001 1 Stabilisation does not stand alone as a discrete type 
of operation; within it we should expect to conduct a range 
of military activity that includes high-end combat.  Although 
the context may be new, this concept is very similar to Krulak’s 
description of the 3-Block War in which combat, peacekeeping 
and humanitarian assistance all take place simultaneously and 
5. Frank G Hoffman, Conflict in the 21st Century; The Rise of Hybrid Wars , Potomac Institute for 
Policy Studies, December 2007.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
XIV
require the force to show agility by transitioning between 
these activities at high tempo 6.   Across this spectrum the 
array of opponents that exist will be diverse, but inter-linked.  
It will include both states and non-state actors such as 
insurgents, terrorists, and criminals.  They will routinely operate 
independently but will be quick to cooperate where they see 
mutual benefit, even if they are ideologically opposed.  They 
are likely to share information, lessons, tactics and procedures.  
Unencumbered by public accountability or bureaucratic 
process, they may be extremely quick to adapt to changes in 
the situation but they are also likely to take the long view of 
their campaigns.  They are likely to share the same culture as 
the local population and they will exploit information quickly 
and effectively to gain their support.  They will have thought 
about our weaknesses and will, where possible, attack us on 
a boundary or vulnerability.  They are unlikely to share our 
legal or ethical framework, allowing them to challenge and 
exploit us in ways that we might not anticipate.  Many of them 
will not subscribe to traditional views of victory and defeat.  
Thus, even when we do achieve military success, it may prove 
difficult to convince them (and hence our own public) that we 
have actually beaten them without ‘winning’ the population.
0012 The military contest is not likely to be one of absolutes; 
‘losing’ and especially ‘winning’ are less relevant notions.  More 
usefully, we should characterise success as the realisation by 
enough of our adversaries of the futility of further violence, 
and popular rejection of their political vision.  From this, 
an accommodation in which they eschew violence can be 
brokered.  This is not reconciliation; but is a ‘good enough’ 
step towards it, allowing political and economic progress 
towards a stable state.
0013 Conflict will require us to conduct a range of activities 
simultaneously.  Some of them will be familiar, others are not 
yet fully understood and for which we are not optimised, such 
as stabilisation.  It is not enough that all players cooperate; 
they must actively apply their full weight in support of one 
another during a conflict, with that effort focused in time and 
space as well as conceptually.  When the security situation 
will not allow a particular department or agency to work 
effectively, then they should work to reinforce the security 
effect we are trying to create.  And as soon as the military 
effort has enabled the effects of others to be unleashed, 
our focus should switch to supporting wider development 
and governance effects.  Hence a working comprehensive 
Major Combat Operations
Peace Support Operations
Limited Intervention
Peacetime Military Engagement
Counter  Irregular Activity
Increasing Violence
Operational Theme
  Spectrum of concurrent activity
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
XV
approach is not just a technical matter; cooperation is 
necessary, but not sufficient.  Unity of command across 
all actors will rarely be achievable (and is not generally 
understood by other comprehensive actors).  Unity of purpose 
and unity of effort are more realistic and essential aspirations.  
Furthermore, the localised nature of the problem is likely to 
demand an ‘open’ or decentralised approach, rather than one 
in which every action and decision is referred to a 
central authority.
A Flavour of What’s New and What’s Not
0014 JDP 3-40 recognises that there is still a great deal in 
our previous doctrine which is relevant.  General Kitson, 
Sir Robert Thompson and Colonel David Galula in particular 
provide useful guidance.  Equally, 30 years of internal security 
operations in Northern Ireland provided us with a pool of 
experience.  For example, the strength of having a fully 
integrated intelligence system which allows you to generate 
and then share information with the local police and security 
services is something that we knew well in the past.  Similarly, 
(although now more than ever) we need to carry with us 
both the local population, and our own population at home.  
Although we may use fresh terms such as the message and 
the narrative, these ideas are not new.  The suggestion that 
perceptions matter as much as facts has been around for a 
long time but the way in which global communications now 
reach out even wider simply magnifies the importance of 
influence.  We also know from long experience in such places 
as Malaya and Northern Ireland how the enemy in protracted 
campaigns will observe how we operate, and then change 
their tactics accordingly.  As in these campaigns, where we 
showed great flexibility, we must now be equally agile and 
adaptive – bending our structures and processes into new 
shapes – if we are to keep pace with much less get ahead of 
our adversaries.
0015 The Revolution in Military Affairs 7  led some to believe 
that we could reshape conflict in our image.  Reliance on 
precision fires and information dominance certainly reshaped 
our own approach, but adaptive adversaries found ways to 
negate these advantages and even turn them against us.  The 
realisation that we may have less situational understanding 
than any other actor is a sobering one.  And some aspects of 
contemporary operations are markedly different from earlier 
Major Combat Operations
Peace Support Operations
Limited Intervention
Peacetime Military Engagement
Counter  Irregular Activity
Increasing Violence
Operational Theme
  Fusion of concurrent activity
6. General Charles C. Krulak, The Strategic Corporal: Leadership in the Three Block War , 
 Marines Magazine, January 1999.
7. The military concept of Revolution in Military Affairs  is a theory about the future of 
warfare, often connected to technological and organisational recommendations for 
change, tied to modern information, communications and space technology.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
XVI
COIN campaigns.  For one thing, the requirement to maintain 
a persistent security force presence amongst the affected 
population demands mass.  Initially at least, this will place 
a demand on international forces.  Currently, this demand, 
particularly for all-volunteer western forces able to operate at 
the higher levels of capability, is greater than any time since 
the end of the Cold War.  Second, it is unlikely that these 
operations would be conducted by a single nation, adding 
layers of complexity to command and control.  Third, the 
need for police and paramilitary expertise is greater than ever 
before and western models of community policing may be 
inappropriate, leaving a capability gap.  To compensate for all 
this, building the capacity of indigenous forces is an urgent 
priority, requiring coordination across several nations and the 
generation of new military skills.
0016 Multinational and multi-agency complexities also 
add new dimensions as does the appearance of transnational 
adversaries with global reach and ambition.  In addition, 
and fundamental to our purpose in stabilisation, is the fact 
that the host nation government must also be seen as part 
of that coalition.  Host nation sovereignty will constrain the 
commander and his diplomatic partners, and they must in 
turn work out how to apply influence and leverage to ensure 
our collective strategies converge.  All of this will take place 
under the scrutiny of international media, and those who 
oppose military action and who are free to challenge the 
actions of governments and, increasingly, subject campaigns 
to scrutiny in courts of law.
0017 Strategic compression is an imprecise term that 
attempts to describe a number of phenomena that 
characterise current military operations, particularly 
stabilisation campaigns.  The requirement to coordinate 
national instruments of power at the local level drags down 
some characteristics of the operational level into the tactical.  
Everyone with a mobile camera-phone has the potential to 
capture an image with global reach.  Newsworthy events 
can break internationally within minutes
8.   The net effect is a 
blurring and compression of the levels of warfare which, if not 
managed, could amount to a challenge to our core notion of 
mission command.  Hence it is critical that the commander has 
a force prepared to operate in a highly nuanced manner, and 
has himself the skills of advocacy needed to secure freedom 
of action for it.
Nine Security Principles for Stabilisation
0018 Principles help the practitioner frame his 
approach to the problem, they are not answers.  These 
principles will guide a commander through the political 
and inter-agency complexities .  Even in outline format, 
they serve as pointers towards an approach that is set out 
JDP 3-40.  The principles flow through but are explained 
in detail at the end of 
Chapter 4.
 Primacy of Political Purpose.
 Understand the Context.
 Focus on the Population.
 Foster Host Nation Governance, 
Authority and Indigenous 
Capacity.
 Unity of Effort.
 Isolate and Neutralise Irregular 
Actors.
 Exploit Credibility to Gain 
Support.
 Prepare for the Long 
Term (Perseverance and 
Sustainability).
 Anticipate, Learn and Adapt.
8. The death of the female bystander, Neda Agha-Soltan, during the Iranian election 
protests was viewablle on Internet sites within minutes of it being captured on a 
 mobile phone.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE 
DHOFAR WAR
BY AIR CHIEF MARSHAL 
SIR JOCK STIRRUP GCB AFC ADC DSc FRAeS FCMI RAF
CHIEF OF THE DEFENCE STAFF
The Chief of the Defence Staff fought as a pilot in the Sultan of 
Oman’
s Air Force from 1973 to 1975.
We are all of us, to some degree 
or other, prisoners of our own 
history.  Our memories, and our 
interpretation of them, make 
us who we are and condition 
how we think.  This can be both 
good and bad.  Good, in so far 
as experience can teach us how 
to deal with the world around 
us with greater success: burning 
one’s fingers usually leads to a 
more circumspect approach to 
fire.  Bad, in that we can, if we’re 
not very careful, take the singular 
and apply it inappropriately 
to the general: burning one’s 
fingers does not mean that fire 
is necessarily something to be 
avoided.  The trick, of course, 
is to extract from particular 
experiences those principles that 
are of an enduring nature, and 
then to apply these carefully in 
the context of varying and often 
very different situations.
My own military character was greatly influenced by my 
experiences in the Dhofar War.  I was on loan service with 
the Sultan of Oman’s Air Force from 1973 to 1975, leaving a 
few months before the war ended.  I was then just a young 
pilot, flying close air support and interdiction missions in 
Strikemaster aircraft, and I can’t say that I devoted much 
thought at the time to wider strategic issues.  But I did think 
about them more and more as the years passed, even before 
a turn of the wheel brought counter-insurgency operations 
into the UK military’s cross-hairs once again.  And when that 
XVII
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

happened, I naturally had to consider what parts – if any – of 
my experience were relevant to our contemporary challenges.
First, it’s worth reflecting on the nature of operations in 
Dhofar.  The tribesmen in that mountainous region were 
fiercely independent, extremely touchy (blood feuds were 
common), and hardy warriors with a long history of fighting.  
In the 1960s they became disenchanted with the ruling Sultan, 
seeing little benefit to them – and many disadvantages – 
from central Omani governance.  It was also the heyday of 
communist-inspired revolutions and resistance movements 
around the world.  One creation to emerge as a result of 
this trend was the Soviet-dominated People’s Democratic 
Republic of the Yemen, or PDRY, which lay directly to the 
west of Dhofar.  In an attempt to spread further the influence 
of Moscow-directed communism, the PDRY seized on the 
opportunity offered by disaffected Dhofaris to create the 
rather grandly named PFLOAG: Popular Front for the Liberation 
of Oman and the Arabian Gulf.  So internal unrest within 
the south of Oman gained Soviet backing – physical as well 
as moral – and grew into a major insurgency.  The early 
response from the government was almost entirely military; 
the Dhofaris had rebelled against their lawful ruler, and force 
was seen as the only appropriate recourse.  The result was a 
protracted and costly campaign in which neither side made 
much progress.  The tribesmen could make little impact on 
government enclaves, despite regular indirect fire attacks 
on Salalah airfield.  On the other hand, they were very much 
at home on the Jebel, an area of difficult terrain and no 
infrastructure.  Government forces could mount forays into the 
region, but any tactical successes were fleeting and had no 
real operational, let alone strategic, impact.  There seemed no 
way forward.
But this all changed in 1970.  There were a number of pivotal 
moments in the Dhofar campaign; but for me, the event that 
changed the whole course of the war, and as a consequence 
the future of Oman, was the accession of Sultan Qaboos.  The 
new ruler saw very quickly that military action alone could not 
deliver strategic success.  Yes, the Dhofaris had to understand 
that continued resistance was going to be a life-shortening 
experience; but at the same time they had to believe that 
there was a much more attractive alternative.  There had to be 
a carrot as well as a stick.  And so reconciliation became the 
second major plank in the counter-insurgency effort.  
This was not about surrendering on the issue of governance 
– of finding, for example, a political place for PFLOAG.  It was 
about making individual Dhofaris understand that what the 
system would deliver for them was much more palatable than 
the alternatives.  It was about a social and political outreach 
programme that was, crucially, directed by the Sultan.  He was 
the government, and people needed to believe in his long-
term commitment to whatever was proposed.
Did this bring the war to a rapid conclusion?  Of course not; 
it went on for another 5 difficult years.  Years that contained 
great frustrations; years that sometimes seemed to yield little 
in the way of progress; years that saw some painful losses.  But 
it was this strategic shift that put the endeavour on the path 
to success.  The journey still had to be made, but the road was 
at last the right one.
And throughout that journey, effective military operations 
remained essential.  Vital though the social and political 
programmes were, they would not have worked without the 
military campaign; the stick remained a crucial element in 
the mix.  So what sort of operations proved most effective?  
Well, for a start, operations that supported the political effort.  
The Dhofar Jebel was not the sort of terrain that lent itself 
to straightforward clear, hold and build; the population was 
too rural and dispersed for that.  But the geography did allow 
enemy movement to be interdicted on the west-east axis.  
This allowed areas to be cleared sufficiently for the political 
programme to be applied.  The effectiveness of the process 
was evident.  Once the Hornbeam Line had been established, 
far to the west of the Salalah plain, the indirect fire attacks on 
the airfield dried up: the insurgents could no longer move 
weapons, ammunition and people through in sufficient 
numbers to sustain the effort.
But like the more conventional clear, hold and build approach, 
this area interdiction process was manpower intensive.  And 
with the Hornbeam Line in place, the Sultan had just about 
run out of available mass, so for the time being that line 
of operation culminated.  Occasional raids were mounted 
beyond the Hornbeam, and an isolated government 
fortification on the border with Yemen kept the insurgents on 
their toes, but there was no immediate prospect of extending 
governance throughout the rest of western Dhofar – the most 
difficult bit.  The answer, of course, was more manpower, 
and this was eventually provided by the Shah of Iran.  The 
additional mass allowed the resumption of area interdiction.  
A difficult and costly operation saw the establishment of the 
Damavand Line in early 1975, which was the beginning of the 
end for the remaining insurgents.
I say remaining insurgents, because while all this was going 
on there was a concerted effort to draw Dhofari fighters 
onto the government side.  This was a cleverly targeted 
programme that focused on underlying motivations.  Many 
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
XVIII
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

Dhofaris – certainly in those days – rather liked fighting.  The 
trick was not to try and turn them into men of peace, but to 
offer them a better fight where they would be on the winning 
side.  Hence the formation of the Firqat, an irregular formation 
of scouts and fighters un der Omani Army command and 
control.  This was successful not just because of the firepower 
and local knowledge that it brought to the government side, 
but because of the extent that it denied these things to the 
enemy.  In the end, we came close to running out of people 
to fight.
There were other important tactical lessons regarding the 
application of force in these circumstances.  The use of special 
forces on influence operations; the crucial role of helicopters 
in providing tactical mobility and logistic support in difficult 
terrain; the ability of responsive air power to multiply many 
times the force available to light, mobile units, and the 
consequent need for close air-land integration: all of this was 
and remained obvious to those who served in the Dhofar 
War.  One famous incident, the Battle of Mirbat, demonstrated 
how relatively small numbers of special forces, backed up by 
effective air support, could defeat even large scale attacks.  
Indeed, that battle was the insurgents’ last conventional 
hurrah; thereafter they relied almost exclusively on an 
asymmetric approach.
Well, this is all – at least to me – an interesting personal view 
on a piece of history.  But what does it tell us about today 
and the future?  What enduring principles might we derive 
that do not depend purely on the particular circumstances 
of Dhofar in the 60s and 70s?  The obvious one to start with 
is that insurgents have generally faced a choice: put up with 
the existing system or fight for something different.  And their 
choice has been the latter.  The aim therefore is to get them 
to reverse that choice, and the best method is to tackle both 
halves of the equation together: make the existing system 
much more attractive to them, and the costs of fighting 
unpalatably high.
The former requires a sustained and credible effort by those 
who run the existing system; reconciliation is an internal 
issue, and cannot be imposed from without.  It must address 
people’s concerns for the future – and hence be carefully 
and sometimes individually targeted – and give them a stake 
in the governance structure, not surrender governance to 
a competing group.  And it requires patience; people, once 
disaffected, cannot be turned back overnight.  Rebuilding 
trust is a slow process, and there will be inevitable setbacks.  
But in the end, the campaign is all about politics.
As for the military line, the first thing to understand is that 
it’s indispensible.  It cannot deliver strategic success, but is 
essential to its delivery.  The second point is that it should at all 
times support the political line; the purpose of raising the cost 
to insurgents is to persuade them to make the right positive 
choice.  Anything that drives them further from that choice 
is patently unhelpful.  The next thing is that numbers matter; 
counter-insurgency operations are manpower intensive.  But 
numbers by themselves are not the answer.  A joint approach 
that applies numbers and technology (yes, even in the 1970s 
we had technology) to counter the enemy’s asymmetric 
advantages is crucial.
And again I would reiterate the need  for patience.  It’s difficult 
to pin down an exact start date for the Dhofar insurgency, but 
it lasted at least seven years before it was brought to an end.  
These campaigns take time and persistence, and there are 
inevitable ups and downs of tactical fortune along the way.  
It’s hard to take the long view from inside such a campaign, 
but it’s essential.
There are other, more detailed lessons that I might draw.  
But I hope I’ve gone sufficiently far to persuade you that 
the experiences of Dhofar, at least as I perceived – and still 
perceive – them, resonate strongly with our contemporary 
security challenges.  That there are some enduring principles 
here that survive the particular and extend to the general.  
And that, looking at Oman today, there is ample evidence that 
the principles, when properly applied, do work.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
XIX
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

PART 1
STABILISATION
Chapter 1
The International System and the Problem of Fragile 
and Failed States
A Political Perspective by The Right Honourable Adam Ingram MP
Chapter 2
The Stabilisation of Fragile and Failed States
A Diplomat’s Perspective by Sir Jeremy Greenstock
1
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

Security is the foundation on 
which stabilisation is built.  
Some security challenges may 
be quickly contained; but in 
its most demanding form, at 
the heart of the contest for 
that security, may be a bloody 
insurgency.  The insurgent must 
have the initiative taken from 
him; however, defeating an 
insurgency is merely treating 
the symptoms of the problem.  
For long-term success, the 
campaign must address the 
root causes of the instability, 
and that is likely to require 
an approach that combines 
economic, governance 
and security measures; a 
comprehensive approach.
Part 1 introduces the problem of societal conflicts within 
fragile states as the defining form of conflict at the beginning 
of the 21st century, and describes the UK approach to the 
stabilisation of such states.  It aims to orientate the reader to 
the underlying causes of state fragility and societal conflicts, 
and introduces three big ideas.  The first of these is the idea 
that stabilisation must be approached ‘comprehensively’ 
across security, development and governance lines of 
operation leveraging from all available arms of national and 
international power.  The second is the notion that the central 
conflict relationship within fragile states is that between 
the host government, competing elites (including insurgent 
groups) and the wider population.  The third is the assertion 
that the national strategic aim of interventions into fragile and 
failed states should be to foster the development of a political 
settlement, amenable to broader UK interests, between this 
triumvirate of actors.
2
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

‘The first, the supreme, the 
most far-reaching act of 
judgement that the statesman 
and commander have to make 
is to establish by that test the 
kind of war on which they are 
embarking; neither mistaking 
it for, nor trying to turn it into, 
something that is alien to its 
nature.  This is the first of all 
strategic questions and the most 
comprehensive’.
1
Carl von Clausewitz, On War
Section I  The Role of States in the International System
 The International System
 Globalisation
 Functions and Norms of the State
Section II  A Framework for Understanding State Fragility
 State Instability
Section III  Societal Conflicts in Fragile States
 Contesting the Political Order
 Evolving Threats
A Political Perspective – The Right Honourable Adam 
Ingram MP
0101 This chapter describes the role of states in the 
international system and provides a framework for 
understanding state fragility.  Stabilisation takes place within 
fragile or failed states.  It is the seriousness of the political, 
social or economic implications arising from the fragility 
and possible failure of a state that provides the context for a 
decision to employ military means in pursuit of stabilisation.  
This chapter provides an understanding of the features of the 
international system and state fragility that forms the broad 
framework within which stabil isation efforts are conducted.
Fragile and Failed States
Countries that have a politically significant presence of 
irregular activity
2 are likely to sit within the spectrum of 
fragile and failed states:
A Fragile State.  A fragile state still has a viable host 
nation government, but it has a reduced capability and 
capacity to secure, protect and govern the population.  
Without intervention, it is likely to become a failed state.
A Failed State.   A failed state is where remnants of a 
host nation government, or some form of potential host 
nation government, may still exist.  However, in such 
states, the government does not have a monopoly on 
the use of force, cannot provide security or simple basic 
services, and is not sufficiently legitimate or effective to 
protect its borders, citizens, or even itself.  It may exert 
a very weak level of governance and rule of law in all or 
part of the state but, overall, the mechanisms and tools of 
governance have largely collapsed.
CHAPTER 1
THE INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM AND 
THE PROBLEM OF FRAGILE AND 
FAILED STATES3
1. Carl von Clausewitz, On War , translated and edited by Peter Paret and Michael Howard, 
(Princeton UP , 1984), page 88.
2. Irregular Activity is the use, or threat, of force, by irregular forces, groups or individuals, 
frequently ideologically or criminally motivated, to effect or prevent change as 
a challenge to governance and authority.  (Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01 
Campaigning (2nd Edition)). Note: Irregular Activity could include a mix of insurgency, 
terrorism, criminality and disorder.
3. Allied Joint Publication (AJP) - 3.4.1 Peace Support Operations .
4. JDP 0-01.1 United Lingdom Glossary of Joint and Multinational Definitions .
5. Such as - linked global financial institutions and mechanisms and dependence on 
energy routes.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
4
SECTION I
THE ROLE OF STATES 
IN THE INTERNATIONAL 
SYSTEM
The International System
0102 A characteristic of the contemporary operating 
environment is the increasing number of transnational 
actors that seek to shape and influence global affairs.  These 
include Inter-governmental Organisations (IGOs), International 
Organisations (IOs), Non-governmental Organisations (NGOs) 
and Multinational Corporations (MNCs).  IGOs are organisations 
‘that may be established by a constituent document such as 
a charter, a treaty or a convention, which when signed by the 
founding members, provides the IGO with legal recognition’
3  
such as UN, NATO and EU.  An NGO is ‘a voluntary, non-profit 
making organisation that is generally independent of government, 
international organisations or commercial interests’ , while a 
MNC has no single authoritative definition but can be 
understood as ‘a company that has branches or subsidiaries 
outside their home country’ .
4   However, in spite of this 
fragmentation of political influence, states are still central 
to the international system.
0103 The number of member states of the UN has 
increased from 51 in 1945 to 192 in 2009.  This indicates the 
powerful attraction of statehood.  Political communities have 
overwhelmingly sought legitimacy and validation by seeking 
to establish a recognised state.  However, internationally 
recognised borders do not automatically convey statehood.  In 
the eyes of certain local populations, they can be somewhat 
meaningless (e.g. the Durand Line).  For them, statehood is not 
bound by arbitrary frontiers (largely drawn up by foreigners), 
rather their sense of nationhood draws greater expression 
from a common language, culture, religion tradition or history 
– Kurds are an example of this.  In these instances, instability 
is not necessarily caused by challenges to the political 
settlement; it may be inherent in certain societies.  Those 
particularly at risk are post-colonial countries that may be in 
effect artificial creations of a former colonial power.
0104 Crises and conflicts are addressed through an 
international system that is still based on the centrality of 
the state as well as the purposes and principles of the UN.  
However, new norms (such as humanitarian intervention 
and human rights) have developed that both flow from, and 
underpin this centrality.  This includes the responsibility of 
the state, within its territory, to deliver basic human security 
(described on page 6).
0105 The post-1945 international organisational architecture 
has struggled at times to cope with and adapt to the 
complexity associated with intra -state violence and instability.  
Organisations were designed to deal with inter-state conflict.  
Therefore, the approach has been based on applying the 
traditional norm of state sovereignty.  But, state sovereignty 
can clash with the need for the international community to 
address security challenges internal to that state.  This has 
often led to cumbersome, delayed or absent multinational 
responses to intra -state conflict and instability.
0106 A characteristic of fragile states is the inability of their 
governments to discharge their responsibilities effectively.  
Insecurity and instability is likely to follow, caused by those 
with specific grievances and opportunists keen to exploit the 
vacuum of authority.  Frequently the state does not have an 
effective monopoly on the use of violence, which inhibits their 
ability to prevent or resolve societal conflicts.
Globalisation
0107 Globalisation is used as a collective term for the 
processes characterised by accelerating international 
interconnectedness.  For many, these processes are seen as 
positive.  However, globalisation has also sparked grievance 
and radicalisation in many parts of the world where some 
see the effects as exacerbating economic inequality, and 
disrupting traditional bonds and social relations.  These effects 
are magnified by the opportunities globalisation provides for 
those with grievances to become more powerful, and also by 
criminal greed.  New vulnerabilities
5 have been introduced 
as economies and societies grow increasingly dependent on 
national and global financial information and communication 
networks.  Simultaneously, these networks have empowered 
groups to communicate more effectively within states, across 
regions and directly to diasporas across the globe.  These 
processes, when coupled with weapons proliferation, provide 
non-state actors with the destructive power and reach 
previously confined to states.
0108 Globalisation has important consequences for 
operations to provide security and stability in fragile states.  
For the commander there are three in particular that may have 
an impact on his operational design:
• Unity of Effort.  Many relevant actors are likely to be 
present in, or have an influence on an operational area; 
an intervening force is but one.  Contributing states 
may be joined by internatio nal and regional agencies, 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
5
Political Settlement
Security
Governance & 
Rule of Law
Economic &
Infrastructure
Development
Societal Relationships
institutions and organisations, both inter-governmental 
and non-governmental.  Therefore stabilisation is likely 
to be a multinational and multi-agency activity.  Private 
sector organisations and contractors will compete to 
supply services, products and even security.  While unity 
of command remains the ideal, the complexity of actors 
rarely makes it achievable.  Consequently, establishing 
 and maintaining unity of effort may be the best that 
 can be achieved, and will require a robust decision-making 
architecture.  Without it, effective campaigning will 
 be difficult.
• Global Communications.  Local actors are also 
embedded in the mechanisms that form international 
interconnectedness.  Transnational communications and 
media networks link insecure and unstable societies and 
the wider international community.  These actors have 
become adept at using such technologies to 
 feed insecurity.
• Unforeseen Effects.  Interventions designed to have a 
local effect can have an impact on events and outcomes 
well beyond the immediate theatre of operations.
0109 These consequences of globalisation make purely 
localised conflict increasingly unlikely.  They challenge the 
utility of traditional organisational concepts such as the 
bounded Joint Operations Area (JOA) and suggest a network 
of threats requiring a more sophisticated response.
Functions and Norms of the State
0110 Figure 1.1 introduces a simple model that illustrates 
the elements of a stable state: security, including national and 
human security; economic and infrastructure development; 
governance and the rule of law.  While these elements can be 
analysed individually, it is unhe lpful and potentially distorting 
to view them separately.  The stability of the state depends 
upon the manner in which the elements interact and are 
mutually supporting.
 
0111 This is an idealised model.  However, as the box below 
indicates, it is not simply a Western view of the elements of a 
stable state.  Much of the logic incorporated into the model is 
shared by our adversaries.
In his letter to Osama bin Laden, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi 
outlines the threat of the Shi’a in Iraq taking control of 
the institutions of the state.  Zarqawi regards the Shi’a 
as the greatest enemy.  It is the Shi’a dominance in the 
burgeoning Iraqi Army and Police (security) and the other 
fledgling national institutions (governance - economy) 
that provide this threat to the establishment of the al-
Qaeda governance model, the Islamic State of Iraq.
‘They began by taking control of the institutions of the State 
and their security, military and economic branches.  As you… 
know, the basic components of any country are security and 
the economy.’
0112 Some states demonstrably fail to provide the functions 
or capacities suggested but retain a form of stability, (the 
Democratic Republic of Congo from 1970s to 1990s is an 
example of this).  However, they are usually unable to exert 
effective control over their territory and are liable to have 
the sort of ungoverned spaces that harbour the types of 
threats discussed earlier.  Others achieve stability through 
ruthless oppression, nepotism and patronage.  The stability of 
such states is often temporary and regimes capable of such 
behaviour are also likely to be amenable to alliances 
of convenience with the actors most threatening to 
global security.
  Figure 1.1 – Elements of a Stable State
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
6
0113 National and Human Security.  Security has 
traditionally been understood as National Security, concerning 
itself with territorial integrity and the protection of the 
institutions and interests of the state from both internal and 
external threats.  However, increasingly, the understanding of 
security has been broadened to include the notion of Human 
Security which emphasises the protection of individuals who 
seek safety and security in their daily lives.  Human security 
encompasses freedom from fear of persecution, intimidation, 
reprisals, terrorism and other forms of systematic violence as 
well as freedom from want of immediate basic needs such 
as food, water, sanitation and shelter.  Importantly, where the 
state lacks the ability to meet the human security needs of the 
population individuals tend to transfer loyalty to any group 
that promises safety and protection, including irregular actors.  
Of note:
• There are obvious overlaps between national and human 
security.  For example, the presence and activities of 
violent groups both exacerbates the fragility of the state 
and undermines the safety and security of the people.
• A stable state must protect the most basic survival 
 needs of both itself and its people.  This includes the 
provision of human security for the population in 
 addition to the control of territory, borders, key assets 
 and sources of revenue.
• A stable state exists within a regional context.  As such 
it may import or export instability across its borders.  
Security issues that are outside of a host nation’s direct 
influence will require regional political engagement.
Human Security  is characterised by: freedom from 
persecution, want and fear; adequate provision 
of essential commodities to sustain life; broader 
environmental security; and the protection of cultural 
values.
6 
Personal Security  is that part of human security which 
ensures protection of an individual from persecution, 
intimidation, reprisals and other forms of systematic 
violence.
National Security  is the traditional understanding 
of security as encompassing ‘the safety of a state or 
organisation and its protection from both external and 
internal threats’.
Physical Security  is that part of National Security that 
relates to national assets and infrastructure.
Security  is the term used in JDP 3-40 to describe the 
combination of human and national security.
0114 Economic and Infrastructure Development.  The 
economic infrastructure, level of natural resources, degree of 
technological development, industrial base, communications 
network and level of government revenue shape the ability 
of the state to provide stable governance; however these 
elements are likely to be less well defined and developed 
within a fragile state.  Note that:
• Wealth determines the quality of life of the people in 
terms of jobs, basic commodities, health, education, 
shelter and energy.
• In a stable, prosperous state, decisions affecting wealth 
creation can be made on the basis of calculated risk 
assessments.  This gives confidence to investors.  The 
degree of predictability in the economic environment 
is a major element in shaping the decisions of 
international and domestic commercial investors, from 
the multinational corporations to the modest market stall 
holder.  Given the increasing mobility of international 
capital, economies that become fundamentally 
unpredictable can rapidly lose their viability.
0115 Governance and the Rule of Law.  A stable state 
has a sustainable political structure that permits the peaceful 
resolution of internal contests for power.  A brittle form of 
stability can exist using brutality and corruption:
• Iraq under Saddam Hussein is an example of such a state.  
However, such states require a constant demonstration of 
the power of the state in order to keep their populations 
in thrall.  The prospect of genuine long-term stable 
governance only occurs when effective influence is 
exercised over a population and territory by methods 
viewed as broadly legitima te by the overwhelming 
majority of the governed.
• The rule of law is fundamental to legitimate governance.  
However, this general principle is likely to be 
institutionalised in varying forms dependent upon the 
social, cultural and political mores of the particular society.  
It should always be acknow ledged that legitimacy is 
ultimately defined by the local population rather than by 
externally imposed criteria.
0116 Societal Relationships.  The three elements above 
encompass the substantive functionalities and competencies 
of the state.  However, the context is also determined by 
the societal relationships that underpin, and are interwoven, 
with these elements.  In a stable state the social, cultural and 
ideological factors that bind society are broadly consistent 
with the manner in which state institutions discharge their 
responsibilities and gain consent from the population.
6. JDP 0-01 British Defence Doctrine (3rd Edition) paragraph 102.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
7
State Fragility State Failure
t (PWFSONFOUJOFQUJUVEFPSDPSSVQUJPO
t #SFBLEPXOPGTPDJBMDPOUSBDU
 MFHJUJNBDZBOENBOEBUF
t -PTTPG(PWFSONFOUNPOPQPMZPO
 MFHJUJNBUFVTFPGWJPMFODF
&DPOPNJD$PMMBQTF
t %FTUSVDUJPOPGJOGSBTUSVDUVSF
t 3JTFPGCMBDLNBSLFUBOEJOBCJMJUZUP
 DPMMFDUTVóDJFOU(PWFSONFOUSFWFOVF
t 6OFNQMPZNFOUBJEEFQFOEFODF
t 1PUFOUJBMGPSIVNBOJUBSJBODSJTFT
4PDJFUBM%JTJOUFHSBUJPOBOE
/BUJPOBM'SBHNFOUBUJPO
t (SJFWBODFJODSFBTJOHMZöOEJOH 
 FYQSFTTJPOJOSFTVSHFOUTFDUBSJBOJTN
t 3JTFPGNBMJHOJSSFHVMBSBDUPST
1PMJUJDBM4FUUMFNFOU
*OTFDVSJUZ
8FBL
(PWFSOBODF
3VMFPG-BX
6OEFS
%FWFMPQNFOU
0117 The Importance of the Political Settlement.  The 
structures of a state are determined by a stable political 
settlement forged by a common understanding, usually 
among elites, that their interests or beliefs are served by 
a particular way of organising political power.  It is the 
achievement of this common understanding, more than 
anything else, which is the most important marker of progress 
in stabilisation.
‘In essence political settlements are in place wherever those with 
the power to threaten state-structures forego that option either 
for reward (which may simply be personal security), for the sake 
of belief, or to wait an opportunity to become the government 
overseeing the existing structures.’ 
7
The political settlement is the mechanism by which states are, 
ultimately, able to undergo non-violent transformations.  This 
understanding of political settlements underpins how elites 
should be defined in a stabilisation context.  Elites are those 
individuals or groups with the power to undermine existing 
political settlements and prevent the establishment of new 
ones.  They can achieve this th rough their ability to mobilise 
resources, decisive groups or broad swathes of the population.
0118 Erosion of the Elements of a Stable State.   
Degradation in any one of these elements of a stable state 
may lead to erosion of the others.  This in turn creates a web 
of poor governance, economic breakdown and insecurity that 
stimulates and exacerbates conflict.  This may cause, or be 
caused by, a collapse in the political settlement that regulates 
key societal and state relationships.  Despite huge contextual 
variations – and every situation is different – there may be a 
downward spiral of state fragility.  This can be characterised 
by decline or disintegration at the junction where security 
and human security, economic development, governance and 
the rule of law meet, leading to the unravelling of the political 
settlement.  Figure 1.2 illustrates this downward spiral.
 
  Figure 1.2 – Fragile States: the Downward Spiral
7. States in Development: Understanding State-Building , a Department for International 
Development (DFID) working paper, 2008, page 7.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
8
SECTION II 
A FRAMEWORK FOR 
UNDERSTANDING STATE 
FRAGILITY
State Instability
0119 Socio-economic, political and environmental factors 
spawn and exacerbate tensions.  The factors that may lead to 
instability can include: disease epidemics; natural disasters; 
chronic economic decline; demographic pressures; climate 
change; scarce resources; mass population movements; 
government weakness; corruption; as well as a fragmented 
sense of identity and nationhood that undermines societal 
bonds.  The biggest driver of instability is conflict and its 
associated violence, which can cause a descending spiral of 
insecurity and ungoverned space.  (Ungoverned space refers 
to areas that are not effectively governed by state authority, 
although they may be subject to a variety of alternative forms 
of governance).  These factors undermine the existing political 
settlement, open the space for hostile groups, and attract 
external actors motivated by profit, ideology or greed.
A State at a Tipping Point – Somalia 1990-92
By 1990 the Somali population had become disillusioned 
with the military totalitarian regime.  Resource shortages, 
rampant inflation, an absence of food and water and 
general deprivation were fuelli ng a thriving black market.  
Government corruption was rife; close monitoring of 
visiting foreigners, harsh exchange control regulations 
and excessive control of the population and media 
became the norm, as did abductions.  There was an 
absence of human security, chronic underdevelopment 
and a lack of effective government authority and the rule 
of law.  This produced a downward spiral resulting in the 
collapse of the moral authority of the government along 
with the political settlement.
In 1991 President Barre was ousted by Ethiopian backed 
northern and southern Somali clans.  The Somali National 
Movement in concert with the northern clans’ elders 
declared independence for Somaliland, the northern part 
of Somalia.  President Ali Mahdi Muhammad was selected 
as interim state president; a fact contested by United 
Somali Congress, the Somali National Movement and the 
Somali Patriotic Movement.  These competing elites were 
locked into a battle over resources and power.  This rift 
soon developed into civil war.
The basis of the conflict was clan allegiances, competition 
for resources and the collapse of state authority.  The 
unravelling of the political settlement saw competing 
elites embroiled in a zero-sum struggle for political and 
economic power.
0120 A collapsing political settlement can also be the 
source, not just the symptom, of state fragility.  If powerful 
elites believe that an existing or proposed political settlement 
is no longer in their interests they may actively seek to 
undermine it.  This may include the use of large-scale violence 
to undermine the authority of the state.  In such circumstances 
exacerbating and prolonging human insecurity, under-
development and weaknesses in governance and the rule of 
law, may be a deliberate and central part of their strategy.
0121 This combination of structural weaknesses and 
deliberate human action produces powerful forces that 
grow in strength and progressively begin to rip the state 
apart.  The purpose of stabilisation, through timely 
engagement, is to reverse the downward spiral of state 
fragility and failure; operations in support of stabilisation 
prevent, contain and then arrest those conditions which 
contributed towards instability.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
9
0122 Insecurity.  One of the defining features of state 
fragility and failure is that, to varying degrees, the capacity 
of the government to contribute effectively to security, is 
degraded.  If the situation has deteriorated to the point that 
foreign military intervention is required, as part of a broad 
stabilisation effort, it is highly likely that the host government 
will be unable to provide the basic structures that protect the 
population from threats to their human security.  Note that:
• Hostile groups may seek to inflict a level of violence 
that weakens and discredits host government security 
forces and destroys the confidence of the population.  
Preventing and reversing security progress underpins their 
strategy.  This task is made easier for hostile groups by the 
fact that such societies are often heavily armed.
• Hostile groups may seek to undermine the states’ 
monopoly on the legitimate use of violence and 
 local security by setting up parallel security and 
governance structures.
0123 Economic Decline.  In fragile or failed states the 
government’s ability to raise and distribute revenue effectively 
is often severely compromised.  This can be caused by a 
combination of: corruption; poor border control; disincentives 
to invest; diversion of human and other capital to the security 
challenge; poverty and an absence of the appropriate 
mechanisms and tax systems.  Thus basic functions, normally 
provided by the state, may depend upon substantial 
international assistance.  In particular:
• Even where significant natural resources exist, these 
may prove to be a driver of instability.  They can provide 
motivation for destabilising actors, both internal and 
external, who seek to control and exploit such resources; 
for example, the trade in conflict diamonds.
• The point at which economic decline stimulates 
challenges to the authority of the state differs from 
country to country.  For example, if long experience of 
poverty generates low expectations of quality of life, 
then the initial standards of living may be quite low and 
even relatively minor progress can boost governmental 
legitimacy in the eyes of the population.  Conversely 
populations that have artificially high expectation may 
challenge the authority of the state and aspirations will 
have to be managed.
• Wherever possible, the host nation government and 
local people should undertake projects and services 
themselves.  Where this is not possible in the short-term, 
the transition of responsibilities to ministries and local 
authorities should be conducted as soon as practicable.  It 
is particularly important that the host nation government 
receives credit for any positive developments.  The 
delivery of projects and services tolerably by the host 
nation, may have more positive, long-term political impact 
than external actors delivering them well.
• Projects and services initiated by international forces, 
organisations and agencies should be self-sustaining.  
Programmes that are not might falter upon the departure 
of the international force, which may contribute to 
instability in the longer term.
0124 Weak Governance and the Rule of Law.  The 
security sector 8 (see Chapter 5) is crucial to effective 
governance and the maintenance of law and order.  Within a 
population’s hierarchy of needs, physical security is essential 
for effective and durable deve lopment and requires well-
managed and competent personnel operating within an 
institutional framework defined by law.  By contrast, a poorly 
managed security sector hampers development, discourages 
investment and helps perpetuate poverty.  In a stabilisation 
situation, there can be important aspects of the conflict which 
can impact on the structure and functioning of the security 
sector.  These include:
• Remnants of a national army or interior forces that are 
opposed to foreign intervention.  These need to be 
reconciled (or, where this is not possible, defeated), noting 
that they may subsequently become the foundation for 
re-building a national security force.
• A broad-based insurgency comprising multiple groups 
that threatens the survival of the state.  This can become a 
magnet for foreign insurgents, as in the case of Bosnia, Iraq 
and Afghanistan.
• The proliferation of predatory armed groups and 
 militias for whom war and criminal activity are their 
 main livelihood.
• The emergence of criminal networks, often with regional 
and international dimensions, protected by armed groups.
• The disappearance of the structures of governance, 
and the emergence of security voids, which provide 
opportunities for competing forms of political authority.
• Institutionalised corruption as the primary means of 
interaction between groups and individuals.
 
8. The Security Sector is inherently linked to the Justice Sector and includes: state and 
non-state armed forces, police and paramilitary units and private military and security 
companies; intelligence and security agencies; the judiciary, prisons, prosecution and 
defence legal authorities as well as traditional (e.g. tribal) justice mechanisms; civil 
management and oversight bodies (including President/Prime Minister, Defence, 
Interior, Justice and Foreign Affairs Ministries and the legislature); and civil society 
including the media, Non-governmental Organisations, professional and religious 
bodies.
9. An example of the Taliban follows paragraph 615.
10. An idea explored in David Kilcullen’s The Accidental Guerrilla , Hurst and Company, 
London 2009.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
10
SECTION III
SOCIETAL CONFLICTS 
IN FRAGILE STATES
Contesting the Political Order
0125 At the heart of the societal conflict is a contest over 
the nature of the political order.  This may be a battle for 
political power between clearly identifiable sides.  However, 
the conflict is likely to involve a kaleidoscope of indistinct 
groups with an array of motivations, goals, tactics and shifting 
allegiances, which may or may not be aligned with national 
boundaries.  Causes can range from the deep-seated and 
strategic, to the temporary and local, modified as need and 
circumstance dictate.  Motivations may include a sense of 
victimhood, alienation, humiliation, resentment, honour or 
revenge.  Some groups feel a need to challenge modernity, 
or express loyalty to a clan, tribe, religious or ideological 
cause.  Others, engaged in criminality, will wish to prevent 
or reduce interference in th eir activities, and may not be 
ideologically driven.
0126 Developing an understanding of the potentially 
multiple motivations, goals, tactics and allegiances of the key 
conflict groups is indispensable for a successful campaign.  
If these aspects are assumed rather than studied in depth, 
it is likely to result in inappropriate and counter-productive 
operations.  In short, understanding what motivates key 
conflict groups, in particular operational contexts, may be 
central to designing measures to counter them.  A key part 
is an acceptance that the ideas that drive such groups may 
be different from Western norms, but could still be seen as 
attractive and legitimate by sections of the society in conflict.
0127 Local elites usually seek to adopt persuasive causes 
to mobilise support, often based on real problems or 
unresolved contradictions inherent to any society.  They 
seek to situate their activities within a compelling narrative 
that attempts to explain and justify their actions while 
simultaneously de-legitimising the motivations and 
behaviours of opponents.  For example, such groups often 
inflict punishment on petty criminals and pass judgement 
on disputes within the community to establish themselves as 
alternative providers of justice.  This is designed to both gain 
favour from the population and illustrate the failure of state 
justice mechanisms.
9 
0128 Competing groups will seek to influence the 
population by communicating a vision of the future, 
commonly referred to as a narrative.  Building such a narrative 
often involves the strategic manipulation of identity.  All 
individuals possess multiple identities.  These may relate to 
regional, national, religious, ethnic, clan, tribal or family forms 
of self-identification.  Others relate to occupation, beliefs or 
interests.  Of the many identities individuals possess, some are 
more important than others in shaping their political attitudes 
or behaviour.  It is these politically significant identities that 
hostile groups seek to manipulate as part of a wider narrative 
that attempts to create belief in an us versus them story 
that paints those seeking to counter their activities as the 
oppressor.  Consequently, developing a unifying counter-
narrative that convinces key audiences and undermines the 
hostile groups’ portrayal is a vital aspect of stabilisation.  This is 
examined in greater depth in Chapter 3.
0129 Boundaries between groups are usually blurred, with 
fluid membership and multiple allegiances. 10  Specific labelling 
is often misleading.  For example, members of the host 
nation government may also transition in and out of irregular 
groups.  Such linkages between political power and illicit 
activity particularly undermine the development of effective 
governance and the rule of law.  However, their fluidity also 
provides opportunities to change the campaign strategic 
geometry, as in the case of the Sons of Iraq programme.
0130 Hostile elements exploit a population where poverty 
and a lack of effective governance make the population 
vulnerable to coercion or inducement.  Yet they sometimes 
provide a measure of physical and economic security for a 
community, as well as a range of social support mechanisms.  
An example of this can be seen in the actions of Hizbollah 
in Southern Lebanon.  At other times coercion, terror and 
intimidation can be the main levers of influence.  Usually, 
however, a combination of coer cive and supportive methods 
will be adopted.  These tend to concentrate on arresting 
or reversing any momentum in  security and stabilisation 
provision established by the authorities.
0131  Central to the societal conflict, there is a battle to 
exert control over the security environment.  At its most 
demanding, this could include countering a brutal 
insurgency.  Doubt in the ability of the state to achieve 
this contributes to fragility.  In order to prevent, arrest, and 
eventually reverse this fragility, hostile elements should be 
thwarted and, just as importantly, seen to be thwarted.  The 
host nation government should be portrayed as the architect 
of any success.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
11
Evolving Threats
0132 Warfare is an enduring element in the international 
system although its character changes over time.  A 
feature of this evolution is the emergence – some argue 
re-emergence – of compound, or hybrid threats.  These 
occur where states or non-state actors choose to exploit all 
modes of war simultaneously using advanced conventional 
weapons, irregular tactics, terrorism and disruptive criminality 
to destabilise an existing order.  Such threats emanate from 
state and non-state actors that have access to some of the 
sophisticated weapons and systems normally fielded by 
regular forces.  Conflicts are increasingly characterised by 
a blend of traditional and irregular tactics, decentralised 
planning and execution, and state or non-state actors who 
may use both simple and sophisticated technologies in new 
ways.  Access to advanced technology and weaponry has 
given some non-state groups formidable capabilities such as 
surface-to-air missiles, chemical, biological, radiological and 
nuclear and thermobaric technologies.  An example of this is 
Hezbollah’s use of an anti-ship cruise missile against an Israeli 
Navy Corvette in 2006.
0133 The power of informatio n and the revolution in 
technology is a significant enabler in the activity of current 
and future adversaries.  Technology has expanded the 
operating space through mass  communication, creating 
the potential for the cyber mobilisation of dispersed 
communities.
11  Groups have seized on the globalisation 
of information to execute the strategic communications 
campaigns that are central to their activities.  The content 
and delivery of information has therefore shifted from the 
mass propaganda of revolutionary insurgents, such as Mao, 
to highly tailored campaigns.  Adversaries have been quick to 
exploit the mobile phone, internet and social networking sites 
for recruiting, training, educatin g, motivating and controlling 
new members.  Information now permits targeted individual 
mobilisation; an alternative to the old mass mobilisation.
12 
0134 Individuals and groups are a shifting, fluid network 
of disparate people, some of whom specialise in particular 
functions or tasks.  In insurgencies in particular, clusters 
of cells or teams gravitate towards each other in informal 
communities of interest – to exchange intelligence and 
weaponry, reinforce a commonly held narrative, train and 
conduct attacks – and then disperse, perhaps never to meet 
again.  Some groups employ a version of mission command 
based on intent, ideas and ideology being passed through 
both the virtual domain and by word of mouth.  Insurgency is 
no longer bounded by the aim of self determination, as was 
the case with the Peoples Liberation Organisation, ETA
13  or 
Irish Republican Army.  Instability emanating from fragile 
states and from diaspora and sympathetic populations in 
developed states can take the form of a franchised, globalised 
insurgency whose goals encompass profound changes to 
international order.
0135 States may choose to convert their conventional 
units into irregular formations and adopt new tactics.  They 
may also be quick to cooperate with non-state actors where 
they see mutual benefit.  Adaptive adversaries, therefore, 
combine various types of warfare in the same time and 
place.  Consequently, attempts to counter them are unlikely 
to be successful if pursued in a linear, sequential or purely 
military manner.  Evolving threats are likely to demand an agile 
and adaptive response.  When warfare or conflict, however 
manifested, impacts a fragile state and its population, 
a comprehensive approach that combines the military, 
development, governance and rule of law measures of 
different organisations and nations is one means of achieving 
this.  This theme is developed further in Chapter 2.
 
11. David Kilcullen, Counter Insurgency Redux , Survival Volume 48 Winter 2006/7 page 113.
12. Thomas X. Hammes, Fourth Generation Warfare Evolves, Fifth Emerges , Military Review, 
May-June 2007.
13. ETA: Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (English: Basque Homeland and Freedom).
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

A POLITICAL PERSPECTIVE 
BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE ADAM INGRAM MP
Adam Ingram served at the heart of the UK’s government 
as Minister of State Northern Ireland Office 1997 – 2001 
and as Minister of State for the Armed Forces 2001 – 2007.  
Here he reflects upon the political/military interface.
It was Edmund Burke, the 18th 
Century politician, who when 
asked, “Do you lead public 
opinion or follow it?” said 
“I meet it on the way.”
The very nature of our recent experiences, whether during the 
40 years in Northern Ireland, the Balkans, Iraq, or Afghanistan, 
prove that dictum in large measure. Initially, through military 
force or presence, we can try to lead to a conclusion by 
occupying the battle-space by denying the enemy real 
room for manoeuvre, but any war fought amongst the 
people means that military commanders and Government 
Ministers must be adaptable, aware and open to the changing 
dynamics of the political battle-space.
General Rupert Smith neatly defines it in the following way:
“Rather than war and peace, there is no predefined sequence, nor 
is peace necessarily either the starting or end point: conflicts are 
resolved, but not necessarily confrontations.”
This elongated nature of modern conflict constantly presents 
new challenges which may prove to be a force for change or 
a force for missed opportunities.  When Governments commit 
to a campaign the political objectives will be set whilst military 
commanders will decide the ways and means to achieve 
them.  And, while there will be a continuum in the military 
command, ethos, and approach, with neat points of handover, 
this does not necessarily apply in the political sphere.  
Ministers from the lead Departments involved in a stabilisation 
or COIN campaign – the FCO, DFID and the MOD – will invest 
a large amount of time, understanding the complexities of the 
country and region in question.  Yet, the vagaries of political 
life mean that they can be here today and gone tomorrow.  
There could even be a change of Government at a critical 
point in a campaign.  The sophisticated nature of present 
day insurgents will be acutely aware of this and they will 
not be slow in exploiting this political weak point of 
democratic societies.
Similar effort will be put in, both by in-theatre commanders, 
diplomats and others to establish good points of contact 
with the emerging leadership in the host country.  While 
stable democracies can be subject to rapid and sometimes 
unpredicted change it applies even more so to the fragile 
make-up of the host country political relationships. So, no 
matter how sophisticated or structured the comprehensive 
plan is to deal with the creation or re-assembly of the new 
state, the political pack of cards can topple over night.
The other reality of modern life is that no matter how justified 
military action is, say after 9/1 1 or after the brutal dictatorship 
of Saddam Hussein, ignoring 12 years of UN resolutions, there 
will be a sizeable domestic and international opposition to the 
actions taken.  This will be used and led by a rapacious media 
which will exploit any failings either in the political arena 
or the military one.  It probably started with Suez and has 
crescendo-ed ever since.
All of these ingredients, either in part or as a whole are the 
risks which have to be taken into account by Governments, 
Ministers and politicians when they commit our Armed Forces 
to actions in foreign fields.  The question is: how are these risks 
to be accommodated?
First, the planning for any mission must be truly 
comprehensive.  Once the political will has been determined, 
all Departments which have a role to play, and this will 
extend beyond the Ministry of Defence and the Foreign 
and Commonwealth Office, should be part of the planning 
framework.  The military configuration should be decided 
on the basis of what is required, with built-in flexibility, and 
the civilian contribution should equally be constructed from 
the outset. It is imperative that a vacuum is not allowed to 
develop at any stage in the campaign; there must be constant 
momentum in the process as continuity reassures the host 
population.  This means that the overall civilian component 
should be ready from day one.  The key to stabilisation is a 
12
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

well-resourced capacity building machine that can help to 
deliver the trappings of a functioning state.  The military can 
hold the ground and provide a measure of security; it is the 
role of the civilian component to deliver the development 
and governance.
Second, military commanders must be truly sensitive to local 
needs.  They should be alert to the changing demands of the 
insurgents and be prepared to accept that not all insurgents 
are in it to the death.  My experience over 10 years as a 
Minister in Northern Ireland and in Defence informs me that at 
some point the host population gets tired of the killing.  They 
may want the insurgents to be part of the future or they may 
not.  The key is to be receptive to that point of departure and 
to build on it.  Those closest to the action are perhaps best 
placed to pick up the signals, to report on them and to insist 
that they are listened to.
This leads me to my third point, the need for mutual 
understanding and respect be tween military commanders 
at all levels, and Ministers.  To  deliver stabilisation elsewhere 
means there must be a stable framework at home.  It is vital 
that unity of effort is maintained if our adversaries are not to 
exploit differences between us.  In private, Ministers welcome 
the advice of a well-informed critical friend, but in public, such 
commentary can undermine the campaign.  Ministers will be 
driven by a different timeline to military commanders.
The political environment, both at home and in-theatre, 
rather than events on the battlefield, can sometimes drive 
timing or sequencing of efforts and allocation of resources.  
Understandably, this can be frustrating for those undertaking 
difficult and dangerous operations.
In summary, Ministers need to balance a broad range of 
political risks in the planning, initiation and conduct of COIN 
and stabilisation campaigns.  Success requires some give and 
take from all elements.  It should not be seen as a one-way 
process of concession to political priorities – at times the 
military element will drive the politics and sometimes vice-
versa.  As Burke said, if military commanders and Ministers 
understand the complexities and meet them on the way, 
success can follow.  Planning for all conceivable eventualities is 
a necessity but the plans must not obscure the vision.
13
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
HMG defines a stabilisation environment as one in which:
• Conflict is severe enough to undermine the 
fundamental relationship between the state and 
society where the state lacks the will or capacity to 
meet the security needs of its population.
• There is an identified need to address the root causes 
of conflict and deal with the immediate security 
problem.  Ordinary mechanisms for the delivery of the 
sustainable development that may be necessary to 
address these causes are broken or severely damaged, 
either across the state or in a significant parts.
• The ordinary military mech anisms for id entifying and 
neutralising security threats must be complemented 
by the need to pursue a workable political settlement 
and create entry points for sustainable development.
• There is a need for an additional security presence.  
The presence may be in the form of an army or police 
force and may be foreign or national.
Stabilisation objectives may include:
• To prevent or contain violent conflict; by coercive as 
well as political intervention and the commitment to 
address the causes of underlying tensions.
• Protect people, key assets and institutions; a security 
situation to allow people to begin conducting their 
daily lives and for government to function.
• Promote political processes for stability; seek political 
settlements which encourage power and resources to 
be contested peacefully without violence.
• Prepare for longer term development and address 
the causes of conflict; create entry points for the long 
term development that achieve sustainable stability.
The Stabilisation Unit exists primarily to: support planning 
by ensuring that Her Majesty’s Government (HMG) 
Departments establish a common aim for intervention, 
a single assessment of the problem, common objectives 
and clear lines of responsibility  for delivering success; that 
lessons are learned from such complex environments 
and applied in future stabilis ation interventions; and, to 
select, develop, train, depl oy and manage civilians for 
stabilisation environments.
Humanitarian, development an d stabilisation activities 
often share operational space. But although the activities 
may appear similar, the guiding principles are different:
• Stabilisation has explicitly political aims and is 
undertaken in pursuit of the national interest.
• Humanitarian assistance is strictly impartial.
• Development,  for the UK, always focuses on poverty.
Stabilisation: The UK Stabilisation Unit’s View
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

‘The Government is committed 
to tackling national security in a 
comprehensive way, and this is 
why plans are in place to tackle 
the causes of instability, and 
respond to those groups who 
pose threats.’
Cabinet Office National Security Strategy – June 2009
Section I   Intervening in Fragile States
 Setting Goals: Choosing Ends, Ways and Means
 The Range of Military Responses
Section II   The Evolution of the UK Approach to Stabilisation
 Countering Insurgency
 Supporting Peace Operations
 Recent Intervention Operations 
 Stabilisation: The Need for a New Approach
Section III  The UK Approach to Stabilisation
 The Stabilisation Model
 Building Human and National Security
 Fostering Host Government Capacity and Legitimacy
 Stimulating Economic Development
 Permissiveness
Section IV  Shaping the Key Conflict Relationship
 Communication and Influence
 The Key Conflict Relationship
Section V  Working With Partners
 The Command and Control Challenge in Stabilisation
 The Host Nation Government
 Integrated  Approaches
 Transitions
A Diplomat’s Perspective – Sir Jeremy Greenstock GCMG
0201 This chapter begins by outlining the purpose of 
intervention into fragile states and the evolution of the UK 
approach through experience in Counter-insurgency (COIN), 
Peace Support Operations (PSOs) and recent intervention 
operations.  It then builds a model of stabilisation that 
is developed from the state model in Chapter 1 before 
describing the key conflict relationship and how military 
activity can be used to influence this relationship.  It finishes 
by examining some of the issues that arise in coordinating 
a coherent multinational and multi-agency response to the 
challenges of stabilisation.
Stabilisation.  The process that supports states which 
are entering, enduring or emerging from conflict, in order 
to prevent or reduce violence; protect the population 
and key infrastructure; promote political processes 
and governance structures, which lead to a political 
settlement that institutionalises non-violent contests for 
power; and prepares for sustainable social and economic 
development.  (JDP 3-40)
Peace Support Operations.  An operation that 
impartially makes use of diplomatic, civil and military 
means, normally in pursuit of UN Charter purposes and 
principles, to restore or maintain peace.  Such operations 
may include conflict prevention, peacemaking, peace 
enforcement, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and/or 
humanitarian operations.  (AAP-6)
Insurgency.  An insurgency is organised, violent 
subversion used to effect or prevent political control, as a 
challenge to established authority.
Counter-insurgency.  Those military, law enforcement, 
political, economic, psychological and civic actions taken 
to defeat or contain insurgency, while addressing root 
causes.
Irregular Activity.  Irregular Activity is the use, or 
threat, of force by irregular fo rces, groups or individuals, 
frequently ideologically or criminally motivated, to effect 
or prevent change as a challenge to governance and 
authority.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition)) 
CHAPTER 2
THE STABILISATION OF 
FRAGILE STATES
14
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

15
Note:  Irregular Activity could include a mix of insurgency, 
terrorism, criminality and disorder.
Countering Irregular Activity.  Countering Irregular 
Activity incorporates military activity with the other 
instruments of power within a comprehensive approach, 
that deal with the threats to security from irregular 
activity, while building go vernance and authority and 
addressing the underlying causes.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
A Comprehensive Approach.  Commonly understood 
principles and collaborative processes that enhance the 
likelihood of favourable and enduring outcomes within a 
particular situation.  (BDD (3rd Edition)).
Note: The delivery of a comprehensive approach goes well 
beyond technical cooperation.  It entails integrated and 
cooperative efforts directed towards a shared goal.  The 
philosophy is exemplified in the Iraq Integrated Campaign 
Plan motto ‘One Team One Fight’.
 
SECTION I 
INTERVENING IN 
FRAGILE STATES
Setting Goals: Choosing Ends, Ways and Means
0202 Globalisation now makes terror, insecurity and 
instability more readily exportable than ever before.  This 
renders concepts of wars of choice and discretionary 
operations more problematical.  By definition, globalised 
security threats do not remain in isolated geographical locales 
waiting to be addressed by intervening states.  As recent 
history has shown, such threats manifest themselves directly, 
suddenly and where least expected.
0203 Our contribution to stabilisation may vary, but will 
always be determined by UK’s strategic interests, obligations 
and national security imperatives.  In some circumstances 
stabilisation may entail the buttressing of an existing 
political order, in others it may entail the shaping of interim 
arrangements following a crisis, while in others it may entail 
whole-scale state building following the collapse or removal 
of the previous regime.  This rationale is fundamentally 
different from Peace Support, Humanitarian Assistance and 
Disaster Relief Operations, which are based on impartiality.  
While some of the activities will be similar, the purpose of 
stabilisation is explicitly political; stability per se is unlikely to be 
the sole motivation for UK involvement.
0204 There are two broad criteria that the UK Government 
will assess when determining the extent to which a particular 
crisis becomes a priority for action: first, the degree of impact 
on the UK’s national security or strategic interests and second, 
our ability to mitigate that impact by intervention.  Each 
case will be judged against these broad determinants.  The 
more direct the impact of a crisis, and the clearer our ability 
to mitigate this impact, the greater likelihood there is of UK 
intervention.  Some generic examples of strategic interests 
and capacities are given above.
The Range of Military Responses
0205 In support of national security objectives, and 
invariably within a wider cross-government approach, UK 
Armed Forces provide critical capabilities that can support 
stability, tackle threats at source and respond to crises 
overseas before they impact upon our national security.  To 
provide this capability the military are able to undertake a 
wide range of roles, at varying scales, including:
• Regional Engagement and International Security 
Cooperation.  In many circumstances instability within a 
state or region can be reduced by host governments and 
regional organisations with limited external support from 
the wider international community.  In such a scenario 
the UK may choose to contribute to a limited-objective 
International Security Cooperation (ISC) initiative such as 
arms control, counter-drugs operations, military capacity 
building or Security Sector Reform (SSR).  Operation 
BASILICA in 2000, which involved the retraining and 
re-equipping of the armed forces of Sierra Leone, is one 
example.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILIZATION: THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
Possible Strategic Interests
• The crisis impacts on UK national security or 
international policy objectives.
• The crisis has significant economic implications for 
the UK.
• There is a humanitarian crisis requiring intervention as 
part of international obligations.
• There is a significant impact on British forces already 
deployed to theatre.
Capacity Considerations
• The likelihood and ability of others in the international 
community to act.
• Understanding of the conflict and the likelihood of a 
successful outcome.
• The ability to provide sufficient resources for the 
required duration.
• The impact of intervention on other crises and interests.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
16
• Counter Weapons of Mass Effect Proliferation.  In 
some circumstances instability may be the catalyst for the 
proliferation of Weapons of Mass Effect (WME) technology 
into the hands of either belligerent states or armed non-
state groups such as al-Qaeda.  In this scenario it is likely 
that UK national security interests and imperatives will 
be engaged within a counter-proliferation operation.  
Over the period 1992 to 2003 the Royal Navy joined 
forces with the United States Navy to conduct maritime 
interdiction operations against vessels bound for Iraq in 
the Persian Gulf.  This was to enforce the UN sanctions 
against Iraq, including the pr evention of the importation 
of conventional or nuclear weapons technology.
• Deterrence or Containment.  Instability within one 
state may provide a haven for groups intent on attacking 
the UK, its allies or its interests.  Where this threat may be 
effectively deterred or contained, the UK may choose to 
participate in international operations designed to reduce 
the impact of the activities of these groups.  The no-fly 
zones established by the US, the UK and France after the 
1991 Gulf War to stop Saddam’s repression of Kurdish 
people in the north of Iraq, and the Shia population in the 
south, are examples.  Also, air and maritime operations in 
the Arabian Gulf and Horn of Africa region have been 
 used to interdict the flow of foreign fighters between 
unstable states.
• Stabilisation in Support of Wider State-Building.  In 
some circumstances state in stability engages the UK’s 
interests or obligations to such a degree that deterrence 
will be ineffective.  Here, the ability to conduct a spectrum 
of intervention operations – including high intensity 
warfighting, usually as part of a coalition – will be a 
more appropriate response.  The International Security 
Assistance Force (ISAF) operation, conducted by NATO as 
part of wider stabilisation an d state-building initiatives 
within Afghanistan, is an example.
0206 The ability to undertake this range of roles affords the 
UK Government choices for how to use the military instrument 
of power in support of national security objectives.  The scale 
of military commitment can range through a single adviser, a 
single unit conducting ISC, to a sizeable Joint Force (see Figure 
2.1).  A regional military presence can be used in support 
of all levels of commitment within the affected country 
itself and in some circumstances can be applied as the only 
military activity in support of diplomatic efforts to prevent 
violent conflict.  Clearly, an early commitment to help prevent 
a downward spiral in a fragile state will be considerably less 
onerous for intervening forces than the scale necessary to 
facilitate restoration.  ISC activity to prevent will normally 
demand a coordinated rather than comprehensive effort.  
Equally clearly, the least intrusive form of response, consistent 
with the achievement of national objectives and policy 
imperatives, should be the goal and intervention operations 
requiring significant resources and persistence are invariably 
the choice of last resort.  Activity to restore will always require a 
comprehensive approach.
 
0207 While civilian statesmen, military commanders 
and inter-agency partners share a responsibility for the 
development of strategy, ultimately both the decision to 
intervene, and the nature of that intervention, will be decided 
by the Government of the day.  It may choose to focus on the 
exportable threats of instability.  Or it may elect to buttress 
indigenous security forces so that they can contain or defeat it 
themselves.  Where the UK Government decides to intervene 
with a sizeable Joint Force, probably as part of a multinational 
coalition, it selects the most complex response option which 
carries the greatest amount of risk.  It is this response option 
which Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-40 addresses.
0208 Recognising the characteristics of stabilisation, the 
UK codified a new Military Task in 2008, Military Assistance 
Regional Military Presence and Advice
Advisers
Prevent Restore
Training 
Teams
Individual 
Military 
Capabilities
Joint
Force
Deployment
  Figure 2.1 – The Graduated Range of Military Commitment
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
17
to Stabilisation and Developmen t (MASD); JDP 3-40 provides 
Joint operational doctrine for this Military Task.
Military Assistance to Stabilisation and Development 
Operations
MASD operations are likely to follow an intervention 
operation or a peace enforcement deployment.  The 
security situation may vary from non-benign to limited 
permissiveness, while compliance is likely to be highly 
variable and the likelihood of disruption high.  UK 
forces will normally be acting as part of a coalition with 
responsibility to support the recognised governing 
entity.  These operations will tend to be complex and 
dynamic requiring a broad spectrum of military effects.  
The intensity will be variable across the theatre in time 
and space, characterised by a campaign to counter-
irregular activity conducted initially by coalition forces, 
but handing off to the developed local security forces 
as soon as practicable.  These operations will require 
a high degree of force protection.  The widest range 
of coordinated stabilisation and reconstruction is to 
be expected, ranging from security assistance for 
civilian personnel through to, and including, limited 
reconstruction activity delivered by UK forces and 
extensive capacity building for local security forces.  
Engendering a secure environment through localised 
consent will allow Non-governmental Organisations 
(NGO) and Other Government Departments (OGDs) to 
take on the majority of this activity.  These operations are 
likely to be enduring in nature.
 
SECTION II
THE EVOLUTION OF 
THE UK APPROACH TO 
STABILISATION
0209 The purpose of this section is to set out the 
provenance of the British approach to stabilisation within 
UK experiences of 20th Century COIN, PSO and more 
recent interventions.  It allows current operations to be 
seen in perspective.
Countering Insurgency
0210 Some previous UK COIN doctrine is still relevant today.  
For those who wish further background reading, a short 
primer on the subject can be found on the Development, 
Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) website.
1  It provides a 
historically-based overview of British COIN practice and traces 
the evolution of the British approach to COIN through 
a discussion of key themes and a series of case studies.
Insurgency
Insurgency is organised violent subversion used to effect 
or prevent political control, as a challenge to established 
authority.  (JDP 3-40)
0211 British Experience of Insurgency and COIN.  There 
are three phases of British experience in relation to small wars; 
conquest; internal policing or control; and colonial withdrawal.  
Stabilisation today is not necessarily the same as any of these, 
but they have shaped our development and thinking and 
merit some consideration.  Early encounters included wars 
against American revolutionaries, Cetewayo’s Zulus, the 
Mahdi’s forces in Sudan and the Great Indian Mutiny of 1857.  
Fighting these wars called for ingenuity, adaptability and, 
crucially, sustainability where distance and terrain presented 
major challenges.  While most campaigns featured some 
elements of guerrilla activity, the decisive battles were largely 
fought between formed bodies of combatants.  C. E. Callwell’s 
book Small Wars, first published in 1896 is perhaps the 
definitive account of the tactics, techniques and procedures of 
the day.  Although it provides context, it is at odds with much 
of the later 20th Century classical COIN (see paragraph 217).  
This is because a characteristic of classical COIN is an emphasis 
on winning the politico-strategic battle while containing at the 
tactical level.  In contrast, Callwell saw regular armies as unlikely 
to win the politico-strategic battle and therefore concluded 
that the decision had to be sought at the tactical level.
0212 The South African War (1899-1902) had a major impact 
on the British Army.  Following the defeat of Boer main 
forces the war regressed from conventional battles into a 
protracted and bitter guerrilla campaign.  In this second phase 
the Boers operated in highly mobile mounted detachments 
(commandos) using raiding tactics.  Kitchener’s adaptations 
to the Army’s operational concept were largely credited with 
defeating Boer guerrillas during this second phase.  These 
adaptations were based on population and resource control 
measures (farm burning, detention and enforced relocations) 
which helped separate guerrillas from their support networks, 
and large-scale sweeps, and cor don and search operations.  
This formed the basis of UK COIN doctrine in the first half of 
the 20th Century.
1. www.mod.uk/DefenceInternet/MicroSite/DCDC/OurPublications/JDWP/
JointDoctrinePublicationjdp340SecurityAndStabilisationTheMilitaryContribution.htm
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
18
0213 The high-water mark of British COIN experience 
coincided with the retreat from Empire in the last half of the 
20th Century.  Campaigns include Malaya (1948-1960), Kenya 
(1952-1956), Cyprus (1955-1960) and Oman (1965-1975).  Often 
referred to as classical COIN, these operations have provided 
many of the lessons that informed the Northern Ireland 
campaign (1969-2007) and current British COIN doctrine.  The 
Malayan emergency represented a turning point.  Large-scale 
sweeps as well as cordon and search operations inherited 
from Kitchener’s tactics in South Africa initially produced 
poor results and were replaced by an ever-increasing reliance 
on deep patrols cued by improved intelligence.  A feature of 
these new tactics was the use of parachute and helicopter 
insertions deep into the jungle and the offering of substantial 
cash sums to induce senior insurgent figures to defect.  At 
the operational level, General Sir Gerald Templer initiated the 
Briggs Plan which provided unity of command across civil 
government, police and military (the so-called ‘three-legged 
stool’) and the resettlement of Chinese squatters in protected 
villages (the so-called ‘expanding ink spot’) which later formed 
the basis of the American Clear-Hold-Build  approach.
0214 Thompson’s Five Principles of COIN.  From his 
experience in Malaya, Sir Robert Thompson, the Permanent 
Minister of Defence for Malaya, formulated what have come to 
be known as Thompson’s Five Principles of COIN:
• The government must have a clear political aim: to 
establish and maintain a free, independent and united 
country which is politically and economically stable and 
viable.
• The government must function in accordance with the law.
• The government must have an overall plan.
• The government must give priority to defeating the 
political subversion, not the guerrillas.
• In the guerrilla phase of an emergency, a government 
must secure its base areas first.
0215 Insurgent Tactics and Critical Requirements.  
Experience in COIN campaigns over the past half century has 
also yielded increased knowledge of the tactics and critical 
requirements of insurgent movements.  Insurgents have 
adopted practices from a wide variety of sources.  There is 
much evidence of influence by Mao Tse-Tung (protracted 
war), Che Guevara ( foco theory), Marighela (urban insurgency), 
and 19th century European nihilists (propaganda of the deed 
and word).  Some insurgents appear to adhere to such classic 
forms of doctrine.  Others develop their own approaches and 
adopt a lessons learnt process from similar operations and 
open source material.  Insurgents use a variety of tactics that 
may include:
• Provocation.  Insurgents carry out acts deliberately 
designed to prompt opponents, whether coalition forces, 
governments or sectarian rivals, to over-react in ways that 
alienate local populations, increase instability and provide 
propaganda value.
• Intimidation.  Insurgents seek to terrify and coerce those 
members of the population, or elements within their 
own communities, who cooperate with, or support, the 
government or coalition forces.  Furthermore, they may 
attempt to terrify and coerce members of the security 
forces, whether local or international, and 
 civilian administrators.
• Protraction.  Insurgents attempt to draw out the conflict 
to avoid decisive confrontation with strong security forces, 
control their own losses, sap the will of counterinsurgents, 
and preserve their strength after setbacks.
• Exhaustion.  Through use of carefully targeted attacks, 
insurgents seek to soak up security forces and 
 government agencies in actions that require major effort, 
but do not significantly progress their mission, for example 
force protection tasks, and the protection of facilities 
 and infrastructure.
“All we have to do is send two mujahidin to the furthest 
point east to raise the cloth on which is written al-Qaeda, in 
order to make their [US] generals race there to cause America 
to suffer human, economic and political losses without 
achieving for it anything of note…bleeding America to the 
point of bankruptcy.”
Osama bin Laden 2004
0216 Insurgencies have a number of critical requirements:
• Leadership.  Insurgencies require charismatic and 
credible leaders to persuade people to join the group 
 and to motivate and drive the existing membership.  They 
may exert direct control or operate indirectly by mobilising 
popular support.  The larger the group the more difficult 
it will be to exercise central control without compromising 
security.
• A Cause.  Insurgents require a cause, some animating 
grievance which a charismatic leader can exploit.  The 
stated cause may be a useful cover for a less palatable 
strategic end-state. 
• Tacit Consent.  While most insurgencies can survive 
without a large base of active support from within the 
population, they cannot progress without the tacit 
consent of a major section of the population.  They seek 
to lever this through a mix of coercion, subversion and 
persuasion of the population.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
19
• Recruits.  Without the ability to maintain a flow of 
 willing recruits, either from within the local population or 
foreign fighters, insurgents will be vulnerable to attrition, 
as in the case of the remnants of the communist insurgent 
Malayan Races Liberation Army, which was reduced to 
a fugitive existence, isolated and irrelevant, in the Thai 
border region.
• Weapons.  In many conflict-riven societies weapons are 
freely available and so cutting supply (as was the approach 
in Northern Ireland) may be impractical.
• Safe Havens.  Insurgents require areas where they can 
rest, regroup, train, resupply and plan their operations, 
 and where they may declare their new political order, as 
was nearly the case when al-Qaeda declared the Islamic 
State of Iraq, centred in Al-Anbar Province.  These will 
be areas in which counter-insurgents are operationally 
constrained.  Cyberspace is a partial safe haven in which 
insurgents can recruit, mobilise, raise and move funds, and 
advance their narrative.
• Essential Supplies.  Food, water, medical supplies, 
combat supplies and means of communication are vital 
for insurgents.  These will tend to be drawn from the 
local population, or by appropriating humanitarian aid.  If 
the flow of these supplies is disrupted or uncertain, the 
insurgency will be undermined.
• Intelligence.  Insurgents require knowledge of the 
population in order to target, coerce, intimidate and recruit 
as well as provide counter-intelligence to 
 avoid penetration.
• Finance.  Although insurgencies are inexpensive relative 
to costs of countering them, they rely on funds generated 
from two broad sources; illegal activities and donations:
• Illegal activities can include trafficking, fraud, money 
laundering, kidnapping, extortion, theft, or any other 
areas likely to turn a profit.  This has 2 important 
effects beyond simply providing insurgents with 
resources.  First, it undermines government revenue, 
authority and legitimacy, particularly if government 
officials become implicated in the activities.  Second, 
it leads insurgents into pacts of convenience with 
organised criminal networks.
• Donations come from supportive communities or 
foreign governments motivated by either ethnic, 
ideological, religious, or geopolitical interests.  Such 
funding can be overt or channelled through a web of 
connections designed to conceal the source and route 
of the donations.
0217 The Characteristics of Classical COIN.  Following 
the success of COIN campaigns in the last half century 
and an increasing understand ing of insurgent tactics and 
vulnerabilities, British COIN doctrine has coalesced around a 
familiar set of characteristics.
Characteristics of Classical British COIN
• Emphasis on winning the politico-strategic battle 
while containing at the tactical level.
• The doctrine of minimum force, meaning ‘the 
minimum force necessary to achieve the aim’ .
• Joint unified command structures integrating civil 
government, police and military.
• Intelligence-based operations including extensive use 
of turned enemy personnel.
• Continuous offensive pressure on the insurgents by all 
elements of the security forces.
• Small unit, patrol-based offensive tactics, but 
supported by a large security force maximising its 
agility and ability to concentrate force provided by air 
manoeuvre and protected ground mobility.
• Population/resource control, and self-defence 
measures, to isolate the insurgent from the support 
of the population and to enhance the security of that 
population.
• Establishing, clearing, securing and extending base 
areas to provide safe zones.
• Emphasis on winning hearts and minds, and on 
Psychological Operations (PSYOPS) in general.
 
2.  The UN Charter included the concept of assigned military forces and a Military Staff 
Committee that was to be formed from the Chiefs of Staff of the UN Security Council 
permanent members.
3. The term peacekeeping  is not in the UN Charter and was first adopted following the 
deployment of a UN force to the Sinai in 1956 (UN Emergency Force) to secure a ceasefire 
between Egyptian and Israeli forces.
4. The habit of describing peace support roles in terms of the chapter divisions of the UN 
Charter had become the norm.  With no clear legal status for peace enforcement  the term 
Chapter VI and a half was coined in an attempt to rationalise the stance.
5. Although the inherent right to use force in self-defence is well grounded in law, the 
range of terms – minimum force; minimum necessary force; restraint in the use of force 
(Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.4.1  Peace Support Operations ) have been prone to wide 
interpretation.
6. Part of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) deployment.
7. Op eration AGRICOL A .
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
20
Supporting Peace Operations
0218 Post World War II.  Following major wars there have 
often been attempts to regulate the behaviour of states.  
The UN Charter represents the most ambitious attempt 
to establish a global system for inter-state relationships.  
However, the UN’s ability to influence global governance has 
been constrained by an inability to empower the organisation 
as it was originally intended.  There have been increasing 
demands for action to defend individual rights and freedoms, 
resulting in successive shifts in international conduct and the 
continual evolution of our approach to operations.
0219 The Cold War.  Although the UN Charter envisaged 
an international enforcement capability 2,  Cold War paralysis 
prevented its delivery.  Therefore the UN continues to depend 
upon the will of member nations to fund and participate in 
operations for which it provides the mandate.  The UN was 
able to moderate international aggression throughout the 
Cold War by mounting what came to be known as traditional 
or Nordic Peacekeeping
3 operations.  Consent (to be given by 
all parties to the dispute before intervention) and neutrality of 
the national contingents were fundamentals to this approach.  
The existence of large standing forces during the Cold War 
helped enable these UN missions.  Notable successes were 
achieved during this era, but this period of relative stability 
ended abruptly, with major implications for roles, capacity, 
flexibility and reach demanded of the UN.
0220 Post Cold War – Peace Enforcement.  After the 
end of the Cold War the UN Security Council (UNSC) became 
increasingly willing to act.  Between 1989 and 1991 the UNSC 
mandated as many peacekeeping missions as it had done 
during the preceding 40 years.  However, it was quickly 
evident that the traditional concept of peacekeeping was 
inadequate for contemporary conflicts that were no longer 
checked by the influence of the two Cold War superpowers.  
UN capacity was poorly matched to the tasks it faced.  In 
parallel, the concept of enforcing the peace  was born.
4  The 
resultant UK doctrine compartmentalised PSO as a type of 
operation underpinned by a clear international mandate, 
based on three principles: consent; impartiality; and the 
application of minimum necessary force.
5  The UK approach 
responded to the volatility of the Balkans conflicts by 
acknowledging the need for forces to act when consent 
was lost – but the adherence to strict impartiality and the 
use of minimum force were seen as essential underpinnings 
of consent.  Thus a consent line, or Rubicon, was seen to 
divide peacekeeping from peace enforcement, and once 
consent was lost military force would default to the use of 
warfighting techniques.  Thereafter consent was unlikely to 
be regained.  The UK approach failed to provide doctrine 
for peace enforcement activity, although it did inform those 
outside the military sphere on the risk of mission creep and 
the uncontrolled escalation of conflict beyond the combat 
potential of the deployed peace support force.
0221 The Military Contribution to Peace Support 
Operations.  UK experiences in Bosnia 6  demanded a more 
flexible approach be developed for the grey area between 
peacekeeping and peace enforcement, which utilised a full 
spectrum of warfighting skills.  The UN responded to the 
perception that it was poorly equipped for the tasks that it 
faced by transferring mission responsibility to NATO.  This set 
the precedent for the UNSC mandating action by regional 
security structures and effectively outsourcing peace 
support.  This created a fundamental shift in the context 
of PSO – a recognition of a need for an international, inter-
agency approach to which there is a military contribution – a 
comprehensive approach, in which the PSO trinity of consent, 
impartiality and limits on the use of force, is replaced by a 
concept of campaign authority, vested in an international 
coalition or regional security alliance and derived from a 
mandate.  This is equivalent to the authority vested in national 
government and described in paragraph 247.
Recent Intervention Operations
0222 A New Paradigm.  The operation to protect the 
indigenous population of Kosovo 7  against Serb intervention 
was the catalyst for a new paradigm that removed previous 
assumptions about consent and impartiality.  Intervention 
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2001 have shown that 
neither the guidelines from classic COIN or PSO are adequate 
for tackling contemporary challenges to stability.  Military 
forces have been drawn into wider stabilisation tasks that have 
gone beyond the delivery of security, and the mechanisms 
for effective stabilisation planning prior to deployment have 
been absent both within UK Defence and across government.  
UK’s response is constrained not only by the size of her Armed 
Forces, but also by the lack of deployable capacity amongst 
the non-security departments, the requisite terms and 
conditions of service that will allow civilians, such as police 
advisers, to operate in an often high risk environment, and the 
means to integrate both planning and delivery of broad-based 
stabilisation support in failed or failing states.
0223 Developing Indigenous Security Capacity.  
Experience has shown that security is an enabler, but without 
adequate security other vital development cannot take 
place.  Assisting the development of capable indigenous 
security capacity has been critical to the ultimate withdrawal 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
21
of international forces.  Security capacity building has 
included military, border, police and other internal security 
forces.  These local forces have to assume responsibility for 
the contest for security by first containing, and ultimately 
neutralising those irregular groups that threaten effective 
national governance.  Therefore, building these units may 
demand emphasis that matches or exceeds that devoted to 
adversary-focused activity.  Building effective indigenous 
units is transitory without strong security institutions, such 
as a capable ministry of defence with responsive planning, 
personnel and procurement processes.
0224 Local Civil Development.  Some level of local 
security, rule of law and national governance are the 
necessary conditions for re-development of indigenous 
economic and institutional capacity.  The US Special Inspector 
General for Iraq Reconstruction identified five principles of 
reconstruction:
8 
• Security is necessary for large scale reconstruction to 
succeed.
• Developing the capacity of people and systems is as 
important as bricks and mortar reconstruction.
• Soft programmes (i.e. governance and economic 
development) serve as an important complement to 
military operations in insecure environments.
• Programmes should be geared to indigenous priorities 
and needs.
• Reconstruction is an extension of political strategy.
0225 Current Capabilities.  The UK’s military structures 
are not currently optimised for the breadth of stabilisation 
tasks, in which mass matters and human factors, local context 
and cultural understanding are fundamental to success.  In 
recognition of this, Defence has resourced new capabilities, 
training and doctrine.  However, stabilisation is not simply a 
lesser included capability embedded in our current structures.  
Rather, in the same way we re-calibrated for operations in 
Northern Ireland in the early 1970s, a continued commitment 
to stabilisation will benefit from further adaptation and 
resources.  No conflict stands still.  The UK’s involvement also 
acts as a catalyst for change.  There may be an inexorable 
ebb and flow of conflict during stabilisation as international 
forces compete with adversaries to provide security: they will 
try to match our stability and security activities with coercion, 
instability and violence.  The commander will often find 
that the situation has developed beyond that for which he 
prepared.  This is likely to be a recurring theme for the more 
demanding stabilisation tasks, in which the military provides 
only part of a solution to a complex, primarily political 
problem that will demand a highly iterative approach and 
institutional agility.  The comprehensive response should be 
seen pragmatically as a work in progress.
Stabilisation: The Need for a New Approach
0226 Classical COIN campaigns shared a number of similar 
features.  Recent UK operations, however, reveal significant 
departures from this classical pattern which together demand 
a new approach.
0227 State Fragility.  In classical COIN, the UK buttressed 
an existing colonial political order with effective state security, 
governance and political structures.  Recent operations, 
however, have been conducted within the context of state 
fragility and state failure.  As such, state-building activities 
have constituted a significant component of recent 
interventions in the Balkans, Iraq and Afghanistan.
0228 Complex of Intervening Actors.  In classical COIN, 
as the colonial power, UK forc es and agencies controlled all 
levers of government.  Recent operations, however, have 
been conducted by a bewildering array of intervening actors 
within the sovereign territory of another state.  As such, the 
commander is forced to manage sensitivities brought about 
by working in multinational co alitions, with non-coalition 
international partners/stakeholders and, most importantly, the 
host government.
0229 Smaller Forces.  The size of intervening armed forces 
is much smaller than in the 20th Century.  Mass matters in 
wars amongst the people where the population’s perception 
of security forces’ ability to deliver greater security is almost 
as important as the reality.  A 1995 review of operations 
suggested that, in crisis interventions, ‘although numbers alone 
do not constitute a security strategy, successful strategies for 
population security and control have required force density either 
as large as or larger than 20 security personnel (troops and police 
combined) per thousand inhabitants.’
9   For a country the size 
of Afghanistan this implies a mix of some 760,000 local and 
international internal security personnel.  But, the capacity 
of the force is as important as any ratio.  This will depend on 
many factors, including the contact that the force has with 
the population; the degree of international commitment; 
the means available to security forces and their access to 
actionable intelligence.  The implications of force persistence 
and presence are explored in Chapter 10, Section III.
0230 Global Networks.  Classical insurgencies were usually 
generated and resourced locally; consequently, the outcome 
of classical COIN campaigns was locally determined.  In 
contrast, recent conflicts have been generated and resourced 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
22
by international support networks which have provided funds, 
supplies (including weapons) and recruits.  In addition, the 
presence of global media, the internet and communications 
networks has allowed instant coverage of conflicts thus 
furnishing non-state armed groups with a global reach 
previously confined to states.  The outcome of contemporary 
operations is becoming increasingly globally determined.
Hezbollah’s Principles of War 
10 
Adversaries have doctrine too.  These principles were 
designed specifically to defeat Israel, a technologically 
advanced enemy.  This is an example of a contemporary, 
adaptive approach by a capable irregular actor.
• Avoid the strong, attack the weak – attack and 
withdrawal.
• Protecting our fighters is more important than 
causing enemy casualties.
• Strike only when success is assured.
• Surprise is essential to success.  If you are spotted, you 
have failed.
• Don’t get into a set piece battle.  Slip away like smoke, 
before the enemy can drive home his advantage.
• Attaining the goal demands patience, in order to 
discover the enemy’s weak points.
• Keep moving; avoid formation in a front line.
• Keep the enemy on constant alert, at the front and in 
the rear.
• The road to the great victory passes through 
thousands of small victories.
• Keep up the morale of the fighters; avoid notions of 
the enemy’s superiority.
• The media has innumerable guns whose hits are like 
bullets.  Use them in battle.
• The population is a treasure – nurture it.
• Hurt the enemy and then stop before he abandons 
restraint.
0231 Complexity of Hostile Groups.  Classical COIN 
typically constituted a binary struggle.  Recent operations, 
however, have highlighted numerous violent factions within 
a general climate of insecurity and instability.  Internal violent 
opposition to government authority - irregular activity  - may 
be motivated by grievance against the state or those keen 
to exploit state fragility.  At times, groups with different 
motivations, aims and allegiances will form ad hoc alliances 
of convenience.  Moreover, grievances may mutate over 
time.  Rather than one simple unifying idea different groups 
may have multiple grievances that overlap.  Resistance to the 
intervening force may become a cause in itself.  At other times 
irregular actors may simultaneously hold government posts or 
transition in and out of government.  As a result, boundaries 
between groups become blurred and memberships fluid.  
In failed states, instability may result from fighting between 
groups competing for local authority, as has been the case in 
Somalia, the Great Lakes region of Africa and Southern Sudan.
Irregular Activity
Irregular Activity is the use, or threat, of force by irregular 
forces, groups or individuals, frequently ideologically 
or criminally motivated, to effect or prevent change as 
a challenge to governance and authority.  (JDP 01 (2nd 
Edition))
Note: Irregular Activity could include a mix of insurgency, 
terrorism, criminality and disorder.
                                                 Differences Between Classical COIN and Contemporary Stabilisation
Classical COIN Contemporary Stabilisation
Effective State Institutions State Fragility and Failure
Single Counter Insurgent (UK Forces) Multitude of Intervening Actors
Large Conscripted UK Army Small Expeditionary Joint Force
Local Conflicts Global Networks and Conflict Dynamics
Single Enemy (the insurgency) Multitude of Irregular Actors
Guerrilla and Asymmetric Threats WME and Hybrid Threats
8. Reconstruction is the term often used in US Government to describe those economic 
and governance development tasks identified in JDP 3-40 chapters 6 and 7.  Taken from 
Hard Lessons: the Iraq Reconstruction Experience , Office of the Special Inspector General for 
Iraq Reconstruction (SIGIR) dated 2 February 2009.
9. James T. Quinlivan, Burden of Victory: the Painful Arithmetic of Stability Operations , RAND 
Corporation.  Specific examples in the study included British operations in Northern 
Ireland and Malaya.  Some doubt exists over Quinlivan’s findings due to the limited 
number of cases studied, although other US Institute of Defense Analyses work appears 
supportive suggesting that densities of 25:1000 are required to provide a 50% chance of 
success.  Ongoing research in the UK (DSTL) is not sufficiently mature to add insight at 
the time of publication. 
10. We were Caught Unprepared , US Army Combined Arms Centre Combat Studies Institute 
Press Long War Series Occasional Paper No 26 2008. 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
23
0232 Lethality.  The lethality of our adversaries has been 
markedly increased through easy access to sophisticated 
weapon systems and inexpensive technologies; sharing 
successful tactics and techniques; and innovation.  For 
example, by 2006 weaponry used by Hezbollah in southern 
Lebanon was being deployed in Afghanistan by organisations 
linked to the Taliban.
11  In addition, radicalisation of hostile 
groups (supported by small elements of the diaspora) has 
increased their ambition to use WME.
0233 For the foreseeable future stabilisation campaigns 
involving UK Forces will be conducted in the sovereign 
territory of a fragile, conflict-affected State.  Here successful 
operations will entail an element of stabilisation and state-
building.  In contrast, however, instability may result from 
other forms of irregular activity besides insurgency.  These 
include warring factions (e.g . South Sudan), large-scale 
criminality (e.g. Somalia), cart els (e.g. Colombia) or foreign 
fighters (e.g. Yemen).
0234 Irregular activity is likely to be at the heart of any 
threat to the stability of a state, and a capable insurgency is 
the most threatening instance of irregular activity.  Countering 
these threats will be central to the stabilisation effort.  This is 
illustrated at Figure 2.2.
 
Instability - the problem Stabilisation - the solution Stabilisation and COIN
Security
Development
Governance
Security
Countering
Irregular
Activity
Irregular
Activity
Development
Governance
Security
Development
Governance
COIN
Stimulate Economic & 
Infrastructure Development
t 3FTUPSF#BTJD4FSWJDFT*OGSBTUSVDUVSF
t 3FCVJME&òFDUJWF&DPOPNJD
 Financial Management
t #FHJO-POHUFSN4PDJBM
 Infrastructure Development
Foster Host Government 
$BQBDJUZ-FHJUJNBDZ
t 3FGPSN4FDVSJUZ1PMJDF+VTUJDF4FDUPST
t 4VQQPSU&OHBHFNFOU3FDPODJMJBUJPO
 1SPDFTTFT
t 'BDJMJUBUF1PMJUJDBM1SPDFTTFT3FFTUBCMJTI
 (PWFSONFOU.BDIJOFSZ
#VJME)VNBOBOE/BUJPOBM4FDVSJUZ
t /FVUSBMJTF)PTUJMF(SPVQT
t 1SPWJEF1VCMJD0SEFS
 (protect population & key assets)
t &OGPSDF$FBTFöSFT
t &OTVSF5FSSJUPSJBM*OUFHSJUZ
t %FMJWFS4VTUBJO&TTFOUJBM$PNNPEJUJFT
1PMJUJDBMSettlement
Insecurity
Weak 
Governance 
3VMFPG-BX
6OEFS
Development
  Figure 2.3 – Stabilisation Model
  Figure 2.2 – Stabilisation,  Irregular Activity and COIN
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
24
SECTION III
THE UK APPROACH TO 
STABILISATION
The Stabilisation Model
0235 There are some generic tenets which underpin 
success.  In addition to the essential requirement for a political 
settlement, discussed in Chapter 1, there are three broad, 
overlapping areas of progress that underpin successful 
stabilisation efforts; security, governance and development.  
Figure 2.3 illustrates the key tasks that fall within these areas.  
The Department for International Development (DFID) 
prioritises further by introducing the concept of survival 
functions.  These are currently defined by DFID as a base level 
of functionality – sockets – which international development 
agencies can plug into.  (Earlier references, pre-2009, to 
survival functions will refer to more specific functions such as 
ability to raise revenue and ability to rule through law.
12)
 
0236 The tasks that fall out of the stabilisation model should 
be understood as part of the process that fosters the authority 
and legitimacy of the host government in the eyes of the 
population.  This leads ultimately to the accommodation of 
competing elites within a workable political settlement.
Building Human and National Security
0237 Traditionally, the security forces have focused on 
national security, however defined.  The UN Commission on 
Human Security has proposed a framework for countries 
experiencing violent conflicts.  It emphasises the need to 
ensure public safety, address immediate humanitarian needs 
as well as begin rehabilitation and reconstruction.  In a 
stabilisation environment the lack of human security can be 
acute and it is critical that this is addressed if the situation is 
not to spiral out of control.  Part of this involves creating the 
conditions that safeguard individuals from all kinds of violence.  
However, it also relates to the immediate needs for a decent 
life, such as food, water, sanitation, shelter, employment, and 
education.  The military contribution is described in Chapter 5.
Fostering Host Government Capacity and 
Legitimacy
0238 Fostering host nation government capacity and 
legitimacy does not imply a particular form of governance, 
but does require the restoration of state survival functions.  
It may also mean helping that government to: reduce 
corruption; improve its practical ability to administer the state; 
become more open and transparent; and be seen as the only 
legitimate, impartial deliverer of justice, although this can also 
include government-sanctioned use of non-state traditional/
customary justice mechanisms.  The military contribution is 
described in Chapter 6.
‘Good governance and safe cities are reciprocal: where 
inhabitants are free from fear, and where safety is improved 
for citizens and neighbourhoods, interaction among people, 
among groups and with the public institutions becomes 
possible.  This in turn creates an enabling environment.  Good 
for the inhabitants in the city, for the quality of their life and 
for economic development’.
UN-Habitat, Safer Cities Programme.
Stimulating Economic and Infrastructure 
Development
0239 The aim of improving the economic situation and 
restoring basic services and infrastructure is likely to be 
twofold: first to provide support to those in need, and 
second, to boost support for the host nation government.  
Projects should make maximum use of local knowledge, skills, 
manpower and materials.  Given the key requirement to foster 
host nation governance, it is important that all actions are 
linked to national priorities, programmes and structures.  The 
long-term sustainability of service delivery should also be 
considered.  It is better to provide essential services that are 
good enough and which can subsequently be taken on by 
local providers, rather than those which are optimal but are 
unlikely to be maintained due to a long-term shortfall in local 
capacity.  Chapter 7 describes the military contribution.
Permissiveness
0240 The model in Figure 2.3 shows the scope and nature 
of the tasks required if a successful outcome to a stabilisation 
mission is to be achieved.  This is clearly a multi-agency 
endeavour and the military will usually only be responsible 
for the delivery of a proportion of these tasks.  The key 
purpose of military involvement should focus on improving 
the security situation sufficiently to allow the appropriate 
civilian organisations to operate effectively.  It is principally the 
results of the actions of these other organisations which will 
bring about the long term, self-sustaining solutions required.  
However, in addition to establishing a robust security 
framework, the military may, in non-permissive 
11. The United Kingdom’s Strategy for Countering International Terrorism, March 2009, 
 Page 26.
12. See States in Development: Understanding State-building, DFID working paper, 2008 
and the summary of the DFID approach at the end of Chapter 6 of this document.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
25
circumstances, be required to contribute to wider stabilisation 
tasks.  Consequently, the following factors may need to be 
considered:
• At times the environment will be so unsafe that only the 
military can operate in it.  Where such a major gap in 
civilian stabilisation capability  delivery exists, this must 
be addressed at the strategic level as it goes to the heart 
of the credibility of the comprehensive approach.  This 
could entail structural changes to military forces.  In such 
circumstances the commander will need to manage the 
tension between immediate, visible security progress, 
and the longer term, sustainable reconstruction and 
development of the state.  This tension has often been 
the cause of friction between civilian agencies and the 
military.
• As UK Armed Forces should expect to be deployed in 
a crisis, a clear priority should be arresting the rapid 
downward security spiral.  The manner in which 
immediate needs are met may, however, affect long-
term development and governance structures in a 
way that could undermine the authority of the host 
government.  Equally, agencies whose focus is on long-
term sustainability may need to accept that, for both 
political and military reasons, demonstrable early progress 
is required.  This progress should be consistent with the 
needs and priorities of the local population.
Permissive and Non-Permissive Environments
Permissiveness is the ability of civilian actors to access 
an area without the need for protection.  However, to be 
effective many tasks require the active engagement of 
the local population, who will only do so if they feel that 
it is safe, even after we have gone.  In assessing the level 
of permissiveness, also consider security from the local 
population’s perspective.
Levels of permissiveness vary between organisations 
and activities; an area that is non-permissive for one may 
be permissive for others.  Actions by one group may 
enhance or undermine the level of permissiveness for 
others.  Military action may bring temporary security 
to an area thus, for a time, increasing the general level 
of permissiveness.  However, it may also draw more 
response from adversaries when the military withdraw, 
with the result that some agencies may find they can no 
longer operate in areas that were previously safe for them.
Stimulate Economic & 
Infrastructure Development
t 3FTUPSF#BTJD4FSWJDFT*OGSBTUSVDUVSF
t 3FCVJME&òFDUJWF&DPOPNJD
 'JOBODJBM.BOBHFNFOU
t #FHJO-POHUFSN4PDJBM
 *OGSBTUSVDUVSF%FWFMPQNFOU
Build Human and National Security
t /FVUSBMJTF)PTUJMF(SPVQT
t 1SPWJEF1VCMJD0SEFS
 	QSPUFDUQPQVMBUJPOLFZBTTFUT
t &OGPSDF$FBTFöSFT
t &OTVSF5FSSJUPSJBM*OUFHSJUZ
t %FMJWFS4VTUBJO&TTFOUJBM$PNNPEJUJFT
Foster Host Government 
Capacity & Legitimacy
t 3FGPSN4FDVSJUZ1PMJDF+VTUJDF4FDUPST
t 4VQQPSU&OHBHFNFOU3FDPODJMJBUJPO
 1SPDFTTFT
t 'BDJMJUBUF1PMJUJDBM1SPDFTTFT3FFTUBCMJTI
 (PWFSONFOU.BDIJOFSZ
1PMJUJDBM4FUUMFNFOU
*OTFDVSJUZ
8FBL
(PWFSOBODF
3VMFPG-BX
6OEFS
%FWFMPQNFOU
Key:
 Military DeliverJO"--&OWJSPONFOUT
 *OBEEJUJPOMilitary AssistJO%FMJWFSJOH
 JOBTFNJQFSNJTTJWFFOWJSPONFOU
 *OBEEJUJPOMilitary Help EnableJO
 BOPOQFSNJTTJWFFOWJSPONFOU
  Figure 2.4 – The Military Contribution to Stabilisation Tasks 13
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
26
0241 Figure 2.4 uses the stabilisation model to illustrate 
the relationship between permissiveness and the military 
contribution.  In non-permissive environments the military 
may provide degrees of support to most or all of the key tasks.  
As permissiveness increases, civil tasks should be handed over, 
as soon as is practicable, to other agencies within the coalition 
and/or host government.
0242 Whether civilian access can be guaranteed or not, 
civilian expertise should be integrated into operational 
planning and execution of stabilisation tasks.  In this way 
the commander is provided with a fuller understanding of 
how operations designed to have immediate impact on the 
ground can influence longer-term sustainable local capacity 
development, and hence host nation authority and legitimacy.
SECTION IV
SHAPING THE KEY 
CONFLICT RELATIONSHIP
0243 Influence.  Individuals and groups derive their views 
and form their perceptions through a complex process of 
absorption through many different conduits and media.  It 
is the combination of what au diences hear and what they 
perceive or experience, (the interaction of the word and the 
deed), interpreted through the prism of their culture, history 
and traditions that determines their opinion and behaviour.  
Consequently, all military activity should be understood as 
exerting influence.  Communication and influence is examined 
in much greater depth in Chapter 3.
The Key Conflict Relationship
0244 The campaign must reshape and stabilise a series of 
key relationships.  The primary relationship is the triangular 
one between the host nation government, competing 
(violent) elites (of which there may be several) and the wider 
population.  It is this set of relationships that holds the key to a 
sustainable political settlement.  Significant relationships also 
exist that involve the internatio nal forces’ domestic audiences, 
regional and international populations and actors, as well as 
between the intervening actors themselves.  The significance 
of these other relationships will be critical if collapse of 
domestic support is not to occur.  The importance of the 
relationships between the host government, competing elites 
and the local population should be the focus of influence.  
But, these are complex human relationships with all the 
attendant unpredictability this implies.
0245 Figure 2.5 illustrates the central relationship in societal 
conflicts.  All stabilisation activity should be planned, executed 
and assessed in terms of the influence brought to bear on 
this relationship.
 
0246 Host Government.  Stabilisation interventions involve 
either supporting an extant government, or contributing 
to the establishment of a government where none exists.  
Competing
Elites
Wider
Population
Host 
Government
  Figure 2.5 – The Key Conflict Relationship  
13. Permissive, semi-permissive, and non-permissive should be seen as relative points on a 
continuum rather than absolute conditions.  If the environment was entirely permissive 
the Joint Force would not be engaged at all.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
27
This does not mean that our support is unconditional.  It is 
legitimate, indeed essential, to seek to influence the conduct, 
attitudes and even, within the bo unds of what is politically 
acceptable, the composition of that government.  Improving 
the quality of governance is an essential aspect of stabilisation.
0247 The Authority of the Host Government.  A political 
settlement is unsustainable if the host nation government 
is unable or unwilling to build sufficient authority and 
legitimacy.  A state’s authority is dependent upon the 
successful amalgamation and interplay of four factors:
• Mandate.  The perceived legitimacy of the mandate 
that establishes a state authority, whether through the 
principles of universal suffrage, or a recognised and 
accepted caste/tribal model.
• Manner.  The perceived legitimacy of the way in which 
those exercising the mandate conduct themselves, both 
individually and collectively.
• Consent.  The extent to which factions, local populations 
and others consent to, comply with, or resist the authority 
of those exercising the mandate.  Consent, or its absence, 
may range from active resistance, through unwilling 
compliance, to freely given support.
• Expectations.  The extent to which the expectations and 
aspirations of factions, local populations and others are 
managed or are met by those exercising the mandate.
0248 Competing Elites.  Political settlement will entail the 
accommodation of competing elites, sometimes referred to 
as elite consolidation.  Elites are those individuals and groups 
with the power (including capacity for significant violence) 
to undermine existing political settlements and prevent 
the establishment of new ones.  Elites will accommodate 
themselves to political settlements on the basis of self-interest.  
Negotiation and peace agreements may be a part of a political 
settlement, but they are not synonymous.  A clear cut victory 
of one set of actors over another could lead to a political 
settlement if the losers believe that the chance of improving 
their position through further conflict is limited; personal 
security can be a strong motivation for accommodation.  
However, unequivocal victories in complex societal conflicts 
are rare.  Usually, success is based on including elements of 
hostile groups in the political system.  Those unwilling to 
reach an accommodation, known as irreconcilables , must be 
captured, expelled, isolated or killed.
0249 The Wider Population.  The third element in the 
central conflict relationship is the wider population.  The 
population should be the focus.  Considerations include:
• Ideas such as winning hearts and minds, population focus 
and securing the population  have become staples of policy 
and doctrine.  However, they can be interpreted, and used 
as a guide for action, in counterproductive ways.
• Winning the hearts and minds of the population in terms 
of their attitudes to the international forces is of secondary 
importance.  While widespread, outright hostility will 
impede stabilisation, it is not the relationship between 
the international forces and the population that is critical.  
People are unlikely to ever be happy or even content 
about a prolonged foreign military presence.  What is 
important is the attitude of the population to 
 the host nation government relative to rival elites 
 seeking their support and mobilisation.  It is the 
populations’ perceptions of their government that are 
critical, and it is these that the international forces should 
seek to influence.
• The population’s perception of security directly influences 
people’s judgements on the competence, authority 
and legitimacy of the government.  It is vital, therefore, 
that there is a government face to security provision.  
Improving the security of an area, while it can create space 
and time for other stabilisat ion efforts, may have less 
positive, long-term political impact if all it does is build 
people’s confidence in the foreign military capability.  The 
population should have confidence that, ultimately, the 
host nation government can sustain adequate security 
provision, as set out in a credible narrative.
A Competing Narrative
In 2006 the Taliban produced a simple, five line message 
to counter the expansion of ISAF into Helmand: “Our 
party, the Taliban.  Our people and Nation, the Pashtun.  Our 
economy, the poppy.  Our constitution, the Shari’a.  Our form 
of government, the Emirate.”
Kilcullen – The Accidental Guerrilla.  
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
28
SECTION V
WORKING WITH 
PARTNERS
The Command and Control Challenge
0250 Multi-agency operations require unique military 
command and control arrangements.  Central authority is 
not achieved easily in stabilisation, which is characterised by 
multinational and interagency actors, who work to balance 
power through individual agendas within a loosely-knit web 
of bi- and multi-lateral engagement mechanisms.  Some 
structures and organisations are inherently dysfunctional with 
no clear lines of authority and a blurring of responsibilities.  
Levels of military authority (theatre, formation, unit etc) do 
not always align with civilian counterparts.  The plethora 
of actors involved may find it difficult – sometimes even 
impossible – to engage the host nation with a unified voice 
and even to understand the basis of their relationships with 
each other.  The web of relationships does not fit neat military 
notions of Command and Control (C2); they can appear almost 
anarchical.  Although partner agencies can function based 
on shared values, informal rules and practical protocols, it 
will take a shared top-down vision, patience, a willingness to 
compromise and a degree of organisation to achieve unity 
of purpose.
0251 One of the most important facts for a commander to 
establish is, who is responsible to whom and for what?   Although 
the UK may lead some operations, it is most likely that it will 
be working within an alliance, such as NATO, or in coalition 
as a supporting partner, for example with the US.  In these 
cases, followership  can be as important as leadership and 
the commander should recognise where his approach 
should be subordinate to that of the alliance or coalition.  
This can be extended to include civil figures such as High 
Representatives who have no formal military command 
authority, but possess a mandate to coordinate civil and 
military activity.  When acting as part of an alliance or 
coalition, national agendas an d direction can sometimes give 
the impression that the UK has a lead role in theatre when in 
reality it does not.
The Host Nation Government
0252 The relationship between intervening actors and the 
host nation government is likely to be dynamic and, at times, 
fraught; interests do not always coincide and methods may 
not be compatible.  A paradox is that success generates new 
challenges.  For example, as the situation improves, the host 
government begins to feel more secure and develops greater 
capacity, so it will be more likely to assert itself.  This can lead 
to differences in approach, such as over the timing and focus 
of operations.  Generally, this should be welcomed as a sign 
of progress.  However, it must be clear that our support is 
conditional upon harmonisation of strategic interests.  This 
influence should be exerted as diplomatically as possible.
0253 Host nation spokesmen should be given prominence; 
joint patrols should be the norm; local advice and 
participation should be sought in information operations, 
and the message delivered by local people; the physical 
presence of the intervening forces should be reduced as 
soon as practicable.
Integrated Approaches
0254 In war we aim to overwhelm our enemy by integrating 
manoeuvre with fires.  In stabilisation, we strive to achieve a 
similar effect on a particularly wicked problem
14 – one that has 
no set formula for resolution, nor a clearly defined end-state 
– by integrating all the levers that our society can muster.  A 
comprehensive approach is often, incorrectly, assumed to be 
synonymous with a UK cross-government approach.  While 
a coherent government response is an essential element, a 
comprehensive approach is a much broader multi-agency 
and, often, multinational response.  The frictions and 
difficulties associated with developing a coherent, cross-
government approach multiply in multinational operations.  
Taking a comprehensive approach involves more than just 
talking to the political or development adviser.  Mutually-
supporting cross-departmental and multi-agency effort 
should enable comprehensive tactical activity to deliver 
overwhelming campaign effect.
Al-Qaeda Recognises That Military Means Alone will 
not Achieve Success
“therefore, I stress again to you and to all your brothers, to 
direct the political action equally with the military action.  
By the alliance, cooperation and gathering of all leaders of 
opinion and influence…I cannot define for you a specific 
means of action… But you… must strive to have around 
you circles of support, assistance and cooperation and, 
through them, to advance until you become a consensus, 
entity, organisation or association that represents all of the 
honourable people”
Ayman al-Zawahiri
14. Rittel, Horst, and Melvin Webber; Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning , 
 pages 155-169, Policy Sciences, Volume 4.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
29
0255 Opponents understand the importance and the 
fragility of a comprehensive approach and therefore are 
likely to use tactics that deliberately target and drive away 
vulnerable civil actors.  By exploiting this fracture point 
adversaries aim to prolong the campaign, undermining the 
collective will and perseverance of the coalition.  If successful, 
this leads to shortfalls in delivery as progress is hampered by 
the absence or weakening of civil expertise and capability.  
Reducing the delivery of comprehensive effect is an area 
where our opponents seek freedom of manoeuvre, both to 
spoil the authority and credibility of the host nation and to 
supplant it with its own.
0256 In stabilisation, the notion of impartiality or neutrality 
has limited relevance.  Civilian participants will automatically 
become part of the conflict.  Civilian targets are often more 
lucrative than military ones.  Attacks on civil capability can 
quickly undermine the broader stabilisation efforts and are 
likely to have greater impact on the domestic audiences of 
intervening actors.  Given this reality, the idea of a shared 
enterprise should be continually defended and promoted.
0257 A comprehensive approach requires an understanding 
of the different philosophies which will shape attitudes 
towards priorities.  For example, the military will tend to 
focus on relatively short-term security deliverables while 
‘On 19 August 2003, the UN Headquarters in the Canal 
Hotel in Baghdad suffered a devastating bomb attack.  
The detonation resulted in the death of 22 UN staff and 
visitors, and over 150 persons were injured.  A second 
bomb attack against the UN Headquarters on 22 
September killed a UN security guard and two local police 
officers.  The targeting of UN Headquarters on 19 August 
and 22 September came as a tragic blow to the UN staff 
in Iraq and their colleagues throughout the world.  Many 
in the UN system have been profoundly disconcerted 
not only by the destructive power of the attacks directed 
towards the UN but also by the mere fact that the UN 
could be the target of such devastating violence.
 
The attacks are signals of the emergence of a new and 
more difficult era for the UN system.  It is of the utmost 
importance for UN management and staff to recognise 
the extent to which the security environment of the UN 
is changing.  Already, parties to hostilities in numerous 
conflicts are targeting civilians in order to draw military 
advantages, in violation of the most basic principles of 
international humanitarian law.  In several instances, staff 
members of the UN and other humanitarian agencies 
have been victims of targeted attacks for their role in 
assisting these civilians.  The bombings in Baghdad 
differ from these previous attacks not so much for 
having targeted the UN, but for having done so by using 
abhorrent tactical means and military-scale weapons.  
These characteristics, added to the potential links to 
global terror groups, are significant developments that 
the UN needs to factor into its security strategy.’
The Independent Panel on the Safety and Security of UN 
Pers
onnel in Iraq, 20 October 2003
Targeting International Civilians
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
30
the development community will tend to give priority to 
broader, longer-term challenges.  While there is no purely 
military solution to complex societal conflict, neither is there 
a purely developmental one.  The President of the World Bank 
made the point that: “even the term ‘security’ may have different 
meaning to a soldier in body armour and a female NGO worker 
living in a village” .
15 
0258 When the UK is a supporting partner in a coalition 
it cannot expect to exert the same degree of control over 
the conduct of operations as it can for national operations.  
However, the commander should seek to maximise 
the influence the UK brings to bear.  This requires an 
understanding of the doctrine, procedures, approaches and 
priorities of the lead partner.
16  The UK contribution will need 
to be shaped in a manner consistent with this framework.  
Achieving influence may also demand a particular level of 
resourcing, but while commanders will advise, this is ultimately 
a matter of political choice.  In any circumstance, commanders 
will need to be frank with the coalition command as to their 
force’s capability.
Transitions
0259 Campaigns pass through a number of transitions as 
they progress.  A key leadership function is analysis of the 
conditions required to enable an early transition of tasks to 
civilian actors and the host government.  As the environment 
becomes less permissive, civil capacities decline.  This draws 
in the military.  As security and capacity building efforts 
begin to take effect the military progressively hands back 
functions to the appropriate authorities, bearing in mind that 
this may need to be revisited given that it is a characteristic 
of such campaigns to ebb and flow.  Transitions call for fine 
judgement and close consultati on between commanders and 
national, international and host nation actors.
0260 Timely transitions meet the expectation of the host 
nation government and its population while generating a 
positive momentum.  They enhance campaign credibility, 
which helps turn passive consent into active support.  Their 
result should be the release of the military to their primary 
tasks – security and SSR – and a reduction in force profile.  
In contrast, poorly timed and conceived transitions create 
opportunities for hostile groups, especially if the host 
government fails adequately to discharge a responsibility that 
was previously being successfully undertaken by us.  Such 
an outcome severely undermines population confidence in 
the government.  However, being too cautious can lead to a 
dependency culture that institutionalises and prolongs the 
international presence.  Guidance on transitions is in Chapter 1 1.
Timely and Premature Transitions: East Timor
The timely Australian-led INTERFET deployment in 
September 1999 responded to widespread instability 
following the previous month’s referendum.  The 
mission was to stabilise the situation in order to allow for 
transition to a UN Transitional Administration.  This was 
widely seen as a success.  Upon full independence in May 
2002 the mission transitioned again to the UN Mission in 
Support of East Timor which was tasked with supporting 
post-independence development.  This was deemed 
sufficiently successful to begin, in 2005, the process of 
ramping down the UN presence with the establishment 
of a new Office to oversee completion of the mandate 
by August 2006.  Many commentators, at this point, saw 
the international involvement in East Timor as a model for 
successful stabilisation and transition.
However, in May 2006 the capital, Dili, was once more the 
scene of widespread violence.  The proximate cause was 
the dismissal of 594 members of the Timorese Armed 
Forces; but, as the Secretary General’s report stated in 
August 2006, ‘it is now evident that those events were 
only the precursor to a political, humanitarian and 
security crisis of major dimensions.’
An Australian-led force was redeployed to stabilise the 
situation again and allow for a reformed UN Mission in 
Timor (UNMIT) to take over.  UNMIT had its mandate 
extended for the third time in February 2009.
East Timor illustrates the dangers of withdrawing 
support for a fragile state too early.  The transitions 
from INTERFET to the successive UN Missions saw a 
gradual ramping down of international support.  At 
each stage the judgement was made that the situation 
was improving sufficiently to allow transition.  However, 
the underlying weaknesses of the state had not been 
sufficiently addressed and a major re-engagement of the 
international community was required to arrest a rapid 
downward spiral in a still fragile state.
15. Robert B. Zoellick, in a speech to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, Geneva, 
12, September 2008, quoting an un-named Canadian development official 
 in Afghanistan.
16. In the case of the US, see the US Government Counterinsurgency Guide , January 2009
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
A DIPLOMAT’S PERSPECTIVE
BY SIR JEREMY GREENSTOCK GCMG
Sir Jeremy Greenstock has extensive, personal experience 
of stabilisation including as UK Ambassador to the UN 
1998 – 2003 and UK Special Envoy for Iraq 
(September 2003-March 2004)
If the world is changing 
rapidly, it is not surprising that 
defence structures that were 
honed for one generation 
have to adapt under pressure 
for the next.  Charles Darwin 
demonstrated that natural 
evolution happens that way, 
under pressure from change.  
The fittest survive by adjusting, 
through luck or wisdom, to the 
new environment.  Maintaining 
valuable capabilities, while 
innovating relevant new ones, is 
what it is all about.  If there are 
parts of the system that go on 
working unnecessarily, that does 
not matter so long as the blood 
supply is there.  But failing to 
grow essential new capacity is 
potentially lethal.
The Geopolitical Context for Stabilisation 
Stabilisation comes into a category of modern-day overseas 
actions whose usefulness in terms of straight national 
interest is not yet fully proven.  High-intensity inter-state war 
appears to be declining in frequency and likelihood, while 
trouble spilling out of failing or badly managed states is on 
the rise.  The danger posed by the first, while diluted by its 
unlikelihood, cannot be ignored; and the cumulative erosion 
of global order threatened by the second must not 
be underestimated.  But public opinion can be hard to 
convince, because the costs come early and the benefits 
are more intangible.
31
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
32
States fail because they have adapted poorly to modern 
conditions or to the pressures of globalisation.  The 
distribution of globalisation’s benefits is uneven and the 
losers can retreat into protectionism, resentment, intensive 
selfishness and violence.  In an environment of insecurity, 
people’s identities narrow.  Near neighbours can become 
enemies.  In such circumstances coherent communities grow 
smaller and more aggressive in their own defence.  It is this 
type of breakdown which leads to highly unpredictable and 
irrational behaviour and often to serious conflict.
Stabilisation is intended to put the pieces back together 
again and to create a society that can once more look after 
itself, prosper on a national scale and live comfortably with 
neighbours.  But this description indicates how complex 
the whole process is.  People lie at the heart of successful 
political arrangements because they own the territory; and it 
is the people who must decide to live in harmony with each 
other, with their sub-region and with what the world throws 
them.  Yet people have to have order before they have choice, 
because their choices can be meaningless, or highly divisive, 
in an atmosphere of disorder.
It is the primary purpose of a military intervention in these 
circumstances to provide that order.  Physical security 
must take first priority.  But social order goes beyond that.  
Psychological security is equally important, because fear 
breeds aggressiveness and violence.  This broader kind of 
security stems from people’s confidence in the authorities, 
from the provision of essential supplies and services, from the 
cumulative regeneration of necessary institutions such as the 
police and the courts and from a sense of legitimate forward 
momentum.  None of these things are too early to consider 
as the first troops land to restore order, because those 
troops will be running to stay in the same place until society 
manages to pick itself up.  The stories of both Iraq and 
Afghanistan show deficiencies in mission conception and 
planning in these respects.
How then can the task be managed?  No modern defence 
structure is capable of covering all these angles without 
working in close cooperation with other types of expert 
practitioners, particularly in civilian affairs, and with allies.  
While this appears obvious, the actual organisation of the 
teamwork required throws up numerous problems.  With 
a plethora of contributors, who sets the mission?  Who 
will be in operational control?  Who will the people of the 
territory regard as their legitimate, if temporary, authority?  
The effective shelf-life of a foreign presence is about half 
what the foreigners think it is.  Partly for this reason, it helps 
considerably to have the basis of a UN Security Council 
resolution to define the objectives, because that limits the 
opportunity for subjective interpretation of the real reasons 
for the foreign presence.  And the UN’s expertise in many of 
the civilian areas is superior to that of most governments.
It is our allies, however, who can pose the trickiest dilemmas.  
The UK can rarely act alone, except in a small theatre such 
as Sierra Leone.  We have to be part of a team and we 
have grown accustomed to that through NATO.  But recent 
experience shows that, even in an approved NATO operation, 
different participants can work to rather different national 
objectives and rules of engagement.  In particular, the 
strategic approach of the United States, as our most capable 
partner by far, can be hard to mesh with.  The Americans can 
devise methods which are less than ally-friendly and bear 
costs which are beyond the British.  They have distinct and 
powerful national motivations.  Yet they can achieve for us 
results which we could never attain on our own or with other 
partners.  This relationship is part of our strategic context and 
each political and military leader has to adjust to its demands 
as appears appropriate at the time.  It is best to address 
the issue with frankness as well as with respect for the US’s 
seniority, retaining the option of backing out if the pressures 
put on us are incompatible with what the British parliament 
and people are likely to tolerate.
That said, the UK is in general good at this type of operation, 
where teamwork and a cross-government approach is 
required.  The tradition of pushing responsibility down to the 
field and allowing local commanders and managers to adapt 
as they see fit to the conditions they face gets the best out of 
our talent and training.  The UK has to be clear, nevertheless, 
that it rarely has the resources or the accumulated power to 
accomplish the full range of tasks that stabilisation demands.  
This makes it all the more important for commanders to be 
sure that they have a clear mission given to them and that 
they do not begin an assignment without confidence in their 
own minds that task, resources and political commitment 
match up.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
33
PART 2
THE MILITARY 
CONTRIBUTION TO 
STABILISATION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
34
This expressive image of a Royal 
Marine in Afghanistan could be 
interpreted to support different 
narratives:
 Western observers with a 
positive disposition may see 
a young Afghan girl being 
rescued.
 Adversaries may portray 
a foreign occupier defiling 
a local girl and forcibly 
removing her from her family.
Our actions, words and 
images are always subject to 
interpretation through the filter 
of presentation, culture and 
opinion.
Part 2 describes the nature of military engagement and 
what must be achieved.  It highlights the military’s role in 
influencing the societal conflict in ways which foster the 
development of a political settlement (Chapter 3) and describes 
the operational parameters of stabilisation (Chapter 4).  Part 
2 then considers in more detail the military contribution to 
specific tasks within the three stabilisation sectors introduced 
in Part One: security (Chapter 5), governance (Chapter 6) and 
development (Chapter 7).
Chapter 3
Influence: The Central Idea
Chapter 4
Operational Guidance
A Military Perspective by General Sir Rupert Smith
Chapter 5 
Security and Security Force Capacity Building
The Military’s Role in Stabilisation by Andrew Rathmell
Chapter 6
Governance and Institutional Capacity Building
A Governance and Statebuilding Perspective by 
Clare Lockhart
Chapter 7
Economic and Infrastructure Development  
Peace Building and State-Building –
A Summary of th
e DFID Approach
by Joelle Jenny.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

‘You may not like what he 
is saying.  You may abhor 
everything he stands for.  But 
you are listening...  The truth 
is that Osama bin Laden 
is very good at what he 
does.  He is one of the great 
propagandists...  He has an 
awesome understanding of 
the holy triumvirate of political 
communication: the power of 
the image, the message and the 
deed.  And he understands how 
they work together’.
Jason Burke The Observer, 31 October 2004
Section I   Applying Influence within the Campaign
 Understanding Target Audiences
 Influence as a Contest
 Narratives
 Actions, Words and Images
Section II  The Influence Framework
 Influence – Organisation and Capabilities
 The Commander’s Influence Tools 
CHAPTER 3
INFLUENCE: THE CENTRAL IDEA
35
1.  In the actual text of Commander International Security Force (COMIASF) guidance 
he uses counter-insurgency , not stabilisation; but states from the outset that his 
commander’s guidance applies equally to stabilisation as counter-insurgency.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

0301 This Chapter takes as its central theme the idea that 
all activity has influence.  Through a sound understanding 
of target audiences, activity should be focused to achieve 
the desired influence.  It also considers how Strategic 
Communication and Informatio n Operations (Info Ops) 
can support this.  All military action should be assessed 
by its contribution toward influencing the key conflict 
relationship and shaping the eventual political settlement.  
The perceptions, beliefs, attitudes and opinions of individuals 
and groups are all fundamental to this outcome, so, influence 
is the guiding idea for the conduct of operations.  Analysis, 
planning, execution and assessment then become a function 
of 2 questions: What effect do we want to achieve?  and What 
actions will best achieve that effect?
0302 This is not a reprise of a mechanistic form of Effects 
Based Approach to Operations, which simply does not work 
for complex and variable human systems.  However, it requires 
commanders to consider the relationship between effects, the 
influence necessary to achieve those effects, and the activities 
to achieve that influence.  Everything that we do, every 
action we take, will have an influence on part of the conflict 
relationship.  This idea is central to JDP 3-40.
‘Think of [stabilisation
1] as an argument to earn the 
support of the people.  It is a contest to influence the real 
and very practical calculations on the part of the people 
about which side to support.  Every action, reaction, failure 
to act and all that is said and done becomes part of the 
debate.  The people in the audience watch, listen and make 
rational choices based on who can better protect them, 
provide for their needs, respect their dignity and 
their community and offer opportunities for the future.  
Ideology can influence the outcome, but is usually 
subordinate to the more practical considerations of 
survival and everyday life.’
Commander ISAF’s Counterinsurgency Guidance, 
Augus
t 2009
0303 As well as the conflict relationship within the host 
nation, the commander may need to shape domestic 
audiences, key regional leaders and populations, coalition 
partners, diaspora communities and broader international 
opinion.  The importance of these relationships may wax 
and wane, but the relationship between the host nation 
government, competing elites and the wider population 
should always remain the focus.
After the debacle of Suez in 1956, Operation MUSKETEER’s 
Commander, General Keightley, summed up the 
over-arching problem: “The one overriding lesson of the 
Suez operation is that world opinion is now an absolute 
principle… and must be treated as such.”
0304 The desired outcome of cross-government activities 
is to change or maintain the character or behaviour of agreed 
audiences through physical and psychological means.  All 
multi-agency capabilities can contribute to this process.  
To achieve the desired outcome, activities need to be 
coordinated and focused.  Psychological effects on specific 
target audiences, rather than physical attacks on capability, are 
likely to be the lasting and decisi ve elements in stabilisation.  
But this is not easy.  Human beings are neither benign nor 
passive; they will respond to influence in different ways.  The 
inherent risk is how actions, words and images are received 
and processed cannot be controlled.  Good analysis and 
understanding will mitigate this risk.
Some straightforward descriptions of common jargon
• Influence.  The power or ability to affect someone’s 
beliefs or actions; or a person or thing with such 
ability or power.
• Communicate.  To share or exchange information or 
ideas, or convey an emotion or feeling (verbal or non-
verbal).  A two-way, dynamic process.
• Target (Designated) Audience.  An individual or 
group selected as the object of influence.
• Narrative.  Communication that portrays a story 
designed to resonate in the mind of the audience 
 that helps explain the campaign strategy and 
operational plan.
• Theme.  An overarching concept or intention, 
designed for broad communication application.
• Message.  A narrowly focused communication 
directed at a specific target audience.
• Conduit/Channel.  A means by which a message is 
transmitted or received.
0305 Influence is achieved when the behaviour of the target 
audience is changed through the coordination of all actions, 
words and images.  It is not ju st about messages or media, 
but about how the combination of  the word and the deed are 
portrayed, interpreted and unde rstood by audiences through 
a lens of their own culture, history, religion and tradition.  
Influence is challenging, requiring subtle understanding 
of target audiences that is difficult to achieve.  It will be 
contested with adversaries who may have a significant 
cultural advantage.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILIZATION: THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
36
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
37
SECTION I
APPLYING INFLUENCE 
WITHIN THE CAMPAIGN
Understanding Target Audiences
0306 People from different cultures both behave and think 
about the world in different ways.  The commander should 
first try to understand how people from different cultures 
think and what symbols, them es, messages, etiquette and 
practices are most likely to resonate with them.  This should 
include systems of reciprocity, kinship, allegiances and social 
obligations.  Analysis and intelligence, discussed in Chapters 8 
and 9, generates this understanding.
Understanding Cultural Complexity in Afghanistan
British Forces have gained considerable insight from 
locals in Helmand but still have more to learn.  The 
conflict is not against a monolithic threat, but is entwined 
with older struggles rooted in tribalism, complex alliances 
and loyalties.  Crude ethnic breakdowns (Pashtun, Tajiks, 
Hazaras, Turkmen, Uzbeks and others) mask baffling 
complexity; there are 60 Pashtun tribes and a further 400 
sub-tribes.  One veteran says that “you must approach 
every village as its own campaign”.
Ousting the Taliban regime in 2001 resulted in renewed 
dominance for some tribes and lost status for others.  
The Taliban regard tribal custom as a deviation from 
shari’a law, but where individual tribes feel aggrieved, the 
Taliban can be willing allies.  Areas where tribal structures 
are strongest tend to be more resistant to Taliban 
encroachment.  However, while tribal structures can help 
undermine support for the Taliban, the Pashtun code 
(with concepts of hospitality, honour and revenge), and its 
self-regulating system of elders and arbitration, is at odds 
with central government and other western-style ideals.
Culture is not just about tribes, nor is the significance 
of culture to the military confined to influence.  
Nevertheless, analysis of cultural factors, including tribal 
dynamics, is crucial to the success of influence strategies.
2 
0307 In failed or failing states, oral traditions are usually 
strong.  Word of mouth compensates for low literacy rates 
and are the principal means by which messages are passed 
between opinion formers and local populations.  Use of verbal 
and audio messaging is likely to have greater effect than the 
written word.  Customs of story-telling in such societies and 
the modern introduction of mobile communication systems 
mean that messages both good and bad, true and untrue, can 
be transmitted very rapidly.  Commanders will need to ensure 
that their messaging is both timely, accurate and persistent 
to pre-empt rumour and manage the distortion inherent in 
verbal messaging.
0308 Populations will usually be sensitive to any slight, 
humiliation or attack on their culture by outsiders, be that real 
or perceived, deliberate or unintentional.  Misunderstanding 
can lead to mistrust and increased tension.  Foreign Area 
Officers
3 deployed cultural advisers and locally employed 
civilians can provide invaluable advice and the skills to decode 
and understand cultural nuan ce.  Messages delivered by 
foreign spokesmen typically lack  credibility and, regardless 
of content, are not as well received as those from familiar, 
trusted sources.  International forces should seek to use 
established channels for messaging.  Where these are absent 
or insufficient, they will need to build relationships with key 
leaders and the population in order to establish 
viable channels.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
38
The Use of Human Terrain Teams in Operations
To understand the cultural dimension of interventions 
into fragile states, the US military’s Foreign Military Studies 
Office established and deployed the Human Terrain Team 
(HTT) – five man teams, comprising social scientists and 
military personnel, who advise operational and tactical 
level commanders on cultural awareness shortcomings.  
A 2007 US Department of Defence report on HTT states:
‘The local population in the area of conflict – the human 
terrain – must be considered as a distinct and critical element 
of the battle space. Therefore, the HTT seeks to integrate 
and apply socio-cultural knowledge of the indigenous 
population to military operations in support of the 
commander’s objectives. In the words of one HTT member, 
‘One anthropologist can be much more effective than a 
B-2 bomber – not winning a war, but creating a peace one 
Afghan at a time’.
By 14 April 2007 38 HTT personnel were deployed in 
Iraq distributed among five teams.  Of those, eight were 
social scientists and thirteen spoke Arabic.  Their role 
was to provide commanders with relevant socio-cultural 
knowledge and understanding, and to extend that 
further by providing specialists able to help integrate that 
understanding into the military decision making process.
4 
Influence as a Contest
0309 Adversaries may use sensational acts of terrorism to 
influence populations, the purpose of which is to generate 
a widespread sense of fear and descent into chaos.  Cheap 
digital cameras and remote internet connections, combined 
with simple narratives to shape both local and global 
perceptions facilitate this.  A video of the murder of American 
contractor Nicholas Berg by Zarqawi, probably initially sent 
from a computer somewhere in Iraq, was copied onto Internet 
sites and within 24 hours had been downloaded half a million 
times.
5  Adversaries messages are highly tuned to specific 
audiences.  They know that opinions can be changed and it is 
this knowledge that empowers and enables them, even when 
they cannot win a physical contest.  Victory in combat may 
be irrelevant if the adversary can continue to fight in a virtual 
battle space of ideas and maintain credibility.
An Adversary’s View of Influence
Abu Mussab al-Zawahiri points out that short-term goals 
require the support of the masses, and that they know the 
enemy (Coalition Forces) is trying to separate them from 
the masses.  Zawahiri states that al-Qaeda must “avoid 
action that the masses don’t understand or approve of.”  
Indeed, the letter instructed Zarqawi to stop broadcasting 
the slaughter of hostages on the Internet.  While Zawahiri 
is not condemning the practice per se, and to some 
degree justifies it, he argues that by exercising restraint, 
influence can be maximised:
“the general opinion of our supporter does not comprehend 
that, and that this general opinion falls under a campaign 
by the malicious, perfidious, and fallacious campaign by the 
deceptive and fabricated media.  And we would spare the 
people from the effect of questions about the usefulness of 
our actions in the hearts and minds of the general opinion 
that is essentially sympathetic to us.”
Adversaries can have as much difficulty as us in trying to 
explain complex issues to local and global audiences.  Yet 
despite his tirade against the media in the quote above, 
he starkly acknowledges their importance:
“I say to you: that we are in a battle, and that more than half 
of this battle is taking place in the battlefield of the media.  
And that we are in a media battle in a race for the hearts and 
minds of our Umma.” 
6
0310 Adversaries usually have a comparative advantage 
over intervening forces and agencies because they share 
religion, ethnicity, culture, history and geography with the 
people.  Even in Northern Ireland where UK forces shared a 
common language and ethnicity (allowing every member of a 
foot patrol to read the graffiti, talk and listen to the population) 
the culture of the Republican movement was still not well 
understood.  This is made much harder where the language is 
not shared and all communication with the population has to 
be conducted through an interpreter.
0311 In stabilisation, the state’s authority, legitimacy 
and reach are in direct competition with their adversaries.  
Adversaries may make strong use of religious or cultural 
narratives, norms or imagery.  They may also choose to place 
the conflict within existing ethnic tensions.  Their proximity 
to local populations may have either a coercive or persuasive 
effect.  This can aid them in the construction of a simple, 
culturally attuned and emotive message to support 
their cause.
2.  Joint Doctrine Note 1/09 The Significance of Culture to the Military .
3. The US Defense Intelligence Agency deploys a cadre of long service Foreign Area 
Officers to provide a pool of contextual understanding and to enable partnership and 
capacity-building operations.
4. Tatham, S. Strategic Communication: A Primer.  Advanced Research and Assessment Group 
Special Series 08/28, Defence Academy of the UK.
5. The Atlantic Monthly, July/August 2006.
6. Umma: The global Muslim community – al-Qaeda’s ultimate source of strategic success 
and future
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
39
Northern Ireland - Coverage of Events and Public 
Perception Matter
On 30 January 1972, in what later became known as 
Bloody Sunday, during the course of a protest march 
in Londonderry, thirteen people were shot dead and 
another died from his wounds.  One recent published 
version of events commented as follows:
‘Members of the Parachute Regiment appeared to have 
run amok, live on TV, and the pictures of a Catholic priest 
running, half-crouched, through the Bogside waving a 
white handkerchief to try and help a fatally wounded victim 
will haunt the British establishment for ever.  Its effect was 
devastating.  Gerry Adams later commented that on the back 
of Bloody Sunday ‘money, guns and recruits flooded into 
the IRA’. 
7 
The perceptions of individuals and groups are formed 
by personal experiences and second-hand assimilation 
of news and information.  Adverse events will normally 
be amplified by greater media coverage and discussion 
than positive events.  A single event early in a campaign 
can set an enduring critical public perception and tone 
that will be hard to break, and it may greatly assist the 
adversary.  The commander cannot prevent all mistakes, 
but he can and should set the tone for how the military 
force will behave and build a reserve  of positive reputation 
by highlighting constructive events in support of the 
people to mitigate the negative.
0312 The commander’s strategy for winning the influence 
contest can easily be undermined by actors and events 
outside of his control; corrupt ion, ineptitude and chronic 
failings of the host government are possible examples.  The 
attitudes, policies and actions of the UK, or its allies on all 
manner of seemingly unrelated issues can also impact on 
efforts to achieve influence in-theatre.
0313 Speed of response is vital.  First impressions count 
and the commander should reinforce his message through 
synchronised words, deeds and images in advance of counter 
narratives proffered by adversaries – be first with the truth .  
The most powerful and convincing messages are factually 
true and are mutually reinforced through our actions.  
However, much messaging will cover subjective issues where 
the truth is not self-evident, or differs according to individual 
perception or cultural values.  Commanders may wish to 
capitalise on subjectivity where the benefits (e.g. legitimate 
military deception) outweigh the potential risks.
Narratives
0314 The narrative seeks to explain the actions of the main 
protagonists.  Commanders should explain the purpose of 
their presence and develop an appropriate narrative for each 
audience.  The best narratives are those which embrace 
the concepts and language of target audiences; known as 
the stickiness of the message.  All Forces should understand 
the narrative of their activities.  Actions should be planned 
and executed to support this narrative, and not the other 
way around.  Sometimes this will involve the controlled and 
coordinated release of themed information; other times 
it may involve specific security operations amongst local 
populations.  Both words and actions and the persistent 
manner in which they are carried out reinforces the narrative.
An Adversary’s Narrative
In November 2006 al-Qaeda in Mesopotamia issued a 
statement justifying attacks on Shi’ites and the coalition 
forces in language designed to provide a unifying 
narrative to a splintered Sunni insurgency: 
“The arrows of the [Sunni] mujahadeen focused on the 
occupying crusader enemy until the black hatred of the Shia 
in Iraq for the Sunnis became obvious...This sect, alongside the 
invading Crusader forces, became the tip of the spear in the 
fight against the mujahadeen.”
8 
Note: The use of terms such as  occupation, Crusader and 
the play upon sectarian and religious fissures in Iraqi 
society.  Other statements played upon traditional Sunni 
Arab suspicion and enmity towards the Persians.  This 
referred both to Iran, and the Shia politicians in power in 
Baghdad who had, or were perceived to have, links with 
the Iranian regime.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
40
0315 Narratives should be flexible so that they are not 
undermined by local messages designed to respond to 
contemporaneous events.  They should also be consistent 
with both the strategic communication strategy and, where 
possible, narratives of the host government.  Strategic level 
narratives set out broad themes which are reinforced by 
tailored, flexible local messages, creating a hierarchy of related 
messages.  It follows that a narrative must be preceded by a 
strategy.  Characteristics of a good narrative include:
• It is clear and credible; it explains the campaign.
• It is acceptable to all intervening parties and the host 
government.
• It is linked to the UK’s political objectives.
• It supports local messaging and can be adapted at 
 local level.
• It is able to be backed up by coherent physical activity 
 and imagery.
• It has a positive impact on a variety of target audiences at 
tempo and relative to the competing narratives.
0316 Recent operations have shown that some of the most 
successful mechanisms for spreading messages lie at either 
end of the technology spectrum.  In Iraq and Afghanistan, 
ancient and traditional mechanisms for discussion such 
as Shuras and Loya Jirgas carry great weight.  At the other 
end of the spectrum, emerging media outlets such as 
blogs and social networking sites can be highly effective.  
However, the most credible mechanisms are the many daily 
interactions between the population, host government 
and international forces.  For example, daily contact during 
security sector reform between liaison and mentoring teams 
and the indigenous security forces generate thousands of 
individual opportunities to reinforce key messages, but one 
that is seldom used systematically.  Each member of the 
indigenous security force provides a channel to his friends 
and family.  Every action, inaction, interaction and transaction 
sends a message.  All should be consistent with the narrative.  
Influence operations need some discipline and care in 
execution, as with a kinetic fireplan.
0317 Adversaries will have their own narrative which should 
be analysed, countered or rebutted.  If an adversaries’ narrative 
can be discredited, acquiescence to the host government’s 
authority and legitimacy should follow.  The commander 
should seek to identify the potential resonances and frictions 
between adversarial narratives and local audiences.  Where 
friction is identified, a counter-narrative should be developed 
to exploit it.
Undermining Adversaries’ Narratives 
– Missed Opportunities
The Legitimacy of the Taliban: Taliban leader Mullah 
Omar received widespread media coverage when, in 
1996, he took Mohammed’s shroud out of storage in 
the shrine of Kharka Sharif in Kandahar, and wore it in a 
public rally, as a way to identify himself with the Prophet.  
However in 2007 there was no coverage of the decision 
of the elders of Kandahar that he should be stripped of 
the cloak for his un-Islamic actions.  This was a fleeting 
opportunity to undermine the adversaries’ narrative.
The Global War on Terror
The narrative of the Global War on Terror has made use 
of terms such as jihad  (holy struggle) and mujaheddin 
(struggler) in reference to adversaries.  However, the use 
of such a vocabulary has served to reinforce adversaries’ 
claim to legitimacy in the Islamic world whereas terms 
such as hirabah (unlawful war) and irahabi (terrorist) might 
have achieved the opposite effect.
Actions, Words and Images
0318 Gaining and holding an au dience’s attention is as 
important as crafting the message.  The most powerful tool is 
the image.  The more dramatic, the more attention it attracts 
and the more it will endure.  Visual images resonate and 
persuade; shaping social  and political agendas.
The Adversary Aligning the Word and the Deed
In discussing the way ahead, Zarqawi analyses the various 
groups that are present - the Kurds, the Shia (for whom 
he reserves his most bitter hatred), the Americans, and 
the (Shia dominated) Iraqi military and security forces.  In 
addition to setting out his reasons for initiating a bitter 
civil war along sectarian lines (Sunni v Shia), he sees the 
importance of influence and perceptions.  In terms of 
selling his carefully prepared narrative he states:
“Perhaps we will decide to go public soon, even if in a gradual 
way, so that we can come out into the open.  We have been 
hiding for a long time.  We are seriously preparing media 
material that will reveal the facts, call forth firm intentions, 
arouse determination, and become an arena for jihad in 
which the pen and the sword complement each other.”
Abu Musab al-Zarqawi
7.   Powell, J. (2008) Great Hatred, Little Room: Making Peace in Northern Ireland , The Bodley 
Head.
8. From Adelphi Paper 402, Iraq’s Sunni Insurgency  by Ahmed S Hashim.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
41
0319 The standard adversarial use of the image is the 
propaganda of the deed.  This might be an act of violence 
conducted against an enemy, (usually the host government 
or intervening actors), whose visual impact or symbolic value 
summons support from sympathetic communities.  It is part of 
a process of narrative construction and reinforcement, and it 
may constitute the core of the adversaries’ influence strategy.  
Targets tend to be selected for their symbolic impact, 
amplifying their ability to resonate meaning to their audience.  
The attacks on the World Trade Centre and Pentagon are 
contemporary examples.
0320 International forces and agencies, on the other hand, 
should use propaganda of the deed with care.  Shock and 
awe strikes on adversarial targets beamed around the world 
may create an impression of success, but may also generate 
significant antipathy amongst otherwise neutral populations.  
Often, the value of the propaganda of the deed overrides the 
military value of the deed itself.  However, the interpretation of 
the deed is even more important.  It may be better to focus on 
visible development, or safety and security within politically 
significant communities.
The Power of the Image
The image is a powerful influence tool; it is the 
visualisation of the deed that endures long after the 
event itself.  It portrays meaning without words, crossing 
language, literacy and cultural barriers.  Its power can be 
positive or negative, the latter demonstrated in this image 
from Iraq showing a newspaper featuring graphic photos 
of US soldiers abusing Iraqi prisoners.  These images 
were enough to instantly undermine and discredit the 
coalition narrative of liberators, and allow the adversary to 
generate one of coalition occupiers and torturers.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
42
SECTION II 
THE INFLUENCE 
FRAMEWORK
Influence – Organisation and Capabilities
0321 Strategic Communication.  Strategic 
communication is the articulation of cross-government 
guidance on influence and supports the synchronisation of 
the words and deeds of friendly actors to maximise desired 
effects.  As the term implies, being pitched at the strategic 
level, many of the ways and means used to conduct strategic 
communication fall outside the remit of the commander.  
Strategic communication messages are coordinated at 
the national strategic level through Targeting and Info Ops 
or through the National Information Strategy.  Strategic 
communication also provides the framework for the delivery 
of psychological effects at lower levels, where the 
operational military contribution is known as influence 
activities.  Strategic Communication has two overlapping 
aspects – that relating to crisis management and that 
concerning enduring requirements.
0322 Coordinating the UK Message.  During 
crisis management and military operations, strategic 
communication is guided by the narrative, laid out in a cross-
government Information Strategy.
• Cohesion.  Cohesion is achieved by a common 
understanding between partners on the ways and 
means to achieve crisis-resolution objectives.  Nationally, 
cohesion is required between government departments 
and agencies, and between th e UK Government and its 
domestic audience.  Cohesion is particularly important in 
the context of coalition and al liance operations, given that 
our adversaries will attempt to disrupt coalition unity.
• Coherence.  A clear and simple high-level narrative 
explains the stabilisation mission, the purpose and the 
role of its participants, and is aimed at supporting the 
operational and tactical activities undertaken by the 
deployed forces.  Coherence is achieved through the use 
of clear, mutually supportive themes and messages, which 
resonate with our target audiences.  These should cover 
the full range of issues relevant to crisis resolution, for all 
       phases of a campaign and include contingencies for high 
risk adverse events – but this will likely be impossible 
at first – and guard against ambiguity and scope for 
misinterpretation.  Coherence is challenging at any time; 
where national objectives differ and our forces face 
multiple cultures in theatre it may be impossible 
 to achieve.
0323 Coalitions and Alliances.   A single, integrated 
strategic communication plan should be the aim.  This 
aspiration is likely to be limited by different national objectives, 
legal frameworks, and constitutional or cultural positions.  It 
is likely that a coalition strategic communication plan will be 
modest in scope and bland in order to achieve consensus 
between partners.  Not all partners will have national plans 
to fall back on, but the UK will seek to reflect the agreed 
coalition communication plan in its own Information Strategy.  
In the absence of a coalition information strategy, the 
strategic communication vision of the Lead Nation is likely 
to prevail.
9  Within NATO policy,10 the North Atlantic Council 
has responsibility for providing mission-specific strategic and 
political guidance on all information related aspects of NATO’s 
operations and activities .  Emerging NATO doctrine on Info 
Ops
11 expects that such guidance will be in a similar format to 
a UK Information Strategy.
0324 The National Information Strategy.   At the highest 
levels within the UK, strategic communication is coordinated 
through cross-government Information Strategy Groups.  
These are normally chaired by a 2* official from the Foreign 
& Commonwealth Office (FCO) and produce a National 
Information Strategy (NIS) in relation to a particular operation.  
Each NIS aims to articulate the strategic level narrative that will 
be used across the UK Government.  It contains details of:
• The campaign objectives and end-state.
• Information objectives.
• Target audiences.
• Core script.
• Key themes and messages related to 
 campaign progression.
• Lines to take.
• Channels of communication.
• Measures of effectiveness.
• Planning factors and constraints.
The NIS will be part of the Chief of the Defence Staff’s 
Directive to the operational level, enhanced with military-
strategic guidance.  Operational planners should note 
that information objectives may be considered as decisive 
conditions and themes as supporting effects, or as factors and 
constraints in their own analysis and planning processes, to be 
 9. For example, the US view (and emerging NATO view) of Strategic Communication is the 
coordinated use of Public Affairs, Information Operations and Public Diplomacy.
10. Military Policy on Information Operations MC 422/3 dated 8 July 2008.
11. Allied Joint Publication (AJP) -3.10 Allied Doctrine for Information Operations  due for 
promulgation in late 2009
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
43
12. New Paradigms for 21st Century Conflict US Department of State Foreign Policy Agenda: 
Volume 12, Number 5
13. Because Joint Action is optimised for conventional operations and is less well-suited 
to political focussed, stabilisation campaigns, the term Information Activities is used 
here in preference to Influence Activities.  Thus Fires, Manoeuvre, Information Activities 
and Other Activities all, individually and collectively, are used to exert influence in 
Stabilisation.
coordinated with other government departments or agencies 
and international partners.
The Commander’s Influence Tools
“We conduct all operations in order to influence people and 
events, to bring about change, whether by 155mm artillery 
shells or hosting visits; these are all Influence Operations.  We 
sought to make use of every lever we had to influence events.”
Divisional Commander Iraq, 2008
0325 The commander’s role is, initially, to establish the 
effects necessary to exert the desired influence.  Assisted 
by his staff, he then derives the activities required to realise 
those effects, and subsequently orchestrates them during 
execution.  Joint Action provides a framework to support 
this process by ensuring that all capabilities and types of 
activity are considered and, where appropriate employed, to 
realise both physical and psychological effects in the most 
efficient and effective manner.  Though Joint Action brigades 
activities by type, these should not be viewed as discrete nor 
exclusive groupings.  While conv enient to visualise activities 
as primarily seeking either a physical or psychological effect, 
the realisation of any one effect may require the orchestration 
of many types of activity or, for example, the specific 
employment of physical means (fires) to realise psychological 
effect.  The aim of Joint Action is to achieve synergy between 
different purposeful activities; organising them by type simply 
provides structure and aids the allocation of planning and 
execution responsibilities.
‘We typically design physical operations first, then craft 
supporting information operations to explain our actions.  
This is the reverse of al-Qaeda’s approach.  For all our 
professionalism, compared to the enemy’s, our public 
information is an afterthought.  In military terms, for al-
Qaeda the ‘main effort’ is information; for us, information is a 
‘supporting effort’.
David Kilcullen
12  
0326 Fires and manoeuvre clearly achieve psychological, 
as well as physical effects.  Additionally, the commander has 
a range of non-lethal tools specifically tailored to manipulate 
information, or perceptions of that information once received.  
These include: Info Ops; Media Operations (Media Ops); Civil-
military Cooperation (CIMIC); and Operations Security (OPSEC).  
Fusing them into an approach, that is coherent with both fires 
and manoeuvre is the objective of the Joint Effects Board (JEB).  
The JEB uses coordination mechanisms, adapted from time-
sensitive targeting procedures, with membership expanded 
to include inter-agency partne rs and those responsible for 
the delivery of non-lethal effects to achieve synchronised 
influence activity at the local level.
0327 During stabilisation the range of tools is 
supplemented by other activities, such as security sector 
reform, infrastructure or governance projects, which present 
opportunities for delivering a coordinated message.  While 
these do not fit easily within the generic types of activity, the 
underpinning logic of Joint Action is equally pertinent to their 
consideration and application.
 
0328 The practical detail of how the military commander 
can make best use of influence tools is covered in Part 3, 
Chapters 10 (Planning) and 1 1 (Execution).  He should always 
keep in mind that his role is to align the appropriate selected 
actions, words and images of th e coalition forces in time and 
space on the correctly identified  target audiences.  By doing 
this he may change behaviour an d achieve influence that will 
bring about a political settlement.  Figure 3.1 illustrates that 
the military contribution to stabilisation is to achieve influence 
through the correct balanced and synchronised interaction of 
lethal and non-lethal activities in a manoeuvrist manner.
13 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
44
Media 
Operations
Information
Operations
CIMIC
OPSEC
Physical
Destruction
Counter
Command
Activities
Electronic
Warfare
Security
Secure Reform
Infrastructure
Projects
Support to 
Governance
Placing strength against
identified venerabilities
in time and space to 
gain advantage
The Military Contribution to Stabilisation
 
 
Information Activities                Other Activities 
Manoeuvre  
 
 
 
  
                         Fires
Target 
Audience
 Influence 
  
Influence 
 
 
Influence  
Influence 
Psychological Operations
Computer Network Operations
Special Capabilities
Deception
Key Leader Engagements
Posture - Presence - Profile
  Figure 3.1 – The Commander’s Influence Tools: Aligning Actions, Words and Images in Time and Space
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

“In the campaign against 
terrorist networks and other 
extremists, we know that direct 
military force will continue 
to have a role.  But over the 
long term, we cannot kill or 
capture our way to victory.  
What the Pentagon calls 
‘kinetic’ operations should 
be subordinate to measures 
to promote participation 
in government, economic 
programs to spur development, 
and efforts to address the 
grievances that often lie at 
the heart of insurgencies and 
among the discontented from 
which the terrorists recruit.  It will 
take the patient accumulation 
of quiet successes over time to 
discredit and defeat extremist 
movements and their ideology”
Robert M. Gates, US Secretary of Defense, 15 July 2008
Section I  The Practical Application of Operational Art
 The Differing Requirements in Stabilisation
 The Commander’s Role
 Organising for Influence
 The Commander’s Relationship with the Host Nation
 The Commander’s Relationship with Other Actors
Section II  Leadership and Legal Requirements
 Leadership
 Coalition Considerations
 Legal Requirements
Section III  Setting the Parameters
 Establishing Comprehensive Coordination Mechanisms
 Influence to Achieve the Appropriate Political   
 Settlement
 Effective Understanding and Intelligence
 Governance through the Rule of Law
 The Mandate
Section IV  An Activity Framework
 Shape-Secure-Hold-Develop 
Section V  The Principles of Stabilisation
 Primacy of Political Purpose
 Understand the Context
 Focus on the Population
 Foster Host Nation Governance, Authority and   
 Indigenous Capacity
 Unity of Effort
 Isolate and Neutralise Irregular Actors
 Exploit Credibility to Gain Support
 Prepare for the Long Term – Perseverance and   
 Sustainability
 Anticipate, Learn and Adapt
Annex 4A  Multinational Force-Iraq, Commander’s 
 COIN Guidance
Annex 4B  The Changing Rule of Law Framework of 
 Iraq 2003 – 2009
A Military Perspective by General Sir Rupert Smith KCB 
DSO* OBE QGM
CHAPTER 4
OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
45
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

46
0401 This chapter provides the civilian reader with an 
overview of some stabilisation considerations, so that they 
may contribute to the campaign planning process, and 
offer operational guidance.  It seeks to operationalise the 
stabilisation model and describes the practical application of 
operational art in stabilisation.  It briefly considers the issues 
of leadership and ethics.  Finally, it offers some conceptual 
ideas for the delivery of th e military contribution and 
describes the military prin ciples for stabilisation.
SECTION I
THE PRACTICAL 
APPLICATION OF 
OPERATIONAL ART
The Differing Requirements in Stabilisation
0402 Civilian readers will encounter the term  operational 
art.  This is the theory and practice of planning, preparing and 
conducting campaigns.  It concerns a commander’s skill in 
orchestrating tactical actions in concert with other agencies 
to achieve the desired outcome.  It is realised through a 
combination of the commander’s expertise and intuition, 
and the staff-assisted processes of campaign design and 
execution.  It translates creati ve and innovative thinking into 
practical action.
0403 In stabilisation, operational art should be based on a 
detailed understanding of the local political dynamics, and an 
in-depth knowledge of the friendly, neutral and adversarial 
groups.  Modern stabilisation can take place amidst semi-
anarchic situations, where the central structure of government 
is limited and adversaries can be a loose confederation (like 
the Taliban in Afghanistan) or franchise (such as al-Qaeda in 
Iraq).  This contrasts with the centralised, hierarchical and slow 
approaches of previous adversaries –  closed systems – such as 
Provisional Irish Republican Army and Group of Soviet Forces 
Germany.  Current and future adversaries are de-centralised, 
flat and agile.  They tend to focus on specific, relatively short-
term issues rather than strategy.  As a result their actions can 
appear contradictory, which makes then unpredictable.  Such 
open, de-centralised adversaries require us to respond with 
an open, de-centralised approach – where commanders 
delegate beyond the point of discomfort.  A critical challenge 
for him will be to adapt the thinking, organisation, tactics and 
procedures of the force to the requirements of stabilisation 
rather than conventional war.
0404  While UK Forces will be deeply involved in the 
provision of security and countering irregular activity, they 
will also need to contribute to the wider stabilisation effort.  
It is this wider context which makes stabilisation so complex.  
The political context will be dynamic; it is unlikely that initial 
political guidance to the commander will be sufficient in 
itself, or sufficiently enduring, to ensure that the continually 
evolving strategic context is adequately captured.  In addition, 
political sensitivities may inhibit a clear public articulation of 
the strategic rationale.  Rapidly changing events can quickly 
render previous judgements and appreciations obsolete.  The 
commander must be engaged as part of a continual strategic 
and operational review that relates changing conditions on 
the ground to the political purpose of operations.  There will 
be different perspectives; the situation will look different when 
viewed from capitals, strategic headquarters or in-theatre.  The 
challenge will be to align them.
0405 One of the paradoxes of these environments is 
that they can appear mired in strategic stalemate.  There 
can be a perception over months or even years of a lack 
of any progress.  Domestic populations and policymakers 
may be uncomfortable with the appearance of stalemate.  
However, these interventions will have been based on a 
calculated strategic choice that brings together the capacity 
and strategic interest consider ations outlined above.  The 
commander should play his part in helping to shape domestic 
understanding of the ebb and flow of these conflicts.  It will 
be important to retain focus on campaign shifts, not tactical 
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILIZATION: THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
47
incidents – beware the tyranny of the weekly report .  They are 
protracted, because shaping the political settlement within a 
conflict-riven society is inherently difficult and groups hostile 
to that effort have a vested interest in prolonging the conflict 
to wait out the intervention.
0406  The Clausewitzian dictum that war has its own 
grammar but not its own logic is at the heart of the military 
contribution to stabilisation.  The strategic and political 
purpose of operations is central to these types of integrated 
campaigns.  In traditional warfighting, the commander could 
afford to be relatively unc oncerned about the nuances of 
political purpose.  The requirement to defeat the enemy 
carried its own logic and provided sufficient guidance.  This 
was certainly true of NATO planning in the Cold War, and in 
operations such as the recapture of the Falkland Islands.  In 
contrast, in stabilisation, victory in combat will not necessarily 
achieve the political goal.
On 25 April 1975, 5 days before the fall of Saigon, US 
Colonel Harry Summers was in Hanoi leading a US 
delegation to the North Vietnamese capital.  During the 
visit he remarked to his North Vietnamese counterpart, 
Colonel Nguyen Don Tu, “you know, you never beat us on 
the battlefield”.   The North Vietnamese officer thought 
for a moment, then replied: “That may be so, but it is also 
irrelevant.”
 
The Commander’s Role
0407 The commander should place himself – and select 
and place his staff – in positions of influence across the 
multi-agency force if the latent potential of that force is to 
be unlocked and synchronised.  He will need to balance the 
requirement for information with the opportunity for action 
in order to make timely decisions, and he will need to become 
an expert in recognising when good enough  will do.
0408  Stabilisation will confer on a commander a political 
status by virtue of his negotiations with government 
representatives to resolve an inherently political problem.  
It is the commander’s access to politicians, diplomats and 
other agency leaders that will shape his operational art.  He 
will need to become an advocate for the use of the military 
instrument and canvas multi-agency support for it.
Organising for Influence
0409  Any commander will expect to plan and execute 
military operations.  But in stab ilisation, military operations 
will be seen as a political act with wide-reaching potential 
consequences.  The commander, therefore, will often have to 
consult others before acting.  He may also need to employ 
comprehensive means from outside his command chain, in 
which case it is his powers of persuasion, rather than direction 
that will secure them.  Since military headquarters are not 
conventionally structured to operate by persuasion, they 
may need to be adapted, restructured and trained for it.  His 
staff are also unlikely to have the developed skill-sets and 
experience required at the outset of the campaign.  He may 
therefore wish to recruit experts who can provide him with 
the advice that he requires both in-theatre and by exploiting 
reach out.
The Commander’s Relationship with the 
Host Nation
0410 The relationship between an international force and 
the host nation is elastic; it can be pulled and placed under 
tension, but it must not be allowed to break.  A commander 
will balance the needs of his force with the competing 
priorities and approaches of the host nation.  The international 
forces’ support will be conditional.
The Commander’s Relationship with 
Other Actors
041 1 The commander will utilise operational art across 
multiple relationships in addition to the host nation.  These 
include coalition partners, national capitals and other 
regional players.  He should be adept in making a case for the 
necessary freedoms and permissions to use force, sensing 
the diverse political nuances at work within his force.  These 
will translate into tangible agreed measures such as Rules 
of Engagement (ROE).  Having understood the explicit and 
implicit constraints, his operational design will need to 
accommodate national caveats as they apply to parts of 
his force.  As a coalition or alliance partner, he will need to 
recognise when to lead and when to follow, and to explain 
his logic to the national chain of command.  His relationship 
with the senior national diplomat (Ambassador or a Special 
Representative) will be critically important since this is the 
nexus of diplomatic and military instruments to achieve unity 
of effort, and is also the key point of access and influence 
between them.  Together they must set the tone and share 
the judgement as to how the elastic can be stretched or eased 
with the host nation.  It is by understanding which levers are 
available to influence host nation government behaviour, and 
how they may be employed, that the levers become mutually 
reinforcing.  This will be based on a mix of personality and 
process.  Of these, the most important is personality.
1. Imperial Policing and Duties in Aid of the Civil Power, Army Council Manual, 13 June 
1949.
2. Slim, Leadership in Management,  Australian Army Journal, no 102, November 1957.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
48
“Cooperation was not optional.  We were going to work 
together. Ryan Crocker and I sat down and committed to 
that, and whenever anybody tried not to do that, it was made 
known that that was unacceptable…”
General Petraeus
“General Petraeus and I had begun our own coordination 
befo
re either of us arrived in country.  We were in secure 
communication when he was still in Fort Leavenworth and I 
was still at our Embassy in Islamabad.” 
Ambassador Crocker
Joint C
entre for Operational Analysis interviews, 2009 
0412 In the absence of formal authority over other agencies, 
the commander needs to build tacit authority  using his powers 
of persuasion.  Through his personal engagement, he should 
establish mechanisms for cooperation and coordination that 
allow him some degree of control – not over the people of 
other nations and agencies – but over the coherence of their 
activities with his and with one another.  The military’s ability 
to coordinate and integrate is part of their smart power  in 
stabilisation.  While a commander can still exert full authority 
over his subordinate military chain of command, with other 
nations and agencies he can only use influence underpinned 
by his tacit or personal authority.
SECTION II
LEADERSHIP AND LEGAL 
REQUIREMENTS
‘Commanders on all levels undoubtedly have a great strain 
placed on their shoulders when aiding civil powers.  By their 
manner and outward bearing they can do much to give 
confidence to government officials, police, civilians and 
soldiers.  They will frequently be exasperated, but they must 
not show it: outrages by one side or another will sorely try 
[them].  Differences of opinion between the civil authorities 
and the military commander as to the best line of action are 
likely to arise.  The military commander must show due regard 
to the views of the civil authorities while not giving way if, 
in his considered opinion, such a course would be wrong; 
he must show firmness with tact.  The troops will want to 
see their commander and they must have confidence in his 
forthrightness and in his determination.’ 
1
0413 There is plenty of British military literature in support 
of developing leadership, but surprisingly little guidance 
on ethics.  Ethics inform law and they go beyond law.  This 
section summarises the key legal principles that underlie 
armed conflict, which are themselves rooted in ethics, and 
also those aspects of leadership that are pertinent.
Leadership
0414 The Contemporary Environment.  Although the 
advice given in 1949, quoted above, remains valid, there are 
additional aspects that need highlighting:
• The commander needs to appreciate his subordinates’ 
difficulties in balancing the risks to their own troops, 
against the need to offer maximum protection to the 
 civil population.
• The possible absence of a well-understood, common 
moral code, especially when operating with a large mix of 
host nation military and civilian organisations.
• The risks associated with the reality of unity of effort in 
place of unity of command.
• The pressures of working in the glare of the global media.  
The commander should be resilient, despite demands to 
respond to short term shocks.
• The political nature of the role of the military commander.
“The most important thing I had to think about was what 
the moral choices of command were; the moral choices that 
flow from fighting and the realisation that we were going 
to lose people.  I had to think through what must be done 
to move the operation forward for the price I was certain we 
would have to pay.  I chose to do everything I could to move 
the operation forward once we were deployed, and in this I 
deliberately drove the operation hard.  I knew we would lose 
people, and I did not think it would be acceptable to lose 
people and not move the operation as far forward as we 
could have done.  One final reason why thinking through the 
moral choices is so important; and that was because it was 
to them that I returned when the stresses of the operation 
were at their greatest, and they have also allowed me to live 
with the consequences of what we did, and the losses that we 
suffered.”
UK Battle Group Commander, Afghanistan, 2008
0415 Projection of Personality.  Field Marshal Viscount 
Slim said that: ‘first and foremost military leadership is about 
the projection of personality.  It is that combination of 
persuasion, compulsion and example that makes other people 
do what you want them to do.’
2  He went on to say: ‘The first 
thing the population will want after war is security, and if the 
interveners won’t or can’t provide it they will look to someone else 
who can.  So, it is essential to dominate the security space and 
introduce the rule of law from day one, moment one – even if, at 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
49
the start, soldiers have to do it through martial law’. 3 It is in this 
situation that the commander needs to provide the clearest 
leadership.  His subordinates will transition between combat 
and peaceful interaction with the locals regularly.  Units 
engaged in warfighting can be expected to support local 
governance and economic development as soon as combat 
ceases.  It is important therefore, that a commander clearly 
thinks through these issues and potential tensions.  At critical 
points in the campaign the commander will need to find ways 
to impose his will on the chaos and articulate his vision.  Such 
was the case in 2008 when General Petraeus updated his 
Coalition campaign guidance in Iraq, see Annex 4A.
Taliban Leadership Impose Code of Conduct 
on its Fighters
4 
In an attempt to consolidate and control their disparate 
organisation, the Taliban leadership have issued a set of 
guidance and rules about how it should conduct itself.  
This is a form of commander’s guidance, covering a range 
of subject areas; for example, prisoners, civilian casualties, 
and suicide bombings.
0416 Support to Subordinates.  Military leaders are 
responsible for delivering national aims within national laws 
and ethical standards.  Leaders are also responsible for the 
standards of their subordinates.  The pressures of prolonged 
stabilisation missions will require leaders to be aware of 
signs of stress in both individuals and units.  Commanders 
sometimes need to de-escalate a situation and this may mean 
risking their own men’s lives in order to protect the lives of the 
indigenous population.
“Communicate what to do and what not to do clearly 
through as many channels as feasible … Commander’s intent 
often is misunderstood; check to see what leaders far down in 
the organisation believe you expect of them.  Commanders 
tend to have too many transmitters and not enough receivers.  
Use (others) to alert you to problems you may not have heard 
about through line subordinates.  Seek information.”
Thomas B. Grassey - the James B. Stockdale Professor of 
Lead
ership and Ethics at the US Naval War College.
0417 Cultural Tolerance Versus Immutable Standards.  
Lieutenant General Sir John Kizsley identified the cultural 
requirement of the contemporary coalition commander as an 
ability to respect the differences of others while still achieving 
effective command.  He identified four attributes essential for 
a coalition commander: political acumen, diplomacy, applied 
intelligence and mental stamina .  All apply to any senior 
military leader, but they become particularly important when 
operating with forces and agencies from other nations.  Local 
culture does not relieve the commander of his responsibility 
for maintaining ethical and moral standards.  He will need 
to strike a balance between tolerating what is acceptable 
behaviour in one culture, agai nst condemning that which is 
unacceptable in any circumstance.  Through all its actions and 
messages, the international force should lead by example, 
demonstrate compassion and empathy for the population, 
maintain the moral high ground and provide a moral compass 
for others.
0418 Dealing with Mistakes.  Mistakes are inevitable, and 
the commander will need to acknowledge when things do 
go wrong.  He will try to minimise the risk of his subordinates 
operating outside the law (in combat, prisoner handling or 
engaging with the population), behaving insensitively or 
causing excessive collateral damage.  Where these do occur, 
he should be ready to respond swiftly and honestly.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
50
 Coalition Considerations
Observations on the UK Military by a Partner Nation 
– There is Much to Learn!
• UK military process: “…we did have to learn British 
abbreviations (it is suspected that they use more than 
they actually understand themselves).”
• Arrogance: “ …people were being talked down to.  For 
example, on verifying last-minute changes to orders and 
attempting to explain the consequences that these would 
have on our battle procedures, the British tended to 
repeat the same orders, but this time very slowly….”
Legal Requirements
0419 The fundamental principles that underlie the Law of 
Armed Conflict are military necessity, humanity, distinction (or 
discrimination) and proportionality.  These have strong ethical 
roots.  The increasing reach of International Human Rights Law 
further controls the behaviour of armed forces and affords 
protections and advantages in certain situations to those 
who are affected by military operations.
5  In stabilisation there 
may also be good political or military reasons for exercising a 
greater degree of self-restraint than is legally required.
6 
0420 The Principles of Proportionality and Distinction.  
The principle of proportionality requires that the anticipated 
loss of civilian life, injury to  civilians, damage to civilian 
property or a combination thereof, incidental to attacks, 
must not be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct 
military advantage expected to be gained.  Distinction (or 
Discrimination) requires combatants only to attack military 
objectives and use means/methods of attack that can 
discriminate between military and civilian objectives.
0421 Determination of Target Value.  When dealing with 
a High Value Target, who will often be an individual, the same 
principles of proportionality and distinction apply.  What 
may differ is that the concrete and direct military advantage 
expected to be gained will generally be greater than for a 
low ranking (or low value) individu al.  Thus, as a matter of law, 
proportionality may allow a higher level of collateral damage 
for High Value Targets than fo r a gunman,  for example.  
However the potential strategic, negative effect of even 
legitimate and justifiable collateral damage should be 
weighed against the potential advantage.
0422 Minimising Unwanted Outcomes.  The commander 
should not only determine the kinds of weapons to use and 
how to employ them, establishing whether lethal means 
are permitted – or even desired.
7  He will consider first, 
second and third order effects as well as desired and possibly 
undesired ones.  For example, bombs delivered by fixed-
wing close air support may destroy the source of small arms 
fire from a building in an urban area; however, lower-calibre 
direct fire weapons may be more appropriate.  This is not only 
because of the risk of collateral damage to nearby buildings 
and non-combatants, but also to the effect on the community 
and the overall impression given to the civilian population 
in the media which may undermine strategic objectives.  
Sometimes explaining that you have chosen not to engage 
may be the best course of action.  Tactical commanders 
should always have an eye on the wider strategic objective; 
fires should only be used when necessary.
Unintended Consequences: the Zawahiri letter
Adversaries face similar dilemmas: here al-Qaeda are 
confronted by ideological schisms between the Sunni 
and the Shia sects, and this poses a problem for the 
Sunni leadership who see the Shia as a greater threat 
to their ambitions (of establishing a caliphate), than the 
West.  A Shia-dominated Iraq would be a major set-back 
to al-Qaeda’s ambitions.  They wrestle with the paradox 
of attacking Shia, who are, in the eyes of most Sunni, still 
Muslim Arab brothers:
“Even if we attack the Shia out of necessity, then why do 
you announce this matter and make it public, which compels 
the Iranians to take counter measures?  And do the brothers 
forget that both we and the Iranians need to refrain from 
harming each other at this time in which the Americans are 
targeting us?”
0423 Policing and Countering Irregular Activity.  The 
purpose of policing is to maintain law and order, usually with 
the consent of the population.  In stabilisation, military forces 
aim to defeat adversaries in order to establish civil authority.  
Once the aim is achieved, these same forces must preserve 
that security until host nation police forces can assume 
responsibility.  This wider policing task will be unfamiliar.  
Although there is a clear difference between combat and 
policing, for UK forces at least, stabilisation requires that the 
military contribution must be able to adapt to both.
3. Ibid, page 94.
4. The Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan Rules for Mujahideen  from www.english.aljazeera.net/
news/asia/2009  27 July 2009.
5. See Chapter 5 Joint Service Publication (JSP) 383 for a more detailed discussion.
6. For example, an Israeli human rights NGO distributed video cameras to Palestinian 
civilians to video the actions of the Israeli Defence Force during operations in Gaza in 
2008.  Video footage was used later to support allegations of illegality and abuse.
7. Details will be given to the commander in the operation-specific Rules of Engagement 
Profile.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
51
0424 Maintaining the Rule of Law.  Maintaining the rule 
of law entails very different ethical obligations than fighting 
to establish it.  Effective security exists when institutions, civil 
law, courts, prisons, and effective police are in place and can 
protect the recognised rights of individuals.  Typically this 
requires that:
• Operations continue to neutralise adversaries to the 
 extent that they are no longer a threat to the 
government’s authority.
• Institutions necessary for law enforcement (including 
police, the judiciary and prison services) are functioning.
• Such institutions are credible and the population has faith 
in their ability to resolve disputes.
• Where a functioning civil authority does not exist, the 
military may be required to help establish an interim 
government.
0425 Corruption.  Our very presence changes the situation 
in unforeseen ways.  Corruption takes many forms, for 
example, it can be a factor in local procurement, to bribes 
being demanded on the street for safe passage or security, 
and to non-meritocratic awards of jobs.  Citizens have a 
pragmatic sense of what is corrupt and what is culturally 
acceptable.  Where corruption on a grand scale is occurring 
under the cover of the security provided by our forces, the 
commander will need to make it clear to the host government 
that our cultural norms are being flouted.
Lose Moral Legitimacy, Lose the War
During the Algerian war of independence between 
1954 and 1962, French leaders decided to permit torture 
against suspected insurgents.  Though they were aware 
that it was against the law and morality of war, they 
argued that:
• This was a new form of war and these rules did not 
apply.
• The threat the enemy represented (communism) was 
a great evil that justified extraordinary means.
• The use of torture against insurgents was measured 
and non-gratuitous.
Officially condoning torture had several negative 
consequences.  It empowered the moral legitimacy of 
the opposition, undermined French moral legitimacy, 
and caused internal fragmentation among serving 
officers.  In the end, failure to comply with moral and 
legal restrictions against torture severely undermined 
French efforts and contributed to their strategic failure, 
despite significant tactical successes.  Illegal and immoral 
activities made the French extremely vulnerable to 
enemy propaganda inside Algeria among the Muslim 
population, as well as in the United Nations and the 
French media.  Torture also degraded the ethical 
climate throughout the French Army.  France eventually 
recognised Algerian independence in July 1963.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
52
SECTION III
SETTING THE 
PARAMETERS
0426 Identifying the Parameters.  Wider cross-
government activities need to be set within defined 
parameters.  Kitson conceived four such parameters which 
formed a generic  frame
8  within which operations could be 
successfully conducted.  By working within his defined frame, 
a government and its supporting allies should be able to 
use force successfully in support of stabilisation objectives, 
without damaging their position; generating a freedom to 
operate.  While not excluding the possibility of operating 
outside of the frame, Kitson suggested that by doing so, it 
would be ‘highly probable that the use of force will do more harm 
than good.’
9   The parameters he identified were:
• The establishment of good coordinating machinery.
• The creation of a political atmosphere that allows 
government measures to be successful.
• The setting up of effective intelligence networks.
• A steadfast adherence to the rule of law.
0427 Updating the Parameters.  These four parameters 
are still valid today, but require some modification for the 
current operating environment.  Together they bound the 
freedom to operate:
• Comprehensive Coordination Mechanisms.  To put 
in place structures and mechanisms to coordinate a fully 
comprehensive approach, from the strategic to tactical 
levels, to direct and execute the campaign.  In a fragile or 
failed state these mechanisms can act as a spine or nervous 
system to connect the government with regional and local 
leaders.
• Influence to Achieve the Appropriate Political 
Settlements.  To assess and implement appropriate 
Security, Governance and Development measures to 
achieve the necessary political settlements.  The influence 
thus created will reshape the relationship between the 
host nation government, competing political elites and 
the wider population.
• Understanding and Intelligence.  To develop 
understanding through the establishment and continuous 
refinement of intelligence organisations and campaign 
continuity initiatives.  This will help underpin analysis, 
shape the campaign plan to win the active support of 
target populations, and direct offensive action against 
hostile groups to cause long-term damage to them.
• Governance Through the Rule of Law.  Perceived 
inequalities in the administration of the law, and real 
or apparent injustices, are triggers for instability.  It is 
of paramount importance that all actions taken by a 
government and its agents in attempting to restore 
stability are legal.
8. Kitson, Bunch of Five . Faber & Faber Ltd. (1997) page 284.
9. Kitson, Practical Aspects of Counter-insurgency , Kermit Roosevelt Lecture delivered May 
1981, Upavon: Tactical Doctrine Retrieval Cell: Annex A to DCinC 8109 dated 11 June 
1981, page 5.
The Freedom to Operate
Use of Influence to achieve appropriate political settlements
Effective understanding and intelligence
Governance through the rule of law
Comprehensive coordination mechanisms
  Figure 4.1 – The Parameters of the Freedom to Operate
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
53
Establishing Comprehensive 
Coordination Mechanisms
0428 Managing Tensions.  There will be tensions between 
the various agencies.  Coordinating machinery must be 
designed to reduce and work through them.  They must be 
robust enough so that when breakdowns occur there is a 
process by which reconciliation can occur.  This is described 
in the US Inter-agency COIN Guide as  ‘an integrated conflict 
management system.’ 
10  The likelihood of friction within a 
national structure is high, but increases in coalition operations.  
Coordination mechanisms must also be capable of coherent 
linkage with the host nation and the commander should 
involve himself in their design (See Chapter 10, Section II).  
Since adversaries will seek to exploit the fault lines that exist 
within any alliance or coalition, particularly one that is reliant 
on the comprehensive approach to generate stabilisation, 
coordination mechanisms should mitigate the risks inherent in 
the coalition.
0429 Achieving Integration.  Successful comprehensive 
mechanisms involve real integration, including; collocation 
of civil and military headquarters, shared staff and common 
processes and co-terminus boundaries.  Provincial 
Reconstruction Teams are examples of structures employed to 
achieve better integration in the delivery of national support 
to local governance and development in both Iraq and 
Afghanistan since 2002.  Integrated process should include 
combined regular updates, a combined theatre integrated 
plan and inter-agency campaign assessment 
and synchronisation boards.  Technical interoperability 
between information systems is critical, but rarely achieved.  
In a new campaign, the commander should strive for this from 
the outset.
Influence to Achieve the Appropriate Political 
Settlement
0430 The commander should generate confidence in the 
perception that the host nation authorities will prevail, and 
will be supported by the international community for as 
long as is necessary.  Host nation authority may enable an 
accommodation with decisive elites, and lever the active 
support of target populations.
Perception and Credibility – Aden
Kitson explains
11 the consequences of lacking credibility, 
as a provider of long-term security:
‘In February 1966 Britain made public her intention of 
withdrawing from Aden when that country became 
independent in 1968.  In effect this meant that Britain would 
pull out in 1968 regardless of whether the insurgents had been 
defeated and regardless of whether the intended successor 
government was able to handle them.  That at any rate is 
how the people of Aden saw the situation and few of them 
doubted that the insurgents would ultimately gain control of 
the country.  As Julian Paget put it: ‘The announcement was a 
disastrous move from the point of view of the Security Forces, 
for it meant that from then onwards they inevitably lost all 
hope of any local support.’
Effective Understanding and Intelligence
0431 Understanding and Intelligence Requirements.  
Relevant, accurate and timely intelligence is critical to the 
successful conduct of any campaign.  In stabilisation that 
requirement for intelligence should be translated into 
understanding.  Understanding is essential to taking and 
subsequently holding the initiative.  Chapter 8 discusses the 
detail of intelligence and understanding, but a few specific 
points are highlighted below.
0432 Early Investment.  At the outset of the campaign it is 
unlikely that commanders will have a complete understanding 
of the environment.  Early allocation of forces and collation 
assets, purely for the purpose of gaining understanding, 
should be considered before other activities are undertaken.  
The first commanders deployed will often want to achieve 
decisive results during their tour, and there can be a logic 
to nipping an insurgency in the bud.  But action must be 
predicated on understanding; it may be better to build 
the detailed picture.  Early in vestment in intelligence and 
understanding will pay dividends in the longer term.
0433 Establishing Intelligence Networks.  Understanding 
a multi-faceted networked problem requires a networked, 
task-organised intelligence structure to gather and exploit 
information.  If influence is the central idea, intelligence-
enabled understanding is the way influence is cued.  
Intelligence (both multinational and indigenous), must be 
harnessed by active management of information and analysis.  
In creating these networks advice should be sought from 
International Organisations (and even Non-governmental 
Organisations (NGOs), many of whom will have been 
10. US Interagency COIN Guide page 37.
11. Kitson. Low Intensity Operations: Subversion, Insurgency & Peackeeping .  Faber & Faber Ltd. 
page 50.
12. Kitson. Low Intensity Operations: Subversion, Insurgency & Peackeeping.  Faber & Faber 
Ltd. page 69.
13. See Chapter 4, Section III for detail on the legal framework and Mandates.
14. The Convention against Torture and Other Cruelty, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment (1984), Article 1(1).
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
54
operating in the area long before  military forces deploy.  While 
not all may be willing to be a formal part of the intelligence 
network, some may be persuaded to engage informally, if only 
for their own force protection.
Governance Through the Rule of Law
‘As a rule the impartial use of the law is not only morally 
right but expedient because it is more compatible with 
the government’s aim of maintaining the allegiance of 
the population’.
12 
0434 Legitimacy.   Over the last thirty years the legal 
framework for such operations has developed in both 
breadth and complexity and now must take account of host 
nation sovereignty and changes in both UK domestic and 
international law.  There has also been an increase in the 
emphasis on human rights legislation.  In spite of this, today’s 
legal framework is as much an operational enabler as a 
constraint.  The UK’s adherence to the law, while others do not, 
should be exploited to underpin legitimacy driving a wedge 
between the adversary and the population.
The Mandate
0435 Implications.  The mandate provides the legal 
framework to conduct operations. 13  It also provides direction 
on freedom of action and constraints.
When the Coalition Provisional Authority was disbanded 
UN Security Council Resolution 1546 established new 
parameters for the Multinational National Force (MNF) 
in Iraq, changing the relationship from occupation to 
partnership.  An annex set out the new, collaborative 
security architecture, including new committee 
structures.  The annex stated ‘The structures…will serve 
as the fora for MNF and the Iraqi government to reach 
agreement on the full range of fundamental security 
and policy issues, including policy on sensitive offensive 
operations, and will ensure full partnership…’.   The 
requirement to ‘reach agreement’ was a new dimension, 
demanding of the coalition a shift in mental as well as 
procedural approach.
0436 The commander may find it helpful to list the activities 
that he intends to conduct and consider whether the mandate 
he has to operate under supports them.  Where it does not, 
he should seek to amend it to ensure that it provides him with 
the maximum freedom of action, while limiting that of the 
adversary.  The following aspects are pertinent:
• Powers of Arrest, Detention and Internment.  The 
mandate should lay down what, if any, powers of 
arrest, detention or internment are permitted.  This 
will particularly be the case when police primacy is 
inapplicable, and the military are leading the fight against 
criminality.  The mandate should specify who is permitted 
to detain those arrested and what rules apply to such 
detention.  If the police are unable to act effectively 
against criminals, the commander may need to make the 
case for additional mandated powers.
• Access.  The mandate will need to cover access to ports 
and airports, exemptions from custom duties, visas, local 
taxes, driving licences etc.
• Immunity.  UK forces overseas will probably require 
some degree of immunity from host nation law, and 
this must be included in the mandate.  As a minimum, 
such immunity should provide protection from criminal 
liability and protection from civil claims.  Failure to gain, 
or maintain, appropriate immunity, as has occurred in Iraq 
in 2009, could undermine the strategic viability of the 
operation.  
• Rule of Law.  The mandate must address which legal 
system is going to be applied in the theatre.  The legal 
status of coalition forces with respect to indigenous 
military and police forces must be established.  
Recognition of where primacy in law enforcement rests 
is critical, as is an understanding of the local legal system.  
All UK support should be conditional to adherence 
to acceptable codes of behaviour.  For example, the 
UK would be unable to support any legal system that 
condones torture or other cruel, inhumane or 
 degrading punishments.
14 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
55
SECTION IV
AN ACTIVITY 
FRAMEWORK
0437 Chapters 1 and 2 lay out a model for stabilisation 
based on:
• Security.
• Economic and Infrastructure Development.
• Governance and Rule of Law.
0438 All three elements build towards achieving an 
appropriate political settlement.  When trying to describe a 
theory for change, it is useful to have a framework to describe 
stabilisation activity.  The purpose of any framework is to 
provide a model that enables a shared lexicon; a common 
understanding can then be developed in a multi-agency 
community.  The commander should be able to use it to 
articulate to his civilian counterparts the key elements of his 
plan; what is to be conducted, where and by whom.  In this 
sense it helps to operationalise  the plan.
0439 The Operational Framework 15 (Shape-Engage-
Exploit-Protect-Sustain) is still relevant in stabilisation, as it is 
to all military operations, but it was designed for a different 
purpose; conventional warfighting, focused on the enemy.  
Stabilisation requires a population and environment focused 
framework.  A number of frameworks already exist:
• Clear – Hold – Build.
16 
• Understand – Shape – Secure – Hold – Build. 17 
• Shape – Secure – Develop. 18 
0440  The precise framework employed is arguably 
less important than the integrated approach and shared 
understanding; no one framework is necessarily more correct 
than any other.  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-40 adopts a 
framework for stabilisation activity which takes its provenance 
from the approach described in US COIN doctrine: 
• Shape
• Secure
• Hold
• Develop
0441 This builds on proven counter-insurgency theories 
and enables closer conceptual  linkage to governance and 
Managing the Mandate
Types of Mandate.  The highest legal authority is a 
United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR).  
Mandates can also take the form of Memorandums of 
Understanding (MOUs), Military Technical Agreements, 
Status of Forces Agreements (SOFAs) or a host nation 
request for support under their domestic law, which may 
be more constraining.  However, the form of the mandate 
is no guide to the limits to freedom of action it provides, 
which can only be deduced by analysis of the specific 
mandate for a given operation.  A UN Mandate (drafted by 
committee) is seldom clear-cut, therefore the commander 
needs to know how to use this to his advantage.  Annex 
4B shows the changing Iraq legal framework.
Questions the Commander Should Ask When 
Considering the Mandate:
• How has the government categorised the stabilisation 
operation; which laws and obligations apply?
• Do any of these laws require interpretation?
• What are the implications for operations?
Aspects of a Mandate that can Affect Operational 
Freedoms and Constraints
• Access • C2 of own forces
• Basing • Freedom of movement
• Overflight • Status of contractors
• Carriage of arms and ammunition • Jurisdiction over criminal offences
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
56
development.  It has an obvious relationship to the US 
approach of Clear-Hold-Build, but reflects the importance the 
UK place on Shape  in order to develop both understanding 
and plans as well as cueing civilian agency support for 
subsequent Develop activity.  Secure is used to reflect a focus 
on the population rather than just terrain or enemy.  Hold 
seeks to highlight the critical transition from military-led 
security to civilian-led development and articulates the risk 
in this period of consolidation and transition.  Develop is 
used because it describes more intuitively the development 
of capacity, primarily by civilians.  Security progress should 
be seen not just as a sequential series of steps into whose 
footprints civil actors can move, but rather as the creation 
of conditions and windows of  opportunity through which 
others must be ready to move, to exploit and develop 
campaign momentum.
0442 A key in stabilisation is alig ning military and civil effort 
so that neither is wasted.  A large military force will require 
a large civilian effort to conduct development.  Civil-Military 
Co-operation (CIMIC) effort under Shape-Secure-Hold  will not 
be sufficient.  The purpose of the military contribution is to set 
the security conditions for cross-sector exploitation with the 
necessary momentum.  Where the civilian force is missing or 
lacks momentum, there can be no Develop  and the strategic 
initiative will swing back to the adversary.  In this case, a new 
plan will be required.
0443 The apparently sequential articulation of the 
framework – Shape, Secure, Hold, Develop – must not be 
confused with its application and execution.  At theatre level 
it is definitely not a sequential process.  There is overlap and 
concurrency, as Figure 4.2 illustrates.  The higher the level of 
the operation at which the activity is being described, the 
more concurrency and overlap there is likely to be.  At the 
tactical level it is likely that the activities will be required to 
be implemented in sequence, but it will take place within a 
higher level, concurrent plan.  At the theatre level, it is the 
need to seize the initiative that demands the framework is 
not applied in a linear manner in which only one activity is 
being conducted at a single moment, or in one area.  Rather, 
the framework provides for a span of activity to enable a 
comprehensive approach in which, at any one given moment, 
one or all of its components may be enacted.  To do otherwise 
would be to cede space, time and ultimately the initiative 
to the adversary.  There are a number of constants that run 
throughout the campaign, such as engagement, analysis, 
assessment and an aim towards transition.  Most importantly 
of all, influence is the overarching effect that all the elements 
of a stabilisation campaign will seek to achieve.  Therefore, the 
framework can be described as sitting within an all embracing 
sphere of influence that is the net effect which security, 
governance and development activity seeks to deliver.
15.  Joint Defence Publication (JDP) 01 (2nd Edition) Campaigning .
16. The most demanding of three approaches to counter-insurgency described in the US 
Army and US Marine Corps Field Manual 3-24.
17. In use with ISAF in Afghanistan: Julian Alford and Scott Cuomo, Operational Design for 
ISAF in Afghanistan, A Primer , Joint Force Quarterly, Issue 53, 2nd Quarter 2009.
18. British Army Field Manual Volume 1 Part 10, Countering Insurgency.
The Freedom to Operate
Security
Emphasis of Activity
Shape
Secure
Hold
Develop
  Figure 4.2 – An Illustrative Campaign Progression Showing Changes of Emphasis
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
57
Shape - Secure - Hold - Develop
0444  The framework is developed in Chapter 1 1, Execution.  
Here, the meaning of its four elements, and how they interact, 
is considered only briefly.
0445 Shape.  Shape starts the process of understanding 
the problem.  Drawing upon all the expertise and contacts 
created during Prevent engagement, Shape is where multi-
agency planning begins.  Shape activity initiates the contest 
for security with the adversary.  The aim is to build a coalition 
for joining up security, govern ance and development activity, 
and to design a military force that is complemented by 
an appropriate weight of civilian effort.  It envisages wide 
engagement with multi-agency actors in order to shape 
and influence them, and in turn to influence and shape its 
own plans.  It includes offensive operations such as raids 
and special forces strike operations, designed to disrupt the 
enemy, denying him safe havens  and gaining intelligence.  
Elements of Shape (liaison and key leadership engagement, 
for example) continue throughout the campaign.  At the 
strategic level it will define objectives and secure resources; at 
the operational level it will achieve comprehensive campaign 
design.  At the tactical level it will improve understanding and 
help build local governance structures to meet the needs of 
the population.
0446  Secure.  Secure describes activity to deliver security in 
a defined area.  It is focused on the population, but it may also 
include the securing of the UK’s own line of communication 
and vital infrastructure.  As international forces may be 
deployed after the campaign has reached a critical point, 
adversaries may have identified key terrain and vital ground, 
such as the national capital.  This will be a priority for early 
Secure activity.  Where there is no insurgency, it may not be 
necessary to conduct security operations.  In operations 
where there is an insurgency, security forces will need to 
neutralise and isolate insurgents and irregulars in order to 
create the space and conditions for Hold and Develop activity.  
Secure is the point at which the adversary is confronted 
throughout his depth and made to fail; where international 
forces seize the security initiative in order to deliver enduring 
security to the local population.  Violence should be expected 
to spike as adversaries fight to protect their footholds.  Both 
military force and comprehensive measures need to be fused 
to support the commander in his task of separating the 
adversary from popular support.  Resources (both military and 
inter-agency) will invariably be a constraint on concurrency 
- in Iraq in 2004/5 the tempo of security operations was 
limited by the availability of American funding for rebuilding 
homes damaged in battle.  At this stage there may be little 
opportunity for major development initiatives due to a lack of 
permissiveness, however money can be used successfully to 
enhance persistent security effect.
0447 Hold.  After securing an area it will usually be 
necessary to Hold  it.  Failure to do so may impact on the 
ability to maintain the initiative.  Operational design should 
match the aspirations to Secure with the availability of forces to 
Hold.  This necessitates close coordination between offensive 
operations and Security Sector Reform (SSR) stands of the 
campaign plan.  It is possible that discrete military activity 
will be required to Hold only temporarily, for instance to 
buy time and space for other activity, but this is likely to be 
rare.  Hold is the critical point at which Other Government 
Departments, International Organisations and NGOs begin 
to invest significant effort in a semi-permissive environment, 
and is the point at which the emphasis of being the supported 
element shifts from the military to the civilian organisations.  
Typically, it is also at this point where indigenous forces deploy 
in greater strength in order to provide security, perhaps 
raising non-standard security forc es (village militias etc) as 
a temporary expedient to generate the necessary mass.  
Additionally, it is at this stage the rule of law is restored and 
the government is physically re-connected to its population 
via local elections and visits by ministers.  This will create 
the vital links necessary between the people and their 
legitimate government.  The adversary is likely to be investing 
his resources in protecting critical areas and his networks.  
Simultaneously, he may adapt to discredit and undermine 
progress, for example, through intimidation and mass-casualty 
terrorist attacks.  Indigenous forces will need sufficient training 
and capability to carry out the security tasks, thereby releasing 
international forces to move on to Secure elsewhere.  Hold is 
an act of tangible commitment that should start to inculcate 
in the population a sense of hope based upon demonstrable 
progress.  This confidence should be apparent through 
increasing intelligence tips.  Engagement with reconcilable 
adversaries should be sought from a position of advantage, 
and this may be the moment to exploit discreet links 
generated through Shape to fracture the opposition.
0448  Develop.  The term Develop , rather than ‘build’ is used 
because it focuses on the wider aspects of capacity building, 
rather than on infrastructure alone.  This activity includes 
investment and the development of governance structures 
and functions such as customs and excise, the legislature 
and the judiciary.  Its benefits will usually be delivered by 
civilian actors operating within an increasingly permissive 
environment.  The security initiative, now gained, must be 
consolidated and further strengthened during Develop.  It is 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
58
Avoiding Misunderstanding: a Comparison 
with the US
We use the term Secure in preference to Clear as it 
relates to the notion of Human Security, and describes 
a more intuitive and militarily  realistic objective.  US 
doctrine
19 describes Clear: ‘...to remove all enemy forces 
and eliminate organized resistance in an assigned area.  
The force does this by destroying, capturing, or forcing 
the withdrawal of insurgent combatants.  This task is 
most effectively initiated by a clear-in-zone or cordon-
and-search operation.  The operation’s purpose is to 
disrupt insurgent forces and force a reaction by major 
insurgent elements in the area.  Commanders employ a 
combination of offensive small-unit operations.  These 
may include area saturation patrolling that enables 
the force to defeat insurgents in the area, interdiction 
ambushes, and targeted raids.’  After insurgent forces are 
eliminated, insurgent infrastructure is removed.
The US definition of Hold is similar to the UK’s.  Joint 
Publication 3-24 states that ‘...the establishment of 
security forces in bases among the population furthers 
the continued disruption, identification and elimination 
of the local insurgent leadership and infrastructure.  
The success or failure of the effort depends, first, on 
effectively and continuously securing the populace 
and, second, on effectively re-establishing a host nation 
government presence at the local level.  Measured 
offensive operations continue against insurgents as 
opportunities arise, but the main effort is focused on 
the population…’  It emphasises the need to secure and 
protect key infrastructure and identifies four key target 
audiences during Hold: Population; Insurgents; COIN 
forces; and regional and international audiences.
In the US Clear-Hold-Build model, Build means 
maintaining a safe environment for the people and the 
local government.  It describes measures to develop 
self-sustaining security in an area, including building 
the capacity of indigenous security forces.  A number 
of tasks that ‘...provide an overt and direct benefit for 
the community are key, initial priorities.  Special funds 
(or other available resources) should be available to 
pay wages to local people to do such beneficial work.  
Accomplishing these tasks can begin the process of 
establishing host nation government legitimacy.  Sample 
tasks include: ...collecting and clearing trash from the 
streets; ...building and improving roads; ...providing 
guides, sentries and translator s; ...building and improving 
schools and similar facilities in coordination with the local 
population, host nation, and other actors; ...development 
of local and regional markets.’  The UK has chosen Develop 
as the term to describe the span of capacity development 
that will be required to enable enduring local stability.
Shape – Linking tactical key leader engagement to 
strategic engagement.  This 2007 Iraq image shows 
the Commanding Officer of a US Battalion alongside 
a former insurgent commander of a Concerned Local 
Citizens group (orange vest) with whom he has come to 
an accommodation to help Hold the local area.  The local 
commander is briefing a senior Iraqi Government adviser, 
escorted by a UK major general, in a coalition bid to build 
confidence and reconnect the local citizens with the 
central Government and to facilitate Develop.
for this reason that Hold  without being ready to Develop risks 
dislocating the campaign.
19. US Army Field Manual (FM) 3-24/US Marine Corps Warfighting Publication (MCWP) 3-33.5, 
Chapter 5, paragraph 5-50 to 5-80.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
59
SECTION V
THE SECURITY PRINCIPLES 
OF STABILISATION
0449 Principles serve as the foundation for action, but 
they are not inflexible rules.  They provide a way of thinking 
about a particular problem from a particular perspective: in 
the case of JDP 3-40, the inherent political and multinational 
requirements of stabilisation at the theatre level.  The 
following security principles of stabilisation are derived 
from analysis of UK and Allied doctrine, recent operational 
experience and lessons learned, and history.  They encapsulate 
the issues articulated in the previous chapters and should 
be used to guide military planning and execution.  They are 
included in this section specifically to help civilian readers 
better understand the military approach.
Primacy of Political Purpose
Political aims dictate the desired outcome and drive the 
planning and conduct of the campaign.
0450 The purpose of UK military participation in security 
and stabilisation is the achievement of the desired UK political 
aim.  This should be at the forefront of the commander’s 
campaign planning, implementation and assessment efforts, 
noting that this may require adaptation where political aims 
change in the light of the conduct of the campaign.  The aim 
of stabilisation activities is to achieve a political settlement 
between the host nation government, competing elites 
and the wider population.  Critics of stabilisation missions 
cite unachievable goals (such as the creation of Jeffersonian 
democracy); this may be to misrepresent the purpose, which 
may be demanding, yet wholly pragmatic.  To have utility, 
military activity and particularly the use of force, should shape 
and drive this political settlement as a part of the solution to 
security and stabilisation problems.  The different interests, 
goals and methods of coalition nations and host nation 
competing elites, may create tensions of political purpose.  
The commander has a key role in  shaping the conditions for, 
and providing a military perspective on, this dynamic process.
Primacy of Political Purpose – France and Algeria
20 
Algeria (1954–62) shows how the failure to maintain 
viable political support and a coherent political 
purpose in stabilisation and COIN campaigns can 
compromise the whole strategy.  It also shows the 
need to avoid a purely military campaign focus.  From 
the beginning of this colonial war, the French military 
enjoyed considerable operational success, forcing the 
Front de Libération Nationale (FLN) on to the defensive 
and restricting them to an urban terror campaign in 
Algiers.  Insurgents were also isolated from rural support 
by large-scale resettlement activity and a formidable 
system of barriers to reduce infiltration from Morocco 
and Tunisia.  A psychological operations campaign was 
established which aimed at persuading Muslims that 
the French administration was a more attractive long-
term option than support for an increasingly ineffective 
terrorist movement.  This military approach did not, 
however, lead to essential political success.  While the 
FLN was effectively destroyed in Algiers, they were able 
to internationalise the war, gaining recognition from 
the non-aligned movement in 1955 and from the UN in 
1960.  In the US, the Eisenhower administration wanted 
the conflict resolved before it weakened the NATO, and 
Senator Kennedy spoke of the need for French withdrawal 
in the 1960 election campaign.  In France there was 
considerable intellectual, church and press protest.  Public 
opinion swung towards Algerian independence.  In 
Algeria the French were thus robbed of any real hope of 
mobilising moderate Moslem support.  The necessarily 
political aspects of civic action drew the army increasingly 
into the political arena.  De Gaulle’s hints in 1959 that 
self-determination  was a possible option enraged the 
French Army who saw it as a betrayal at a time when 
they felt they were effectively winning the conflict.  This 
led to an attempted military coup against de-Gaulle in 
1961.  A terrorist campaign spread to mainland France.  
Independence was granted in 1962 following a collapse 
in French domestic popular support for the campaign.  
Algeria shows the irrelevance of tactical success in the 
absence of a viable political settlement, and when there is 
confusion and incoherence in the political purpose 
of intervention.
20. Horne, Alastair. A Savage War of Peace: Algeria 1954-1962 .  Beckett, Ian, Modern Insurgencies 
and Counterinsurgencies .
21. Later Commander, US Central Command and member of the Obama Administration.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
60
Understand the Context
A shared understanding of the context within which 
insecurity and instability has arisen, between the UK 
military and their immediate partners, is essential to 
provide a basis for focused and coordinated action, 
known by some as a Theory of Change.
0451 A common understanding is the basis of a common 
approach, but it cannot be assumed.  To understand 
the contextual aspects of security and stabilisation, 
anthropological, religious, ethnographic, social, political 
and economic information is re quired to inform campaign 
analysis and assessment.  It is essential that the broad conflict 
dynamics are understood and agreed, and the analysis 
shared with all appropriate partners.  The establishment 
of an effective and adaptive intelligence mechanism may 
require restructuring the intelligence architecture.  Effective 
intelligence gathering is proactive, aggressive and bottom-up  
in nature.  The intelligence organisation should provide for 
the greatest possible level of information exchange between 
nations, government departments and multi-national and 
local security forces at all levels.  The commander is, initially, 
faced with uncertainty in the pl anning process, which should 
diminish with focused intellig ence gathering and analysis.  
Growing and maintaining this intelligence capability should 
form a central part of planning and execution.  Effective and 
imaginative knowledge management in theatre and at home 
is critical.  This requires early investment in, for example, 
cultural advisers and databases, to manage challenges of 
continuity and roulement.  From understanding flow the 
campaign big ideas, or theory of change.
Understand the Context: Somalia – Unified Task 
Force 1992-93
The US experience in Somalia demonstrates that, without 
understanding the cultural and operational context, it is 
impossible to create a platform upon which successful 
planning and influence can be built.  The clan system was 
misunderstood.  Unified Task Force (UNITAF) overlooked 
the fact that Somalis viewed an attack against one clan 
as an attack on all clans.  By targeting General Mohamed 
Farrah Aidid, a clan leader, UNITAF unwittingly provided a 
unifying purpose, coalescing the clans in a war perceived 
by Somalis in general as legitimate, against the outsiders.  
American helicopters dropped leaflets over Mogadishu’s 
primarily illiterate population.  This encapsulated a 
Western intervention with a high dependence on 
technology but a low level of host nation cultural 
understanding.  The oral tradition and ready access to 
radios would have made broadcast a more suitable 
medium.  US Marine Brigadier General Anthony Zinni
21  
observed: “What above all made Somalia a tough place to 
do business was the United States’ lack of comprehension of 
its intricate and unfamiliar social and cultural fabric.”
Focus on the Population
The needs of the population, whose expectations will 
vary from one situation to another, must be met to 
promote human security and encourage support for the 
political settlement.
0452 The inability of a state to provide for the basic needs of 
its population can be both the cause and result of insecurity 
and instability.  Failed states fail their people: the atomisation 
of societies makes them more open to manipulation and 
radicalisation. A desperate population will turn to any 
provider, including potential adversaries, when basic needs 
are not met.  Similarly, adversaries will seek to fill the vacuum 
of needs where the government is absent or ineffective.  
The commander should identify what the military may be 
required to contribute to human security tasks, recognising 
that military provision is a last resort and that the main 
responsibility lies with international organisations and the host 
nation government.  Failure to provide for the populations’ 
needs may undermine the foundati ons of stabilisation as the 
people struggle for survival.  Political progress is unlikely to 
take place in the midst of chronic human insecurity.  Focusing 
on the population does not mean ignoring the adversary; on 
the contrary, the contest for security will be fought amongst 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
61
the population and for their support.  The population may not 
like us, but our military aim is not the pursuit of popularity, 
although this is important for in digenous forces.  International 
forces should seek to husband respect, to prevent the 
adversary from gaining influence and security control, and 
to re-connect the population with their government; this 
requires their government be perceived as credible.  People 
need to believe that their situation is more likely to improve 
under the government than its adversaries.  There will be 
a dynamic relationship between the international forces’ 
own and the opponents’ narratives, and the perception of 
audiences should be considered when planning courses of 
action.  The adversary must be marginalised; hence the term 
‘the population is the prize’, noting that international forces are 
competing on behalf of the host government, not themselves.
The Iraqi  Surge demonstrates how the human security 
needs of a population are best met locally, with decisions 
delegated down to the lowest level.  In 2007-8 the 
substantial increase in the US force helped to deliver a 
significant and sustained reduction in violence across 
the Country.  Stationing US troops alongside their Iraqi 
counterparts (in joint security stations) placed a very 
strong physical presence in previously abandoned and 
conflict-ridden communities.  Gated communities, 
concrete barriers and the well-targeted attrition of armed 
groups that continued to fight, alongside engagement 
and accommodation with others, allowed the focused 
use of resources by local commanders to rebuild 
services in the newly controlled areas. The murder 
rate fell and refugees began returning.  Economic life 
slowly re-started.  Across Iraq as a whole, civilian deaths 
declined significantly.  Transitioning local security to a 
local lead was a central tenet in the plan.  The battle 
against al-Qaeda succeeded because extremism was 
rejected by the Sunni tribes, and al-Qaeda was subjected 
to remorseless targeting by special forces.  Exploiting 
the early progress of an ‘Anbar Awakening’, the US 
launched a major engagement effort, to agree local 
security accommodations with neighbourhood tribal 
(often former-insurgent) groups.  This consolidated 
and expanded the security gains made under the US 
Surge.  Al Sadr demobilised Jaish al Mahdi in response to 
public pressure, causing internal frictions to erupt.  These 
improvements, together with the growing capabilities 
of the Iraqi Security Forces, gave the Iraqi Government 
increased confidence in their political and physical 
authority.  This in turn allowed them to intervene against 
the Shia militia in Basra.  Delivering security in the south, 
combined with the general successes of the Surge across 
other parts of the Country, offered the Iraqi government 
the opportunity to re-connect with its people.  The 
security action created political space and options.
Focus on the Population – Iraq 2007-8
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
62
Foster Host Nation Governance, Authority and 
Indigenous Capacity
Host nation ownership of, and responsibility for, security 
and stabilisation requires the development of sufficient 
governance, authority and indigenous capability.
0453 All governments exercise control through a 
combination of consent and coercion.  Legitimate 
governments function with the tacit consent of the governed 
and are generally stable, whereas regimes generally 
considered illegitimate rule entirely, or mainly through 
coercion.  The more a state relies on coercion, the greater the 
likelihood of collapse if that power is disrupted.  Legitimate 
governance can be undermined by many issues including 
corruption, greed, incompeten ce, bias, disregard for the 
rule of law and disenfranchisement.  However, legitimacy is 
determined by the local population, not imposed externally.  
Coalition partners should not try to replace the functions 
of the government.  They should work with it to rebuild 
its capacity and competence by establishing local trust in 
governance based on consistent and fair, rather than arbitrary, 
application of the law.  All coalition actions should aim to 
foster host nation authority and capacity in order to underpin 
enduring stability.  The military contribution is primarily in the 
field of security capacity, but should contribute to the wider 
development of robust institutions.
0454 Capacity-building and SSR are essential parts of 
the overall stabilisation solution  and will require significant 
investment in time, resources and the commander’s attention.  
He will need to design a coherent, effective capacity-building 
and SSR operation, albeit in concert with allies and partners, 
in a way that overcomes the inefficiencies inherent in a 
multi-lateral enterprise.  The goal is to field capability at a 
tempo that matches the demands of the changing problem.  
Host nation capacity facilitates the international forces’ 
reassignment to new areas in order to spread campaign and 
government authority, and is the enabler of transition and 
eventual withdrawal.  SSR is not about creating forces that 
look like ours, and nor is it necessarily about creating what the 
host nation wants.  Forces should be appropriate to the local 
cultural and security context, agreed by the host nation, and 
sustainable.  Tensions may arise when there is a divergence 
between the plans and activities of the indigenous nation 
and coalition partners.  Timely diplomacy should produce a 
solution that is acceptable to both sides if momentum and 
unity is to be maintained.
Foster Host Nation Governance, Authority and 
Indigenous Capacity – Sierra Leone
In addition to its human consequences, the 1 1-year war 
also brought about the destruction of the country’s 
economy, infrastructure and state institutions.  During 
the conflict, the often unpaid and unfed Sierra Leone 
Army (SLA) was as much a source of instability as the 
Revolutionary United Front (RUF).  They were known by 
the civilian population as ‘sobels’ – (soldier by day, rebel 
by night) due to their violent and predatory activity.  
Their ineffectiveness, along with that of other state 
institutions such as the police, saw the use of local militias 
and private military security companies against the RUF.  
The British joint task force that intervened in May 2000 
(Operation PALLISER) went through a number of mission 
and role transitions.  Initially an evacuation force, then 
a stabilisation force, before concluding as a training 
organisation.  One of the keys to long term success in 
Sierra Leone was the UK’s commitment to training and 
institution building.  In their part of a comprehensive 
approach, UK forces initially operated as short-term 
training teams and later as a permanent International 
Military Advisory and Training Team.  This small but 
high-profile team helped build the new Republic of Sierra 
Leone Armed Forces, and reassure the population that 
they had not been abandoned when UK combat forces 
withdrew.  This addressed their concern that the SLA 
may regress to its old ways.  Confidence was bolstered 
by use of highly visible demonstrations in support of the 
Government through short term military deployments, 
ship visits and joint training exercises to coincide with 
local political events, such as elections.
Unity of Effort
Military force is but one elem ent required for the delivery 
of security and stabilisation.  The collective contribution 
of all actors is required and must be coordinated to 
ensure unity of effort in every facet of the mission.
0455 Cross-government and inter-agency cohesion is vital 
but relationships and processes have no agreed template.  
In the past, a single UK leader may have had authority over 
all UK government agencies.  However, in a contemporary 
campaign, such unity of command is unlikely.  Consequently, 
once the Theory of Change has been agreed, the commander 
should focus on achieving unity of effort.  Much will rest 
on willingness to collaborate in a way that each participant 
agrees to accept constraints in order to achieve a degree of 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
63
unity.  This will be challenging: the mission will throw together 
disparate organisations, with different philosophies and 
cultures.  Once this essential unity of effort has been agreed, 
and the tone set by the leaders, it needs to be implemented 
through tailored committee structures and competent liaison 
at every level.  Some actors, for example NGOs, may be unable 
or unwilling, to participate in such formal mechanisms.  In 
these cases, de-confliction may be the best that can be 
achieved.  Intellectual and physical support will be required; 
for example, protection, intelligence, communications, that 
only the military may be able to provide.  When formed, 
committees will: agree priorities and designate main effort; 
allocate responsibilities; apportion resources; and coordinate 
activity while mediating differences of opinion.  All should 
realise that as the campaign progresses, there will be shifts 
between the supporting – supported relationship, along with 
changes to the main effort.  Even these terms will need to be 
discussed and their meaning agreed.  Unity of effort should 
be manifested in a joint, inter-agency plan, shared planning 
tools and perhaps a tailored integrated headquarters to ensure 
that all levers of power are maximised to deliver influence.  
Uncoordinated activity and disagreement will present 
structural and conceptual gaps – opportunities adversaries 
will exploit.
Unity of Effort – Borneo 1963-66
Commonwealth forces defeated a complex insurgency 
actively supported by Indonesian forces infiltrating 
across the border.  A combination of security, judicial 
and political action based on a coordinated civil-military 
plan, and extensive use of psychological operations, 
suppressed the urban insurgency.  The conflict was 
displaced to the jungle interior, where ultimately a 
well-coordinated approach led to the insurgents’ 
defeat.  Extensive manoeuvre, using aviation, created an 
illusion of large-scale military presence, the impact of 
which was amplified by highly aggressive, but carefully 
targeted, military action.  Se nsitive handling of the local 
population led to Commonwealth forces, rather than the 
insurgents, being regarded as the providers of security.  
Through a well-orchestrated combination of physical and 
psychological effects, the Commonwealth succeeded in 
the complete demoralisation of Indonesian forces and 
the defeat of the internal insurgency.  This enabled an 
enduring political settlement in the north of Borneo that 
led to the provinces of Sarawak and Sabah remaining 
secure within the Federation of Malaysia.
Isolate and Neutralise Irregular Actors
By isolating those who oppose the government from 
their cause and the source of their support they can be 
made irrelevant.
0456 The primary role of the military is to provide sufficient 
security for the people and control over the operating 
environment.  Security cannot be achieved solely through 
the presence of military forces, or just by killing or capturing 
adversaries.  Unlike in general war, the objective is not the 
defeat or destruction of the enemy, but neutralisation of a 
threat to stable society.  Neutralisation can take many forms, 
but isolation of the adversary is attractive as it makes him 
irrelevant through loss of legitimacy and erodes his popular 
support.  Isolation may begin the process of accommodation; 
but campaign success is likely to require the irreconcilable 
elements to be killed or captured.  Military forces will 
have to fight and win in the physical, virtual and cognitive 
domains.  The physical domai n may include significant 
combat operations to establish the host nation government’s 
monopoly of the use of force, and provide a secure 
environment for the population.  There is a growing contest 
for domination of the information environment.  For example, 
websites supporting violent extremism grew from twelve in 
1998 to over 4000 by 2008.
22  Additionally, in the cognitive 
arena, the host government should provide the people with 
a more credible vision of the future than the adversary and 
tangible human security in the short-term.
0457 There must be no safe havens.  Ways and means 
include physical population control, border security, 
international legal and diplomatic action to limit financial or 
political support and removal of internet-based virtual havens 
that propagate support, training and doctrine.  In instances 
where isolation cannot be achieved or is insufficient, targeted 
strike to complete neutralisation is required.  The commander 
may choose to keep his adversaries constantly under pressure 
and on the move, or contain them within an area where 
they can be monitored and exploited.  Commanders should 
consider military activity not ju st for its security and political 
effects, but also the impact it will have on the adversary’s 
cohesion and confidence.  Seiz ing the initiative and thus 
denying it to the adversary is key; it creates momentum, 
demoralises adversaries and shows tangible security progress.  
These pro-active measures come at a price.
22. Bernard Finel & Holly Gell, American Security Project , 2008.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
64
Neutralise and Counteract Irregular Actors Oman – 
1965-1975
In a classic example of economy of force a Special Air 
Service (SAS) squadron of about 90 men was deployed 
into the Omani hinterland where it fused the civil and 
military elements of the COIN strategy.  The British wished 
to keep the strategic footprint small, to enable plausible 
deniability of direct involvement in the conflict.  For this 
reason, a significant number of additional British officers 
were privately contracted to the Sultan’s Armed Forces 
(SAF) in specialist, mentoring and leadership roles.  The 
SAS raised, trained and led jebali militias known as firqats 
which isolated the insurgents from the locals, and set 
secure conditions allowing effective implementation 
of the civil aid programme.  The SAS were also directly 
involved in the provision of ci vil aid, helping to establish 
clinics, schools and bore wells.  A Royal Engineer 
squadron provided specialist support with infrastructure 
projects and an ambitious road building programme 
dramatically improved SAF access into the mountains.  
A UK military medical unit provided ad hoc medical and 
health care while clinics were constructed.  Civil aid 
was complemented by an information operation which 
countered the insurgent’s communist ideology; this was 
largely delivered directly to the jebalis by the SAS teams.  
SAS-led firqats fought a series of small, but intense, battles 
to neutralise insurgents which enhanced the effect of 
regular SAF operations.  The SAF successfully interdicted 
the border with Yemen and denied insurgent movement 
in the mountains through the extensive use of barriers 
and airpower.  Once the insurgents were isolated and 
neutralised the new Sultan was able to establish an 
ambitious programme for change.
Exploit Credibility to Gain Support
Consent is the minimum requirement, but it is not 
enough.  Credibility must act as a lever to shift tacit 
consent into active support for the campaign.  UK forces 
must be perceived to be both legitimate and credible 
locally (especially amongst opinion-forming elites), 
regionally and with UK audiences.
0458 Credibility is capital; it can be lost or exploited.  It is 
used to change the conflict.  The commander should adapt 
to the political and social dynamics, managing expectations.  
His approach should be to under-promise and over-deliver.  
This will ensure that both he, and his force, are credible to all 
parties.  The UK should seek to create campaign momentum; 
moving from a situation of partial opposition, through consent 
(which can be passive), to one in which the host government 
enjoys the active support of the vast majority at the expense 
of the adversary.  As a result, there will be an increased flow 
of actionable intelligence and recruits and an acceptance of 
governance by the people, for example, by voting in elections.
0459 Credibility is delivered and leveraged on a number 
of levels.  The adherence to local cultural norms and high 
professional standards by security forces will generate basic 
credibility for the force, but not credibility for the enterprise.  
Instead, this requires the host nation government to articulate 
a vision that is matched by action.  Coalition and host nation 
actions should mutually reinforce, deliver benefit, generate 
consent and support the narrative that articulates how the 
population’s lives will change for the better if they give their 
support.  This theory of change is key.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
65
Support – Later Stages of Northern Ireland
On the night of 7 March 2009, two British soldiers were 
murdered outside Massareene Barracks in County 
Antrim.  The Real Irish Republican Army (IRA), a dissident 
splinter group of the IRA, accepted responsibility.  The 
murders were seen as defiance of, and a challenge to, 
the popular cross-community support and commitment 
to the political process outlined in the 1998 Good Friday 
Peace Agreement.  Martin McGuinness, Deputy First 
Minister of Northern Ireland, a former senior member of 
the IRA, made a public statement that those carrying out 
attacks in Northern Ireland were ‘traitors to the island of 
Ireland’ and reaffirmed that the ‘only legal mandate’ was 
the Good Friday Agreement.  His actions reinforced the 
credibility of the Stormont Assembly and broad support 
for the political settlement.  The effect was the further 
isolation of violent dissiden t groups and growing support 
for the political process.
 
Adversaries Ignore Their Doctrine
During the Anbar ‘awakening’ of 2007 al-Qaeda lost 
the support of the Iraqi population and suffered an 
operational-level defeat.  Local tribes joined forces with 
the US Marines when the tribal leadership recognised that 
al-Qaeda was a greater threat to their interests than the 
US ‘occupation’.
Al-Zawahiri emphasises the fundamental importance of 
popular support:
“If we are in agreement that the victory of Islam and the 
establishment of a caliphate…will not be achieved except 
through jihad…then this goal will not be accomplished by 
the mujahedeen movement while it is cut off from public 
support…[He goes on to note that] …popular support 
would be a decisive factor between victory and defeat.  In 
the absence of this popular support, the Islamic mujahedeen 
movement would be crushed in the shadows… [Furthermore, 
he warns that the west is] …stealthily striving to separate  
[the Jihadist elite] from the misguided or frightened masses.  
Therefore, our planning must strive to involve the Muslim 
masses in the battle, and to bring the mujahed movement to 
the masses and not conduct the struggle for them.”
Prepare for the Long Term – Perseverance 
and Sustainability
The stabilisation of a failed or failing state will tend to 
take a long time.  It will require the provision of significant 
cross-government resources, immersion in the problem, 
and demonstration of resilience in the face of short-term 
set-backs.
0460  The protracted nature of security and stabilisation 
campaigns presents a challenge.  The political desire to 
balance the cost of national commitment to the stabilisation 
campaign against other domestic priorities may inadvertently 
communicate a lack of resolve, resulting in a short-term 
approach to campaign design and resourcing.  A lack of 
continuity of approach may also result.  One of the principal 
adversary strategies is to outlast the international deployment, 
such as in Somalia.  The local population must be convinced 
that external support for their government will be sufficient 
and enduring.  Indications of transitory engagement will 
undermine the credibility of the campaign.  Against this 
should be set the danger of creating a sense of permanence 
amounting to dependency, and leading to a perception 
of occupation.
0461 Early investment in supporting infrastructure, specialist 
capabilities and capacity building are essential, both for the 
successful conduct of the campaign and as an indication of 
national commitment.  Many fragile states return to conflict 
after the departure of external military assistance.  Even if 
the UK commitment is time limited, forces should generate 
capabilities and the mindset that can adopt the necessary 
long-term approach, before transition or withdrawal.
23. Operation Banner - An Analysis of Military Operations in Northern Ireland , Army Code 71842 
dated July 2006.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
66
Long-Term Commitment – The ‘NITAT Moment’ in 
Northern Ireland -1972 23
The first units to deploy to Operation BANNER in 1969 
had no pre-deployment training.  The need for specific 
theatre training became increasingly clear: generic 
colonial-era COIN methods were inappropriate.  The 
Northern Ireland Training Team (NITAT) was established 
in 1972 to fill the theatre-specific gap.  The idea adopted 
an approach used successfully at the Jungle Warfare 
School at Kota Tingi in 1948 to train units deploying to 
the Malayan Emergency.  Using high-quality military 
and police instructors fresh from operations to design 
and deliver the training, NITAT also developed specialist 
training areas and ranges representative of the conditions 
in theatre.  Despite the costs and distraction from training 
for general war on NATO’s Central Front, a second team 
was established at Sennelager shortly afterwards, to 
train units deploying from Germany, and then a third in 
Northern Ireland to train indi vidual reinforcements.  This 
enterprise required a leap of faith.  It was by no means 
clear that the campaign would be protracted, but the 
necessary investment was made to put force preparation 
on a campaign footing.  Operational standards were 
raised and without doubt lives saved.  From 1973 onwards 
no unit or individual deployed to Northern Ireland 
without passing through NITAT, which constantly 
adapted to meet evolving threats and changes to the 
operational requirement.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
67
Anticipate, Learn and Adapt – Make Best Use of 
What’s Available
In late 2002, RAF Maritime Surveillance Aircraft were re-
equipped for a new task never previously envisaged for 
this platform.  They were fitted with the WESCAM MX-15 
electro-optical system, together with new defensive aids 
and an enhanced communications suite and re-roled to 
overland tasks.  The work, completed in six months, has 
allowed the Nimrod MR2 to be continuously tasked since 
in support of ground forces participating in Operations 
TELIC and HERRICK.  The system is shown here over the 
Kajaki Dam in Afghanistan.
Anticipate, Learn and Adapt
Complex, uncertain and dynamic operating environments 
demand continuous anticipation, learning, and 
adaptation (without detriment to the maintenance of the 
aim).  Adversaries will adapt; so must the UK forces if their 
adversaries are to be outwitted.
0462 Constant change is not a sign of failure; it is a defining 
characteristic of such operations.  Disaggregated adversaries 
and often loose central governance demands a de-centralised 
response by international forces.  Anticipation and adaptation 
should therefore be seen as a sign of initiative, an active 
process that the commander sh ould drive throughout the 
campaign.  Assessment mechanisms should be established 
to identify and interpret the resu lts of the UK forces’ own, and 
other actors’ actions, to exploit success and correct errors.  
The commander should be robust, yet apply his judgement 
to assess whether setbacks are temporary or require a change 
of approach.  Adversaries, due to their structure, size of 
organisation and agility, may adapt more rapidly; their survival 
depends on it.  Consequently, coalition forces should not just 
learn and adapt quickly in a reactive manner but anticipate 
at sufficient relative tempo in order to seize or retain the 
initiative.  This means designing new structures, bending 
existing ones out of shape and co nstantly refining our training 
and education.  One relative ad vantage that coalition forces 
will normally hold is the use of technology.  The commander 
should establish staff structures and procedures to drive 
change, including to equipment and structures.  Reachback 
can build continuity and mobili se the institutional capacity 
out of theatre to support the campaign.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

68
• Secure and Serve the Population.  The Iraqi people are 
the decisive ‘terrain’.  Together with our Iraqi partners, 
work to provide the people security, to give them respect, 
to gain their support, and to facilitate establishment of 
local governance, restoration of basic services, and revival 
of local economies.
• Live Among the People.   You can’t commute to this fight.  
Position Joint Security Stations, Combat Outposts, and 
Patrol Bases in the neighbourhoods we intend to secure.  
Living among the people is essential to securing them and 
defeating the insurgents.
• Hold Areas that have been Secured.  Once we clear 
an area, we must retain it. Develop the plan for holding 
an area before starting to clear it.  The people need to 
know that we and our Iraqi partners will not abandon 
their neighbourhoods.  When reducing forces and 
presence, gradually thin the line rather than handing off 
or withdrawing completely.  Ensure situational awareness 
even after transfer of responsibility to Iraqi forces.
• Pursue the Enemy Relentlessly.  Identify and pursue 
 Al-Qaeda Iraq and other extremist elements tenaciously.  
Do not let them retain support areas or sanctuaries. Force 
the enemy to respond to us.  Deny the enemy the ability 
to plan and conduct deliberate operations.
• Generate Unity of Effort.  Coordinate operations and 
initiatives with our embassy and interagency partners, our 
Iraqi counterparts, local governmental leaders, and non-
governmental organisations to ensure all are working to 
achieve a common purpose.
• Promote Reconciliation.  We cannot kill our way out of 
this endeavour.  We and our Iraqi partners must identify 
and separate the ‘reconcilables’ from the ‘irreconcilables’ 
through engagement, population control measures, 
information operations, kineti c operations, and political 
activities.  We must strive to make the reconcilables a 
part of the solution, even as we identify, pursue, and kill, 
capture, or drive out the irreconcilables.
• Defeat the Network, not Just the Attack.  Defeat the 
insurgent networks to the ‘left’ of the explosion.  Focus 
intelligence assets to identify the network behind an 
attack, and go after its leaders, financiers, suppliers, 
 and operators.
•  Foster Iraqi Legitimacy.  Encourage Iraqi leadership 
and initiative; recognise that their success is our success.  
Partner in all that we do and support local involvement in 
security, governance, economic revival, and provision of 
basic services.  Find the right balance between Coalition 
Forces leading and the Iraqis exercising their leadership 
and initiative, and en courage the latter.  Legitimacy in the 
eyes of the Iraqi people is essential to overall success.
• Punch Above Your Weight Class.  Strive to be “bigger 
than you actually are.”  Partner in operations with Iraqi 
units and police, and employ “Sons of Iraq”, contractors, 
and local Iraqis to perform routine tasks in and around 
Forward Operating Bases, Patrol Bases and Joint Security 
Stations, thereby freeing up our troopers to focus on tasks 
“outside the wire.”
1. Issued by General Petraeus, Commanding General Multi-National Force Iraq, COIN 
Guidance dated 15 July 2008.
ANNEX 4A
MULTINATIONAL FORCE - IRAQ, 
COMMANDER’S COUNTER-
INSURGENCY GUIDANCE
HEADQUARTERS, MULTI-NATIONAL FORCE – IRAQ:  BAGHDAD, IRAQ, APO AE 09342-1400:  15 July 2008
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
1
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

69
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
• Employ All Assets to Isolate and Defeat the Terrorists 
and Insurgents.  Counter-terrorist forces alone cannot 
defeat al-Qaeda and the other extremists; success requires 
all forces and all means at our disposal – non-kinetic as 
well as kinetic. Employ Coalition and Iraqi conventional 
and special operations forces, Sons of Iraq, and all other 
available multipliers.  Integrate civilian and military 
efforts to cement security gains.  Resource and fight 
decentralised.  Push assets down to those who most need 
them and can actually use them.
• Employ Money as a Weapon System.  Use a targeting 
board process to ensure the greatest effect for each 
‘round’ expended, and to ensure that each engagement 
using money contributes to the achievement of the unit’s 
overall objectives.  Ensure contracting activities support 
the security effort, employing locals wherever possible.  
Employ a ‘matching fund’ concept when feasible in order 
to ensure Iraqi involvement and commitment.
• Fight for Intelligence.  A nuanced understanding of the 
situation is everything. Analys e the intelligence that is 
gathered, share it, and fight for more.  Every patrol should 
have tasks designed to augment understanding of the 
area of operations and the enemy.  Operate on a ‘need 
to share’ rather than a ‘need to know’ basis; disseminate 
intelligence as soon as possible to all who can benefit 
from it.
• Walk.  Move mounted, work dismounted.  Stop by, 
 don’t drive by.  Patrol on foot and engage the population.  
Situational awareness can only be gained by interacting 
with the people face-to-face, not separated by 
 ballistic glass.
• Understand the Neighbourhood.  Map the human 
terrain and study it in detail. Understand local culture 
and history.  Learn about the tribes, formal and informal 
leaders, governmental structures, and local security forces.  
Understand how local systems are supposed 
 to work – including governance, basic services, 
maintenance of infrastructure, and the economy – 
 and how they really work.
• Build Relationships.  Relationships are a critical 
component of counter-insurgency operations.  Together 
with our Iraqi counterparts, strive to establish productive 
links with local leaders, tribal sheikhs, governmental 
officials, religious leaders, and interagency partners.
• Look for Sustainable Solutions.  Build mechanisms by 
which the Iraqi Security Forces, Iraqi community leaders, 
and local Iraqis under the control of governmental 
institutions can continue to secure local areas and sustain 
governance and economic gains in their communities as 
the Coalition Force presence is reduced.  Figure out the 
Iraqi systems and help Iraqis make them work.
• Maintain Continuity and Tempo Through Transitions.  
Start to build the informatio n you’ll provide to your 
successors on the day you take over.  Allow those who 
will follow you to virtually ‘look over your shoulder’ while 
they’re still at home station by giving them access to your 
daily updates and other items on SIPRNET.  Encourage 
extra time on the ground during transition periods, 
and strive to maintain operational tempo and local 
relationships to avoid giving the enemy respite.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

70
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
• Manage Expectations.  Be cautious and measured in 
announcing progress.  Note what has been accomplished, 
but also acknowledge what still needs to be done.  Avoid 
premature declarations of success.  Ensure our troopers 
and our partners are aware of our assessments and 
recognize that any counterinsurgency operation has 
innumerable challenges, that enemies get a vote, and that 
progress is likely to be slow.
• Be First with the Truth.  Get accurate information of 
significant activities to your chain of command, to Iraqi 
leaders, and to the press as soon as is possible.  Beat the 
insurgents, extremists, and criminals to the headlines, and 
pre-empt rumours.  Integrity is critical to this fight.  Don’t 
put lipstick on pigs.  Acknowledge setbacks and failures, 
and then state what we’ve learned and how we’ll respond.  
Hold the press (and ourselves) accountable for accuracy, 
characterization, and context.  Avoid spin and let facts 
speak for themselves.  Challenge enemy disinformation.  
Turn our enemies’ bankrupt messages, extremist 
ideologies, oppressive practices, and indiscriminate 
violence against them.
• Fight the Information War Relentlessly.  Realize that we 
are in a struggle for legitimacy that in the end will be won 
or lost in the perception of the Iraqi people.  Every action 
taken by the enemy and United States has implications 
in the public arena.  Develop and sustain a narrative that 
works and continually drive the themes home through all 
forms of media.
• Live our Values.  Do not hesitate to kill or capture the 
enemy, but stay true to the values we hold dear.  This 
is what distinguishes us from our enemies.  There is 
no tougher endeavour than the one in which we are 
engaged.  It is often brutal, physically demanding, and 
frustrating.  All of us experience moments of anger, but 
we can neither give in to dark impulses nor tolerate 
unacceptable actions by others.
• Exercise Initiative.  In the absence of guidance or orders, 
determine what they should be and execute aggressively.  
Higher level leaders will provide broad vision and paint 
‘white lines on the road,’ but it will be up to those at 
tactical levels to turn ‘big ideas’ into specific actions.
• Empower Subordinates.  Resource to enable 
decentralized action.  Push assets and authorities down 
to those who most need them and can actually use them.  
Flatten reporting chains.  Identify the level to which you 
would naturally plan and resource, and go one further – 
generally looking three levels down, vice the three levels 
down that is traditional in major combat operations.
• Prepare for and Exploit Opportunities.  “Luck is 
what happens when preparation meets opportunity” 
(Seneca the Younger).  Develop concepts (such as that 
of ‘reconcilables’ and ‘irreconcilables’) in anticipation of 
possible opportunities, and be prepared to take risk as 
necessary to take advantage of them.
• Learn and Adapt.  Continually assess the situation and 
adjust tactics, policies, and programs as required.  Share 
good ideas (none of us is smarter than all of us together).  
Avoid mental or physical complacency.  Never forget 
that what works in an area today may not work there 
tomorrow, and may or may not be transferable to another 
part of Iraq.
DAVID H. PETRAEUS
General, United States Army
Commanding
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

71
04B01 Coalition operations in 
Iraq from 2003 until 2009 show 
how the legal framework can 
change dramatically during 
the course of a campaign, and 
the consequences this can have 
for a Force’s operations, its 
freedoms and obligations. 
   
The Invasion
04B02 On 20 March 2003 Coalition forces invaded Iraq.  This 
was a classic international armed conflict governed by the 
Laws of Armed Conflict, including the full panoply of the 
1949 Geneva Conventions.  Subject to these laws, and to 
the political and military dire ction of the Coalition states’ 
themselves, the Coalition forces had operational freedom 
to defeat the Iraqi forces and to subdue the government of 
Saddam Hussain.
The Occupation May 2003 – June 2004
04B03 Establishing the Coalition Provisional Authority.  
General Franks’ freedom message  of 16 April 2003 announced 
the creation of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), 
a civilian administration which would exercise temporary 
governmental authority in Iraq.  After major combat 
operations were declared to be complete on 1 May 2003, 
albeit that hostilities did not end on that date in all parts of the 
country, the US and the UK became occupying powers within 
the meaning of the 1907 Hague Regulations and the 1949 
Fourth Geneva Convention.  Though much misunderstood, 
occupation did not take away sovereignty.  
04B04  On 13 May 2003 Mr Paul Bremer was appointed as 
the Administrator of the CPA.  The CPA promptly set about 
the business of government, issuing Orders, Regulations and 
Memoranda.  By CPA Regulation No 1, dated 16 May 2003, the 
CPA assumed ‘all executive, legislative and judicial authority 
necessary to achieve its objectives, to be exercised under 
relevant United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCRs), 
including Resolution 1483 (200 3), and the laws and usages 
of war’.  Iraqi laws, unless suspended or replaced by the CPA, 
were to continue to apply insofar as they did not prevent the 
CPA from exercising its rights and fulfilling its obligations, or 
conflict with Regulations or Orders issued by the CPA.  The 
Coalition forces, though having a separate chain of command 
to the US Defense Secretary (a point of doctrinal and practical 
ANNEX 4B
THE CHANGING RULE OF LAW: A CASE 
STUDY FOR IRAQ 2003 TO 2009
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

72
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
interest), were the right arm of power for the CPA, providing 
the conditions for delivering its goals and suppressing 
the insurgency.  
04B05 UNSCR 1483 (May 2003).  Resolution 1483 was 
adopted by the Security Council on 22 May 2003.  Its opening 
recitals reaffirmed the sovereignty and territorial integrity 
of Iraq and acknowledged the US and UK Permanent 
Representatives’ letter of 8 May to the President of the Security 
Council which, inter alia , recorded the creation of the CPA, 
the requirement to provide security, and the provision of 
temporary administration of Iraq while facilitating Iraqi efforts 
to form a representative government based on the rule of 
law.  Under Chapter VII of the United Nations (UN) Charter, 
UNSCR 1483 took occupation law to new heights with its 
thrust towards constitutional, legal, judicial, economic and 
political reform.  It was a nation-building Resolution which 
tipped the balance from the conservationist to the reformist 
approach, and doubtless justified only by the UN’s political 
and economic aims for the fledgling democracy.  In July 2003 
an Iraqi Governing Council (IGC) was established, which the 
CPA was to consult on all matters concerning the temporary 
governance of Iraq.  
04B06  UNSCR 1511 (October 2003).  On 16 October 2003 
Resolution 151 1 was adopted under Chapter VII of the UN 
Charter.  Operative paragraph 1 underscored the temporary 
nature of the CPA’s exercise of its specific responsibilities, 
authorities and obligations until an internationally recognised, 
representative government was established by the people of 
Iraq.  In a new departure, the Council at operative paragraph 
13 authorised 
‘a multinational force [MNF] under unified command to take 
all necessary measures to contribute to the maintenance of 
security and stability in Iraq, including for the purpose of 
ensuring necessary conditions for the implementation of the 
timetable and programme as well as to contribute to the security 
of [UNAMI], the Governing Council of Iraq and other institutions 
of the Iraqi interim administration, and key humanitarian and 
economic infrastructure’.
What is clear from operative paragraph 9 of UNSCR 1546 is 
that the Coalition forces had become the UN-authorised MNF 
before the occupation had formally ceased.  This was a point 
of relevance to the Force Comd in understanding his strategic 
mandate, although there was little practical difference on the 
ground to the mission between October 2003 and June 2004 
because there was still a belligerent occupation.
04B07 Transitional Administrative Law.  On 8 March 
2004 the IGC promulgated a transitional administrative law, 
paving the way towards an interim and then an elected 
Iraqi government. 
Post-Occupation – UNSCR Mandate for the 
Multinational Force 2004 to 2005
04B08 UNSCR 1546 (June 2004).  On 5 June 2004 the Prime 
Minister of the newly formed Interim Government of Iraq and 
the US Secretary of State wrote to the President of the Security 
Council.  Dr Allawi asked for the support of the Security 
Council and the international community until Iraq could 
provide its own security, including through the arrangements 
set out in Mr Powell’s letter.  Mr Powell’s letter recognised Dr 
Allawi’s request for the continued presence of the MNF in Iraq 
and confirmed that:
‘Under the agreed arrangement, the MNF stands ready to 
continue to undertake a broad range of tasks to contribute to the 
maintenance of security and to ensure force protection. These 
include activities necessary to counter ongoing security threats 
posed by forces seeking to influence Iraq’s political future through 
violence. This will include combat operations against members 
of these groups, internment where this is necessary for imperative 
reasons of security, and the continued search for and securing of 
weapons that threaten Iraq’s security. A further objective will be 
to train and equip Iraqi security forces that will increasingly take 
responsibility for maintaining Iraq’s security. The MNF also stands 
ready as needed to participate in the provision of humanitarian 
assistance, civil affairs support, and relief and reconstruction 
assistance requested by the Iraqi Interim Government and in line 
with previous Security Council Resolutions.’
This letter clearly contributed to the Force Commander’s 
understanding of his operational and legal freedoms, and had 
to be considered as part of his mission analysis process.
04B09  Resolution 1546, adopted by the Security Council on 
8 June 2004, reaffirmed the authorisation under UNSCR 151 1 
(2003) for the presence of the MNF under unified command 
with the consent of the Interim Government and decided:
‘that the multinational force shall have the authority to take all 
necessary measures to contribute to the maintenance of security 
and stability in Iraq in accordance with the letters annexed to 
this Resolution expressing, inter alia, the Iraqi request for the 
continued presence of the multinational force and setting out its 
tasks, including by preventing and deterring terrorism, so that, 
inter alia, the United Nations can fulfil its role in assisting the Iraqi 
people [...] and the Iraqi people can implement freely and without 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

73
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILIZATION: THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
intimidation the timetable and programme for the 
political process and benefit from reconstruction and 
rehabilitation activities…’
04B10 Operative paragraph 1 1 of the Resolution made clear 
that the Allawi and Powell letters governed the operational 
remit of the MNF from July 2004 and set out the security 
arrangements between the MNF and the Interim Government 
with an emphasis on partnership, coordination, consultation 
and agreement.  The partnership could clearly not be an 
empty agreement to agree, but a good faith, purposive 
interpretation of the mandate.  Dr Allawi’s letter annexed 
to UNSCR 1546 specifically mentioned that sensitive issues 
would need to be ‘resolved in the framework of a mutual 
understanding’.  Nevertheless, subject to the ultimate 
sanctions of the Iraqi Government terminating the mandate 
or the MNF withdrawing altogether, the UNSCR could not 
regulate this partnership in detail, and the ways in which 
differences and disagreements would have to be, and were, 
resolved, or simply ignored with unilateral action by one party, 
inevitably form the unseen narrative of this period June 2004 
to December 2008.
04B1 1 The Council further decided that the mandate for 
the multinational force should be reviewed at the request of 
the Government of Iraq or 12 months from the date of the 
Resolution and that the mandate should end on completion 
of the political process described earlier in the Resolution, 
but the Council undertook to terminate the mandate earlier if 
requested by the Government of Iraq.
04B12 On 27 June 2004 the CPA issued a revised CPA Order 
17 giving members of the multinational force and the CPA 
general immunity from Iraqi process, and providing that they 
should be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of their sending 
states.  On the following day power was formally transferred to 
the Iraqi Interim Government, the CPA was dissolved and the 
occupation of Iraq by coalition forces came to an end.
The UNSCR Mandate for the Multinational Force 
2006 to 2008
04B13 UNSCRs 1637, 1723 and 1790.  After this date 
there were three further Resolutions of the Security Council, 
which extended the MNF mandate year on year.  They 
were Resolution 1637 of November 2005, Resolution 1723 
of November 2006 and Resolution 1790 of December 2007 , 
which effectively preserved the presence of the MNF in Iraq 
under the Resolution 1546 mandate, subject to gradual shifts 
in the balance of power that reflected the progress Iraq had 
to make in the area of security.  Thus, for example, In 2004 
(UNSCR 1546 operative paragraph 8) Iraqi security forces were 
being developed and would progre ssively play a greater role, 
but by 2008 (UNSCR 1790, paragraph 4((2) of Mr al-Maliki’s 
letter annexed thereto) the Iraqi Government (established in 
May 2006, succeeding the Transitional Government of May 
2005) was ready to take full responsibility for the command 
and control of all Iraqi forc es and the MNF would provide 
‘support and backing’.
Post UNSCR Mandate – the Bilateral 
Agreements
04B14 On 31 December 2008 the mandate for the MNF 
came to a close and the presence of US and UK forces would 
in future be governed by more restrictive, separate bilateral 
agreements.  These set out what they could do, where they 
could go, what jurisdiction applies and the relationship 
between visiting forces and the host nation for the command 
and control of military operations and training.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

74
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
A MILITARY PERSPECTIVE
BY GENERAL SIR RUPERT SMITH KCB DSO* OBE QGM
General Sir Rupert Smith is a retired officer who 
Commanded 1st (UK) Armoured Division during the 
Gulf War (1990-1991).  He went on to be Commander 
UNPROFOR In Sarajevo (1995), GOC Northern Ireland (1996 
-1998) and NATO Deputy Supreme Allied Commander 
Europe (1998-2001).  He is the author of: ‘The Utility Of 
Force: The Art Of War In The Modern World’ (2005)
Every commander of whatever rank must understand that 
if there are non-combatants on or in his objective, he is 
responsible for the outcome of his action as it affects them. 
It does not matter whether the commander in question is 
a corporal clearing a house or a general taking a town: the 
principle remains the same.  In the heat of battle, with the 
imperative of overcoming the enemy and little information, 
it is difficult to balance the responsibilities – of achieving the 
objective at the least cost to ones’ own with concern for the 
non combatant – so as to reach a decision regarding the way 
of achieving ones’ objective.  Nevertheless, a decision must 
be reached.
The moment the objective is gained, or starts to be gained in 
the case of a large one, then the decision must be reassessed.  
The objective must be secured and the responsibility for the 
non combatant, if present, discharged.  For example: in the 
Kosovo operation of 1999 Serbian targets in both Kosovo and 
the rest of Serbia were bombed to the point that the Serbian 
forces withdrew from Kosovo and NATO forces entered the 
province.  The objective of the bombing was achieved.  
However, the moment those alliance forces entered Kosovo 
the objective changed to one of securing the population as a 
whole, and in particular those Kosovars of Serb ethnicity.  The 
change of objective would have occurred even if the NATO 
forces would have had to fight their way into Kosovo.  If such 
had been the case, the overall commander would have been 
conducting operations with two objectives simultaneously: 
the defeat of the Serbs, and also the protection of Serb non-
combatants as the operation succeeded.
The successful conduct of an operation with two objectives 
to be achieved simultaneously requires a method of 
command appropriate to the particular circumstances.  If one 
is advancing through a territory and the enemy are in front 
of ones’ forward troops, the two objectives are separated 
by ones’ own forces and a subordinate commander can be 
tasked with securing the rear.  However, if the enemy continue 
their resistance in your rear, in spite of your advance and 
particularly if they are operating amongst the people, then 
the achievement of the two objectives is not separated in 
spatial terms.  Nor is there a separation of the achievement 
of the objectives in terms of time or activity: the rear cannot 
be secured without the defeat of the enemy; but the enemy 
cannot be defeated without a secure rear.  In practice, forward 
and rear as generally understood become useless terms in 
these circumstances.  The objectives and their achievement 
are superimposed in terms of space, time and activity, and 
the method of command (the allocation of responsibility, 
authority, priorities, forces and resources) must have the 
capability of handling this complexity.
A commander conducting such an operation – a security 
operation with two superimposed objectives – must hold 
two ideas firmly in mind as he seeks to defeat his enemy.  The 
first is to ensure the provision of the basic needs of all non 
combatants. Note that ensuring the provision of the need is 
not the same as providing for the need, although in extremis 
the latter may be necessary.  These needs are: food, water, 
shelter, warmth and access to some level of health care.  The 
more the non combatants are dependent for these needs 
on others, such as humanitarian organisations, the more 
vulnerable they are and the longer it will take to achieve 
security and stability.
The second is to ensure the security of the individual: the 
sooner law and order are established the better.  This requires 
a body of law, a police service, the collection of evidential 
information, courts and all such.  Until these are in place and 
functioning adequately the societ y and the individuals in it are 
not secure, and until they are secure the military cannot leave.  
The main point is this: the military can establish order but it 
is not a law enforcement agency, particularly in a different 
state to its own.  Nonetheless, it is still incumbent upon the 
commander to ensure security, unless he is prepared to fail to 
discharge his duty to the non combatant on his objective.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

“The conflict will be won by 
persuading the population, not 
by destroying the enemy… …
we must get the people involved 
as active participants in the 
success of their communities.”
General SA McChrystal, COMISAF, August 2009
Section I  Addressing the Drivers of Insecurity
 The Politics of Conflicts in Stabilisation
 Decisive Actors 
Section II Establishing Human Security  
 Protecting the Population
 Providing Humanitarian Assistance
 Building on Secure Areas
Section III  Security Force Capacity Building
Section IV  Countering Adversaries
 Understanding Adversarial Groups
 The Use of Money
 The Use of Force
 The Use of Detention
The Military’s Role in Stabilisation by Andrew Rathmell
0501 This chapter allows readers, especially non-military 
ones, to examine security as the bedrock of stability.  It takes 
a high-level look at the options available to the military 
commander when deciding what his contribution to security 
could be.  The details of how this is achieved can be found 
in Part 3.
0502 A state which is unable to exercise a monopoly on 
the legitimate use of violence may fragment, or even collapse.  
Where this occurs, the primary role of a military commander 
is to use his force to arrest this fragmentation and re-establish 
a safe and secure environment.  The military should always 
consider not only the immediate measures that may be 
required to deliver a safe environment for all to operate in, 
but also the long-term drivers of insecurity.  If the latter is 
neglected then any improvement in security may only be 
temporary.  However, in many situations, without security 
in the short term, there is no possibility of long-term 
progress either.
75
CHAPTER 5
SECURITY AND SECURITY FORCE 
CAPACITY BUILDING
1. UK Strategy for Countering International Terrorism, March 2009.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
76
SECTION I
ADDRESSING THE 
DRIVERS OF INSECURITY
The Politics of Conflict in Stabilisation
0503 Of twenty failed states in 2008 almost all were 
experiencing violent conflict or political violence. 1  At the 
heart of the political problem lies a contest between the way 
political power is organised, and who wields that power.  A 
commander will need to convince decisive elites that their 
interests are best served through an accommodation with the 
approved political settlement, rather than renewed conflict.  
Where this is not possible, the use of military force can 
influence and alter the political dynamics, which may remove 
the barriers to any accommodation.
Decisive Actors  
0504 Everyone present has the potential to influence 
the course of events in ways which may be positive or 
negative.  The commander will strive to understand the full 
range of actors; their motivations, aspirations, interests and 
relationships.  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 5-00 (2nd 
Edition) Campaign Planning  suggests a generic way of 
dividing actors into five categories based on their aims, 
methods and relationships.  They are: adversaries, belligerents, 
neutrals, friendly and spoilers.  These generic categories can 
be tailored to the specific needs of stabilisation in fragile and 
failed states.
0505 Adversaries.  Terms such as insurgents, irregulars, 
terrorists, jihadists, warlords and criminals are commonly used 
in stabilisation and counter-insu rgency (COIN) literature, and 
each nation and organisation has different understandings of 
these terms.  Here they are all covered by the term adversary.  
Adversaries may oppose either the host government or the 
international forces, or both.  Some of them can be actively 
and violently hostile, while others will be antagonistic.  Not all 
violence will be perpetrated by adversarial groups; in many 
societies low level violence has long been a characteristic of 
politics.  Equally, many less ardent adversaries will stop short 
of significant violence against coalition forces or government 
authorities in their day to day behaviour, but may provide 
materiel or moral assistance to more hostile elements.  Their 
reasons for providing such support will not necessarily be 
personal antagonism towards the host government but 
may, for example, be based on traditional understandings 
of hospitality and obligation (e.g. Pashtunwali) or coercion, 
or fear of reprisals.  Motivation and commitment will be 
variable across and within groups, and some adversaries will 
be irreconcilable.  Many may be receptive to concessions, 
or a path back into the mainstream, in the form of limited 
or national settlements and confidence building measures.  
Constant assessment and probing will reveal fault-lines within 
and between adversarial groups which can be exploited to 
change the conflict geometry.
0506 Belligerents.  Belligerents are primarily hostile to 
each other.  Their motivations, intentions and relationships 
and may be influenced by historical grievance, self-interest, 
ideology, religion, or ethnicity.  While belligerent hostilities 
are usually not directed towards UK forces, they contribute to 
the societal conflict in destabilising ways.  Examples include 
competing tribes and warlords, nationalist groups or religious 
organisations attempting to influence local or national power 
structures through the use of violence.  In recent operations 
adversaries have attempted to mobilise belligerent groups by 
focusing their existing ideological, religious or ethnic tensions 
towards the international force.  An example of this is 
al-Qaeda’s attempt to mobilise Sunni tribes to oppose 
coalition forces in Iraq by playing on pre-existing Sunni-Shia 
tensions, and claiming that coal ition forces were supporting a 
general de-Sunnification of Iraq’s political elite.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
77
0507 Neutrals.  Neutrality covers those who may stop short 
of active opposition to the host government at the one end, 
through passive consent, to those who support it but with 
reservations at the other.  The conflict produces uncertainty 
for neutral actors with the potential for both risk and reward.  
Groups in this category will often play a critical role in the 
campaign, especially if they constitute a large proportion 
of the population.  Historically, the passive acquiescence of 
neutrals has proven to be vital to the success of an insurgency.  
This group cannot be expected to support the host nation 
government until it has clearly shown that it is likely to prevail.
0508 Friendly.  Friendly actors broadly support the host 
nation government and the international force.  They may 
include members of host nation government institutions 
(including the security forces), dominant groups within the 
political settlement under contest and, if fortunate, large 
sections of the population.  Building and then maintaining 
a broad coalition of friendly actors (which may be in 
competition with one another) is part of the operational 
art in stabilisation.
0509 Opportunists.  Opportunists are referred to as 
spoilers in JDP 5-00 and some academic works, but this term 
is more descriptive of their role in stabilisation situations.  
They exist in all conflict-affected countries.  They tend to 
be highly enterprising and adaptable, making use of the 
conflict environment to further their interests.  In some cases 
opportunists have an interest in maintaining the status quo 
and may attempt to frustrate progress or to prevent any 
change harmful to their interests.  Examples include: arms 
dealers, pirates and smugglers.  Some opportunists may not 
have a decisive impact on the situation, but criminal gangs 
operating in organised networks, possibly across national 
borders (for example, narco-criminals) can have a significant 
destabilising effect.  Criminal opportunists and adversaries will 
exploit the nexus of interests, sharing lines of communication 
and exploiting instability for th eir own ends.  For example, in 
2008 Afghanistan produced the opium for 90% of the World’s 
heroin, which in turn funded insurgency and terrorism, and 
fuelled systemic corruption.  Opportunists – such as some of 
the tribal groups in Iraq in 2007 – can be helpful in changing 
the conflict geometry, but as with all the above groups, 
should be constantly re-evaluated, not least for long-term 
rather than declared goals.
0510 Shifting Allegiances.   Assessment based on 
observed behaviour is useful, but can be misleading.  
Applying labels such as adversary or irreconcilable is a way to 
organise our thinking when dealing with a wicked problem.  
However, they should be used with care.  Groups are rarely 
fixed and bounded entities, and seeing them as such can 
inhibit the commander’s understanding of social interactions 
and deprive him of opportunities for influencing key actors.  
People have many, shifting identities and allegiances, and 
the categories cross-classify each other in complex ways.  For 
example, Jaish-al-Mahdi is an armed militia group, but is part 
of the Sadr Trend which is a political and social movement.  
Belligerents may be friendly on some issues and hostile 
on others; adversaries today may be neutral tomorrow (or 
vice versa).  Warlords, for example, may start as belligerents, 
squabbling amongst themselves, but then be drawn into the 
conflict and act as adversaries.  Additionally, as al-Qaeda is 
recruiting fighters as young as fourteen, although they may be 
radicalised individuals, it would be absurd to say that they are 
all irreconcilable .  Any categorisation must balance the need 
to organise our approach to a problem with building walls to 
compartmentalise and using labels to describe things, that are 
in reality porous and ambiguous.
0511 Tailored Approaches.  A well targeted, differentiated, 
strategy for engaging the various actors can transform the 
strategic geometry of the conflict.  Such a strategy may allow 
the commander to co-opt once adversarial or belligerent 
groups into the emerging political settlement.  Consequently, 
efforts should be focussed on:
• Supporting, protecting, empowering and reassuring 
friendly groups and neutrals; for example, by giving public 
credit for changes in force posture.
• Persuading, providing incentives or compelling 
belligerents, opportunists and reconcilable adversaries.
• Marginalising, disempowering and targeting irreconcilable 
and actively hostile adversaries.
2. Mary Harper, BBC Africa analyst, Life in Somalia’s Pirate Town , 18 September 2008 and The 
Battle Against Piracy Begins in Mogadishu , The Times 16 April 2009.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
78
The extensive media coverage of the capture of the oil 
tanker, the Sirius Star, by Somali pirates in November 
2008 precipitated an international naval response.  The 
impact of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and the western 
Indian Ocean delays cargo, increases the cost of transport 
(typically ransom sums are $2m per vessel) and the 
premiums on shipping insurance, with detrimental 
impact on trade.  Global, as well as regional, stability 
depends upon the freedom to trade and the prosperity 
it brings.
 
In the coastal regions of Puntland, from where most of 
these pirates originate, fortunes being amassed by the 
few are destabilising an alread y fragile economy, diverting 
men of working age into the lucrative piracy business.  
Much of the money is being used to fund warring 
factions within Somalia, including international 
terrorist groups.
Piracy originated when local fishermen attempted to 
protect their fishing grounds from illegal international 
exploitation.  However, it soon became clear that 
significantly more gains were to be made by targeting 
trade rather than illegal fishing vessels. Tapping into a 
long-standing Somali tradition of the heroic bandit (or 
shifta), the pirates have become community heroes, 
a maritime mafia upholding local social order while 
resisting foreign power.  Just as shiftas flourished in the 
lawless mountain regions of 19th Century Somalia, so the 
abject failure of the modern Somali state has led to the 
explosion of piracy.
Listed as number one on Foreign Policy’s  failed states 
index in 2008, Somalia has suffered fourteen failed 
governments in two decades.  In the absence of a 
functioning economy or state apparatus, piracy has 
become a national industry.  In 2008 alone pirates 
extorted US $150 million.  These raids have continued 
unabated for the better part of the last decade.  The only 
time between 1998 and 2008 that piracy was effectively 
curtailed was the six months of rule by the Islamic Courts 
Union – a clear indication that piracy in the Gulf of Aden 
is largely opportunistic, conducted by people benefiting 
from the failure of Somali state security forces.  Experts 
say there will be no order at sea until there is rule of law 
in Somalia.
2
Opportunists: Somali Pirates
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
79
SECTION II
ESTABLISHING HUMAN 
SECURITY
0512 Where violence is extreme, daily life effectively stops; 
produce cannot get to market, children cannot attend school 
and large parts of the population are displaced.  People 
become preoccupied with their immediate needs – food, 
security, health and survival.  When conflict causes people to 
flee their homes and villages their vulnerability to predators, 
disease and malnutrition increases, often dramatically.
Protecting the Population
0513 Where the state lacks the capability or will to meet 
human security needs, individuals tend to transfer loyalty 
to any group that promises to meet those needs, including 
adversarial groups.  These groups can exploit human 
insecurity by providing money, basic social services and a 
crude form of justice.  Winning the contest for human security 
therefore, is fundamental to the development of host nation 
government authority and, ultimately security of the state.
Only by living and operating among the people can an 
outsider gain an understanding of local security needs, 
and intelligence on the adversary.  Embedding in the 
local security forces and engaging with the population 
enables personal relationships to be forged, the conduit 
for the two-way passage of influence.  But placing forces 
amongst the population carries with it a risk of placing 
them closer to potential threats – a risk that may have to 
be carried in order to achieve progress.
Situational awareness can only be gained by interacting with 
the people face-to-face, not separated by ballistic glass’.
3 
0514 Providing protection for the population stimulates 
economic activity and supports longer-term development 
and governance reform.  Importan tly, it generates confidence 
in local people about their own local security situation – their 
collective human security – and an economic interest in 
ongoing stability.  It also denies adversarial groups one of their 
principal strategies for expanding their support base.
0515 The commander can employ a range of techniques.  
Not all will be popular:
• Static protection of key sites e.g. market places and 
refugee camps.
• Persistent security in areas secured and held e.g. intensive 
patrolling and check points.
• Targeted action against adversaries, e.g. search or strike 
operations.
• Population control, e.g. curfews and vehicle restrictions. 
Providing Humanitarian Assistance
0516 Human security may include protection from 
deprivation and disease as well as protection from violence.  
Conflicts can generate large scale population movement 
which, in turn, can trigger a famine or an epidemic.  Where 
development or humanitarian agencies are absent, 
international forces may need to provide emergency 
shelter, medical or food aid within the limits of their existing 
capacity.  However, military delivery of aid may further 
politicise humanitarian assistance and is not always welcome 
by external agencies.  UK forces should only undertake 
humanitarian assistance in close consultation with the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Department for 
International Development, or with International Organisations 
working through these departments.
Developing Secured Areas
0517 As well as isolating the adversary from the population, 
securing key areas helps to support economic activity, 
enable major infrastructure projects and encourage effective 
governance and rule of law.  Once the situation allows such 
areas should be consolidated and expanded.  It will be 
critical to bring the weight of a comprehensive approach to 
bear at the right time and place; concepts such as secured 
development zones  can provide a focal point by concentrating 
security, local governance and development effect to be 
mutually reinforcing.  Rapid integration of local government 
apparatus, including security  committees, together with 
initiatives that generate local employment 
and economic growth will be critical to maintaining security 
and stability.
3. Commander Multinational Force-Iraq Counter-insurgency Guidance.  See Annex 4A for 
full text.
4. DSTL analysis is currently (September 2009) attempting to confirm or update previous 
work on ratios.  Currently they are unable to support or counter the findings of James 
T Quinlavan’s work for the RAND Corporation which is the provenance of the 20:1000 
ratio.  The report was based on only six case studies and included British interventions in 
Northern Ireland and Malaya.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
80
SECTION III 
SECURITY FORCE 
CAPACITY BUILDING
0518 Providing protection for civil society and expanding 
security and development zones has, historically, involved 
greater security force levels and has been more difficult than 
first expected.  The number of forces required to carry out 
security tasks in stabilisation may exceed those needed during 
conventional combat operations.  Force ratios – usually used 
to describe the relative numbers available to friendly and 
hostile forces, are rarely instru ctive in stabilisation.  There 
are hard choices to be made between allocating UK troops 
for concurrent capacity building and allocating them for 
operations to isolate and neutralise adversaries, recognising 
that the demands of these separate tasks require different 
skills and structures.  Ultimately, success will involve recruiting, 
training, possibly equipping indigenous security forces, and 
embedding with them.  It may also entail the creation of non-
standard security structures, such as village or neighbourhood 
guards and tribal police forces in order to attain the critical 
mass which population protection demands.  Today, when 
British and other allied nations have fewer forces than in the 
past, investment in capacity building is ever more important.
0519 In addition to bolstering security force numbers, 
indigenous forces lower the profile of intervening actors 
and reinforce the security capacities of the state.  In contrast, 
sectarian or poorly disciplined forces may fuel the conflict.  
The host nation government may require firm advice, as 
well as financial support, to sustain the capabilities required.  
Previous capacity building ef forts have foundered due to a 
lack of sustainability; vehicles have been delivered without the 
means to maintain them, for example.
 
0520 Integrating host nation security forces into the 
campaign also provides a vehicl e for on the job training and 
mentoring.  However, care should be taken to ensure that they 
are not over-faced before they are demonstrably capable.  
In the early stages of their development, examples of their 
tactical employment may include:
• Static guarding and border security tasks.
• Patrolling areas that have earlier been secured such as 
development zones.
• Facilitating local contacts to gain intelligence while 
working with us to overco me language barriers and 
develop our cultural understanding.
• Conducting deliberate, limited offensive operations having 
been set up for success by international forces.
• Protecting host government officials.
0521 It is likely that a range of combined arms functions, 
such as joint fires, airborne surveillance and combat search 
and rescue, will be required to underpin the indigenous 
capability to conduct operations.  If local forces do not yet 
possess these capabilities, then international forces may 
be required to fill the gap even after indigenous units have 
achieved combat readiness.  A coherent reform programme 
is likely to include the provis ion of Monitoring, Mentoring and 
Security Force Ratios: Northern Ireland and 
Afghanistan Compared
In the mid-1970s in Northern Ireland, the total security 
force strength was 35,000 for a population of 1,539,000, 
giving a force density of 23 security force personnel per 
1000 local population (expressed as 23:1000).
In early 2009 in Helmand, the total security force strength 
(International Security Assistance Force and Afghan 
National Security Forces (ANSF)) was 14,000.  This rose to 
18,000 by the summer of 2009 with the deployment of 
an additional US Brigade and further trained ANSF.  With 
a population of ~1,400,000, this gives force density of 
10:1000 and 13:1000 respectively.
These figures do not reflect local concentrations of force 
against specific threats, and of course the nature of these 
two campaigns is different.  Some historical analysis 
indicates that a ratio of 20:1000 is a viable benchmark, 
although the validity of this analysis is currently being 
questioned.
4  In the 2008 operation against the Tamil 
Tigers, force density were as high as 60:1000.
The absolute requirement for mass may be misleading.  
Although mass is undoubtedly relevant, metrics of 
persistency and density may be more helpful.  Favourable 
force capacity can be achieved not only through 
numbers of international forces, but also by population 
control measures; raising indigenous or militia forces; the 
availability of technology such as biometric data; access 
to intelligence obtained through constant contact with 
the indigenous population; and attrition of adversaries.  
This is covered in Chapter 10.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
81
Training Teams (M2T) which is covered in more detail in Annex 
1 1A, as well as the simultaneous delivery of: equipment and 
infrastructure; operational support through the provision of 
logistics; and support to financial and managerial systems.
0522 Once an acceptably secure environment is established 
and public order restored, the commander should consider 
moving from an international military security lead to an 
indigenous lead.  This will be a political as well as security 
judgement.  There are at least two options: transition from 
international forces to an indigenous military security lead; 
or transition direct to a civil (police) lead, i.e. police primacy.  
In either case, the international community is likely to be 
asked to assist the host nation government to generate basic 
policing capacity so that the rule of law can be seen to apply.  
Developing civil security capacity and police forces is touched 
on in Chapter 6, Section II.  Since the UK has no equivalent 
of a gendarmerie, military commanders may be drawn into 
policing and interior security matters.  Commanders may need 
to improvise using military police and other re-roled forces, 
augmented with any deployable police specialists that are 
available from contributing nations.
0523 Police primacy should be the ultimate goal as it 
can bolster the perception of progress and reinforce the 
impression of hostile groups as criminals rather than freedom 
fighters.  It demonstrates the host nation government’s 
commitment to governing through the rule of law.  However, 
police primacy will often be un-achievable until relatively late 
in the campaign and may even be an alien concept in some 
societies.  Premature police primacy can be disastrous.
Failure to Prioritise – Afghan National Police
The Afghan National Police (ANP) was the least 
competent of the government’s forces, with little training 
or investment.  The ANP was not an international priority 
in the early stages of the insurgency and received 
significantly less money and attention than the Army.  
Key problems included the failure to conduct follow-on 
mentoring and not providing significant institutional 
reform in the Ministry of Interior.  Although the ANP was 
vital to establishing order in urban and rural areas, it 
lacked any semblance of a national police infrastructure, 
with little oversight at provincial or district levels.  These 
deficiencies affected not only the COIN campaign, but 
also security more broadly.
5
The process should not stop with the completion of 
basic training, but continue through collective training 
in units and a staged introduction to operations.  
Failed states tend to have plentiful supplies of men, 
but lack administrative, technical, combat and service 
support capacity.  UK mentors, loan service personnel, 
embedded training teams and partnering indigenous 
with international forces will often be essential.  All 
this requires detailed planning at the force design 
stage.  It also requires considerable resources including; 
timely funding, a dedicated headquarters and training 
organisation, and associated support.  Combined Security 
Transition Command – Afghanistan comprises over 1000 
personnel supported by a military force of over 6000 
personnel acting as trainers, advisers and mentors.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
82
0524 The generation and subsequent training of indigenous 
security forces should be conducted in a coordinated 
manner with broader Security Sector Reform (SSR) initiatives 
such as the development of civilian oversight bodies, 
judiciary and detention institutio ns, as well as transitional 
justice mechanisms and Disarmament, Demobilisation and 
Reintegration (DDR) programmes.  Chapter 6 deals with 
the military contribution to these broader governance and 
institutional aspects of SSR, whil e training indigenous forces is 
covered in more detail in Chapter 11.
SECTION IV 
COUNTERING 
ADVERSARIES
0525 Direct military action against adversaries may be a 
central component of a stabilisation campaign.  In which case, 
setting the conditions for a negotiated political settlement will 
entail breaking the ideological, financial or intimidatory links 
both within and between differ ent adversarial and belligerent 
groups, as well as between them and the broader population.
Understanding Adversarial Groups
0526 Developing and maintainin g an understanding of the 
motivations of different adversarial and potentially violent 
groups allows the commander to tailor his approach to each.
6  
It may be that the most effective way of countering some of 
these groups is to reach an accommodation from a position of 
strength through formal accords or local bargains.  However, 
there may be a number of actively hostile and irreconcilable 
adversarial groups, and countering these requires a balanced 
mix of the use of:
• Force.
• Money.
• Detention.
The Use of Force
0527 International forces should expect to meet resistance; 
as they mount the challenge to restore security that 
resistance can be expected to grow.  In its most demanding 
form this could come from committed, irreconcilable and well 
organised adversaries.  Such resistance may set up a fierce 
contest for the initiative, freedom of movement, authority, 
the provision of security and the popular support of the local 
people in areas of symbolic, political, economic and security 
significance.  Campaign progress may dictate the need to 
prioritise effort in such areas, where the adversary may be 
at his strongest.  A reactive stance may have attractions, but 
a purely defensive posture risks fixing the force.  Failure to 
wrest the initiative from adversaries who have gained popular 
support and sapped host nation government authority 
can undermine the campaign fatally.  Offensive air, land, 
maritime and special operations in a targeted, measured and 
highly discriminate manner, supported by the full range of 
comprehensive effects, will be needed.  Such operations are 
likely to be designed to:
• Decapitate adversarial command structures by killing or 
capturing key leaders.
• Defeat adversarial armed groups where they hold 
something that has particular operational or political 
significance.
• Disrupt or destroy adversarial offensive, support, and 
propaganda capabilities.
• Deny adversarial groups safe havens from where they may 
launch attacks or challenge legitimate governance.
“In wars among the people, if you are using a lot of firepower, 
you are almost certainly losing”.
General Sir David Richards (Geneva, September 2008)
0528 Offensive operations should minimise civilian 
casualties and damage to infrastructure.  If not, they risk 
undermining the broader influence campaign.  An operation 
that kills five low-level adversaries is counterproductive if 
collateral damage leads to the recruitment of fifty more.  
Sometimes the more force used, the less effective it is.  The 
dilemma is that adversaries will often choose to fight amongst 
the people for just this reason.
0529 There is a risk that operations to secure an area 
simply displace an adversary to a new safe haven beyond 
the commander’s control.  If this happens, they can regroup, 
possibly gaining strength, and strike where the host 
government and internationa l forces and agencies are 
less able to respond.  An alternative may be to isolate 
adversarial groups, seek to gain information and disrupt 
their activities.  In some circumstances it may be better not 
to strike but to gather intelligence for later decisive actions, 
including accommodation.
5. Seth Jones, Counteinsurgency in Afghanisatn, RAND Counterinsurgercy Study Volume 4.
6. For more detail see Chapter 8 Intelligence, Section VI, Understanding Adversaries.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
83
 The Use of Money
“Some of the best weapons for counter-insurgents do not shoot”
Sarah Sewall 7 
0530 In the battle to influence decisive actors, the 
judicious use of money can help persuade both individuals 
and groups to accept the authority and legitimacy of 
the host government.  Like lethal weapons, money can 
have either lasting or transitory effects.  Additionally as 
with lethal weapons, there are risks associated with its 
use.  However, money may both enable and magnify the 
delivery of immediate security effects, which may not have 
been achieved through the use of force alone.  It can be a 
substitute for force.  In part icular, money can be used for 
direct security programmes such as the funding of indigenous 
forces, or indirect consent-wi nning initiatives such as the 
settling of specific grievances before they become sources 
of disaffection and resentment.  The controls placed upon its 
use by accounting procedures should reflect the requirement 
for agility and risk, as with all Rules of Engagement.  Existing 
targeting mechanisms can be easily adapted to make them 
more comprehensive in composition.
0531 Examples of the use of money for security effect 
include:
• Recruiting non-standard security forces on short or long-
term contracts.
• Remunerating a militia or funding weapons buy-back 
under DDR.
• Compensating civilians for disruption, inconvenience 
 or loss brought about as a result of military activity in 
 the area.
• Short-term job creation.
• Counter-narcotics alternative livelihood programmes.
• Offering rewards for the capture of prominent insurgents.
• The provision of temporary accommodation for key 
 leader meetings.
0532 Operational experience has shown that the use 
of money to fund consent-winning activities can make a 
significant contribution to security effect.  For example, 
the secondary effect of quick impact projects as part of 
a development programme can be improved security.  
However, under current UK funding rules, such projects need 
to be linked to longer-term development.  The commander 
will wish to access the widest possible source of funds: see 
Chapter 7 , Section II.
The Use of Detention
0533 Arrest, detention, trial and imprisonment will ideally be 
conducted by the host nation judicial system.  International 
military forces will wish to employ such civil mechanisms 
wherever possible.  However, as will often be the case, when 
the host nation government lacks an effective police force, 
an independent judiciary, or a penal system with the capacity 
or resolve to be effective, it may be necessary for the UK to 
conduct military detention operations.  A well-coordinated 
screening and interrogation mechanism can have the 
added bonus of providing a valuable source of actionable 
intelligence and a direct channel to the adversary.  This, in 
turn, enables more precise targeting and stimulates the 
perception of progress, restraint and legitimacy.  However, 
there are risks associated with detention operations.  The 
factors affecting the execution of detention operations are 
described in detail in of Chapter 1 1, Section III.
 
7. Carr Center for Human Rights, Harvard University.  Contributor to US Army FM 3-24 
Counterinsurgency Field Manual .
8. Stabilisation Unit Guidance Note on Human Rights.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
84
0534 Effective detention operations must identify the 
motivations of those held and provide incentives that weaken 
the links within the adversarial network.  In this way, the 
reconcilable can be separated from the irreconcilable.
0535 Those detained must be brought swiftly under due 
legal process to bolster perceptions of normality and the 
rule of law.  This underscores the need for the collection and 
proper handling of evidence to ensure that individuals can be 
successfully dealt with by appropriate courts.
Transfer of Detainees in Afghanistan
8 
A Memorandum of Understanding (agreed in April 2006) 
between the UK Government and the Government of 
Afghanistan notes the ‘need to respect basic standards 
of international human rights law such as the right to life, 
and the prohibition against torture or cruel, inhumane and 
degrading treatment’.
It outlines the responsibility of UK Armed Forces 
to transfer detainees to Afghan authorities and the 
obligations of the Afghan authorities to treat individuals 
in accordance with its international human rights 
obligations, allow access to detainees by the Afghan 
Independent Human Rights Commission, UK Personnel, 
the International Committee of the Red Cross and Red 
Crescent and relevant UN human rights institutions.  It 
also outlines record keeping and use of the death penalty.
British forces or Embassy staff routinely visit detainees 
transferred from British forces’ custody.  Any allegation of 
mistreatment, if received, is thoroughly investigated.
Simultaneously, the UK has: provided funding for the 
renovation and rebuilding of National Directorate of 
Security (NDS) and Ministry of Justice detention facilities; 
provides training for NDS Prison Officers; and funds a Rule 
of Law capacity building project in Helmand province.
Detention.  Detention operations should be conducted 
within an appropriate policy and legal framework that 
include specialised training  and independent external 
monitoring provided by organisations such as the 
International Committee of the Red Cross.  Although 
politically sensitive and resource intensive, detention 
if done well, can generate significant intelligence, 
rehabilitate the casual and reconcilable insurgent, and 
help spread fear and mistrust within the insurgent 
leadership.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

THE MILITARY’S ROLE IN STABILISATION
BY ANDREW RATHMELL
Dr Andrew Rathmell, a director of Libra Advisory Group, 
has served as Deputy Director of Strategy at the FCO, 
Senior Adviser to the Iraqi Ministry of Interior, and Head 
of Plans for the Coalition Provisional Authority.  He has 
published numerous reports on stabilisation, security 
sector reform as well as regional and national 
security issues.
What is the military for?
This is a question that challenges today’s military professionals 
even more than it did their predecessors who led the 
transition from a Cold War force to the messy world of 
peacekeeping and humanitarian intervention of the 1990s.  
Serving readers of this doctrine will have to answer this 
question for themselves.  Some may fear that the ambitious 
agenda laid out here – of stab ilisation, counter-insurgency, 
state-building and peace-building – once again asks military 
commanders to take on too much.  Is it really right that 
commanders can be asked to, perhaps simultaneously, deliver 
high-intensity kinetic campaigns against insurgents, engage in 
subtle tribal diplomacy, rebuild civilian ministries and manage 
agricultural development programmes to wean poppy 
farmers away from narco-traffickers?
In practice, military commanders have shown incredible 
flexibility in turning their hands to these tasks, and more, in 
recent stabilisation missions.  Perhaps, it’s not fair that military 
personnel – whose core raison d’être  is to act as society’s 
specialists in the application of organised violence for political 
ends – have had to learn to paint on a far broader canvas.  And 
it’s far from ideal that soldiers, sailors and airmen, often with 
no preparation, have had to become development workers, 
police officers, or city councillors.  But this demand is likely 
to persist.  The UK’s civilian agencies, and our international 
partners, will make progress in the coming years in recruiting 
and deploying qualified civilian experts to plan, manage and 
implement the non-military aspects of stabilisation.  But the 
military’s natural advantages – its organisation, discipline, 
mobility, force protection and ap petite for risk – means that 
the next generation of military commanders will continue 
to have to take leading roles in designing and managing 
stabilisation.
If we are to get this right and to avoid, yet again, relearning 
hard lessons on the job, often at the cost of lives, then readers 
need to take the hard-won lessons in this doctrine to heart.  
And, while the primary audience of  this doctrine is the military 
readership, in the absence of comparable civilian doctrine, 
civilian readers need to adopt much of the advice provided in 
this publication.
There are perhaps four guidelines that are a good starting 
point for the operational commander tasked with preparing 
himself for a stabilisation task:
• Accept ambiguity and embrace uncertainty by building 
a learning organisation.  Direction from the political and 
military chain of command is likely to be unsatisfactory, 
lack clarity and be subject to change, especially when 
operating in a multilateral mission.  At the same time, 
circumstances may change rapidly on the ground.  The 
only response to this environment is to build a flexible, 
responsive and self-critical culture into your force.  
Encourage criticism, lessons learning, and initiative at all 
levels.  Have the moral courage to challenge the objectives 
set by the chain of command and by London, which does 
not always know best.
• Tap into expertise.  There is lots of expertise available 
out there but it is likely that little of it will be on tap in 
your units or within normal government channels.  Be 
imaginative in how you tap and deploy this expertise. 
Consider creating a reachout capability.  Ensure that you 
and your staff are thoroughly immersed in the theory and 
practice of stabilization and the recent experiences of 
those who have been working in the theatre.  Much of this 
preparation will involve working with NGOs, academics, 
international agencies, and diaspora groups.
• Be robust but accountable.  Some local actors will pursue 
their own interests and will clearly be enemies and 
spoilers, others may appear as your friends.  Focus on 
bringing even violent extremists into the political process 
wherever possible but stand up early on and robustly 
to those who want to intimidate us and the populace.  
Crucially, however, ensure that you insist on accountability.  
Local populations will often respect a firm hand but you’ll 
create enemies if you don’t enforce the highest standards 
of accountability and behaviour by your forces.
• Stay longer – and return.  Local knowledge, credibility and 
relationships are central to this game.  Do what you can 
to ensure that you and your staffs extend your tours in 
theatre, continue working on the issues when back home, 
and look for opportunities to redeploy multiple times so 
that you can really get under the skin of the environment.
85
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

CHAPTER 6
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL 
CAPACITY BUILDING
86
Section I   Addressing Critical Governance Functions
 Determining the Military Contribution to Governance
 Specific Governance Tasks
 Building on Local Capacities
Section II  Reforming the Security and Justice Sectors
 The Necessity for Safety, Security and Accessible   
 Justice
 Challenges to Reform
 Determining the Military Contribution to Reform
 Specific Military Tasks
A Governance and State-building Perspective 
by Clare Lockhart
0601 This chapter describes the military contribution to 
governance capacity building and the wider non-military 
components of security and justice sector reform.  It 
describes anti-corruption measures and the challenges of 
developing police capability.  The ability to govern, and 
to be seen to govern, fairly and consistently becomes a 
precondition of long-term stability.  Regardless of the success 
of an intervention, international actors will be unable to 
compensate for a government which does not undertake 
necessary reform.  Success depends on the host nation 
government.
0602 Improved governance helps to reduce grievances and 
marginalise adversarial groups, intent on portraying the state 
as ineffective and corrupt.  Conversely, where governance 
is authoritarian, exclusionary or corrupt, it fosters conflict 
and undermines the legitimacy of the state.  This is often 
the case where a dominant ethnic, religious or sectarian 
group dominates an unrepresentative government.  Stability 
results from both a political settlement, and an effective, 
representative government.
0603 Support to governance has two dimensions, fostering 
the processes that underpin a political settlement (elite 
consolidation) and enhancing the state’s ability to function 
(capacity building).  The former attempts to allocate power 
amongst competing elites in order to resolve the conflict.  
The latter is about generating sufficient institutional capacity 
for the state to fulfil its survival functions and meet at least 
some of the expectations of the population.  A balance must 
be struck between these two imperatives.  For example, it 
is common for governments to use public appointments to 
cement alliances and reduce opposition.  Political settlements 
may depend upon a degree of patronage which undermines 
broader institution building initiatives in the short term.
0604  A realistic immediate aim would be to support steps 
toward good enough  governance without undermining 
parallel processes of elite consolidation.  While good 
governance may be characterised by inclusivity, accountability, 
transparency, efficiency, equity, legality and decency, good 
enough governance could be defined as the ability of the host 
government to balance the priorities of powerful elites with 
basic security, administrative and service delivery tasks on a 
sustained basis.  Accordingly, good enough  governance is likely 
to be relationship and personality based, and only later extend 
to large-scale institution building.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
87
SECTION I
ADDRESSING CRITICAL 
GOVERNANCE 
FUNCTIONS
Determining the Military Contribution to 
Governance
0605 Determining the military contribution to governance 
will require an understanding of what constitutes good 
enough governance in context.  Local security levels will 
affect the capacity of international forces to contribute to 
wider governance.  Given limited resources of time, money, 
troops and organisational capacities, prioritisation of those 
tasks that may fall to the military will be essential.  Where 
possible, governance activities should be implemented 
by international civilian agencies and enabled, only where 
necessary, by the military.
0606 In non-permissive environments civilian access will 
be limited.  However, security is usually conditional on 
a degree of popular consent and this, in turn, may be 
conditional on the restoration of basic governance.  
Accordingly, military forces may be drawn into those 
governance areas essential for early progress.  Military 
substitution for absent civilian actors should be temporary.  
Civilian expertise must be integrated into planning through 
reachout, or by in-theatre governance advisers.
0607 Occupation.  International forces may be designated 
as an occupying power.  Occupation exists whenever an 
area is placed under the authority of external military forces.  
This will occur after a conflict in which an enemy has been 
defeated (known as belligerent occupation ) or may occur where 
international forces are deployed to restore law and order in 
the absence of a formal treaty or agreement with that state. 
The latter, however, is likely to be as a result of a UN Security 
Council Resolution (UNSCR) or other legal mandate, and thus 
may not amount to occupation in legal terms.
1  Occupation 
establishes a legal relationship between international 
forces and the civilian popu lation, involving rights and 
responsibilities on both sides, such as the protection of the 
population and the administration of the territory.  Here 
military substitution for absent civilian governance actors is 
both an operational necessity and a legal obligation.
Governance Tasks
0608 Local confidence is likely to be enhanced by 
demonstrable participation of host nation authorities.  
International forces should work through government 
agencies to generate local capacity and influence.  We must 
be prepared to become involved in tasks for which we have 
to carry out much of the planni ng and delivery, but for which 
ultimate responsibility lies with local authorities.  Provincial 
Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) are examples of integrated civil-
military structures that enable governance and reconstruction 
activity to be coordinated where the security situation 
prevents civilians from working freely.  These are described in 
greater detail at Chapter 7 , Section I.  The following paragraphs 
describe examples of tasks in which military forces may find 
themselves engaged.
0609 Protection of Civilians.  Where a host nation 
government is unable to provide security, international forces 
may be required to fulfil this basic state function.  Military 
forces should expect to be drawn into policing as well as 
military security tasks.
0610 Restoration of Essential Services.  Local services, 
such as food, water, sanitation, shelter and medical care, 
contribute to human security.  The military contribution 
may be optimised in supporting local and international 
humanitarian and development organisations to expand 
their access to the population.  Where these agencies cannot 
operate, the military contribution could include:
• Restoration of potable water supply and sanitation – while 
respecting local customs (for example, Afghan women 
may have the opportunity to socialise outside their homes 
only at the local well).
• Enabling the supply of power and fuel to homes.
• Assisting local authorities to reopen markets.
• Restoration of local hospitals, schools and clinics.
1. See Joint Service Publication (JSP) 383 The Joint Service Manual on the Law of Armed 
Conflict , Chapter 11.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
88
The military should only lead on civilian health provision 
for as short a time as possible, until the appropriate 
civilian authority can take over.  The general rule should 
be to support whoever is the appropriate lead: the 
government if it exists, even if its capability is currently 
small.  If there is no effective government then a lead 
agency will provide health coordination temporarily.  
In most cases that will probably be the World Health 
Organization but it could be another UN agency such 
as UNICEF, or even a medical, Non-governmental 
Organisation (NGO).
 
• Identifying the specific health needs of the 
 local population.
• Optimising all local NGO and military agencies for 
health provision.
• The disproportionate influence that simple medical 
interventions can bring in developing countries.
• Providing leadership and coordination to what 
may be a chaotic NGO and Other Government 
Department (OGD) mix.
• Recognising that security and health can combine to 
reinforce stability.
• Cultural sensitivity; western medicine may not be 
ideal and patient-centred cultural sensitivity should 
guide your response.
• Maintaining the local health economy and foster 
confidence in local healthcare providers.
• Ensuring consistency with the national health policies 
and sustainability at the local level.  It should not 
endanger other civilian healthcare providers.
• Helping the local population to help itself.  Better 
health leads to people better able to be economically, 
politically and socially productive.
• Training healthcare workers to raise local 
 health education.
• Veterinary health - it can significantly increase 
 local wealth.
Health: Commander’s Considerations
Consider:
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
89
061 1 Engagement and Conflict Resolution.  Societal 
conflicts are rarely resolved quickly or decisively; negotiated 
settlements are usually necessary locally and nationally.  
International forces are likely to be involved in negotiations 
that assist communities to connect with the government.  
Typical tasks may include:
• Providing a secure environment for negotiations.
• Direct and regular engagement with key elites and 
government authorities.
• Settling disputes, for example over land and 
 property seizure.
• Public outreach and information programmes.
• Enforcing ceasefires and support to transitional 
 justice arrangements.
0612 Supporting Elections.  Fair and secure elections 
are good indicators of stability.  However, if elections are 
conducted too early they may provoke an increase in violence.  
The commander should assess their likely impact on security 
and advise host nation government and international agencies 
accordingly.  Considerations include:
• How local elites, government authorities and International 
Organisations are perceived locally and nationally will 
impact the plan for delivering an election.
• The election should be implemented by the host nation 
government where possible.
• International authorities may be required to deliver the 
election where local authorities generate feelings of 
intimidation and insecurity.
 
0613 Anti-Corruption.  Corruption undermines confidence 
in the state, impedes the flow of aid, concentrates wealth into 
the hands of a minority and can be used by elites to protect 
their positions and interests.  It affords adversaries propaganda 
opportunities and contributes to wider crime and instability.  
Yet there is no absolute test of corruption; practices that are 
acceptable in some societies are considered corrupt in others.  
Some, however, such as bribery, embezzlement, fraud and 
extortion are universally considered corrupt.  Others, such as 
nepotism, patronage or preferred client systems are less clear; 
local customs should guide the assessment.
0614 Grand and Petty Corruption.  It may help to 
distinguish between grand  and petty  corruption.  Grand 
A UK military commander and a diplomat hold a meeting 
(shura) with village elders and tribal chiefs in Musa 
Qal’eh.  Governance and the political process have to be 
embedded at the local as well as the national level.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
90
corruption is at the highest levels of government and erodes 
confidence in the rule of law.  Petty corruption involves the 
exchange of small amounts of money or the granting of 
minor favours by those seeking preferential treatment.  The 
critical difference is that grand  corruption distorts the central 
functions of the state whereas the impact of petty  corruption 
is at a lower level, where people interact with agents of the 
state.  Although it may be within local norms, petty  corruption 
can affect the local economy and security, and thereby the 
legitimacy of the state.  It may be rife in the host nation 
police forces.
0615 Anti-corruption measures are likely to directly 
affect those elites on which a political settlement depends 
– they will resist.  Anti-corruption measures may need 
to be tempered so that they do not undermine local 
accommodations.  Once anti-corruption initiatives are in place, 
international forces may need to support:
• Integrated coalition efforts to eradicate grand corruption.
• Enforcing codes of conduct fo r indigenous security forces 
and civil servants.
• Training in ethics and standards of conduct for security 
forces.
• Monitoring deployed security forces to prevent 
opportunistic extortion.  
• Audit, prosecutorial and judicial support.
• Tracking the movement of aid such as food, clothing, and 
weapons.
• Overseeing contract management procedures, for 
example, in dispersing reconstruction funds with local 
companies.
• Ensuring security forces are properly paid and the funds 
accounted for.
• Whistleblower protection schemes.
0616 These measures may assist international forces to 
develop accountable indigenous forces that accept the need 
to operate in a non-predatory and transparent manner.  We 
should expect resistance to the notion of public accountability 
at first.  Ultimately, if grand corruption threatens campaign 
progress, then international partners may need to make their 
support conditional upon host government reform.
Building on Local Capacities
0617 Coalition governance efforts should build on the 
foundations of existing capacity, however informal or 
insubstantial.  The trick is to join local, functioning centres 
of power to the national authority of the indigenous 
government.  In Afghanistan the local goal is frequently to 
reinvigorate the lapsed power of the Malik (the government’s 
representative) and the Khan (the tribal leader) to balance that 
of the Mullah (the religious authority), thereby creating an 
informal system of governance – one that is imperfect, and 
does not deserve the term architecture – but that connects 
the dots between central and local authorities.  This is an 
example of working with the grain  of local life, in this instance, 
Pashtunwali.  By building on existing structures, the expansion 
of governance is more likely to succeed than a system 
imposed by outsiders.
2. Frank Ledwidg, Justice and Counter-Insurgency in Afghanistan : A Missing Link, RUSI Journal, 
Volume 154.
Perceptions of Corruption and Justice in Afghanistan
Corruption by state officials can cause the local 
population to turn back to the very people the 
government is seeking to isolate them from:
‘In Helmand Province a cadre of four Taliban judges travel 
the countryside deciding cases referred to them by village 
elders.  In the way they work they are rather reminiscent of the 
medieval English circuit courts and they have established a 
reputation for fair and quick justice.
A recent, well publicised, case took place in Garmsir where the 
formal state court had sentenced a murderer to six months 
imprisonment.  The shortness of the sentence, for a crime 
which would usually attract the death penalty, was said to 
have been explained by the fact that the murderer’s family 
had bribed the judge.  Not satisfied with the state judicial 
process, the victim’s family referred the case to the Taliban 
who re-arrested the murderer on his release from Lashkar Gah 
prison.  The Taliban heard the case again, found him guilty, 
and presented him to the victim’s family who subsequently 
killed him.
This kind of justice is common in Helmand where the Taliban 
are keen to portray the government as ineffectual and 
chronically corrupt’ .
2  
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
91
0618 Where local institutions are absent or ineffective, 
then alternative forms of non-state authorities are likely to 
fill the vacuum.  These may derive their status from a mix 
of coercion and local incentives.  If this has occurred, there 
may be no choice but to create new authorities from scratch.  
Local knowledge and an assessment about those locals 
who wield influence will be critical in determining what is 
likely to work and what will not.  But new institution building 
initiatives could make matters worse by eroding the local, 
informal capacity, in which case strengthening local forms of 
governance may be a better option.  However, where local 
authorities are criminal or insurgent-based, there may be 
no choice.
SECTION II
REFORMING THE 
SECURITY AND JUSTICE 
SECTORS
‘The risk of conflict is heightened when security forces are 
not subject to proper discipline or civilian control … properly 
constituted and reformed security forces can act as a force for 
good … helping to reduce instability and contributing to a 
reduction in human suffering’
DFID, FCO and MOD SSR Policy Brief, November 2003
Accessible Security and Justice
0619 The security and justice sectors deliver a fundamental 
function of government and are the cornerstone of state 
sovereignty.  They comprise those institutions responsible for 
national security, and safety and justice for the population 
– this is far more than the security forces.  In addition to 
military forces, intelligence services, militia and police, the 
security sector includes judici al and penal systems, oversight 
bodies, the Executive, parliamentary committees, government 
ministries, legislative frameworks, customary or traditional 
authorities, financial and regulatory bodies.
0620 When functioning effectively the security and 
justice sectors contribute to a generally safe environment 
for the population.  These sectors also contribute to wider 
regional security, for example through effective coastal and 
border protection.
0621 Societal conflicts create ideal conditions for the 
proliferation of predatory armed groups, criminal networks 
and an increase in opportunistic crime.  For many, conflict 
and criminal activity becomes their livelihood.  In turn, 
the population’s experience of state security forces can be 
extremely negative: security forces may perpetrate human 
rights abuses; judicial systems may be weak, corrupt or 
dominated by sectarian interests; and prisoners be held in 
inhumane conditions.
0622 Those opposing the government will prey on 
perceptions of injustice by depicting the state as ineffectual 
and corrupt, and international forc es culpable by association.  
It is, therefore, essential to show progress towards a security 
sector that is effective, legitimate, transparent, just and subject 
to the rule of law.
Consult Widely.  Develop relationships with a broad set 
of indigenous actors.  It is dangerous to pick or empower 
winners, not least due to the risk of misjudging the ability 
of local elites to gain the confidence of the population.  
Take an inclusive approach and work with a broad 
spectrum of indigenous actors.
Foster Local Ownership.  Prioritise that which people 
really want according to their circumstances (e.g. 
demands will differ between urban and rural areas), and 
avoid supply-driven initiatives dominating the agenda.  
Encourage locals to take the lead.
Look Beyond the State.  Important capacities exist 
outside state institutions: in civil society; tribal groups; 
religious organisations; and the private sector.  These 
capacities will be crucial gap-fillers in the short term, and 
even when formal state institutions strengthen they are 
likely to remain a source of local influence and parallel 
capacity.
Balance Effort.  Improved stability requires a balance 
of effort between capacity building initiatives and those 
activities that are aimed at stopping the violence.
Aim for Transition from the Start.   Plan for transition 
to international civilian or host government agencies to 
help manage local expectations about on-going external 
support.  This keeps the imperative for indigenous self-
reliance at the forefront of the measurement of campaign 
success.  Transition planning should be based on realistic 
benchmarks being met, balanced with time imperatives.
Capacity Building Guidelines for the Military Commander
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
92
Challenges to Reform
0623 Ideal preconditions for reform will rarely exist because 
justice and security underpin a country’s balance of power 
and, in some circumstances, the fragile political settlement 
from which a government’s authority is derived.  Attempts 
at reform may challenge vested interests and upset existing 
power relationships.  Therefore, reform is primarily a political 
undertaking and not simply a technical activity.
Security
Legislative Frameworks
Financial Management Executive Ombudsman
Parliamentary Committees
Ministry of Defence
Armed Forces
Intelligence
Border Security
Tribal Security Forces
Private Military and Security 
Companies
Ministry of Interior
Police
Detention
Ministry of Justice
Courts
Prisons
Formal Law
Customary Law
Justice
  Figure 6.1 – The Security and Justice Sectors
The Political Implications of Security Sector Reform: 
de-Ba’athification
On 22 May 2003, the same day the UNSC approved 
Resolution 1483 recognising the Coalition Provisional 
Authority (CPA) as the temporary governing authority 
in Iraq, the CPA issued Order Number 1 eliminating 
all Ba’ath Party structures and banning senior party 
members from service within Iraq’s public sector.  The 
order, which became known as de-Ba’athification required 
the immediate dismissal of all in the top three layers of 
management within the Iraqi government if he or she 
had been a full member of the Ba’ath Party.
Because the vast majority of senior leaders in Saddam’s 
regime were Ba’ath party members, the order effectively 
fired most senior leaders in the Iraqi government. 
Lieutenant General Sanchez, Commander of Coalition 
Forces in Iraq later said “the impact of this de-Ba’athification 
order was devastating …Essentially, it eliminated the entire 
government and civic capacity of the nation.  Organisations 
involving justice, defense, interior, communications, schools, 
universities and hospitals were all either completely shut 
down or severely crippled, because anybody with any 
experience was now out of a job.”
One week after issuing the de-Bathification order the CPA 
issued Order Number 2, entitled Dissolution of Entities , 
which abolished virtually the entire Iraqi security 
sector including the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of 
Information, Ministry of State for Military Affairs, Iraqi 
Intelligence Service, National Security Bureau, Directorate 
of National Security and Special Security Organisation.  
The order put some 500,000 men, with guns in their 
hands, immediately out of work, many without any 
compensation.
The impact of these orders was immediate.  Sunnis 
tended to equate the orders with a general de-
Sunnification of the government.  In Mosul, where the 
then Major General Petraeus was commanding the 
101st Airborne Division, disbanded military members 
demonstrated for several days before sparking a riot in 
which 18 US soldiers were wounded.  Petraeus later said 
that the order sparked anti-coalition sentiment amongst 
the Sunni which fuelled the nascent insurgency in Iraq 
creating tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands 
of additional enemies.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
93
Determining the Military Contribution to Reform
0624 Opportunities to drive through change may result 
from the negotiations leading to a political settlement; for 
example, on the back of initiatives to demilitarise society, 
as clauses within formal peace agreements, as conditions 
attached to foreign aid, or following elections.  The UK 
contribution is likely to be determined by a team drawn from 
the MOD, DFID, FCO and the Home Office, and may range 
from providing temporary training teams to rebuilding whole 
areas of defence and national security.
0625 If possible, the Security Sector Reform (SSR) analysis 
to establish the scope of the reform programme – and by 
implication the military contribution – would result from a full 
assessment involving both the host nation government and 
international partners .  It would include:
• The priorities of other nations involved in the provision of 
equipment, training and infrastructure.
• An estimate of the pace and cost of reform.
• Agreement with the host nation government regarding 
the size, shape, role, governance arrangements and 
priorities for its security and justice sectors.
• Agreement on the broad structures of the security and 
justice sectors and their impact on society.
0626 Alternatively, the commander may need to conduct a 
pre-assessment in the absence of indigenous and international 
civilian agencies, based on assumptions.  A full assessment 
should follow as soon as possible.  The assumptions may 
include:
• The likely role, size, structure and budget of the military 
and police forces, judi ciary and penal systems.
• Priorities for early capacity building (for example, whether 
the army or police take priority) and within this, what 
security capabilities are needed first, and at what scale, to 
support his campaign.
• The need for immediate disarmament, as a security 
imperative, ahead of any full Disarmament, Demobilisation 
and Reintegration (DDR) programme.
Specific Military Tasks
0627 Likely military tasks include: the demilitarisation 
of society; reform of the defence ministry; and the initial 
generation and subsequent development of the armed forces.  
However, the military contribution may expand to include the 
initial development of indigenous policing and support to the 
promotion of judicial and la w enforcement institutions.  
A detailed consideration of the issues that arise when working 
with indigenous forces is provided in Chapter 1 1, but a few of 
the key areas are outlined below.
0628 Initial Generation of Indigenous Forces.  In some 
instances the commander may need to rely on non-state 
security forces to support his campaign.  Parallel development 
of basic support structures for indigenous forces is essential.
In Dhofar, the use of Firqats  (local units formed by 
surrendered enemy personnel taking up arms against 
their former colleagues), directly supported by coalition 
specialist forces, proved critical to campaign success.
0629 Management of Indigenous Forces.  The 
operational capability of local forces is likely to reflect the 
quality of basic administration: pay, feeding and equipment 
husbandry.  International training teams should establish 
the fundamentals of effective administration parallel to 
operational training, unless the commander has consciously 
decided to resource these functions as part of his 
operational design.  
0630 Education.  A programme of education will help to 
ensure that both the population and their new security forces 
understand their role and responsibilities.  The programme 
should emphasise a culture of service to the people and an 
understanding of the relationship between the armed forces 
and the state.  
0631 Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration.  
Significant armed groups, or a disproportionately large 
military, are likely to impact security.  While some of these 
groups could be put to work on behalf of the state to generate 
mass and bolster local security, other groups will require 
inclusion in an arms management programme and their 
members re-trained and reintegrated back into civil society.  
DDR usually forms part of wider post-conflict restoration 
processes.  Its aim is to ensure that combatants, and their 
weapons, are taken out of the conflict and provided with a 
transition package so that they do not seek to return to arms 
again.  As such, DDR is not just a technical military activity, but 
a political process with economic and social consequences:
• Disarmament initiatives may encourage a local arms trade.
• Early disarming may leave a security vacuum which may 
be filled by younger, new combatants.  It may change 
factional security balances, setting conditions for reprisals.
• Ex-combatants who are detained in encampments can 
create unrest.  Funded re-integration programmes (such as 
jobs and skills training) may be required to prevent militia 
leaders from re-forming their groups.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
94
While DFID and the UN may offer DDR expertise, there is no 
universal model.  Each situation is unique.  International actors 
must adopt a consistent approach and provide the means to 
monitor and evaluate progress.
Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration – 
Two Successful Examples
In Southern Sudan there were many semi-autonomous 
clan militias.  Rather than alienate these militias and 
flood the region with unemployed ex-combatants, the 
Southern Sudanese Parliament decided to absorb the 
clans into the national army, corrections system and 
wildlife enforcement.  This deliberately expanded an 
already bloated army.  The government then initiated 
a programme of force reduction over the next six years 
across the whole security sector, rather than any specific 
clan.
In Sierra Leone, a similar programme was initiated 
following the cessation of hostilities.  The new army 
integrated 2600 former members of rebel and militia 
groups before implementing a significant force reduction 
programme.  Downsizing to an affordable and sustainable 
force was done predominantly through retirement, 
including senior officers, using severance payments 
largely funded by the UK.
0632 Host Government Ministry Reform.  UK military and 
MOD civilians may provide advice to host government officials 
within a range of ministries.  Assistance may include advice 
on policy, strategy, risk assessment, capability development, 
budgets, resource management and procurement.
Invest in Quality
The development of the Malayan Armed Forces had to 
reflect the needs of the post-emergency, independent 
state.  This included identi fying high quali ty individuals 
and giving them extra training to make them more 
effective.  As one example, the best senior members of 
the Malay Police Force were selected for expert training to 
become Special Branch (Counter Terrorism) officers.  The 
improved campaign intelligence provided by this cadre, 
through their local contacts and knowledge, provided the 
lead for wider professional improvement across the Force.
0633 Developing Indigenous Police Services.  The 
responsibility for on-going internal security should ideally be 
provided by a demilitarised police force with a mandate for 
law enforcement and strong links to the judiciary.  Ideally, this 
sees the creation of a community-based police service, with 
a clear separation between the roles of the police and the 
military.  However, while police primacy for internal security 
remains an aspiration, community policing models assume 
consent which is unlikely to be achievable in the midst of 
violent conflict.  The policing model must be realistic.
Police Primacy in Maysan
In the summer of 2005 UK forces transitioned 
responsibility for security of urban areas to the Iraqi police 
while the British Army concentrated on patrolling the 
Iranian border with the aim of interdicting the movement 
of weapons and foreign fighters.  However, with sharply 
divided loyalties, serious corruption and a security 
force density of about 3 per 1000 head of population, 
the Iraqi police were incapable of maintaining civil 
order.  Given the existence of a highly politicised and 
violent population, the decision to transition can now 
be seen as premature, and was undoubtedly a factor 
in the burgeoning growth of the Mahdi Army and, by 
implication, Iranian influence.
0634 Military Input.  Coalition military forces may need to 
lead on police basic training, leaving specialist training, such 
as evidence handling and forensic  investigation, to others who 
may be private contractors.  Their role is discussed further in 
Chapter 11.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
95
0635 Restoration of Judicial Institutions.  In many 
developing states, the primary sources of justice are traditional 
ones.  These include tribal elders, religious authorities and 
informal local courts administering long-held rules and 
customs.  During the initial stages of a campaign, military 
forces may be involved in the identification of local key leaders 
and any informal justice mechanisms to incorporate them into 
the reform process.  International forces may also be required 
to begin the refurbishment or reconstruction of facilities, 
possibly including court houses and prisons.
Transitional Justice
Transitional justice refers to the range of mechanisms 
available to address war crimes, crimes against humanity, 
genocide and other significant human rights violations.  
Instruments include direct prosecutions (through 
domestic, international or hybrid courts), truth and 
reconciliation commissions, reparations schemes and ad 
hoc tribunals.  Any transitional justice scheme is likely 
to be part of a wider reconciliation process and is best 
delayed until a secure environment is achieved.  Local 
actors’ choice of instrument will depend on the nature 
of the conflict, the extent of the violations and culturally 
specific attitudes to human rights, justice and impunity.
0636 Border Forces.  Effective border control is essential 
to combat regional criminality and the movement of foreign 
fighters.  Additionally, in the absence of significant natural 
resources, customs and immigration duties are often a major 
source of government revenue.  International forces may be 
tasked to patrol borders and mentor customs, immigration 
and border control agencies.
0637 Intelligence and Security Services.  Intelligence 
and Security Services (ISS) are normally located within central 
government reporting directly to senior decision-makers.  In 
conflict-affected countries, ISS are routinely misused, often 
acting as a repressive arm of the state.  It is common for there 
to be a proliferation of ISS, serving different power blocs 
within government and the security forces.  In addition, there 
may be rivalry between the ISS and the armed forces.  The 
commander should track local ISS activities; those factors that 
will lead to a lack of transparency and the extent of any inter-
service rivalries.
0638 Enduring Partnership.  Following successful transfer 
of security responsibility to host nation authority, UK may 
offer a Security Sector Development and Advisory Team, 
and continuity training support in UK.  As with prevent 
activity, these soft power strategies can be highly effective, 
but in the interests of brevity are not covered in this Joint 
Doctrine Publication.
Police Capacity Building.  Where there are insufficient 
civilian police trainers with relevant experience, or they 
are constrained by safety regulations then international 
military provost, gendarmerie or para-military police units 
may have to plug the gap.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

A GOVERNANCE AND STATE-BUILDING 
PERSPECTIVE 
BY CLARE LOCKHART
Clare Lockhart is a senior Adviser on Governance 
and state building for the UN, North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) and International Security Assistance 
Force (ISAF).  She is co-founder and Director of the 
Institute for State Effectiveness, advising a number of 
countries on their approaches to state-building.  Together 
with Ashraf Ghani, she has written the book: ‘Fixing Failed 
States: a framework for rebuilding a fractured world’.
‘The Character and Context of Failed States and 
the Impact of Military Intervention; Maximising 
the Positives and Minimising the Negatives’.
A stable, sovereign state requires legitimacy, won and 
sustained by the trust of its own citizens in return for fulfilling 
the legitimate aspirations of those citizens, and through 
responsible international behaviour according to agreed 
rules.  A large number of states are now failing to meet this 
double compact  to their citizens and neighbours, representing 
a significant threat to global security.  The ultimate aim 
of international engagement in these contexts must be a 
coherent and integrated process of state-building, through 
which international and national actors seek to enhance state 
legitimacy and functionality over a long-term timeframe.  It is 
only through such a process of co-production that a vicious 
cycle of destructive politics can be transformed into peace 
and constructive change.
The counter-insurgency (COIN) literature, from Galula and 
Thompson, to the recent U.S. COIN manual emphasises that 
the use of force must be part of a process of movement 
towards political objectives, as part of a coherent multi-
dimensional effort.  A state-building approach, which creates 
support from the population for positive change through a 
reframing of the relations between state, market and citizen, 
must be central. It is often illegitimate leadership, abuse of 
power and misuse of resources that results in alienation of 
segments of the population.  Efforts to expand networks 
of rights and obligations give citizens a stake in the system, 
rather than outside it, and create widening spheres of 
opportunities to underpin peace and stability.
Stabilisation doctrine must provide a clear roadmap for 
soldiers to understand the tasks they should be performing, 
across what timeframes and in what ways, with what 
resources, and in concert with which other actors.  These 
are not easy challenges, nor are there generalisable 
answers – indeed, a failure to date has been the propensity 
of international actors to use off-the-shelf solutions.  
Furthermore, while understanding of these issues has now 
evolved at the strategic level, the international community 
often lacks the tools at the operational level to translate 
thinking into practice.  That said, analysis of British experience 
from a range of contexts indicates a number of useful lessons.
First, in stabilisation it must be recognised that state functions 
are interdependent, and that security is only one aspect of 
state functionality across the spectrum of tasks a national 
government must perform.  This does not mean that British 
troops should perform more tasks across a wider variety 
96
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

of sectors; rather, they should understand that developing 
security forces also requires understanding the spectrum 
of functions that underpin and complement those services, 
including a judiciary system, a legal framework, a public 
finance system and health and education services.  All 
functions cannot be performed simultaneously: the issue 
is rather to determine which functions are appropriate to 
context, at what level of governance (from village to capital) 
they should be performed, and how their performance 
should be prioritised and sequenced over time.  They must 
be able to design an appropriate response to the problems, 
understanding which tasks they , and which others, will be 
responsible for, and which tools different actors bring to the 
table.  Lastly, they must have the ability to be able to supervise 
tasks which they are directly responsible for.
As the goal of stabilisation is ultimately to return the control 
of the territory to a legitimate government, stabilisation 
should be carried out in such a way as to create and empower 
legitimate national actors wherever possible, rather than 
substitute for those actors.  While it is understood that the 
skills base can often be low in fragile contexts, it is critical 
to build capacity within national institutions to ensure that 
stability becomes sustainable.  This requires a long-term 
approach – state-building is a 10 to 20 year endeavour at 
a minimum – with a comprehens ive mapping of assets at 
the outset, and with clear time lines and benchmarks for the 
handover of responsibilities to the national government.  
All local actors are not necessarily legitimate in the eyes of 
the population, and so care must be taken not to empower 
illegitimate actors, without bringing them within a framework 
of rule of law and accountability for use of power.
Finally, stabilisation should recognise that in the past, aid has 
not always been appropriately designed for context, and that 
mere spending of money on thousands of uncoordinated, 
unsustainable small projects will not win the population 
or create stability in the longer term.  Learning is currently 
taking place among development actors on how to improve 
their behaviour and instruments, including through use of 
trust funds, programmatic instruments and private sector 
financing tools.  National Programs which allow a government 
to mobilise the relevant forces – government, the private 
sector and civil society – to execute critical tasks across state 
territory can be a key component of stabilisation processes.  
In Afghanistan between 2001-2005, for example, a National 
Programme for the Afghan National Army ensured an 
institutional foundation within  a law and order framework, 
with fair and transparent recruitment processes; and the 
National Solidarity Programme transferred decision-rights over 
funding to locally elected bodies which could then identify 
reconstruction and development priorities.  Support for 
this type of programming can enhance stabilisation in such 
contexts.  Ultimately, the key instrument of change 
and accountability is the national budget process, and 
thus the key counterparts are not western aid agencies, 
but national representatives of government, civil society, 
business and media.
As the result of past experience and forward-thinking, the UK 
has been better than most at developing and implementing 
stabilisation processes in difficult contexts.  The confidence 
that a British military presence can generate, both within the 
countries in question, and among the larger international 
community, is significant.  This does not mean, however, 
that our efforts have always been appropriate or successful, 
and it is critical that our thinking evolves as quickly as the 
threats and issues that our soldiers face in the field.  This 
means a movement towards long-term, coherent, people-
centred approaches, with a clear division of labour with other 
stakeholders.  It also necessitates support for nascent state 
institutions and capacity buil ding wherever possible, and a 
holistic, programmatic approach that marshals the relevant 
resources and actors behind national, partner-country 
objectives.  It is only through thinking of this type that the 
UK will be able to withdraw its troops from these places and 
leave behind sustainable state institutions that provide for 
security and stability, which sh ould be the ultimate objective 
at the outset.
97
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
CHAPTER 7
ECONOMIC AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
DEVELOPMENT
98
Section I Addressing Critical Development Needs
 Determining the Military Contribution to Development
 Provincial Reconstruction Teams
 Stabilising the Economy
 Reconstructing Enabling Infrastructure
 Generating Employment
 Addressing the Economic Drivers of Conflict
Section II Quick Impact Projects
 Overview
 Categorising Quick Impact Projects
 Accessing Funding for Quick Impact Projects
 Guidelines for the Effective Use of Quick Impact   
 Projects
Peace Building and State Building - the Department for 
International Development Approach by Joelle Jenny
0701 This Chapter discusses the military contribution to 
economic and infrastructure development.  Poverty can be 
both a cause and effect of conflict, and should be addressed 
as part of a comprehensive approach to stabilisation.  
While aid relieves poverty in the short term, only sustained 
economic growth can reduce it in the long term.  However, 
standard economic interventions designed to address 
familiar development problems are often inappropriate in 
conflict-affected societies.  In these circumstances, effective 
programmes require an understanding of how economies 
change during conflict and how targeted economic and 
infrastructure development initiatives can prise open 
possibilities for political settlements and vice versa.  For 
example, improvements in employment prospects not 
only help raise people out of poverty but may support an 
emerging political settlement by bolstering support for host 
government authorities while reducing the pool of frustrated 
under-employed young me n and women from which 
adversaries can readily recruit.
0702 Research of some African states suggests that for 
every year [a state is] in decline, it will take at least one year 
in recovery.  This ratio can easily be greater as states can 
sometimes lose 7% to 8% of their total economic product in 
a year of conflict.  Achieving this level of growth is difficult 
at the best of times.
1  Key areas for development to enable 
reform include: property rights; policy predictability; legal and 
admin reform; trade facilitation; and financial services, 
tax policy and risk ratings.
2  Campaign planners might usefully 
check that development initiatives address these issues.  
However, they are not easily resolved and it should be 
clear that the process of economic and infrastructure 
development is likely to be a long one, and is wholly 
dependent on civilian agencies.
0703 Growth requires a stable and secure environment.  In 
helping to deliver this environment, the military will always 
have a significant, if indirect, contribution to make.  There 
may also be times when more direct military involvement 
in economic development will be necessary; for example, 
when conditions restrict civilian movement or when civilian 
agencies have not yet arrived on the ground.  Although 
security and governance refo rm remain priorities, early 
attention to economic growth increases the likelihood 
of success.
3  Accordingly, while economic measures and 
reconstruction are not the panacea for stability, they should 
constitute a significant component of the solution.  Priorities 
for international agencies an d forces includes measures 
designed to stabilise the economy, protect and reconstruct 
critical economic infrastructure, generate employment and 
address any underlying economic drivers of conflict.
1. Jeffrey Herbst, Confronting Fragile and Failed States in Africa , RUSI Whitehall Report 2-08: 
International Peace-Building for the 21st Century, The Tswalu Protocol and Background 
Papers , John Mackinlay, Terence McNamee and Gred Mills (ed).
2. Mauro De Lorenzo, Why Entrepeneurship and Business Climate Reform Should Be the 
Centrepiece of Peace-Building Operations .
3. Collier P, Hoeffler A, & Soderbom M (2007) Post-Conflict Risks . Centre for the Study of 
African Economics, Department of Economics, University of Oxford, UK.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
99
SECTION I
ADDRESSING CRITICAL 
DEVELOPMENT NEEDS
Determining the Military Contribution to 
Development
0704 There are fundamental differences in both approach 
and timeframe between stab ilisation and development:
• Development activity focuses on poverty reduction and 
addressing the drivers of poverty over the longer term.
• Stabilisation focuses on violence reduction, while 
addressing the drivers of conflict; it has greater immediacy 
and visibility in the short term.
0705 Conflict is a significant driver of poverty and vice versa.  
Consequently, UK forces will often find themselves working in 
theatre alongside, supporting or being supported by targeted 
development programmes.  The key UK partner in the delivery 
of in-theatre development assistance is likely to be DFID.  
The commander should therefore understand the drivers 
underlying the DFID approach to enable 
effective cooperation.
0706 DFID is responsible for managing the British 
Government’s aid to developing countries and supports 
longer term programmes to help tackle the causes of 
poverty, such as conflict and state fragility.  Its work forms 
part of a global promise to support progress towards the UN 
Millennium Development Goals  and its overseas development 
assistance budget which constitutes most of DFIDs funding, is 
required by law to comply with the International Development 
Act (2002).
4  This stipulates that no funds may be spent on 
military equipment of any type, and that all expenditure must 
contribute to the overall goal of reducing poverty.
The UN Millennium Development Goals
• Halve the number of people living in extreme poverty 
and hunger.
• Ensure that all children receive primary education.
• Promote sexual equality and give women a 
 stronger voice.
• Reduce child death rates.
• Improve the health of mothers.
• Combat HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases.
• Make sure the environment is protected.
• Build a global partnership for those working 
 in development.
0707 At the strategic level, cooperation between DFID 
and the military may involve joint assessments and the 
development of shared objectives.  At the operational level it 
will require cooperative implementation planning or pre-
deployment training.  At the tactical level it could involve the 
secondment of DFID development advisers into deployed 
military headquarters or the military execution of 
DFID-funded projects.
0708 In addition to DFID, there could be an array of 
development organisations represented in theatre, all with 
highly individual aims and ob jectives.  The commander will 
need to build relationships with the more significant of these 
organisations.  He should assess the potential effects these 
projects could have on stability within the region, as well as 
the potential effects of his own security operations on current 
or planned development projects.  The commander should 
seek to synchronise and coordinate his activities with those 
of the host nation and developm ent agencies, ideally within a 
single integrated theatre plan (see Chapter 10).
0709 In a permissive environment, the military contribution 
to economic and infrastructure development should be 
minimal, limited to maintaining the security necessary for 
others to operate and move freely.  In volatile environments 
adversaries are likely to target development workers, be they 
government or non-government, indigenous or intervening, 
military or civilian.  Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) 
(see paragraphs 711-713) containing military and civilian 
capabilities, may be critical to achieving local development.  
The commander should be aware of the potential risks 
development workers face within his area of operation, 
consider what priority should be accorded to their protection, 
and advise them of potential security risks.
0710 In those circumstances in which civilian agencies are 
unable to deploy, international forces may be requested, or 
as part of the integrated campaign plan, initiate specific, high 
priority, localised development tasks.  These may include 
generating employment opportunities, infusing money 
into local economies, restoring and protecting essential 
infrastructure or supporting the restoration of market activity.  
The commander should, where feasible, use local knowledge, 
skills, manpower and materials as well as link local 
4. Expenditure under the Conflict Pool is not governed by the Act.
5. Country plans are published on the DFID website, www.dfid.gov.uk.
6. In July 2009.
7. This list is derived from Robert Perito et al, Provincial Reconstruction Teams: Lessons and 
Recommendations , Princeton University, January 2008.
 8. Such as the UK’s Stabilisation Unit and US State Department’s Office of the Coordinator 
for Reconstruction and Stabilization.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
100
development initiatives to national priorities, programmes and 
structures.  The military presence will have a significant impact 
on local economies, and the advice of civilian specialists will 
be vital.
Provincial Reconstruction Teams
0711 PRTs are civil-military organisations designed to 
operate where the freedom of movement for civil agencies 
is constrained.  They are usually delivered by a single nation.  
Originally designed to extend the reach of the government 
beyond the capital, PRTs had three objectives when 
introduced in Afghanistan: to improve security; extend the 
authority of the government; and to promote reconstruction.  
The approach was later introduced into Iraq.  The reality is that 
each PRT’s role, structure and approach has been defined by 
the priorities of the donor country – there is no single model.
0712 US PRTs are military-led comprising mainly of 
military personnel with support from other US Government 
departments and often including contractors working on 
police and military reform.  Th e UK PRT in Helmand comprises 
120 people of which 80 are civilians from UK, US, Denmark 
and Estonia.
6  It works closely with the UK Helmand Task 
Force.  It is led by a director (2*) from FCO with deputies from 
DFID and MOD.  Its focus is on capacity building, working 
to a province-wide plan agreed between the government 
of Afghanistan and its international partners covering 
politics and reconstruction, governance, rule of law, security, 
economic and social development, counter-narcotics and 
strategic communications.  It is collocated with the Task Force 
Headquarters in Lashkar Gah and has stabilisation teams in 
outlying districts.  These teams work closely with the local 
international military and depend on them for security.  
PRT funding is usually from contributing nations, although 
some comes from international sources such as the UN 
and EU.  Sources are described later in Section II.  US in-
country allocation for nineteen PRTs in Afghanistan was 
$450m in FY 2007.
0713 The following characteristics and observations about 
PRTs are derived from reports on a variety of multinational 
experiences:
7 
• PRTs are shaped by the contributing nations’ political 
priorities and capabilities.
• PRT field operations are enhanced where interagency 
organisations exist in nations capitals. 8 
• Common funding promotes unity of effort.
• Pre-deployment training significantly improves staff 
coordination in the field.
• Civilian leaders shift the focus from security to 
DFID is likely to be represented in theatre by the DFID 
country office.  A typical country office will comprise two 
to four international staff, a handful of locally employed 
staff and additional specialist advisers who are deployed 
for short periods to support specific events.  It is likely that 
the number of DFID staff will increase when UK forces are 
deployed; the Afghanistan office (DFID’s largest) currently 
has fifty staff.  The majority of offices are situated within 
the capital city but may not be collocated with the 
British Embassy.  Some cover several countries and the 
country head will usually have at least ten years relevant 
experience although many will have twenty or more.
The country office manages the UK’s development 
assistance programme to the country and will be working 
to a country plan developed to support the host nation’s 
poverty reduction strategy.
5  Country plans take a five-
year perspective and will normally draw upon a range 
of assessments including Strategic Conflict Assessment, 
Political Economy, Drivers of Change and Gender and 
Social Exclusion Analyses.  DFID will normally try to work 
in partnership with other donors and through host 
government ministries.  They do not deliver programmes 
directly, but channel development through implementing 
partners such as international and regional organisations, 
Non-governmental Organisations (NGO) or civil society 
groups.
The commander can therefore expect DFID to have 
a good understanding of who the key development 
actors are within the country, their objectives, major 
programmes and their comparative strengths and 
weaknesses.  They are also likely to have a good network 
of contacts and may be helping to coordinate the 
international development assistance to the country.  
In addition they should have conducted a number of 
assessments that can help identify the dynamics and 
underlying causes of any conflict.  Even where access for 
international civilian staff is limited, DFID may, through 
their implementing partners, have an understanding that 
reaches beyond the capital and to elements of society 
other than ruling elites.
Working with DFID in Theatre
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
101
 longer-term development.
• The military role in reconstruction can lead to a 
 short-term focus.
• PRTs add most value to Security Sector Reform when they 
partner host nation security forces.
• Evaluating the impact and effectiveness of PRT activity is 
generally poor.
• PRTs are most effective when integrated as a component 
of a wider strategy.
Stabilising the Economy
0714 In addition to security, monetary policy is fundamental 
to stabilising an economy.  Military activity in the field of 
monetary policy is likely to be limited to enabling safe passage 
of World Bank or International Monetary Fund officials to 
key ministries and meetings, and ensuring the security of 
critical financial institutions, infrastructure and stockpiles.  The 
international force should also be careful not to undermine 
monetary policy by, for example, making large cash payments 
in foreign currency and instead reinforce currency stabilisation 
initiatives by making payments to contractors in the local 
currency at local rates.  Economies cannot stabilise until levels 
of violence begin to fall allowing local people to re-establish 
normal patterns of economic life.
Looting the Central Bank of Iraq
After the fall of Baghdad, looters broke into the Central 
Bank of Iraq and stole the printing press, paper and 
engraving plates.  With the potential for counterfeit 
bills of that quality flooding the market, the Coalition 
Provisional Authority was forced to replace the national 
currency, further complicating efforts aimed at economic 
stabilisation.  If the building had been secured then 
restarting central bank operations would have proceeded 
more quickly and smoothly.
9 
0715 Economic recovery often follows a predictable pattern 
and can easily be seen to fit within the activity framework for 
stabilisation described in Chapter 4:
0716 While a reduction in violence is likely to stimulate a 
restoration of normal economic activity, local growth may 
depend on targeted international development assistance.  
If international interventions are successful, growth will be 
self-sustaining.  Consequently, successful businesses expand 
and begin making longer-term investments, entrepreneurs 
re-appear and locally financed reconstruction can resume.
Shape Secure Hold Develop
In the initial stages of an 
intervention economic 
recovery is unlikely.  
The commander may 
be confronted with a 
deteriorating economic 
situation as well as 
a declining security 
situation. 
During operations to secure 
a locality, combat with 
armed adversaries may 
contribute to a declining 
economy. However, once 
international forces have 
managed to secure an area, 
the local population should 
perceive it is safe to return 
to more normal modes of 
economic activity.  These 
areas can serve as a magnet 
attracting both trade and 
local migrants, which in 
turn stimulates further 
demand.
Attracted by improvements 
in the security situation 
host government 
authorities and 
international agencies 
descend on the locality and 
generate demand for local 
goods and services such 
as housing, restaurants, 
hotels, interpreters and 
skilled labour.  Such donor 
consumption provides 
further stimulation to the 
local economy, although 
it is unlikely to generate 
sustained growth.  Major 
projects will be planned as 
quicker impact tools, such 
as micro-loans for small 
business start-up have an 
immediate effect.
International agencies 
can now undertake 
targeted investment in 
specific sectors.  This can 
range from agricultural 
rehabilitation to health 
clinics, schools and large 
infrastructure projects.  
Donor investment 
provides a third impetus 
to growth.  International 
agencies should guard 
against so-called ‘dutch 
disease’ whereby rapid 
surges in investment 
increase the exchange 
rate, making exports 
less competitive.  Inward 
investment does not need 
a risk-free environment; 
but investors do need 
to be able to assess and 
manage risk.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
102
0717 As violence fluctuates so too, do local economic 
conditions.  Once areas have been secured, they have the 
potential to become important centres of economic 
recovery and the commander should be aware of the 
impact that security has.  Plans should identify mechanisms 
for accessing development fund s and channelling them into 
areas that are held at the necessary tempo – economic action 
relative to the contested security situation – in order 
to promote further development, minimise gaps in
delivering security or economic progress, and transition 
to host nation responsibility.
Reconstructing Essential Infrastructure
0718 Infrastructure is fundamental to economic recovery.  
Transport networks allow freedom of movement, trade and 
social interaction; telecommunications systems support every 
element of society from the host government, to the private 
sector, to the media and the wider population; and power 
generation facilities constitute the engine room of 
economic production.
 
0719 When prioritising and sequencing infrastructure 
projects it is useful to distinguish between infrastructure 
associated with essential government services such as 
hospitals, schools, water and sanitation, and infrastructure 
associated with the country’s economic capacity such as 
transport links, telecommunications, significant commercial 
facilities and power generation and distribution systems.  Both 
are important.  However, whereas the former are associated 
with the immediate well-being of the population, and 
are dealt with in Chapter 6, the latter are essential for the 
immediate recovery of the economy.
9. Crane, K. et al (2008) Guidebook for Providing Economic Assistance at the Tactical Level 
During Stability Operations . RAND Corporation.
Infrastructure Repair.  The military has limited capacity 
and expertise to undertake civil infrastructure repair.  
Military engineers, specialist engineer units and 
volunteer reserve personnel may be used but 
commanders should mobilise, facilitate and utilise 
local resources and skills where possible.  Long-term 
infrastructure development and repair should be the 
responsibility of the host nation ministries, supported by 
specialists, development agencies and contractors.  The 
aim is to work with and through  host nation and civilian 
structures, rather than around.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
103
0720 Although airports, railways, ports and communications 
facilities may represent iconic projects, if they do not come 
with air traffic controllers and ground crew, train drivers, 
shipping masters and engineers to maintain them, they 
are unsustainable.  One of the most damaging aspects of 
long-term conflict is the departure of the most highly trained 
people in the economy, many of whom will never return.  
The only way to replace these is to train a new generation, 
something that takes significant time and effort.  Prioritisation 
and expectation management are essential.
0721 The military contribution to infrastructure 
development is likely to be an enabling one.  However, in 
environments in which civilian agencies are absent or unable 
to move freely, intervention forces may need to implement 
critical infrastructure reconstruction tasks themselves.  In 
these circumstances the military  contribution might include:
• Priority repairs to and protection of national transportation 
infrastructure (airports, roads, bridges, railways, ports).
• Restoration and protection of essential 
telecommunications infrastructure.
• Repair and protection of important commercial facilities 
and key assets associated with economic production, 
import and export (vital for revenue generation).
• Repair and protection of key power generation facilities 
and distribution systems.
• Training and developing indigenous expertise.
Generating Employment
0722 Unless local people have a reasonable prospect of 
restoring their livelihoods and im proving their living standards, 
support for the host government is likely to be low.  Therefore, 
activities which stimulate economic growth and generate 
employment may be crucial to stability.
0723 When international forces  and agencies occupy an 
area they stimulate economic recovery through increased 
demand for goods and services as well as targeted 
development initiatives.  In some circumstances, international 
forces and agencies may spon sor large-scale employment 
programmes – cash for work programmes  – as a temporary 
solution to mass unemployment.  These are often low-wage 
job opportunities for unskilled workers and are designed to 
minimise interference with more traditional and profitable 
sectors.  Such initiatives, however, should be translated 
into sustained employment prospects based on traditional 
transactions amongst the local population.
Build Local Ownership and Capacity
‘Win the argument. Use localized development and economic 
support to bring community leaders and people together 
for their own success.  Listen, share and get buy-in.  Build 
local ownership and capacity.  Together with legitimate 
GIRoA
10 leaders, work all local issues with the local shura and 
community.  Foster ownership.  As the Afghans say, “If you 
sweat for it, you will protect it”.’
Commander ISAF’s Counterinsurgency Guidance, August 2009
0724 The agricultural and fishing sectors are central to 
the well-being of the population.  The commander should 
familiarise himself with local crops and seasonal cycles, and 
understand how these are used by adversaries to generate 
funds and may relate to surges in the level of violence.  The 
location of markets, areas of primary production which 
support them, and the transport routes and storage facilities 
en-route are all critical components of the sector.  The 
commander may be required to ensure safe access from the 
farm-gate to market and security for local consumers.  In 
10. GIRoA – Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
104
The Kajaki Dam – Security Supporting Development
In September 2008, Afghan National Security Forces 
(ANSF) and the International Security Assistance Force 
(ISAF) ensured that a new turbine was successfully 
installed in Helmand province.  The ultimate purpose of 
the operation was to increase the capacity to generate 
electrical power, so contributing to the improvement of 
the quality of life for the people in southern Afghanistan.  
It was funded by the United States Agency for 
International Development.
 
The multinational convoy travelled 180km over road and 
desert tracks to reach its destination, involving 4,000 
ANSF and ISAF troops along with NATO air support, who 
protected the convoy and dominated the mountains 
surrounding the dam.  The project demonstrated that 
major development can be a key driver for setting 
security priorities.  This is covered in Chapter 10, Planning.
A contributory factor to the increase in Afghan opium 
production is the way in which dealers purchase the 
crop from farmers, particularly in the more volatile and 
insecure areas.  Often dealers will contract to purchase 
the entire crop and provide sizeable cash deposits to 
farmers prior to planting.  Dealers will also arrange to 
collect the harvested product directly from the farm gate.  
This process significantly reduces the risks incurred by 
the farmer; from crop failure, the threat of eradication, 
and in transporting the product over insecure roads.  
While the profit margins on conventional and illicit crops 
may be broadly similar, conventional crops are often 
stolen by criminals or taxed by corrupt policemen on 
the way to market.  This erodes the economic viability 
of licit crops and substantially increases the financial 
and personal risks inherent in this form of agriculture.  
Accordingly, the international community is taking a more 
effective approach to countering narcotics production by 
offering more competitive, less risky alternatives, based 
on an understanding of the value chain for agricultural 
production in Afghanistan.  This approach identifies the 
steps between growing the crops and selling them in the 
market place.  Its objective is to reduce the risk incurred 
by the farmer during different parts of the economic 
chain.  In some areas this has increased the incentives 
for licit crop production through contract purchasing 
of crops in advance of planting and arranging for their 
collection direct from the farm gate after harvest.  The 
intention has been to make farmers perceive that licit 
agriculture is economically viable and entails less risk than 
growing poppy.
‘Farm Gate to Market’ Supply Chains in Afghanistan
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
105
some circumstances, direct assistance to producers will be 
required to accelerate both the recovery of agricultural and 
fisheries production, and the repatriation of the displaced rural 
population.  Possible military tasks include:
• Repair to enabling agricultural and fisheries infrastructure 
(irrigation systems, power generation and distribution 
systems, fishing vessels, etc).
• Provision of supplies, including an adequate supply of fuel.
• Protection of post-harvest storage facilities.
• Mediation of land or fisheries disputes.
0725 While hiring local labour and issuing contracts boosts 
incomes and generates broader economic growth, care 
should be taken to minimise potentially disruptive effects on 
local labour markets, in particular, pay scales.  International 
forces should seek to avoid creating large disparities in wages 
between that which can be earned on the local market or 
working for the host government and that which is possible 
working for internatio nal forces and agen cies.  Commanders 
usually need to remunerate local staff at higher levels to 
attract quality personnel and compensate for added risks 
associated with supporting international forces.  However, 
salaries should not be so far above local market rates that they 
entice skilled workers or professionals to leave important jobs 
in the community for less important, but better paying jobs 
working for international actors.  It is particularly important 
to get this right with respect to security force wages.  Local 
personnel working for internat ional forces should not make 
more money than those working for the indigenous army 
or police.
Addressing the Economic Drivers of Conflict
0726 Development initiatives, where possible, should be 
designed directly to confront the economic and political 
drivers of conflict, and not simply execute programmes based 
on narrow technical considerations.  This adds complexity to 
typical development activities, which do not usually need to 
consider conflict dynamics.  The commander should develop 
an understanding of the drivers of societal conflict and be an 
advocate for those development activities that best address 
the causes of local instability.  Critically, he will need to ensure 
that development does not reinforce divisions.
0727 If inequality or discrimination are central to the conflict 
then development activity should be broadly based.  A 
perception that development is being distributed unequally 
may lead to resistance from aggrieved local groups.  In 
these circumstances, programmes should be judged on 
whether they strengthen one party to the conflict at the 
expense of others in addition to traditional considerations of 
effectiveness and efficiency.  Equally, if powerful warlords are 
central to the conflict, there must be a concerted effort not 
to allow development activity to finance the rebuilding of old 
ownership structures.
11. See website: http://ifrc.org/Docs/pubs/disasters/resources/reducing-risks/leaflet-bpi.pdf
12. Anderson, M. (1999) Do No Harm: How Aid Can Support Peace – Or War . Lynne Rienner, 
Boulder, Colorado, USA.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
106
0728 The commander should consider who benefits 
and who risks exclusion from development initiatives and 
programmes, and the potential negative effects.  A particularly 
useful tool is the Red Cross Better Programming Initiative .
11  This 
explores the potential impact of development programmes 
on the connectors and dividers between people, allowing 
planners to gauge more accurately the likely effects of 
programmes and projects on conflict dynamics.  Experience 
shows that the delivery of aid may exacerbate the conflict by 
having the following unintended consequences:
• It may be misappropriated by adversaries.
• It may distort local markets.
• It may benefit some groups and not others, causing 
further tension.
• It may substitute for local resources, freeing them up for 
further conflict.
• It may legitimise the cause of competing factions and 
adversaries.
Failure to Implement the ‘Do not Harm Principle’ 
– Tajikistan
12  
At the end of the civil war, one international NGO 
undertook massive housing construction in a southern 
province.  The intent was:
• To encourage people who had been displaced during 
the fighting to return to the region.
• To support reconciliation between the two groups 
who had fought by getting them to work together in 
rebuilding the destroyed villages.
Priority for reconstruction went to the villages that had 
suffered the most damage.  In these, the NGO worked 
with local people to decide which houses would be 
rebuilt and to organise work crews to do the construction.  
They agreed that ‘anyone from the village who wanted a 
job’ would be hired in these crews. 
A few months later, they had successfully sponsored the 
reconstruction of almost 60% of the damaged housing 
in the region.  However, one day a local man came into 
the NGO compound with a Kalashnikov and threatened 
the staff, saying, “Why are you favouring that group that 
we defeated in the war?  If you don’t start building some 
houses for my clan, I will kill you.”  The NGO staff members 
were astounded.  They had meant to be completely 
inclusive and to ensure that everyone who suffered in the 
conflict received equal attention.  They had not known, 
until this moment, that during the conflict, the greatest 
damage was done in villages occupied by only one 
(rather than both) of the local, warring groups.
By focusing their assistance on the areas of greatest 
damage, and by hiring people to work on the 
construction who came from those villages, they had 
inadvertently provided almost all of their assistance 
to one side of the conflict.  Their project design had 
unintentionally reinforced existing inter-group divisions 
by focusing on villages that were mono-ethnic and 
providing all their support to these groups.  However, 
with a project redesign, the NGO was able to supply 
building materials and support to multi-ethnic villages, 
to damaged homes of the other ethnicity, and to 
community buildings that both groups shared such as 
schools, clinics and mosques.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
107
SECTION II
QUICK IMPACT PROJECTS
Overview
0729 Quick Impact Projects (QIPs) are characterised as short-
term, small-scale, low-cost and rapidly implemented initiatives 
that are designed to deliver an immediate and highly 
visible impact, generally at the tactical level.  Their primary 
purpose is to facilitate political and economic progress and 
attempt to generate confidence in, if not consent for, the 
host government.  By design, QIPs should leverage consent, 
however on occasions access may be all that can be achieved.  
In non-permissive environments, where it is deemed that the 
project is critical for early stabilisation and cannot wait until 
the security situation improves, the military might implement 
QIPs.  In more permissive environments, it is only where there 
is a capability gap that cannot be filled by another actor, or 
where the military possess particular specialist skills that QIPs 
are likely to be implemented by the military.
 
Categorising Quick Impact Projects
0730 It is useful to distinguish between two types of QIPs:
• Direct QIPs – critical, and rapidly implemented, security, 
governance or development projects that directly 
support a goal on the path to stability and longer term 
development.
• Indirect QIPs – rapidly implemented security, governance 
or development projects that serve primarily as 
instruments of influence and are designed to generate 
consent for the host government or international forces, 
thereby indirectly contributing to stability.  Their effect 
may be more short term.
0731 Direct QIPs have tended to focus on key elements 
of security (such as the repair and refurbishment of 
police stations and vehicle check points), critical enabling 
infrastructure (such as market places, roads and bridges) or 
the delivery of essential services (such as schools and 
health clinics).
Examples of Direct Quick Impact Projects in Recent 
Operations:
13
• Reconstruction of roads in South Sudan facilitating 
access to markets and the return of displaced persons.
• Grants to communities in Ethiopia and Eritrea for 
emergency repairs of schools, clinics and restoration 
of basic services.
• The restoration of salary payments to civil servants 
 in Iraq.
• Emergency supply of seeds and tools to farmers in 
Liberia in time for the planting season.
• Proper disposal of dead bodies and livestock and the 
restoration of a potable water supply in Bosnia to 
restore public health and prevent epidemic.
0732 Indirect QIPs focus on influencing perception and 
gaining consent.  They are used to communicate positive 
messages, provide incentives fo r compliance, facilitate key 
leader engagement or demonstrate tangible benefits from 
peace.  Indirect QIPs are particularly effective where lack 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
108
of demonstrable progress is seen as an important driver 
of instability.  Examples include the construction of parks 
and the refurbishment of stadia, the clearance of waste or 
drainage systems and broader infrastructure refurbishment 
programmes.  Often, the most appropriate indirect QIPs are 
ones which cluster projects by visibly rolling out initiatives in 
sufficient numbers to create the perception of 
systematic change.
0733 When using QIPs for these purposes the commander 
should be clear on: 
• Who will provide the consent?
• What will the beneficiaries of the QIP consent to?
• What purpose this will serve?
• Why might he expect to generate the consent through 
the use of the QIP?
• How long is the consent expected to endure?
Accessing Funding for Quick Impact Projects
0734 Where PRTs exist, much of this activity will be funded, 
planned and implemented by development agencies 
coordinated through the PRT.  In these circumstances, 
development and security activities will need to be mutually 
reinforcing within a civil-military theatre integrated plan.  In 
other circumstances however the commander needs to 
understand the various sources of funding himself in order to 
capitalise on opportunities for QIPs as they arise.  This involves 
understanding the purpose of different funds, the regulations 
governing their use, the basis on which funds are allocated 
and how he may be able to rapidly access them.  The 
commander, where possible, should make use of the specialist 
advice of a Military Stabilisation Support Team, or individual 
Stabilisation Advisers and Deve lopment Advisers.  Given the 
typical six week funding process, commanders will need to 
exercise judgment in selecting QIPs, which must be defined 
by their influence on the population, not their impact on the 
operational tour.
0735 The sources of funding for QIPs are varied and change 
frequently.  At present, funding for direct QIPs is available 
through the Conflict Pool (DFID’s budget being reserved for 
direct poverty reduction initiative s).  Funding for indirect QIPs, 
on the other hand, is available via the Commander’s Consent 
Winning Fund.  In addition to these primary sources, there 
may be numerous alternative sources of funding available, 
including pooled inter-departmental funds and money 
from international partners – such as the US Commander’s 
Emergency Response Program; abbreviated to, and commonly 
known as CERP .
14  There is also the potential of funding from 
international organisations such as the UN, NATO or EU.
Guidelines for the Effective Use of Quick 
Impact Projects
0736 As discussed in Chapter 3, all military action should 
be assessed by its actual or potential contribution toward 
influencing the key conflict relationship within the society and 
shaping the eventual political settlement.  It is on this basis 
that the utility of each QIP must, ultimately, be assessed.  To 
help the commander balance short and long-term imperatives 
and avoid unintended consequences, a number of guidelines 
for the effective use of QIPs are provided:
Guidelines for the Effective Use of Quick Impact 
Projects:
15 
• Influence.  Ensure that there is a strategy for 
communicating the positive benefits of the project, 
that politically significant communities are included 
and that key leaders are engaged.  Use the project to 
promote understanding, if not reconciliation, across 
sectarian divides and shape the emerging political 
settlement.
• ‘Do No Harm’.  Ensure that the project is conflict-
sensitive and avoids creating or exacerbating 
conflicts, jealousies or rivalries by the selection of 
beneficiaries.
• Participation.  Ensure that the host community and 
local government are involved in planning, design 
and delivery.
• Efficiency.  Ensure resources are used in the most 
efficient and cost effective way and that the project is 
not diverting resources from more important ones.
• Timeliness.  Ensure that the project will be 
implemented or completed in a time frame relevant 
to the commander’s overall campaign.
• Sustainability.  Address recurrent costs associated 
with the project.
• Coordination.  Ensure the project coheres with 
national priorities and is coordinated with the 
activities of other relevant actors.
• Delivery.  Ensure that the most appropriate agency 
delivers the project, favouring local expertise and 
civilian agencies whenever practicable.
• Monitoring and Evaluation.  Ensure there is a plan 
for assessing the project’s effectiveness as well as its 
impact on the overall conflict dynamics.
 
13. Gordon, S. Stabilisation Quick Impact Projects , Stabilisation Unit (2009), London, UK.
14. Training and Doctrine Command (United States Army) (TRADOC) Technical Guide.
15. Gordon, S. Stabilisation Quick Impact Projects , Stabilisation Unit (2009), London, UK.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

PEACE BUILDING AND STATE-BUILDING 
- A SUMMARY OF THE DEPARTMENT 
FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID) APPROACH
BY JOELLE JENNY DEPUTY HEAD OF THE DFID CONFLICT, 
HUMANITARIAN AND SECURITY DEPARTMENT (CHASE)
Building peaceful states and societies is at the heart of 
achieving lasting poverty re duction and the Millennium 
Development Goals in highly fragile environments.  State-
building and peace-building must therefore be central to 
donor responses and wider international engagement.  They 
are long-term, complex political processes involving continual 
negotiation between the state and society.  The influence of 
external actors is limited, but crucial.
This DFID approach explains what state-building and peace-
building mean, and sets out a new, integrated approach to 
inform DFID’s work.  It is based on 4 inter-related objectives, 
set out in diagram 7A.1.
 
State-building has two dimensions – enhancing the state’s 
ability to function, and the political processes that underpin 
the state-society relationship.  Peace-building aims to establish 
durable peace and prevent violence by addressing the causes 
of conflict through reconciliation, institution-building and 
political and economic transformation.
Address causes of conflict & 
build resolution mechanisms
We will work with our development partners to help them:
Support inclusive 
political settlements
Respond to 
public expectations
Develop state 
survival funtions
  Figure 7A.1 - DFID Approach to Building Peaceful States and Societies
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
109
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

An integrated approach highlights the commonalities 
between state-building and peace-building, particularly 
the need to support the evolution of an inclusive 
political settlement.  It also ensures that actions taken are 
complementary, and informed by both perspectives.  Short-
term measures to secure peace should take into account 
their implications (positive or negative) for long-term state-
building and growth.  Equally, state-building needs to take 
account of past or potential causes of conflict, and incorporate 
formal and informal conflict resolution mechanisms.  At 
times, tough decisions may need to be made – for example, 
providing health and education services immediately through 
contractors or supporting the local ministry to develop 
delivery capacity.
The key operational messages for DFID and other donors, 
are: stay engaged for the long term, over decades, not years; 
understand and become more cl osely engaged in the political 
dynamics in partner countries; take a regional approach where 
necessary because cross-border issues have a direct impact on 
state fragility and conflict; and think carefully about priorities 
and sequencing before identifying which instruments to use 
in different contexts.
Examples of how specific interventions can be designed to 
support the four objectives:
• Support an inclusive political settlement – this establishes 
the rules of the game through which political power 
is organised and exercised.  Initially, a settlement may 
only involve elites, but must broaden out to include 
wider society and bring in excluded groups.  Donors 
can support mediation efforts and peace processes, as 
well as democratic institut ions, constitution making and 
political processes.  Support to formal institutions should 
be complemented by engagement with informal and 
traditional institutions.
• Address causes of conflict and build resolution 
mechanisms – addressing the underlying causes of 
conflict is DFID’s core business, and includes a wide 
range of interventions to address issues such as exclusion, 
unemployment and lack of accountability.  DFID’s work 
on deepening democracy can help political systems to 
become more inclusive and manage tensions peacefully. 
We can also support community initiatives to prevent 
conflict from escalating, and engage with informal dispute 
resolution mechanisms, paying careful attention to their 
compatibility with human rights.
• Develop state survival functions, a base level of capability 
which can be developed.  For example, security, a revenue 
base and rule of law are necessary to ensure the survival 
of the state.  DFID’s approach to security and justice works 
with state and non-state actors to build accountability 
and ensure that justice systems respond to the needs 
and rights of the poor.  Our support for taxation needs to 
balance the incremental improvement of taxation receipts 
with the state’s ability to respond to public expectations.
• Respond to public expectations – these include delivering 
public services (e.g. health, education, infrastructure), 
macro-economic stability and social protection, and 
supporting voice and accountability (e.g. fair elections, 
free media, anti-corruption).  It is important not to make 
assumptions about the expectations of different groups 
in society, and DFID can support research, such as public 
expectations surveys, as a starting point.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
110
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
111
Campaign Design
t 'SBNFUIF1SPCMFN
t 3FöOFBOE%FWFMPQ*EFBT
t &YQSFTT7JTJPO
t 3FWJTF1MBO
Campaign Management
t *OUFHSBUF
t $PPSEJOBUF
t 4ZODISPOJTF
t 1SJPSJUJTF
t %JTTFNJOBUF
t "TTFTT1SPHSFTT
Strategic Objectives
Tactical Employment of Forces
Commander’s Skill
Analyse Plan
Assess Execute
PART 3
CAMPAIGNING IN 
STABILISATION
  Operational Art and Orchestr ation at the Operational Level
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
112
Operational Art
Part 3 discusses the specifics of campaigning within 
stabilisation.  It provides mili tary commanders and staff with 
some additional tools and insights necessary to aid analysis, 
planning, execution and assessment  within societal conflicts.  
Campaign Design and Campaign Management framed by the 
Commander’s Operational Art, as described in Joint Doctrine 
Publication(JDP) 01 (2nd Edition) Campaigning, remains the 
authoritative model (Fig overleaf).  With some additions, Part 3 
is structured in accordance with JDP 01.
It is assumed that the reader is already familiar with 
JDPs 01, 2-00, 3-00 and 5-00, which remain the foundation of 
campaigning.  JDP 3-40 Part 3 provides some further advice 
and instruction on how to apply, and in some cases adapt, the 
generic campaign processes and techniques to make them 
more useful in a stabilisation context.
Chapter 8
Intelligence and Understanding
Chapter 9
Political and Social Analysis
Chapter 10 
Planning
Chapter 11
Execution
Chapter 12
Anticipate, Learn and Adapt
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

“If you do not, as the 
Operational Commander, 
directly engage with your 
intelligence team, personally 
direct their work, demand of 
them Herculean tasks, and 
expect carefully considered 
insights on which you will 
decide the campaign’s course of 
action, you will probably fail.”
Lt Gen Sir Graeme Lamb, Commander Field Army
Section I  The Demands of Stabilisation
Section II  A Systematic Approach
Section III  Coordination and Application of Intelligence   
 Assets
 Functions and Capabilities
 Supporting Functions
Section IV  Organisational Requirements
Section V  Exploiting Technology
Annex 8A  Understanding the Adversary
Annex 8B  Command and Control of the Intelligence Process
CHAPTER 8
INTELLIGENCE AND 
UNDERSTANDING
113
1. The dismantling of the security apparatus in Iraq helped lead to anarchy.  It was based 
upon an incomplete understanding of Iraqi society.  Subsequent attempts to re-
establish a security infrastructure excluded ex-Baath’ists for political reasons and hence 
automatically excluded a significant sector of society from engagement with the state.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
SECTION I
THE DEMANDS OF 
STABILISATION
0801 This Chapter describes an expanded approach to 
intelligence.  Stabilisation demands of the J2 community a 
far wider span of expertise than conventional operations.  
Military intelligence has traditionally focused on analysis, 
based upon doctrinal models and equipment capability, 
for example, where and when a tank regiment may cross 
a river.  In stabilisation, understanding is about unique 
human dimensions.  A J2 is as likely to be required to advise 
on the intricacies of applied sociology or economics as on 
the adversary Order of Battle.  This is the expanded terrain 
pertinent to stabilisation.
0802 Information and Intelligence.  Information and 
intelligence are defined as:
Information.  Unprocessed data of every description 
which may be used in the production of intelligence.  
(Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-6)).  Information 
concerns facts.
Intelligence.  The product of processing information 
concerning foreign nations, hostile or potentially hostile 
forces or elements, or areas of actual or potential 
operations.  (AAP-6).  It provides a coherent and 
comprehensive narrative or material tailored to the 
specific ends of the recipient.
The relationship between informat ion and intelligence is best 
illustrated by the use of an example.  There are armed civilians 
at a given location, in an area frequented by insurgents (fact 
– information).  From supporting information it is deduced 
that these armed men are from a local private security 
company (intelligence).  Had the initial information been 
acted on immediately then there could have been a friendly 
fire incident.  Both informatio n and intelligence will inform 
decision-making.  Information acted on without analysis 
incorporates a higher degree of risk, but time imperatives 
or lack of ability to corroborate may force the pace of 
decision-making.
1 
0803 The Pre-eminence of Intelligence.  Effective, 
accurate and timely intelligence is vital in any operation.  It 
will not only drive analysis and subsequent planning, but 
it will also enable assessment and the ability of the force 
to anticipate, learn and adapt.  Commanders’ direction is 
fundamental to setting these pr iorities, and the intelligence 
effort.  Operations are co mmand-led and intelligence-
enabled.  Intelligence drives operations and, equally, successful 
operations generate information which can be processed 
and analysed to produce intell igence.  Although intelligence 
may be produced and disseminated by J2 Staff, they require 
the support of J3/5 as forces will need to be deployed to gain 
information.  The natural dynamic, especially in warfighting, 
is to acquire targeting intellig ence to engage and defeat the 
enemy through faster decision-action cycles.  The Intelligence, 
Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance (ISTAR) 
effort is synchronised by the J3, which by definition, is focused 
on the current battle.  However, in these operations, it is 
necessary to shift the balance between collection effort for 
immediate targeting, and that for longer-term intelligence 
to develop understanding.  In stabilisation missions tactical 
actions frequently have strategic effects, while tactical 
intelligence may have operational or strategic value.  Once 
generated, intelligence must be treated as a common resource 
– available in useable form to whoever needs it.
0804 Understanding.  Understanding is the accurate 
interpretation of a particular situation, and the likely reaction 
of groups or individuals within it.  It ensures that timely, 
appropriate measures are developed to influence competing 
elites and the wider population.  Understanding is derived 
from continuous analysis and engagement with the decisive 
actors; it requires a progression through shared knowledge 
and awareness, and an intuitive feel for the behaviour of local 
individuals and groups; J2 continui ty is crucial.  Intelligence 
staff and others in key appointments must become immersed 
in the theatre.  The challenge is to institutionalise intuition 
and create an accessible corporate memory.  Intelligence 
architecture should be designed to support understanding by, 
for example, early investment in databases, network enabled 
reachout and novel approaches to continuity, such as the use 
of retired experts on contract.
0805 Understanding Group Dynamics.   Identifying 
the motivation of decisive groups requires a detailed 
understanding of individual leaders, those around them 
and their interactions.  It is important to determine how 
adversarial groups will mobilise the means and methods to 
conduct violence, and their sources of political, economic 
and popular support.  Such groups will always be part of a 
complex social and political dynamic.  Their objectives will 
be arrived at according to their position in the political order.  
For this reason the military must understand the relationship 
between themselves and all other friendly, neutral, belligerent 
114
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
115
and adversarial groups, and the potential consequences of 
their actions.
0806 Early Establishment of Effective Structures and 
Networks.  The western way of warfare assumes information 
superiority.  However, in stabilisation, commanders should 
assume that that they will deploy with an incomplete 
understanding of the situation.  In order to develop timely 
knowledge, awareness and unde rstanding, intelligence 
structures (and networks between intelligence communities) 
need to be established early.  Important insights can be 
gained by establishing strong channels to multinational 
partners, Other Government Departments (OGDs), 
International Organisations, possibly some Non-governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) and from open-source material.  
Designing an effective information management system is a 
pre-cursor to sound decision-making.
0807  Flow of Intelligence.  In conventional combat 
operations against a defined adversary, the enemy’s intent 
is usually identified and assess ed at the strategic level and 
subsequently confirmed by operational and tactical level 
activity.  In stabilisation missio ns the flow of intelligence is 
generally reversed.  Military intelligence organisations must 
adapt to this change.  Small groups and individuals may 
alter their stance more quickly than conventional military 
opponents.  Commanders should instil into their J2 and 
wider staffs this idea of building the intelligence picture 
from the bottom up.  Sources of intelligence are also likely 
to be non-traditional and the environment may be most 
effectively understood through engagement with local 
religious, economic or social leaders, local contractors and 
NGOs.  J2 staff should be trained to access and analyse these 
different sources, and how to determine the accuracy of the 
information given according to the potential bias and intent of 
the source.  This calls for analytical skills that differ from those 
employed in conventional warfighting.
0808 The Find Function.  A systematic approach and long-
term investment is required to allow understanding to be built 
up over time.  Hostile groups must be identi fied and found 
before they can be neutralised.  This will involve finding their 
networks, and systematically unravelling them.  Irregulars, 
particularly leaders and core activists, will seek anonymity 
amongst the population.  They will use them as cover and 
hosts, with or without their knowledge and consent.  J2 must 
acquire information to help the commander differentiate 
between the irreconcilable activists, the opportunists, the 
reticent supporters and the non-supporters within a group.  
This allows exploitation of potential fracture points and the 
splitting of irreconcilable from reconcilable elements.  It is 
not easy to obtain the granularity and timeliness of 
information to enable precise strike and ‘striking’ may 
cut the flow of intelligence.
0809 Relationship with the Population.  The population 
is a rich source of intelligence.  The relationship between the 
security forces and the population is linked to the application 
of force and its impact on trust.  The greater the degree of 
trust, the greater the flow of information.  The active support 
of the population is central to long term success.  Protecting 
them against intimidation or attack by adversaries, as well as 
from any unintended results of action taken by UK forces, is 
essential for intelligence gathering.  For this reason, when an 
operation is being considered, an essential question is: “How 
will it impact on the population who will be providing me with 
information in the future?”
2  Only when he has answered this, 
can the commander make a properly informed decision as to 
whether to proceed as planned, or look for alternative ways to 
exploit his situational understanding.
0810 Host Nation Vulnerabilities.  Hostile groups will 
seek to infiltrate host nation organisations and security forces, 
intimidate potential sources, feed deceptive information 
and use civilians locally employed by international forces 
in intelligence gathering roles.  They will have their own 
collection plans and will pursue them aggressively, potentially 
with support from external states.  A counter-ISTAR plan is 
required.  This includes thorough record-keeping and the 
screening of locally employed civilians and host nation 
forces, possibly by use of biometric technology, and robust 
information protection policies.  Care should be taken, 
however, to avoid damaging relationships which have 
painstakingly been built up with local forces.
081 1 Own Force Vulnerabilities.  The capability to 
intercept non-secure communications is now commercially 
available and is used by irregular adversaries.  Controlling the 
use of personal mobile telephones and the internet by UK 
forces in theatre is difficult but essential.  As well as the more 
obvious threat to operational information, an adversary may 
seek to exploit information on home locations, including 
families and friends.
0812 Counter-intelligence.  Counter-intelligence produces 
intelligence related to the iden tity, capability and intentions 
of hostile individuals or organi sations that may be engaged in 
espionage, sabotage, subversion or terrorism directed against 
UK forces.  Counter-intelligence staffs provide intelligence to 
support the development of force protection measures.  This 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
116
involves contributing to the assessment of the adversary’s 
intent, risks, capabilities and their opportunities afforded to 
mount attacks.  Counter-intelligence staff should be included 
in the planning of significant cross-government and host 
nation programmes to advise on any security requirements.
SECTION II
A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH
0813 Developing High Quality Intelligence.  A common 
theme in post operational reports is the lack of high quality 
intelligence.  Even when good intelligence is available, it is 
rarely in the right form and requires further analytical work 
to be developed into high grade targeting intelligence.  This 
is not a new problem; nearly forty years ago in Low Intensity 
Operations, Kitson described two interlinked functions that 
he believes underpin successful operations.  The first involves 
collecting ‘background information’ and the second further 
develops this into ‘contact information’.  Kitson himself 
recognises that this division is an oversimplification, and that 
it belies the highly dynamic, symbiotic and mentally intensive 
analytical process that it entails.  This basic model is still valid.  
Refined, the two functions become:
• Generation of an intelligence picture to underpin 
understanding.
• Development of target intelligence.
0814 Generating an Intelligence Picture to Underpin 
Understanding.  Wide situational awareness and 
understanding is developed through what Kitson referred to 
as ‘background information’.  Detail is important here.  The 
intelligence picture informs th e campaign plan, engagement 
strategies and wider comprehensive activities to win the 
active support of target populations and achieve political 
accommodation with key elites.  It will draw information from 
many sources, both military an d civilian, includ ing information 
gained from debriefing, interrogation and informant handling.  
However, on its own, this intelligence picture is unlikely to be 
sufficiently refined to target specific groups or individuals.
‘All actions designed to retain and regain the allegiance 
of the population are relevant to the process of collecting 
background information because its provision is closely 
geared to the attitude of the people...the whole national 
programme of civil and military action has a bearing on 
the problem’.
Kitson, Low Intensity Operations
0815 Developing Target Intelligence.  High quality 
targeting intelligence is required to direct kinetic or non-
kinetic activities against specific groups or individuals, whilst 
reducing collateral risk.  It is achieved by focused tasking 
and analysis designed to ‘zero-in’ on adversarial groups.  
This requires the explicit direction and involvement of the 
commander himself, not least as it is likely to require the 
commitment of resources.  Forces should be deployed for the 
specific task of gaining inform ation and refining intelligence.
2. Lieutenant General Sir John Kiszley interviewed by Russell W Glenn, Shrivenham, UK, 12 
April 2007.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
117
0816 The Virtuous Spiral.  The process described above, 
which takes information and transforms it into targeting 
intelligence, is illustrated in Figu re 8.1.  It is the intelligence 
picture which forms the body of knowledge from which 
targeting intelligence is derived.  The model illustrates how 
the process of continual refinement should work.  This is a 
variation on the traditional questi on-led intelligence cycle.  It 
is not fixed in duration, and at each stage the commander 
will need to decide whether it requires further intelligence 
development, or if he wishes to act on what he knows at 
that point in time.  His personal intelligence requirements, 
based upon his own hypothesis of the conflict and the way 
to resolve it – the theory of change – act as the engine for 
the process.  They force J2 to focus effort and challenge the 
hypothesis (continuously testing the campaign big ideas).  The 
process requires the J2 to build and refine a richer but sharper 
picture, whilst either confirming the hypothesis or leading the 
commander to adjust it.
0817 There are two further aspects of this model that 
should be considered:
• Patience.  At each point at which the commander 
draws his deductions he will need to weigh the benefits 
of immediate action, against the potentially greater 
benefits that may be gained from further refinement.  
Clearly a decision to gather further information risks 
missing perhaps fleeting opportunities.  Yet, premature 
exploitation not only causes set-backs in the spiral, it 
may have far wider implications including; support of 
the wider population being lost through unintended 
consequences, or the loss of the UK forces’ grasp of the 
adversaries’ pattern of life (painstakingly built up) due to 
tightened operations security.  This business should not 
be viewed in terms of tour lengths.  Building a pattern of 
life in a foreign society is a long-term investment.  In the 
long run, time invested in gr owing intelligence capital will 
pay dividends.  Once the intelligence picture has been 
sufficiently developed, the two intelligence functions 
– understanding and targeting – will have a synergistic 
effect.
• Multiple Spirals.  Throughout a campaign there are 
likely to be multiple spirals operating, both in and out of 
theatre.  Each network or adversarial group could require 
its own analytical spiral.  Gathering information to fuel 
these spirals relies on the prioritisation and coordination 
of collection assets, and the adoption of organisational 
structures and information sharing protocols which differ 
markedly from those employed in more conventional 
warfighting operations.
0818 Applying Pressure to Adversarial Groups.  The 
focused and systematic applicatio n of intelligence assets and 
the tightening of the virtuous spiral will apply pressure to 
adversarial groups.  They are likely to improve their counter-
measures, making the ‘find’ function more challenging.  For 
example, they may stop using communications systems 
and reduce their inner-circle to remain cloaked.  Overt and 
covert security operations that protect security forces’ 
sources of information will be crucial to maintain the visibility 
of adversarial groups: this will demand tight control of 
exploitation (see Operational Intelligence Support Group 
(OISG), paragraph 835).  However, the paranoia that successful 
intelligence and wider operations  induce in adversarial groups 
can be advantageous.  Not only may it reduce their freedom 
of manoeuvre and cause paralysis; it can have destructive 
effects within their organisations.  It can cause them to self-
destruct, increase intimidation on the population (thus losing 
them support) or create panic that forces them to take greater 
risks, exposing them to further security force action.  However, 
direct action may have unintended consequences to wider 
intelligence operations or cause the groups to mutate into 
something more dangerous.
The political decision to intern all known Irish Republican 
Army (IRA) members in 1972 removed the majority of the 
Special Branch’s networks within the IRA organisation.  
The new IRA commanders that emerged were more 
extreme, and an unknown quantity.
By the latter stages of the campaign, the Provisional IRA 
was preoccupied with internal security; by this stage 
more IRA terrorists were being killed by their own as 
suspected informers than by the security forces.
3. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 2-10.1 Human Intelligence , due for publication late 2009 
provides more guidance.
4. Known as Covert Human Intelligence Sources, or CHIS. 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
118
SECTION III
COORDINATION AND 
APPLICATION OF 
INTELLIGENCE ASSETS
Functions and Capabilities
0819 Intelligence coverage will invariably have major 
gaps and the J2 must tell the commander which he can – 
and more importantly, cannot – cover.  Collection must be 
prioritised and coordinated to prevent duplication of effort 
and missed opportunities.  Intelligence constructs have been 
designed to allow synergy between the Commander’s Critical 
Information Requirements, his Intelligence Requirements 
and the availability of collection  capabilities, including assets 
from wider intelligence agenci es.  Care needs to be given 
to the tracking of Requests fo r Information, and Information 
Management should be an active rather than a passive 
function.  The following collection capabilities have particular 
value.  Competition for these often scarce resources will be 
fierce, both between different levels of command and the 
variety of operations being conducted at a particular time.
0820 Human Intelligence.  Human Intelligence (HUMINT) 
is a category of intelligence derived from information 
provided by, or collected on, human sources and individuals of 
intelligence interest, as well as the systematic and controlled 
exploitation, by interaction with, or surveillance of, sources or 
individuals.
3 
• Human Intelligence Sources.  Sources include passive 
informal walk-ins, routine liaison and key leadership 
engagement, to more active source handling and 
interrogations.  All personnel in contact with actors across 
the Joint Operations Area will inevitably be dealing with 
potential HUMINT sources.  However, while HUMINT 
may be obtained from a wide variety of sources, the 
development and exploitation of informants
4 is the 
preserve of specialist organisations, such as the Secret 
Intelligence Service (SIS) and the Intelligence Collection 
Group’s Defence HUMINT Organisation.  Specialist 
HUMINT capabilities are limited and deployment should 
be prioritised to achieve maximum effect.  HUMINT 
encompasses the management of human sources and 
is likely to include information gained from detainees, 
refugees and the civilian population; it will often require 
language support.
Initial Intelligence Picture - 
Basis of Understanding
Target Group
or Individual
Refined Understanding
Deductions Drawn
Refined Understanding
Deductions Drawn
Refined Understanding
Deductions Drawn
Refined Direction to 
Gather More Information
Refined Direction to 
Gather More Information
Direction to 
Gather Information
The Population
Opportunity
Opportunity
  Figure 8.1 - The Virtuous Spiral
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
119
• The Value of Human Intelligence.  Building HUMINT 
source networks is a long-term process.  HUMINT is tasked 
like any other ISTAR asset, but getting results may take 
considerable time and is dependent on access to the 
 right sources, which must be handled by the right people.
5  
HUMINT (along with Signals Intelligence) is particularly 
good at providing evidence of people’s intentions, 
motivations, wants and fears as well as the effect of 
friendly action on them, thus developing understanding of 
the context within which decisions are made.  At its best, it 
is literally a conversation with the adversary.  
 This understanding is vital in order to positively influence 
the situation; other ISTAR assets cannot develop this, only 
support it.
• Reports.  HUMINT reports are categorised by originator.  
Military (M) HUMINT (X) reports are known as MX.  SIS 
reports are known as CX.  They are likely to be highly 
classified, but with tear-lines (sanitised text to mask the 
source) for wider dissemination.
 
0821 Signals Intelligence/Electronic Warfare (SIGINT/
EW).  The generic term to describe communications intelligence 
and electronic intelligence, when there is no requirement to 
differentiate between these two types of intelligence or to 
represent fusion of the two.  (AAP-6).  Electronic Warfare (EW) is 
often referred to as tactical SIGINT.  Intelligence from national 
and military SIGINT/EW capabilities will be essential to the 
operational and tactical levels of command.  SIGINT/EW can 
provide real-time intelligence from a range of platforms.  It can 
be used not only to identify geographic positions, but also to 
build a picture of the adversary’s network and to provide real-
time insights into intentions and objectives.
0822 Geospatial Information.  Geospatial Information 
(GEOINF) comprises of facts about the Earth referenced by 
geographical position and arranged in a coherent structure.  
It describes the physical environment and includes data from 
the aeronautical, geographic, hydrographic, oceanographic 
and meteorological disciplines.  GEOINF includes data, 
products and services in graphic, textual and digital form, 
HUMINT: Servicemen will constantly be in contact with 
local civilians, either as part of planned engagement 
or through patrol opportunities.  Such interactions will 
only have enduring value if they are conducted with the 
support of interpreters, or language trained personnel 
and if the results are disseminated into the intelligence 
chain to allow wider use.  Basic unit collection and 
collation systems lie at the heart of this process.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
120
which may be used to support navigation, targeting and 
situational awareness.  It can be critical to precision strike.
0823 Geospatial Intelligence.  Geospatial Intelligence 
(GEOINT) comprises the integrat ion and analysis of imagery, 
imagery intelligence and geospati al information.  It provides 
a geospatial framework to establish patterns or to aggregate 
and extract additional intelligence.  It provides the means 
upon which to collate, display and precisely locate activities 
and objects, assess and determine their inter-relationships, 
in order to provide an understanding of a situation.  GEOINT 
units generate mapping and sophisticated briefing products, 
and rely on specialist Comm unications and Information 
Systems (CIS).
0824 Imagery Intelligence.  Imagery Intelligence (IMINT) 
is intelligence derived from imagery acquired by sensors which 
can be ground based, sea borne or carried by air or space 
platforms.  (Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1).  It can be 
delivered via tactical, operational and strategic collections 
assets and has been proven to be a force multiplier on 
operations, in Northern Ireland, Iraq and Afghanistan.  Its use 
ranges from general area surveillance design to contribute 
to an understanding of the operational theatre, through the 
production of target packs for individual operations, right 
down to providing cueing action against specific targets.
0825 Open-source Intelligence.  Open-source Intelligence 
(OSINT) is derived from publicly available information, as well as 
other unclassified information that has limited public distribution 
or access.  (AAP-6).  Major sources of information include the 
internet and the media; for example, the BBC Monitoring 
Service.  It can be a rich source to support understanding 
of the local population’s needs and assessment of military 
activity.  Qualified linguists may be required to exploit local 
media ranging from web-sites through to religious sermons 
or even graffiti.  Discussions with locals as a collection task 
around capacity building provides OSINT but many such 
opportunities are missed.
0826 Measurement and Signature Intelligence.  
Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT) is scientific and 
technical intelligence derived from the analysis of data obtained 
from sensing instruments for the purpose of identifying any 
distinctive features associated with the source, emitter or sender, 
to facilitate the latter’s measurement and identification  (AAP-6).  
MASINT results in intelligence that facilitates the detection, 
tracking, and identification of targets or systems and describes 
the distinctive characteristics of fixed or dynamic targets.
0827  Technical Intelligence.  Technical Intelligence 
(TECHINT) concerns foreign technological developments, and 
the performance and operational capabilities of foreign materiel, 
which have or may eventually have a practical application for 
military purposes.   (AAP-6).  Evaluation of equipment employed 
by hostile groups can provide useful TECHINT, which 
contributes to assessment of their capability and links to wider 
support.  This is primarily provided by Weapons Intelligence 
Units that exploit captured weapons and explosives devices 
and analyse post-incident forensic evidence.  Additional 
support can be provided by reach-back to the Defence 
Intelligence Staff and through deployed Scientific Advisers.  
TECHINT product tends to be used in support of force 
protection measures.  In particular, intelligence on the 
capabilities and construction of Improvised Explosive Devices 
(IEDs) assists the counter-IED process.  However, TECHINT 
capabilities can be used more widely.  For example, TECHINT 
can help to establish which external support networks in-
theatre irregular groups are exploiting.
0828 Intelligence Exploitation.  The detailed forensic 
exploitation of captured documents, electronic media and 
technical material can provide vital intelligence, as can 
the in-depth exploitation of captured personnel through 
tactical questioning, interrogat ion and biometric techniques.  
Materiel and Personnel Exploitation
6 (MPE) is closely allied 
to TECHINT, and provides focused intelligence support to 
develop actionable intelligence, support the development 
of wider situational awareness, and enable the development 
of effective counter threat measures.  MPE uses a variety of 
collection and exploitation techniques to provide multiple-
source, responsive intelligence for specific purposes or to 
5. HUMINT operators need to be credible in both experience and perception.  Some of 
this activity is covered by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 and is tightly 
controlled.
6. The systematic collection, processing and dissemination of intelligence obtained as a 
result of tactical questioning, interrogation and the extraction of data from recovered 
materiel.  Adapted from Defence Intelligence Staff definition for this publication and 
future UK doctrine.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
121
contribute to open-source assessment.  Initial exploitation 
takes place in-theatre and is linked to Defence Exploitation 
facilities for more forensic analysis.  MPE is likely to be an 
increasingly important means of intelligence gathering as 
adversaries make more use of technology in, for example, 
Information and Communications Technology.  As with 
TECHINT, the preservation of forensic detail requires training.
Supporting Functions
0829 Key Leadership Engagement.  Key leaders are 
engaged as a source of information, to achieve influence 
and for assessment.  Key Leader Engagement should only 
be conducted by personnel with suitable experience and 
authority.  Trust and rapport needs to be built up, which takes 
time.  Individuals in senior positions and those with particular 
personal access, may need to remain in post beyond the 
standard tour length.  Engagements (such as a meeting with a 
local senior official) should be recorded, or the insight will 
be lost.
0830 Screening.  Screening is the process of identifying and 
assessing individuals who may ha ve knowledge of intelligence 
value.  Screening is not in itself an intelligence collection 
technique, but it is a filter to identify those who could be of 
value.  These individuals may be high level officials, adversary 
foot-soldiers or ordinary members of the public who could 
provide useful intelligence.  Screening, where possible, should 
be conducted by trained operators, but all military personnel 
need to know the basics, including how to recognise potential 
HUMINT sources and ways of soliciting information of 
potential value.  Even routine engagement with the people 
must be exploited.
0831 Biometric Data Collection.  Understanding can be 
significantly enhanced by the use of biometric data.  This is 
costly and it may take time to gather a sufficient volume to be 
effective.  Early decisions and investment are required.  Legal 
and procedural protocols for sh aring the information gathered 
with other security agencies, including the host nation, are 
also required.
0832 Arrest, Detention and Internment Operations.  
Such operations present an opportunity to gather and exploit 
documents, information technology and HUMINT.  They also 
provide opportunities to turn individuals to the government’s 
cause.  Even the perception of this can paralyse a covert 
network.  Turning may include detention as a ploy, whereby an 
individual is questioned and released before the community 
has registered his absence.  Thoughtless use of force, or even 
the inadvertent arrest of potential sources of information, can 
lead to lost opportunities.  Detainees will have channels to 
their external organisation, so it is possible to have an informal 
dialogue and to pulse ideas to the adversary.
Fear of Compromise Resulting from Arrest:
‘I want to reassure you about our situation.  The summer 
started hot with operations escalating in Afghanistan.  The 
enemy struck a blow against us with the arrest of Abu al-
Faraj, may God break his bonds.  However, no Arab brother 
was arrested because of him.  The brothers tried and were 
successful to a great degree to contain the fall of Abu al-Faraj 
as much as they could.’
7 
7. Letter from al-Zawahiri to al-Zarqawi dated July 2005.
8. In some exceptional cases the Operational Intelligence Support Group (OISG) may fulfil 
the entire UK J2 function (e.g. Headquarters British Forces South Atlantic Islands).
9. Examples are targeting opportunities and threat information.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
122
SECTION IV
ORGANISATIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS
0833 A Single Intelligence Environment.   All intelligence 
should be available to those who need it, in usable form.  
Intelligence collected by nation al and multinational agencies, 
such as Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), 
may be useful at the tactical level.  Conversely, material 
collected by foot patrols may have strategic importance.  This 
makes centralised coordination of collection and processing 
resources and the sharing of intelligence through a single 
intelligence environment vital.  Intelligence communities 
of interest must be identified and re-assessed throughout 
a campaign.  Accessibility must be a characteristic of 
intelligence, and any tenden cy to over-classify and 
compartmentalise intelligence product must be addressed.  
The commander needs to ensure that trust with intelligence 
agencies is maintained.  Th e intelligence community is 
one based on norms that emphasise trust and discretion; a 
balance must be struck between the need to know  and need 
to share.  Sources and methods for gaining intelligence must 
be protected from accidental or ill-conceived compromise 
by the wider recipients.  At the same time, it is important 
to share intelligence widely in order to reap the maximum 
benefit from it.  This is amplified in a multinational, cross-
government environment where risk will be viewed differently.  
Intelligence should be written for release.  Paragraphs should 
be individually classified so that lower-classified material or 
‘tear lines’ can be distributed more widely.
0834 Interoperability.  Organisational structures, 
procedures, and interoperability challenges between military 
and non-military intelligence agencies, (including those of the 
host nation), will present obstacles that need to be overcome.  
It is essential to strive for a common intelligence picture.
“You will never completely get the intelligence wing of an 
agency, such as the army or the police, to relinquish its 
independence.  After a number of mistakes, we got people to 
agree that we were all on the same side, and therefore would 
share intelligence”
Assistant Chief Constable Albiston, formerly Head Special 
Branch, Polic
e Service of Northern Ireland
0835 The Operational Intelligence Support Group.  To 
enhance information sharing acro ss national and multinational 
intelligence agencies the UK fiel ds an Operational Intelligence 
Support Group (OISG).  The OISG provides a deployable and 
scaleable facility to complement the organic J2 capability
8  
that is able to reachout to national intelligence support and 
specialist capabilities in order to provide assessed material 
and fused multi-intelligence product particularly at the higher 
levels of classification.  Fusion of the national and defence 
intelligence picture with orga nic intelligence across the 
SIGINT, HUMINT, GEOINT and MASINT domains will provide 
the most complete available picture, enabling a locally based 
team of Defence and OGDs specialists to provide focused, 
timely information and interpretation.  The OISG will also 
prepare sanitised product for local dissemination, in response 
to specific tasking, as regular updates, or to push priority 
information to those with an immediate requirement for it.
9  It 
will contribute to the strategic picture where the operational 
or tactical picture is seen to provide relevant new information.  
The following should be noted:
• The depth and continuity of knowledge that an OISG 
provides means that it can also fulfil a think-tank function 
or Red Team, from which commanders can rapidly access 
informed opinion to enhance their understanding.
• The OISG should provide the focal point for the risk 
management of need to know  versus need to share.  It 
should give guidance on how to exploit intelligence while 
protecting and supporting the sources of that intelligence.
• Intelligence operators in the OISG need to have a 
clear understanding of the reality on the ground.  This 
means that they should routinely deploy with units in 
order to enable them to add value and nuance to their 
assessments.
• Although the OISG concept applies in both national and 
multinational environments, in practice it is difficult to fully 
integrate OISGs with allied an d host nation intelligence 
networks.  It may be necessary for the OISG to be gradually 
developed as the campaign progresses.
0836 Open-source Analysis Cells.  Below the theatre-
level OISG, an All source Analysis Cell comprises a military 
command element and task-organised production section 
for processing information and intelligence to provide 
open-source intelligence products.  All-source Analysis Cells 
augment intelligence cells throughout a force but do not 
have the direct reachout capability, nor the cross-government 
representation, of OISGs.  Close coordination between them 
and the OISG enhances assessment, as does the fusion of 
caveated OISG material into more widely distributed J2 
products.  The Cell coordinates closely with J2 Plans to ensure 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
123
that intelligence products meet commander’s needs, and that 
Information Requirements and Re quests for Information (RFIs) 
raised during processing are addressed accordingly.
0837 Network Enabled Reachout.  In-theatre 
commanders and staff require reachout, i.e. access to 
rear-based communities of subject matter experts.  The 
role of these networks is to exploit the (often latent) 
intellectual capacity that can be tapped in support of the 
theatre.  Reachout encompasses areas such as analysis on 
psychological profiling and previous adversary patterns of 
activity.  Senior mentors are another source of corporate 
memory.  This will ensure that knowledge and expertise can 
be leveraged even if it is not physically deployed.  Knowledge 
networks should be coordinated by the Permanent Joint 
Headquarters on behalf of the theatre commander, and 
formed from personnel recently returned from the operation 
along with those relevant experts in wider defence, industry, 
academia and government.
0838 Intelligence Liaison Officers.  To facilitate 
information sharing between multinational organisations, 
trained intelligence personnel may be employed as 
intelligence liaison officers.  Mili tary intelligence liaison is overt 
contact by individuals with members of friendly organisations, 
including indigenous military an d police organisations that, by 
virtue of their official positions, have access to information of 
potential intelligence value.  The overt nature of this activity 
means that an organisation contacted will know the status 
of the liaison officers and the reason for interest.  Military 
intelligence liaison is most effective when rapport and a 
mutual sense of trust have been developed 
between individuals.
0839 Wider Distribution of Intelligence Expertise.  To 
facilitate the effective analysis of information and its broader 
access up, down and across the chain of command a wide 
distribution of intelligence staffs across the force is required.  
This should extend down to sub-unit level.  These intelligence 
staffs must also be distributed among indigenous military and 
police forces both to acquire in telligence and, ultimately, to 
help them to build a self-susta ining indigenous intelligence 
capability.  Commanders need to resource this wider 
distribution of intelligence staffs either through the provision 
of additional specialist intelligence personnel, or through the 
training of generalists for the role.  However it is achieved, 
emphasis should be placed on the ability of all intelligence 
staffs to analyse HUMINT and SIGINT.
0840  Improving Tactical Intelligence Capability.  While 
the maxim ‘every soldier is a sensor’  may be hackneyed, it is 
still pertinent.  To maximise their potential, units (and staff 
officers) need to report assiduously what they observe on the 
ground and in meetings.  This behaviour must be inculcated 
in pre-deployment training.  Everyone must be briefed 
on the types of information that they are trying to obtain, 
methods and postures needed to extract it.  Units require 
the technical means to pass information up and across the 
chain of command, as well as to input their own information 
requirements.  The flow of intelligence is not a one-way street 
and, to be effective, generalist units will require access to 
wider information to focus thei r intelligence gathering role.
0841 Specialist Intelligence Units.  The formation of 
theatre-specific intelligence units may be required to enable 
specialised surveillance and reconnaissance, HUMINT and 
indigenous capability to be exploited.  Historically, in Kenya, 
Malaya, Northern Ireland and Rhodesia, the formation of such 
specialist units significantly enhanced the military intelligence 
capability to understand and neutralise adversarial groups.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
124
SECTION V
EXPLOITING 
TECHNOLOGY
0842 Establishing an effective intelligence organisation 
requires major investment, bo th within and outside the 
theatre, and should be done from the outset of the 
campaign.  Experience shows that investment made at the 
earliest stages will prove to be cost-effective in the long run.  
If done well, it will read across into savings in other areas, such 
as force protection.
0843 Communications and Information Systems:
• Shared Databases.  Intelligence databases, in which 
information is available to different agencies in a common 
format, are a non-discretionary vital capability.  This 
lesson was learned and successfully implemented by the 
Army in Northern Ireland in the 1970s and 1980s but has 
been overlooked in more recent operations.  Since then 
even more powerful data mining techniques have been 
developed which can form a powerful collective memory.
• Networks and Infrastructure.   Robust Communications 
and Information Systems networ ks, linking both military 
and non-military intelligence organisations, are critical to 
the gathering and exploitation of intelligence.  Advances 
in web-based systems should be capitalised to enhance 
information sharing, which is constrained by traditional 
hierarchical chains of command.  Procedures must 
be established so informal networks can rapidly be 
established, and information accessed between and across 
various levels of command within the security force and 
wider agencies.
• Technical Compatibility.  System and software 
incompatibilities must be addressed in order to allow 
information sharing at required levels.  Security will 
always be an issue, and some classification protocols 
will undoubtedly have to be adapted.  However, even 
in multinational environments, systems can still remain 
secure whilst allowing the necessary access.
0844  Emerging Technologies.  The integration of 
technologies such as face-recognition and side-scanning 
radar down to the lowest levels will significantly enhance 
operational effectiveness.  This is especially true in theatres 
where there is a lack of national personal data (such as 
National Insurance numbers and driving licence details) or 
where western militaries find facial recognition difficult.
Evolving an Intelligence Framework 
– Northern Ireland
‘In 1994 Northern Ireland had over 37 separate intelligence 
gathering computer systems operating.  Their focus was 
detection before, during and after paramilitary activity with 
a particular focus on PIRA.  Key to the transformation was an 
electronic spring-clean of the Military Intelligence cupboard.  
Throughout the IRA ceasefires of 1995 and 1997-98, the British 
Army energetically transformed its armoury of computers.  
The scale and cost of this programme reflected the Army’s 
belief that it would continue to fight an intelligence war 
in Northern Ireland and that the surveillance war would 
increasingly become part of normal life in England.
The uses of two systems in particular were force multipliers: 
VENGEFUL, dedicated to vehicles, and CRUCIBLE, for people; 
the former linked to the Northern Ireland vehicle licensing 
office, the latter capable of ‘ho lding a personal file containing 
a map/picture showing where a suspect lived as well as 
details of family and past’.  The two systems provide total 
cover of a largely innocent population, the sea within which 
the terrorist fish swam’.
From The Irish War by Ton
 y Gerahty, JHU Press (2000)
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

“To fight and conquer in all 
your battles is not supreme 
excellence; supreme excellence 
consists in breaking the enemy’s 
resistance without fighting” 
Sun Tzu
Section I  Ends
Section II  Ways and Means
Section III  Critical Requirements of Adversaries
Section IV   Exploiting the Contemporary Operating   
 Environment
08A01 Describing adversaries is difficult.  Different terms and 
definitions are used for insurgents, irregulars, terrorists and 
criminals.  Furthermore, different nations and organisations 
derive different meanings from these terms depending on 
the context.
Adversaries
Groups who oppose the host government and 
international force, and who possess a willingness to 
employ violence against them in addition to other 
subversive techniques such as instigating civil disorder by 
exploiting legal demonstrations, strikes or exacerbating 
political discontent.
08A02 Understanding the motivation of adversaries in a 
particular operational context is a prerequisite to designing 
measures to counter them.  Military action to counter 
adversarial groups is usually required when normal law 
enforcement agencies cannot contain the level of routine 
violence.  An approach based on categorisation of their likely 
ends, ways and means can be useful.
125
ANNEX 8A
UNDERSTANDING THE ADVERSARY
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

126
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
SECTION I 
ENDS
08A03 The Range of Adversaries.  Numerous adversarial 
groups can affect the campaign simultaneously.  They may 
come from diverse states an d ethnic groups, and include 
foreign fighters and warlords.  In most cases, adversarial 
groups will pursue specific objectives, be they economic 
or political.
08A04 Aims and Objectives.  Groups mobilise, unify and 
define themselves around an aim or goal.  This will shape the 
organisational structure and approach that the organisation 
adopts to both politics and the use of violence.  It can be 
helpful to categorise adversarial groups but it is not always 
straightforward to do so.  Developing the decisive actors 
described in Chapter 5, four broad categories of adversarial 
groups may be identified:
• Indigenous Insurgents.
• Global Insurgents. 
• Local Power Brokers.
• Adversarial Opportunists.
Each group is likely to align themselves, for reasons of 
expediency, with other adversarial groups (which may 
include states).
08A05 Indigenous Insurgents.  The indigenous insurgents 
will require popular support or acceptance.  They may be 
nationalist and focused on an internal civil struggle, albeit with 
an ideological element.  These groups are motivated to gain 
some state control and therefore they are often amenable 
to reconciliation through compromise on both sides.  The 
support of an external state may also be a factor.  The many 
proxy wars that took place in the 20th Century are examples 
of this, as are aspects of contemporary operations.  Classical 
Counter-insurgency (COIN) theories, such as Mao’s Protracted 
War,
1 still provide useful models to orientate military officers to 
the basic ends, ways and means of such nationalist groups.
08A06 Global Insurgents.  Global insurgents will look to 
exploit the conflict for wider political purposes.  Typically, 
their aim will be regional autonomy, or the destruction of the 
existing political order.  Examples include Chechnya, Somalia 
and East Timor, as well as Iraq and Afghanistan in the form of 
al-Qaeda cells and foreign fighters.  The nature of their aims 
and objectives makes reconciliation unlikely.  The focus of any 
intervention should be to separate global insurgents from 
indigenous groups, and neutralise them.  The utility of a Joint 
Operations Area is challenged by global insurgents who work 
across such boundaries.
08A07 Local Power-Brokers.  In some regions local power-
brokers may predominate.  The aim of such groups is to keep 
central governance weak.  These groups are usually tribal 
and sometimes criminal.  They may not aspire to political 
control, but rather to maintain local autonomy and power 
through mobilisation of support from the local population.  
Engagement may be necessary to prevent their alignment 
with, or exploitation by, insurgent groups.
08A08 Adversarial Opportunists.   Opportunist groups, 
such as arms dealers, smugglers, people traffickers, pirates and 
narco-criminals, are motivated by greed and criminal activity.  
The absence of effective rule of law allows them to flourish.  
These groups are unlikely to be decisive and it may not be 
necessary to establish a political accommodation with them.  
Once sufficient governance as well as law and order have been 
established, their influence will be reduced by the host nation.  
In contrast, locally these groups may need to be dealt with in 
order to demonstrate government authority and to gain the 
support of local populations.  Opportunist groups may acquire 
wealth which can be exploited by other adversarial groups, as 
well as denying revenue to the host nation.  One example of 
this is the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta, 
initially a political movement, but which now incorporates 
armed criminal groups who sustain its activities from oil theft 
and ransom, which diminishes the oil revenue of Nigeria by 
more than $1billion a year.
1. The coordination of political and military action through a three phase strategy of 
Strategic Defence, Strategic Equilibrium and the Strategic Offensive phase.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

SECTION II
WAYS AND MEANS
08A09 Finding a Cause.  The leadership of adversarial 
groups will use a persuasive cause to mobilise support based 
on real grievances or unresolved contradictions with the 
host nation government.  Adversaries will select causes that 
range from the deep-rooted and strategic, to the temporary 
and local.  They will use a compelling narrative to justify their 
actions, while simultaneously depicting the motivations and 
behaviours of their opponents as illegitimate.
08A10 Invalidating the Cause.  Where causes do not fully 
align with the real motivation of a group, they provide a 
fault-line that international forces can exploit to separate the 
adversary from the wider population.  Where the cause is 
valid, and compromise politically acceptable, remedial action 
is required to remove the grievance and deny it as a source of 
leverage to the adversary.  If the cause is not valid it should be 
demonstrated that adversaries cannot deliver their promises, 
or that their achievement will have disastrous political and 
social consequences.
08A1 1 Alternative Delivery.  The adversary may 
challenge the delivery of human security and establish 
parallel governance structures.  The host nation will need 
to demonstrate that they can deliver security, justice, 
governance and economic prosperity more effectively 
than their adversaries.
08A12 Accommodation Strategy.  Commanders may 
need to strike accommodations with less hostile adversarial 
groups.  This is not short-termism, but may be essential for 
long-term success.  It is by these means that the commander 
may re-establish links between the national government, 
local authorities and the population.  These activities need 
to be conducted with the full knowledge of the host nation 
government.  Money and other resources may be useful levers 
to achieve such accommodations.
In December 2004 Osama Bin-Laden issued a statement 
that played to another source of resentment - the ‘stolen’ 
oil, a narrative that would resonate throughout the region 
(note the breadth of what we would call the ‘targeting 
directive’ in the quote).  This also provided a rationale 
for attacks against the coalition’s economic Lines of 
Operation (and is evidence of why all elements of our 
own comprehensive approach are in the fight, whether 
they like it or not): 
“One of the most important reasons that made our enemies 
control our land is the pilfering of our oil.  Exert all that you 
can to stop the largest stealing operation [in history] . . . Be 
active and prevent them from reaching the oil, and mount 
your operations accordingly, particularly in Iraq and the Gulf.”
2 
In late 2005 Ayman al-Zawahiri told the Muslims of Iraq 
to concentrate their campaign on the “Muslims stolen 
oil...most of whose revenues go to the enemies of Islam.”  
Al-Qaeda aimed to raise the costs of the US occupation to 
an unacceptable level with attacks on oil infrastructure so 
that the full burden fell on the American taxpayer.
Mobilising Support
2. From Adelphi Paper 402, Iraq’s Sunni Insurgency  by Ahmed S Hashim.
127
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

SECTION III
CRITICAL REQUIREMENTS 
OF ADVERSARIES
08A13 All adversarial groups are likely to have the following 
critical requirements.  Following analysis (Chapter 9) it should 
be possible to identify those requirements most suitable to be 
attacked and denied.  Potential approaches are described in 
the grey box.
08A14 Figureheads.  Some groups may have a figurehead 
that embodies the cause and unifies support; this is not the 
same as leadership.  Figureheads, such as Osama bin Laden 
or Moqtada al-Sadr, may not directly control the actions of 
adversarial groups but mobilise popular support.  Indeed, they 
may already be a martyr.
The host nation government needs to compete against 
the figurehead without reinforcing their credibility.  In 
some instances they may be able to use a narrative to 
counter them, but often they will have to work around 
them rather than risk bolstering their cause.
08A15 Leadership.  All groups require leadership.  They may 
exert direct control or operate indirectly.  The larger the group 
the more difficult it will be to exercise central control without 
compromising security.
Identify, analyse and undermine it.  Well-judged strike 
operations to neutralise individuals can also coerce others 
to desist or seek reconciliation.
08A16 A Cause.  Groups require a cause; some animating 
grievance capable of being exploited.
See 08B10: Invalidating The Cause.
08A17 Freedom of Movement.  Freedom of movement is 
dependent on tacit consent and the ability to blend in with 
the local population.
Physical movement can be restricted by population 
control (Chapter 1 1) and legal means, such as identity 
cards linked to a database.  Interdicting lines of 
communication has proved to be difficult in the past, but 
offers high returns when successful.  The most effective 
long-term solution is separate the adversary from the 
people; to isolate and neutralise him.
128
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

08A18 Recruits.  Without the ability to maintain a flow of 
willing recruits, either from within the local population or 
foreign fighters, groups will be vulnerable to attrition.
Paying-off potential recruits or offering them alternative 
opportunities can erode the recruiting base.  Breaking 
the ideological link between the leaders and recruits may 
best be achieved through indirect means.  For example, 
analysis of Palestinian groups in Lebanon showed that 
measures taken to prevent the radicalisation of young 
men should be directed at their fathers and not the 
youths themselves.
08A19 Weapons.  The means to fight are a critical 
requirement.  In many conflict-riven societies weapons are 
freely available, and so cutting supply may be impractical.
Limiting access to weapons is difficult in armed societies.  
Even in unarmed societies, global markets and networks 
mean that high-tech weaponry, traditionally confined to 
states, may be available to our adversaries.  Coercion of 
states may limit or abate supply, but will not prevent it 
indefinitely; good intelligence and diplomacy will only 
go so far.  Where no commercial product is available, 
adversaries improvise, often using very low-tech 
equipment.  Equipment and adaptive Tactics, Techniques 
and Procedures (TTPs) (including attacking their weapon 
production system) are our best mitigation.
08A20 Safe Havens.  Groups require areas where they 
can rest, regroup, train, resupply and plan their operations.  
Cyberspace is a partial safe haven in which insurgents 
can recruit, mobilise, raise and move funds, and advance 
their narrative.
Both virtual and physical safe havens should be identified 
and monitored.  If no intelligence advantage is likely 
to accrue, they should be attacked and denied to keep 
pressure on the adversary.
08A21 Essential Supplies.  Food, water, medical supplies, 
combat supplies and means of communication are vital for 
adversarial groups.  These will tend to be drawn from the 
local population, or by appropriating humanitarian aid.  If the 
flow of these supplies is disrupted or uncertain, the threat 
will be undermined.
Since these will often be delivered through a network in 
the population, the best approach will be to isolate the 
adversary physically and psychologically from popular 
support.
08A22 Intelligence.  Adversarial groups require knowledge 
of the population in order to target, coerce, intimidate 
and recruit as well as prov ide counter-intelligence to 
avoid penetration.
Counter-intelligence analysis, Operations Security and 
good TTPs, for example to spot dickers
3 and informants, 
will reduce the adversary’s ability to generate intelligence.  
Again, since his collection systems move among the 
population, separating him from it is key.
08A23 Finance.  Although irregular activity can be 
inexpensive relative to the costs of countering it, groups rely 
on funds generated from two broad sources: illegal activities 
and donations.
Work comprehensively to identify the physical and virtual 
networks for raising, moving and hiding money.  Identify 
the physical links in theatre and break them.  Attack the 
nexus between illicit activity that generates revenue and 
adversaries that use it.
 
3. Dicker is a colloquial term used to describe seemingly innocent bystanders who are 
actively monitoring and reporting on security force activity
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
129
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

SECTION IV
EXPLOITING THE 
CONTEMPORARY 
OPERATING 
ENVIRONMENT
08A24 Propaganda of the Deed.  Adversarial groups 
orchestrate violence to have the maximum effect on targeted 
audiences.  The media effect of this violence may be more 
important than the physical damage since the act of violence 
is often designed to undermine international efforts and build 
their own support base.  Understanding the effects sought 
by adversarial groups can assist in establishing defensive and 
offensive measures to counter them.  Figure 8A.1 illustrates 
some of the desired effects of violence by adversaries.
08A25 Effects Aimed to Undermine the Host Nation/
Intervention Forces Objectives.  The following paragraphs 
are the generic, but not exhaustive, effects that adversarial 
groups may wish to achieve on target audiences through 
violence.
• Undermine Political Resolve.  An example may be an 
act of terrorism used to undermine international political 
resolve.
• Unhinge a Comprehensive Approach.  Attacks on 
vulnerable civilian agencies may create a perception 
within the comprehensive community that security is 
inadequate, so preventing them from operating.
• Dissipate Security Forces’ Effort.  Widespread insecurity 
may dissipate and fix the security effort, thereby reducing 
the freedom of manoeuvre of the commander.
• Provocation.  Violence may be designed to provoke an 
over-reaction that will deepen popular grievances against 
the security forces and government.
Undermine
Political
Resolve
Unhinge
Comprehensive
Approach
Dissipate
Forces
Provocation Underpin
Credibility
Recruit
Intimidation
Effects to Undermine Host 
Nation / International Objectives
Effects Aimed to Support 
Hostile Groups Objectives
Increase
Discontentment
with Host 
Nation
Create 
Disorder for 
Own Ends
Act(s)
of 
Violence
  Figure 8A.1 - The Desired Effects of Violence by Adversaries
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
130
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

08A26  Effects Aimed to Support Adversaries’ Objectives.
• Create Disorder.  Attacks designed to create disorder and 
weaken government control may enhance tacit support 
and freedom of manoeuvre.
• Increase Discontentment.  Disorder is likely to foster 
popular discontent and the perception of the host nation 
government’s inability to deliver security.
• Intimidate the Population.  Violence may be designed to 
coerce and compel local support.
• Recruitment.  Acts of violence can stimulate the 
recruiting base, particularly among young disenfranchised 
men who crave the kudos, comradeship and opportunities 
that come from being in a fighting organisation.
• Underpin Credibility.  The capability to deliver violence 
may demand a response from government and security 
forces so conferring status and credibility on a group out 
of proportion to its size and popular support.
Attacking Political Resolve: 1 1 March 2004, emergency 
services at the scene of the Madrid train bombing which 
killed 191 people and injured 1,824.  The attack, claimed 
by sympathisers of al-Qaeda, the Abu Hafs al-Masri 
Brigade, was the worst terrorist strike Spain had ever 
known.  Commentators noted plausibly that the incident 
may have contributed to the result of the Spanish national 
election and subsequent withdrawal of Spanish troops 
from Iraq.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
131
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

132
BSS: British Security Service
CDI: Chief of Defence Intelligence
DFID: Department for International Development
DGC: Defence Geographic Centre
DHO: Defence HUMINT Organisation
DIS: Defence Intelligence Staff
FCO: Foreign and Commonwealth Office
FLC: Front Line Command
ICG: Intelligence Collection Group
JAGO: Joint Aeronautical and Geospatial Organisation 
JARIC: Joint Air Reconnaissance Intelligence Centre
JSSO: Joint Service Signals Organisation
NIEC: National Imagery Exploitation Centre (JARIC)
NSO: National SIGINT Organisation (GCHQ)
PJHQ: Permanent Joint Headquarters
OISG: Operational Intelligence Support Group
SCOG: Security Cooperation Tasking Group
SIS: Secret Intelligence Service
SOCA: Serious and Organised Crime Agency
CDI
Defence Intelligence Staff
ICG
DGC
JAGO
NIEC (JARIC)
JSSO
DHO
Theatre OISGFLCs
1* CTMG
2* Collection Tasking
Management
Group (CTMG)
Communication and 
Information Sharing
Security Co-operation
Operational Tasking
Group (SCOG)
Requirement and 
Priorities for Defence 
Intelligence (RPDI)
Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC)
National Agencies:
SIS
BSS
NSO
Other Government 
Departments:
DFID
FCO
SOCA
PJHQDefence
MOD Centre
Assessment Staff
  Figure 8B.1 – Strategic Intelligence Relationships
ANNEX 8B
COMMAND AND CONTROL OF THE 
INTELLIGENCE PROCESS
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
08B01 The relationships between strategic and operational 
intelligence organisations is mapped in Figure 8B.1.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

133
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
08B02 The Defence Intelligence Staff.  The Defence 
Intelligence Staff (DIS) is respon sible for strategic intelligence 
and provides all-source intell igence support to current and 
contingent military operations, the latter in concert with 
the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).  It also monitors 
potential crisis areas in accordance with designated priorities.  
DIS activity is also affected by the Security Cooperation 
Operational Tasking Group (SCOG) process (Figure 8A.1).  
Owned by the Deputy Chief of Defence Staff (Operations), the 
SCOG draws together MOD Commitments Staff, DIS and PJHQ 
to consider worldwide matters of concern and the potential 
for any UK military activity.
08B03 Permanent Joint Headquarters.  PJHQ J2 leads 
on Chief of Joint Operation’s intelligence policies within the 
theatre, providing, for example, information exchange policies 
and legal policy for Human Intelligence (HUMINT).  It supports 
the Joint Task Force (JTF) through the supply of intelligence, 
conducting collaborative research with the JTF J2 and the 
DIS and providing a route fo r Information Requirements 
from theatre.  PJHQ has operational command of any 
deployed Operational Intelligence Support Group (OISG), 
which, through forward deployed liaison officers, provides 
operational level links to the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), 
Government Communications Headquarters and the Joint Air 
Reconnaissance Intelligence Centre.  These organisations in 
turn have links with other countries’ national agencies.  PJHQ is 
responsible for:
• Owning and planning the JTF intelligence architecture.
• Owning and staffing all J2 requirements for the JTF.
• Managing the Intelligence Directive, and co-writing the 
initial Intelligence and Security Management Plan with the 
Joint Headquarters.
• Managing the Naval Command N2 and Air Warfare Centre 
A2 subject matter expert support, which is provided to 
PJHQ J2 under a Service Level Agreement.
08B04  Joint Task Force Headquarters.  A JTF Headquarters 
will usually have an integral intelligence organisation, adjusted 
or augmented to meet its requirements.  This may include an 
OISG and support from strategic intelligence organisations 
and agencies, or from outsid e the intelligence community 
providing local, regional or cultural expertise.
08B05 Joint, Inter-Agency and Multinational Operations.  
Command and control of the intelligence process on coalition 
operations must reflect the need to integrate with Joint, inter-
agency and multinational partners in order that situational 
awareness is maximised.  National and local agreements 
should outline the architecture, access and processes to be 
adopted.  National caveats can be mitigated through the 
use of ‘tear lines’ where necessary.  To facilitate multinational 
shared situational awareness, National Intelligence Centres 
(NICs) should, where possible, be collocated with J2.  
Additionally NIC staff should  be integrated and include 
officers with the authority to release national intelligence.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

CHAPTER 9
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL ANALYSIS
134
‘Do not believe what you want 
to believe until you know what 
it is you need to know’
RV Jones1
Section I  The Nature of the Analysis Process
Section II  Focusing on Political Analysis
Section III  How to Conduct Political and Social Analysis
Section IV  The Output of Analysis  
Annex 9A  Generic Example of Output of Centre of Gravity  
 Analysis  
Annex 9B  Schematic of Conflict Relationship  
1. Reginald Victor Jones, CH, CB, CBE, FRS, noted World War II physicist and scientific 
military intelligence specialist; author of Most Secret War: British Scientific Intelligence 1939-
1945, London: Hamish Hamilton.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
135
SECTION I
THE NATURE OF THE 
ANALYSIS PROCESS
0901 This chapter describes the process and output of 
analysis.  It explains the imperative to analyse the interaction 
of key groups and their impact on national politics.  Before 
attempting to solve a problem it is necessary to understand 
it.  Analysis is the process th rough which that understanding 
is achieved, and from which the commander can begin to 
develop scenarios that test his theory for change  based on 
a clear grasp of the strategic context.  Supported by 
intelligence, it provides that basic knowledge which informs 
planning.  The output can then inform the estimate and 
provide the depth of understanding necessary to plan and 
execute military operations.
0902 Strategic and regional analysis does not start with 
crisis planning; it is part of contingency planning and should 
have driven the National Security, International Relations 
and Development (Overseas and Defence) sub-committee 
and Ministry of Defence (MOD) Strategic Planning Groups 
in reaching their conclusions on national strategy.  An 
operational level commander would hope to have a 
considerable amount of informat ion and intelligence available 
to him.  However, in reality, this is often not the case, as in 
Kosovo in 1999 when even basic campaign planning data was 
scarce.  Analysis is primarily for the benefit of the commander.  
He is the main recipient of it, and is also the main contributor 
due to his theatre-wide perspective and access to other 
leaders and actors.  He should develop his own analysis team 
drawn from his headquarters and where possible include 
international partners, Other Government Departments 
(OGDs) and host nation officials.
0903 Analysis is the examination of the relationship 
between elements to obtain the optimal understanding of the 
operational context, and anticipates its likely development.  
Climate and topographical details, sources of water and 
energy, features and their impl ications (e.g. Helmand River 
and ‘Green Zone’; Kajaki Dam and Khyber Pass) will shape 
Courses of Action (CoAs) and possible responses.  An analysis 
of the people involved, their wealth, society and culture, 
their neighbours and their relationships will also be critical to 
campaign design.  However, a commander will rarely be able 
to develop the sophisticated, nuanced understanding of how 
other actors make their policy decisions, or how an unfamiliar 
economy, society or individual and collective psychology 
of leaders and citizens actually work.  Caution should be 
exercised in trying to model human systems and the results of 
military action against them.  Human groups are not physical 
systems, and the science of systems analysis has limited 
utility in modelling human behaviour; an understanding of 
sociology
2 and anthropology 3 is probably more relevant.
0904 Initial analysis conducted jointly by the military and 
OGDs should inform the formulation of the theory of change ; 
a robust thesis on the ways and means required to resolve a 
problem.  It primes campaign planning but must not be 
done just once.  Analysis should be continuously refined 
and the assumptions challenged.  A combination of 
continuous analysis and assessment should identify changes 
and identify the potential effect of planned activities, 
allowing the commander to refine his plan and minimise 
undesirable consequences.
0905 Analysis factors will vary from one situation to another.  
Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 5-00 Campaign Planning 
suggests factors that apply to all operational scenarios 
including: geo-strategic; the physical environment; and 
national and regional infrastructure.  These are pertinent 
and should be analysed, but stabilisation will always require 
analysis of the politics of the conflict, with groups as the focus, 
in order to determine how influence can be applied to achieve 
the desired political settlement.
2. Defined in Concise Oxford English Dictionary (COED) – the study of the development, 
structures and functioning of human society.  The study of social problems. 
3. Defined in COED – study of mankind, especially of its societies and customs.
4. Kilcullen, David.  The Accidental Guerrilla , 2009, describes the factors that lead significant 
groups to conform to the methods of terrorist and insurgent groups without sharing 
their political motivation.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
136
SECTION II
FOCUSING ON 
POLITICAL ANALYSIS
0906 Political Order.   A detailed political and social analysis 
should identify the decisive social groups and the source of 
their political authority, their interactions – including their 
political alliances – interdepen dencies and rivalries, and the 
critical economic and political resources over which these 
groups compete and cooperate.  A broad classification of 
groups is in Chapter 5, Section I (groups may be seen as 
friendly, neutral, belligerent, opportunist or adversarial – of a 
combination of these).  Finally, it will identify their propensity 
for violence.  The resulting picture of the political order is likely 
to look very different from western democracies.  For instance, 
bodies such as the Office of the Commander-in-Chief in Iraq 
may wield significant direct and indirect power.
0907 Social Groups.   Any human collective can be 
considered as a social group, whatever its size; when 
participants unite around common goals they become a social 
group.  Typically, these draw upon unifying social distinctions 
such as language, ethnicity, trib e, clan, religion, income and 
qualifications.  Once unified, they are then able to cooperate 
with each other – groups might then monopolise resources, 
thereby excluding others, to achieve their goals.  No social 
group exists in isolation.  All are affected by their interaction 
and competition with other groups; they are likely to be 
mutually interdependent and reactive.  This is what is meant 
by a conflict eco-system .  As a result of globalisation, this 
eco-system may have wider regional and even international 
consequences.  Western culture is heavily individualist and 
tends to emphasise the propensity for individual, rational 
decision making.  In other cultures, the group identities 
are likely to be shaped by the objectives and tribal links of 
the collective group.  Identifying the decisive groups and 
their identities, and then persuading them to support the 
government through focused influence campaigns may be 
more effective than killing and capturing adversaries.
0908 Gaining Support.  It is likely that dominant groups 
will enjoy privileged and unrepresentative access to political 
and economic resources in fragile states.  They may own the 
sources of wealth, enjoy the support of powerful allies and 
use military force to intimidate or defend the population.  
Part of the commander’s task is to remove or ameliorate 
these obstacles to legitimate political control, so that the 
government is able to gain the support, or at least the 
consent, of the majority of the population.  To do this, the 
government will need to demonstrate that the benefits it 
offers are preferable to those offered by other groups.
0909 Reversing Social Fragmentation.  Establishing a 
legitimate regime around an identified group can be difficult.  
The group should be empowered so that the population 
becomes contentedly reliant on it.  However, there will be 
other competing groups trying to undermine its authority.  
International intervention is likely to assist the selected groups 
to attain sufficient economic, political and military authority 
so that they can command the allegiance of the wider 
population through the provision of resources.  However, 
in failed or failing states the means to achieve this may be 
absent, and where people have little experience of centralised 
government, this can be difficult to achieve.  Intervention must 
also counter the causes of state fragmentation.  Accidental 
guerrillas
4  result from the atomisation of society, the absence 
of effective justice and governance and catalyse factors, such 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
137
as the presence of foreign troops.  The population will need to 
be turned away from their dependence on adversarial hostile 
and belligerent forces by fracturing these groups and their 
linkages to the population.
0910 Application of Resources.  The offer of economic, 
political and military resources to the decisive group could 
be used to stimulate internal reform of indigenous neutral 
and friendly groups.  Prompting changes that have to be 
consistent with the local political realities and avoid the 
impression of imposing inappropriate external systems.  The 
involvement of international organisations such as the World 
Bank, International Monetary Fund, UN and EU to support the 
emergent regime will be necessary.  These organisations not 
only provide critical economic and political resources, but 
will confer legitimacy on the regime which adversarial and 
belligerent groups lack.
091 1 Networks.  It is useful to consider social groups as 
a network of networks.  The different strategies and aims of 
each group affect the others.  Commanders should map the 
geography of the social and poli tical network, identifying the 
relations between groups and their mutual interaction.  The 
networks may not be confined to the specific province or 
country; many networks are transnational.  In order to defeat 
the network not just the attack it may be necessary to involve 
the international community in support for the friendly 
regime, whilst simultaneously denying critical resources 
such as money, political favour , media access, legitimacy and 
weapons to adversarial groups from transnational networks.
 
0912 Elites.  Political elites are small groups which hold 
disproportionate power.  Those which are capable of 
achieving a political accommodation with decisive groups 
need to be identified and persuaded.  The leaders of elites 
are invariably the product of the social group, representing 
its collective character and objectives, rather than necessarily 
determining them.  Such leaders are the channels through 
which the commander can achieve an effect on the group.  
The aim is to identify them, understand their relationships and 
potential influence, and their sources of power.
0913 Working Through Elites.  Political analysis may help 
to identify the elites which should be empowered and those 
which not.  It may be that the elites which are capable of 
winning popular support and stabilising the country may not 
offer the preferred solution.  However, providing that their 
behaviour can be modified, working through them may be 
preferable to promoting elites who do not have the credibility 
to achieve the necessary popular support.  Having identified 
credible elites through whom to work, it should be made clear 
that support for them will be conditional.  Deciding those 
leaders and elites which are to be supported is a significant 
political choice and, at the start of a campaign, the military 
Local Elites.  A political settlement will be the result 
of local political leaders bargaining and coming to an 
agreement, often facilitated by a third party.  Agreement 
that excludes a major grouping will lack legitimacy and 
is unlikely to endure.  Here, Iraqi political leaders discuss 
the formation of a new Government during a meeting at 
President Talabani’s residence on 24 March 2006 with the 
US Ambassador. 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
138
commander’s assessment may be key.  His early encounters 
with local actors are likely to provide critical evidence on 
which the judgement may be based.
0914 The Importance of Geographical Locations.  
Geography is important.  One of the consequences of violence 
erupting in fragile or failed states is that populations begin 
to migrate and concentrate around group identities.  They 
move to places which have symbolic, political, economic 
and security value to them.  Furthermore, the significance 
of cultural and religious symbols may spur the government 
to make their security a priority, to invest in their protection 
as they might for critical national infrastructure.  It may also 
delegate authority and responsibility to regional authorities for 
this purpose, thereby creating a local political accommodation 
with a competing elite.  Thus geographical locations have 
operational significance, as they become focal points for 
influence by political, economic and military means.
0915 History and Culture.  History will often provide key 
pointers to the evolution of a country’s power base.  This can 
be deeply personal with religious, cultural and sectarian issues 
helping to fuel a legacy of conflict.  For example, the Battle of 
the Boyne 1690 helps us to understand the Northern Ireland 
(NI) Protestant tradition; the Dublin Easter Rising 1916 has a 
similar significance to the Irish Republican movement; and 
Serbs hold dear the history of the Battle of Kosovo 1389, the 
location of which near Kosovo Polje was an important factor 
in understanding the Serbian position during the Kosovo 
conflict.  Culture is shaped by history and planners will need 
to be familiar with both.  It is important to ensure that we 
work with the social and cult ural grain and do not impose 
solutions that will not root and endure when local institutions 
are leading.
The Importance of Symbolic Locations and Buildings.  
Often unguarded, as their importance may not be clear 
to coalition forces, the adversary will target and exploit 
any opportunity due to his greater understanding of local 
cultural factors.
 
These pictures are of the golden mosque of Imam Hassan 
al-Askari in Samarra (left).  This shrine has enormous 
significance for Shia Muslims.  On 22 February 2006 
militants bombed the shrine (centre) leaving it in ruins.  
It was al-Qaeda’s intention to trigger brutal nationwide 
Shia and Sunni sectarian clashes that would sharply 
underscored Iraq’s religious divide and lead to civil war.  
The civilian death toll rose from 2165 in February 2006 
to a peak of 3700 in November that year before falling 
off again to below 1000 civilian deaths per month by 
August 2008.  The strategy failed and in February 2008, 
Iraqi workers began a reconstruction project aimed at 
restoring the revered shrine (right).
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
139
SECTION III
HOW TO CONDUCT 
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL 
ANALYSIS
0916 Centre of Gravity (CoG) identification and analysis lies 
at the heart of operational art.  In stabilisation, the myriad 
groups likely to impact the outcome – and their varied 
political objectives – demand detailed analysis.  For this reason 
CoG analysis demands a different focus from conventional 
campaigning.
5  The deductions made from CoG analysis 
will help the commander choose on whom, when and where 
to exert influence.  In turn they will help him define his 
decisive conditions.
0917 Defining Centres of Gravity.  A CoG is a moral, 
political or physical centre of power, 6 characterised by what 
it can do and the influence it can exert.  This influence is the 
sum of its critical capabilities.  Because the ultimate aim of 
stabilisation is a political settlement, it may be useful to think 
of CoGs as the elites or leaders of the decisive groups that 
are in competition within the conflict eco-system.  Multiple 
CoG analyses are likely to be required on the decisive groups 
in order to understand them and their relationships with 
each other.  
0918 Multiple Centres of Gravity Analysis.  
Understanding the impact of the decisive groups (friendly, 
neutral, opportunist, belligerent and adversarial) demands 
a sociological analysis.  The greater understanding of the 
controlling elites that can be achieved, the better the ultimate 
plan to re-balance the conflict relationship.  Success will 
depend on developing a detailed intelligence picture to 
identify those covert irregular groups and their leaders (see 
Chapter 8), and to provide evidence to support the analysis 
and subsequent planning.  This picture will emerge from 
early prevent activity and be reinforced by shape operations.  
Over time, group identities and dynamics change, and CoGs 
may shift.
0919  Analysing of Critical Requirements.  Having 
determined the multiple CoGs through an iterative process 
of identifying their critical capabilities, the commander can 
then begin to identify and analyse their critical requirements 
and their critical vulnerabilities.  A CoG is not usually 
attacked directly, but is unlocked by neutralising their 
critical capabilities by threatening, denying or attacking 
those critical requirements that can be reached; commonly 
these are their critical vulnerabilities.  In this way, it may be 
possible to simultaneously attack or undermine numerous 
adversarial critical requirements while protecting those of 
groups deemed friendly.  Critical requirements and critical 
vulnerabilities are likely to be a mix of political, economic, 
and military attributes.  From these the commander can 
begin to describe a series of decisive conditions pertaining to 
each decisive group, which must be met for the stabilisation 
operation to achieve the desired end-state (the political 
settlement).
Stabilisation Centres of Gravity Analysis
7 
Critical Capabilities: Primary moral, political or physical 
attributes that allow the CoG to exert its influence in the 
context of a given scenario, situation or mission.
Critical Requirements:  Essential conditions, resources 
and means for a CoG to be fully operative.
Critical Vulnerability: Derived from Critical 
Requirements, these are essential conditions, resources 
and means that, if successfully threatened or attacked, will 
fatally weaken the CoG.
0920 Friendly Centres of Gravity Analysis.  Because an 
adversary’s CoG may be difficult to identify initially, a good 
starting point may be to examine the CoGs of friendly groups, 
since empowering them should help contribute to the 
development of a stable state.  The government is likely to be 
the principal, decisive friendly group, and its critical capability 
will be its ability to govern.  The analysis should include: the 
political order the government seeks to establish; the extent 
of its control and the extent to which it can exert its authority 
throughout the country; the level of support of competing 
elites and the wider population it requires to govern; and 
the basis of its legitimacy.  Once these factors have been 
considered, the critical requirements can be identified.  These 
may include economic resources, governance structures and 
effective security forces.  The government will also require 
the active support of other elites and a sustainable political 
settlement amongst those with whom they compete.  Once 
these critical requirements are identified, the analysis can 
move on to the government’s critical vulnerabilities.  These 
may be derived directly from the critical requirements.  For 
example, if the critical requirement is the impartial rule of 
law, then a critical vulnerability is that which will prevent an 
independent legal system operating.  Once identified, these 
vulnerabilities must be protected or reduced; in many cases 
through the reform of governance structures.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
140
0921 Opponent Centres of Gravity.  Analysis will identify 
the adversaries’ elites and critical capabilities, their political 
objectives and how they are challenging the government.  
As understanding develops, an alysis should identify how 
the adversarial groups view themselves, their goals and 
objectives, and how they mobilise themselves and their 
supporting population in pursuit of these.  Like friendly 
groups, adversaries have critical requirements that are also 
political, economic and military. For example, groups may 
depend on extortion for funding, or to gain unrestricted 
movement through check-points.  These critical requirements 
should be identified and their weaknesses, that is their critical 
vulnerabilities, exploited.  It is also necessary to understand 
the narrative which adversaries will use to exploit grievances 
in other target groups, and the political and social dynamics 
that give context to their behaviour.
0922 Nested Centres of Gravity.  CoG analysis may reveal 
that one group may already be, or will become a critical 
requirement of another.  Through mapping of the conflict 
relationship and identification of these group relationships and 
inter-dependencies, we can begin to design how we might 
alter the conflict relationship.  Indeed, analysis may identify 
that a third group is such a critical requirement to a number of 
competing elites that it may become a CoG within the conflict 
relationship as a whole.  When trying to influence groups 
(neutral, belligerent or opportunist) to support government, 
the commander should seek to use constructive acts to 
gain leverage.  For example; by providing the key resource 
that a group needs he may be able to alter the inter-group 
relationship, and shift a local balance of power.  Conversely, 
where a friendly group, such as the government, is obstructing 
campaign progress it may be appropriate to deny a critical 
requirement until their behaviour is modified.  The support 
to all groups by international partners should be seen as 
conditional.  However, care is required; the conflict relationship 
is an open system.  It must be understood that there are clear 
limitations for predicting accurately the effects of leverage on 
groups.  They also evolve, and analysis must capture this.
Identifying Critical  Vulnerabilities
There are fracture lines within insurgencies.  In March 
2007 in an open letter, a Sunni insurgent leader 
questioned al-Qaeda Iraq’s lack of consultation over 
setting up an Islamic State: breaking up Iraq had never 
been a goal of the mainstream Ba’athist ‘honourable 
resistance’ movements.  This fundamental difference over 
ends as well as frictions over ways and means (attacks 
on civilians for example, and al-Qaeda-Iraq’s challenge to 
tribal power structures) was a major factor in the Anbar 
Awakening.
8 
0923 Cross-Government Analysis.  Typically, military J2 
organisations are ill-equipped to conduct political and social 
analysis.  Expertise should be brought in or exploited through 
reachout.  This may include the following:
• Sociologists and anthropologists.
• Psychologists to profile individual leaders.
• Indigenous cultural and political experts.
• Seeking to understand local economic markets 
 and conditions.
• Other security experts (Police, organised crime, customs 
and excise).
0924 Methodologies.  Many methodologies can be used 
5. Different from that described in JDP 5-00 Campaign Planning  (2nd Edition), 
 paragraph 2E2.
6. JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition), paragraph 226 - here it can be a person, organisation, a force 
 or groups.
7. These descriptions are adapted slightly from JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition), paragraph 2E2.
8. From Adelphi Paper 402, Iraq’s Sunni Insurgency  by Ahmed S Hashim.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
141
to conduct analysis.  Commanders will have preferences and 
the context may demand a specialist approach.  One common 
methodology used extensively is Political, Military, Economic, 
Social, Infrastructure and Information.  Other human terrain 
analysis tools, such as social network analysis and Human-
Geospatial products, may help to analyse the links between 
and within groups.  However, these tools may lack fidelity 
at the theatre level.  Table 9.1 is intended to assist the J5/3 
branches.  It lays out a series of iterative questions focused 
on the groups which should continually be addressed and 
refined throughout the campaign.  This will allow information 
requirements to be better focused and 
improve understanding.
SECTION IV
Questions Deductions Conclusion
1.  Who are the decisive groups in the 
conflict? 
[Friendly, Neutral, Belligerent and 
Adversaries’ CoG]
See Note 9.
Identify:
• Causes and symptoms of the conflict, 
and the existing conflict relationships.
• Decisive groups in the conflict-
ecosystem as the campaign’s multiple 
CoGs.
• What or where does the decisive 
group derive its power?  Alternatively, 
since the relationship will be one of 
mutual benefit, what, or who does the 
group influence?
• The political elites/key leaders in the 
decisive groups and determine the 
influence they have on their groups 
and wider situation.
Prioritise the groups and elites to be 
empowered/supported, reassured, 
persuaded or marginalised.
2.  What are the political goals of each 
of the decisive groups?
[Critical Capabilities]
Identify:
• The key resources/issues that decisive 
groups are competing, which forms 
the basis of their political goals.
• The basis of mobilisation to achieve 
their goals and thus the power base 
they require – e.g. ethnic, national, 
tribal, religious, economic, class, 
ideological.
• The political order they seek to create 
or exploit to achieve their goals.
Identify the potential political 
settlement and specific 
accommodations which are likely to 
be achievable on each decisive group 
to meet UK interests.  This will range 
from modification of behaviour of 
some groups to the neutralisation 
of irreconcilable groups.  (Note: 
multinational and host nation partners 
may have differing opinions on what 
accommodations are acceptable.)
Determine how to engage with the 
political elites, through economic, 
military and diplomatic means in 
order to achieve the required political 
settlement.  This may include the 
removal of some leaders to change 
the behaviour of the group or 
neutralisation of other groups.
  Table 9.1 – CoG Analysis on Decisive Groups (continued opposite)
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
142
Questions Deductions Conclusion
3.  What are the groups’ primary 
economic resources?
[Critical Requirements/
Vulnerabilities]
To achieve their goals, all groups 
need economic resources to sustain 
themselves.  The staff should identify 
those critical to the attainment of the 
group’s goals, and determine how 
they are likely to be attained.
The means which are available to 
facilitate or impede access to economic 
resources.  This is a key area of political 
leverage over friendly, neutral, 
belligerent and adversarial groups.
(May form a decisive condition or 
supporting effect.)
4.  What are the groups’ primary 
political resources?
[Critical Requirements/
Vulnerabilities]
Identify:
• The local, national and transnational 
political alliances/rivalries which 
enable or impede the group from 
achieving their goals.
• The institutions of government which 
the group is able to use or needs to 
use to achieve their goals (judiciary, 
prison system, police and militias).
The means of consolidating/
fragmenting the alliances of the 
decisive groups.
The means of protecting /supporting 
friendly groups from adversaries while 
exposing those of the adversaries.
The measures necessary to increase the 
political authority of friendly groups.
The kinship links of friendly and hostile 
groups which often act as key political 
resources.  
(May form a decisive condition or 
supporting effect.)
5.  What are the decisive groups’ 
military resources?
[Critical Requirements/
Vulnerabilities]
Identify military resources, access to 
arms, ordnance and recruits.  (See 
Understanding Adversaries Annex 8B).
Identify the measures to reinforce or 
degrade this capability of particular 
groups. This may have transnational 
political implications.  
(May form a decisive condition or 
supporting effect.)
9.  Decisive groups will need to be defined at a macro-level to prevent being immersed 
in detail. Additionally, creating too many splinter groups, may be expedient in the short 
term, but will make longer-term management by  the host nation very difficult.  The 
ultimate goal is to unite groups within a viable state.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
143
THE OUTPUT OF 
ANALYSIS
0925 Centre of Gravity Analysis Matrix.  The questions 
in the Aide Memoire at Table 9.1, supported by more detailed 
analytical tools, enable the staff to capture the output of the 
analysis of decisive groups in a CoG matrix.  Each group’s 
CoG, critical capabilities, requir ements and vulnerabilities, and 
linkages to other groups can then be refined and the means 
to influence specific groups can be deduced.  Annex 9A offers 
examples of CoG analysis matrices on a (generic) government 
and an adversarial group.  Although CoG analysis may be 
conducted on multiple groups, in a complex operating 
environment the commander may wish to select a focal CoG 
linked to the campaign end-state, contained in his strategic 
guidance.  For example, a candidate focal CoG could be 
popular support for the indigenous government (from which 
it derives its ability to govern – its critical capability).
0926 Schematics and the Map.  Although the CoG matrix 
is a useful tool for analysis, the relationships between decisive 
groups are most easily represented on a map schematic.  
Although they risk over-simplifying the situation, schematics 
can help to unify understanding and ensure that the big ideas 
do not get lost in detail.  An example of a conflict relationship 
schematic to capture the dynamic between decisive groups 
is at Annex 9B, which can be produced on the agile campaign 
planner used by the Joint Force Headquarters (JFHQ).  This 
level of fidelity is appropriate at the theatre level.  At the 
tactical level, more detailed analysis will examine streets and 
local kinship networks.
10  A common approach across the 
theatre is required to ensure that there is a clear link between 
all levels of command.
0927 Depicting Groups by Attitude to the Political 
Settlement.  Figure 9.2 is an illustration of the attitude 
of specified groups towards the local government at a 
given time.  This technique may help to generate shared 
understanding and approaches , (both military and non-
military), to determine how to influence the behaviour of 
groups.  As the Northern Ireland vignette on page 9-14 shows, 
the attitudes and behaviour of groups change over time and 
therefore should be constantly re-assessed.
 
0928 Advice.  Understanding developed through analysis 
should enable commanders and partners to provide 
informed advice to ministers or strategic partners.  A good 
understanding of the problem and the potential scenarios that 
might emerge will help inform both political and operational 
choices.  This can be particularly useful when deciding upon 
early levels of investment, modification to military and OGD 
structures, and the capabilities likely to be required in theatre. 
10. As represented by the Population Support overlays in US Field Manual 3-24 
 Counter-insurgency  (Appendix B-6).
11. Paul Bew, Ireland – The Politics of Enmity , Oxford University Press 2007.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
144
In 1968 the main protagonists in Northern Ireland were 
the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), 
The Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and the Stormont 
Government.  The nationalist and unionist paramilitaries 
were initially minor players.  While the Irish Government 
was assumed to want the unification of Ireland, it was 
expected that the UK Government would steadfastly 
support Stormont.  Although right in 1968, it became 
clear that both of these assumptions changed over time.
Once NICRA’s demands had been met their significance 
faded.  By 1970, the nationalist paramilitaries, the Irish 
Republican Army (IRA), had effectively split into two 
groups: the Official (OIRA) and Provisional wings (PIRA), 
with PIRA taking the leading nationalist role.  The British 
Army had deployed to the Province in strength to protect 
the Catholic community, in response to the actions of the 
Protestant paramilitary groups, who had begun to wage 
their campaign of sectarian attacks.
In March 1972, Stormont was suspended in favour of 
direct rule from Westminster.  The Irish Government were 
now calling for a UN peacekeeping force to prevent the 
clandestine delivery of arms to Northern Ireland; overtly 
demonstrating their lack of support for unification in the 
circumstances of the day.
Within four years it can be seen that each group had 
changed their position due to a combination of military 
and political action.  Any classification of groups 
should be regarded as a snapshot in time rather than a 
permanent evaluation.
11 
Group Dynamics – Northern Ireland
Spectrum of Attitudes and Behaviours Towards the Host Nation
Violent  Propensity to Violence Non Violent Group D
Group D
Irreconcilable Hostile Neutral Positive Neutral Hostile Irreconcilable
Group B
Group H
Group F
Group G
Political
Process
        Isolate
   Accommodate
                Neutralise or Isolate
Group E
Engage
Develop
    Engage
Group C
Illustrative effects applied to each target 
group, leading them into political process
Neutralise
Group A
    Reassure
   Figure 9.2 – Political Progress through Effects on Decisive Groups
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

Focal Friendly Centre of Gravity Analysis Matrix
Campaign End-state:  The Political Settlement/Political Order required – achieved through reaching a political 
accommodation with each decisive group to accept it.
Political Accommodation/Modification of Behaviour Required : Determine the modification of behaviour and 
political system of local government that is acceptable to co mpeting elites to achieve a political settlement (for example 
representative, not corrupt).
1 - Centre of Gravity
(The elite of the group)
2 - Critical Capabilities
(What operationally decisive thing is the CoG able to do, or is 
trying to do?)
The indigenous central government. The ability to independently govern and control competing 
elites.
4 - Critical Vulnerabilities
(What stops a CoG from acting?)
3 - Critical Requirements
(What does a CoG need in order to be able to act?)
Any threat to the Critical Requirements, typically from 
the insurgency but also from competing elites, internal 
incompetence or corruption (real or perceived).
Decisive conditions will aim to eliminate vulnerabilities and 
ensure that the critical requirements are met.
Legitimacy: the government must mobilise domestic 
support around coherent shared understandings or 
ideologies (be they ethnic, nationalist, religious or political).  
It must communicate its intentions; an effective narrative is 
necessary.
Economic base: the ability to raise funds sustainably, 
particularly through taxation.
Security: monopoly on the legitimate use of violence.
Legal system: the capacity to provide impartial justice and 
rule of law.
Other departments of state: especially those that meet the 
basic needs of the people.
Political alliances with elite groups domestically and 
internationally.
ANNEX 9A
GENERIC EXAMPLE OF OUTPUT OF 
CENTRE OF GRAVITY ANALYSIS
145
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

09A01 Centre of Gravity (CoG) analysis is the process used 
to determine the relative strengths and weaknesses of the 
principal protagonists.  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 
5-00 (2nd Edition) Campaigning Planning  considers bi-polar, 
multiple, non-opponent and focal point CoG.  They all share a 
common approach; only the factors applied, and the situation 
for which they are best suited, differ.  This Annex adds texture 
to the process to better support security and stabilisation 
tasks; in a contested environment, a commander is likely to 
require CoG analysis for multiple (decisive) groups – friendly, 
neutral, belligerent and adversarial.  Focal CoGs are intended 
for complex situations involving many actors.
Centre of Gravity Analysis Matrix: Belligerent or Potential Adversarial Group
Campaign End-state: The political settlement or political order required – achieved throug h reaching a sustainable political 
accommodation with each decisive group.
Political Accommodation/Modification of Behaviour Required: Determine what modification of behaviour is required to 
achieve accommodation.  The cessation of violence outside the law imposed.  To adhere to the national law and relinquish 
desire for autonomy.  Neutralisation of the Group.
1 - Centre of Gravity
(The elite of the Group)
2 - Critical Capabilities
(What is the operationally decisive thing that the CoG is able 
to do or is trying to do?)
The elite of Belligerent or Adversarial group. Ability to challenge indigenous government.
Mobilise population against the government by reference to 
political ideology, religious or ethnic identities.
4 - Critical Vulnerabilities
(What stops a CoG from acting?)
3 - Critical Requirements
(What does a CoG need in order to be able to act?)
Contradictions in or inadequacy of their ideology/legitimacy.  
Information campaigns demonstrate that the goal and 
objectives they seek are impossible or dangerous.  They 
cannot deliver the benefits they offer without the support 
of the host nation government and wider international 
community.
Their dependence on economic, political, and military 
resources may be exploited or interdicted.  The group can 
be weakened by isolating it from its critical requirements 
through military and non-military means.
Decisive security conditions will address these vulnerabilities 
of the insurgency.
Monopolise critical political resources (internal and external), 
local and global alliances.  Local kinship links will be crucial 
as will alliances with other subversive groups globally.
Monopolise critical economic resources.
Monopolise military resources.
(For examples of critical requirements see Annex 8B, 
Section III).
146
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
09A02 A Belligerent or Adversarial Group.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

147
ANNEX 9B
SCHEMATIC OF CONFLICT 
RELATIONSHIPS
Country ‘X’
Province ‘A’
Province ‘B’
Province ‘C’
Province ‘D’
District  ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
District ‘C-1’
   Map A – Key Centres of Political Influence and Economic Resources
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

148
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
Country ‘X’
Province ‘A’
Province ‘B’
Province ‘C’
Province‘D’
District  ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
District  ‘C-1’
Country ‘X’
Province ‘A’‘A’
Province ‘B’n
Province ‘C’
Province‘D’
District  ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
District  ‘C-1’
Adverserial
Beligerent
Friendly
Neutral
Opportunist
Close Link
Alliance
Informal or Intermittent Link
Direction of Influence
Conflict
Broken Link
Principle Issue
Key
text
Political
Control Opposition 
to the West
Common
Ethnic Goal
Power
Religious
Ethnic
Tribal
Common
GoalPoverty
Influence
Economic
Economic Advantage
Political
Control
Ethnic Gp ‘B’
CoG
Tribal Gp ‘D’
CoG
Ethnic Gp ‘A’
CoG
State Gov
 CoG
Adverserial 
Gp ‘A’  CoG
HN Gov
Gp ‘B’  CoG
Ethnic Gp ‘C’
CoG
Tribal Gp ‘C’
CoG
Adverserial 
Gp ‘B’  CoG
   Map B – Conflict Relationships of Decisive Groups
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

CHAPTER 10
PLANNING
149
‘Campaign planning is a term 
fraught with danger.  Many 
say they are doing it, when 
only a few should be – and 
then, only rarely.  The many 
should be planning operations 
arising from, and in support 
of, the Campaign Plan...  If 
care is not taken, planning at 
the ‘Campaign’ level can be 
irrelevant to that happening 
on the ground; indeed activity 
continues despite the planning, 
not because of it.’
Senior UK Military Planner
Section I  The Planning Environment
 Where Are We Now?
 Strategic Planning
 Campaign Planning Guidance
 Commander’s Considerations
 Considerations for Integrated Headquarters Design in  
 Stabilisation
 Working with the Host Nation
Section II  Planning Techniques
 Planning Tools
 Campaign Schematics
 Planning Coordination
 Lines of Operation (LoOs)
Section III  Further Planning Considerations
 Operating Amongst the People
 Force Protection
Section IV  Integration of the Force
 Design and Composition of the Force
 Air-Land Integration
 Sustainment and Personnel
 Communications and Information Systems (CIS)
Section V  Private Military and Security Companies
 Tensions Between Military Objectives and Contractual  
 Obligations
 Capabilities and Services
 Factors for the Operational Estimate
Annex 10A  The Hierarchy of Plans for UK Operations in   
 Helmand 2005
Annex 10B  Advisers and Analysts
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

150
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
1001 This chapter considers cross-government, campaign 
and military planning.  Reflecting  on the quotation at the start, 
the reader should note the following:
• A winning military strategy hinges on the successful 
union of ends (outcomes and objectives), ways (the paths 
to them) and means (resources, which includes time).
1  A 
successful strategy for stabilisation will require the means 
to be weighted.  As the campaign develops, so weight 
of effort will shift between the instruments of power.  
Resources will be multinational and inter-agency, and 
should be brought to bear at the right time and sequence 
and in the right place.  The management of this is made 
more difficult because effects  within a comprehensive 
approach occur at different rates.
• In-theatre planning will be conducted at all levels and 
in different locations.  There will be a profusion of plans 
which, while linked, will rarely form a neat hierarchy.  
 There can only be, however, one campaign plan, which 
must be understood and supported in letter and spirit 
 by all involved.
• The need for plans to be aligned creates tension between 
the actors.  The skill is to avoid its destructive potential, but 
instead use it creatively.  Assimilating cross-government 
objectives into a theatre integrated plan will provide 
 a reference point against which disaggregated, yet 
coherent planning can take place.  Planners should then 
prioritise, synchronise and sequence activity to achieve 
pan-theatre coherence.
1002 Campaign design should decentralise command 
and decision-making.  Our traditional approach that casts an 
enemy in our own mould and relies on centralised targeting 
boards and a faster decision cycle to deconstruct it will not 
be appropriate.  The theatre headquarters should set out the 
major milestones in an integrated campaign plan that includes 
a description of the broad direction of travel for all partners, 
and provides the unifying purpose.  It should confer on more 
junior leaders the authority to execute it, and afford them the 
freedom and means to do so in ways that meet local needs.
1003 Only in exceptional and unusual circumstances 
will purely military objectives be appropriate.  All activity, 
military or otherwise, that supports the campaign objectives 
is conducted for political purpose.  Activity conducted in 
isolation will only achieve short-term narrow effects, or be 
nugatory and fail to contribute in any meaningful way to the 
long-term solution.  Military planners must constantly ask 
themselves: how does my planned activity support the wider, 
cross-government and coalition initiative; and, does my plan tie-in 
sufficient cross-government and coalition support?
1. See Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01 (2nd Edition) Campaigning , paragraphs 
 216 and 321.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
151
SECTION I
THE PLANNING 
ENVIRONMENT
Where Are We Now?
1004 At the point of production of this doctrine, the UK 
approach to cross-government, comprehensive planning is 
evolving.  The Stabilisation Unit Guidance on Strategic Planning 
and Execution seeks to formalise a cross-government process, 
but it is not yet endorsed across Whitehall.  Previous attempts 
at cross-government planning which have included the MOD 
have failed to be truly comprehensive.  What has resulted 
instead is a broad government strategy and a profusion of 
departmental plans beneath it.  Even where attempts by the 
FCO, DFID and MOD have been made to join up an approach, 
such as the Helmand Road Map, the plan has arguably failed 
to take full account of the direction of the Alliance campaign 
plan which sets the higher theatre direction; multinationality 
brings its own challenges of followership and cooperation.
1005 The MOD is able to plan and manage crisis activity 
on a scale that Other Government Departments (OGDs) are 
not.  Somehow there is a need to find a gearing mechanism 
to coordinate government strategy with the individual 
departmental plans by fusing their high level aims and 
objectives.  If this can be done in a truly comprehensive way, it 
will be possible to produce a comprehensive campaign plan.  
If it cannot, the best that may be achieved are departmental 
plans – for the military a campaign plan – that act 
comprehensively.  As the notion of a comprehensive approach 
gains traction across government and the international 
community, the aspiration for the former is increasingly likely 
to be realised.
1006 There is currently no universal template for 
collaborative planning at the operational or theatre level.  
Existing models described in JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition) Campaign 
Planning suggest several variations in inter-departmental 
collaboration.  Three illustrative scenarios are described in 
which the military either acts: first alone; second in loose 
cooperation with national agenci es as part of a multi-agency 
operation; or finally with close inter-agency collaboration 
under a unified cross-Government Strategy (Figure 10.1 Model 
C).  However, in complex stabilisation tasks not even Model C 
goes far enough in ensuring that the theatre campaign plan 
is knitted into the cross-government strategy and supports 
OGD plans.  As a result, an additional Model D is offered.  This 
envisages a theatre integrated campaign plan which provides 
for the operational level desi gn and campaign management 
of a complex stabilisation task that includes a challenging level 
of insecurity.
JDP 5-00 Model C
Cross-Government Strategy
FCO Plan DFID Plan
Military
Campaign
Plan
Stabilisation Model D
Cross-Government Strategy
Theatre Integrated
Campaign Plan
FCO Plan DFID Plan Military
Plan
  Figure 10.1 – Models of Comprehensive Planning at the Operational Level
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
152
1007 In the future, the Cabinet Office Stabilisation Plan 
(paragraph 1009 onwards) should provide what the military 
would consider to be a Model D style pan-theatre integrated 
campaign plan.  However, this approach may not be 
appropriate in a multinational coalition operation such as 
Iraq or Afghanistan, where a coalition authority (i.e. NATO) 
will design and own the campaign plan.  In this case, it is the 
coalition’s campaign plan that provides for the operational 
level design and campaign management of the complex 
stabilisation task, including the theatre-integration of national 
and multi-agency activity.
2  Complementary to it, the UK 
might choose to develop its own sub-theatre national plan 
to articulate the national critical path; the Helmand Plan is 
an example.  Whatever its form or name, the purpose of a 
theatre integrated campaign plan is to articulate how strategic 
objectives can be achieved thr ough a combination of tactical 
military, governance and development activity; the ways.  Its 
golden thread is the coordination, cooperation and, where 
appropriate, integration of the political, diplomatic, economic 
and military instruments.
Strategic Planning
1008 The Standard Approach.  The Defence Crisis 
Management Organisation has responsibility for crisis 
management and planning within MOD.  Through it, 
the Cabinet Office is fed military advice by Ministers and 
senior officers, usually as a result of discussions in a Current 
Operations Group in the first instance.  This, in turn, is 
informed by output from a Strategic Planning Group and 
the Political-Military Estimate.  Once he has received a Chief 
of Defence Staff’s (CDS’) Planning Directive, Chief of Joint 
Operations (CJO) will initiate formal planning in the Permanent 
Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) J5 with a Crisis Planning Team, 
which will draw on extant and new planning work.  At the 
same time, in order to inform political choice, The Operations 
Directorate (Overseas Operations) will work with the Strategic 
Planning Group to refine high level objectives, and with 
front line commands to identify  the force elements that may 
be generated.  This work is done in close concert with the 
PJHQ planning effort in order to refine what, in effect, is a 
military-strategic estimate.  The military output of this is a CDS 
Operational Directive to CJO which directs him to execute 
the operation and assigns force elements to his command.  
Concurrently, planning is likely to be taking place in allied 
capitals.  For example, in Washington DC, the CDS Liaison 
Officer will be acting as the link between US and UK military 
planning and, in the case of key US Combatant Commands, 
UK embedded officers have the task of integrating US theatre 
objectives with UK strategic objectives.  There may also be 
senior UK embedded officers in the theatre of operations 
affected by the planning.  An immediate risk is that distributed 
and disjointed planning will proceed before the fundamental 
multinational campaign objectives have hardened.
1009 The Stabilisation Approach. 3  The cross-government 
nature of stabilisation requires a modified approach, 
although within Whitehall departments the internal planning 
mechanisms will be largely unchanged.  In a national 
operation, where a significant military contribution is required, 
the Cabinet Office will take th e lead in initiating planning; 
it may use an existing contingency plan developed by a 
department.  The Stabilisation Unit will provide advice and 
expertise on how to coordinate cross-government planning, 
but it has no executive authority nor owns any plans.  The 
highest level output of cross-government planning should 
be a Stabilisation Plan.   This should comprise a common 
2. Although led by a single nation, the US’ planners Joint Campaign Plan, notably the 
General Petraeus – Ambassador Crocker Plan in Iraq 2007, is an example of a theatre 
integrated campaign plan.
3. This is developed from the Stabilisation Unit paper  Integrated Stabilisation Planning: 
Structures and Processes.  Conducting an Integrated Stabilisation Assessment, Stabilisation 
Unit, July 2009 provides more detail on the tools and techniques of the Joint 
Stabilisation Assessment.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
153
assessment, common strategic aims and objectives, 
departmental targets and a sequence and priority of activity.  
It will describe a critical path through the numerous tasks that 
different government departments, including MOD, need 
to undertake.  It does not replace any single departmental 
planning process, but is designed to achieve integration 
and coherence at the strategic and operational levels.  In a 
coalition or Alliance operation, the Stabilisation Plan should 
reflect coalition or Alliance objectives, not purely national 
ones.  Ideally, it should be nested within an integrated plan for 
the theatre. This is illustrated in Figure 10.2.
1010 Coalition Campaigns.  The UK strategic aim and 
objectives will both shape, and be shaped by, the international 
view.  National departmental plans should be integrated and 
these must be consistent with integrated multinational plans 
if we are to achieve unity of effort.  Ideally, planning teams 
should be collocated, but at the start of operational planning 
this may be unrealistic.  However, as the campaign matures 
and develops authority, the UK should look to disaggregate 
national planning to better support and draw upon coalition 
in-theatre planning.
TACTICAL OPERATIONAL STRATEGIC
UK Planning Processes
National Security Strategy
Public Service Agreements (26 CT)
(29 Poverty) (30 Conflict)
Defence
Strategic
Guidance
Stratgic
Conflict
Framework
DFID
White
Paper
UK Foreign
Policy
Aims
UK
Military
Development
Activity
Diplomatic
Activity
Coalition
Integrated
Alliance tactical
integrated plans
Alliance theatre
integrated campaign 
plan may combine 
these or elements
of them
Coalition
Military
CDS 
Directive
DFID
Divisional
Performance
Frameworks
UK cross 
government
stabilisation
plan or national 
intergrated plan
Geographic
& Funtional 
Directrate
Business
Plans
Theatre
Campaign
Plan
DFID
Country
Plans
Post
(Embassy)
Business
Plan
Operation
Orders
OPLAN
Theatre
Campaign
Plan
Operation
Orders
DFID
Programs
  Figure 10.2 – HMG’s Planning Processes
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
154
1011 National Campaigns.  When operating alone, a 
UK Stabilisation Plan will be the de facto cross-government 
integrated campaign plan for the theatre.  If, for any reason 
the Stabilisation Plan is crafted solely at the strategic rather 
than strategic and operational levels, it may be necessary 
to develop a separate national theatre integrated campaign 
plan beneath it.  In this case, it is likely that it will use a military 
planning framework.  In such cases, the campaign plan must 
use the same Strategic Objectives and Outputs to shape it.  A 
comprehensive solution will only be realised in this way.
1012 Planning Lead and Coordination.  Cabinet Office 
will initiate planning where significant contributions are 
needed from more than one department, otherwise it will 
usually be the FCO.  In Whitehall, a steering group of key 
government departments will direct a Strategic Planning 
Team comprising representatives of the FCO, DFID’s Conflict 
Humanitarian and Security Department (CHASE), MOD, 
Cabinet Office, Stabilisation Unit and others as required.  The 
role of this Strategic Planning Team is to: propose a strategic 
aim; agree a common assessment of the problem; identify 
stabilisation objectives, their priority and sequencing; and 
identify lead responsibilities as well as measure and report 
success against the strategic plan.  The Steering Group 
will agree the aim, objectiv es and responsibilities, and 
are accountable to Ministers for delivery of the plan.  The 
single strategic aim will be a compromise between political 
ambition, resources and susceptibility of the problem to 
solutions.  It is likely to identify an end-point several years 
in the future.  The Strategic Planning Team may use the 
framework of a Joint Stabilisation Assessment (JSA) to conduct 
its analysis.  This is shown in Figure 10.3.
 
1013 Strategic Objectives, Outputs and Tasks.  In a 
similar methodology to military campaign planning, the 
strategic aim will be broken down into lines of outcome.  
These identify dependencies  and priorities, but there 
is no set format.  Typically, but not exclusively, lines of 
outcome may be established for security, economic, social 
development, governance and strategic communications.  
Strategic objectives are set for these outcomes and a critical 
path derived in order to sequence and prioritise them.  
An Operational Planning Team may be formed to derive 
stabilisation outputs and tasks,  and to manage and measure 
success of the plan at the operational level.  It will deploy into 
theatre and either integrate fully into the J5 element of the 
military headquarters, or where there is only limited military 
involvement, into an Embassy or DFID Office.  The planning 
Stage 1:
Draw up detailed 
terms of reference
What is the UK interest?
What is the HMG startegic 
aim/desired end state?
Who will lead 
development of JSA? 
Who will be involved?
How when and where 
will JSA be conducted?
Stage 3:
Future Projection 
of Conflict
Trend assessment
Triggers and likely 
responses
Possible scenarios
Possible levers
Stage 4:
Key issues for 
Stabilisation Planning
Identification of major 
challenges to successful 
stabilisation and 
acheivement of 
UK’s aim
Feeds into Stabilisation 
Objectives
Stage 2:
Conflict Analysis
Structural causes 
(political, governance, 
socio-economic security)
Conflict Actors (interests, 
relations, capacities, 
agendas, track record)
Conflict responses
  Figure 10.3 – Cross-Government Strategic Planning: Joint Stabilisation Analysis
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
155
cycle from initiation to operational management may look 
like Figure 10.4.  The cycle should be re-visited during 
strategic reviews.
1014 Integrating Strategic and Campaign Planning.  The 
process described above is an ideal.  It is subject to variation 
for reasons such as competing priorities, concurrency, staff 
capacity, time pressure and a potential lack of clarity of 
political purpose at the beginning of a crisis.  The relationship 
between the Cabinet Office-led, Stabilisation Unit coordinated 
strategic planning process and campaign planning in the 
PJHQ must be a close one.  Indeed, it may be so close 
that they not only complement each other, which is the 
minimum requirement, but they are capable of replicating 
each other where required at the operational level.  It is at 
the tactical level, where plans for operations are crafted, that 
aims and objectives will be defined by military, rather than 
comprehensive activity or effect.
Strategic
Objective
Outputs
Risks
Tasks
Risks
TasksOutputs
Initiation of 
Planning
Oversight
Stabilisation
Assessment
Stabilisation
Aim
Means of Verification
Strategic
Objective
Outputs
Risks
Tasks
Risks
Tasks
Outputs
Strategic
Objective
Outputs
Risks
Tasks
Risks
TasksOutputs
Strategic
Objective
Outputs
Risks
Tasks
Risks
TasksOutputs
Lead
 Dept
Steering 
Group
Strategic
Planning Team
Operational
Planning Team
Lines of Outcome
  Figure 10.4 – Stabilisation Planning Cycle 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
156
Campaign Planning Guidance
1015 Purpose.  The purpose of a campaign plan is to 
develop, synchronise and sequen ce all the lines of military, 
political, economic and social activity necessary to achieve 
strategic objectives.  It should be as broad as possible, taking 
into account factors such as the influence from neighbouring 
states, culture, religion, history and politics.  The planning 
team should be drawn from a broad spectrum also.  It should 
include military, government, academics, regional experts, 
business, partner nations and alliance members amongst 
others.  Managing this complex group is best achieved by 
dividing the group into planning teams, each of which focuses 
on a specific area; for example, on economic, development, 
security or vital infrastructure aspects.  Teams’ plans should 
then be reviewed and integrated by an executive board.
Joint Strategic Assessment Team
Stabilisation planning lends itself to the formation of 
short duration, ad hoc planning teams that will confront 
the accepted norms and practices while seeking practical 
alternatives.  An example is the Joint Strategic Assessment 
Team (JSAT) that was formed in Iraq in 2007.  It was given 
the task of producing a joint, inter-agency, multinational 
Campaign Plan in just over one month.  Its methodology 
was: ‘starting with a political plan, then devising an influence 
plan to achieve it and only then developing military, 
economic and governance activities to achieve it’.
4  The 
team was headed by a senior US State Department 
civilian and a US Army colonel.  The hand-picked team 
had 24 members which included representatives from 
intelligence, diplomatic, mili tary, economic, information, 
doctrine and academic communities.  A similar JSAT 
formed to focus on the Afghanistan-Pakistan regional 
issue in 2008.
1016 Output.  The output from the campaign plan should 
be a framework from which other work flows and from 
which clear missions and tasks can be easily derived.  The 
key takeaways should be a few big ideas that set the tone 
for subsequent operations and activities.  Through further 
analysis and planning, these ideas are refined and expressed 
with increasing focus and detail.  In the military they are 
expressed as Operation Plans (OPLANs) by J5, Operation 
Orders (OPORDs) by J3/5, and Fragmentary Orders (FRAGOs) 
by J3 (see paragraph 1061 and JDP 5-00, paragraph 287).  
Having provided context for the conduct of future work, the 
campaign plan should designate effect or time-based leads 
for subordinate tasks; for example, security sector reform, anti-
narcotics, agricultural reform and infrastructure development.
1017 Influence and Strategic Communication.  One 
of the most important outputs of planning is a shared and 
agreed understanding of how activity will exert influence.  
Specifically, planning must identify the principal tenets of 
the UK narrative and establish how strategic communication, 
narrative and influence will be stitched together with 
objectives, outputs, activity and risks.  Influence should 
become the guiding reference point for activity, and strategic 
communication should set out clearly and simply the 
narrative; it explains the stabilisation mission, the purpose 
and role of its participants and is aimed at supporting the 
operational and tactical activities undertaken by the deployed 
forces.  Influence and strategic communication must also be 
capable of dynamic adjustment since the effects sought will 
not just happen.  They will only be realised through constant 
effort and refinement of the means.
1018 Campaign Review.  While progress towards 
objectives will require monitoring, a full campaign review 
should only be conducted once a suitable time period has 
elapsed.  This in-depth review of the plan should only occur 
at major intersections; for example, where there has been a 
recognisable shift in the strategic geometry and the future 
direction of the whole campaign needs further refinement.  
Reviews carried out too frequently, or at lesser junctions, 
may not reflect the real effects of activity and could skew the 
overall direction of the campaign.  Progress checks, however, 
should be carried out at regular intervals – every six weeks is 
the battle rhythm adopted in US theatre headquarters.
A Personal View of Cross-Departmental Planning
‘All government departments have planning processes – the 
names may vary, but each has a recognisable planning cycle.  
The issue is more often to do with language and terminology, 
rather than process.  As government departments continue 
to work together, some of the inter-departmental barriers will 
come down, while others, principally for budgetary reasons, 
are likely to remain.  The nirvana of complete integration is 
therefore unlikely to be achievable.  Nevertheless, experience 
has shown that government departments have more in 
common than they have differences between them – but 
the requirement and ability at the human level to ‘reachout’ 
remains paramount.’
Emma Sky, Stabilisation Adviser, Iraq 2006
4. David Kilcullen, The Accidental Guerrilla – Fighting Small Wars in the Midst of a Big One , 
Hurst & Company, London 2009.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
157
Campaign Design and Resources
1019 Where the UK is engaged in a multinational 
mission, campaign design options may include focusing 
its contributions into a British area which will enable 
significant freedoms in the design and execution of the local 
campaign.  But, this is likely to present resource challenges 
as the demands rise, as well as fall, with the ebb and flow of 
security activity.  Alternatively, pooling UK effort with other 
international support may enable us to tap greater resources 
and permit clearer limits to be placed on the UK resources that 
are committed.  The ability to control campaign design and 
execution will be delivered main ly through the lead coalition 
nation or the alliance command arrangements.  An example 
of how the UK Joint Plan for Helmand in its original form was 
nested with other national, alliance and agency plans is shown 
at Annex 10A.  The key is to balance UK aspirations ( ways) 
with our ability to resource them ( means).  Where the UK is 
reliant on external means, such as Commander’s Emergency 
Response Plan (CERP) or USAID funds, then it may need to 
accept less autonomy over ways.
1020 Planning Timeframes.  Since the cross-government 
strategy looks out to a strategic aim that may be several years 
away, a theatre integrated campaign plan may need to set a 
lesser horizon.  A six-month to three-year period is probably 
appropriate, noting that lower level OPLANs, OPORDs and 
FRAGOs, as opposed to a campaign plan, will typically be valid 
for between six months and a matter of days.  Similarly, civil 
partners will produce, for example, country plans and business 
plans to direct and manage their equivalent tactical activity.
1021 Other Government Department Planning 
Methodologies.   A guiding principle of a truly comprehensive 
approach is that  institutional familiarity will enhance 
collaborative working and trust between entities .5  Just as 
familiarity with alliance and US doctrine will enhance conduct 
in multinational operations, so too, an understanding of 
partners’ methodologies should enhance integrated planning, 
be they government or international organisations.  Each 
has its own unique approach and lexicon.  The commander 
should understand the different tools
6 and methodologies 
so that they know how the different organisations function 
and how they can interact with, and influence, one another.  
The military should also know the constraints and freedoms 
under which others may operate, such as their approach to 
risk.  It will also be necessary to agree with OGD planners what 
integrated or collaborative planning process will be most 
effective.  Early personal contact between the commander 
and staff with key OGD representatives is critical to developing 
personal trust and understanding.  Ideally this will start before 
pre-deployment training and continue as the campaign 
progresses.  Understanding each other’s terms helps; see 
Figure 10.5.
1022 Synchronisation of Planning and Activity.  
By comparison with civil ag encies, military operational 
headquarters are well staffed.  The capacity to plan different 
options and contingencies simult aneously is unlikely to be 
matched by civil partners.  Military staffs trained in common 
procedures to meet tight timelines have a unique potential 
to support and integrate inter-agency planning and activity.  
Civil partners are therefore likely to produce focused plans, 
supporting specified options.  They may select potential 
solutions earlier than military headquarters.  Incoherence will 
result if these different approaches remain disconnected.  
Some form of gearing mechanism is required that allows the 
synchronisation of planning and activity.
Synchronising Cross-Departmental Planning 
and Activity
From his involvement in Exercise JOINT VENTURE 
2008 (a PJHQ operational level exercise in late 2008) 
Commander Field Army recognised a requirement for a 
gearing mechanism  to facilitate complementary planning 
mechanisms and varying tempo in planning activities 
across organisations and government departments:
“The military staff and decision-making process are not 
dissimilar to a Hoover Dam Turbine – massive energy and 
massive output demanding massive input and turning 
at monstrous speed.  The FCO and DFID are smaller, but 
more perfectly formed, slower engines.  Should all of 
these be connected through a single drive shaft … the 
outcome would be simply catastrophic for all three.  The 
aim therefore should be, while embracing [each other‘s] 
individuality and independence, to seek to provide a 
clear, single reference point – an artificial horizon – which 
provides a crude but nevertheless common perspective of 
the problem.  A recognised campaign picture, drawn from 
all Departments, [that is] influential not prescriptive, implicit 
not explicit, authoritative not autocratic, will prove a steady 
reference point for all parties wherever they are, whatever 
they are doing.  A common understanding, agreed by all 
but constantly adjusted and contested, will allow each 
Department to prosecute at its own pace its part in the 
enterprise through its own plan and planning process, with 
the result that the activities become self-synchronising; a 
much sought after, but seldom achieved objective.  Less in 
this case is simply more.”
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
158
Commander’s Considerations
1023 Stakeholder Analysis.  Identifying the range 
of stakeholders and their command chains early in the 
endeavour may be more complex than it appears.  A simple 
stakeholder analysis to identify who is responsible for what, 
and to whom, should be an early task.  Actors, and their 
influences, may be depicted diagrammatically to show 
formal, and informal, relationships – in essence a stakeholder 
network can be drawn up.  The purpose is to identify the 
framework of empowered actors with whom the commander 
can engage.  Identifying the network and understanding the 
motivations and interaction of the players, is often lengthy 
and complicated.  A series of linked questions have been 
developed to help:
• WHO (are the relevant actors)?  Who are the predominant 
interlocutors with whom I need to interact in order to 
enable holistic planning and to deliver coherent execution 
(delivery)?
• WHAT (are their motivations)?  What is their mandate and 
constraints?
• WHY (are they involved)?  What are their specific interests 
5. JDP 01 (2nd Edition) Campaigning .
6. These include Strategic Conflict Analysis and Critical Path Analysis developed by the 
Stabilisation Unit and the Country Assistance Plan and Logical Framework Analysis used 
by DFID.
Outputs
Purpose
Assistance
Strategy 
Goal
Assistance
Strategy 
Objectives
DFID
Activities
Goal
Campaign
End-State 
Campaign
Objectives
Supporting
Effects
MOD
National
Strategic Aim
Strategic
Objectives
Activities
Decisive
Conditions
Strategic Vision
Stabilisation
Aim
Stabilisation
Objectives
Operational
Objectives
Activities
Stabilisation
Unit
Generic
Situation Activity
Conditions
Activities
Vision
IN CAPITALS :
Impact
Output
Outcome
Activities
IN THEATRE :
  Figure 10.5 – Cross-Government Terminology Comparator
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
159
and objectives? How may they be affected by the 
proposed crisis resolution and theory of change , and what 
are their likely responses?
• SO WHAT (does their involvement mean to me)?
• What can I expect to leverage from them and, 
conversely, what are they likely to want to leverage 
from me? 
• What steps do I need to take to integrate them into, or 
exclude them from my process?  What must I do?
• How can discipline be imposed on their engagement 
(e.g. who is the lead interlocutor with each player)?
1024 Multi-agency Leadership.  A comprehensive 
response to any situation is most likely to succeed if a single 
figure, ideally formally empowered, draws together and 
orchestrates the activities of the various agencies involved.  
How the role may be agreed, and the formal authority that the 
leader could be granted, varies on a case-by-case basis.  For 
UK national campaigns, an Ambassador, a political appointee, 
or a military commander may be appropriate.  In multinational 
operations undertaken by the UN, the Special Representative 
of the Secretary General is likely to be the multi-agency leader.  
On other occasions, where there is no framework nation, it is 
not uncommon for an individual  to emerge, often by force 
of character, as the accepted leader.
7  The ability to build 
consensus and work in collaboration with civilian partners, 
as well as other military cultures, will be essential qualities of 
the theatre commander, and will have a significant impact 
on the whole character and conduct of the campaign.  It is 
unlikely, however, that the conditions will exist that enable 
overall authority to be vested in one person – authority is 
more frequently vested in committees with responsibility to 
integrate and coordinate activity.
1025 Committee System.  Where multinational and multi-
agency engagement is required to solve complex issues a 
hierarchy of committees can facilitate successful collaboration 
between departments.  The committee system complements 
the normal departmental chains of command, and allows 
the key civil, political and milita ry figures to develop a shared 
analysis and provide coherent direction to their own planners.  
An excellent example of this system was the British authorities’ 
response to the Malayan Emergency; similar arrangements 
were also developed in Northern Ireland.
8  Whether a single 
Unity of Purpose: Former US Ambassador to Iraq, Ryan 
Crocker and former Coalition Commander in Iraq, General 
David Petraeus testify before a joint hearing of the House 
Armed Services and Foreign Affairs Committee.  In Iraq, 
their close professional relationship illustrated how a 
cooperative united front can create unity of purpose at 
the theatre level and beyond, without formal unity of 
command.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
160
leader or committee system is used, both models will require a 
tiered system of collaborative committees to synchronise and 
coordinate activity; they will act as the nervous system in a 
failed or failing state.  Since stab ilisation that requires a military 
contribution is often characterised by semi-anarchy – where 
there is no central governance structure – the military may 
need to provide a skeleton of security committees which can 
act as a spine for governance.
1026 Effective Consultation.   Pre-deployment training 
should include key advisers and partner representatives so 
that the commander can initiate consultation and begin to 
build not only his team, but the cross-departmental one.  He 
will also want to develop early the working practices to deliver 
a comprehensive approach.
A Guide to Effective Consultation
“Templer in Malaya was running a single-nation effort and 
everyone beneath him would do as they were told.  In my 
position there were thirty-seven nations, all of whom could 
second-guess what I wanted; there was also a President, a 
number of ministries and the UN to satisfy.  I could not have 
hoped to pull the levers in the same way as Templer did; I 
needed to influence and needed to convince them as best I 
could using (a mnemonic this time) the LIC process: Listen, 
Influence and Coordinate.  [That was the function of the 
Policy Action Group
9…]”
Lt Gen Sir David Richards, COMISAF IX, May 2007
1027 Managing Relationships.  The commander will need 
to manage a variety of relationships including with PJHQ, in-
country representatives from HMG, international and bilateral 
partners and, above all, with local power centres within the 
host nation.  These power centres may include residual or new 
governments, powerful interest groups and political elites, 
opportunists or even hostile groups.  Consider:
• Personal time, energy and resources are required 
to develop and maintain constructive relationships.  
Established agreements and relationships may quickly 
falter; they need to be tested and assessed, and steps 
taken to rebuild them, or to modify processes if required.
• The skill of persuasion is paramount and many will 
demand the commander’s time – a deputy commander is 
likely to be required.
• Roulement of commanders and key staff will impact 
relationships.  The value of continuity is particularly 
important in fragile states where personal contact is often 
more important than institutional links.  Handing over key 
relationships, therefore, will take time – a week may be 
 too short.
1028 Commander’s Intuition.  Due to the commander’s 
connections and the relationships he builds, his situational 
awareness is often better than his staff who get stove-piped 
and fixed to headquarters locations.  Therefore commanders 
tend to have a better holistic view and sharp situational 
understanding of the operation.  This allows them to use their 
intuition to identify and exploit opportunities that quantitative 
staff processes may not identify.
1029 Providing Texture for Senior Leaders.  Occasional 
direct communication between theatre and Whitehall can add 
welcome evidence to strategic decision-makers.  This should 
complement, not circumvent, the chain of command and is 
a 2-way process.  Direct access, though not welcomed by all, 
can be important in moments of crisis or opportunity, where 
the commander’s feel and judgement can be passed directly 
and explicitly – often melding personal observations and 
uncorroborated reports to give a more nuanced picture.  This 
helps mitigate any false sense of understanding gained from 
media reports.  It both provides Whitehall with texture and 
context, as well as allowing strategic leaders and officials to 
explain to commanders the impact of events in-theatre on the 
political scene at home.
1030 Commander’s Inner Circle.  The commander 
may choose to form a select group of close and trusted 
advisers.  This inner circle  may include senior, retired military 
or diplomatic personnel with a particular knowledge of 
host nation issues or the wider region.  The group should 
be supported by the commander’s most capable and 
experienced staff officer and might be codified as the 
Commander’s Initiatives Group.  OGD leaders are likely to 
have similar arrangements and informal meetings between 
the groups are likely to be useful.  However, without a small 
but dedicated support staff, any outputs from these informal 
meetings are unlikely to be integrated with the more formal 
processes.  Therefore, empowering a small secretariat will help 
unity of purpose.
1031 Decentralised Command.  Where high levels of 
public interest and scrutiny exist, the temptation may be 
to retain control at the highest level of command.  Local 
knowledge and relationships are, however, pivotal to timely 
decision-making at the tactical level.  It may be difficult to 
apply the tenets of mission command because of the strategic 
7. For example, Lord Ashdown in Bosnia.
8. Historical examples of these and other campaigns are available on the Development, 
Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) internet site: www.mod.uk/defenceinternet/
microsite/dcdc/ 
9. This consisted of the Afghan Government, International Security Assistance Force, UN, 
Non-governmental Organisation (NGOs) and other international actors.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
161
impact of inappropriate actions and messages applied 
locally.  Yet, decentralised decision-making and the wider 
application of mission command is important to enable junior 
commanders to seize fleeting opportunities – for example, 
by judging when to use overwhelming force – thereby 
generating tempo.
10  Successful decentralisation relies on 
junior commanders understanding the theatre commander’s 
intent and applying good judgement.  Demanding, well-
resourced training that replicates the conditions in theatre is 
the key enabler.
1032 Delegation of Capability.  The delegation of 
capability should go hand-in-hand with decentralised 
command.  Some capabilities, traditionally held at the 
operational level, may need to be permanently allocated to 
the tactical level.  An example of this may be the allocation 
of unmanned aerial systems and joint forward air controllers 
down to sub-unit level.
1033 Understanding and Employing Coalition 
Capabilities.  Many implications flow from working with 
coalition partners, and no list will be wholly inclusive. 11  
Understanding coalition partner capabilities is essential to 
inform the employment of forces.  Some fundamentals are:
• Identify the strengths and weaknesses of contributing 
nations’ forces, their national objectives and motivations, 
and their capabilities and caveats.
• Each nation may have a different interpretation of similar 
doctrinal terms.  The commander should explore how 
coalition members view their role in terms of doctrine, 
activities and Rules of Engagement.
• All contributing nations have national chains of command 
to which they are likely to refer major decisions.  This 
extends the planning process and introduces delays 
between planning and execution.  Frustrating though it 
may be, a multinational planning cycle may follow these 
steps: plan – consult – plan – consul t – agree – plan – refine – 
consult – issue orders.
• The commander should socialise potentially novel or 
contentious elements of the plan with involved parties in 
order to avoid misunderstanding and delay.  No elements 
of the plan should come as a surprise to those taking 
part, whether military or civilian.  Proactive coalition 
management will include direct briefings in the capitals of 
contributing nations.
• When working as a supporting partner in a coalition it 
is necessary to understand and consider adapting to 
the doctrine, routine and procedures used by the senior 
partner.  This will be critical if the commander wishes to 
synchronise and influence decisions made at the higher 
level.  In reports and when expressing views, the use of 
British understatement should be avoided.
1034 Regional Engagement.   Planning must include a 
regional dimension.  Instability may be exported from fragile 
states, threatening regional security.  Neighbouring states will 
have some political, security, economic and social influence 
on the affected state – for good or bad.  Securing their active 
support for the political settlement may be necessary, and 
ideally take place as a preventative measure, so avoiding the 
need for intervention.  Regional  engagement should include, 
for example, the protection of international borders, denial of 
safe haven for irregular groups, management and return of 
refugees, and garnering support for wider, regional security 
initiatives.  In certain circumstances, a regional security 
consensus will be required that is capable of integrating 
the host nation within a regional context.  The international 
force may need to align its area of influence with its area of 
interest – greatly increasing the area of operations .  Regional 
10. Tempo is not the pace of operations per se , rather it is one’s speed of action and reaction 
relative to the adversary .
11. One valuable guide is the American-Britain-Canada-Australia (ABCA) Coalition Operations 
Handbook .  This is regularly updated, and provides commanders with a reference to 
promote interoperability in multinational operations.
12. Taken from the April 2009 Cabinet Office Document UK Policy in Afghanistan and Pakistan: 
The Way Forward .
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
162
engagement can then be used to restrict the flow of money, 
men and materiel in support of local irregular actors.  
Conversely, failure to engage with the wider region and 
imposing artificial boundaries will almost certainly foment 
regional instability and result in an unachievable campaign 
plan.  The box below provides an example of a policy-led 
imperative for a regional engagement plan.
A Regional Approach – Why Afghanistan and 
Pakistan matter
12
Afghanistan and Pakistan are of critical strategic 
importance to the UK and the international community as 
a whole.  Instability and insecurity in both countries have 
a direct impact on our national security and the safety of 
our citizens.  Of the six major sources of threat listed in the 
UK’s National Security Strategy, Afghanistan and Pakistan 
are relevant to at least four:
• Terrorism – Afghanistan was the base for al-Qaeda’s 
terrorist activity, including the largest ever terrorist 
atrocity of 1 1 September 2001; al-Qaeda’s senior 
leadership is currently located in the border areas of 
Pakistan, and three quarters of the most serious plots 
investigated in the UK have links back to Pakistan.
• Conflict – the insurgency in Afghanistan and insecurity 
in Pakistan have an impact on regional instability 
which affects the UK’s interests, not least given deep 
connections with the region and the large British 
Pakistani community.
• Transnational crime – Afghanistan is the source of 90% 
of the heroin in the UK, and it is estimated that roughly 
half is smuggled via Pakistan.
• Weapons of mass destruction  – Pakistan is a nuclear-
armed state.  Its proper control of its weapons and 
nuclear material, and the prevention of proliferation 
to other countries or non-state actors, is vital to UK 
interests.
Integrated Headquarters Considerations
1035 Stabilisation is likely to require a different headquarters 
construct.  The political, multinational and multi-agency 
nature of the problem means that:
• The operational commander is likely to find himself 
concerned with factors that affect strategic decisions.  The 
focus of subordinate tactical headquarters will be similarly 
elevated.  In a multinational operation, national areas of 
focus and command chains will exacerbate this blurring of 
the levels of command.
• Staff structures need to evolve to accommodate these 
changes.  Choices will need to be made between the 
relative efforts afforded to non-kinetic or soft effects, 
such as influence and engagement, and direct, kinetic 
activity or hard effects.  Although they are not mutually 
exclusive, the ratios of effort will vary at different levels 
of headquarters and with campaign progression.  A 
commander will need an enlarged J5/J35 staff.
• The underlying tempo of staff activity (battle rhythm) 
is generally slower since military effort needs to be 
synchronised with the governance and development lines 
of operation, and it seeks a human, psychological effect 
which takes time to develop and then assess.  However, 
overall activity, particularly J2 and J3, may be as fast as 
in conventional operations.  The political interface, too, 
absorbs time.
• The multinational, multi-agency nature of the operation 
will require tailored structures into which partners can 
plug.  All-source information will need to be analysed, 
fused, shared, protected and exploited.  Information 
management will be critical.
1036 The Case for Theatre Integrated Headquarters.  
Delivering Model D levels of integration and synchronisation 
requires more than dialogue alone.  Further measures will be 
necessary.  These include exchanging empowered planning 
staff, by the physical collocation of headquarters, or ultimately 
the development of a fully integrated campaign staff in a 
single headquarters.  In non-permissive environments, the 
military may be well placed to provide a platform on which 
OGDs base themselves until the situation improves.  This 
allows civil and military planners to integrate and interact in 
pursuit of their own mandated tasks, identify areas of mutual 
support and de-conflict.
1037 Design of an Integrated Headquarters in 
Stabilisation.  Adaptive force generation will be required 
to create the structures and organisations, both within 
the integrated headquarters and more widely within the 
construct of the force.  The design will differ from that 
required to support conventional operations.  While the 
constituent elements and staf f branches may be broadly 
similar, they will have a different emphasis; some roles may 
change and this will be reflected in their relative size and 
influence.  The operational headquarters will need to be 
capable of conducting high level inter-agency planning while 
concurrently offering support to, and enabling, tactical 
level military activity.  Th e following observations are 
worthy of note:
• Multi-agency synchronisation of effect must be 
 achieved at the operational level.  Whatever model is 
adopted, it must promote coherence across all activity, 
both military and civilian.  Ther e is unlikely to be a civilian 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
163
organisational level that matches up with a corps or 
divisional headquarters.
• The operational headquarters should remain focused on 
delivering ‘synchronised output’ rather than on process 
per se.  The guiding mantra for headquarters design 
should be ‘form follows function’.  This requirement 
drives the trend towards larger and better integrated 
planning branches (notably J2, J5, J35 and J9), whose 
precise composition needs to reflect their expanded 
responsibilities and which wi ll change shape over time.
• The J3 function executes operational level activity while 
coordinating and supporting tactical level output.  This 
includes the Command and Control (C2) of assigned 
tactical manoeuvre units in the short term, which has the 
benefit of generating situational understanding that can 
be fed back into the planning process.  Although this is 
not significantly different from warfighting, the span of 
activity sets it apart.
• The design of the headquarters should institutionalise the 
process of learning, and adaptation (see Chapter 12).
• As the planning horizon will be greatly extended, cells and 
branches must record the planning assumptions which 
they used to develop their plans.  This will mitigate the 
effects of staff turn-over and loss of corporate knowledge.  
A trickle posting system for the staff can help, but this 
has its own problems as staff do not train together before 
deployment and often never gel as a team.
1038 Headquarters’ structures constantly evolve, and new 
ideas for getting the best out of  an inter-agency approach are 
being tested.  One such evolution being used increasingly by 
the US is the Joint Inter-agency Task Force (JIATF).
1039 Advisers and Analysts.  The headquarters is likely 
to have embedded within it a number of additional experts, 
advisers and analysts drawn from the MOD and partner 
departments and agencies.  Annex 10B gives a 
brief description.
1040 Points of Emphasis.  The design of a headquarters 
should include:
• The ability to expand, adapt and contract as the campaign 
demands.  Learning organisations cannot stand still.  There 
may be occasions when a function becomes too large or 
too complex for a single staff branch to manage.  In this 
case, the branch may have to reorganise and separate out 
JIATF have been used by the US in a number of ways to 
deal with challenges outside the singular remit of the 
Department of Defense.  They have a potential utility for 
stabilisation.  This table summaries the strengths and 
limitations of these relatively novel organisations:
Purpose
• Address a specific trans-departmental issue.  For 
example, the standing US Task Force for the Horn of 
Africa and AFRICOM have embedded State and Justice 
Department manning, as well as US AID, to reflect the 
cross-cutting characteristics of the challenges that 
 each faces.
• Share resources, informatio n, planning and execution 
approaches.
• Empower decision makers.
• Use network of networks to overcome stovepipes and 
lack of resources.
Characteristics
• Single agency lead (appropriate to task), with other 
agencies (national and intern ational) embedded.  All US 
JIATF are currently Defense-led.
• A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) formalises 
arrangements between agencies.
• Usually adopt a single-issue focus.
• Adopts collaborative approaches focused on outcomes 
rather than process.
• Effective across complex operational environments.
• Use of reachback direct to decision makers in US.
Construct
• Form follows function.  No two JIATFs are the same.
• Mission analysis identifies the outcomes and skills that 
are required.
• Team structure (lead agency, numbers, support, 
workspace) designed round analysis.
• Processes within each JIATF are based on the agreement 
codified in the MOU.
• Inter-agency manning contributes to wide connectivity 
in-theatre and through reachback to cross-government 
resources.
Strengths
• Successfully cuts across agency and departmental 
stovepipes.
• Each is outcome-focused.
Weaknesses
• Dependent on personalities and almost exclusive single-
nation participation.
• Inadequate structural capacity to expand beyond 
single-issue focus.
The US JIATF: Principal Characteristics
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
164
from the integrated headquarters to form a functional 
headquarters of its own.  An example is Multinational 
Security Transition Command - Iraq, which was formed for 
its specific purpose and commanded at 3* level.
• Liaison Officers are critical.  They enable a commander 
to extend his reach as he attempts to influence others.  
Key liaison officers should be personal appointees by 
the commander, and he should consider how best to 
empower them.  Headquarters’ design must cater for 
in-coming liaison officers, allocating the connectivity and 
information systems, and giving access to information that 
allows them to integrate effectively.
• Visitors may provide a means of communicating with 
important target audiences, such as allied nations, the 
home base, superior headquarters and local leaders.  
Briefing and managing them is an important business, not 
peripheral or nuisance activity.
• Media and press briefings should be accessible to local, 
domestic and internationally accredited media.  Media 
access to the commander and principal staff should be 
enabled rather than restricted.
• Reachback will enable the headquarters to tap additional 
resources.  If constructed and organised, reachback 
provides rapid, tailored information, with the appropriate 
level of fidelity and a soun ding board for the commander 
and his staff.
1041 Operations Security.  Recent security and 
information assurance studies have re-defined the relationship 
between protective security and Operations Security 
(OPSEC).
13  There is a requirement for specific OPSEC posts 
and training at the practitioner and command levels.  Detail 
is in OPSEC policy
14 and JDP 3-80.1 OPSEC, Deception and 
Psychological Operations.
1042 Creating Synergy with Host Nation Headquarters.  
As the campaign develops, there may be increased need 
to integrate with host nation staff, for example to plan joint 
operations or share analysis.  Full collocation or embedding 
key personnel may be options, but the solution will need 
to balance OPSEC against campaign cohesion.  Joint 
Coordination Centres have been created to provide a 
formalised – but air-locked – relationship.
1043 ‘Connectivity’ of the Commander.  For the duration 
of his appointment, whether he is in theatre or not, the 
commander should have the ability to remain connected 
and engaged.  Although others can assume responsibility for 
routine decision-making, the pivotal role of the commander 
in shaping the campaign means he should never be beyond 
reach.  Secure systems that enable the commander to remain 
engaged (even remotely) must be resourced.
1044 Tour Lengths.  In protracted operations, consideration 
should be given to the benefits of longer tours for the 
commander and his key staff.  Where possible, the approach 
should be linked to the Coalition approach.  This should be an 
early consideration on transition from a contingent operation 
onto a campaign footing.
13. Set out in JDP 03 Security in the Contemporary Operating Environment.
14. Policy: DCDS(C)/DTIO/OPSEC dated 25 January 2006.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
165
Working with the Host Nation
1045 Overload.  Working constructively with the host nation 
is a delicate task, largely because governments of fragile states 
are likely to have immature structures and capabilities.  There 
may be a dearth of talent, exacerbated by under-investment 
in human capital and an exodus of experienced people.  Host 
nation authorities can easily be overwhelmed by a profusion 
of good ideas emanating at speed from a variety of well-
meaning external agencies.  Overloading the host nation in 
this manner results in disenchantment and paralysis.  Less 
engagement, in this case, is often more.  A staff branch should 
be charged with imposing engagement discipline.
1046 Generating a Productive Relationship.  The aim 
will be to enable host nation authorities to have legitimate 
control over their own affairs.  To that end, there is a need to 
understand the host nation’s concerns and aspirations, as their 
views should shape the overall approach.  If this is not done 
from the start, then they may force unwelcome alterations to 
the plan at a later stage.
1047 Politics and Politicking.   Local politics will impose 
constraints in various forms, which have the potential to 
generate friction.  Local politicking will generate internal 
tensions within the host nation’s government as, for example, 
ministries jostle for position or key personalities within 
government manipulate and manoeuvre for personal or 
political advantage.  The commander needs to be attuned to 
these tensions.
1048 Sovereignty.  As the host nation’s sovereignty 
begins to mature (as a result of UN Security Council 
Resolutions or elections), its government will become less 
receptive to external guidance, and seek to exercise greater 
autonomy.  This can give rise to tensions with and between 
its international partners over the conduct and direction of 
the campaign.  There is a danger that much progress and 
success could be undone if this situation is not handled 
sensitively.  Military commande rs and their civilian partners 
must be prepared to work through these difficulties.  They are, 
perversely, a manifestation of the success achieved so far.
1049 The Importance of Cultural Symbols.  The 
significance of cultural symbol s, including events, times and 
places, should be carefully studied and understood. 15  In 
certain societies symbols may include tangible objects such 
as the national flag, insignia, icons, saints/martyrs, or 
intangible ones such as particular dates in the calendar.  These 
symbols can have a powerful motivating effect and, where 
possible, should be capitalised upon.  Equally, if symbols are 
misjudged, misapplied or misunderstood, this will have a 
detrimental impact.
Host Nation Politics: The Afghan parliament in session.  
Local politics will often act as a constraint and source 
of friction.  These are the unavoidable consequences 
of shifts in position and local power.  Politics, such as 
the timing and conduct of elec tions, will impact on the 
campaign.
Growing Sovereignty
‘The new Security Agreement was a further step in Iraqi 
sovereignty.  Many of the Iraqi officers had been in the Army 
that had been so rapidly defeated by the Coalition in 2003, 
and were still shamed by that.  Now they were asserting 
themselves as the drivers, and we had to become back-seat 
passengers.  There were frictions from this.’ 
A UK Brigade Commander, Operation TELIC
15. For more detailed information, refer to Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 1/09 The Significance of 
Culture to the Military .
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
166
SECTION II
PLANNING TECHNIQUES
 
Health Warning
‘Plans are nothing - planning is everything’ 
– von Moltke the Elder
The purpose of the planning tool is to provide an example; 
a refere
nce.  Commanders and their staff will exercise their 
own judgment, experience and style in order to develop 
the tools that best support them.  JDP 5-00 Campaign 
Planning remains authoritative, but this section describes 
how planning techniques may be adapted to meet the 
specific demands of the stabilisation environment.
1050 Planning Horizons.  At the start of planning, 
understanding of the situation and task will be limited.  
Identifying the conditions required for ultimate success 
will be difficult.  However, as the campaign unfolds and 
understanding develops, so the objectives and the conditions 
required to realise them will be refined.  This may lead to a 
shift in planning horizons; initially they may be short, but 
increase as the campaign develops.  The horizon should be 
long enough to consider strategic issues, but not so long 
that the linkages between activities and objectives become 
nebulous.  To help achieve this, the notion of short, medium 
and long-term objectives can be useful.  Long-term objectives 
articulate the broad strategic vision, short and medium 
objectives are the building blocks to realise it.
In a joint-interagency environment, taxonomy 
compromises often have to be made.  In Iraq, definitions 
and taxonomy were amended to reflect the views of the 
US State Department officials and US military in the Joint 
Campaign Plans (JCP) from 2008 to date.  For example, 
the term campaign goal was used as a cross-cutting term 
rather than the military term, decisive condition.
National Strategic Aim.  The national strategic aim 
is the UK Government’s declared purpose, in a particular 
situation, normally expressed in terms of reaching a future 
desired outcome.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition) Campaigning).  
The national strategic aim may be articulated personally 
by Ministers, or it may be discerned indirectly from UK 
foreign policy statements, or through discussions between 
politicians and officials.  Ac hieving the national strategic 
aim requires contributions from across government 
and, perhaps, multinational contributors.  It provides the 
unity of purpose for military commanders as well as their 
civilian partners and needs to be integrated into the wider 
objectives of multinational and host nation partners.
Strategic Objective.  A strategic objective is a goal to 
be achieved through one or more instruments of national 
power in order to meet the national strategic aim.  (JDP 01 
(2nd Edition)).
Campaign Objective.  A campaign objective is a goal, 
expressed in terms of one or more decisive conditions that 
needs to be achieved in order to meet the national strategic 
aim.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition)).
Campaign End-State.  The campaign end-state is reached 
when all the campaign objectives have been achieved.  
It therefore represents the extent of the commander’s 
contribution to meeting the national strategic aim.   (JDP 01 
(2nd Edition)).
Decisive Condition.  A decisive condition is a specific 
combination of circumstances deemed necessary to achieve 
a campaign objective.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition)).  Decisive 
conditions are the building blocks that deliver campaign 
objectives.  Of course in many complex situations it 
is impossible for any one condition to be absolutely 
‘decisive’, and the term should not be taken too literally.
Supporting Effect.  The intended consequence of actions.  
(JDP 01 (2nd Edition)).  In order to arrive at a particular 
decisive condition it is necessary to achieve one, or a 
number of, supporting effects.  
Centre of Gravity.  Characteristic, capability, or influence 
from which a nation, an alliance, a military force or other 
civil or militia grouping draws its freedom of action, physical 
strength, cohesion or will to fight.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition)).
The leader in stabilisation is not necessarily the military 
commander, he may also be a diplomat or DFID In-
Country Head.  Since cross-departmental support is not 
mandatory, but is vital if a comprehensive approach is to 
work, two other definitions are relevant:
Supported Commander.  The commander having 
primary responsibility for any given task assigned by a higher 
authority.  (JDP 0-01.1 (7th Edition)).
Supporting Commander.  A commander who furnishes 
forces, equipment, logistics or other support to a Supported 
Commander, or who develops a supporting plan.  (JDP 0-01.1 
(7th Edition)).
A Quick Guide to Military Planning Terminology
Campaign Planning
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
167
Planning Tools
1051 The Foundations of Planning.  Crisis response 
planning addresses 3 questions: what are the features of the 
current situation; what should the more favourable situation 
look like in the future; and what is the commander’s theory 
of change?
16  A commander should start his operational 
estimate armed with a basic situational understanding and 
a working definition of the strategic aim.  The commander 
will begin the process of campai gn design by conducting his 
own analysis in order to frame the problem.  He will consider 
two campaign planning concepts in particular: the end-state 
which should be derived from the Strategic Objective, and 
Centres of Gravity (CoGs).
17  These will form a foundation 
for subsequent planning and help identify initial decisive 
conditions.  Since there should be only one campaign plan, 
this must incorporate cross-government objectives and 
activity articulated in strategic direction or the Stabilisation 
Plan.  In planning for a cross-government stabilisation plan, or 
where a military planning process is providing the framework 
for cross-government planning , the principal outputs of 
the planning team are agreement and cross-government 
support for the campaign objectives and their building 
blocks.  That which DFID may call a goal, the Stabilisation Unit 
a stabilisation objective, and the MOD a decisive condition 
must be coordinated.  If possible, the activity to achieve these 
objectives (or decisive conditions) should also be agreed.  
The art for the commander, and his civilian counterparts, is 
to plan and coordinate activity within and across different 
LoOs in order to realise the campaign objectives.  This is the 
definitive cross-government activi ty in stabilisation.  Figure 
10.6 shows how the generic model in JDP 5-00
18 may be 
adapted for stabilisation.
1052 Adjusting the Planning Approach.  The planning 
tools of end-state, campaign objective and decisive conditions 
may benefit from some adjustment.  In JDP 5-00, which 
Campaign End-State
Strategic Planning
Campaign Planning
Departmental Planning
Campaign
Objective
Campaign
Objective
Campaign
Objective
Campaign
Objective
Campaign
Objective
Coordinating Machinery
‘Goals’
‘Objectives’
‘Decisive
Conditions’
‘Goals’
‘Objectives’
‘Decisive
Conditions’
‘Goals’
‘Objectives’
‘Decisive
Conditions’
‘Goals’
‘Objectives’
‘Decisive
Conditions’
‘Goals’
‘Objectives’
‘Decisive
Conditions’
Strategic Objectives
National Strategic Aim
FCO
Plan
DFID
Plan
Military
Plan
  Figure 10.6 – The Coordination of Activity in Stabilisation
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
168
is primarily written for inter-state warfighting operations, 
objectives are defined as military goals: ‘Campaign objectives 
are assigned to the Joint Force Commander as part of the MOD’s 
overall strategy; their collective achievement represents the 
campaign end-state’ .
19  Within stabilisation, such purely military 
goals are inappropriate.  Instead, it is helpful to think in a 
broader, political context since it is the political settlement 
that delivers long-term stability.  It may also be helpful to view 
activity: from the strategic to the tactical, through the prism 
of building security; stimulating economic and infrastructure 
development; and fostering host nation government 
capacity and legitimacy.  This is  the Stabilisation Model, first 
introduced in Chapter 2 and now reproduced in Figure 10.7.  
The campaign end-state, objectives and decisive conditions 
should be defined and agreed within this broader framework, 
and will be shaped by the nature of the intended political 
settlement.  The military has a role to play, to a greater or lesser 
extent, in all the areas of the Stabilisation Model as indicated in 
the key:
1053 Integration at the Operational Level.  At the heart 
of any integrated theatre campaign plan should be the means 
in time and space to influence the decisive groups in order to 
enable a political settlement.  The operational commander, 
working with host nation, mult inational and cross-government 
counterparts may need to broker a series of separate, lesser 
political accommodations at the local level.  These will be 
achieved through bespoke and synchronised economic, 
governance and security activities targeted at decisive groups 
and their centres of power and influence, as depicted in 
Figure 10.8.  This shows how activity varies at a local level, at 
any given moment.  Such localised solutions must remain 
16. See JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition) Campaign Planning .
17. As previously discussed in Chapter 9 – Analysis.
18. JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition), Figure 2.4
19. See JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition), paragraph 230.
Stimulate Economic & 
Infrastructure Development
t 3FTUPSF#BTJD4FSWJDFT*OGSBTUSVDUVSF
t 3FCVJME&òFDUJWF&DPOPNJD
 'JOBODJBM.BOBHFNFOU
t #FHJO-POHUFSN4PDJBM
 *OGSBTUSVDUVSF%FWFMPQNFOU
Key:
 Military DeliverJOBMMDJSDVNTUBODFT
 Military AssistJOTFNJQFSNJTTJWF
 FOWJSPONFOU
 Military EnableJOBOPOQFSNJTTJWF
 FOWJSPONFOU
Build Human and National Security
t /FVUSBMJTF)PTUJMF(SPVQT
t 1SPWJEF1VCMJD0SEFS
 	QSPUFDUQPQVMBUJPOLFZBTTFUT
t &OGPSDF$FBTFöSFT
t &OTVSF5FSSJUPSJBM*OUFHSJUZ
t %FMJWFS4VTUBJO&TTFOUJBM$PNNPEJUJFT
Political Settlement
Foster Host Government 
Capacity & Legitimacy
t 3FGPSN4FDVSJUZ1PMJDF+VTUJDF4FDUPST
t 4VQQPSU&OHBHFNFOU3FDPODJMJBUJPO
 1SPDFTTFT
t 'BDJMJUBUF1PMJUJDBM1SPDFTTFT3FFTUBCMJTI
 (PWFSONFOU.BDIJOFSZ
  Figure 10.7 – The Stabilisation Model
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
169
within the bounds of the UK’s political purpose and they 
must support its longer-term objectives.  As the campaign 
progresses, the locations and relative weight of effort will 
also shift.
1054 Focusing Campaign Objectives on Decisive 
Groups.   In JDP 5-00 a campaign objective is defined as ‘a 
goal, expressed in terms of one or more decisive conditions…their 
collective achievement represents the campaign end-state…LoO 
are used to visualise the relationship between decisive conditions, 
campaign objectives and, by inference, the end-state .’
20  Many 
campaign plans use LoOs that are focused on security, 
governance and economic development.  An alternative 
approach that may be useful is to focus the campaign 
objectives and resultant LoOs on the decisive groups, as it is 
the influence brought to bear on them which will rebalance 
the conflict relationship and achieve a positive outcome.
21  
The sum of comprehensive measures required to influence 
each group can be defined in decisive conditions, which 
should ‘reflect the inter-dependencies between individual decisive 
conditions and the relationship between each condition, the 
operational CoGs and campaign objectives’
.22  As was explained 
in Chapter 9, CoG analysis can be used to identify the decisive 
groups and their critical capabilities and vulnerabilities, from 
which decisive conditions can be derived.  If the decisive 
groups form the focus of campaign objectives, such outputs 
of CoG analysis can be captured in a campaign plan.  However:
• Developing the understanding of groups, their 
motivations, allegiances and aims takes time.  A feel for 
the cultural traditions of the nation, its people and the 
environment is also critical.
• Understanding will usually need to be developed on the 
ground, probably drawing upon indigenous expertise.
• At the outset of campaign design, lack of understanding 
may preclude the effective focus on decisive groups.  This 
will need to be developed as the campaign progresses.
Key:
Size of circle represents weight of effort in time and space.
 Economic  Security  Governance
Map A: Key centres of political Influence and 
economic resources.
Map B: Localised tailored approach required 
to attain political settlement.
Country ‘X’
Province ‘A’
Province ‘B’
Province ‘C’
Province ‘D’
District  ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
District ‘C-1’
Country ‘X’
Province ‘A’
Province ‘B’
Province ‘C’
Province ‘D’
District  ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
District ‘C-1’
ovince D
n
nce D
nce D
alised tailo
Dist
Province ‘B’
n
P i
Province A
ountry Y
d l
 
  Figure 10.8 – Localised Approaches to Influence
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
170
1055 Stabilisation Decisive Conditions.  Where campaign 
objectives are achieved by a co mbination of local conditions 
leading to a political accommodation, these local conditions 
may be viewed as decisive conditions (i.e. the localised 
approaches represented in Figure 10.8).  Although this is a 
military term, it should not be seen or defined as a military 
condition but rather a cross-government one.  (The FCO, 
DFID and Stabilisation Unit will have their own equivalent 
terminology to decisive conditions – see Figure 10.5).  The 
important element in campaign planning and management is 
to ensure that this level of acti vity (decisive conditions), which 
might largely be planned and managed on discrete LoOs, is 
properly coordinated, synchronised and resourced across all 
LoOs.  For example, activity on a development LoO must be 
coordinated and cued with the security LoO in order to move 
from Hold to Develop.  Equally, activity to isolate and neutralise 
one decisive group might need to be coordinated with an 
accommodation or empowerment of another.  Activity on any 
one LoO should complement activity on the others.  If it fails 
to do so, a gap will develop between the LoO that adversaries 
and competing elites can exploit.
Northern Ireland
The UK Government made the decision to improve 
the poor housing conditions in the Province.  These 
conditions principally affected the Catholic community 
and it was hoped that by removing one of their legitimate 
grievances the local population’s support for the Irish 
Republic Army would diminish.  Such activity could 
have been viewed as a LoO focused on the Catholic 
community.  However, Protestant groups seized on this as 
an example of discrimination and used it to rally support 
for their negative perception of Westminster’s policy.  This 
may have been because the implications of the activity 
on one group (the Catholic community) was not readily 
identifiable on another (the Protestant group), and thus a 
gap appeared.
1056 Supporting Effects.  Supporting effects realise 
decisive conditions.  They are achieved primarily through 
tactical operations but, like decisive conditions, they 
should not be seen as exclusively a military activity, but a 
combination of human security, host nation governance and 
economic effects.  Figure 10.9 shows how coordinated activity 
to deliver supporting effects drawn from the Stabilisation 
Model are, in turn, brought together in order to achieve a 
decisive condition.
Political
Settlement
Security
Economic Governance
Decisive Condition: 
A specific combination of circumstances deemed 
necessary to achieve or support the desired condition              
Supporting Effects
Coordination at ALL Levels
Security
Inflence Groups
   
Neutral Hostiles
Provide Public Order
Ensure Territorial Integrity
Deliver and sustain 
essential commodities
Foster Governance, 
Capability, Legitimacy
SSR
Support  Engagement and
Reconstruction processes
Facilitate Political Processes
Rebuild Government
Machinery
Economic Stimuli
Basic Services
Economic and Financial
Mangement
Development of 
Infrastructure
  Figure 10.9 – Stabilisation Decisive Conditions
20. See JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition), paragraphs 230 and 237.
21. See paragraphs 243-249.
22. See JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition), paragraph 232.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
171
Campaign Schematics
1057 Visualising a Theatre Integrated Campaign Plan.  
The commander will need to articulate the purpose, priorities 
and resources in the plan and, where necessary, arbitrate 
over-competing interests.  Various techniques can be used.  
A traditional campaign schematic using decisive groups as 
the campaign objectives is one, but notable in the Crocker/
Petraeus plan is the method adopted to visualise the plan on 
a map.  This showed how activity across LoOs was integrated 
and focused in order to satisfy local requirements in time 
and space, allowing cross-govern ment actors to visualise the 
plan – an important attribute.  An example of such a theatre 
integrated campaign plan briefing schematic is at Figure 10.10.  
Military readers will note that the traditional campaigning 
symbol of decisive conditions or supporting effects has been 
replaced by the stabilisation model spheres.  Their relative size 
indicates the weight of effort between security, governance 
and economic measures over time.
1058 Conceptualising the Campaign Plan for 
Key Audiences.  Traditional military campaign design 
is impenetrable to most civilian audiences.  Instead, 
commanders and staff should find words and images that 
explain clearly and convincingly what they are trying to 
achieve.  The model that General Petraeus used to articulate 
his strategy to target al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) for audiences such 
as Congress is at Figure 10.11.
Province‘C
Province‘
District ‘C-1’
Country ‘X’
Province‘A’e‘A’
Province‘B’n
Province‘C’
Province‘D’
District ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
District ‘C-1’
Country ‘X’
Province‘A’e‘A’
Province‘B’n
Province‘C’
Province‘D’
District ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
District ‘C-1’
Operational  Art
Short-Term Medium-Term End-State 
Stability Sustainable Localised National 
Economic
Security
Continued Engage
Country ‘X’
Province‘A’
e‘A’
ProvrovovivivinP nP ce‘B’ce‘B’eBeB
nn
C’
D’
District ‘A-1’
Country ‘Y’
dStable  State
ntry Y
Province
nce‘D’
vin
nc
ce D
ce DeD
ntry Y
y
D
Province
nce‘D’
vin
n
ce DeD
DeD
Government
  Figure 10.10 – Campaign Shifting in Emphasis over Time
“The Afghan Development Zones (ADZs)… were designed 
to get at the psyche of the population so that they would 
support their government…We then had to string that 
together by selecting ADZs (one or two per Province) and, to 
make the whole package deliverable, we needed to establish 
a mechanism in Kabul to support it.  We therefore created 
the President’s Policy Action Group.  This involved weekly 
meetings of key Afghan ministers who were involved not only 
in security but reconstruction and development, economy, 
counter narcotics, finance and foreign affairs.  It was an 
internationalised War Cabinet and, as it depended so much 
on international support, it included representatives from 
organisations like the UN and the World Bank, as well as the 
military and the ambassadors from interested nations.  This 
enabled us to produce a coherent comprehensive approach 
to the problems in theatre.”
23 
Oil-Spots in Action – Afghanistan
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
172
Planning Coordination
1059 Supported and Supporting Relationships.  The 
established military concept of supported and supporting 
relationships can be used to describe the primacy of 
security, economic or governance effort at any given point 
in time.  Where activity is focused on population centres, the 
supported – supporting relationship will evolve as the 
security situation improves; and economic and governance 
activities assume a greater weight of effort.  Relationships 
will also change as a result of transitions, discussed further in 
Chapter 11.
1060 Organisational Requirements.  Planning meetings 
and committees will need to be organised into a battle 
rhythm.  These include Comprehensive Policy Planning 
Groups, Joint Force Planning Gr oups, bespoke Staff Planning 
Groups and Joint Effects Meetings (which inform a Joint 
Coordination Board to plan, prioritise and synchronise 
targeting activity to achieve a specific influence).  In order 
to synchronise outputs and to deliver integrated effects, the 
composition of these bodies is adjusted to ensure appropriate 
multinational, civil and host nation partners’ representation.  
Collocation of key organisations and individuals makes this 
much easier to achieve.  Technology should be exploited to 
enhance integration where this is not possible; video tele-
conferencing, for example.  Decisions on the location of cross-
government headquarters will drive the requirement for CIS 
infrastructure and liaison.
1061 Civil - Military Integration.  Even when a civil-
military headquarters has been established, it may be 
necessary to retain some degree of separation as different 
organisations operate under different legislation and policy.  
There is also a need for organisations to be auditable and 
to manage staff in accordance with their own conditions of 
service.  However, separation should be minimised and the 
planning process as inclusive and comprehensive as possible.  
This inclusive approach will be  underpinned by four guiding 
principles: proactive engagement; shared understanding; 
outcome-based thinking and collaborative working.
24  The 
key to achieving coherent planning is to ensure that effective, 
integrated C2 mechanisms are established at all levels.  The 
23. Lieutenant General Sir David Richards, Commander International Stabilisation Force IX – 
Post Operational Tour Interview dated 29 May 2007.
24. JDP 0-01 (3rd Edition) British Defence Doctrine, paragraph 137.
Work with 
Source Countries
Border Ports of Entry
Improvements
Counter-Terrorist
Force Ops
Conventional
Force Ops
Iraqi Conventional
& Special Force Ops
Sons of Iraq
Counter 
Ethno-Sectarian
Pressures
Tribal Awakenings
Political
Reconciliation
(Laws/Policies)
Intel Fusion
Armed Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles
Intel, Surveillance and Recce 
Platforms
Counter-
insurgency
 in Detention 
Facilities
Detainee
Releases
Religious
Engagement
Education
Jobs Programs
Services
Syria
Engagement Strategic
Communications
Information
Operations
Internet
AQI NEEDS
Weapons
Foreign
Fighters
Safe
Havens
Popular
Support
Ideology
Command and 
Control
Money
AQ Senior Leader
Guidance
Ansar
al Sunna
Other
Groups
AQIAQI
Kinetics
Politics
Intelligence
Detainee
Ops
Non-Kinetics
Inter-agency
  Figure 10.1 1 – Multinational Force – Iraq Conceptualising Model
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
173
sequencing and synchronisation of decisive conditions with 
civilian counterparts in order to achieve campaign objectives 
is the key part of this process.  Both decisive conditions and 
campaign objectives however, may take time to deliver.  
In order that a datum for progress can be set, additional 
short-term objectives, consistent with the campaign plan, 
such as supporting effects and other activity, may need 
to be established.  These should be Specific, Measurable, 
Achievable, Relevant and Timely – SMART.
Lines of Operation
1062 Military Objectives and Lines of Operation.   The 
military will produce their OPLAN or OPORD to support the 
cross-government stabilisation plan or any theatre integrated 
campaign plan.  An example is the Multinational Corps (Iraq) 
Plan.
25  The military plan will describe how to achieve decisive 
conditions and campaign objectives made at the higher 
(theatre) level.  The delivery of military effects will require the 
commander to coordinate his activity across other generic 
LoOs – security, governance and economic development – 
so that he can sequence, synchronise and resource military 
activity across his area of operations.
1063 Candidate Lines of Operation.  LoOs will be 
selected to fit the purpose.  The military are likely to be 
focused on four key areas of activity drawn from the 
Stabilisation Model at Figure 10.7.  These may form 
candidate LoOs within a military plan:
• Establishing a Secure Environment.  Experience has 
shown that to be successful in stabilisation, military 
operations need to focus on the population in order to 
provide human and physical security.  Such operations 
should not only focus on the local population alone, but 
also on the civilian commun ity engaged in stabilisation 
activities since it is essential to enable non-military 
organisations to implement the economic and governance 
measures that deliver long-term stabilisation.  Although 
operations to secure base areas
26 may have a defensive 
characteristic, these are not static tasks.  Some offensive 
operations will be required to maintain the initiative and 
write-down adversaries.  Initially, operations to secure 
populations are likely to focus on securing key centres 
of political, military and economic importance, such as 
ports, power-stations and communication centres.  Once 
secured and controlled, these areas, will need to be 
expanded so as to demonstrate tangible progress 
 to the local population.  Such expansion will require 
further security mass and the integration of indigenous 
security forces.
Unbalancing the Insurgent
‘To be effective therefore, we have to help change the 
local context so people are more attracted to building 
and protecting their communities than destroying them.  
Leverage, economic initiatives and routine jirgas with 
community leaders to employ young men and develop 
peaceful means to resolve outstanding issues; create viable 
local alternatives to insurgency.
At the same time, it would be naive to ignore the fact that 
the enemy often gets a vote on how we focus our time and 
energy.  This is certainly the case in times of high kinetic 
activity as well as in the areas where the shadow government 
influences the population.  There is clearly a role for precise 
operations that keep the insurgents off balance, take the fight 
to their sanctuaries and prevent them from affecting the 
population.  These operations are important, but in and of 
themselves, are not necessarily decisive.’
Commander ISAF’s Counterinsurgency Guidance, 
Augus
t 2009
• Isolate and Neutralise Adversarial Groups.  Offe nsive 
activities to isolate and neutralise adversaries will be 
required.  At the same time, the introduction of wider 
comprehensive measures should undermine the 
adversaries’ support base.  It is through a combination 
of attrition and marginalisation, that either an 
accommodation can be leveraged, or the adversary can 
be rendered irrelevant or increasingly vulnerable.
• Establishing Territorial Integrity.  Any viable state 
must be capable of establishing and maintaining its own 
territorial integrity.  Fragile or failed states, however, tend 
to be incapable of guaranteeing their own territorial 
integrity, which prolongs state fragility.  Porous borders 
threaten security by allowing adversaries to exploit 
sanctuaries in neighbouring countries.  Lack of border 
control also denies the government vital tax and excise 
revenue, and encourages the black economy.  Efforts to 
improve border control need to be cross-governmental 
and multinational.  While th e military can develop some 
capacity, wider governance and economic measures will 
be critical in developing the border control system that 
includes its administration, le gal authority and the ability 
to collect and manage re venue without corruption.
25. Issued by Lieutenant General L Austin, Commander, Multinational Corps -Iraq, 10 May 
2008.
26. Drawn from Thompson’s Principles of Counter-insurgency (COIN) – in the guerrilla phase 
of an emergency, a government must secure its base areas first.
27. Such as the Concerned Local Citizens forces created in Anbar Province, Iraq during early 
2007 onwards. 
28. Such operations should take place in close cooperation with the host nation authorities.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
174
• Capacity Building and Security Sector Reform Tasks.  
A fundamental task will be to develop and support a 
durable, legitimate and effective indigenous security force 
that is capable of managing the security situation on its 
own.  Indeed, this will be a key determinant of campaign 
progress as indigenous forces take over from international 
forces via transition.  In the short to medium-term, 
the Security Sector Reform (SSR) programme needs to 
generate the mass to supplement the international forces, 
and then integrate the newly created indigenous security 
force units into the overall mission.  This both creates 
the necessary mass required to secure the environment, 
and helps establishing legitimacy.  It will also improve 
intelligence by exploiting lo cal knowledge and helping to 
overcome cultural and linguistic barriers.  The long-term 
objective is to transition authority and responsibility for 
security to the indigenous security force.  Planners need 
to address the issues set out in Chapter 5 Section III, and 
Chapter 6 Section II.
• Information Operations.  Given their pivotal 
contribution, the commander may wish to accord 
information operations their own separate LoO.  If so, this 
LoO will need to be coordinated with other partners who 
may also be conducting information operations in support 
of their own activities.
1064 Additional Candidate Lines of Operation.  Other 
campaign LoOs may drive some security operations; for 
example, security support to elections or measures to enforce 
ceasefires.  Additional LoOs that have been used in previous 
military plans include: Influence, Diplomatic, Political, Regional 
Engagement, Rule of Law, Counter-Narcotics, Restoration of 
Essential Services, Transition, Engagement and Reconciliation.
SECTION III
FURTHER PLANNING 
CONSIDERATIONS
Operating Amongst the People
1065 The Need for Mass.  Balancing the requirements to 
protect the population while concurrently neutralising hostile 
groups will always be a challenge.  Generating a security force 
that has the mass and capability to satisfy these concurrent 
requirements is a key component of planning and force 
design for any stabilisation campaign.  Previous campaigns 
would indicate that there is a critical mass, below which the 
combined capability of internat ional and indigenous security 
forces are unlikely to be effective in delivering improved 
security, and persuading a local population of their credibility.  
Some historical analysis on force densities is at paragraph 229.  
These densities may be generated by, for example, building 
indigenous security force capacity; raising local tribal security 
forces,
27 by re-tasking forces rapidly from areas that can be 
held with a lower security profile; or by the use of international 
and indigenous surge forces.  Economy of force operations are 
unlikely to succeed.  There is usually a need to build sufficient 
force density quickly in order to consolidate gains and to 
deliver persistent security.  Insufficient mass is likely to result 
in loss of the initiative and a tendency to become fixed in 
isolated locations.
1066 Security Force Capacity.  The size of the force (its 
mass) and the capacity to employ that mass effectively – the 
means – are the factors which, when effectively combined 
give it the momentum  to change the dynamics of security.  
Contact with the people, gained for example by patrolling 
in the populated areas and effective engagement with local 
leaders, as well as by embedding mentors and trainers in 
indigenous security forces, will be an important component of 
force capacity.  So too are the means available, for example, for 
population control.  The ability to stop and search, constrain 
vehicle and population movement, or employ curfews (which 
clearly has significant political impact) or detain suspects 
are examples of population control measures that will affect 
the ability of a force to contribute to effective security 
operations.
28   Technology also – for example the ability to 
use biometric data for population screening – may enable a 
given force to operate more effectively.  So too will the use 
of money (such as US CERP funds) for security effect.  Access 
to timely, actionable intelligence, which itself is likely to flow 
from frequent and effective contact with the local population, 
will be the critical factor in enabling security forces to gain the 
momentum in this competition for security.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
175
1067 Persistent Security.  To be effective over time, a 
favourable perception of the security situation must pervade 
throughout the Joint Operations Area (JOA).  To achieve this, 
once an area has been secured, it must be held as failure 
to do so will result in a loss of confidence in the security 
forces.  A lack of persistence undermines the perception of 
the host nation and international forces’ ability to protect 
the population.  Where areas were once secured, but not 
subsequently held, the adversary may inflict retribution or 
intimidate inhabitants.  Therefore, prior to investment into an 
area, a plan to generate and maintain persistent security, and 
to kick-start development activity will be required.
1068 Adopting an Incremental Approach.  To achieve the 
force ratios and persistence required, an incremental approach 
to security may be necessary.  Initial investment in softer areas 
may be advantageous before moving into the heartlands of 
hostile groups.  For example, securing areas that are in danger 
but, as yet, have not fallen under the control of the adversary 
may be a priority for early investment.  This may have to be 
balanced with conducting concurrent punitive activities 
against the adversary in other contested areas in order to 
isolate and neutralise him.  Such an approach may generate 
a number of quick-wins  that can help develop positive 
perceptions amongst local, domestic and international 
audiences, generating momentum in the campaign, while 
allowing the force to consolidate.  It also provides the time 
and space necessary to build capacity within the indigenous 
security force, before committing them to the fight.  Once 
sufficient force-levels and capabilities have been developed, 
further operations with indigenous security forces can be 
conducted to secure the heartlands.
1069 Competing Demands and Risk.  Competing 
demands will require commande rs to identify and manage 
risk.  For example, on the one hand, the need to satisfy the 
political pressure to limit casualties may demand high levels 
of force protection and a stand-off approach; on the other 
hand, to gain the confidence of the local population the 
force will have to engage in face-to-face contact with them.  
Commanders will need to identify where risk exists and be 
able to articulate it up the command chain.  They will then 
need to manage that risk.
29 
1070 Managing Economic Risk.  There will also be risk 
when implementing economic measures and balancing short 
and long-term needs of the population.  These 3 areas should 
be considered:
• Bias.  The apparent disproportionate allocation of 
economic resources to one group of the population may 
inadvertently stimulate grievances in another.  Great care 
needs to be taken to assess the likely impact of economic 
measures; with an assessment taken across the whole 
community, and not just on those to whom the measures 
are being applied.
• De-stabilising the Economy.  The introduction of some 
economic measures may inadvertently and, sometimes 
rapidly, de-stabilise the local economy.  In Iraq for example, 
the practice of paying the locally employed contractors in 
US dollars quickly caused inflation and created distortions 
in the market, which the local population could not 
 cope with.
• Unbalancing the Social Class Structure.  The short-
term and expedient employment of the professional and 
educated classes by international forces can compete 
with the host nation’s needs.  In Kosovo, most interpreters 
employed by the international community were teachers, 
lawyers or similarly educated professionals.  Their pay far 
exceeded that of their professional peers who were being 
paid by the fledgling government, and so their skills, 
essential for the development of the human capital of the 
country, were misdirected.
1071 Corruption.  Corruption is present in fragile states, 
and is endemic in fail ing and failed ones.  Indeed it could be a 
major contributor to the state’s decline and, if left unchecked, 
may remain a significant threat to recovery.  Corruption 
is invariably difficult to eradicate.  Where it exists, there is 
a hierarchy that can encompass the whole of society.  In 
some cultures, certain levels of what may be considered 
corrupt practices will be perfectly normal in the eyes of the 
indigenous population.  However, where it begins to effect 
the pace and efficiency of the recovery, it must be addressed 
through administrative, judicial and legislative measures.  If it is 
perceived that the UK and multinational forces are associated 
with corrupt organisations, our legitimacy will also be 
tarnished and international forces will lose the support of 
the population.
30
Force Protection
1072 Force protection is a key enabling activity to sustain 
operational effectiveness and generate freedom of action.  
A failure of force protection at the tactical level can result in 
casualties, which may have a disproportionate impact at the 
29. See JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition), Appendix 2H1.
30. For example, in Vietnam, the South Vietnamese government was widely regarded as 
corrupt by its population and this discredited many of the initiatives which the US 
sought to introduce through it.
31. Defined by AJP-3.14 Allied Joint Doctrine for Force Protection as ‘measures and means to 
minimize the vulnerability of personnel, facilities, materiel, operations and activities from 
threats and hazards in order to preserve freedom of action and operational effectiveness’.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
176
political or strategic level.  For example, the use of Improvised 
Explosive Devices (IEDs) against coalition forces in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, the number of casualties that they have inflicted, 
and the resultant media and public attention illustrates the 
importance of force protection. However, balance is required.  
Becoming fixed, isolated or losing our agility because of force 
protection is likely, in fact, to increase our vulnerability.
1073 In planning, joint force protection 31 is predominantly 
an iterative risk management activity that requires a thorough 
J2 assessment of all possible threats and hazards.  The detailed 
threat assessment must then be analysed to determine a 
range of measures to counter the identified threats and 
hazards.  These measures will comprise a balance of proactive 
or offensive means, and reactive or defensive means 
depending on the severity of the threat.  In a multinational 
and multi-agency environment, this process is complicated 
by varying levels of acceptance of risk and hence differing 
approaches to force protection.  The Joint Force Commander 
may also have to consider the force protection of OGDs, 
Non-governmental Organisation (NGO) and International 
Organisations in order that they may continue to be effective 
and to achieve the campaign end-state.  Coordination at the 
planning stage is essential to providing a coherent approach, 
including appropriate battlespace management, across the 
JOA.  Specific guidance on force protection is provided in 
Allied Joint Publication-3.14 Allied Joint Doctrine for Force 
Protection and JDP 3-64 Joint Force Protection .
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
177
SECTION IV
INTEGRATION OF 
THE FORCE
Design and Composition of the Force
1074 To date, western standing military forces have 
generally been configured for state-on-state industrial warfare 
and so, at the start of any stabilisation campaign, it is likely 
that the force will have to be adjusted and new capabilities 
created.  This is in contrast to conventional warfare where 
force packages are assembled from already-trained force 
elements held at readiness.
1075 Force design will impact how military activity is 
conducted and may trigger changes in individual and unit 
roles, their composition, their equipment, their operating 
procedures and their training.  These changes will only deliver 
the operational effect sought if the force design is right.  If the 
initial deployment of the force is on the basis of a contingent 
intervention operation which then transitions to a stabilisation 
campaign (e.g. Iraq 2003 – 2004), then the force may have to 
adapt its approach, structures, equipment, and composition 
in contact.  Equally, since the operational context will evolve, 
so the security force will need to adapt; force design and force 
adaptation are separate, but linked activities.  Even the best 
designed force must remain agile, adaptive and responsive to 
the ever changing demands of the operational theatre.
1076 The initial composition and any need to adapt the 
force should be one of the major deductions to fall out of the 
commander’s analysis.  A typical force composition is likely to 
contain the following generic elements:
• Framework Forces.  Framework forces enable and 
conduct the bulk of the routine security operations.  
They will largely be focused on securing key installations, 
locations and population centres.  Units will normally have 
their own areas of responsibility and should be capable of 
autonomous action.  Likely tasks include:
• Population Security.  Som
 e elements of the force 
will conduct operations that directly protect the 
population.  This means living amongst the people.  
Involvement over time provides enhanced knowledge 
of, and an intuitive feel for, their specific area.  The 
aim is to become as confident and competent when 
operating in this environment as the adversary.  The 
integration of indigenous security forces as quickly as 
possible is essential.
• Infrastruc ture Se curit
 y.  Another element will 
conduct the control activities necessary to secure 
essential infrastructure and facilities.
• Manoeuvre Outreach.  A manoeuvre element will 
att
empt to create security throughout the area of 
operations by their presence within it.  The manoeuvre 
element should conduct routine presence patrolling, 
normally from secure locations, and should be capable 
of gathering informat ion for intelligence.
• Strike Forces.  Strike forces are used against high-value 
targets, and often in depth.  They should be resourced 
and trained according to the task, and will need to act 
‘As long as the insurgent has failed to build a powerful 
regular army, the counter-insurgent has little use for heavy, 
sophisticated forces designed for conventional warfare.  For 
his ground forces, he needs infantry and more infantry, highly 
mobile and lightly armed; some field artillery for occasional 
support; armoured cavalry, and if terrain conditions are 
favourable, horse cavalry for road surveillance and patrolling.  
For his air force, he wants ground support and observation 
planes of slow speed, high endurance, great firepower, 
protected against small-arms ground fire; plus short-takeoff 
transport planes and helicopters, which play a vital role in 
counter-insurgency operations.  The Navy’s mission… is to 
enforce blockade, a conventional type of operation that 
does not require elaboration here.  In addition, the counter-
insurgent needs an extremely dense signal network.
The counter-insurgent, therefore, has to proceed to a first 
transformation of his existing forces along these lines, notably 
to convert into infantry units as many unneeded specialised 
units as possible.
The adaptation, however, must go deeper than that.  At some 
point in the counter-insurgency process, the static units that 
took part initially in large-scale military operations in their 
area will find themselves confronted with a huge variety of 
non-military tasks which have to be performed in order to get 
the support of the population, and which can be performed 
only by military personnel, because of the shortage of reliable 
civilian political and administrative personnel…They have to 
be organised, equipped and supported accordingly’.
As David Galula wrote in 1964:
32
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
178
on high-grade intelligence.  Although these strikes are 
usually kinetic, they should be supported by information 
operations either before, or where the interests of 
operational security require it, immediately after the 
completion of their task.
• Surge Forces.  Surge forces are deployed to reinforce 
framework forces in order to achieve specific effects.  
 They can be a separate part of the overall force package 
and based over the horizon, or in-country and redeployed 
where needed.  They can be used in support of Strike 
forces, or as a reserve for a specific operation.  Although 
good for achieving temporary localised mass, they 
lack the finely tuned awareness of framework forces 
and will require liaison officers, continuity personnel or 
local security forces attached to them to provide local 
knowledge.  Alternatively, surge forces can be generated 
by output from the SSR process.
• Capacity Building Task Forces.  These forces are made 
up of specialists who, subject to policy, are likely to be 
embedded in host nation units.  If they are, they must 
be capable of ensuring their own force protection, but 
must be trained, equipped and resourced to carry out 
their primary function as trainers, advisers and embeds,
33 
even in non-permissive security environments.  They 
should have a deep cultural understanding of the 
local population and will need to build robust working 
relationships with them.  They are likely to have to work in 
demanding, often spartan conditions.  In order for them 
to be effective, the commander must ensure that he has 
fully resourced the necessary force protection and risk 
mitigation measures for what are often small, detached 
and isolated groups.  They may also deliver capabilities, 
such as air support and medical, that the local forces lack.
• Special Forces.  By virtue of the quality of their personnel 
and their high level of training, Special Forces (SF) are 
ideally suited to fighting irregular forces in complex terrain, 
and for gathering inte lligence.  As they are a scarce and 
valuable resource, they are employed in accordance with 
some enduring principles,
34 the foremost of which is that 
they are employed for strategic effect.  This often means 
they are used in support of the theatre level main effort, 
which may not be the stabilisation line of operation or 
indeed in the UK’s Area of Operations at all.  However, 
with their broad spectrum of roles,
35 capabilities and core 
characteristics 36 they can represent a significant force 
multiplier for the operational commander.  They have a 
critical role in shaping the operational environment and 
setting the conditions for the entry or engagement by the 
main force.  The following points should be considered:
• As SF activities are planned and executed in pursuit of 
stra
tegic objectives, they will always be commanded 
at the highest level.  This can create tensions at the 
operational and tactical levels as SF are likely to 
operate in the same battlespace as other forces.
• SF strike activities are likely to be specifically targeted 
at cau
sing maximum destruction to the adversary, 
his leadership and his network.  These activities are 
likely to draw heavily on scarce military resources such 
as Intelligence, Surveillan ce, Target Acquisition and 
Reconnaissance (ISTAR), Human Intelligence (HUMINT) 
and air/aviation assets.
• It is important that the operational commander 
should forg
e a sound working relationship with the SF 
commander and should take him into his confidence 
allowing them to work through issues together.  This 
will allow the activities of all force elements to be 
prioritised and sequenced so as to maximise the 
availability of assets to all users and to minimise any 
potential adverse effects.
• Procedures at the tactical level that help de-conflict 
what is like
ly to be an already cluttered battlespace 
must be worked up so that all force elements can 
pursue their own goals without fear of compromise, 
interference or reprisal.
37 
• Joint Enablers.  Joint enablers, are those elements that 
move, sustain, maintain and support the other elements of 
the force.  This element can often prove to be a very large 
proportion of a stabilisation force and the requirement 
for joint enablers should not be underestimated.  For 
example, in Afghanistan in 2009, the UK commitment was 
split more or less equally between troops interacting with 
the local population, and those in enabling, support or 
staff functions.
32. David Galula.  Counter-insurgency Warfare: Theory and Practice – Adaptation of the Armed 
Forces to Counterinsurgency Warfare , page 93.
33. Sometimes referred to as Operational Mentoring and Liaison Teams (OMLTs) or Military 
Transitions Teams (MiTTs).
34. JDP 3-05 Special Forces Operations lists the principles as follows: employed for strategic 
effect; commanded at the highest appropriate level; use of directives (as opposed to 
Operations Orders in order to encourage mission command); timely decision-making (to 
commit them); access to the highest levels of intelligence; and security.
35. Surveillance and Reconnaissance, Offensive Action, Support and Influence.  JDP 3-05, 
Chapter 2, Section III.
36. Precision, Agility, Tempo, Reach, Endurance, and Risk.  JDP 3-05, paragraphs 208-213
37. An example of this was the Out of Bounds (OOB) system in Northern Ireland.  These 
were imposed with minimal warning on areas of specific interest to Special Forces, 
and restrictions were placed on other users within the designated areas for specific 
periods of time.  This approach ensured that de-confliction between Special Forces 
and framework forces was achieved in time and space, thereby reducing the threat 
of compromise.  Any OOB restrictions were lifted as soon as possible after the Special 
Forces operation was concluded, and this allowed for ‘normality’ to return.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
179
Joint Force Integration – Borneo Campaign, 
1963 – 1966
Borneo has often been described as the ‘helicopter war’ 
because of the way in which this developing technology 
allowed Commonwealth security forces to consistently 
out-manoeuvre their numerically superior opponents.  
Operating out of permanent forward bases, helicopters 
were able to move ground forces rapidly into the heart of 
the jungle to cut off insurgents.  This gave the impression 
that the security forces were everywhere at once and 
had a major psychological impact.  However, these 
helicopters and the ground forces which they supported 
were only the spearhead of a remarkable joint operation.  
The RAF was at the forefront of a logistical supply line 
stretching back to Singapore which was only viable to 
the less heralded efforts of the various Commonwealth 
navies and constant RAF shuttle runs forward.  Further, 
the prospect of RAF offensive intervention deterred the 
Indonesian Air Force and helped maintain escalation 
dominance.  The various roles of the RN were equally 
low-profile, but no less important.  Aside from re-supply, 
the RN helped to keep northern Borneo free from 
incursions from the seaward flank, and worked tirelessly 
up and down the rivers inland where it became a popular 
presence and useful source of intelligence in its own 
right.
38 
1077 Intelligence Surveillan ce Target Acquisition 
and Reconnaissance.  ISTAR staff, capabilities, processes 
and force elements develop situ ational understanding.  An 
integrated system of systems is required to collect, analyse 
and disseminate information that becomes intelligence.  The 
joint, interagency, international demands on the ISTAR system 
are likely to exceed the available capabilities.  Consider:
• Capability will be required throughout the intelligence 
cycle (Direct-Collect-Process-Disseminate) .  An over-
emphasis on collect  should be avoided since other areas 
will have less capacity.  For example, there will probably 
be insufficient staff to process information and produce 
intelligence,
39 insufficient bandwidth to disseminate the 
product, and insufficient Information Systems connectivity 
to access it.  Commanders and staff will therefore need 
to select and manage their information requirements 
carefully.
• ISTAR requires its own command and management 
structure to enable selective exploitation and generate 
greater tempo.
• The range of collection capabilities must be a balance 
between:
• Endurance with responsiveness and flexibility.
• Wide area surveillance against high resolution narrow 
focus cap
abilities.
• Point-to-point systems against those that can be more 
widely net worke
d.
• High cost, highly capable but relatively scarce 
capa
bilities against those that can be fielded more 
widely, in greater numbers and cheaper.
• The precise kinetic attack of physical targets with low yield 
weapons will drive a requirement for commensurately 
higher levels of resolution in our understanding of targets.
• Non-kinetic targeting will place an emphasis on 
understanding that is beyond that seen in more 
conventional operations.
• The ISTAR system must support the measurement and 
assessment of effect in both the cognitive and physical 
domains if support to the targeting process is to be 
effective.
1078 Third Force.  Unlike the UK, some coalition partners 
employ a third force such as a gendarmerie for internal security.  
Their duties include the containment of serious civil disorder.  
This delegates the conduct of routine, community (but high 
risk) policing functions to a separate element of the police 
force.  In the right circumstances, these third force elements 
can lead in the conduct of internal security and population 
control tasks, which will release the military for other tasks.
1079 Specific Focus Task Forces.  Depending on the 
complexity of the threat, there may be a need to develop 
specific focus task forces that target narrow aspects of 
the conflict.  These task forces will usually include cross-
government representation, possibly including the security 
services.  For example, if the adversary has a dynamic IED 
capability, then developing a specific task force that targets 
the whole of the network and IED system may be necessary 
to bring the threat under control.  Areas that could attract 
the creation of specific focus task forces with a diminishing 
military involvement may be: counter-IED, counter-terrorist, 
counter-narcotics and counter-corruption task forces.
1080 Non-regular Militias and Cadres.  As a short term 
expedient to free-up other security resources or to generate 
sufficient mass, the commander may consider the use of 
locally recruited militias and othe r cadres.  Being lightly armed, 
they can provide point security and guard vital installations 
such as government buildings and businesses.  They should 
not be trained or empowered to conduct offensive operations 
nor arrest and detain people.  These militias may be drawn 
from armed civilian groups including concerned local citizens , 
or former irregular parties to the conflict; or they may be the 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
180
rump of the previous indigenous security forces who, hitherto, 
have remained outside of the SSR process.  Should the option 
be considered, the competing advantages and disadvantages 
will have to be carefully weighed and judged; the key 
criterion is that these home guard units must be brought 
under host nation control.  Over time these groups should 
be either formally incorporated into the host nation security 
infrastructure (through the SSR process), or be given new skills 
and returned to civilian occupation through Disarmament, 
Demobilisation and Reintegration.
Air-Land Integration 40 
1081 Recent experience in Iraq and Afghanistan has 
highlighted the requirement for air-land integration in 
the battle against a less sophisticated, yet tactically aware 
adversary.  The success that was achieved came from hard-
won experience, as well as massive investment in technology, 
equipment and joint training.  Consider:
• Conducting effective air-land integration in a multinational 
context will demand greater levels of joint integration 
and training.  This carries at tendant training implications, 
such as the development and practice of commonly 
understood and applied tactics, techniques and 
procedures.
• Planners will need to apply judgement in establishing 
the balance of capability between strike and find assets.  
Often the capability will be present in a single asset, and 
therefore prioritisation will be key.
• There may be inherent problems in developing equally 
successful air-land integration in indigenous forces.  In 
addition to the financial, practical and technical hurdles 
to be overcome, there are likely to be political sensitivities.  
For example, providing this level of capability to a force 
that may be vulnerable to penetration by adversaries 
carries risk.
• Planners need to identify the effect sought, and not be 
prescriptive as to which capability they need, noting that 
the effect could be delivered by a variety of different 
 air assets.
Sustainment and Personnel
1082 Logistics in Context. 41  Stabilisation activity is 
likely to take place within a state with weak or inadequate 
infrastructure.  This complicates logistics.  It also places 
greater demand on the commander as logistic decisions, 
such as basing, will have an impact on his freedom of action.  
The logistic architecture will be shaped by a wide variety 
of factors that may be outside of the commander’s control.  
38. Taken from: Dr Stuart Griffin, Joint Operations: A Short History , March 2005.
39. Fundamentally a human function or activity.
40. For a detailed description of Air-Land Integration, see Joint Doctrine Note 2/08 
Integrated Air-Land Operations in Contemporary Warfare.
41. Logistic planning considerations are covered in detail in JDP 4-00 (3rd Edition) Logistics 
for Joint Operations  and JDP 4-03 Medical Support to Joint Operations  (2nd Edition).
Sustainment of the Force: Investing in facilities to 
sustain a deployed force will present a number of 
paradoxes.  Short 2-3 year planning horizons may drive 
balance of investment decisions towards temporary 
facilities or ad hoc solutions using a mix of military and 
contractors.  Often this leads to the expensive re-
provision of facilities as more realistic timescales emerge.  
These photographs show the water treatment and 
bottling plant in Camp Bastion; an example of the use of 
Contractors Deployed on Operations and the significant 
level of investment that may be needed.  In addition 
to guaranteeing supply, the facility provided long-term 
financial savings and reduced the logistic lift requirement 
along LOCs.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
181
Some issues, (for example clearances for over-flights, basing 
issues and access to port facilities), will require considerable 
cross-government effort to resolve and will be complicated 
by host nation factors.  Once decisions in these areas have 
been made, they are difficult to reverse and can prove very 
costly to change later on.  Early logistic decisions will have 
a long lasting impact on the campaign, the structure of the 
force and the conduct of operations.  The establishment of 
access arrangements – setting the theatre – is important at the 
outset and will require adjustment throughout the campaign 
as the viability and resilience of both basing options and Lines 
of Communication (LOCs) ebbs and flows.
42  Logistics will be 
both a planning factor and a constraint on the commander’s 
freedom of action.
1083 The J4 Contribution to Wider Campaign Effect.  
The J4 contribution can present opportunities to generate 
wider and enduring stabilisation effect.  This can be achieved 
by aligning military logistic planning with the longer-term 
needs of the host nation.  To be successful, it will require 
foresight, simplicity and cooper ation in logistic planning.  
To realise this wider campaign effect, there will be a need 
for visibility and a clear unde rstanding of national, inter-
agency, multinational, NGO
43 and host nation development 
goals.  Such transparency may engender partnerships and 
joint ventures where the more immediate requirements of 
enabling military capability may align and converge with 
medium to longer-term development needs.  Such levels 
of cooperation may also present a more efficient means of 
delivering campaign objectives and sustaining the force over 
time through an interagency appr oach.  These initiatives will 
be subject to considerable friction, and solutions will need to 
have inbuilt agility and redundancy.  Particular attention will 
need to be paid to the issues raised in Chapter 7 with regard 
to stimulating economic growth, as the mere presence of a 
foreign military may destabilis e and unbalance economic and 
infrastructure development activities.
1084 Throughout a campaign, a great deal of money will 
be spent on supplying and sustaining the force.  Where 
feasible, some of this expenditure should be used to develop 
in-country capacity where the military and host nation needs 
align.  In identifying suitable development areas, care has 
to be taken to avoid distorting local markets while ensuring 
that the deliverables are transferable to the local economy 
following redeployment of the force.  It should also recognise 
the need to overturn illegal activities, such as corruption, and 
the threats and risks posed to local producers.  This latter area 
may be tackled through realistic and competitive pricing of 
commodities for joint force sustainment (which represents a 
ready market for the local economy).  Reducing illegal activity 
can be achieved through opportunities to develop alternative 
livelihoods.  Areas fo r consideration include:
• In-country Supply Initiatives.  Over time, and through 
early investment, the need to run expensive, contracted 
hub-and-spoke supply chain operations should be 
reduced and complemented by developing host nation 
capacity to meet the force requirement.  Adopting a 
long-term view of sustainable agricultural development 
may also assist in marginalising illegal markets.  In concert 
with other agencies and contractors, recent operational 
initiatives have incentivised local producers through the 
development of local food crop production, including 
in-country commodity and fuel processing chains.  While 
not entirely military in nature, these initiatives do have 
beneficial spin-offs, but need considerable inter-agency 
cooperation in order to be realised.
• J4 Infrastructure Development.   Where military J4 
requirements for road, power, water and fuel pipelines, 
converge with host nation and interagency development 
aspirations, infrastructure development initiatives may be 
shaped to satisfy all users’ requirements.  For example, the 
production of bottled water within secure and insecure 
facilities both reduces the costly movement of high bulk 
42. Setting the theatre is a US term used to describe the setting up of access and LOCs in 
sustainment design.
43. For example the Peace Dividend Trust is a non-profit making organisation dedicated to 
the idea that effective, efficient and equitable international operations result in cheaper, 
faster and more successful missions, delivering a stronger peace and a more sustainable 
recovery.
44. The use of contracted logistics should stipulate a requirement to recruit and train local 
work forces, avoiding where possible the employment of third country  nationals; an issue 
that may engender resentment due to a lack of local employment opportunity.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
182
- local value products, and enables the development 
of much needed local infrastructure, skills and the 
employment of a local workforce.
44  The requirement 
to maintain and repair local infrastructure must also be 
considered from the outset, so that its development is 
both appropriate and sustainable.
• Developing Human Capital.  Capacity building involves 
the development of things and people.  Neither can work 
effectively in isolation; for example, new, well equipped 
hospitals without trained staff cannot deliver their 
intended services.  Therefore, sustainable development 
also requires capacity to be generated within the host 
nation’s human capital.  A common feature of states with 
instability is a brain drain.  The longer this goes on, the 
harder it is to stop, and the more difficult it becomes to 
reverse.  Consideration must be given to the development 
of human capital throughout all levels of the host nations’ 
blue and white-collar workforce.  J4 can contribute to this 
by engaging local contractors and by using local services.  
Training and mentoring will mitigate some of the short-
term risks inherent in this approach, but the enduring 
effect on stabilisation is self-evident.  This approach will be 
convergent with the initiatives by other actors involved in 
capacity building, for example in SSR.
• Inter-agency Contracting.   Long-term development and 
human capital investment can be achieved through well 
coordinated interagency contracting.  This will includes 
specific caveats on the requirement to let local sub-
contracts, to use local services and to employ local people.  
This may not occur at the outset, but over time, local 
stakeholders must be brought into the process with the 
aim being that the scale of their involvement eventually 
displaces that brought in from outside of the country 
giving them a greater share.
1085 The Logistic Footprint and its Effect on 
Operations.  The traditional way in which logistic lines of 
supply are implemented (1st, 2nd, 3rd and reachback) will not 
always apply in stabilisation.  The logistics architecture will 
be dictated by the security situation; for example, the extent 
to which civilian contractors can freely move around.  The 
complexity of the sustainment, maintenance and joint medical 
plans requires early engagement and logistics planners must 
feature in any joint reconnaissance.  The logistic footprint that 
is established will set limits on the tempo of operations, and 
should be at the forefront of planning.  Logistic infrastructure 
will always be vulnerable to interdiction as well as to regional 
and strategic events, some of which may not be under the 
control of the joint force.  Long lead times and the ability to 
flow men and materiel through the joint coupling bridge 
will determine relative priorities and the art of the possible.  
Further, when operating in a land locked region, the Land 
LOCs may also be subject to commercial pressures and 
prioritisation of movement that are, once again, outside the 
commander’s control.  Tactical constraints imposed by an 
inadequate logistic capability could have operational and 
strategic implications.  Greater reliance on ‘just in case’ logistic 
support, rather than ‘just in time’ will have an impact on the 
physical footprint of the logistic support chain, which must be 
considered in terms of impact on the local community, as well 
as on military capability.
The Adversary Will Attack Our Vulnerabilities
Baitullah Mehsud, head of Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan - an 
umbrella organisation of Pakistani Taliban - told local 
media in early 2007 that he would ‘cut off supply lines for 
Coalition forces.’
‘The leader of al-Qaeda in the Arab Peninsula, Abu Basir, 
claimed that the group has launched a plan to cut supply 
lines serving US forces present in the Arab Peninsula.’  The 
announcement was made by al-Qaeda in the Yemen in 
the 7th issue of its online magazine Sada al Malahem .  This 
was realised by the attacks on the International Security 
Assistance Force (ISAF) warehouses and LOCs inside 
Pakistan in early 2009.
Afghanistan Lines of Communications
Experiences in Afghanistan since 2001 illustrates the 
inherent difficulties and risks associated with complex 
lines of communications, both in-theatre and throughout 
the joint coupling bridge.  Such constraints placed 
emphasis on the need to prioritise sustainment flow and 
maintain a logistic reserve in theatre; as the freedom to 
flow both personnel and material into theatre was critical 
to mission success and vulnerable to both interdiction 
and external factors that inhibit logistic activity.
With the closest Sea Port of Disembarkation being 
located in Southern Pakistan there were significant 
force protection issues and a considerable reliance on 
commercial solutions.  The ability to transport materiel 
500 miles overland through ch allenging terrain was key to 
the maintenance of the force.  These factors, along with 
the added security, customs and political complexities 
of moving military equipment through Pakistan to 
Afghanistan, placed a much greater reliance on resilient 
storage methods and a robust Air LOC.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
183
Communications and Information Systems
1086 Information Exploitation.  Timely information 
is critical to effective decision making and the efficient 
application of resources.  The sharing and exploitation 
of information in order to ga in individual and corporate 
knowledge should be seamless throughout the planning 
process and be continued throughout execution.  The array 
of ISTAR and other data feeds and information can quickly 
lead to information overload.  The commander will need 
to prioritise the limited reso urces available for Information 
Exploitation if he is to gain maximum effect from all the 
information available.
1087 Information Management.  In order to exploit 
information effectively sound Information Management is 
required.  This transcends electronic working practices or 
the delivery of CIS and must be resourced and sufficiently 
prioritised across all functional areas.  The Defence policy for 
information management is described in detail in Joint Service 
Publication 747.  Investment in well-resourced information 
management is important because:
• Poor information management will lead to ineffectual 
information exploitation.
• Without good information management the force will not 
have the ability to generate, store and access its corporate 
memory.
• Without well-resourced in formation management and 
effective information exploitation, the force will not be 
capable of learning and adapting at tempo.
1088 Interoperability.  Multinational and multi-
agency operations necessitates an enhanced degree of 
interoperability.  If the UK is a supporting partner in a 
coalition, it will need to ensure it has connectivity with the 
lead or framework nation.  Equally, if it is to act as the lead 
or framework nation, then it must understand and fulfil its 
attendant obligations to supporting partners.  Whatever 
the case, there will be a premium on interoperability of CIS 
and commonality of tactics, techniques and procedures.  
Difficulties in communicating at the tactical level, as well as 
issues such as electronic counter-measure fratricide, can be 
resolved by developing common procedures, exchanging 
liaison officers and communications equipment.  Early 
consideration of the OPSEC implications is required.
As well as fostering close links between J3/5 and J4 staffs, 
the commander should strive to develop a strong rapport 
with his Civil Secretary.
Protocols, MOUs, Status of Forces Agreements, host-
nation law, contraband, customs regulations will all 
need to be established and will take time and effort to 
negotiate.
LOCs, (strategic, operational and tactical) will be 
particularly prone to strategic and regional ‘shocks’.  It 
may require engagement at diplomatic and strategic 
levels to establish and maintain them.  At the operational 
and tactical level sea, air, road and rail networks, Air 
Dispatch, and ports of disembarkation are all important 
and will impact on the conduct of campaign.
Dependencies for Combat Service Support may include 
not only own forces, but also coalition forces, indigenous 
forces, other entitled personnel (OGDs, NGOs), contractors 
on deployed operations, 3rd country nationals, locally 
employed civilians and detainees among many others.  
The commander may also need to consider the provision 
of essential services to the local population, and 
humanitarian assistance.  The potential for this list to grow 
to unmanageable proportions is often overlooked.  The 
bottom line is that logistic support – in its widest sense – 
is almost certain to include more than just the force itself 
and the level of commitment to it will be governed by 
both expedient and policy.
Force protection of logistic assets can be a major concern.  
The difficulties of providing the myriad logistic support 
needed to sustain the force across a widely dispersed JOA 
should not be underestimated.  It will require significant 
joint, combat and combat support assets, including 
support helicopters, to deliver and therefore must be 
considered as a deliberate operation and not routine 
sustainment business.
Medical considerations such as casualty evacuation 
and clinical guidelines and governance will, in large 
part, impact the planning process.  Multinational 
procedures will need to be established, and MOUs and 
protocols agreed with coalition partners.  Guidelines for 
dealing with host nation, nationals, 3rd party nationals, 
contractors deployed on operations and others will also 
need consideration and agreement.
Commanders’ Aide Memoire for Logistic Planning in Stabilisation
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
184
Enabling Interoperability with Allies – Iraq
“What having Multinational Corps-Iraq Tac [temporarily 
co-located] taught us was that, to work under an American 
Corps Headquarters, you have to get to use American 
software and staff procedures exclusively.  The American 
staffs … will only action requests using their own systems…
It was not until we had enough US staff and SIPRNET 
45 
access that we were able to function as a formation under 
Multinational Corps-Iraq.  My strong advice is that, when 
we put formations under [another country’s] command 
in the future, we must insist on having a fully staffed and 
[appropriately] equipped Liaison Team, not just a couple of 
Liaison Officers and a terminal; which is what we had when 
we arrived…” 
46 
1089 Reachback or Reachout?  Reachback will extend 
the capability of the headquarters, allowing it to tap in to 
additional resources that are not directly allocated to the 
theatre.  However the concept of reachback only to the UK 
is too narrow.  There will be other reachout resources that a 
commander will wish to tap.
• Reachback is traditionally the term used to describe the 
ability to communicate directly back to headquarters 
and other capabilities in the UK.  It can offer a deployed 
force access to information resources not immediately 
available in theatre.  Not only will it provide connectivity 
for those who are preparing to deploy, it should also 
enable connectivity to be established with those who can 
contribute to the clarification of intelligence in theatre.
• When confronted by a globalised conflict, the UK-centric 
focus of reachback may be too constraining.  Rather the 
process should aim to enable a secure global reach to 
any organisation that can contribute to the fight.  In that 
case, reachback is perhaps a less useful term and should 
be changed to ‘reachout’.  To be effective, the process 
must be supported by an appropriately resourced CIS 
infrastructure, which includes sufficient bandwidth.
SECTION V
PRIVATE MILITARY AND 
SECURITY COMPANIES
1090 Private Military and Security Companies (PMSCs) are a 
feature of the contemporary operating environment.  Their use 
by governments and international organisations complicates 
the framework within which commanders operate.  The 
following planning consid erations apply to PMSCs
47 and help 
to distinguish between them and contractors on deployed 
operations.
1091  Although there is little regulation, most British-
registered PMSCs sign up to an industry code of conduct 
which requires them to conduct tasks that are consistent 
45. SIPRNET: Secret Internet Protocol Router Network.
46. Post Operational Tour Interview GOC MND(SE), Operation TELIC 2008.
47. For more detailed guidance on working with PMSCs, commanders should refer to JDN 
1/08 Military Interaction with Private Military and Security Companies .
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
185
with British values and interests.  However, commanders are 
likely to encounter an array of international PMSCs, under 
contract to different governments, not all of whom will share 
our culture, goals or values.  Indeed, our adversaries may 
contract with PMSCs, and others may be contracted for purely 
commercial interests.  All of this increases the complexity of 
the operating environment.
Tensions between Campaign Objectives and 
Contractual Obligations
1092 Participants in conflict are likely to have different 
agendas and objectives, although it  is hoped, within a single 
nation’s contribution that most should be working towards 
similar goals or pursuing common themes.  However, PMSC 
activity will always be contractual while the military approach 
is outcome-focused.  Tensions can arise between them 
when government departments contract PMSCs for security 
or development activities.  The military focus will be on 
campaign progress, whereas PMSCs will focus on meeting 
their contracted performance objectives.
Capabilities and Services
1093 PMSCs offer both armed and unarmed services.  When 
working for commercial clients most will be unarmed, but 
armed capabilities are offered where either the threat or the 
contract requires.  When considering how the presence of 
PMSCs should be managed, the key question should not be 
whether they are armed or unarmed, but whether there is 
scope for some form of adverse impact on the campaign from 
their use.
1094 Armed Capabilities.  PMSC capabilities can range 
from the purely defensive, such as close-protection of 
diplomats, to providing combat support to military operations.  
Two broad capability areas may be considered:
• Security Support.  Armed security support may provide 
protection for personnel or assets worldwide, in support 
of military,
48 governmental and commercial organisations.  
These companies may deliver training packages for clients 
that may include skill-sets that the UK Government would 
consider the prerogative of the military, such as SF and 
Civil-Military Cooperation.
• Military Support.  Some commercial PMSCs are prepared 
to agree contracts that could have an adverse impact on 
the security and political environment of the host nation, 
either through the nature of the capabilities provided, 
or through the manner in which the contract is fulfilled.  
Most British PMSCs would not offer services of this nature, 
and the UK Government would not contract with these 
companies, or for such services.  Mercenary groups still 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
186
exist that offer those who hire them the ability to engage 
in offensive operations. 49 
1095 Unarmed Capabilities.  PMSCs can provide a wide 
variety of services that seek to minimise the operational risk 
to clients operating overseas.  More recently, this category 
has developed security and justice sector capabilities in 
order to compete for stabilisation contracts.  This includes 
the development of SSR and disarmament, demobilisation 
and reintegration programmes.  The broad range of services 
offered by PMSCs to clients,
50 include:
• Training.  Military and police training for governments as 
part of SSR programmes, and security awareness training 
to commercial organisations, civilians and diplomats 
deploying to hostile environments.
• Development.  Services that may include reconstruction, 
governance, mine survey an d clearance, and delivery 
 of aid.
• Intelligence and Research.  Some have the ability to 
provide tailored intelligence and research services.
• Corporate Tracker and Insurance Services.  Based on 
risk analysis and intelligence work, global threat awareness 
and assessment programmes , including provision and 
execution of hostage rescue and extraction plan.
Factors for the Operational Estimate
1096 Private Security Company Analysis.  It is helpful 
for the commander to focus his analysis of PMSCs on some 
specific areas.  This will help him determine the likely risks and 
benefits of interaction with any particular PMSC.  Consider:
• General Background.  Gain an understanding of the 
PMSC, its reputation, culture, history, ethos, other contracts 
and other operating locations, and, if a British PMSC, 
whether it is a member of the British Association of Private 
Security Companies.
51 
• Head Office.  Confirm the location of the PMSC’s Head 
Office and which national laws may apply, and which 
major stakeholders have an interest in the PMSC, including 
Government departments.
• The Client.  Understand with whom the PMSC is 
contracted and over what time.  Develop an awareness of 
the client ethos and attitude, goals, agendas and approach 
to risk.  Determine the likely client responses to a range of 
potential threats or challenges.  Identify the relationship 
between British Armed Forces and the client, and whether 
any responsibilities or liabilities may exist.  Understand the 
different rules and regulations that apply, depending on 
which client
52 sets the contract.
• Capabilities and Services.  Understand the nature of the 
contract, whether armed or unarmed, which services are 
to be provided, and which are not provided.  Understand 
performance parameters and contract management 
procedures.  Identify potential benefits or shortfalls that 
may subsequently have a bearing on military operational 
planning.  Understand the capabilities that the PMSC has 
offered, and has the skills to offer.
• Location.  Determine where the contract is to be 
performed, the threat environment, what support or 
resources may be required, what military facilities exist in 
the area, what potential demands may emerge.
• Employees.   Identify which nationalities are employed by 
the PMSC, what their backgrounds
53 and motivations are, 
their likely ethics and operating procedures, their military 
or law enforcement experience and training, and what 
their national government’s position
54 is relative to the 
crisis at hand.
• Use of Force.  Gain a clear understanding of the PMSC’s 
rules guiding its employees in the use of weapons, 
what weapon training may have been provided, how 
those Rules for the Use of Force relate to the Rules of 
Engagement for UK forces and host nation procedures 
and authorisations for the use of a range of weapons 
from small arms to heavy weapons.  Any such differences 
identified, will need to be reflected in the PMSC 
 Risk Assessment.
• Information Sharing.  Consideration should also be 
given to the obligation (or otherwise) to share relevant 
aspects of threat assessment and other information to 
enhance the survival of PMSCs contracted to, or in support 
of, coalition operations.  Because of the nature of their 
likely tasks, PMSCs may be operating under higher threat 
thresholds that other deployed contractors.  They can be 
useful sources of information, and their threat assessments 
can, in turn, contribute to the clarity of the overall picture.  
It may also be helpful to establish a C2 node to exchange 
information and de-conflict activity such as convoy moves; 
a Civil-Military Operations Centre for example.
48. PMSCs are used by the US government to guard military installations on operations in 
Iraq and Afghanistan.
49. Offensive operations are ‘operations in which forces seek out the enemy in order to 
attack him’.  (JDP 0-01.1 UK Glossary of Joint and Multinational Terms and Definitions  
 (7th Edition)).
50. Increasingly includes the humanitarian sector.
51. Membership of British Association of Private Security Companies implies acceptance of 
its Code of Conduct.
52. For example, in the US system, different procedures apply depending on whether the 
Department of Defense (DOD) or the Department of State sets the contract; only those 
PMSC contracted through DOD may be subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(US Service Law).
53. While UK and US PMSC employees are frequently former UK or US SF or other regular 
military or law enforcement personnel, it has been alleged that some personnel 
employed by other PMSCs may be former Special Police with service under oppressive 
or harsh regimes.
54. For example, South Africa has drafted legislation that would, when enacted, 
 prohibit her citizens from participating in conflicts or crises opposed by the South 
African Government.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

ANNEX 10A
THE HIERARCHY OF PLANS FOR UK 
OPERATIONS IN HELMAND 2005
DFID Country 
Plan
UK Afghan 
Drug Control 
Strategy
MOD Strategic 
Campaign Plan 
for AFG
Interim 
Afghan National 
Development 
Strategy
Afghan 
National Drugs 
Control Strategy
GOA central 
& provincial
plans
UK National 
Strategy for 
AFG
The Helmand
‘Way Ahead’
Paper
PRT Detailed 
Plans
UK Joint Plan
Reviewed 
Autumn 2006
UK Joint Plan 
for HELMAND 
(Draft-December 
2005)
16 AA Bde Plan
US CENTCOM 
Campaign Plan 
for GWOT
CF C-A 
Campaign 
Plan AFG
JFC BRUNSSUM 
PLAN 30302
(June 2005)
HQ ISAF
OPLAN 60032
After hand over 
from CJTF-76 to 
NATO/ISAF
CJTF-76 
Plan for Region 
South - Affects
 PRT
Canadian Task Force 
under command of 
OEF CJTF-76 before 
Handover 
to NATO/ISAF, 
where CA lead 
RC South
International/Multi-lateral Plans
Key to colours/shading:
Government of Afghanistan Plans
UK PlansUS/US-led Plans
US CN
PlansUSAID
and other 
Donors
CJF-76 OP
PLANS until 
hand over to 
NATO/ISAF
NATO/
ISAF RC 
South
CTSC -A 
Plans for ANA 
and ANP
SACEUR OPLAN 
10302
(December 2005)
187
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

ANNEX 10B
ADVISERS AND ANALYSTS
188
10B01 Ministry of Defence Advisers and Analysts.   
There are a variety of advisers and analysts available to the 
commander who will provide him with specialist advice and 
contribute to the planning process within his headquarters.  
Some of these advisers may be serving officers but most are 
MOD civil servants who bring with them specific knowledge 
and expertise that will help the staff develop and refine 
critical elements of the plan.  As well as integrated members 
of his Command Group, the advisers should also prove to 
be a valuable source of contact with other government 
departments and agencies thereby further strengthening 
the bonds that cement the comprehensive approach.  An 
overview of the key responsibilities of each adviser/analyst is 
as follows:
• Defence Adviser.  Defence Analysts are experienced 
civil servants (Band B2 to 1* equivalent
1) who work within 
the host nation’s defence ministry.  Their role is to build 
capacity by working with key defence leaders, both 
politicians and senior civil servants, and advise them 
on how to improve their organisation, develop their 
personnel and implement their plans.
• Policy Adviser.  Policy Advisers (POLADs) are MOD 
civil servants (Band C1 or B2) who work directly to the 
commander.  Their role is a bridging one that ensures 
that national policy takes proper account of the needs 
and views of the deployed commander and, in turn, 
that the deployed commander understands that he is 
acting within Government policy.  They provide advice 
to the commander and staff on the full range of defence, 
national and international policy.  They can also be used to 
support the development of new policy for use within the 
theatre of operations.
• Legal Adviser.  Operational Legal Advisers (LEGADs) 
serving in the UK Armed Forces are qualified solicitors or 
barristers who are likely to have specialised in criminal 
law.  They may have further specialised in another area of 
law notably, international law.  LEGADs overriding duty 
is to provide the commander with accurate, relevant and 
robust legal advice.  They also have a key responsibility 
to guide planners on the principles of necessity and 
proportionality in the use of force.
• Media Adviser.  Media Advisers are senior MOD civil 
servants who provide advice to the commander and 
his Media Operations staff on all aspects of media 
presentation and handling.  They are responsible for 
coordinating theatre media activities with the Permanent 
Joint Headquarters (PJHQ), the MOD Press Office and 
others in order to maximise media potential and to 
complement the UK Information Strategy.  They also 
support the in-theatre military spokesperson.
• Civilian Police Adviser.  The Civilian Police Adviser is 
likely to be a senior MOD police officer whose principal 
role is to provide expert advice on host nation police 
1. Civil Service rank equivalency is as follows: B1/B2: OF5, C1: OF4, C2: OF3, D: OF2, E1/E2: 
SNCO.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

development matters and contribute to the development 
of Rule of Law as an essential element of the wider 
stabilisation agenda.
• Scientific Adviser.  The Scientific Adviser (SCIAD) will be 
a civilian scientist (Band B1 or equivalent) whose primary 
role is to provide independent, broad ranging scientific 
advice to the commander and coordinate all deployed 
science and technology staff.
• Operational Analyst.  Working closely with the SCIAD, 
Operational Analysts will generally deploy in small teams 
and be filled by a spectrum of civil service grades (Bands 
D to B).  Their primary role is to provide the commander 
with advice based upon the analysis and interpretation of 
campaign data.  Operational Analysts primarily support 
the planning function in the headquarters; the J5 branch is 
an appropriate point of integration.
• Civil Secretary.  Generally the Civil Secretary (CivSec) 
is a MOD Band B civil servant holding delegated 
responsibilities from PJHQ Command Secretary.  His role 
is the management of commercial, financial and claims 
functions in an operational theatre.  The CivSec is the 
senior financial adviser in theatre, providing advice and 
guidance on all aspects of financial activities.
• Commercial Officer.  Commercial officers are augmented 
to the in theatre CivSec team to provide commercial policy 
and guidance in accordance with current MOD best policy 
and practice.  They hold sole Commercial Delegation for 
the commitment of funds against commercial contractors 
within their Letter of Commercial Delegation.
• Civilian Intelligence Analyst.  Civilian intelligence 
analysts are generally Band C1 civil servants who fill posts 
within Operational Intelligence Support Groups and other 
bespoke roles in support of national and multinational 
intelligence teams.  Their primary role is to provide high 
grade analysis and assessment of intelligence using their 
expertise and reaching back to the operational support 
teams in the Defence Intelligence Staff (DIS).  They are 
likely to be part of J2, but will be expected to personally 
brief and support the senior commander whenever 
required.
• Defence Estates Commercial Operations.  Deputy 
Director Commercial Defence Estates Operations 
International (DE Commerci al) currently provides 
commercial support to PJHQ and 170 Infrastructure 
Support Group RE (in-theatre and rear-based in the 
UK) for the delivery of infrastructure requirements in all 
operational locations.  The main stakeholders who interact 
with DE Commercial are PJHQ, J4 Infrastructure, PJHQ J8 
Finance Operations, Royal Engineers Works Groups and 
the local CivSec teams.
• Area Claims Officer.  Area Claims Officers provide advice 
on third party compensation claims brought against British 
Armed Forces within the theatre.  To handle, adjudicate 
and settle all property and personal injury related claims 
from third parties arising from on-duty and off-duty British 
Armed Forces activities including fatalities from road traffic 
accidents liaising with CivSec, POLAD, LEGAD and force 
commanders as necessary.
10B02 Other Government Department Advisers.  In most 
circumstances, the Joint Force Commander will have access 
to a number of additional advisers who will be seconded 
from Other Government Departments, or from contract that 
are integrated into his Joint Task Force Headquarters.  A brief 
definition of their roles is as follows:
• Senior Stabilisation Adviser.  The Senior Stabilisation 
Adviser (STABAD) may work in support of a Senior Field 
Team Leader who is working at the strategic level, and 
may in turn coordinate the activities of one or more 
Stabilisation Field Team Advisers operating at the tactical 
level.  He will be a generalist with a broad knowledge 
and experience of designing programmes to bring about 
political stability.
• Governance Adviser.  The Governance Adviser (GOVAD) 
assesses political affairs and governance issues in the host 
nation administration.  Additionally he provides advice 
and assistance with developing strategies across public 
administration, political instit utions, local governance and 
community engagement.
• Rule of Law Adviser.  The Rule of Law Adviser (ROLAD) 
is concerned primarily with the host nation judiciary, 
ministry of justice and courts.  He holds a wide-ranging 
legal and legislative brief and will be an expert in 
institutional reform.
• Development Adviser.  The Development Adviser 
(DEVAD) is an expert in private sector development, 
including having relevant experience of regenerating 
immediate livelihoods.  He will be familiar with the 
planning and implementation of small-scale and 
subsistence agriculture programmes and environmental 
affairs.  He will design and implement job creation 
projects, micro-finance chains of production, as well as 
business training and development programmes.
• Cultural Adviser.  The Stabilisation Unit is currently 
refining the definition for this post, but it is likely to include 
both a cultural and linguistic element.
189
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

CHAPTER 1 1
EXECUTION
190
“The shooting side of this 
business is only 25% of the 
trouble”
General Sir Gerald Templer  
THE CO
NDUCT OF OPERATIONS
Section I  Shape
 The Purpose of Shape
 Engagement Strategy
 Engagement with Neutral and Friendly Groups
 Engaging with Adversaries
 Offensive Operations
Section II  Secure
 The Purpose of Secure
 Focus on the Population
 The Use of Force
 Rules of Engagement (ROE)
 Containing and Disrupting the Irregular Actor
 Targeting and Influence
Section III  Hold
 The Purpose of Hold
Section IV  Develop
 The Purpose of Develop
 Training Indigenous Forces
 Governance
 Economic Development
 Transitions
 Reconciliation
MEASURING CAMPAIGN SUCCESS
Section V  Assessment
 Assessment Categories
 Planning Assessment
 Gathering Evidence for Assessment
 Evaluating Evidence in Assessment
 Using Assessment to Support Decision Making
Annex 11A Developing Indigenous Forces
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

1101 This chapter describes the conduct of military 
operations using a population focused activity framework.  
The framework of Shape-Secure-Hold-Develop  is a 
model designed to enable a shared lexicon, a common 
understanding and characterisation  of stabilisation activities 
in a multi-agency community.  It allows the commander to 
explain his operational design and intent.  He can use it to 
describe what activities are being conducted at any given 
moment, where they are planned to be conducted, and by 
whom.  In this sense, the framework can help operationalise 
the plan.
1102 At the theatre level, this framework is not applied 
in a linear or sequential manner.  Instead, there is overlap 
and concurrency of activity, as areas that have previously 
been secured and held become ready for greater civilian-
led development activity, while elsewhere other areas 
or population groups are still being secured.  Building 
momentum and progress in this way allows the security forces 
to invest in new areas and expand their influence.  In contrast, 
at the tactical level, the framework is more likely to be applied 
sequentially.  Allowing for these differences in approach, the 
framework has utility across all levels of the operation.  In any 
circumstance, within the framework of stabilisation activity, 
conventional tactical military activity will need to take place.  
For example, it will be necessary within Shape-Secure-Hold-
Develop to raid, deter, disrupt, deny, contain, retain, mentor 
and partner in order to conduct our tactical business.
1103 Civilian-led development has a pivotal role in the 
stabilisation process.  Military and civil effort must be aligned 
so that neither is wasted.  This is a key function of the planning 
process (Chapter 10).  A large military force will require a large 
civilian effort to conduct development.  Where the civilian 
force is missing, a new plan will be required.  Hold  is described 
as a separate element of the framework because of the 
inherent risk in the transition from military-led Secure, through 
Hold, to civilian-led Develop.  Hold is a defining moment in the 
campaign; the point at which the weight of effort shifts from 
the military to civilian agencies.  It is critical that this civil-led 
development is planned and cued during Shape  and Secure.  
Hold is the point at which indigenous security forces are likely 
to be invested into the campaign in strength, and where 
they begin to assume formal responsibility for local security.  
In turn, this allows the international forces to progress on to 
other, new areas and begin to Secure them.  It is in this way 
that campaign influence spreads and progress is made.
110 4 The Shape-Secure-Hold-Develop  framework has a clear 
relevance to the US approach of Clear-Hold-Build .  The UK 
version simply reflects the importance we place on Shape  in 
order to develop both understa nding and plans, and to cue 
civilian agency support for subsequent Develop activity; Secure 
reflects a focus on the population rather than just terrain 
or enemy; and Develop is used because it describes more 
intuitively the development of ca pacity, primarily by civilian 
development organisations.  The difference is described 
in more detail in Chapter 4.  The adversary may also have a 
framework for his activity:
This adversary follows the same logic as the UK’s activity 
framework; starting small, consolidating and then 
expanding into new territory.
‘our body has begun to spread into the security vacuum, 
gaining locations on the ground that will be the nucleus from 
which to launch and move out in a serious way’ 
1
‘What has prevented us from going public is that we have 
been waiting until we have weight on the ground and finish 
preparing integrated structures capable of bearing the 
consequences of going public so that we appear in strength 
and do not suffer a reversal.’ 
2 
1105 In Section I, the purpose of Shape and the nature of 
engagement is explained.  Section II deals with Secure and 
offers some considerations for the use of force, and some 
implications of ROE and targeting.  Section III discusses Hold, 
while Section IV addresses Develop activity including training, 
economic development, transition and reconciliation.  Finally, 
Section V, under the heading of Measuring Campaign Success, 
examines assessment.
191
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
1. Abu Musab al-Zarqawi letter to bin-Laden (intercepted February 2004).
2. Ibid.
3. See Chapter 3 – Influence: the Central Idea, for more detail.
4. See Julian Alford and Scott Cuomo, Operational Design for International Security Assistance 
Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan, A Primer Joint Force Quarterly, Issue 53, 2nd Quarter 2009.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
192
THE CONDUCT OF OPERATIONS
SECTION I
SHAPE
Likely Context in which to Shape
• In the opening stages of an intervention, the adversary 
is likely to have mounted a credible challenge to the 
authority of the host nation government.  In certain 
areas, he may hold the initiative in terms of being able 
to offer ‘security’ or ‘protection’ or a ‘viable political 
alternative’ to the population, or to key elements of it.  
Some of this may be real, in the sense that he maintains 
a presence on the ground among key populations, in 
safe havens for example; and some may be perception, 
created by fleeting attacks and his own disruptive 
and influence operations.  He will seek to maximise 
his influence by manipulating all available media 
(for example, the internet, radio and TV images), and 
through the use of coercive means.
• A significant and natural advantage held by the 
adversary is that he will be operating from, and 
among the people that he is claiming to represent.  He 
will already have established a connection with the 
population, and be able to influence them and their 
community leaders through his own narrative and, 
when necessary, his coercive acts.
• The adversary will already have established his 
influence mechanisms and support networks, and have 
developed his Tactics, Techniques and Procedures.  As 
the operation progresses, he will refine and adapt these 
to pitch his strength against our weakness.  He will 
analyse our intentions and our capabilities in detail after 
every encounter, especially if he feels his Operations 
Security (OPSEC) has been breached.
• In developing his narrative and building his influence, 
the adversary will not be constrained by the need or 
desire to tell the truth (as the UK perceive it to be).  He is 
likely to index his words and actions against a different 
set of values and use a different logic to our own.  His 
application of violence is unlikely to be bounded by any 
of the rules of warfare that international forces would 
normally apply.
• In the early stages of the campaign, it is likely that the 
adversary will hold the initiative in the competition for 
the minds of the people.
The Purpose of Shape
110 6 As perceptions, beliefs, attitudes and opinions of 
individuals and groups all matter, so influence becomes the 
guiding reference point for stabilisation.  Shape begins the 
influence process.  It comprises four elements.  These are 
a combination of: developing situational understanding; 
influencing specific audiences to attain specific outcomes in 
planning and resource terms; persuading and empowering 
other actors to make choices that are advantageous to our 
own aims; and conducting limited offensive operations in 
order to keep adversaries off-balance.  All of these elements 
will need to be refined as the operation progresses.  Successful 
Shape will require engagement with groups, actors and elites 
on the widest possible scale using words and messages that 
are backed up by kinetic and non-kinetic activity.
1107 Throughout Shape, influence is central 3 and all activity 
can directly contribute to, or detract from it.  Previously, 
during training for Northern Ireland, units were told that  ‘every 
contact leaves a trace’ .  This holds true; everyone, no matter 
what their level of involvement, will leave some impression, 
however faint.  Since everything said or done exerts a degree 
of influence – good, bad, intended or otherwise – bringing 
structure and order to Shape activity will focus the effort to 
harness desired effects.
• Developing Understanding.
4  The first element of 
Shape is the intellectual engagement to develop an 
understanding of the operational environment.  Some 
US doctrine, notably that used in International Security 
Assistance Force (ISAF) has understand as a separate 
element of the framework: Understand – Shape – Secure 
– Hold – Build .  Cross-government resources must be 
committed to find out what is happening and why, and 
to begin to understand the dynamics.  Understanding the 
adversary is only one aspect of the mosaic; an orientation 
on wider factors, such as history, culture and values is 
also essential.  It is important to identify who are the 
competing elites and who wields true power, which is 
not necessarily the same as those who hold positions of 
authority.  Groups, societies, tribes and allegiances must 
be determined in order to facilitate the development 
of a coherent plan.  The political, social and economic 
dynamics must be mapped in order to exercise influence.  
Empowering the host nation government and gaining 
the support of key elites and the wider population 
will be pivotal.  Traditional enemy-oriented military 
intelligence will be inadequate and it will be necessary 
to adapt existing intelligence structures and build more 
comprehensive organisations, such as the Operational 
Intelligence Support Group.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
193
• Developing Options.  Armed with sufficient 
understanding, Shape activity can become more proactive.  
Commanders can begin to deduce what supportive  and 
coercive effects  are required on specific groups in order 
to alter the operational situation.  Supportive effects are 
used to empower and influence key elites and gain the 
consent of target populations.  Coercive effects are used 
to neutralise adversarial groups, or isolate them from their 
support base, thereby either brokering an accommodation 
on behalf of the host government or setting the 
conditions for their defeat.  Military plans must support 
the cross-government objectives set out in any theatre 
integrated campaign plan.  Commanders need to work 
with both the host nation government and their civilian 
counterparts in order to secure agreement and resources 
for their proposals.  The commander needs to become an 
advocate for cross-government support to the campaign, 
and he should be able to articulate the requirement 
to other partners.  It is largely his own planning that 
determines the requirement, but it is also his personality 
and powers of persuasion that will deliver it.  This is not 
discretionary; it is a fundamental aspect of his role.  Once 
options are agreed, they should be prioritised across all 
Lines of Operations (LoOs).  Each activity in the plan will 
require resourcing and may involve partners agreeing to 
compromise their own activities for the greater campaign 
good.  Partners will bring their effects to bear; in turn the 
military provide resources and secure locations, to support 
those partners in order to enable them to deliver their 
contribution.
• Offensive Operations.  Offensive operations are integral 
to Shape, and have two purposes.  Firstly, they apply and 
maintain pressure on adversaries in order to contain their 
destabilising activities.  Seco ndly, they build intelligence 
that either contributes to understanding or triggers 
further, more precise strike operations.  In this way the 
security forces can keep adversaries off-balance in the 
early stages, and Shape them for more decisive activity 
later in Secure and Hold.  If they do not already have it, it 
is during these latter activities that the security forces will 
wrest the initiative from the insurgents.
Engagement Strategy
110 8 Shape is delivered by an engagement strategy – or 
more accurately, a series of them – which need to bring both 
adversarial and friendly groups into the political process.  
The objective is to build constructive relationships between 
the host nation government, competing elites, and the 
population, if necessary, enabled by the coalition.  Figure 1 1.1 
provides an example of the sorts of triangular relationships 
that are needed to effect a successful engagement strategy.  
The key is that the coalition must both enable and support the 
building of effective relationships between the host nation 
elements, rather than interposing between them.  In practice, 
finding channels to engage with individuals and groups 
may not be the difficulty; there will be direct and covert 
channels to all parties, including exchanges in the media.  
The difficulty is to engage with a purpose, and this requires 
policy to be established as the basis for initial and subsequent 
productive engagement.  For example, an adversary based 
outside the country, tentatively exploring the possibility of an 
accommodation, will wish to know his legal status, should he 
wish to return.  This may demand formulating and agreeing 
a legal and policy mechanism, such as conditional immunity 
for a probationary period prior to full amnesty.  When dealing 
with irregulars, it can be difficult to verify their claims to 
leadership.  This may entail setting tests, such as a tangible 
reduction in violence in a given place, to establish their 
authority and commitment.
110 9 Elements of an Engagement Strategy.  At its most 
complex, the coalition will contribute by forming a series of 
triangular relationships with:
• The host nation government and competing elites.
• Competing elites and the host nation population.
• The host nation government and its population.
• A further, potentially complicating, dimension (not shown 
in Figure 1 1.1) is the need to situate this engagement 
strategy regionally.
1110 Key Leader Engagement.   It is necessary to capture 
the views of community leaders both for the purpose of 
developing understanding of the situation, and in order to 
influence them.  Much of this will be part of a deliberate, 
intelligence-led process to target specific individuals to 
achieve influence upon them and the groups that they lead.  
Some, however, will be less structured; informal gatherings, 
social meetings, discussion groups and impromptu shuras  for 
example.  Some of this engagement can be achieved by the 
commander himself, but it is helpful to spread the burden.  
Deputy commanders, senior staff officers and deployed 
civil-servants can be especially useful in this regard; the 
trick is to apply some discipline to Key Leader Engagement 
(KLE) and then share the information generated.  It may be 
useful therefore to develop a management system for all 
engagement which the intelligence community can also 
access.  Carefully selected cultural and stabilisation advisers
5 
will aid understanding, advise on key leader engagement, and 
extend influence.  There are numerous reasons why the UK 
may seek influence through KLE, examples are:
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
194
• In support of Planning:
• To Secure Agreement for Objectives and 
Resource s
.  It will not be possible to identify all 
objectives, in all time frames at the outset of the 
campaign.  Many will emerge as the campaign 
progresses.  Political and adversary action may 
also force adjustments to the plan.  For the military 
commander, KLE will be necessary with the host 
nation ministries and international organisations 
in order to gain their support and to coordinate, 
synchronise and prioritise activity in order to achieve 
the building blocks of the decisive conditions that 
realise campaign objectives.  This requires powers of 
advocacy to inform and build consensus.  KLE will also 
be necessary to negotiate and prioritise the allocation 
of resources to achieve common objectives.
• In Pursuit of the Political Settlement:
• To Reinforce the Authority of Legitimate Leaders.  
Engaging with c
ertain individuals or groups, such 
as giving them the credit for detainee releases, can 
legitimise their position, while ignoring others can 
weaken theirs.  Transparent engagement with the 
host nation government at every level encourages the 
population to recognise their authority.
• To Restore Confidence and Enable Reconciliation.  
Res
toring public confidence in their government is a 
key objective.  The aim is to engage in concert with 
the government, although in practice this can be 
complex.  The host nation may not have a strategy, or 
it may have a different set of engagement priorities 
whose pursuit may actively obstruct the attainment of 
the UK’s objectives.  Alternatively, the host nation may 
have links to some groups that the UK does not, and 
vice versa.  In Iraq, the coalition had good connections 
to some elements of the Sunni insurgency, whereas 
the Government had better connections to the Shia 
militias.  A mechanism was developed to harmonise 
and exploit both channels.  Engagement to test the 
ground for accommodation is a vital first step towards 
ultimate reconciliation.  The conflict will be settled by 
locals not outsiders, through an agreed framework of 
confidence-building measures.
Key:
  Confidence Building
  Engagement Strategy
  Accommodation or Destruction
  Break the Influence
Coalition
Host Nation
Population
Host Nation
Government
Competing
Elities
SOFA, MOU, Mandate
and Other Formal 
Arrangements
  Figure 1 1.1 – Engagement Relationships
5. See Annex 10B for a description of advisers and analysts.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
195
• In Pursuit of Security:
• To Obtain Intelligence.   Human Inte lligence 
(HUMINT) may be gathered both by specialists and 
through KLE by others.  It will provide texture and 
context, ideally through prolonged and widespread 
engagement and ideally on the basis of personal 
relationships.
• To Deliver Targeted Messages.  Using lo
 cals – 
including tribal and other informal structures – as 
the conduit for messages into their communities has 
greater impact than an outsider delivering the same 
message.  However, the message can be corrupted 
and should therefore be disseminated down multiple 
channels.
• To Provide Feedback.  En gagem
 ent also enables 
those delivering messages to judge whether or 
not they are having their intended effect on target 
audiences.  If properly targeted, it is a valuable, though 
subjective, contribution to campaign assessment.
Engagement with Neutral and Friendly Groups
1111 Leadership.  It can be difficult to identify the 
legitimate leaders within a community, especially in the early 
stages.  It may also be difficult to distinguish between those 
that hold apparent authority, and those who hold positions 
of real influence; the latter matter most.  In some countries, 
ministers are merely bureaucratic functionaries with the real 
Local 
Security Stability Full Governance
and Prosperity
Tactical
Support/ 
Coalition Forces
rewards Meeting with Government of Iraq
Intel
Exchange
Extend tactical support/
Government of Iraq
 rewards
Joint Activity with Iraq 
Security Force
Deal to form Supervised 
Local Security Forces
Detainee releases Amnesty
Economic
DevelopmentProjects
ImprovedservicesEconomic
communityrewards
Oath of 
Allegiance to Iraq
ResultsTrial
period
Cooperation 
with Coalition 
Forces
Review Local
Security Forces:
Incorporate into
Iraq Security Forces 
or
Disarmament 
Demoblisation
Reintregration 
Figure 1 1.2 – Example of a Route to Reconciliati on: Confidence Building Measures Used in the 
 ‘Sons of Iraq’ Engagements in 2007
Engagement Case Study – Sierra Leone
The identification of, and engagement with, key leaders 
within the major influence groups operating in Sierra 
Leone was an integral part of the UK’s operations during 
Operation PALLISER.  The major de-stabilising force within 
the country was composed of a number of street gangs  
who were heavily involved in criminal activity associated 
with diamond smuggling and extortion.  These gangs 
formed loose associations and alliances based on their 
short-term interests.  By engaging with their leaders, 
it was possible to split these alliances and significantly 
alter the balance of power between the gangs.  This 
allowed the security forces to exert greater influence over 
individuals and groups, resultin g in the disintegration and 
marginalisation of a number of them.
Wider UK engagement with other key leaders within 
other influence groups, including the local population, 
international organisations, Non-governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) and other African states, was 
also conducted.  This ensured that the purpose and 
duration of UK’s involvement in Sierra Leone was widely 
understood, and this garnered domestic, as well as 
international support for operations.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
196
power being wielded by those close to the national leader 
through their position in the social, religious or tribal hierarchy.  
In most failing states, corruption is rife and few leaders are 
untainted by it.  Equally, elites are likely to be tainted by 
criminality.  Commanders will be wary of compromising 
their own legitimacy but will have to deal with unsavoury 
characters.
1112 Host Nation Government Representatives.  
Engagement takes place from the highest level of 
government, utilising the hierarchy of committees, right the 
way through to routine business at the local level.  It can 
be conducted directly with government representatives or 
through the use of liaison officers embedded within key 
ministries.  Connecting the work of these committees allows 
coherent messaging (both ways) and a nascent nation-wide 
‘nervous system’.  Patience and tact are essential; choosing 
people with the right skills is critical.
 
1113 Host Nation Security Forces.   Capacity building 
provides an opportunity for large-scale, structured daily 
engagement.  Soldiers are also members of society, each 
with their own network of contacts.  Engagement will 
occur primarily through embedd ed training and mentoring, 
partnering and liaison.  The purpose is: first, to develop 
understanding of indigenous fo rce capabilities, structures 
and doctrine; second, to assess jointly their capacity and how 
they may best be used to conduct or support operations; 
and third, to design appropriate Security Sector Reform (SSR) 
and associated training mechanisms that deliver an effective 
security force capable of combined operations and which are 
eventually capable of transitioning to independent operations.  
All contacts with host nation forces are an ideal – though 
often under utilised – two-way channel for messaging, 
understanding and influence if it occurs within a structured 
plan.  (See Annex 1 1A – Developing Indigenous Forces).
1114 Regional Engagement.  Stability will demand 
support from neighbouring states, and therefore regional 
The Host Nation Government.  Regular engagement 
at the highest levels of government will be a time 
consuming, vital task for the commander and staff.  
Force design should take this into account.  Personal 
relationships at all levels are pivotal, which has 
implications for the selection of personnel and continuity.  
Here, Commander ISAF, General David Richards, speaks 
with Afghan President, Hamid Karzai and Defence Minister 
Wardak.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
197
engagement.  Engagement manage s the risk that instability 
will be exported thus threatening the entire region.  Equally, 
neighbouring countries may exert political, security and 
economic influence that has the potential to be both positive 
and malign.  Regional engagement should be politically led.  
However, operational necessity or the absence of capacity 
may require a commander to conduct this task, not least 
to arrange technical matters, such as cross-border security 
coordination.
6  Significant investment in liaison may be 
required and boundaries set to avoid imposing artificial lines 
on seamless problems.
Engaging with Adversaries
1115 Engagement with adversaries is highly sensitive and 
commanders need to provide clear guidance on it to the 
force.  In reality, engagement with the adversary is conducted 
directly or indirectly at the tactical level every day through 
contact with the local population.  In any group there will 
be a spread of commitment, a mix of reconcilable and 
irreconcilable members.  The aim is to distinguish between 
them; accommodate with the reconcilable, and kill, neutralise 
or isolate the irreconcilable, particularly the leadership 
element.  Engagement will add tension to the group.  
Achieving accommodations may break its cohesion and foster 
mistrust and internal tensions.  Identifying these tensions and 
exploiting them generates opportunities.
1116 Internees and Detainees.  The most frequent 
engagement with adversaries will be when they are held 
as internees and detainees.  They represent a valuable 
information resource, and this must be exploited within a 
legal framework.
6. The tripartite relationship between the Afghan National Security Force, Pakistan Military 
and ISAF is an example.
7. A term used by General Petraeus in Iraq to describe an unstoppable momentum of 
success.
8. For a visual representation of this, see Figure 4.2
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
198
1117 Security Accommodations.  A commander may 
have to broker local security accommodations in order to 
stabilise the situation.  An example is the arrangements that 
tactical commanders may broker with groups of concerned 
local citizens to contribute to the local security situation.  
While, in certain circumstances, these may be necessary at 
the tactical level, they will have operational and, perhaps, 
strategic repercussions that must eventually be addressed, in 
particular with the host nation.  Any such accommodations 
should, where possible, be established from a position of 
strength.  Offensive operations may be used as a precursor 
to establish that firm basis.  Accommodations, by definition, 
involve compromise and risk on all sides.  The terms of the 
accommodation are negotiable.  The declared reason why an 
adversary seeks an accommodation may not be his ultimate 
objective; some of the groups engaged in Iraq in 2007 , for 
instance, sought an accommodation with Multinational 
Force-Iraq to fight al-Qaeda in the short-term as a precursor 
to their strategic goal of changing the political balance.  
Adversaries will typically demand release of prisoners 
and operational restrictions, such as a cessation of raids.  
If and when these cards are played it is politically and 
militarily sensitive, demanding the full engagement of 
politicians, diplomats, intell igence agencies, international 
organisations (such as the UN) and military commanders.  
Due to the security risk of ceding hard-won initiative, it is a 
test of operational art.  As Musa Qal’eh in 2007 illustrated, 
accommodations are not guarantees; but taking risk is 
essential for campaign momentum.
• Accommodation is about conflict management. 
• Reconciliation is about conflict termination.
1118 Negotiating with Reconcilable Adversaries.   This 
could be the most important form of engagement, as it may 
be the first step towards conflict transformation.  If the military 
are involved, some considerations are:
• Negotiation is a delicate process, and the broad terms, 
such as no deal that undermines the host government, 
must be clearly set from the outset.  Frequently, 
however, the parties will initially be divided by a gulf of 
misunderstanding and misperceptions.  Identifying these, 
much less starting to address them, will not be possible 
until the process of exploration starts.  Setting definitive 
boundaries, therefore, such as whether or not the release 
of prisoners is contemplated, is likely to be counter-
productive.  Negotiation is not a sign of weakness; rather it 
confronts the adversary and forces him to decide whether 
or not to join the political process.  He should be left in no 
doubt as to the alternative of not joining the process.
• Offering conditional immunity from prosecution 
 may permit an accommodation, without granting a 
general amnesty which may more properly be part 
 of reconciliation.
• Once started, engagement may generate a momentum 
that transforms the campaign; creating a ‘Mesopotamian 
Stampede’ effect.
7  These relationships carry risk and 
 may be seen by the government as threatening.  
Transparency is essential as suspicion that the 
 international coalition is brokering a separate deal has 
the potential to cause a strategic rift.  The government 
will need to share an assessment of the risks and see how 
they are to be mitigated, for instance by the collection of 
biometric data which will allow tracking of those involved.  
The coalition should remain engaged until a political 
settlement is achieved.
Offensive Operations
1119 Shape through engagement continues throughout the 
campaign. 8  It occurs in areas where Secure – Hold – Develop is 
being enacted and also in areas where security force presence 
has yet to be established.  In both these situations, adversaries 
will seek to secure or create their own safe havens.  They will 
do this to: secure a population to their own cause; force-
generate or recuperate; or to develop and protect funding and 
resource streams.  Although military resources will inevitably 
be stretched, the adversary cannot be allowed the freedom 
of action that these ungoverned spaces afford, unless it is to 
our advantage.  Instead, even though our force may be largely 
committed elsewhere, some activity will be necessary to 
raid, disrupt and deter into these areas, or at least understand 
through Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and 
Reconnaissance (ISTAR).  Such operations are particularly 
suitable for Special Forces and indigenous Specialist Forces, 
where the capability exists.  In addition, local militia cadres 
may be established with appropriate mentoring and enablers.  
This provides a twin benefit of establishing mass and a force 
that demonstrably addresses local security concerns.  Through 
such forces and their outposts, there is scope to build an 
early connection with the local community and to garner 
intelligence.  However, there are clearly risks to be weighed.  
These include: the sustainment burden; the inherent risks of 
isolated bases; the requirement to provide reinforcement, 
often through the use of fires with the associated risks of 
collateral damage; and the trustworthiness and motivations 
of cadres if used and the risk of retribution to the local 
population if the cadres fail.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
199
SECTION II
SECURE
Likely Context in which to Secure
• The adversary’s ability to read our intentions, adapt and 
counter international forces’ efforts will improve.  By 
modifying his approach, he aims to find weaknesses 
and negate technological advantage.  He may employ 
a variety of means to bolster and broaden his appeal to 
the population, and may expand the span and tempo 
of his activity to demonstrate continued relevance.
• Because he recognises that the conflict is principally 
about gaining influence over the population and 
supplanting ideas, he will refine, and possibly redefine, 
his narrative as he tries to maintain the initiative and 
the perception that he still offers a viable alternative.  
He may attack legitimate authorities and their partners.
• The adversary will extract every advantage from being 
almost indistinguishable from the local population.  He 
will seek sanctuary and establish safe havens in areas in 
which those who oppose him will find it most difficult 
or dangerous to operate.
The Purpose of Secure
1120 Like Shape, Secure comprises both supportive and 
coercive effects.  The re-establishment of government control 
is supportive; the reduction of the influence and freedom of 
action of adversarial groups is coercive.  In Secure, it will be 
necessary to focus on the population, not just the adversary, 
terrain or infrastructure.  However, it will be vital to strike 
the right balance in the use of force for the population to be 
convinced that their security needs can be adequately met.  
During secure violence may spike.  The military will need the 
full support of all inter-agency partners to wrest the security 
initiative.  Secure may not be quick.  The tactical aspects of 
secure are covered in Army Field Manual Volume 1 Part 10, 
Counter-insurgency Operations .
Focus on the Population
1121 Securing vital national infrastructure and 
implementing measures to re-establish and maintain control 
of key populations, such as significant ethnic minorities, 
through the provision of rule of law and basic public services, 
is central to legitimacy.  Securing an environment that 
provides populations with the opportunity to go about their 
daily lives without the fear of violence is paramount.  The goal 
must be pragmatic: not a complete absence of violence, but 
its reduction to levels containa ble by indigenous forces and 
where normal life can be resumed.  It may even be possible 
to secure an area without force, through implementing 
economic and governance measures.
1122 Measures to Control the Population.  In order to 
separate the adversary from the population, the commander 
may introduce control measures, temporarily restricting some 
freedoms.  This will have an influence upon perceptions of 
the government and the security forces.  The commander 
may risk resentment and alienation in the short term in order 
to isolate the adversary and deliver better security in the 
mid term, or continue to allow the adversary access to the 
population.  Measures therefore need to be applied with care 
and coordinated with an active  information operation that 
explains the situation.  Control measures include:
• Curfews.  A curfew can constrain adversary freedom of 
movement and temporarily quells civil unrest.  It can be 
employed as an economy of force measure.  It must not 
 be used for collective punishment; this is against 
international law.
• Barriers and Check Points.  Barriers and check points 
control and canalise movement, protect property and help 
isolate adversaries.  In many circumstances, adversaries rely 
on vehicles to transport weapons and munitions.  Check 
points and barriers may be used to enhance the physical 
security of certain vulnerable locations, such as markets 
and government offices.
• Establishing Who is Who.  The key to operating 
effectively amongst the people is knowing who is who .  
Population censuses, public records such as ration records 
or identification cards, network analysis, biometric data 
and evidence collection all combine to deny the adversary 
the anonymity on which he depends.  This is a major 
organisational task and needs the cooperation of the 
government.
The Use of Force
1123 Striking the Balance.  Militaries have a bias for 
high-tempo, kinetic operations to defeat the enemy.  Such 
approaches, critical to success in war, can be counter-
productive in stabilisation.  Properly applied force, however, 
can gain moral and physical ascendancy over an adversary.  
As operations to secure the support of the people must 
necessarily be conducted amongst them, risk that would 
normally be mitigated by the use of force may be unavoidable.  
The consequences of collateral damage can erode any 
advantage gained by a military strike against a hostile group.  
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
200
Commanders will need to manage this risk by balancing three 
competing demands: limiting military casualties by stand-
off and high levels of force protection; engaging with the 
population in order to develo p understanding and trust; and 
implanting in the mind of the adversary a sense of personal 
risk and uncertainty.
1124 Considerations for the Use of Force.  The right to 
use force is covered by UK law and will be supplemented on 
operations by a mandate, ROE and, if the offensive use of force 
has been authorised, a Targeting Directive.  These set the 
boundaries and policy
9 for the use of force, but the general 
principle should be to use the minimum, but not minimal 
force.  Consider:
• It is better to modify behaviour by coercion than by 
using force.  This needs a subtle combination of threats 
and incentives that allows the commander to retain 
control without losing the initiative or public support.  
Demonstrations of force, without resorting to its use, can 
also have a powerful deterrent effect.  This may allow us to 
secure areas without fighting.
• The minimum amount of force is that force commensurate 
with the task, which may still include a significant range 
of fires to achieve the aim.  It should not be confused with 
minimal force; this is the smallest amount of force that can 
possibly be used and may not enable the task to 
 be achieved.
• Force must be scalable, fine-tuning the tempo and 
intensity of violence as appropriate.  Well-crafted ROE 
 will assist.
• Use of euphemistic language that obscures the reality of, 
necessity for, or legitimacy of armed conflict is unhelpful.  
Terms such as police action  can create confusion in the 
minds of the commander, staff, and external observers.  
Describing armed conflict as armed conflict will help 
 avoid doubt.
1125 Recording the Use of Force.  Adversaries seek to 
undermine the public’s confidence in the security forces by 
propaganda or the spread of misinformation.  The government 
and security forces ideally should be first with their message.  
Where they are not, they must be able to challenge and refute 
the adversary’s version, particularly when lethal force has 
been used.  Fires and outcomes ideally should be recorded, 
providing operational verification, which promotes credibility.
Influence Through a Show of Force 
– Sierra Leone 2000
Following the ceasefire between the Sierra Leone 
Government and Revolutionary United Front (RUF) UK 
joint forces, primarily from the Amphibious Ready Group, 
conducted a demonstration at Aberdeen Beach near the 
capital, Freetown.
The demonstration provided a timely reminder to the RUF 
and underscored the UK’s support for a stable, democratic 
Sierra Leone.  The clear message to the rebels was: ‘it 
would not be to your advantage to break the ceasefire’ .
9. It is important to note that the policy will depend on whether a state of conflict exists or 
not.  This decision is made at government level.  The required direction is given to the 
commander via Chief of Defence Staff’s Directive.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
201
ISAF did not begin to collect accurate data on civilian 
casualties until mid-2007 , but even then only figures 
reported by ISAF units.  Other forces and agencies did 
not record or share their figures.  The Taliban were able 
to make claims about NATO’s use of force that ISAF 
was neither able to refute nor confirm.  This generated 
considerable pressure, particularly after two major civilian 
casualty incidents in Nangrahar and Shindand in 2008.  
The repercussions of these threatened the Force’s Centre 
of Gravity.  Following the issue of a command directive 
and better consultation with international organisations 
and NGOs, ISAF was able to establish the facts more 
accurately and refute or confirm complaints.  
Although imperfect, the system allowed ISAF to be first 
with the truth.
Rules of Engagement
1126 Considerations.  ROE are directives that set out the 
circumstances and limitations under which armed force may 
be applied to achieve military objectives for the furtherance 
of government policy.
10  Although focused on the physical 
domain, they may also cover activity in such areas as the 
electromagnetic spectrum and the virtual domain.  While not 
in themselves law, ROE must be consistent with it.
11  A bespoke 
set of ROE, known as the ROE Profile, will be generated for 
each operation.  This ROE Profile will be shaped by the force’s 
mandate as well as by the legal framework within which the 
force is to operate.  ROE for UK forces will be developed by the 
MOD ROE Committee and issued only after formal agreement 
by the Minister.  Additional co nsiderations for operating under 
ROE are:
• UK forces will be bounded by the specific national ROE 
Profile developed for the mission, as well as any applicable 
coalition ROE.  Each force contributing nation will usually 
develop its own or variations of coalition ROE so that they 
conform to their own national legal framework.  National 
contingents will need to pay particular attention to this 
when operating outside their own mandated areas or 
when operating across boundaries.  This aspect may 
have particular implications for: air/land integration, 
where other nation’s close air support may be operating 
under tighter or looser ROE; the integration of coalition 
forces coming under UK command; and UK personnel 
embedded in coalition posts.
• Although a commander may take unilateral action to make 
the ROE more restrictive than originally intended, he may 
not make them more permissive without consultation 
with the issuing authority.  A commander may also choose 
to delegate authority for some ROE to a subordinate, 
while retaining authority over others himself.  In addition, 
where UK and coalition ROE exist side-by-side, the most 
restrictive elements will apply to UK forces.
• As well as understanding the mandate, the Targeting 
Directive (if applicable), his own national ROE, and those of 
the coalition
12 and other partners, the commander should 
also constantly monitor the validity of the ROE.  He should 
know how and when to request changes to them, if and 
when circumstances change.  Joint Service Publication 
(JSP) 398 provides clear guidance on the process to be 
followed when submitting a ROE Request.
• The commander should also be aware of any host 
nation ROE, and any constraints that they may place on 
the employment of UK forces operating under national 
ROE.  If necessary, assistance should be offered to the 
host nation to develop its own ROE Profiles.  However, it 
must be remembered that that ROE are based, in part, on 
national law, and that UK forces are unlikely to have the 
required understanding of host nation law to make a full 
contribution to this process.
Containing and Disrupting the Adversary
1127 Detention.  The UK may not wish to conduct 
detention operations, but where the host nation lacks the 
capacity, there may be no alternative.  The authority and the 
extent of any powers granted to the commander will rest with 
Whitehall under an agreement with the host nation.  Well-run 
detention operations can be highly effective in disrupting the 
adversaries’ flow of men, materiel and funds.  Consider:
• Detention may be a cyclical as it involves the 
 following steps: Capture-Detention-Release-(and 
 possible) Recapture.  The cycle is fed by the conduct 
of other security operations and is refined by the ever-
increasing and accurate intelligence picture that the 
process generates.
• All internees and detainees must be handled strictly 
 within UK policy guidelines, the rule of law, and in 
accordance with international norms by appropriately 
trained personnel.  Poorly conducted detention or 
interrogation will damage campaign authority and may 
lead to large numbers of neutrals choosing to support 
the adversary.  The interrogation and detention system 
must be capable of correctly handling and segregating 
detained persons.  For example, attempting to identify 
and separate the hard-core insurgent from the petty 
criminal, and this will help manage the risk that detention 
centres become insurgent universities.
• Detention is manpower intensive.  The facility must 
be properly resourced.  In Iraq, where the US ran a 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
202
sophisticated detention system, including rehabilitation 
and employment-related training, the total staff-to-
detainee ratio was in the order of 3 per 10.
• Long-term detention without trial can be difficult to 
defend.  With the passage of time, successful prosecution 
becomes more difficult.  The transition from international 
to host nation responsibility should be planned from the 
outset, and shape SSR priorities.
• Ideally, longer-term detention offers an opportunity to 
rehabilitate internees, and to release them back into 
society as useful citizens when it is assessed that they do 
not pose a major threat.  In surgency is overwhelmingly 
a young, male trait.  In some cases, the unemployed 
‘insurgent’ will have been paid to plant a bomb.  Education 
and job-related training can help break the cycle of 
violence in which they are caught.
• There must be a transparent process for case review and 
release.  This may benefit from external over-sight.  A 
problem is that only negative intelligence will be available.  
Involving local leaders and experts such as behavioural 
psychologists in assessing risk and radicalisation can help.
• There will be times when the controlled and coordinated 
release or exchange of internees is appropriate for 
strategic or operational reasons.  These releases will carry 
significant political and symbolic importance both within 
the host nation and the wide r international audience.  
Getting local leaders to guarantee good behaviour 
mitigates risk, assists re-integration and breaks adversarial 
control.  Leaders may need to be incentivised.
1128 Isolate and Neutralise the Adversary.  This is a 
principle for the military contribution covered in Chapter 
4.  By attacking adversaries’ critical requirements (Annex 8B) 
they can be isolated and neutralised.  Generally, the goal is 
to neutralise, rather than kill, and to make him irrelevant in 
security and political terms.  Some considerations:
• Population control measures help shape and set the 
conditions for isolation.
• Framework operations deter and disrupt the adversary, 
forcing him into the open.
• Intelligence-led strike operations cause attrition and 
fracture leadership.
• Rapid materiel and personnel exploitation can 
 generate tempo.
• Use of the judicial system and detention helps 
demonstrate effective host nation Rule of Law.
• Measures are needed to isolate the Joint Operations Area 
and secure the country’s borders.
• Adversary lines of communication should be placed at risk.
• Cross-government and multinational mechanisms deny 
financial support.
• An information operations campaign disrupts adversary 
influence mechanisms.
• Measures of effectiveness should guide the campaign.
10. UK Rules of Engagement (ROE) are contained in the Joint Services Publication (JSP) 398 
United Kingdom Manual of National Rules of Engagement.
11.  In accordance with both UK domestic law and the UK’s interpretation of International 
Law.
12. This is to include an understanding of any national caveats (sometimes referred to as ‘red 
cards’) that may apply to national contingents.  This may be difficult to achieve, as most 
ROE is highly classified.
The term detention is often used to describe 
imprisonment of those who oppose the government or 
international forces.  During hostilities not amounting to 
international armed conflict, Joint Doctrine Publication 
(JDP) 1-10 Prisoners of War, Internees and Detainee s, makes 
it clear that there are two categories of captured or 
detained persons: 
• Internees.  UK Forces operating abroad may have a 
power to intern civilians under the host nation’s law 
where they pose an imperative threat to the security 
of the force; such power may derive from the host 
state’s own domestic law or from a UN Security Council 
Resolution.  Internees may be disarmed, but must be 
allowed to keep all of their personal property (unless it 
is of evidential value or must be confiscated for security 
reasons) and steps should be taken to establish their 
identity.  Internees must be treated humanely.  The basis 
upon which individuals are interned must be made 
subject to periodic review.
• Criminal Detainees.  UK Armed Forces operating 
abroad may have the power (derived from the host 
nation’s own domestic law) to participate in the arrest 
of criminal suspects, or may assist the host nation’s 
authorised personnel in the arrest of persons.  In 
the case of criminal suspects or indicted persons, 
they should be handed over to the appropriate local 
authorities at the earliest opportunity, provided that 
there is no reason to believe that they will suffer torture 
or summary execution.   Criminal detainees must be 
treated humanely They may be disarmed, but must be 
allowed to keep all of their personal property (unless it 
is of evidential value or must be confiscated for security 
reasons) and steps should be taken to establish their 
identity
Detainees and Internees
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
203
Targeting and Influence
1129 The Targeting Process in Stabilisation.  Targeting is 
the process of selecting targets and matching the appropriate 
response to them, taking account of operational requirements 
and capabilities, and is detailed in JSP 900 UK Joint Targeting 
Policy.  It provides an iterative methodology for the 
development, planning, execution, and assessment of kinetic 
and non-kinetic effects.  It relies on the effective coordination 
of activity by numerous organisations across different LoOs.  
The selection, authorisation and prioritisation of targets 
requires the personal involvement of the commander.  The 
aim is to generate a specified effect.
• Focus.  The focus of targeting in stabilisation is on 
people, neutral and friendly groups as well as adversaries.  
Targeting identifies the options, both physical and 
psychological, to create effects that support objectives.  
Some targets are best addressed using activities with 
a primarily physical effect, while other targets are best 
engaged using: psychological effects such as Civil-
military Co-operation; information operations; direct 
engagement; negotiation; and political, economic and 
social programmes.
• Consequences.  In a crowded operating space the impact 
of poor targeting or unintended collateral damage can be 
severe.  Successful targeting requires:
• Clear understanding of the effects sought and their 
cons
equences.
• Prioritisation and sequencing to balance demands and 
resou
rces.
• Balancing short-term impact against longer term 
consid
erations.
• Established, and proven measures of effectiveness.
• The management of unintended consequences.
1130 Collateral Damage.  Collateral damage could 
adversely affect public confidence, support from the home 
base and campaign authority.  Adversaries will often use 
sensitive, cultural or religious sites to carry out attacks.  When 
responding, the precise use of force may minimise collateral 
damage.  Adversaries may try to:
• Goad security forces into overreaction.
• Lead them into sensitive areas where fires may cause 
civilian injury and collateral damage.
• Deceive the security forces into believing civilian areas 
 or sensitive sites are harbouring adversaries, when they 
 are not.
• Make the international forces so concerned about 
collateral damage that they cede the initiative.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
204
SECTION III
HOLD
Likely Context in which to Hold
• Losses suffered by the adversary could force him to 
move, thereby displacing and disrupting him.  However, 
borders and rigid boundaries offer the adversary the 
possibility of re-establishing elsewhere.
• As the adversary’s influence is diminished, and the 
balance of the initiative begins to swing away from him 
in areas that have been secured, he will be increasingly 
compelled to act against the seams of the UK’s inter-
agency and multinational ef fort, attacking civilian 
partners and discrediting their gains.
• The adversary will undermine any host nation economic 
or government development successes.  In its early 
stages, progress made by these programmes may be 
fragile.
• He will be forced into a more covert stance and may 
switch focus to terrorism.
• He may ask to talk, possibly to buy time to re-group, 
especially if his goal is to husband resources for a 
subsequent, longer term internal power struggle.
The Purpose of Hold
1131 Hold – of a secured area – is about demonstrating 
commitment and establishing the conditions for civilian-led 
development.  Once achieved, it must not be lost.  It is also 
about developing hope.  To Hold what has been secured 
is so fundamental that in some frameworks it is subsumed 
into the term Secure.  Hold can be considered to be a pivot 
on which campaign progress is balanced and the point at 
which progress can be most readily assessed.  During this 
stage the emphasis of supported shifts from military to civilian 
organisations.  Any failure to Hold after Secure  will cause the 
government and security forces to lose credibility.  During 
Hold, government forces, generated earlier by SSR, deploy 
with appropriate capabilities to that area.  This should create 
a sense of permanence that strengthens the belief that 
the security forces have regained control.  In turn, it should 
further the translation of consent into active support.  Hold is 
a statement of intent and an act of commitment.  It is critical 
because the population will only fully commit their support 
to government security forces when they conclude that the 
government will prevail and their own safety will be assured 
by government forces.
• Focus on Policing.   It is possibly during Hold that the 
transition to an indigenous security force lead on policing 
may begin.  It will have been necessary to develop 
sufficient mass for this through capacity building and SSR 
conducted in areas that have already undergone Shape-
Secure-Hold-Develop .  Ideally, indigenous police forces, 
possibly paramilitary ones, will have been developed at 
this stage.  If not, it will be necessary for other forces to 
fill the gap.  Since not all armed forces have a mandate 
to police, some enabling legislation may be needed.  
International forces must live among the population 
and partner indigenous forces if they are to establish 
effective security and a policing function that serves 
the population.  This not only further erodes the power 
base and freedom of action of the remaining adversarial 
groups, but information gained from the population by 
holding an area can be exploited to influence or inflict 
further damage against adversaries.
Mobilising Inter-agency Action for Security Effect – 
UK Brigade Commander, Iraq, 2008
“The Corps sent us a CMOC [Civil Military Operations Centre], 
which had ready access to money, which in turn required 
only minimal process to be released.  When an operation 
was being run, CMOC would talk to the local people, find 
out what they needed (if they wanted the street cleared of 
rubbish, they would tell them to get fifty people together and, 
once they had, pay them there-and-then to clear the streets).  
This bought short term consent…short term action provides 
the preconditions for long term development.  Security 
depends on it; it is suppression by other means; and CMOC 
gave us the ability to do it.”
• Synchronising Comprehensive Measures.  While 
an effective security force presence must be retained, 
the decisive factor will be the speed of governance 
initiatives and economic progress.  A sense of security 
cannot be maintained by military action alone since it 
is bound into the wider concept of Human Security and 
improving governance.  The aim therefore is not merely 
to deliver freedom from persecution, want and fear, but 
simultaneously to provide essential commodities such 
as water and food and get society to function again at 
the local level.  This means going with the grain, such 
as working with tribal structures, while simultaneously 
enabling the central government to re-connect (or 
connect) with its people.  Wherever possible, projects 
should be linked to longer-term priorities on the economic 
and governance LoO.  However, the imperative is to 
demonstrate short-term human security effect.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
205
SECTION IV
DEVELOP
Likely Context in which to Develop
• The adversary may continue to disrupt our efforts 
at long-term development.  However, as his security 
deteriorates, he will find it more difficult to offer a 
convincing alternative.
• His behaviour could become increasingly extreme.  He 
may reframe his concepts of victory and defeat, arguing 
that he can win merely by not losing.
• Adversaries are likely to target host nation 
vulnerabilities, recognising that in Develop, most activity 
will have an overtly civilian lead.
• He will tell the population that the international forces’ 
security is transient, and state that he will be there, 
amongst them, long after we have gone.
• As government measures gain greater traction, some 
adversaries may become more open to the suggestion 
of reconciliation.  His structures may fracture.
The Purpose of Develop
1132 In Develop, comprehensive measures are implemented 
to build organisational capacity and stimulate the economy.  
This enhances government credibility and delivers on the 
promise of increasing prosperity.  Success should further 
erode the support base of adversarial groups and create 
the conditions for a political settlement.  Concurrent, early 
investment in both short and long-term projects will be 
required.  Develop comprises a mix of political and economic 
development, capacity building and SSR.
13  The goal is for 
the development effort to be coordinated through the host 
government.  Local governance structures should be used 
to create a dialogue with the population in order to give 
them a stake in their future, a sense of ownership, and to 
ensure that effort is clearly prioritised.  Economic and political 
aspects of Develop are not primary military business; the 
military are still likely to be needed in a supporting role.  The 
commander should engage in and influence these processes 
and may need to use military capability to plug gaps, without 
becoming fixed.
Training Indigenous Forces
1133 SSR is one of the key outputs of building capacity.  
The goal is effective, accountable and non-predatory 
security forces that serve the population and the nation.  This 
endeavour is likely to constitute a principal element of the 
military contribution to stabilisation.  Generic guidance is 
contained at Annex 1 1A.  Some Develop activity needs to occur 
while the operation more generally is conducting Shape and 
Secure to ensure indigenous forces are generated in time to 
support Secure, Hold and other Develop activity.
113 4  As was highlighted in Chapters 5 and 6, SSR is broader 
than the training of indigenous security forces.  Recent 
insights from a military commander are opposite:
Governance
1135 Likely Governance Tasks.  Governance will be 
defined at the strategic level and coordinated with civilian 
partners.  Military involvement will depend on the level of 
security.  At first, tasks may include the identification of key 
leaders and government officials and the measures to support 
and empower their offices.
14  There may be relevant skills 
in, for example, national and local governance and utility 
management, within regular forces and sponsored reserves.  
As governance structures and processes grow, they should 
become responsible for the delivery of public services and 
budgets.  At this stage they can take on the mantle of the 
military run security committee architecture, further linking 
governance and security. 
 
Economic Development
1136 Likely Economic Tasks.  The long-term development 
of the economy will be led by Other Government 
Departments (OGDs) and international organisations, but 
an early assessment of what needs to be done will be 
necessary.  Military presence on the ground ahead of other 
organisations and agencies will enable them to contribute to 
any assessment.  Specialists, particularly from the Reserve, with 
their civilian skill-sets, can assist.
13. See Chapter 6, Section II for detail on Security Sector Reform (SSR).
14. In the western democratic model, power is vested in the office, rather than in the 
individual who holds that office.  In many other societies, the reverse is true.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
206
Transitions
1137 The Use of Transitions.  Achieving objectives is 
likely to be incremental.  Transition describes the transfer of 
authority and responsibility for the delivery of pre-defined, 
discrete functions between one set of empowered, legitimate 
actors and another.  This process is often two-way; at first 
local agencies may be overwhelmed so requiring external 
support from international forces – this may be the first 
transition.  Then, as capacity builds, responsibility will be 
handed back incrementally to the appropriate local authorities 
until they have restored full indigenous control.  As with all 
transitional phases, such as a rearward passage of lines, the 
force will be off-balance.
1138 The Link between End-states and Transitions.  
The end-state should be expressed as the achievement of 
defined levels of political and economic stability within a 
self-sustaining security environment.  Activity on all LoOs 
will transition to a host nation lead, either at a localised level 
or as part of a larger, national process of transition.  Early in 
planning, the conditions required for them (particularly the 
final ones that allow the force to redeploy) are identified 
and resourced.
1139 Planning Transitions.  The campaign will mature 
in stages.  Transitions may be constrained by the different 
national strategies and local imperatives, such as elections or 
the fall of a government.  There may also be sensitivities over 
control and timing.  Transitions alter the balance of supported/
supporting  relationships.  Smooth transition may be enabled 
by the creation of Military-to-Civil Transition Teams.  The 
rate of transition is often used as an indicator of campaign 
effectiveness, so the commander should expect to come 
under pressure to accelerate.
• Non-Discretionary.   SSR is a non-discretionary task; the 
later it is started, the longer the intervention.
• Consultation, consultation, consultation.   Creating 
forces that look like your own is one of the biggest 
mistakes that you can make.  You need to go with the 
grain but equally you need to apply standards that 
create real capability.  Be realistic; some things just 
cannot be achieved because of cultural resistance.  
Consultation and coordination with all the partners 
is essential.  SSR involves lots of players; many of the 
problems are because not everyone is on the same 
page.  Some resist coordination.  There is an extensive 
body of international expertise on SSR– use it.
• Organisation.  Train, Equip, Mentor and Organise are 
good headings.  Expect to create new structures in your 
own organisation.  And you will need to find qualified, 
talented people.  Equally, you may have to work with, 
not around, existing local security structures.  SSR makes 
strange bedfellows: tribes and militias may enjoy broad 
support or have utility.  If so, use them; but plan their 
future concurrently.
• Ministries.  Creating fighters at the execution end of 
SSR but ignoring the policy end will undo any progress 
you make.  Local ministries are rife with power struggles: 
once started they are difficult to control.  Reforming 
ministries requires civilian and military experts – the A 
Team you find in the busy parts of MOD Main Building.
• Prioritisation.  You will be tempted to focus on the 
military.  But treating the police and justice system as 
afterthoughts can lead to mission failure.  None of this is 
sequential; it must be concurrent.
• Embedding.  Embedding is risky, but it is right at the 
heart of effective mentoring and training.  We have to 
live and serve alongside the locals if we are 
 to lead by example.  To be more than ‘goons with 
 guns’, local forces must be accountable – to their 
internal disciplinary system, their civilian leaders, 
 and the population.
• Vacuums.  Conflict breaks down any system that may 
have been there.  Criminality, militias and warlords 
will fill the vacuum.  Your goal is to dominate these 
vacuums.  SSR allows you to transition that dominance 
to local partners.
• Patience.  Accept that creating effective local forces 
takes time, patience and sustained commitment.  Poor 
decision-making, such as goin g for mass over quality at 
first, haunts you.  Even the best plan may not get it right 
first time; you may need to go back, test and adjust to 
get the forces you (and they) need.
• Balance.   Getting the balance right between training 
them too quickly (to get them into the fight) or training 
them too slowly (to make them fully qualified) is 
difficult.  If you drive them too quickly they unravel 
when pushed; drive them too slowly and they fail to 
have impact.  Mentoring and close-marking helps.
• The Basics.  If paid and fed, the locals are more likely 
to fight.  If not, they become predators.  Getting the 
basics of administration right cuts out cronyism and 
corruption; you get real capability, not ghost soldiers.
SSR – 10 Top Tips From UK Military Commanders
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
207
The adversary tracks campaign progress and may even 
use similar tools to our own.  This shows al-Qaeda in Iraq’s 
pictorial view of their operations and progress in a one 
week period 2-8 March 2007.  It illustrates that the Islamic 
State of Iraq (ISI)
15 considered they had a large part of the 
country, including Baghdad the strategic centre of gravity, 
completely or partially under control.  It also highlights 
that this was their ‘high water mark’, and since that time 
they have suffered a major reversal, not least due to 
adaptation in the coalition campaign plan.
An Adversaries Campaign Management
15. ISI is an umbrella organisation of a number of Iraqi insurgent groups established in 2006.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
208
114 0 Conditions.  There will be a debate about whether 
transitions should be time or conditions-based.  Time-based 
conditions set clear benchmarks and can galvanise the 
effort (including the host government).  However, they risk 
handing the initiative to the adversary by laying out the limits 
of our commitment, or to opportunists who benefit from 
the conflict.  Conditions-based transition planning is also 
problematic because they appear open-ended.  Achieving 
conditions identified in the plan can take far longer than 
first anticipated.  Setting good enough  conditions, and then 
assessing them objectively are essentials of a conditions-based 
strategy.  In practice, the approach is likely to be constrained 
by an un-easy amalgam of these approaches, as they 
represent the political reality.  One external indicator is the 
behaviour of certain NGOs such as International Committee of 
the Red Cross and Médecins Sans Frontières .  Their withdrawal 
to other higher priority areas may be indicative that the 
crisis has passed.  This may support or act as a check to any 
military assessment of the suitability for transition.  Where 
the decision to amend or ignore certain conditions is not 
in the commander’s gift, he should robustly explain the 
consequences.    
1141 Risks.  Possible risks involved in transitions include:
• Mal-alignment of Authority and Responsibility.  
Transitions that involve the migration of authority but 
not responsibility, should be avoided; for example, where 
security operations in an area are transitioned to local 
command, but remain reliant on the international forces’ 
military capability and hence they carry the risk.
• Progressive Loss of Situational Awareness.  As 
international forces hand over more responsibility, they risk 
campaign blindness and an intelligence void.  It is at this 
precise moment that the need for situational awareness 
is at its greatest.  This can be ameliorated, for example, by 
increasing embedded mentors and stand-off surveillance.  
However, this is likely to coincide with a desire to reduce 
the military footprint, rather than to increase it in any way.
• Set-backs.  Transitions may not work.  The strategy should 
consider the potential to re-assume a Hold posture if, after 
a trial period, security conditions are not sustained.  The 
force may be asked to re-engage to prevent collapse.  
Before transitioning, the commander should establish the 
policy parameters.
• Loss of Control.  As responsibility is progressively 
transferred, the international community gradually loses 
control.  Influence and negotiation become the primary 
tools for the commander, in place of direct action.
Reconciliation
‘There are no specific formulas for reconciliation.’
Carlinda Monteiro, Accord Issue 15 2004, Peace and 
Reconci
liation
1142 Understanding Reconciliation.  Reconciliation has to 
be lasting and self-sustaining and depends upon the viability 
of the political settlement previously described in Chapter 1.  
The military contributes by creating the right conditions and 
usually focus on SSR and Disarmament, Demobilisation and 
Reintegration (DDR):
• Providing a secure environment for meetings 
 between protagonists.
• Initiation of meetings between protagonists, noting that 
the international force is unlikely to be seen as impartial.
Reconciliation Case Study – Sierra Leone
The UK’s military contribution to reconciliation was 
important in a number of ways:
• It provided the overarching framework in which 
reconciliation took place.  The Republic of Sierra Leone 
Armed Forces (RSLAF) and its predecessors were so 
fragmented that, without the UK military involvement, 
they may have remained a serious obstacle to reform.  
The UK military designed and maintained the first 
functioning command structure for some time.  In the 
early days advisers took on direct command roles.
• The UK military played a critical role in the DDR process, 
by running the absorption of former combatants into 
the new military and retraining the RSLAF.
• The continuing UK presence meant that the RSLAF 
remained relatively non-politicised, playing a role as 
both catalyst and conscience.
• The persistent presence of UK advisers increased 
societal confidence and reconciliation and curbed the 
political activities of senior RSLAF officers.
 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
209
MEASURING CAMPAIGN SUCCESS
SECTION V
ASSESSMENT
1143 Achieving and Measuring Effects.  There are two 
factors to consider in the design of campaign assessment.  
First, determine the effects (outcomes) of activity and their 
impact on the wide range of audiences.  Second, the time-
lag between cause and effect.  The rush to measure the 
outcome of activity before its effects can be determined can 
distort decision-making.  Some of the effects, particularly 
the most important ones which are designed to affect 
people’s perceptions, may take considerable time to mature.  
Assessment is a feature of military campaigning and has a role 
to play both in making better sense of the chaos of a state in 
crisis and justifying resources.  However, at worst it has driven 
pointless tactical activity simply to feed that process - and 
become an industry that consumes staff effort, known as 
feeding the beast .
114 4 Assessment.  Assessment is the evaluation of progress, 
based on levels of subjective and objective measurement 
in order to inform decision-making .
16  It combines art and 
science.  Specific metrics should be designed, collected 
and subsequently analysed – that is the science part.  
Interpretation demands judgement, intuition, imagination and 
insight – art.
Assessment – a Combination of Art and Science
Sometimes unorthodox methods of analysis yield 
the most valuable answers.  When a French doctoral 
student, Bernard Fall, went to Vietnam in 1953, the 
French authorities claimed that the war was going well, 
and showed maps and statistics indicating that they 
controlled a large proportion of the territory.  But Fall 
soon realised that French claims about the amount of 
territory they controlled were exaggerated, or at least 
lacked real meaning as far as the conduct of government 
was concerned.  He reached this conclusion both by 
visiting Vietminh-held areas, and by inspecting tax 
records in supposedly government-held areas; these later 
showed a dramatic collapse in the payment of taxes, and 
thus indicated a lack of government control.
In Afghanistan, payment of taxes, or rather the absence of 
payment, also works as a measure of government control.  
Data shows that taxation constitutes a uniquely small 
proportion of the national budget; in 2005 it was only 8% 
of all estimated income.
17 
1145 Metrics and their Interpretation.  Over time, metrics 
allow an assessment of campaign progress.  Metrics are the 
pieces of information that, when considered collectively, 
generate the operating picture.  They can be analogous to 
the pixels on a television screen.  Metrics may be unique to 
each operation, difficult to define, and possibly difficult to 
collect, but must cover the political, security, economic and 
social aspects of any activity.  They will usually be defined 
by the senior coalition partner.  They should be: mission 
related; comprehensible; meanin gful; measurable (to include 
perceptions); timely; cost effective to obtain; and appropriate 
to cultural norms and expectations.  As with any statistical 
analysis, the process is open to different, albeit apparently 
coherent, interpretations.  They allow a test to be applied to 
the theory of change – the campaign big ideas, but in trying 
to ascertain ground truth it is commander’s judgement that is 
critical.  To test the hypothesis, a Red Team
18 can be used to 
explore different interpretations of the accepted operating 
picture.  This will avoid the pit-falls of group-think.  This 
approach links with the ability of the force to anticipate, learn 
and adapt – qualities that give an agile organisation its edge.
114 6 Consistency and Credibility.  Discipline and 
consistency in the use of metrics is essential.  The 
Commander’s personal credibility will be damaged if data, for 
instance on attack statistics or what is defined as a significant 
act, can be made to appear contradictory or misleading.  For 
example, a multi-barrel mortar attack can be recorded and 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
210
reported as one incident, or several.  The media will be quick 
to exploit apparent inconsistencies, as will adversaries.
1147 Designing Assessment.  Traditionally J5 designs 
and implements assessment to inform campaign progress.  
However, as stated in Chapter 10, a separate cell within 
the headquarters may be required to provide a shared, 
comprehensive assessment of campaign progress.  There is a 
significant difference between measurement and assessment; 
the first indicates, for example, ‘how much?’ but the second 
addresses the ‘so what?’  Measurement itself requires diligent 
consideration to ensure consistency of results against 
an agreed standard, thus allowing reliable comparative 
evaluation of performance and progress over time.
19  However, 
planning a campaign based on assessment is like driving 
with both eyes on the rear-view mirror.  Even given a high 
degree of confidence in the validity of assessments, they 
represent a historical snapshot and do not forecast the future.  
The principle for the design of assessment conducted at the 
campaign level should be to record tidal movements, not wave 
patterns.  These movements have to be selected in advance, 
and studied for long enough to derive strategic patterns; yet 
the leadership will wish to set new questions as the situation 
evolves.  Nor is it the case that once objectives are met that 
they will necessarily endure without allocation of effort.
A Key Metric – Civilian Deaths
20 
“…We will know by August if this is working.  An increase in 
the death rate will mean little.  With 26,000 new troops in 
country, violence is bound to spike – whether we are winning 
or losing – simply because more troops are fighting and 
reporting.  The measure of success is not whether the military 
can kill the Taliban but whether it can protect the population 
from them.  The question to ask is not ‘how many Taliban 
have we killed?’ but ‘do civilian officials and members of the 
community feel safe in this area’.  Afghan civilian casualties, 
however, will be an especially telling measure.  Our central 
goal is to make Afghans feel secure enough to engage in 
peaceful politics and so marginalise the Taliban and other 
illegal armed groups.  Killing non-combatant civilians 
fundamentally undermines this goal.”
Assessment Categories
114 8 Categories.   There are three broad categories 
of assessment which should produce the answers to the 
following three questions, first, did we do, properly, the things 
that we set out to do ; second, was what we set out to do, the right 
thing; and finally, is the combination of things that we are doing 
getting us to where we want to be?
• Answers to the first are provided by Measurement of 
Activity (MOA).  MOA is defined as: ‘assessment of task 
performance and achievement of its associated purpose.’ 
21  
It is an evaluation of what actions have been completed 
rather than simply what has been undertaken.  For 
example, in an attack on a command and control 
installation, MOA would be concerned with the level of 
damage done to the facility, not the number of sorties 
flown.  It may give an approximation of the outcome 
of the act.  MOA informs decisions on whether activity 
should be repeated or altered.  MOA is reviewed within the 
daily campaign rhythm led by the J3.
• Answers to the second are provided by Measurement 
of Effect (MOE).  MOE is ‘the assessment of the realisation 
of specified effects’ .
22  It is concerned with effects, 
both intended and unintended.  Drawing on various 
measurements and perspectives, it assists progress 
measurement, highlights setbacks and supports planning.  
The effects review battle-rhythm may be daily, but is more 
likely to take place over more protracted periods, and is 
conducted by all cells and coordinated by J35 or, for longer 
term issues, by J5.
• Finally, answers to the third are provided by Campaign 
Effectiveness Assessment (CEA).  CEA is ‘evaluation of 
campaign progress based on levels of subjective and objective 
measurement in order to inform decision-making’ .
23  It is 
concerned with the timely progress of the campaign, 
and is predominantly the concern of the commander.  
Supplementing daily assessment (such as the battlefield 
update assessment process used in US headquarters), 
due to the planning and assessment effort necessary to 
review campaign progress properly, CEA is conducted to a 
timetable that best meets the commander’s needs, based 
on the scale, complexity and tempo of operations.  CEA 
is likely to occur on a monthly (or longer) basis,
24 and all 
branches and cells will contribute towards it.  It is a formal, 
structured process, normally led by J5 or, in the case of 
more demanding campaigns, by a specially constituted 
assessments cell overseen by the Chief of Staff or 
 Deputy Commander.
16. JDP 01 Campaigning (2nd Edition), December 2008.
17. Adam Roberts, Doctrine and Reality in Afghanistan , Survival: Global Politics and Strategy, 
Volume 51, No. 1, 2009.
18. The Red Team should enjoy a degree of autonomy.  Answering to the chain of command, 
its membership should be separate from it.  It should be made up of both civilian and 
military planners/analysts, and report to the mission lead.
19. A structured trial in gathering stabilisation data was conducted during Operation 
HERRICK 7 in Helmand using the Tactical Conflict Assessment Framework, a systematic 
questionnaire scheme aimed at tracking local perceptions on a wide variety of issues 
over time.
20. David Kilcullen, How To Win In Afghanistan , The Spectator, 23 May 2009.
21. JDP 01 (2nd Edition).
22. JDP 01 (2nd Edition).  Measurements of Effect (MOEs) are most often developed for 
supporting effects.  Decisive conditions are then monitored through the aggregation 
of MOEs related to their subordinate supporting effects.  The commander may elect, 
however, to assign MOE specific to a decisive condition.
23. JDP 01 (2nd Edition).
24. During Operation TELIC 1, a daily campaign review-cycle was employed initially.  ISAF IX 
reviewed the campaign every 2 months.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
211
1149 Campaign Assessment Hierarchy.   There is a 
hierarchical relationship between campaign objectives, 
decisive conditions, supporting effects and activities.  Figure 
1 1.3 shows how the three categories of assessment relate:
1150 Assessment Planning.   As decisive conditions, 
supporting effects and activities are derived, assessment 
measures must be simultaneously developed for each.  
Consideration should also be given to the identification of 
unintended effects and the development of appropriate 
measures to capture them.  Pl anning for evidence gathering 
(what is to be gathered, when, by whom and for what 
purpose) is conducted collaboratively, and an assessment 
framework could be used (see below).  Assessment includes 
operational analysis to eval uate, develop and incorporate 
lessons identified.  A Red Team can help to refine the 
understanding of what has been achieved.
1151 Assessment in all the Domains.  Evidence across 
the physical, virtual and cognitive domains is needed.  
Results of activities conducte d in the physical domain will 
generally be easier to measure, but in stabilisation, measuring 
psychological effects in the cognitive domain may deliver 
greater insights.  How people feel and what people think, for 
example, will be vital indicators of campaign progress.  Much 
evidence for physical MOE can be obtained from routine 
J2, J3 and J9 reporting.  Virtual domain information may be 
obtained from media output analysis, including internet and 
on-line sources along with analysis of the more traditional 
broadcast and published media.  Insights into the cognitive 
domain may be obtained from HUMINT, Signals Intelligence 
and wider human factors research.  In stabilisation, the need 
to understand the perceptions of target groups places a 
premium on representative material gathered by opinion 
polling and focus group engagement, for example.
Campaign Effectiveness Assessment
Measurement of Effect
Measurement of Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Activity
Supporting
Effect
Supporting
Effect
Supporting
Effect
Supporting
Effect
Supporting
Effect
Campaign
Objective
Decisive
Condition
Decisive
Condition
Decisive
Condition
  Figure 1 1.3 – Assessment Categories
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
212
Campaign Assessment Framework 
– an Example from Afghanistan, 2009
The Campaign Assessment Framework (CAF) reflects 
the Commander’s Intent and the conditions that enable 
success.  The framework is nested within Joint Force 
Commander-Brunssum’s (JFC -B) campaign framework.  
All operation plans are synchronised and linked to the 
NATO End-state.  The CAF reflects the LoO set by the 
Afghan National Development Strategy, which is owned 
by the Government of Afghanistan.  The specific LoO are: 
Security, Governance and Development; each of which 
has to achieve specified enduring effects to achieve the 
Commander’s Intent.
1152 Looking Beyond Military Activity.   The risk 
is that assessment will be conducted by government 
departments to validate their own activities.  While not 
entirely nugatory, it may provide different departments 
with differing understanding of overall progress.  What may 
be deemed good progress by one, could be perceived as 
a setback by another.  For this reason, CEA should link into 
a broader assessment process that is designed to capture 
and, at the highest level, provide a unified indication of 
campaign progress.  There is currently no cross-Government 
or multinational stabilisation assessment methodology, and 
therefore this will demand a high level of information sharing 
and collaboration.
1153 Integrating Non-Military Evidence.  Evidence 
should not be limited to military sources.  OGDs can provide 
useful information, often through departmental assessments 
such as Diplomatic Telegrams and Stabilisation Unit Stability 
Assessments.  The headquarters should use its access with 
imagination, for example, data on attendance at health clinics.  
Visits to a clinic may be discretionary, for instance for routine 
treatment, or non-discretionary, for life-saving intervention.  
If the security situation is poor, the number of discretionary 
visits will drop.  If they rise, it may be that the population 
perceive an improvement in their security, and feel more 
confident about venturing out.  By examining the reasons 
for attendance, an indirect assessment of perceived security 
is obtained.  Where raw data is provided from non-military 
or governmental sources, such as from an NGO, care must 
be taken to ensure consistency of reporting criteria, to avoid 
slewing comparative results over time if the data 
set is modified.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
213
Evaluating Evidence in Assessment
115 4 Reducing Bias.  Evidence must be evaluated before 
it can be used to support decision making.  Noting human 
vulnerability to intentional deception, unintentional bias and 
groupthink, objectivity and moral courage are essential.
1155 Integration.  In Iraq following the 2007 Crocker/
Petraeus review, an integrated assessment staff was 
assembled, the Joint Strategy Plans and Assessments team.  
This enabled comprehensive review and adjustment to an 
integrated plan.  It encompassed all LoO, tracking for example, 
take-up of small business micro-loans.
Integration in Action – an Example from Afghanistan
In December 2008, the Afghan Assessment Group (AAG) 
formed in Headquarters ISAF to institutionalise and 
lead a process of integrated assessment that combined 
products from the Afghan Government, UN Assistance 
Mission Afghanistan, embassies, NATO and other 
campaign partners.  The AAG consists of a leadership 
and integration element and two assessment branches: 
the Operations Analysis Branch; and the Lessons Learned 
Branch.  In addition, the AAG is capable of drawing upon 
wider analysis through reach-out.  The AAG enables 
transparent sharing of information between the wider 
community, both horizontally and vertically, to form an 
integrated picture of overall campaign progress.
Using Assessment to Support Decision Making
1156 Informing Judgement.  MOA and MOE inform 
reviews of current plans, while CEA supports longer term 
plans.  Periodically, all the trends derived from analysis 
must be brought together to prompt and set some of the 
parameters for a strategic conversation.  This may be known 
as a Commander’s Assessment and Synchronisation Board, but 
critically, it brings together the leaders of all the key partners 
to take stock and issue new comprehensive direction.
1157 Linkages.  The link between activity and effect is 
often apparent – for example, between fires and their physical 
effects.  This may be less evident in stabilisation.  Although 
changes in behaviour and attitude may be associated with 
identifiable activity, only history will judge whether effects 
were caused by specific activities.  Even when strong causal 
relationships are identified, care must be taken to ensure that 
they are applied in a contextually sensitive manner, as the 
cause and effect linkage may be  circumstantial and difficult 
to replicate.
Westmorland (Blame the Soldier).  According to 
General Westmoreland, the US commander in Vietnam, 
the answer could be found by the solution to a simple 
equation: take the total number of communist troops 
estimated in-country, and subtract those killed or 
captured during military operations to determine the 
‘crossover point’ at which the number of those eliminated 
exceeded those being recruited or replaced.  In an 
address to the National Press Club on 21 November 1967 , 
Westmoreland reported that, as of the end of 1967 , the 
Vietcong was “unable to mount a major offensive...I am 
absolutely certain that, whereas in 1965, the enemy was 
winning; today, he is certainly losing...We have reached an 
important point when the end begins to come into view.”   
As if to prove him wrong, the Tet Offensive began five 
weeks later.
McNamara (Blame the Politician).  ‘Critics point to the use 
of body count as an example of my obsession with numbers.  
“This guy McNamara”, they said, “he tries to quantify 
everything.”  But things you can count, you ought to count.  
Loss of life is one when you are fighting a war of attrition.  
We tried to use body counts as a measurement to help us 
figure out what we should be doing in Vietnam to win the 
war while putting our troops at the least risk.  Every attempt 
to monitor progress in Vietnam during my tenure as Secretary 
of Defense was directed towards those goals; but often the 
reports were misleading.’
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

Introduction
11A01 A key military contribution to Security Sector Reform 
(SSR) is assisting in the development of indigenous security 
forces.  This is about developing indigenous forces so that 
they are capable of delivering the nation’s long-term security 
needs without over reliance on  outside assistance.  In the 
short-term the process will also create sufficient mass to assist 
in stabilisation and begin the process of transition.  Although 
it is part of Develop in the stabilisation activity framework, 
in order for it to contribute effectively to Secure and Hold, 
it will usually need to begin early in the campaign.  This 
must be reflected in the analysis and planning cycles.  In 
most cases, the commander should only be expected to be 
tasked with training the military elements of the host nation 
security forces.  Other Government Departments (OGDs), 
Private Military and Security Companies (PMSCs) and others 
should take responsibility for the development of other 
elements of the security infrastructure, although this will 
depend on circumstances.  Whatever the overall allocation 
of responsibilities, it is key that the development of the 
indigenous security force is considered as an integrated whole.  
Although this initially increases the size of the challenge, it is 
a necessity to avoid the creation of costly imbalances that will 
ultimately delay effective development.
Planning
11A02 Scope of the Plan.  In a situation in which a force has 
been invited to assist a host nation government in training 
their forces, there should be ample time to prepare before any 
deployment.  In alternative scenarios, for example where the 
need occurs immediately follow ing a warfighting intervention, 
a comprehensive plan should already have considered the 
need for such development.  If it is to be effective any such 
plan must include the allocation of sufficient funds and 
specialist personnel for the task.
11A03 Scope of the Task.  Usually a commander is given 
the task of taking existing, weak, indigenous security forces 
and transforming them into a more effective body rather 
than building a force from scratch.  This task will often be 
made more difficult because the in-situ organisations may 
be corrupt and incompetent; they may also have lost the 
confidence of the population.  Clearly, it is important that any 
comprehensive training plan deals with all these aspects, but 
it must also ensure that the process does not undermine the 
host nation government’s ownership or authority.
11A0 4 Assessment.   When beginning to consider the nature 
of the problem, it is helpful to determine the framework within 
which the task must be carried out.  Addressing the following 
questions is a useful start:
• ‘What do we need the indigenous security forces 
to do?’ Articulate the tasks required of the indigenous 
security force, taking into account the host nation’s 
own long-term security needs and objectives.  Special 
consideration should be given to the long-term 
sustainability and affordability issues that will be left to the 
host nation to deal with.
• ‘What additional capabilities do they require in order 
be able to operate on their own?’  Define the level of 
capability required of an indigenous security force if it is to 
carry out operations independently.
• ‘What J1 - J9 capacity do they need for the long-term?’  
Define what organisational and institutional capacities are 
required for the enduring sustainability of the new force.
• ‘What can they do now and what changes will be 
required if they are to sustain security in the long-
term?’  Establish the degree of political/legal mandate at 
the point of intervention.
11A05 Key Factors.  The following factors should be 
considered:
• Funding.  Involvement of OGDs in planning and guiding 
military capacity building is essential if funds are to be 
mobilised quickly.  This is the most effective way of 
ensuring adequate resources are made available to military 
commanders who will provide the lead for such activity.
• Non-military expertise.  Civilian security experts may 
214
ANNEX 1 1A
DEVELOPING INDIGENOUS FORCES
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

215
provide commanders with a broader understanding of the 
longer-term training and implementation considerations 
involved in developing host nation security capacity.  This 
may be particularly valuable in those parts of the sector 
that are outside the immediate expertise of the military.  
As the military has limited policing, legal and penal sector 
resources, OGDs, PMSCs and other agencies can assist by 
providing deployed expertise.
1 
• Risks.  When the security environment is hostile, there 
is often an imperative to bu ild indigenous military and 
policing capacity quickly.  However, experience shows 
that there are significant risks in any rapid development 
programme.  Some recent examples are:
• A development programme that is too rapid may 
compro
mise the recipients’ training and fitness 
for role.  For example police with little training or 
competent leadership are likely to be ineffective, 
corrupt and potentially hostile to the population.
• Early development of a reformed security sector using 
indigenous tr
ibal structures may seem to offer a quick 
solution.  However, although it may be superficially 
attractive and deliver some short-term security, in 
the longer-term it may prejudice the more enduring 
aspirations for impartiali ty and independence.  
• Insufficient or inadequate security vetting of recruits 
for the sec
tor, usually conducted against time 
pressures, is likely to lead to a high proportion of 
corrupt or criminal elements within security forces.
11A0 6  Embedding Policy.  The commander should 
carefully consider the policy guidance that he receives 
regarding the embedding of UK mentors and trainers in the 
nascent indigenous force.  Clearly, there are advantages to 
allowing embedding into the structures of indigenous units, 
however there are disadvantages and risks that will need to 
be considered too.  As the policy guidance covering each 
circumstance will be different, so the commander must 
consider his own case, and make recommendations to the 
chain of command as appropriate.
Early Implementation
11A07 Impact of Environment.  Initially, military capacity 
building tasks will focus on creating sufficient indigenous 
capability to contribute to maintaining security; Hold.  At this 
stage the environment may still be non-permissive and OGD 
deployment constrained.  This complicates the delivery of 
early capacity building, as the commander may have to take 
responsibility for the delivery of all security force capacity 
building activities, many of which are outside the core 
expertise of his force.
11A0 8 Benefits of Successful Capacity Building.  Initial 
capacity building should be aimed at:
• Developing an initial indigenous capability and increasing 
their numbers by focusing on raising and training 
 military forces.
• Reinforcing, and ultimately replacing, intervention forces 
on the ground and contributing to the establishment and 
maintenance of law and order.
• Improving our own situational awareness through 
intelligence gathering an d shaping operations, and 
through better cultural understanding and engagement.  
Local forces provide an ideal channel for focussed 
messaging to their wider family groupings and the 
population they interact with. 
• Delivering mutual benefit through combined operations 
with indigenous forces.
Sustained Development
11A0 9 Training.  Initially, basic training is the priority and 
should focus only on essential skills.  Specialist skills can be 
developed once there is sufficient confidence to progress 
and a suitable infrastructure is provided.  Indigenous security 
forces are unlikely to have the technical skills, equipment 
or budget to maintain high technology capabilities which 
would soon become unserviceable.  Collective training will be 
necessary to prepare indigenous units to assume the greater 
responsibilities that will lead to transition.  Any programme 
of exercises should be progressive and test all levels of 
command, ultimately including political-military decision 
makers.  A programme of education will be required to 
ensure that indigenous security forces understand their new 
role, responsibilities and relationships across the sector and 
the community.  
11A10 Mentoring.  Mentoring will usually focus on assisting 
the indigenous military forces to improve their own systems 
and processes.  Depending on policy, it may also involve UK 
mentors embedding with indigenous units.  In this respect, 
mentors and trainers provide the essential link between 
both the indigenous and the intervention forces, and have 
a significant role to play within the transition process.  The 
integrated headquarters should have a dedicated staff 
branch dealing with SSR
2 that maintains close links to the 
corresponding host nation government departments.  
Experience from recent operations suggests the following:
• Mentors should be carefully selected to cope with the 
inevitable frustrations of dealing with poorly trained 
forces.  They will require more extensive pre-deployment 
training than those involved in other roles.
• Continuity of personnel and a consistent approach is 
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

216
required if mentoring is to progress smoothly.  Tour 
lengths for mentors should be long enough for 
relationships to be forged and for a deep understanding 
 of how best to develop the indigenous force.
• The nuances of language, culture and behaviour must 
be addressed, either through formal training or through 
dedicated interpreters.
• The structure of the mentoring organisation should 
be adaptable so that it is the best possible fit with the 
indigenous units it is supporting.  This may have to be 
continuously reviewed, particularly as indigenous 
 capacity is progressed.
• Mentors embedded at various levels, from government 
ministries to tactical units, need to have ready access to 
each other.  This allows them to monitor and influence 
decisions made across host nation forces and, where 
necessary, inform both those involved in the SSR process 
and the higher military chains of command.
Coalition Naval Advisory Training Team, Iraq
Stabilisation is a process that must be tailored to suit 
the local circumstances that exist at any one time.  A 
fundamental aspect in the economic Line of Operation 
in southern Iraq post-2003 was the revitalisation of the 
offshore oil fields and maritime trade.  In support of this, 
coalition forces were responsible for developing an Iraqi 
force capable of protecting these vital interests from 
internal and external threats.  In 2009 the Royal Navy (RN) 
was leading the continuing commitment to a Coalition 
Naval Advisory Training Team (CNATT), based within the 
Iraqi Naval Base at Umm Qasr.  Mentoring the Iraqi Navy, 
including 2 Marine Battalions , the CNATT was conducting 
basic, advanced and operational training with embedded 
Royal Marines, US Navy, US Marine Corps, US Coast Guard 
and British Army teams.  Along with CTG Iraqi Maritime 
they generated the skills required to integrate Iraqi 
personnel fully into the Coalition structure.  Considered 
an enduring commitment, tasks included the defence of 
2 strategically vital oil platforms, which generate over 90% 
of Iraq’s revenue, as well as patrolling the Khawr Abd Allah 
waterway and delivering port security at Umm Qasr and 
Az Zubayr.
Additionally, the RN was leading the Maritime Strategic 
Transition Team in Baghdad, mentoring the Head of the 
Iraqi Navy and supporting his staff in procurement, force 
generation and personnel planning.
11A11 Monitoring.   Defined as ‘stand back and observe ; only 
advising in particular circumstances’ ,3 this normally includes 
measuring progress against prescribed objectives at set 
intervals.  Monitoring is usually conducted through the 
partnering of intervention and host nation units, and this 
approach can be beneficial, particularly during transitions.  
Partnering arrangements can cover both training and the 
conduct of operations.  The longer such arrangements are in 
place, the greater the benefit to the indigenous force.
11A12 Monitoring, Mentoring and Training.  Monitoring, 
mentoring and training (M2T) is a generic term used to 
describe military support to indigenous armed forces during 
the development of local capacity and its subsequent 
transition to host nation security responsibility.  This term is 
used to describe both Military Transition Teams (MiTT) in Iraq 
and Operational Mentoring and Liaison Teams (OMLT) 
in Afghanistan.  
Supporting Issues
11A13 Infrastructure Support.  In addition to the capability 
to conduct operations, military capacity building must 
include basic administrative support and the development 
of a functioning Defence Ministry and chain of command 
structure.  A coherent programme should focus on the 
provision of training and mentoring teams,
4 simultaneous 
delivery of equipment logistic support and infrastructure, 
and delivering financial and managerial support for the 
security forces.
11A14 Moves Towards Transition.  As indigenous forces 
progress towards transition of security responsibility and 
authority, there will need to be even closer relations with 
host nation staffs.  This will enable mutually planned and run 
operations to be carried out and a well-defined handover 
to take place.  A clear understanding of the command 
relationship and responsibilities between our own and 
indigenous forces will be critical to the successful transition 
of authority.
5  This should include information operations 
promoting the indigenous forces, as they are unlikely to have 
their own capability.
1. In some cases, when there is no capacity to provide trainers, then contracted experts 
may be employed, who are often retired personnel from the UK and other nation’s 
Police, Judiciary and Prison Services.
2. Often, the J7 branch is re-rolled and augmented to be the staff focus for Security Sector 
Reform (SSR).  The formation Deputy Commander or a suitable senior officer may 
provide the high-level focus for such activity.
3. Land Warfare Centre Information Note 08/08 - Developing Indigenous Forces – M2T and 
Associated Nomenclature.
4. There are several ways of delivering training teams; the most popular being dedicated 
mentoring teams, or through Provincial Reconstruction Teams that link SSR to wider 
reconstruction and governance.
5. For example, it is likely that senior officers of the intervention force would wish to retain 
control over the selection of key indigenous appointments until late in the transition 
process.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

217
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
11A15 Vetting.  Plans to build and train an indigenous 
military force require transparen t and fair systems for vetting 
personnel, particularly in the case of officer applicants.  The 
vetting process needs to include an examination of the 
applicant’s background, previous record and, possibly, political 
affiliations.  The standard for officers should be set higher 
than for others, even if this slows the process of building the 
force.  There may be a requirement to develop and/or accredit 
the host nation’s security vetting process to ensure that it is 
fit for purpose.  This will help to build trust between the host 
nation and the intervention forces, which in turn will facilitate 
the exchange of information and in telligence as a part of force 
development and contribute to successful transition. 
11A16 Relationships with the Local Community.  In 
stabilisation it is crucial to engender trust between host 
nation security forces and the people.  Measures must be put 
in place that prevent the growth of self-serving, predatory 
security forces.  As indigenous forces become increasingly 
active, they will be tested by a hostile security environment 
and exposed to the population, possibly for the first time.  
They must be seen to be providing impartial security on 
behalf of the state and their actions must be deemed 
legitimate by the local population.  This will form the basis 
of their long-term effectiveness.
11A17 Local Militias.  When a nation is faced with 
instability and disorder, there is a tendency amongst the 
local population to establish their own militias and cadres for 
security purposes.  This reality cannot be ignored as the issue 
of local militias is based on the natural desire for local security.  
The issue, therefore, is one of  managing the process through 
integration or Disarmament, Demobilisation or Reintegration.
11A18 Wider Aspects of Security Sector Reform.  Military 
personnel involved in developing indigenous military forces 
should understand how their mission integrates with other 
aspects of the security sector.  The commander must be 
ready to assist in some of the wider aspects of SSR should 
circumstances demand it.  The extent of military involvement 
in these areas cannot be predicted, but may include police 
reform, support to judicial reform, the establishment of 
effective border control forces, and intelligence and security 
services.  These are covered in Chapter 5.
11A19 Alignment of Coalition Approaches.  In a large 
scale capacity building endeavour, it is likely that a number of 
different nations will contribute to the overall process.  While 
this effectively spreads the burden, it can create weak seams 
between contributors.  It is therefore important to align the 
various coalition approaches in order to ensure that these 
potential weaknesses are prevented.
International Military Advisory and Training Team 
(Sierra Leone)
The Sierra Leone Army numbered 16,000 at the height 
of the conflict.  The new Army numbers 8700, including 
2600 former members of various rebel and militia groups 
under a military re-integration programme.  Downsizing 
was done through retirement, including senior officers, 
using severance payments largely contributed by the 
UK.  SSR saw the establishment of the Office of National 
Security, responsible for co-ordinating the activities of 
Sierra Leone’s security agencies.  It sponsors regional 
forums that bring together primary security players, local 
government and civil society representatives, as well as 
traditional leaders, to encourage the participation of the 
local community in dealing with security as it affects 
them.  The moral component remains the main effort 
for IMATT (SL), particularly professional integrity - the 
emphasis on ‘thinking’ not ‘things’, and transferring the 
attitude that having the moral courage and integrity to 
make the right choices is paramount.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

218
“Originality is the most vital of 
military virtues as two thousand 
years of history attest.  In peace 
it is at a discount, for it causes 
the disturbance of comfortable 
ways without producing 
dividends, as in civil life.  But in 
war, originality bears a higher 
premium than it can ever do in 
civil professions.”
Sir Basil Liddell Hart
Section I  The Requirement
 To Anticipate
 To Learn
 To Adapt
Section II  Learn and Adapt Cycles
Section III  Enabling an Anticipatory, Learning and Adaptive  
 Organisation
Annex 12A  Force Preparation
Annex 12B Reading List
1201 Adaptive Adversaries.  Adversaries exploit 
the opportunities that global communications provide 
to publicise the propaganda of the deed, to mobilise 
transnational support, and to share the tactics that capitalise 
on our vulnerabilities.  This gi ves them resilience and agility; 
some adapt at unprecedented rates.  We have to anticipate, 
learn and adapt if we are to succeed.  These should not be 
seen as linear or sequential activities, but mutually supporting 
attributes that shape military action.
1202 Cultural and Organisation Requirements.  This 
chapter sets out an approach for military organisations to 
become anticipatory, learning and adaptive organisations in 
order to gain and maintain the initiative.  To be fully effective, 
this will need to be integrated locally, internationally and with 
inter-agency partners.
CHAPTER 12
ANTICIPATE LEARN AND ADAPT
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
219
SECTION I
THE REQUIREMENT
To Anticipate
1203 A force which is able to anticipate is better prepared 
than one which is simply responsive.  Anticipation involves 
looking ahead and predicting what may happen in the future, 
and then instigating pre-emptive measures to shape and 
exploit events; it is key to seizin g and maintaining the initiative.  
This requires a sophisticated understanding of the operational 
environment and competing groups.  The aim is to derive 
a position whereby it is possible to assess how these target 
groups are likely to react to a given situation.  Anticipation is 
an attribute that should be common in all military thinking 
and present from pre-deployment planning to tactical action.  
To achieve it, commanders will need to apply a continuous 
process of learning and a refinement of understanding.
To Learn
1204 Challenges to Learning.  Although learning is a 
collective activity, individual leaders can play a crucial role 
in its development.  The responsibility for learning rests 
with commanders, who will need to drive the process 
and overcome institutional inertia to it.  To overcome this, 
innovation should be instilled into all officers through 
education, training and throug h the conduct of operations.
The essential qualities required by all commanders if 
they wish their force to become one which can learn and 
adapt include:
‘Among other duties, the duty of generals is to observe, 
to think and to listen even to majors and colonels.  Break 
down the compartments, wherever they exist, of service 
parochialism, of ‘turf’ or hierarchical layering.  Let insight 
evolve from an atmosphere of open, shared thought…
from a willing openness, from continuous evaluation and 
discussion, from the review of assumptions, from listening to 
the views of outsiders, from the study of history and from the 
indispensable ingredient of humility’.
1 
1205 Measurement of Effect.  The ability to learn within 
a military organisation is tightly linked to the Measurement 
of Effect (MOE) process – to act, to measure, to learn.  Within 
stabilisation, the desired effects are principally focused 
on changing the perceptions of target audiences.  The 
identification of assessment criteria is essential and requires 
a balance of judgement and empirical evidence supported, 
but not driven, by statistical evidence.  Traditional MOE such 
as equipment destroyed or enemy dead is unlikely to be 
appropriate within a stabilisation environment.  More detail 
on MOE is given in Chapter 1 1 and JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition) 
Campaign Planning.
To Adapt
1206 Enhancing the Ability to Adapt.  In order to 
become adaptive, it is necessary to develop the organisational 
structures, mechanisms and procedures that facilitate rapid 
conceptual and physical modification, and innovation.  The 
challenge this poses for the armed forces of a western 
democratic state are significant.  While a non-state adversary’s 
primary focus is only the current conflict at hand, UK Armed 
Forces are also prepared and structured for a range of 
other tasks.  The traditional focus on inter-state warfighting, 
combined with the level of political and procedural 
accountability involved in major conceptual or structural 
change can restrain adaptation.
Learning and Adapting – Decentralisation.  In 
Afghanistan, the Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC) 
held responsibility for the High Density Airspace Control 
Zones over the Task Force Helmand area.  But, initial 
attempts to enforce higher level control by using A10 and 
then airborne early warning and control aircraft failed. 
Recognising that air-land situational awareness in the 
Task Force operations room was better than elsewhere, 
the CAOC adapted its processes and delegated authority 
to Task Force Helmand.  The result was successful high 
tempo, 24/7 close air support for three days, peaking at 
forty-three aircraft, and precision artillery being used at 
the same time in a single kill box.
1207 Timely Adaption.  The fostering of an adaptive 
environment is not risk-free.  By constantly seeking change, 
the need for persistence becomes neglected.  Judgement 
is needed to weigh up potential risks before implementing 
change.
• Adaptation v Persistence.  To maintain pressure on the 
enemy, and to achieve military objectives, there will be 
moments when the commander may judge that more 
time is needed for the effects of a particular activity to 
be realised – to persist.  Just because there are high levels 
of violence and casualties does not necessarily mean 
the mission is failing.  In such cases, changes should be 
delayed and the commander must ensure that this need 
to persist is clearly articula ted and understood within and 
outside the military.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
220
• Timely and Appropriate Implementation.  Major 
adaptations, for example to reorganise or retrain the force, 
take time.  They are even more demanding when forces 
are heavily engaged in operations.  Ideally, windows of 
opportunity will be identified  in which to make changes, 
but it is more probable that the need for change will only 
be identified after forces have been heavily committed.  
Adaptation in such a case may carry significant risk and 
may only be achievable by withdrawing elements of the 
force from contact.  Where this entails giving ground, the 
commander will need to articulate the risks and benefits 
of maintaining the current approach against instigating 
the necessary changes.
Anticipation – Slim in Burma.  Field Marshal The 
Viscount Slim, when commander of the 14th Army 
in Burma in 1942, realised that his force, at that time 
optimised for fighting in close jungle in the north of the 
theatre, was not correctly trained or configured to exploit 
the situation when he broke out into the open plains of 
the south.  Months before he would achieve this breakout 
he re-organised and trained his Army for the demands of 
mobile warfare to exploit the future situation.
1208 The Physical Ability to Adapt.   In addition to an 
intellectual quality, there must be the physical ability to 
instigate change across the Defence Lines of Development
2 
(DLoDs) in a pre-emptive and agile manner.  Such agility will 
be underpinned by retaining sufficient breadth of expertise 
within Defence, which can be rapidly exploited to meet 
the demands of a specific situation.
3  A commander will be 
focused on his ability to adapt existing capabilities to meet the 
requirements of the theatre.  This will often require new and 
novel approaches, and the development of new technologies, 
to then be inculcated into the force through training.  Such 
developments may impact on investment priorities in the 
equipment and force preparation programmes.
4  Gaining the 
authority, budgets and physical means to instigate change 
are pre-conditions to adaptation.  A key policy decision will 
be whether the UK is embarking on a short-term intervention 
operation or a campaign.  This will set the tone for the level 
of pan-Defence investment and commitment.  A campaign 
footing will be required as soon as transition to an enduring 
operation becomes clear.  But this is a difficult judgment 
to make.  Moreover, it is a political decision rather than a 
military one.  Although the decision to move to a campaign 
footing may trigger the necessary investment, such as theatre 
specific training teams and infrastructure, it is likely to be at an 
opportunity cost for the government or even Defence, 
and might entail losing, or re-prioritising other capabilities 
and programmes.  
1. Lt Gen John H Cushman, US Army, Challenge and Response at the Operational and Tactical 
levels, 1914-1945, Millet and Murray, Editors, Military Effectiveness , Volume III, pages 334-
336.
2. Training, Equipment, Personnel, Information, Concepts and Doctrine, Organisation, 
Infrastructure, Logistics.
3. For example; linguistic skills, cultural knowledge or niche capabilities (the current 
expansion of Weapons Intelligence and Improvise Explosive Device measures in Iraq and 
Afghanistan were built on Northern Ireland expertise).
4. Operation BANNER (Northern Ireland) was allocated its own budget and staff within the 
Equipment Programme in order to pre-emptively develop and bring into service theatre 
specific equipment.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
221
SECTION II
LEARN AND ADAPT 
CYCLES
1209 Levels of Anticipation, Learning and Adaption.   
Anticipation, learning and adaptation are relevant at all 
levels of command.  At the strategic level, the end state 
and campaign objectives are defined within the wider 
comprehensive plan – these may need to be revised if earlier 
assumptions are disproved.  At the operational level, as 
commanders learn more about the environment and their 
own force’s effectiveness within it, the campaign objectives 
may need adapting.  Within the force, commanders must 
establish responsive mechanisms that not only encourage 
and facilitate learning at the operational and tactical levels, 
but also adaptation at the necessary tempo.  Examples 
are in-theatre induction and refresher training or Counter-
insurgency (COIN) Academies used in Iraq and Afghanistan.  
The commander must ensure that an atmosphere of learning 
exists within the entire force.  Confidence in this can only 
be provided by the continuous, honest and aggressive 
extraction of lessons and their incorporation into the 
campaign design.  Commanders should ensure that the 
mechanisms to question assumptions and to share best 
practice are established, not only between levels of national 
command, but also across levels of command at both the 
multinational and inter-agency levels.
‘There is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous 
to conduct and more uncertain of success than to take the 
lead in the introduction of a new order of things.  Because the 
innovator has for enemies those who have done well under 
the old conditions and only lukewarm defenders in those who 
may do well under the new until certain of the outcome.’
Niccolo Machiavelli 1532 AD
1210 Critical Deductions.   Lessons are often only identified 
when errors have been made.  A key deduction will be 
to determine whether the error was caused due to poor 
execution (a relatively simple issue to address), or an incorrect 
approach.  The latter is more challenging to remedy and will 
require greater effort to address it.  The pre-eminent question 
we should ask is:
5 
• Are we doing the right things?
• Are we doing the right things correctly?
• Are these things getting us to where we want to be?
1211 Learn and Adapt Cycle.  The most successful 
examples of adaptation use a simple 3-step cycle, driven 
by constant review of the operational environment and the 
military capability required.  The first step in the cycle is to 
identify the lesson and determine the change in approach 
necessary – perhaps through practical experience, applied 
research or drawing on intellectual or innovative thinking.  
Then, a decision about the change of approach should be 
made and codified through either policy, the campaign plan, 
doctrine, Standing Operating Procedures (SOPs) or Tactics, 
Techniques and Procedures (TTPs).  Finally, not only should the 
change be inculcated into the organisation, primarily through 
education and training, but also through organisational 
changes and the employment of new technologies and 
equipments, in order to alter practice.  This is shown 
graphically in Figure 12.1.
1212 Increasing the Tempo.  Any system for capturing 
lessons needs to be supported by evidence for analysis.  The 
commander has an important role in ensuring honest and 
open reporting, which may reveal poor performance or lack of 
success.  The UK derives lessons from many routes including:
• Lessons identified in post-operational reports and 
 theatre headquarters. 
• Post-tour debrief of commanders and senior staff at the 
Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).
• Post-operational interviews conducted by single-Service 
warfare centres.
• Operational Experience Groups at the Development, 
Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC). 
• Directorate of Operational Capability audits tasked by the 
Vice Chief of the Defence Staff (VCDS). 
Because our forces are not optimised for stabilisation, the 
tempo and coverage of these processes should be monitored 
for their sufficiency to complete the learn and adapt cycle.  To 
achieve this, the three step learn and adapt cycle needs to 
be conducted at two levels.  They are intrinsically linked, but 
necessarily revolve at different speeds.
1213 Strategic Level.  At this level, the cycle is concerned 
with institutionalising patterns of practice, organisational 
structures and equipment procurement.  This provides the 
foundation for operational capability.  It is enacted via the 
array of organisations which are responsible for extracting 
lessons and developing concepts and ideas.  Necessary 
changes may be captured, for example, in revised policy, or 
changes to the equipment programme or codified within UK 
and NATO doctrine, and implemented through appropriate 
education and courses within training establishments.  This 
process is slow as it needs to not only gain wide consensus 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
222
before change is accepted but also, it should balance the 
requirements across the span of military tasks; both now and 
in the future.  The commander has a role in influencing and 
accelerating this cycle.
1214 Theatre Level.  The theatre level is concerned with 
the specific requirements of the campaign. At this level the 
cycle must be quick enough to maintain the initiative.  The 
process will be driven by the commander, who can codify 
new approaches through the production of  local doctrine , 
and by changing the structure of the force.  This will require 
both new organisations and processes, and existing ones 
to be bent out of shape.  For example, a decentralised 
approach to stabilisation will require intelligence processes 
that are sufficiently de-centralised to work out how a 
network of adversaries both links with other networks and 
with the population; the emphasis shifting from finding to 
understanding.  Similarly, it will be necessary to design and 
implement at high tempo an  Information effort that will 
resonate with locals, rather than rely on over-centralised 
Information Operations approaches.   Local doctrine can 
take the form of commander’s guidance notes, an operational 
handbook, headquarters’ SOPs or unit TTPs.  Whatever its 
form, the commander should have the resources to inculcate
it rapidly into the force through the adaptation of 
organisational structures, leadership and training, either as 
an aspect of in-theatre continuation training or as part of pre-
deployment training.
After a period of theoretical and doctrinal adaptation, 
with limited training to confirm it, Israel attempted to 
fight a short war on its own terms in the Lebanon in the 
summer of 2006.  It is debateable whether the lessons 
demonstrated a failure to adapt correctly, or a case of 
over-adaptation, trying to be too radical.  Either way, 
a number of strategic and operational weakness were 
highlighted by the Winograd commission,
6 which was 
scathing in its criticisms:
‘The IDF did not demonstrate creativity in proposing 
alternatives…, did not alert the political decision-
makers to the discrepancy between its own scenarios 
and authorised activity, and did not demand - as was 
necessary under its own plans - early mobilisation of the 
reserves so they could be equipped and trained in case a 
ground operation was required’.
7 
Even after leaders knew these facts, they failed to 
adapt the military’s objectives and execution of the 
operation to the reality in the field.  Indeed, although 
the declared goals were too ambitious, it was publicly 
stated that fighting would continue until they were 
achieved; an impossibility given the scope of authorised 
military operations.
5. JDP 3-00 (3rd Edition) Campaign Execution , Chapter 4.
6. Government commission of inquiry headed by Dr Eliyahu Winograd, former president of 
the Tel Aviv District Court.  Other appointees were Professor Ruth Gavison of the Hebrew 
Univerity of Jerusalem, political scientist Professor Yehezkel Dror, and retired Army 
generals Manahem Einan and Chaim Nadel.
7. 34 Days - Israel, Hezbollah and the War in Lebanon, A Harel & A Issacharoff, Chapter 8, 
page 246 (2008).
Operational Environment / 
Current Military Capability
Review Situation
Step 3: Inculcate Change
Education & Training
Organisational Structure
Use of Technology
Step 2: Codify Change
Education & Training
Organisational Structure
Use for Technology
Step 1: ID Need for Change
Practical Experience
Operational Analysis/Research
Innovative Thinking
  Figure 12.1 – Learn and Adapt Cycle
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
223
1215 Releasing the Potential.   In-theatre mechanisms, 
supported by staff capacity, are needed to allow the 
force to learn and adapt quickly.  This is done by sharing 
experience, identifying best pr actice, and codifying them.  
Simple techniques such as in-theatre training camps and 
the use of units with recent experience to train incoming 
ones are effective.  Mission command and decentralised 
control must underpin a force’s ability to learn and adapt, 
and an open atmosphere must be developed with an 
institutional understanding to operate across, if not break 
down hierarchical layering.  Allied with Communications 
and Information Systems (CIS), opportunistic networks can 
be established to exploit the experience and initiative of 
individuals at all levels, and allow them to adapt.  The use 
of these emerging media needs careful management to 
ensure that bad practices are not spread as well as good, but 
their potential for positive effect is significant.  For example, 
NATO’s Civil-Military Overview  website that covers theatre level 
knowledge management and less ons for Afghanistan and the 
Horn of Africa: https://cmo.act.nato.int/Pages/Login.aspx.
1216 Completing the Loop.  Effective concepts that 
have been proved effective on operations should be 
codified and incorporated into doctrine.  This will ensure 
In Theatre 
Commander
In Theatre
Specialist
Expert’s
Contacts
Expert’s
Contacts
Expert’s
Contacts
Expert’s
ContactsOther 
Specialists
Out of
Theatre Specialist
Experts
Primary Link
Ministry of Defence
Permanent Joint Headquarters
Defence Intelligence Staff
  Figure 12.2 – Network via Reachout
Networks via Reachout.  Tapping the expertise that 
exists in the home-base may be achieved by linking 
the commander to a network of experts in UK (or 
wider) through a single point of contact.  This spiders-
web of contacts and subject-matter experts might be 
coordinated through, for example, the Operational 
Team at PJHQ, to deliver tailored responses to questions 
for which the expertise is not available in theatre.  This 
approach may be used to develop understanding about 
the motivations of interlocutors, or finding a wider range 
of potential levers to influence host nation leaders.  This 
might work as shown in Figure 12.2.
 Operational Lessons Teams  can be deployed quickly to 
focus on key issues related to the effectiveness of current 
training, equipment, doctrine or interoperability to match the 
demands of current operations.  An example early in 2009 
examined the delivery of joint In telligence, Surveillance, Target 
Acquisition and Reconnaissance (I STAR) capability to Helmand.  
The UK Joint Lessons Reference Group
8 directs short 
deployments into theatre.  Deployed teams, typically led at 
OF5, work with deployed headquarters and partner agencies 
and nations to an agenda set by the reference group.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
224
that such enduring lessons ar e inculcated through training 
and education into future generations.  It is important that 
organisational structures and mechanisms are continually 
assessed to ensure best practice.  The deployment of 
operational lessons teams into theatre, to hunt for lessons and 
to advise on priorities in order to effect the necessary changes 
in Defence is an important mechanism in the UK’s ability to 
anticipate, learn and adapt.
1217 Adaptive Employment.  Bespoke capabilities are 
needed to conduct stabilisation.  These range from high-end 
combat capabilities optimised for precision strike, through the 
training of indigenous forces, to the support of indigenous 
governance.  None is likely to possess sufficient skills or 
experience to do them all well.  Some tasks require specialist 
preparation, and certain appointments need the right 
individual, with continuity of ap pointment often being critical.  
To achieve this, commanders need to allocate unit tasks and 
appoint individuals selectively on their merits.  This requires 
adaptive force generation and manning polices.  Commanders 
will need to shape force generation processes, and influence 
personnel selections for critical tasks.
1218 Total Immersion.  Understanding local conditions 
and culture is always challenging for those who are deployed 
for the short term.  Some states, and regions within them, 
may merit the employment of military officers who become 
specialists in the personalities, culture and geography of a 
region through immersion and repeated tours.
9  These can 
develop personal relationships and the local awareness that 
may provide the means to enable deployed task forces to 
anticipate events and adapt to local conditions.
When General Casey assumed US military command in 
Iraq, he summoned Derek Harvey, a retired army colonel 
and Foreign Area Officer to brief him on the insurgency.  
In the 1980s Harvey had travelled extensively through Iraq 
by taxi, sharing living quarters with locals.  His analyses 
presaged the survival of Saddam Hussein after the 1991 
Gulf War and the threat that Iraq and Afghanistan would 
later become.  After the invasion in 2003 Harvey spoke 
to tribes and Baathist regime leaders, and he studied 
documents and letters seized by the US military.  He 
determined that the old regime elements had plans 
to create a violent, hostile environment and that the 
developing insurgency was based on the old trust 
networks of professional, tribal and family relationships.  
He also discovered that guidance instructions and 
exhortation were often written in the language of holy 
war.  Casey asked Harvey what was really going on in Iraq. 
“The Sunni insurgency is growing and getting worse…It’s 
organized.  It’s coherent.  And its members have a strategy.”   
Harvey said the Americans must learn to operate with 
humility, partly because…“We don’t understand the fight 
we’re in”.   When violence erupted around the end of 
October 2004 and daily attacks doubled from 70 to 140, 
Harvey’s assessment seemed prescient.  
Harvey was summoned to brief Rumsfield.  He said 
they were doing the wrong things – underestimating 
the violence and failing to en gage with the tribes.  He 
was sent to brief Rice; he told her that money was 
being invested in the wrong areas, that it needed to 
go to areas of high unemployment where people felt 
disenfranchised, not just the areas that were judged 
safe.  In December, he briefed President Bush and the 
CIA Director: “Who are you? What’s your experience on Iraq? 
And why should I believe what you’re saying?” , the President 
asked.  
“I’ve spent nearly 20 years working in the Middle East” …”I 
have advanced degrees.  I’ve spent the last 18 months 
working, travelling, talking with insurgents, sitting in 
interrogation rooms.”  He described going into Fallujah in 
the middle of the uprising without armed escort and spent 
the night talking with Abdullah al-Janabi, one of the clerics 
leading the insurgency.  “We label him a religious extremist,” 
Harvey said.  “He’s a Baathist who’s very angry, has lost family 
members, okay?  Drinks Johnnie Walker Black Label.”
“Okay”, Bush said, “let’s go on.”  
Derek Harvey’s assessment won over the CIA Director, 
against his own Agency advice.  His deep cultural 
understanding proved instrumental in US decision 
making at the highest levels and helped shape the 
outcome of the campaign.
Understanding from Total Immersion.
10
8. Chaired by Chief of Staff Joint Warfare Development, Permanent Joint Headquarters, 
it comprises 2* representatives from the Ministry of Defence, Joint Services Command 
and Staff College and the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre.  It considers the 
analysis from operational reports, interviews and experience groups and sets priority for 
further evidence gathering.
9. The US Foreign Area Officer career field is one such means to achieve total immersion in 
a country.
10. Bob Woodward, The War Within , Simon and Schuster, 2008, pages 17-26.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
225
SECTION III
ENABLING AN 
ANTICIPATORY, LEARNING 
AND ADAPTIVE 
ORGANISATION
1219 The following list provides some guidance to 
commanders on activity to enable organisational anticipation, 
learning and adaptation:
Anticipation:
• Develop an in-depth understanding of the operating 
environment in order to recognise patterns and the 
significance of fragmented activity.  Make plans based 
on this knowledge enabled by commanders having the 
opportunity to think and reflect.
• Gain an understanding from multinational, inter-agency 
and joint sources of how target groups are likely to react to 
a given situation and prepare for it in advance.
Learning:
• Consult widely to understand local political, cultural and 
social dynamics outside the military’s traditional field 
 of expertise.
• Coordinate closely with governmental and non-
government partners at all levels of command.
• Develop a military culture that challenges institutional 
assumptions of the situation, both formally and informally.
• Foster open communications between senior officers and 
their subordinates.
• Be open to solutions suggested from the field.
• Solicit the understanding of local people (hostile and 
friendly) and be sensitive to their evaluation of the 
situation in the conflict zone.
Adaptation:
• Establish rapid mechanisms to disseminate lessons.
• Develop doctrine and practices locally.
• Establish in-theatre training facilities (for national and 
indigenous forces).
Meeting Capability Shortfalls.  The Urgent Operational 
Requirement (UOR) is an important tool in every 
commander’s set to rectify lessons identified.  The UOR 
process exists to address capability shortfalls on current, 
or imminent, operations.  Funded by the Treasury, they 
are regulated by tight timelines – 18 months from 
statement to employment within theatre, often much 
less.  Each theatre will have an equipment capability 
branch.  They assist in writing Urgent Statements of User 
Requirement and subsequent fielding.  Key to a successful 
urgent statement of user requirement is that it addresses 
a capability shortfall specific to that theatre and it is 
essential to operational success.  
The imperative to urgently satisfy the operational 
capability gap is balanced against greater risk against 
meeting cross-DLoD requirements.
Analysis at Pace.  Deployed operational analysis teams 
can provide rapid evidence to support headquarters. 
Operational analysis tools and scientific advisers, 
supplemented by accessing broad analytical expertise 
through reach-out, can be used to assess plans and 
wargame scenarios.  Such expertise can provide critical 
evidence to support key decisions.  Rock drills, scenario 
based seminars, wargames and BOGSAT
11 are examples of 
activities that will be enhanc ed by engaging analysts to 
supports their design and execution.
11. A US acronym (for a Bunch of Guys Sitting Around a Table) to describe informal, 
resource-limited wargaming or analysis
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

226
 ‘The good fighter of old first puts 
themselves beyond the possibility 
of defeat, and then waited for 
an opportunity of defeating 
the enemy.  To secure ourselves 
against defeat lies in our own 
hands, but the opportunity of 
defeating the enemy is provided 
by the enemy himself.’
Sun Tzu – The Art of War
The Requirement
12A01 Maintaining the Edge.  Force preparation must 
not become separated from the operational environment; 
it must replicate the complexity and challenges that are 
likely to be demanded.  The increasing complex demands of 
the operational environment and the growing range, reach 
and adaptability of adversaries requires an agile, adaptive 
approach.  Anticipation and learning is necessary to prepare 
and adapt the force accordingly – conceptually, physically and 
morally – in order to identify and respond to emerging threats 
as well as exploit opportunities.  Early investment will be 
essential for Defence to make the decisions necessary to equip 
commanders and trainers with the resources required in time.
12A02 Balance of Preparation.  Only limited components 
of UK’s military force structure is likely to be optimised for 
the demands of stabilisation.  Therefore tailored individual, 
collective and mission specific preparation is required.  There 
are three broad areas of force preparation:
• Mindset.   Establishing the culture and mindset within a 
force for security and stabilisation.
• Education and Training.  Developing the education and 
training mechanisms to plan and execute comprehensive 
activity.  These should include a deep understanding of 
the utility of force and alternative methods of realising 
security effects.  Additionally, a greater emphasis 
on intelligence preparation and the gathering and 
exploitation of actionable intelligence from a wider variety 
of sources will be required, underpinned by effective 
information management.
• Tactics.  The inculcation of Tactics, Techniques and 
Procedures (TTPs) to conduct the range of military 
operations and activities wi thin a complex stabilisation 
operation. 
12A03 Education and Training.  Education develops 
mental power and understanding; training prepares 
people, individually or coll ectively, for given tasks in 
given circumstances; train for what is known, educate 
ANNEX 12A
FORCE PREPARATION
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

227
for the unknown.  Operations will always be uncertain.  
Notwithstanding efforts to anticipate, it is impossible to 
predict, or plan for all eventualities.  Therefore, there must be 
a degree to which the military react to events.
1  Education 
provides a flexible and resili ent foundation upon which to 
build the training.  To be effective, professional stabilisation 
education will need to be conducted at a lower level than it 
has been previously to develop the understanding required 
early enough to be of real value.  Additionally, revisions to 
professional military education should give greater emphasis 
to inter-agency and mu ltinational integration.
12A04 Self-Education.  Self-education is an essential part of 
building wider expertise.  Commanders and staffs now have to 
be capable of much more than the professional management 
of military force.  Acknowledging the vast and varied nature of 
writing on this subject, the selective Reading List at the Annex 
12B is intended as a guide.  Additional material, some of which 
was drafted in support of this publication is available on the 
Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) Internet 
and Defence Intranet sites.
2 
Effective Preparation
12A05 Warfighting Ethos.  Preparation must maintain 
our ability to succeed in a violent and austere environment.  
This will establish and strengthen the common standards of 
conduct and achievement to create trust and understanding 
that enables the integration of joint activity.  The assumption 
that readiness for warfighting alone will provide the necessary 
qualities and expertise to co nduct stabilisation missions 
with limited additional preparation is incorrect.
3  Instead, the 
development of sufficient st abilisation understanding and 
expertise, and the right mindset within the force, during both 
generic and mission specific preparation will be vital.
4 
12A06 Preparing for Stabilisation.  Stabilisation requires 
appropriate force structures, doctrine and experience to 
operate effectively with a wide spectrum of multinational, 
inter-agency and indigenous partners.
5  Additionally, the 
requirement to influence the population, provide security 
and develop host nation capability is likely to be manpower 
intensive.  Organisations solely based on lean warfighting 
structures are likely to be inadequate without significant 
augmentation and preparation.  This is relevant to Maritime,
6 
Land7 and Air8 formations and force generation must take this 
into account.
12A07 Train as Intended to Operate.  All stabilisation 
forces should train as they intend to operate in order to 
develop the teamwork, understa nding and procedures that 
will be needed for a specific operation.  This will require 
units to gain increased exposure to a wide range of military, 
civilian and multinational capa bilities during preparation 
so that dispersed individuals and units are able to function 
as an effective network.  This will challenge traditional 
models of force generation where Joint and Multinational 
preparation is reserved for the final stages only.  In order 
to operate as a network, greater Joint, inter-agency and 
multinational integration will be required at lower tactical 
levels.  Stabilisation requires greater emphasis at lower 
command levels in the use of Command and Control (C2) 
applications, exploiting information, conducting engagement 
and controlling organic and Joint fires.  Additionally, training 
as forces intend to operate should not be interpreted 
as advocating rigid force structures.  The stabilisation 
environment will require the ability to force package in a 
more dynamic comprehensive manner and decentralise 
decision making.
“Lieutenant General Stan McChrystal had it right when he 
said; to defeat a network, you have to be a network.  In 
our case the network of which I speak is the network of 
Joint, Inter-Agency, Inter-Governmental and Multinational 
partners”
General Dempsey (CG TRADOC), Joint Warfighting 
Conferenc
e  – 12 May 2009
12A08 Replicating the Operating Environment.  Training 
and exercises need to be conducted in the conditions and 
environments that most closely represent the complexity, 
intensity and scale that might be expected on operations.
9  
Training must develop familiarity and proficiency in operating 
with coalition forces, resulting, as far as possible, in cultural 
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

228
understanding, interoperability and procedural alignment 10 to 
develop the cohesion required.  In particular, it is essential that 
personnel be exposed to training that as closely as possible 
reflects the sights, sounds, sensations and decision making 
challenges that will be encountered on operations.  This 
includes the need to give co mmanders experience during 
training that will allow them to develop an understanding of 
the different levels of the operation.
12A09 Exploiting Technology.   Technology and networked 
capabilities should be exploited to enable dispersed civil-
military elements to train together from home locations 
as well as to simulate the complexity of, and interaction 
necessary in, the operating environment.  Whenever possible, 
systems and data used in simulations and synthetic training 
should be the same as are being used for real.  This demands 
ready access to the relevant data sets and systems to enable 
the physical and cultural characteristics of the operational 
theatre to be represented.  Additionally, a networked 
deployable capability will enhance in-theatre training whilst 
exploiting Home Base resources through reachout.  This 
can support connectivity and information sharing between 
those about to deploy, those in theatre and those with recent 
operational experience.  These networks are commonly 
known as communities of practice.
 11
In 1997 , the scenario of a regiment’s capstone two 
week field training exercise at the US National Training 
Centre was driven by 2,500 injects of information and 
intelligence.  In 2009, a similar training exercise was driven 
by 1.2 million injects of information and intelligence.
Wider Preparation
12A10 Preparing the Home Base.  The UK Armed Forces, in 
conjunction with Other Government Departments, will need 
to develop and implement methods that allow access to the 
resources of the Home Base in support of comprehensive 
stabilisation activities.  Direct support will typically include: 
access to UK based Reserve, specialised and contractual 
capabilities; and resort to the resources and capacity of 
both state and commercial sectors, such as the provision of 
medical care.  At the same time, it may be necessary to put 
in place measures to safeguard the Home Base and lines of 
communication in the event of an attack or threat.
12 
12A11 Medical.  Confidence in the effectiveness and 
availability of medical provision and services will be a critical 
factor in supporting the Moral Component.  For short-
notice operations that take place outside temperate zones, 
consideration will have to be given to the scale of prophylaxis 
and medical preparation required.  Similarly, time may need 
to be allocated for acclimatisation and conditioning when 
operating in unfamiliar, challenging conditions.
12A12 Infrastructure.  The provision of appropriate training 
infrastructure 13 is an essential requirement for effective 
individual and collective preparat ion.  Adequate infrastructure 
must therefore be developed to enable the education and 
training of individuals and unit s to support stabilisation.  A 
balance will need to be struck between long-term investment 
in fixed infrastructures and more modular and deployable 
assets to enhance flexibility.
12A13 Welfare Support.  Sufficient camp infrastructure 
and welfare support must also continue to be developed for 
deployed forces and, equally importantly, for their families 
and the units left behind.  This must increasingly be provided 
throughout the UK and elsewhere as Service personnel settle 
their families away from military bases.  Such welfare support 
must also include the ability to manage the media and protect 
families from intrusive reporting.
12A14 Acquisition Cycle.  For equipment to be successfully 
exploited on operations, it must be introduced in such a 
way as to allow the necessary training prior to operational 
employment.  This will require sufficient equipments to 
be held to enable both preparation for and concurrent 
engagement on operations, and means that the supporting 
capabilities required for preparation should be accounted for 
in acquisition decisions.
 
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
1. Kiszely, Lt Gen Sir John, Post Modern Challenges for Modern Warriors , The Shrivenham 
Papers – Number 5, December 2007, page 14.
2. Defence Intranet: www.dcdc.dii.r.mil.uk; Internet: www.mod.uk/defenceinternet/
microsite/dcdc/.
3. Kitson, Low Intensity Operations; Subversion, Insurgency and Peacekeeping . Faber and Faber. 
Pages 172 & 200.
4. Kiszely, Lt Gen J. 2006, Learning about Counter-insurgency .  RUSI Journal, December 2006. 
‘Small wars cannot be fought by big war methods...in the eyes of the warrior insurgency 
calls for some very un-warrior qualities, such as emotional intelligence, empathy, 
subtlety, sophistication, nuance and political adroitness’.
5. Other Security Forces, International Police, Indigenous Forces.
6. Maritime – inter-alia, Maritime Security Operations, Capacity building, Regional 
Engagement, the requirement will exist to provide boarding parties, medical support, 
training teams from lean manned ships and the capability to conduct shallow-water and 
riverine operations.
7. Land – infantry units possess the most appropriate core skills, force structure and 
manpower for this role but still require additional training.  Converting armoured, 
combat support and combat service support units is likely to pose greater challenges 
due to the nature of the core skills of these units, the generally smaller orders of battle 
that consist of a greater proportion of technical personnel compared to infantry units. 
8. Air – Intelligence, Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance to strike platform 
relationship, ordnance and persistence required.
9. This will need to include the development of realistic exercise adversaries (OPFOR) to 
reflect the increasing range of likely threats and challenges, including those within 
civilian populations to replicate operations ‘amongst the people’.
10. Through the appropriate alignment of Tactics, Techniques and Procedures which will be 
practised during Joint Training.
11. The British Army have developed a community of practice for company level 
commanders called ‘Vital Ground’ on www.armynet.mod.uk.
12. In 2008 Parviz Khan, from Birmingham, was sentenced to life imprisonment for plotting 
to kidnap and behead a British Muslim soldier at home on leave.
13. Centres of excellence, training support teams, equipments and simulation, real estate 
and logistic support.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

ANNEX 12B
READING LIST
Reading Lists.  Self education is an essential part of building 
a new, broader and more demanding expertise.  Commanders 
and staffs now have to be capable of much more than the 
professional management of force.  Acknowledging the vast 
and varied nature of writing on this subject, the following list 
of suggested reading is intended to provide a broad spectrum 
– it is not exhaustive.  As this must be considered in context, 
the list has been broken down into sections:
Character of the Situation:
• Bastrup-Birk, Burke and Hill , Non-state Actors: Evolutions 
and Influence, DSTL/CR28549, March 2008.
• Gray, Colin, Irregular Warfare, One Nature, Many Characters , 
Strategic Studies Quarterly, Winter 2007.
• Kilcullen, David , The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small 
Wars in the Mist of a Big One , Hurst and Company, 2009.
• Hammes, T X , The Sling and the Stone: On war in the 21st 
Century, Zenith Press, 2006.
• Hoffman, Frank , Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of 
Hybrid Wars, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, 2007.
• Smith, General Sir Rupert , The Utility of Force – The Art of 
War in the Modern World , Penguin Books, 2006.
• Weinstein, Jeremy , Inside Rebellion – The Politics of 
Insurgent Violence, Cambridge, 2007.
Environment:
• Betz, Dr David , Redesigning Land Forces for Wars Amongst 
the People, Contemporary Security Policy Volume 28, 
August 2007.
• Coker, Christopher , The Warrior Ethos, Military Culture and 
The War on Terror, Routledge, 2007.
• Gordon and Gompert , War By Other Means.  Building 
Complete and Balanced Capabilities for Counterinsurgency , 
RAND Counterinsurgency study – final report 2008.
• Mackinlay, John , Defeating Complex Insurgency , RUSI 
Whitehall Paper No 64, 2005.
• Mills, Greg , Calibrating Ink Spots: Filling Afghanistan’s 
Ungoverned Spaces , RUSI Journal, August 2006.
• Mackinlay, McNamee, Mills , International Peace-Building 
for the 21st Century: The Tswalu Protocol and Background 
Papers, RUSI Whitehall Report 2-08.
Opponents:
• Cassidy, Robert , The Long Small War: Indigenous Forces for 
COIN, US Army War College Parameters, Summer 2006.
• Glenn and Gayton , Intelligence Operations and Metrics 
in Afghanistan and Iraq, Joint Urban Operations and 
Counterinsurgency Studies, RAND, November 2008.
229
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILIZATION: THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

230
• Jones, S, Fighting Networked Terrorist Groups: Lessons from 
Israel, RAND, April 2006.
• Kilcullen, Dr David , Countering Global Insurgency , Version 
2.2, 30 November 2004
• Millen, Raymond , The Hobbesian Notion of Self-Preservation 
Concerning Human Behaviour During an Insurgency , US 
Army War College Parameters, Winter 2006-07.
• Sky, Emma, Iraq 2007 – Moving Beyond Counter-Insurgency 
Doctrine: A First Hand Perspective , RUSI Journal; Volume 153, 
No 2, pages 30-40.
• Villeneuve, Lt Col D , To Provide Focus: Intelligence and 
Counterinsurgency, Canadian Army Journal, Volume 10.4, 
Winter 2008.
Allies, Partners and Other Agencies:
• Kiszely, Lt Gen Sir John , Coalition Command in 
Contemporary Operations , RUSI Whitehall Report 1-08, 2008.
• Kleiner, Lt Col C , The Importance of Cultural Knowledge For 
Today’s Warrior Diplomats , US Army War College Strategy 
Research Project, March 2008.
• Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.4.4  COIN (being produced 
in parallel with JDP 3-40).
• AJP-3.2  Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations .
• Allied Tactical Publication (ATP)-3.2.1.1  Guidance for the 
Conduct of Tactical Stability Activities and Tasks .
• US Government Counterinsurgency Guide , 13 January 2009, 
Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, Department of State.
• US Joint Publication 3-24 , Counterinsurgency Operations , 
Revision Draft August 2008.
• US Army FM 3-24, Marine Corps Warfighting Publication 
No 3-33.5, Counterinsurgency Field Manual , Chicago 
University Press edition, 2007.
• US Army FM 3-07 Stability Operations , October 2008.
• Australia – Adaptive Campaigning: The Land Force Response 
to Complex Warfighting , Future Land Warfare Branch, 
Australian Army Headquarters, December 2007.
• Canada – Land Operations 2021 , Adaptive Dispersed 
Operations: The Force Employment Concept for Canada’s 
Army of Tomorrow.
• UK Stabilisation Unit  – The UK Approach to Stabilisation , 
2008
• Whaites, Alan , States in Development: Understanding 
State-Building, Department for International Development 
Working Paper, Policy and Research Division, 2008.
Culture and History:  
• Callwell, Col C , Small Wars: Their Principles and Practice , 
HMSO 1906, 3rd Edition, Bison Books, 1996
• Galula, David , Counterinsurgency Warfare – Theory and 
Practice, Praeger Security International, 2006.
• Havoll, H, COIN Revisited: Lessons of the Classical Literature on 
Counterinsurgency and its Applicability to the Afghan Hybrid 
Insurgency, Norwegian Institute of International Affairs, 
2008.
• Kitson, Gen Sir Frank , Low Intensity Operations: Subversion, 
Insurgency, Peacekeeping , London Faber, 1971.
• McCuen, John J , The Art of Counter-Revolutionary War: the 
Strategy of Counter-Insurgency, Stackpole Books, USA, 1966. 
• McFate, Montgomery , Anthropology and 
Counterinsurgency: The Strange Story of their Curious 
Relationship, Military Review, March-April 2005.
• Muckian, Martin , Structural Vulnerabilities and Networked 
Insurgencies: Adapting to the New Adversary , US Army War 
College Parameters Winter 2006-7.
• Nagl, Lt Col J , Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife: 
Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya and Vietnam , 
University of Chicago Press edition, 2005.
• Porter, Dr Patrick , Good Anthropology, Bad History: 
The Cultural Turn in Studying War, US Army War College 
Parameters Summer 2007.
• Reed, Brian , A Social Network Approach to Understanding an 
Insurgency, US Army War College Parameters Summer 2007.
• Thomson, Sir Robert , Defeating Communist Insurgency.  
Experiences from Malaya to Vietnam , Chatto & Windus, 
London 1972.
• Wass de Czege, H , Lessons from the Past: Making the Army’s 
Doctrine ‘Right Enough’ Today , Landpower Essay 06-2, 
September 2006.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

231
PART 1
ACRONYMS AND 
ABBREVIATIONS
AAG Afghan Assessment Group
ADZ Afghan Development Zones
AJP Allied Joint Publication
ANP Afghan National Police
ANSF Afghan National Security Force
AOO Area of Operations
AQI Al-Qaeda in Iraq
ASAC All Source Analysis Cell
BDD British Defence Doctrine
BUA Battlefield Update Assessment
C2 Command and Control
C3I Command, Control, Communications and   
 Intelligence
CAF Campaign Assessment Framework
CCIR Commander’s Critical Information Requirements
CDS Chief of the Defence Staff
CEA Campaign Effectiveness Assessment 
CERP Commander’s Emergency Response Programme  
 (US)
CHASE Conflict, Humanitarian and Security Department
CIMIC Civil-Military Co-operation
CIS Communications and Information Systems
CivSec Civil Secretary
CJO Chief of Joint Operations
COED Concise Oxford English Dictionary
CoG Centre of Gravity
COIN Counter-insurgency
COMISAF Commander International Stabilisation   
 Assistance Force
DCDC Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
DDR Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration
DEVAD Development Adviser
DFID Department for International Development
DIS Defence Intelligence Staff
EU European Union
EW Electronic Warfare
FCO Foreign and Commonwealth Office
FRAGO Fragmentary Order
GCHQ Government Communications Headquarters
GEOINF Geospatial Information
GEOINT Geospatial Intelligence
GOVAD Governance Adviser
HMG Her Majesty’s Government
HUMINT Human Intelligence
IED Improvised Explosive Device
IGO Inter-governmental Organisation
ISAF International Security Assistance Force
LEXICON
The Lexicon contains acronyms/abbreviations and terms/
definitions relevant to JDP 3-40, but is not intended to be 
exhaustive.  For fuller reference to extant terminology see 
the current edition of JDP 0-01.1 The UK Glossary of Joint and 
Multinational Terms and Definitions.
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
232
ISTAR Intelligence, Surveillan ce, Target Acquisition and  
 Reconnaissance
IRA Irish Republican Army
JARIC Joint Air Reconnaissance Intelligence Centre
JDN Joint Doctrine Note
JDP Joint Doctrine Publication
JFC Joint Force Commander
JIATF Joint Inter-Agency Task Force
JOA Joint Operations Area
JSP Joint Service Publication
JSA Joint Stabilisation Assessment
JSAT Joint Strategic Assessment Team
JTF Joint Task Force
JTFHQ Joint Task Force Headquarters
JWP Joint Warfare Publication  
KLE Key Leader Engagement
LEGAD Legal Adviser
LOC Line of Communication
LoO Line of Operation
MASINT Measurement and Signature Intelligence
M2T Monitoring, Mentoring and Training
MiTT Military Transition Teams
MNC Multinational Cooperation
MNC -I Multinational Corps-Iraq
MNF-I Multinational Force-Iraq
MOA Measurement of Activity
MOD Ministry of Defence
MOE Measurement of Effect
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
MPE Materiel and Personnel Exploitation
MTA Military Technical Agreement
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NDS National Directorate of Security
NGO Non-governmental Organisation
NI Northern Ireland
NIC National Intelligence Cell
NIS National Information Strategy
NSID National Security, International Relations and  
 Development
OGD Other Government Departments
OPORD Operation Order
OPLAN Operation Plan
OISG Operational Intelligence Support Group
OMLT Operational Mentoring and Liaison Team
OOB Out of Bounds
OPSEC Operations Security
OSINT Open-source Intelligence
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
PMSC Private Military and Security Company(ies)
POLAD Policy Adviser
PRT Provincial Reconstruction Team
PSO Peace Support Operations
PSYOPS Psychological Operations
QIP Quick Impact Project 
RAF Royal Air Force
RCDS Royal College of Defence Studies
RFI Request for Information
RN Royal Navy
ROE Rules of Engagement
ROLAD Rule of Law Adviser
RSLAF Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces
RUF Revolutionary United Front
SAF Sultan’s Armed Forces
SAS Special Air Service
SCIAD Scientific Adviser
SCOG Security Cooperation Operations Group
SIGINT Signals Intelligence
SIPRNET Secret Internet Protocol Router Network
SIS Secret Intelligence Service
SOFA Status of Forces Agreements
SOP Standard/Standing Operating Procedure
SSR Security Sector Reform
STABAD Senior Stabilisation Adviser
TECHINT Technical Intelligence
TRADOC Training and Doctrine Command (United States  
 Army)
TTPs Tactics, Techniques and Procedures
UAS Unmanned Aerial Systems
UK United Kingdom
UN United Nations
UNITAF Unified Task Force
UNPROFOR United Nations Protection Force
UNSC UN Security Council
UNSCR UN Security Council Resolution
US United States
WME Weapons of Mass Effect
 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
233
PART 2
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Agency
A distinct non-military body which has objectives that are 
broadly consistent with those of the campaign.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Analysis
1. The examination of all the constituent elements of a 
situation, and their inter-relationships, in order to obtain 
a thorough understanding of the past, present and 
anticipated future operational context.  (JDP 01 (2nd 
Edition))
2. In intelligence usage, a step in the processing phase of 
the intelligence cycle in which information is subjected to 
review in order to identify significant facts for subsequent 
interpretation.  (AAP-6)
Area of Operations
A geographical area, defined by a Joint Force Commander 
within his Joint Operations Area, in which a commander 
designated by him (usually a Component Commander) is 
delegated authority to conduct operations.  See also Joint 
Operations Area. (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Area of Interest
The area of concern to a commander, relative to the objectives 
of current or planned operations, including his Joint 
Operations Area/Area of Operations and adjacent areas.  See 
also Joint Operations Area and Area of Operations.  (JDP 01 
(2nd Edition))
Battlespace
All aspects of a Joint Operations Area within which military 
activities take place subject to Battlespace Management.  See 
also Battlespace Management and Joint Operations Area.  (JDP 01 
(2nd Edition))
Battlespace Management
The adaptive means and measures that enable the dynamic 
synchronisation of activity. (JDP 3-70)
Campaign
A set of military operations planned and conducted to 
achieve strategic objectives within a given timeframe and 
geographical area, which normally involve Joint forces, 
frequently in concert with other instruments of national or 
multinational power. (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Campaign Authority
The authority established by in ternational forces, agencies 
and organisations within a given situation in support of (or in 
place of) an accepted (or ineffective, even absent) indigenous 
government or organisation.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Note:
It is an amalgam of 4 inter-dependent factors: the perceived 
legitimacy of the authorisation or mandate for action; the 
perceived legitimacy of the manner in which those exercising the 
mandate conduct themselves both individually and collectively; 
the degree to which factions, local populations and others accept 
the authority of those executing the mandate; and the degree to 
which the aspirations of factions, local populations and others are 
managed or met by those executing the mandate.
Campaign Design
Campaign Design develops and refines the commander’s (and 
staff’s) ideas to provide detailed, executable and successful 
plans.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Campaign End-State
The extent of the Joint Force Commander’s contribution to 
meeting the National Strategic Aim. (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Campaign Effectiveness Assessment
Evaluation of campaign progress based on levels of subjective 
and objective measurement, in order to inform decision-
making.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Campaign Management
Campaign Management integrates, coordinates, synchronises 
and prioritises the execution of operations and assesses 
progress.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Campaign Objective
A goal, expressed in terms of one or more decisive conditions, 
that needs to be achieved in order to meet the National 
Strategic Aim.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Campaign Rhythm
The regular recurring sequence of events and actions, 
harmonised across a Joint force, to regulate and maintain 
control of a campaign.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Close Air Support
Air action against hostile targets which are in close proximity 
to friendly forces and which require detailed integration of 
each air mission with the fire and movement of those forces.  
(AAP-6)
Civil-Military Cooperation
The process whereby the relationship between military and 
civilian sectors is addressed, with the aim of enabling a more 
coherent military contribution to the achievement of UK and/
or international objectives.  (JDP0-01.1)
Centre of Gravity
Characteristic, capability, or influence from which a nation, an 
alliance, a military force or othe r civil or militia grouping draws 
its freedom of action, physical strength, cohesion or will to 
fight.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
234
Coalition
An ad hoc arrangement between two or more nations for 
common action. (JDP 0-01.1)
Collation
In intelligence usage, a step in the processing phase of the 
intelligence cycle in which the grouping together of related 
items of information or intelligen ce provides a record of events 
and facilitates further processing. (AAP-6)
Collection
The exploitation of sources by collection agencies and the 
delivery of the information obtained to the appropriate 
processing unit for use in the production of intelligence.  
(AAP-6)
Combat Support
Fire support and operational assistance provided to combat 
elements.  (AAP-6)
Combat Service Support
The support provided to combat forces, primarily in the fields 
of administration and logistics.  (AAP-6)
Command
The authority vested in an individual to influence events and 
to order subordinates to implement decisions. (BDD (3rd 
Edition))
Note:
It comprises 3 closely inter-related elements: leadership, decision-
making (including risk assessment) and control.
Commander’s Intent
A concise and precise statement of what a JFC intends to do 
and why, focused on the overall effect the Joint Force is to 
have and the desired situation it aims to bring about.  (JDP 01 
(2nd Edition))
Comprehensive Approach
Commonly understood principles and collaborative processes 
that enhance the likelihood of favourable and enduring 
outcomes within a particular situation.  (BDD (3rd Edition))
Contingents
Force elements of one nation grouped under one or more 
multinational component commanders subordinate to the 
Joint Task Force Commander.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Contingency Plan
A plan which is developed for possible operations where the 
planning factors have identified or can be assumed.  This 
plan is produced in as much detail as possible, including the 
resources needed and deployment options, as a basis for 
subsequent planning.  (AAP-6)
Contingency Planning
Planning, in advance, for potential military activity in the 
future.  (2nd Edition))
Control
The coordination of activity, through processes and structures 
that enable a commander to manage risk and to deliver intent.  
(BDD (3rd Edition))
Counter-Intelligence
Those activities that are concerned with identifying and 
counteracting the threat to security posed by hostile 
intelligence services and organisations or by individuals 
engaged in espionage, sabotage, extremism and other 
non-traditional threats, including organised crime and 
unauthorised disclosure.  (JSP 440)
Counter-insurgency  
1. Those military, law enforcement, political, economic, 
psychological and civic actions taken to defeat or contain 
insurgency, while addressing root causes.  (JDP3-40)
2. Those military, paramilitary, political, economic 
psychological and civic actions taken to defeat insurgency.  
(AAP-6)
3. The set of political, economic, social, military, law 
enforcement, civil and psychological activities required to 
defeat insurgency and address any core grievances.  (AJP-
3.4.4 – Proposed modification to AAP-6 definition)
Countering-Irregular Activity
The coordinated measures, incorporating military activity 
with the other instruments of power within a Comprehensive 
Approach, that deal with the threats to security from irregular 
activity, while building go vernance and authority and 
addressing the underlying causes.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
 Crisis Management
The process of preventing, cont aining or resolving crises 
before they develop into armed conflict, while simultaneously 
planning for possible escalation. (BDD (3rd Edition))
Crisis Response Planning
Planning, often at short notice, to determine an appropriate 
military response to a current or imminent crisis.  (JDP 5-00 
(2nd Edition))
Decisive Condition
A specific combination of circumstances deemed necessary to 
achieve a campaign objective.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Directive
A military communication in which policy is established or a 
specific action is ordered.  (AAP-6)
Domain
There are 3 Domains:
1.  Physical Domain.  The sphere in which physical activity 
occurs and where the principal effects generated are upon 
capability.
2.  Virtual Domain.  The sphere in which intangible activity 
occurs, such as the generation, maintenance and transfer 
of information.  The principal effects generated are upon 
understanding.
3.  Cognitive Domain.  The sphere in which human decision-
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
235
making occurs as a result of assimilating knowledge acquired 
through thought, experience and sense.  The principal effects 
generated are upon will and understanding.  (JDP 01 (2nd 
Edition))
Note: The internet is part of the virtual domain.
Failed State
A failed state is where remnants of a host nation government, 
or some form of potential host nation government, may still 
exist.  (JDP 3-40)
Note:  However, in such states, the government does not have a 
monopoly on the use of force, cannot provide security or simple 
basic services, and is not sufficiently legitimate or effective to 
protect its borders, citizens, or even itself.  It may exert a very weak 
level of governance and rule of law in all or part of the state but, 
overall, the mechanisms and tools of governance have largely 
collapsed.
Force Density
The ratio of security forces  involved in securing and controlling 
the population, to that population.  It is usually expressed 
as a figure per 1000 head of population.  Security forces 
include multinational,  UK and indigenous military and police, 
including any tribal security forces that are raised or sponsored 
by the host nation government.
Force Protection
Measures and means to minimize the vulnerability of 
personnel, facilities, materiel, operations and activities from 
threats and hazards in order to preserve freedom of action 
and operational effectiveness.  (AJP-3.14)
Force Ratio
The qualitative and quantitative ratio between friendly and 
hostile forces at a specific time and location.  (AAP-6A)
Fires
The deliberate use of physical means to support the realisation 
of, primarily, physical effects.  (BDD (3rd Edition))
Fragile State
A fragile state still has a viable host nation government, but it 
has a reduced capability and capacity to secure, protect and 
govern the population.  Without intervention, it is likely to 
become a failed state.  (JDP 3-40)
Framework Nation
Forces generated under a ‘framework nation’ are commanded 
by an officer from that nation, which also provides a significant 
proportion of the staff and support to the headquarters.  (JDP 
3-00 (3rd Edition))
Note: The framework nation is also likely to dictate the language 
and procedures adopted.
Fratricide
The accidental death or injury which occurs when friendly 
forces engage their own forces believing either them, or their 
location, to be an enemy target.  (JDP 3-62)
Geospatial Information
Facts about the Earth referenced by geographical position and 
arranged in a coherent structure.  (JDP 3-70) 
Note: It describes the physical environment and includes data from 
the aeronautical, geographic, hydrographic, oceanographic and 
meteorological disciplines.
Geospatial Intelligence
Intelligence derived from the analysis and exploitation of 
geospatial information and imag ery to describe, assess and 
visually depict physical features and geographically referenced 
activities of intelligence interest.  (JDP 3-70)
Human Intelligence
1 
A category of Intelligence derived from information provided 
by, or collected on, human sources and individuals of 
intelligence interest, as well as the systematic and controlled 
exploitation, by interaction with, or surveillance of, sources or 
individuals. (JDP 3-40)
Human Factors 
The study of how humans behave physically and 
psychologically in relation to particular environments.  (JDP 
3-62)
Human Security
Human Security is characterised by: freedom from 
persecution, want and fear; adequate provision of essential 
commodities to sustain life; broader environmental security; 
and the protection of cultural values.  (BDD (3rd Edition))
Humanitarian Assistance
Humanitarian Assistance is a secondary Military Task, which 
is the provision of relief aid by military forces conducting 
operations other than Disaster Relief Operations.   (JDP 3-52)
Imagery Intelligence
Intelligence derived from imagery acquired by sensors which 
can be ground based, sea borne or carried by air or space 
platforms’.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Influence Activities
The capability, or perceived capacity, to affect the character or 
behaviour of someone or something.  (BDD (3rd Edition))
Information Management
The integrated management processes and services that 
provide exploitable information on time, in the right place and 
format, to maximise freedom of action.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Information Strategy
Coordinated information output of all government activity, 
undertaken to influence approved audiences in support of 
policy objectives.  (JWP 3-45.1)
1. Detailed doctrine on this subject is to be developed in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 
2-10.1 Human Intelligence , due for publication late 2009.
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
236
Information
Unprocessed data of every description that may be used in 
the production of intelligence.  (AAP-6)
Intelligence
The product resulting from the processing of information 
concerning foreign nations, hostile or potentially hostile forces 
or elements, or areas of actual or potential operations.  The 
term is also applied to the activity which results in the product 
and to the organisations engaged in such activity.  (AAP-6)
Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and 
Reconnaissance
The prioritised integration, coordination and synchronisation 
of capabilities and activities to acquire, process and 
disseminate information and in telligence, to support the 
planning and execution of operations.  (JDP 3-00 (3rd Edition))
Inter-governmental Organisation
An organisations that may be established by a constituent 
document such as a charter, a treaty or a convention, which 
when signed by the founding members, provides the 
organisation with legal recognition.  (AJP-3.4.1)
Interoperability
The ability to operate in synergy in the execution of assigned 
tasks. (AAP-6)
Irregular Activity
The use, or threat, of force, by irregular forces, groups or 
individuals, frequently ideologically or criminally motivated, 
to effect or prevent change as a challenge to governance and 
authority.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Note:  Irregular Activity could include a mix of insurgency, 
terrorism, criminality and disorder.
Insurgency
1. An organised, violent subversion used to effect or prevent 
political control, as a challenge to established authority.  
(JDP 3-40)
2. An organised movement aimed at the overthrow of a 
constituted government through the use of subversion 
and armed conflict.  (AAP-6)
Joint
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and 
organisations in which elements of at least two Services 
participate.  (AAP-6)
Joint Action
The deliberate use and orchestration of military capabilities 
and activities to realise effects on other actors’ will, 
understanding and capability, and the cohesion between 
them.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Note: It is implemented through the coordination and 
synchronisation of Fires, Influence Activities and Manoeuvre.
Joint Commander
The Joint Commander, appointed by CDS, exercises the 
highest level of operational command of forces assigned 
with specific responsibility for deployments, sustainment and 
recovery.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Joint Enablers
Operational activities that do not have an end unto 
themselves and are likely to be discrete lines of operation in 
achieving the end-state.  Their principle purpose is to enable 
other activity to take place.  (JDP 3-70)
Joint Force Planning Group
The Joint Force Planning Group, attended by the Joint Force 
Commander and normally chaired by his COS, is the forum 
where progress against the Campaign Plan is analysed and 
measured.  From this assessment will come direction on 
contingency planning that can be undertaken to capitalise 
on favourable developments or indeed help to offset or 
overcome setbacks.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Joint Force
A force composed of significant elements of two or more 
Services operating under a single commander authorised to 
exercise operational command or control.  (JWP 0-01.1)
Joint Force Commander
A general term applied to a commander authorised to exercise 
operational command or control over a Joint force.  (JWP 
0-01.1 )
Joint Operations Area
An area of land, sea and airspace defined by a higher authority, 
in which a designated Joint Task Force Commander plans and 
conducts military operations to accomplish a specific mission.  
A Joint Operations Area including its defining parameters, 
such as time, scope and geographic area, is contingency/
mission specific.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Lead Nation
Forces generated under a ‘lead nation’ are commanded 
by an officer from that nation, from his own Joint Force 
Headquarters (augmented with Liaison Officers, and 
potentially staff officers, from across the multinational force).  
The lead nation is responsible for planning and executing the 
operation, to which others contribute National Contingents 
and National Contingent Commanders.  (JDP 3-00 (3rd 
Edition))
Lines or Groupings of Operation
In a campaign or operation, a line or grouping linking Decisive 
Conditions, and hence Campaign Objectives, in time and 
space on the path to the Campaign End-state.
(JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition))
Main Effort
The concentration of capability or activity in order to bring 
about a specific outcome.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
237
Measurement and Signature Intelligence
Scientific and technical intelligence derived from the analysis 
of data obtained from sensing instruments for the purpose of 
identifying any distinctive features associated with the source, 
emitter or sender, to facilitate the latter’s measurement and 
identification.  (AAP-6)
Manoeuvre
Coordinated activities necessary to gain advantage within a 
situation in time and space.  (BDD (2nd Edition))
Manoeuvrist Approach
An approach to operations in which shattering the enemy’s 
overall cohesion and will to fight is paramount.  It calls for 
an attitude of mind in which doing the unexpected, using 
initiative and seeking originalit y is combined with a ruthless 
determination to succeed.
(JDP 0-01.1)
Mass
The concentration of combat power.  (AAP-6)  Interpreted 
in JDP 3-40 as the size of the international force deployed.  
It is a combination of the force’s mass and its capabilities 
that provides momentum to change the dynamics of 
security.  Capabilities include not only the technical skills and 
equipment of the force, but also its ability to interact with 
the indigenous population, to implement population control 
measures, and other factors such as the use of money for 
security effect.  (JDP 3-40)
Materiel and Personnel Exploitation
The systematic collection, processing and dissemination 
of intelligence obtained as a result of tactical questioning, 
interrogation and the extraction of data from recovered 
materiel.  (JDP 3-40)
Measurement of Activity
Assessment of the performance of a task and achievement of 
its associated purpose.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Measurement of Effect
Assessment of the realisation of specified effects.  (JDP 01 (2nd 
Edition))
Measurement and Signature Intelligence
Measurement and Signature Intelligence is scientific and 
technical intelligence derived from the analysis of data 
obtained from sensing instruments for the purpose of 
identifying any distinctive features associated with the source, 
emitter or sender, to facilitate the latter’s measurement and 
identification.  (AAP-6).
 Media Operations
That line of activity developed to ensure timely, accurate, 
and effective provision of Public Information (P Info) and 
implementation of Public Relations (PR) policy within the 
operational environment, whilst maintaining OPSEC.  (JDP 
0-01.1 )
Military Risk
The probability and implications if an event of potentially 
substantive positive or negative consequences taking place.  
(JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Military Strategic End-State
The extent of the Military Strategic Commander’s contribution 
to meeting the National Strategic Aim, reached when all the 
Military Strategic Objectives have been achieved.
(JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Military Strategic Objective
Goals to be achieved by the military in order to meet the 
National Strategic Aim.
(JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Mission Command
A style of command that seeks to convey understanding to 
subordinates about intentions of the higher commander and 
their place within his plan, enabling them to carry out missions 
with maximum freedom of action and appropriate resources.  
(JDP 0-01.1)
Multi-agency
Activities or operations in wh ich multiple agen cies, including 
national, international and non-state organisations and other 
actors, participate in the same or overlapping areas with 
varying degrees of inter-agency cooperation.  (JDP 01 (2nd 
Edition))
Multinational
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and 
organisations, in which forces or agencies of more than one 
nation participate.  See also Joint.  (JDP 0-01.1)
National Security
The traditional understanding of security as encompassing 
‘the safety of a state or organisation and its protection from 
both external and internal threats’.  (JDP 3-40)
National Strategy
The coordinated application of the instruments of national 
power in the pursuit of national policy aspirations.  (BDD (3rd 
Edition))
National Strategic Aim
The Government’s declared purpose in a particular situation, 
normally expressed in terms of reaching a future desired 
outcome.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
National Strategic Objective
A goal to be achieved by one or more instruments of national 
power in order to meet the National Strategic Aim.  (JDP 01 
(2nd Edition))
Non-governmental Organisation
A voluntary, non-profit making organisation that is generally 
independent of government, international organisations or 
commercial interests.  The organisation will write its own 
charter and mission.  (JDP 0-01.1)
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
238
Open Source Intelligence
Intelligence derived from publicly available information, as 
well as other unclassified info rmation that has limited public 
distribution or access.  (AAP-6)
Operational Analysis
The use of mathematical, statistical and other forms of 
analysis to explore situations and to help decision-makers 
resolve problems.  Facts and probabilities are processed into 
manageable patterns relevant to the likely consequences of 
alternative courses of action.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Operational Art
The orchestration of a campaign, in concert with other 
agencies, involved in converting strategic objectives into 
tactical activity in order to achieve a desired outcome.  (JDP 01 
(2nd Edition))
Operational Level
The level of warfare at which campaigns are planned, 
conducted and sustained to  accomplish strategic objectives 
and synchronise action, within theatres or areas of operation.  
(BDD (3rd Edition))
Operation Order
A directive, usually formal, issued by a commander to 
subordinate commanders for the purpose of effecting the 
coordinated execution of an operation.  (AAP-6)
Operation Plan
A plan for a single or series of connected operations to be 
carried out simultaneously or in succession.  It is usually 
based upon stated assumptions and is the form of directive 
employed by higher authority to permit subordinate 
commanders to prepare supporting plans and orders.  The 
designation ‘plan’ is usually used instead of ‘order’ in preparing 
for operations well in advance.  An operation plan may be 
put into effect at a prescribed time, or on signal, and then 
becomes the operation order.  (AAP-6)
Operational Intelligence
Intelligence required for the planning and conduct of 
campaigns at the operational level.  (AAP-6)
Operations Security
The discipline which gives a military operation or exercise 
appropriate security, using active or passive means, to deny 
a target decision-maker knowledge of essential elements of 
friendly information.  (JDP 3-80.1)
Operating Space
All aspects of a Joint Operations Area within which activities, 
both military and non-military, take place.  See also Joint 
Operations Area.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Open Source Intelligence
Intelligence derived from publicly available information, as 
well as other unclassified info rmation that has limited public 
distribution or access.  (AAP-6)
Peace Support Operations
An operation that impartially makes use of diplomatic, 
civil and military means, normally in pursuit of UN Charter 
purposes and principles, to restore or maintain peace.  Such 
operations may include conflict prevention, peacemaking, 
peace enforcement, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and/or 
humanitarian operations.  (AAP-6)
Personal Security
That part of human security which ensures protection of an 
individual from persecution, in timidation, reprisals and other 
forms of systematic violence.  (JDP 3-40)
Physical Security
That part of National Security that relates to national assets 
and infrastructure. (JDP 3-40)
Reachout
Access to external expertise, information or functions.  (JDP 
3-00 3rd Edition)
Red Team
An enabled cell, discrete from the main staff, that develops 
opponent, neutral, and other contextual perspectives in order 
to challenge the perceived norms and assumptions of the 
commander and staff.  (JDP 5-00 (2nd Edition))
Security
The term used in JDP 3-40 to describe the combination of 
human and national security.  (JDP 3-40)
Security Sector Reform
The reform of security institutions to enable them to play 
an effective, legitimate and accountable role in providing 
external and internal security  for their citizens under the 
control of a legitimate authority and to promote stability.  (JDP 
01 (2nd Edition))
 Security Intelligence
Intelligence on the identity, capabilities and intentions 
of hostile organisations or individuals who are or may be 
engaged in espionage, espionage, sabotage, subversion 
or extremism and other non-traditional threats, including 
organised crime and unauthorised disclosure.  (JDP 2-00 (3rd 
Edition))
Signals Intelligence 
The generic term to describe communications intelligence 
and electronic intelligence when there is no requirement to 
differentiate between these two types of intelligence, or to 
represent fusion of the two.  (AAP-6)
Single Intelligence Environment
A Defence-wide approach and environment, enabled by 
architecture and process, through which appropriate and 
timely intelligence reaches the user based on operational 
need, rather than command hierarchy, classification or method 
of collection.  (JDP 2-00 (3rd Edition))
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
239
Situational Awareness
The understanding of the operational environment in the 
context of a commander’s (or staff officer’s) mission (or task).  
(JDP 0-01.1)
Stabilisation
The process that supports states which are entering, enduring 
or emerging from conflict, in order to prevent or reduce 
violence; protect the population and key infrastructure; 
promote political processes and governance structures, which 
lead to a political settlement that institutionalises non-violent 
contests for power; and prepares for sustainable social and 
economic development.  (JDP 3-40)
Strategic Objective
A goal to be achieved by one or more instruments of national 
power in order to meet the National Strategic Aim.  See also 
National Strategic Aim.  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Supporting Effect
The intended consequence of actions.
(JDP 01 2nd Edition)
Supported Commander
A commander having primary responsibility for all aspects 
of a task assigned by a higher authority.  See also Supporting 
Commander.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Supporting Commander
A commander who furnishes forces, equipment, logistics or 
other support to a supported commander, or who develops a 
supporting plan. See also supported commander .  (JDP 0-01.1)
Surveillance
The systematic observation of aerospace, surface or 
subsurface areas, places, persons or things, by visual, aural, 
electronic, photographic, or other means.  (AAP-6)
Sustainability
The ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of combat 
power for the duration required to achieve its objectives.  
(AAP-6)
Sustainment
The activity and resources necessary to sustain a force.  (JDP 
4-00 (3rd Edition))
Target
The object of a particular action, for example a geographic 
area, a complex, an installation, a force, equipment, an 
individual, a group or a system, planned for capture, 
exploitation, neutralisation or destruction by military forces.  
(AAP-6)
Target Acquisition
The detection, identification, and location of a target in 
sufficient detail to permit the effective implementation of 
Fires or Influence Activities.  (JDP 2-00 (3rd Edition))
Targeting
The process of selecting targets and matching the appropriate 
responses to them taking account of operational requirements 
and capabilities.  See also Joint Action .  JDP 01 (2nd Edition))
Notes:
1. Targeting is an integral part of Joint Action.
2. It underpins the use and orchestration of all capabilities and 
activities (fires, influence activities and manoeuvre) to ensure 
that they are focused on realising intended effects.
Targeting
The process of selecting targets and matching the 
appropriate responses to them, taking account of operational 
requirements and capabilities.  (AAP-6)
Technical Intelligence
Technical Intelligence concerns foreign technological 
developments, and the performance and operational 
capabilities of foreign materiel, which have or may eventually 
have a practical application for military purposes.  (AAP-6)
Tempo
The rate or rhythm of activity relative to the enemy, within 
tactical engagements and battles and between major 
operations.  It incorporates the capacity of the force to 
transition from one operation of war to another.  (JDP 0-01.1)
Theatre of Operations
A geographical area, or more precisely a space, defined by the 
military-strategic authority, wh ich includes and surrounds the 
area delegated to a Joint Force Commander (termed the Joint 
Operations Area), within which he conducts operations.  (JDP 
01 (2nd Edition))
Thresholds
Criteria identifying progress.  (JDP 3-00 (3rd Edition)).
Note:  They may be used to identify ‘milestones’ in the realisation of 
effects and include both subjective statements and/or metrics.
Time Sensitive Targets
Time sensitive targets are those targets requiring immediate 
response because they represent a serious and imminent 
threat to friendly forces or are high payoff, fleeting targets of 
opportunity.  In practice, time sensitive targets are specific 
target sets designated by the Joint Task Force Commander 
(JTFC).  (JDP 0-01.1)
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

INDEX 
A
Activity Frameworks, 0437-0448, 0715, 1016
 Clear–Hold–Build, 0213, 0441, 1104
 Shape–Secure–Hold–Develop , 0440-0448 , 0715, 
  C h a p t e r  1 1
 Shape–Engage–Exploit–Protect–Sustain 
  ( Operational Framework ), 439
 Understand–Shape–Secure–Hold–Build, 439
Actors
 Civilian, 
0250, 0255, 0259, 0409, 0448, 0606, 0607, 1057
 Decisive, 0504-0510 , 0530, 0804, 1106
 Destabilising, 0123
 External, 0119, 0123
 Intervention, 0108, 0228, 0244, 0252
 Irregular, 0107, 0231, 1034, 1127-1128
Adversary
 Countering the, 
Chapter 5 Section IV
 Example of doctrine, 0111, 0230
 Understanding the, Annex 8A
Advisers
 Command, 
0707, 0734, 1026, 1030, 1056, Annex 10B, 1110, 1218
 Military, 0206, Fig 2.1, 0520, 0632, 1076
Analysis,  
Centre of Gravity, 
(see CoG)
 Methodology, 0427, 0815, Annex 8B Section III, Chapter 9 Section III
 Output, 0259, 0804, Chapter 9 Section IV
 Political and Social, Chapter 9  
 Private Security Companies, 1095
 Process, 0301, 0443, 0625, 0807, Chapter 9 Section I , 1012, Fig 10.3, 
  1 0 5 1 ,  1 1 5 5
 Stakeholder, 1023
Arrest (see Detention)
Assessment, Chapter 11 Section V
 Campaign Effectiveness, 0450, 0462, 1077, 1129, 1140, 11A04, 1205
 Conflict, 0245
 Joint Stabilisation, 1006, Fig 10.3
 Planning, 0707, 1051
 Risk, 0114, 0632, 1070, 1073, 1095, 1118, 1127
Authority
 Campaign, 
0221, 0247, 0454, 1024, 1127, 1130
 Central, 0250, 0920
 Government, 0216, 0231, 0236, 0247, 0317, 0424, 0513, 0527, 0530, 0617,  
 0623, 0711, 08B08, 11A03
 Military, 0250-0251, 0412, 0455, 0527, 0829, 0909, 1126, 1214
 Moral, 0617
 Political, 0 9 0 6, 0 9 0 9, 1110, 1111
 State, 0119, 0120, 0124, 0247, 0255, 0311, 0423, 0453, 0502, 0638, 1064
Transfer of, 1137, 1141
B
Borders
 Control, 
0123, 0636, 1064, 11A18
 Security, 0457, 0520, Fig 6.1, 1114
C
Campaign Assessment, Chapter 11 Section V , 0429, 0462, 1110 
Campaign Objective
 Assessment, 
1149
 Definition, 1050
 Focusing on Decisive Groups, 1054 
 Planning of, 1051, 1110
 Tensions with PMSCs, 1091
Campaign Planning, Chapter 10
 Command and Coordination, 1002, 1023-1034
 Comprehensive, 0429, 0450, 0904, 1004, 1005, 1015-1022
 Military Plans, 1051, 1055, 1063-1065, 1107
 Momentum, 0441, 0458, 1066
 Theatre Integrated Plans, 0429, 0734, 1014-1032, 1035-1044, 
  1 0 5 7 ,  1 1 0 7
Capacity Building
 Institutional, 
Chapter 6 , 0448, 0712, 1050, 1084, 1132,
 Military, Chapter 5 Section III , Annex 11A, 0205, 0259, 0454, 1064, 1066,  
 1076, 1113, 1131
240
JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
241
Cause
 of Fragility, 0106, 0119, 0123, 0452, 0701, 0909
 Insurgency, 0216, 0231, 0311, 0728, 08B09, 1119
 Invalidating, 08B10
 Political, 0125, 0127, 0832, 
Centre of Gravity (CoG), 0916, 0925, Annex 9A
Civil-Military
 Command, 
0429, 0608, 0711-0713, 1062
 Cooperation, 0326, 0610, 1062, 1093
 Coordination, 0412, 0427, 0428, 0713, 1019, 1027, Fig 10.6, 1060, 
  1 0 7 3 ,  1 1 2 9
Collateral Damage, 0418, 0421, 0422, 0528, 1119, 1123, 1129, 1130
Command and Control, 0250-0251 , 0412, Annex 8A, 1002, 1036, 
 1062, 12A07
Commitment
 Early 
0206, 0432, 1068
 Enduring 1131, 120 8
 Long-term 1081
 Military 0206, Fig. 2.1, 0447,
 National 0460, 0461
 Political 0523
Comprehensive Approach, 0135, 0206, 0516, 0701, Annex 10B
 Coherent Response, 0240, 0254, 0257, 0322, 0427, 0517
 Comprehensive Planning, 1004-1007, Fig 10.1, 1021, 1083
 Definition, 0201
 Host Nation Government, 0252, 0625, 08B12, 1083, 1107
 International Organisations (IOs), 0433, 0447, 0516, 0806, 1073,  
 1083, 1136
 Non-governmental Organisations (NGOs), 0433, 0447 , 0455,  
 0806, 1073, 1083, 1152
 Other Government Departments (OGDs), 0447, 0455, 0806,  
 1073, 1083, 1136, 1152
Conflict
 Armed, 
0419
 Eco-system, Fig 9.2
 Hybrid, 0232
 Inter-State, 0105
 Relationship, 0244-0249, 0302, 0736, 0918, 0922, Annex 9B
 Societal, Chapter 1 Section III, 0245, 0248, 0257, 0506, 0611, 0621, 0726
 Violent, 0206, 0237, 0503, 0633
Corruption 
 Causing Instability, 
0115, 0119, 0123, 0124, 0312, 0453, 0621, 1071
 and Response to, 0238, 0425, 0613-0616 , 09A01, 1064, 1079, 1084,  
 1111, 11A03
Countering Insurgency (COIN)
 Classical COIN, 
0210-0217
 Contemporary Stabilisation, 0233, 0404, 0434
 Counter-insurgency Guidance, 0301, Annex 4A, 0723, 1064
 Small Wars, 0211
Criminals, 0124, 0132, 0216, 0436, 0505, 0509, 0523, 0618, 0621, 0636, 1111, 1127
Cultural Understanding, 0225, 0520, 0915 1076, 11A08, 12A08
D
Decisive Condition
 Definition, 
1050
 Planning of, 1051, 1062
 Focusing on Decisive Groups, 1054
 Stabilisation, 1055
 Integration with LoO, 1063
Detention, 0436, 0533-0535, 0821, 1127, 1128
Develop, 0448, Chapter 11 Section IV
Development
 Economic, 
0114, 0118, 0123, 0224, 0239, Chapter 7, 1052, 1054, 1056,  
 1132, 1136
 Governance, 0224, Chapter 6 , 1052, 1054, 1056
 Infrastructure, 0114, 0239, Chapter 7, 1016, 1052, 1084
Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration (DDR), 0524, 
0531, 0626, 0631, 1080, 1094, 1142
Drivers
 Conflict, 
0705
 Insecurity, 0119, 0123, 0732
E
Economic and Infrastructure Development
 (see also QIPs)
 Military Contribution, 
Chapter 7 Section I
Elites
 Competing, 
0244, 0248, 0307, 0450, 0603, 0804, 0920, 0922, 09A01, 1055,  
 1107-1109
 Political, 0427, 0912, 0924, 1027, 
 Powerful, 0120, 0604
Employment
 Cash-for-work schemes, 
0723
 Generation, 0517, 0701, 0702, 0710, 0722-0724
Ends, ways and means, 0202-0205 , 08B02, 08B05
Engagement
 Engaging with Adversaries, 
0115-0118, 0447, 0804, 1064, 
  1115 -1118
 Engaging with Friendly and Neutral Groups, 0412, 0445, 0611,  
 0804, 0807, 0830, 08B07, 1062, 10B02, 1111-1114
 Implementation, 0460, 0611, 1035
 Key Leaders, Fig 3.1, 0445, 0732, 0807, 0820, 0829, 1110
 Method, 0439, 0924, 1129, 1151
 Offensive Operations, 0422, 0803, 1093, 1119
 Planning, 0511, 0814, 1023
 Purpose, 0433, 1069, 1106, 1123
 Regional, 0113, 0205, 1034, 1065, 1114
 Strategy, 110 8 -1110
Environment
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
242
 Permissive and Non-Permissive, 0240
Ethics, 0413-0425, 1095
Evolving Threats, 0132-0135
Exit Strategy, (see Transitions)
F
Force
 Composition/Structure, 0225, 0608, 1074-1080 , 12A02, 12A06,   
 12A07
 Integration, 1062, Chapter 10 Section IV
 Levels, 0518, 1067, 1068 (see also Mass)
Framework, (see Activity Frameworks)
G
Governance
 Central, 
08B07, Annex 9A, 1131 (see also Host Nation)
 Local, 0429, 0445, 0517, 0921, Annex 9A, 1132, 1135
 Military Contribution,  0605-0618
 National, 0223, 0224, 0247, 08B12, 1095
 SSR, (see Security Sector Reform)
Globalisation 0107-0109, 0133, 0202
Groups
 Adversarial, 
0505, 0513, 0514, 0526, 0527, 0529, 0602, 0805, 0815, 0817,  
 0818, Annex 8B , 0911, 0921, 0924, 0925, 09A02, 1064, 1107, 1115-1118,  
 1120, 1131, 1132
 diasporas, 0107, 0134, 0303
 Friendly, 050 8, 0511, 0 910, 0 920, 0 922, 0 924, 110 8, 1111-1114, 1129
 Hostile, 0119, 0122, 0128, 0130, 0131, 0231, 0232, 0244, 0248, 0260, 0405,  
 0427, 0505, 0506, 0511, 0513, 0523, 0526, 0808, 0827, 0810, 0812, 08B12,  
 08B24, 0909, 1067, 1068, 1123 
 Insurgent, 0215, 0216, 0446, 0505, 0513, 08B01, 08B04, 08B07,
 Neutral, 0507, 0511, 0 910, 1111-1114, 1127, 1129
 Opportunist, 0106, 0509, 0513, 0615, 0621, 08B04, 08B08, 1140
H
Hold, 0447 , Chapter 11 Section III
Host Nation, 1045-1049, Annex 10B
 Government, 0123, 0131, 0238, 0239, 0240, 0244, 0247, 0249, 0250, 0252,  
 0253, 0259, 0260, 0411, 0427, 0450, 0453, 0527, Chapter 6 Section I,  
 0810, 08B26, 1107, 1112
 Security Forces, 0414, 0423, 0454, 0456, 0459, 0461, 0519-0523,   
 Chapter 6 Section II, 0713, 0810, 0831, 08B11, 1042, 1068, 1074, 1076,  
 1080, 1081, 1084, 1113, 1127, 11A12, 12A06
 Sovereignty, 0242, 0252, 0255, 0410, 0428, 0430, 0434, 0436, 0513, 0533,  
 0717, 08B12, 1016, 1048, 1138
Human Security, (see Security) 
Humanitarian Assistance, 0104, 0516, 1152 
Hybrid Threats, 0132
I
Illegal, 0216, 08B23, 1084
Indigenous Forces, 0447 , 0519, 0530, 0616, 0628, 0629, 1064, 1081, 1121, 
1133, 113 4, Annex 11A
Influence, Chapter 3
 As a Contest, 0309-0313
 Framework, Chapter 3 Section II
 Kinetic, 1076, 1106, 1123, 1129, 
 Narrative, 0127, 0128, 0134, 0216, 0249, 0314-0317, 0452, 0459, 08B09,  
 0921, 1017
 Organisation, 0321-0324
 Non-kinetic, 110 6, 1123, 1129
Instability
 Causes, 0106, 0119, 0231, 0452,
 Drivers, 0119, 0123, 0215, 0427, 0613, 0726, 0732, 
 Global, 0134, 0202, 
 Regional, 0113, 1034, 1114, 
 State, 01 19-0124, 0203-0205, 1084, 
 Understanding, 0233, 0451
Insurgency
 Definition, 
0201
Integrated Approach, 0254-0258, 0440, 1 154
Integration
 Air-Land, 
1081
Intelligence
 Application, 
Chapter 8 Section III
 Exploitation, 0828, 0835
 Gathering, 0451, 0529, 0809, 0810, 0817, 0828, 0840, 1064, 11A08
International System, Chapter 1 Section I
Interoperability
 Achieving integration, 
0429
 Of Intelligence, 0834
 With Partners, 1033
Intervention
 Military, 
0108, 0122, 0229, 0231, 0249, 0253, 0310, 0314, 0316, 0410, 0417,  
 0637, 0709, 0714, 0721, 0725, 0730, 08B25, 1034, 1064, 1068, 1075, 
  1103, (see also Multinational Military Partners)
 International, 0108, 0125, Chapter 2 Section I, 0222, 0227, 0246, 0252,  
 0405, 0505, 0703, 0716, 08B06, 08B24, 0909, 1034, 1208
 Humanitarian, (see Humanitarian Assistance)
ISTAR, 0803, 1077
K
Kinetic Activity
 
(see also Use of Force)
 (see also Targeting)
 (see also Collateral Damage)
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
243
L
Law
 Domestic, 0214, 0235, 0413, 0416, 0434, 0436, 0502, 0607, 0627, 0633,  
 08B02, 1095, 10B01, 11A08
 International, 0418, 0419, 0421, 0434, 0706, 10B01, 1122, 1124, 
 Martial, 0415, 0423, 0607, 0627, 
 Rule of, 0115, 0124, 0224, 0424, 0427, 0434, 0436, 0447, 0453, Annex 4B,  
 0517, 0522, 0535, 0614, 0622, 0712, 08B08, 1064, 10B02, 1121, 1127, 1128  
 (see also Rules of Engagement)
Leadership
 Adversary, 0216, 0527, 0631, 0805, 0808, 08B09, 08B14, 08B15, 1064, 1076,  
 110 8, 1115, 1128
 Host Nation, 030 8, 0 617, 0 635, 0 8 07, 0 829, 0 911- 0 913, 0 917, 1110, 1111,  
 1127, 1135
 Military, 0251, 0259, 0303, 0403, Chapter 4 Section II , 0455, 0713, 1024,  
 1025, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1147, 1155, 1204, 1214
Learn and Adapt, 0462, 0803, 1145, Chapter 12 Section II
Legal, 0102, Chapter 4 Section II, 0427, 0434, 0435, 0436, 0457, 0535, 0604, 0607, 
0831, 1062, 1064, 10B01, 1108, 1116, 1126
Legitimacy, 0103, 0115, 0126, 0236, 0238, 0247, 0311, 0434, 0453, 0527, 0530, 
0614, 0909, 09A01, 1052, 1063, 1121
Lines of Operations (LoO), (see Operations)
Links
 Breaking links, 
0525, 0534
 Ideological, 0525, 
 Political, 0447, 08B12, 1027, 1110
 Population, 0447, 0633, 0907, 0924
Logistics, 1082-1085
M
Mandate, 0247, 0435-0436
Mass, 0225, 0229, 0447, 0518, 1064, 1067, 1080, 1119, 1131, 11A01
Measurement of Effect (MOE), 1129, 1145, 114 8, 1151, 1155, 1205
Media, 0108, 0230, 0243, 0316, 0327, Fig 3.1, 0414, 0422, 0825, 08B24, 0911, 1040, 
1072, 1108, 1146, 1151, 12A13
Mentor, 0316, 0520, 0521, 0636, 0837, 1076, 1084, 1113, 1119, 1141, 11A06, 11A10, 
 11A12 11A13
Military
 Skills, 
0221, 0518, 0610, 0729, 0807, 1027, 1095, 11A09, 1217
 Training, 0447, 0518, 0521, 0524, 0615, 0625, 0629, 0634, 0721, 1075, 1076,  
 1085, 1094, 1133-1134, Annex 11A
Model
 Comprehensive Planning, 
Fig 10.1, Fig 10.6, Fig 10.9, 1101
 Conceptualising, Fig 10.11
 Learn and Adapt, Fig 12.1
 Stabilisation, Fig 2.3, 0240, Fig 2.4, 0401, 0903, Fig 10.6, Fig 10.9
 State, Fig 1.1, 
 Virtuous Intelligence Spiral, Fig 8.1, 0818
Money
 Security Effect, 0446, 0513, 0530-0532 , 0710, Chapter 7 Section II,  
 0911, 1034, 1066
Monitoring, mentoring and training (M2T), 0521, 11A12
Multinational Military Partners
 Allies, 
0251, 0312, 0323, 0411, 0426-0428, 0454, 1019, 1087
 Coalition Military, 0205, 0251, 0255, 0258, 0323, 0326, 0411, 0417, 0428,  
 0436, 0454, Annex 4A, 0634, 1019, 1033, 1067, 1074, 1078, 1081, 1087,  
 1095, 1126, 1145, 11A19, 12A08
 Indigenous Forces, 0223, 0316, 0436, 0447, Chapter 5 Section III, 0530,  
 0615, 0627, 0629-0634, 0725, 0838, 1064,1067, 1068, 1074, 1076, 1080,  
 1113, 1121, 1131, 1133 -113 4, 1137, Ann e x 11A , 12 A0 6
 Private Security Companies, Chapter 10 Section V
N
Narrative
 Adversary’s, 0311, 0317, 0319, 0452, 08B09, 0921
 Coalition’s, 0313-0316, 0323, 0452, 0459, 1017, 1124
 Target Audiences, 0314, 0452
Non-Permissive (see Environment)
O
Operating Environment, 0102, 0427, 0456, Annex 8B Section IV, 0925, 
1075, 1089, 1219, 12A08
Operational Art, Chapter 4 Section I, 0916, 1117
Operations
 Combat, 
0309, 0406, 0456, 0518, 0521, 1093, 1217
 Influence, 0302
 Intelligence, 0818
 Lines of (LoO), 1051, 1054-1065, 1107, 1131, 1138, 1154
 Media, 0327, Fig 3.1, 10B01
 Military, 0 224, 0323, 0410, 0439, 0901, 1064, 1093, 1095, Chapter 11
P
Parameters
 Performance, 
1095, 1155
 Setting, Chapter 4 Section III, 1141, 1155
Permissive (see Environment)
Physical Security, 0124, 1122
 Definition, 0113
 Local, 0122, 0224, 0514, 0605, 0631, 1080, 1103, 1119, 11A17
 National, 0237, 0619
 Regional, 0620, 1034
 UK National, 0205, 0206, 0902, Fig 10.2
Planning
 Campaign, 
0445, 0606, 0803, 0904, 1014-1022 , 1051-1059, 
  1139, 1150
 Coalition, 1007, 1010
 Horizon, 1050
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
244
 National, 1007, 1011
 Operational, 0242, Chapter 4 Section V, 0608, 1060-1065 , 1076, 1081,  
 1085, 1095, 11A02-11A0 6, 1203
 Stabilisation, 0222, Fig 3.1, 1034, 1037, 1067-1073
 Strategic, 0325, 1008-1014, 1138
Political Order 0125-0131, 0203, 0805, 0906, 0920
Political Settlement, 0117, Fig 1.1, 0120, 0236, 0244, 0248, Fig 4.1, 0450, 0503, 
0511, 0525, 0615, 0623, 0736, 0905, 0919, 0926, 1034, 1052, 1110, 1118, 1132
Population
 Control, 0457, 1078, 1122
 Focus, 0249, 0439, 0441, 0452, 1035, 1064, 1121
 Protection, 0513-0515 
Poverty, 0123, 0124, 0130, 0704-0707
Pre-Deployment Training, 0707, 0713, 0840, 1021, 1026, 1031, 1075, 1081, 
1208, 1214, 12A07-12A09, 12A14
Prevent Instability, 0121, 0131, 0206, 0445, 0452, 0631, 08B07, 0918, 
 1034, 1141
Principles
 Humanitarian, 
0516
 of Reconstruction, 0224
 Security Principles of Stabilisation, Chapter 4 Section V
 Thompson’s Principles of COIN, 0214 
 underlying Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC), 0419-0421
Private (Military and) Security Companies, 0802, 
 Chapter 10 Section V
Propaganda, 0215, 0319, 0320, 0425, 0527, 0613, 08B24, 1125
Protection
 Force, 
0215, 0414, 0812, 0827, 0842, 1069, 1072-1073, 1076, 1085, 1123
 Infrastructure, 0721, 0724, 0914
 Personal, 0433, 0709, 1093
 Population, 0113, 0414, 0513-0518, 0607, 0609, 1064
Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT), 0608, 0711-0713, 0734
Psychological Effects, 0304, 0322, 0326, 0327, Figures 3.1, 1035, 1129, 1151
Q
Quick Impact Projects (QIPs), 0532, Chapter 7 Section II
R
Ratio, Force: Population 0518, 1065
Reachout, 0837 , 1088
Reform, (see Security Sector Reform)
Regional engagement, (see Engagement)
Risk, 1069, 1070
 Transition, 1141
Rules of engagement, 1126 (see also Law)
S
Secure, 0446, Chapter 11 Section II
Security
 Accommodations, 
0248, 0456, 0526, 08B12, 1064, 1108, 1110, 1117, 1118
 Capacity Building, 0223, 0454, Chapter 5 Section III , 0618, Chapter  
 6 Section II , 1066, 11A05
 Countering Adversaries, Chapter 5 Section IV
 Definitions
  Human, National, Personal, Physical, 
0113
 Human, 0104, 0110, 0113, 0118, 0122, 0237, 0452, 0456, Chapter 5   
 Section II , 0610, 08B11, 1052, 1064, 1131
 Insecurity Drivers, 452, Chapter 5 Section I, 1034
 National, 0113, 0124, 0203-0206, 0237, 0619, Fig 10.2
 Personal, 0117, 0248
 Physical, 0124, 1122
Security Sector Reform (SSR), 0205, 0260, 0316, 0327, 0447, 0454, 
Chapter 5 Section III , Chapter 6 Section II , 0713, 1016, 1050, 1064, 1076, 
1080, 1084, 1094, 1127, 1131-1134, 1142, Annex 11A
Shape, 0445, Chapter 11 Section I
Situational Understanding, 0809, 1028, 1037, 1051, 1077
Stabilisation
 Definition, 
0201
 Preventative, 0121, 0206, 0445, 1034, 1141
 Non-permissive, 0240-0242, 0606, 0729, 1076, 11A07
 Post-conflict, 0631
State
 Building, 
0203, 0205, 0233, 
 Failure, 0227, 0231, 0452, 0503, 
 Fragile and Failed Definition, 0101
 Fragility, Chapter 1 Section II, 0227, 0231
 Survival Functions, 0235, 0238, 0603, 1064
Strategic 
 Geometry 
0511, 1018
 Interests, 0204
 Objective 1008, 1013
 Planning, 1015 (see also Planning)
Supporting Effect 1056
 Definition, 1050
 Assessment of, 1150
T
Targeting
 Precision, 
0327, 0511, 0533, 0803, 0815, Fig 8.1, 1077, 1129, 1130
 Kinetic, 1076, 1077, 1124, 1126, 1129, 1130
 Non-kinetic, 0321, 1077, 1129
Terrain, human, 0308, 0924
Theatre Integrated Plan, 0429, 0734, 1001, 1057
Theory of Change, 0451, 0455, 0459, 0816, 0904 , 1051, 1145
Transitions
 Link to End State, 
0454, 0461, 0618, 1113, 1138
 Planning, 0123, 0259-0260, 0522, 0717, 1064, 1127, 1131, 1139, 1140,   
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 

JDP 3-40 SECURITY AND STABILISATION:  THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION
245
 Annex 11A
 Risks, 0441, 0631, 1075, 1103, 1137, 1141
U
Understanding
 Adversarial Groups, 0526, Annex 8A
 Cultural, 0225, 0520, 1076, 11A08, 12A08
 State Fragility, (see State Fragility)
 Target Audiences, 0306-0308
Unintended Consequences, 0728, 0736, 0817, 0818, 1129
Unity
 of Command, 
0414, 
 of Effort, 0108, 0322, 0411, 0455, 0713
 of Purpose, 0250, 0454, 1030
Use of Force
 Minimal, 
1124
 Minimum, 0220, 1124, 1125
V
Virtuous Intelligence Spiral, Fig 8.1, 0818
Vulnerabilities
 Host Nation, 
0810
 Own Force, 0008
 
ARCHIVED
This publication was replaced by:  
Shaping a stable world: The Military contribution (JDP 05) 
published by DCDC in March 2016 
 
This publication is no longer authoritative and has been archived. 