Home - Alma Research and Education Center
Skip to content
UNDERSTANDING THE SECURITY CHALLENGES ON ISRAEL'S NORTHERN BORDER
Alma provides accessible knowledge from an authentic and professional viewpoint.
LEARN MORE
Hezbollah’s Human Shield Map
CURRENT UPDATES
Read about the latest developments on Israel’s northern border conflict on our blog
Lawyers with Guns: The Professionals Killed in Hezbollah’s Ranks
During the current conflict, Hezbollah’s death list have repeatedly revealed a striking pattern: many of those killed within the organization’s ranks were not only military
Alma Research
May 7, 2026
Analysis of Daily IDF Airstrikes in Lebanon: North and South of the Litani, and Inside and Outside the Yellow Line
Since the beginning of the ceasefire, fluctuations have been evident in the pattern of IDF airstrikes in Lebanon. At the beginning of the post-ceasefire period
Alma Research
May 7, 2026
How Would the Fall or Weakening of the Iranian Regime Affect Hezbollah in Lebanon?
A Scenario Analysis By: Yaakov Lappin, Dr. Zoe Levornick, and Tal Beeri The regional campaign that began in March 2026 constitutes a strategic turning point
Alma Research
May 6, 2026
IDF Forward Defense Line
The forward defense line of the IDF in southern Lebanon (Yellow Line) is deliberately demarcated along key terrain for both defensive advantage and to establish
Alma Research
May 6, 2026
Is Syria Returning to Salafi Islam? The Sharia Campaign of the “ISIS Mufti”
Key Points:Over the past year, a campaign focused on “Da’wah” (دعوة – inviting individuals to learn about and return to the path of Islam as
Dvir Peri
May 5, 2026
Analysis of IDF Airstrikes in Lebanon – Geographic Distribution (April 18–May 3, 2026)
Analysis of IDF Airstrikes in Lebanon – Geographic Distribution (April 18–May 3, 2026) Since the beginning of the ceasefire, the IDF has carried out 299
Alma Research
May 5, 2026
Tweets by Israel_Alma_org
Latest news
WHAT IS ALMA?
Alma is an education and research center, dedicated to researching the security challenges on Israel’s northern borders and educating opinion-makers from research centers, academia, and others on the multi-dimensional complexities in the Middle East. Alma takes pride in providing an authentic, unique, and professional perspective regarding the areas next to the borders of Lebanon, Syria, and Israel that interweaves the special diversity of societies along those borders with geography, politics, and military capabilities – all combining together to impact the ever-changing security climate in the region.
WE NEED YOUR SUPPORT
Your tax-deductible contribution to Alma funds our ongoing efforts in research and education on Israel’s border conflict.
DONATE NOW
OUR EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
Alma works to provide a well-researched viewpoint on the developments in Israel’s northern communities through the following services:
Security Crisis Simulation
Field Brieﬁngs on the Border
Life on the Border: Insider’s Point of View
Panels: Human Mosaic of the Galilee
Interactive Workshops
Lectures
READ MORE
We value your privacy
We use cookies to improve functionality and performance of our website and to provide you with the best possible browsing experience. These cookies include those which are strictly necessary for website operation, as well as those which are used for functionality and performance purposes.
For more information on how our Sites use cookies, click here to view our  Cookie Policy.
For more information on how our Sites use cookies, click here to view our
Cookie Policy
.