ANU College of Asia & the Pacific
A 
 
Strategic & Defence Studies Centre 
ANU College of Asia & the Pacifc 
May 2018 
China’s New Navy: 
A short guide for Australian policy-makers 
Sam Roggeveen 

ANU College of Asia & the Pacifc 
A 
Debating the Quad
Euan Graham, Chengxin Pan, Ian Hall, Rikki Kersten, Benjamin Zala, Sarah Per
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
i
il i
i
cy 
The Centre of Gravity series 
About the Centre of Gravity Series 
The Centre of Gravity Series is the fagship publication of 
the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre (SDSC) based 
at The Australian National University’s College of Asia 
and the Pacifc. The series aspires to provide high quality 
analysis and to generate debate on strategic policy issues 
of direct relevance to Australia. Centre of Gravity papers 
are 3,000-4,000 words in length and are written for a policy 
audience. Consistent with this, each Centre of Gravity paper 
includes at least one policy recommendation. Papers are 
commissioned by SDSC and appearance in the series is by 
invitation only. SDSC commissions up to 10 papers in any 
given year. 
About the Editor 
The Centre of Gravity Series is edited by Dr Andrew Carr, 
Senior Lecturer at the Strategic & Defence Studies Centre. 
He has published widely on Australian strategic and defence 
policy, Asia-Pacifc Security and Middle Powers. The COG 
series was developed to improve the conversation and 
engagement between academic and policy communities 
and draw attention to the most signifcant strategic questions 
facing Australia and the Asia-Pacifc. Any comments or 
suggestions about how to improve the series or topics of 
particular interest are warmly welcomed. Dr Carr can be 
contacted on: 
(E) Andrew.Carr@anu.edu.au 
(M) 0421 728 207 
Centre of Gravity series paper #41 
Photos courtesy of Baycrest via Wikimedia Commons, 海防先锋 via Wikimedia Commons, kees torn via 
Wikimedia Commons and Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Shannon via Wikimedia Commons 
© 2018 ANU Strategic and Defence Studies Centre. All rights reserved. 
The Australian National University does not take institutional positions on public policy issues; the views 
represented here are the author’s own and do not necessarily refect the views of the University, its staff, 
or its trustees. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without 
permission in writing from the ANU Strategic and Defence Studies Centre. Please direct inquiries to 
andrew.carr@anu.edu.au 
This publication can be downloaded for free at sdsc.bellschool.anu.edu.au/our-publications/ 
centre-of-gravity-series 
CRICOS#00120C 
ISSN: 2208-7311 (Online) 
ISSN: 2208-7303 (Print) 
Strateg c & Defence Stud es Centre
ANU Col ege of As a & the Pac fc 
March 2018 
ANU College of Asia & the Pacific A
Strategic & Defence Studies Centre
ANU College of Asia & the Pacific
April 2018
Australia and the Korean Crisis:  
Confronting the limits of influence?
Andrew O’Neil, Brendan Taylor, and William T. Tow


ANU College of Asia & the Pacific
1 
 
 
About the author 
Sam Roggeveen is a Senior Fellow at the Lowy Institute 
and a Visiting Fellow at the Strategic and Defence Studies 
Centre, Australian National University. Before joining the 
Lowy Institute, Sam was a senior strategic analyst in 
Australia’s peak intelligence agency, the Offce of National 
Assessments, where his work dealt mainly with nuclear 
strategy and arms control, ballistic-missile defence, North 
Asian strategic affairs and WMD terrorism. Sam also 
worked on arms control policy in Australia’s Department 
of Foreign Affairs, and as an analyst in the Defence 
Intelligence Organisation. Sam writes for newspapers and 
magazines in Australia and around the world, and is a regular 
commentator for The Interpreter. 

  China’s New Navy: 
A short guide for Australian policy-makers 
Sam Roggeveen 
Executive Summary 
òòChina’s focus on developing a large ocean-going surface feet indicates its 
growing ambitions. While China’s maritime modernisation was previously 
weighted more towards capabilities that would make it diffcult for the United 
States and its allies to operate close to China, Beijing now also wants to signal 
its status as a great power and have the ability to pressure its neighbours. 
òòChina already has the second most powerful navy in the Pacifc and is 
developing the capability to match America’s maritime strength in the Pacifc. 
America’s naval predominance will erode in North Asia and give way to a 
multipolar balance, but in Southeast Asia Beijing will itself become predominant. 
òòChina may already be building a ‘post-American navy’, one designed not 
to confront US naval predominance in the Pacifc, but to inherit it as the US 
baulks at the increasing cost of continued regional leadership. 
òòThanks to China’s rise and America’s relative decline, Australia faces its most 
challenging maritime security environment since World War II. To meet the 
challenge, the ADF needs a force structure that is itself inspired by lessons 
from China. 
Policy Recommendations 
òòAustralia must plan for a future in which its major ally is not the uncontested 
maritime leader in our region, and in which America’s will to maintain a pre-
eminent place in the region will be severely tested. Maritime power in North 
Asia will in future be balanced between the United States, China and several 
middle powers, and Southeast Asia will be vulnerable to coercion by Chinese 
maritime forces. 
òòAustralia should follow China’s example by focusing its maritime force structure 
on anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) capabilities. The plan to double the size 
of Australia’s submarine feet is welcome, but given the leaps in Chinese 
capability, there are major questions surrounding the pace of this program. 
òòAustralia cannot pursue an A2/AD strategy without Indonesia’s consent, and 
preferably its cooperation. Our defence diplomacy should be concentrated 
on Jakarta. 
Introduction 
It is widely accepted that China is surpassing the United States as an economic power. That this shift 
is also leading to a rebalance of military power is perhaps less appreciated, because the difference 
between the two countries remains so extreme. For instance, according to the Stockholm International 
Peace Research Institute, the United States spent US$611.2 billion in 2016 while China spent 
US$215.7 billion. In raw measures of military power, such as numbers of nuclear weapons, foreign 
bases, aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered submarines, and forces that can be deployed at short notice 
anywhere on earth, the United States remains far ahead of China. 
2 

ANU College of Asia & the Pacific
2014 2035 
China USA Japan Australia Indonesia 
Source: Australian Department of Defence, 2016 Defence White Paper , p. 49. 
   
 
However, the 2016 Australian Defence White Paper estimated that the defence spending gap between 
the United States and China will be closed by 2035 (fgure 1). That doesn’t mean China will equal 
the United States as a military power by 2035—China would need to sustain spending at that level 
over many years to match the United States—but it does indicate a clear and dramatic trend, one 
compounded by the fact that China has no evident ambitions for a global defence presence, so unlike 
the United States, it will concentrate far more of its resources in a single region. (It is also worth noting in 
fgure 1 that Indonesian defence spending will match Australia’s in the same period; Indonesia will need 
to play a key role in Australia’s response to China’s naval expansion, a subject we will return to in the 
closing section of this Paper.) 
FIGURE 1 Indicative Defence Spending to 2035 
Perhaps just as important as the raw number is how  China is working towards parity with US defence 
spending. Compared to America’s Cold War rival, the Soviet Union, China is not distorting its economy 
in an effort to keep up. The Soviet Union was a military superpower with the economy of a middle 
power. We cannot say the same of China, which has kept its defence spending at roughly 2% of GDP, a 
fgure which seems comfortably sustainable. 
For Australia, the most signifcant manifestation of this growing military capability will be in maritime 
power. For decades Australia has enjoyed a maritime edge in its immediate neighbourhood, and in 
more distant parts of the Pacifc and Indian Oceans it could count on its ally the United States, which 
possessed by far the biggest navy and air force in the world. 
Thanks to China, that period is now rapidly drawing to a close, so it is critical to understand why  Beijing 
has embarked on such a dramatic expansion of its naval capabilities. China’s public statements offer 
some clues as to its ambitions, but China’s political system is far from transparent, and Beijing probably 
calculates that maintaining ambiguity about its capabilities and intentions works in its favour. Therefore, 
we have to look elsewhere to understand Beijing’s ambitions. Naval power can refect a nation’s identity 
and hint at the bureaucratic power of the navy and its supporters. But it is also a material expression 
of a nation’s foreign policy aims. The analysis that follows briefy examines strategy, force structure and 
even the design of some of its new warships in order to fnd clues to Beijing’s broader ambitions. 
The scale of Chinese expansion 
The US Naval Institute’s Andrew Erickson estimates that the Chinese People’s Liberation Army 
(PLA) Navy is “poised to become the world’s second largest navy by 2020, and — if current trends 
continue — a combat feet that in overall order of battle is quantitatively and even perhaps qualitatively 
on a par with that of the US Navy by 2030.”
1 Yet in the sheer number of combat vessels, the PLA 
Navy has not grown much. The true measure of its growth is in capabilities. In the last two decades, 
it has replaced vessels which would long have been considered obsolete in Western navies with ships 
that are approaching the levels of sophistication seen in the West, and surpassing those of Russia. 
3 

The Centre of Gravity Series
4 
In 2015, the US Offce of Naval Intelligence judged that, of the 78 destroyers and frigates in the PLA 
Navy feet, 56 (or 72%) could be considered modern. 2 That percentage continues to increase because 
China is adding new ships quickly; IISS recently reported that in the last four years alone China has 
added enough new combat and auxiliary vessels to equal the size of the French Navy.
3 There are still 
major doubts about PLA Navy capability—can it deploy naval forces safely and consistently over long 
distances and long time periods? Are its offcers and sailors trained to the highest standard? Can it 
match the command & control capabilities of the best navies? Can it integrate its operations with the 
other arms of the PLA?—but the direction of movement is clear. 
Some high-profle examples illustrate the point. Note that the emphasis here is on surface ships rather 
than submarines, for reasons that will become clearer in the following section on why China is staging 
this dramatic expansion of capabilities: 
•  Aircraft carriers : China will soon be just the second nation on earth operating more than a single 
large aircraft carrier.
4 China’s frst carrier, CV-16, is operational, while the second (CV-17) is likely 
to enter service in 2020. The carriers that follow are likely to abandon the more primitive ‘ski jump’ 
method of launching aircraft in favour of catapults, which allow for more launches of heavier aircraft, 
thus increasing combat capability. Future Chinese carriers are likely to have similar capabilities to US 
vessels, though China may not build as many as the United States. 
•  Type 055: A new class of cruisers, each with 112 vertical-launch cells for anti-aircraft, anti-ship, and 
land-attack missiles (which at present, is only slightly fewer missile cells than the Royal Australian 
Navy has in its entire feet).
5 The frst ship will commence sea trials soon and it is likely at least eight 
will be built.6 The exact tonnage of these ships is still contested but they are probably larger than the 
US Navy’s Ticonderoga-class, though with fewer missile cells. 
•  Type 052D: Destroyers in roughly the same weight and capability class as Australia’s three planned 
Hobart-class ships. Thirteen Type 052Ds have been launched. One credible source says 26 are on 
order. China also operates six 052Cs, an earlier version of this class. 
•  Type 054A: Frigates roughly comparable to Australia’s eight upgraded  ANZAC-class. China has 
inducted 26 copies into service since the mid-2000s, with more known to be under construction. 
Credible reports suggest production will soon be halted in favour of an upgraded version known as 
the Type-054B, of which more than twenty may have been ordered. 
•  Type 901 replenishment ship : Only the US Navy currently felds replenishment ships of over 
40,000 tonnes, which allow for long-range and long-term deployment of combat vessels, but China 
now has one of these ships in trials and a second ftting out. More are likely to follow as the aircraft-
carrier feet expands.  
•  Type 071 amphibious transport dock : 25,000 tonne ships which can transport 5-800 troops 
as well as armoured vehicles over long distances, put them ashore and then support the landing 
with command facilities and logistics. Four are already in service and two more are ftting out. More 
may follow, though there are strong rumours of a Type 075 ship which will look similar to the RAN’s 
Canberra-class but will likely be substantially larger. 

ANU College of Asia & the Pacific
 China has done 
more than any other 
modern military 
force to make 
large surface ships 
vulnerable. 
Altogether, by 2020 we are on track to see a PLA Navy equipped with two aircraft carriers, two cruisers 
and around sixty destroyers and frigates, all of which can be broadly defned as modern vessels. This 
feet will be supported by a growing number of replenishment ships, at least one overseas base in 
Djibouti and perhaps several more in Pakistan, Tanzania, Sri Lanka and the Maldives.
7 In the Pacifc, 
of course, China is constructing artifcial islands in the South China Sea which can support naval and 
air deployments. 
What’s it all for? 
To understand why China is dramatically expanding the capability of its navy and particularly its surface 
feet, it is worth beginning with the observation that China has done more than any other modern 
military force to make large surface ships vulnerable, some would even say obsolete. This has been the 
aim of China’s so-called anti-access, area-denial (A2/AD) forces. A2/AD has been defned as a “family 
of military capabilities used to prevent or constrain the deployment of opposing forces into a given 
theatre of operations and reduce their freedom of manoeuvre once in a theatre.”
8 To put it another way, 
A2/AD is designed to weaken the ability of an adversary 
to achieve sea control, which is the means to operate in 
a given maritime area without interference from hostile 
forces. Importantly, A2/AD is not itself an attempt to impose 
sea control, but merely to challenge the ability of others 
to exercise it. 
China has developed a suite of capabilities that would, in the 
event of confict, deny the United States or other adversaries 
the ability to control the oceans near Chinese territory. This  
is particularly important because the United States has so 
much capability to project power from the sea onto land, 
primarily through its aircraft carriers but also with cruise-
missiles carried aboard surface ships and submarines, and 
with amphibious forces.  By focusing on A2/AD, China has 
made it increasingly diffcult for large, ocean-going surface  
feets to operate safely. Such is the capability of these 
systems that some observers now regard large surface ships 
as expensive follies or foating targets. 
What does China’s A2/AD feet look like? It is centred around anti-ship weapons (torpedoes; fast sea-
skimming missiles; and, most notoriously, the DF-21D ‘carrier killer’ ballistic missile) and small, agile 
or stealthy platforms to carry them (short-range surface ships, including catamarans that derive from 
Australian designs; strike-fghters and bombers; and quiet diesel-powered submarines).  These weapons 
and carrying platforms are knitted together by a network of sensors—on submarines, surveillance 
aircraft, satellites, and in future a network of remote underwater sensors—designed to give China 
visibility of its maritime approaches and the ability to target hostile forces with great accuracy. 
Despite the fearsome reputation of China’s A2/AD capabilities, the effort to make China’s maritime 
approaches impassable territory for hostile navies is far from complete; the further an adversary gets  
from the Chinese landmass, the less dangerous the PLA’s capabilities become. That is one reason why 
Chinese island-building in the South China Sea is so concerning.
9 It is also why Taiwan, just 160km 
from the Chinese coast, is so vulnerable. Back in 1996, the United States was able to sail aircraft-carrier 
groups through the Taiwan Strait as a protest against Chinese missile tests during Taiwan’s election 
campaign. The US Navy could do this knowing it could defend itself against any threat from China. 
But the United States cannot have such confdence today. Indeed, the risk to US maritime forces in 
the event of a US-China military clash over Taiwan is now so great that America’s implicit security 
guarantees to Taiwan are under severe strain. China’s A2/AD capabilities now make it doubtful that the 
United States could intervene in such a confict at an acceptable cost. 
Clearly, though, A2/AD has not been the PLA Navy’s exclusive focus; it is also in the process of building 
a powerful surface feet. In fact, China’s 2015 Defence White Paper declared openly that China would 
“gradually shift its focus from ‘offshore waters defense’ to the combination of ‘offshore waters defense’ 
with ‘open seas protection’”, thus signalling that China was moving decisively away from its focus 
on A2/AD.
10  
5 

  
But this raises a crucial question: given how much effort 
China has put into undermining the very viability of surface 
warships, why has the PLA Navy invested so heavily in those 
very forces? Why is China seemingly unconcerned that its 
adversaries will adopt the same A2/AD formula that China 
has itself used successfully around its coastline? There are 
various possible answers to this question, some overlapping 
or mutually reinforcing, others mutually exclusive.11 
1.   Challenge US sea control: Having frst 
developed the ability to deny the United States 
control of the seas, China now wants a feet with 
the capability to forcefully replace the US Navy as 
the hegemonic military force in the region.
12 
China is building a 
surface feet not so 
much to challenge 
the United States as 
to inherit its position. 
This would require a feet that could dominate the Asian maritime domain at the expense of all others. China 
would need the ability to defeat the US Navy and its allies in a Midway-style pitched naval battle, 13 which  
would be both massively costly and geopolitically risky. Even at the present high pace of Chinese capability 
development, it would take several decades for China to achieve such capability, and given the ability of 
the United States and regional adversaries to respond, it may never be achievable at an acceptable cost. 
2.   Inherit US sea control: China wants a feet that can take on the mission of US forces in 
Asia as the US position in the region erodes. 
China may be betting that it will never need to fght for sea control; rather, it may believe it can wait for the 
United States to cede such control over time.14 China may calculate that, as its forces grow, the United 
States essentially gives up on its current strategic posture in the Asia Pacifc through an unwillingness 
to pay the ever-increasing cost of maintaining its position of leadership. America’s alliances will weaken 
as allies start to lose faith that the United States is willing to stand up to an ever more powerful China, 
and US investment in its military won’t keep up with China’s growth. The United States won’t leave 
the region entirely, but bit by bit, Washington will accept China’s status as regional strategic leader. 
China cannot occupy this space with an A2/AD-focused navy alone, so it is building a surface feet not 
so much to challenge the United States as to inherit its position. This is less resource-intensive than 
option 1, since China would only need the ability to dominate its regional neighbours. 
3.   A focus on regional adversaries: China wants a surface feet not to challenge the 
United States, but in order to overwhelm smaller Southeast Asian adversaries.  
Beijing may be calculating that even if the United States retains its military capability in Asia Pacifc, its 
will to intervene in local disputes is fagging. That feeling may have hardened in the wake of Chinese 
island-building in the South China Sea, which the United States has done little to oppose. So even 
if China’s surface feet looks vulnerable against the United States, it would be formidable against a 
small regional adversary which cannot count on US support. The Philippines is one such country, and 
Vietnam may be another (though it is working to bolster maritime capabilities, largely with Russian help).  
Against smaller adversaries, even nascent capabilities such as China’s small aircraft-carrier feet would 
give China an important advantage in a military confrontation. 
Of course, China would prefer to avoid such confrontation altogether. So the new feet is also intended 
as a tool of coercion: convince an adversary not to fght by demonstrating that the adversary is at a 
hopeless disadvantage, making confrontation highly costly. 15 That effect is diffcult to achieve with A2/AD 
forces alone. China’s ability to coerce Southeast Asian states in regard to the South China Sea dispute, 
for instance, is reinforced by a carrier-centred feet with long-range and staying power, and by the 
development of amphibious forces that could threaten small pieces of territory at great distance from the 
Chinese mainland. A force built around submarines and anti-ship missiles has less coercive potential. 
4. ‘Costly signalling’: China wants a powerful surface feet to signal to the region and the 
world its great-power ambitions, thereby eroding incentives to resist China’s agenda. 
The theory of costly signalling arises from the natural world: Darwin, it is said, was baffed by the ornate 
plumage which he observed in some bird species, which actually made it more diffcult to fght or fee 
6 

ANU College of Asia & the Pacific
from predators. But plumage or display can signal health, strength or aggression, which may deter  
rivals or predators. Of course, such signals depend on an audience that will understand and interpret 
them unambiguously, and in the realm of international security, a large surface feet centred on aircraft 
carriers does just that. The fact that China is investing in capabilities that might be seen as vulnerable 
can even reinforce the sense that China is committed to what might be a costly course.
16  
Implications for Australia 
None of these four accounts are reassuring for Australia . The frst would be the most serious but it is also 
the least likely, while the second will depend largely on the pace and scale of America’s relative regional 
decline. Unless there is a crisis, there will be no trigger for the United States to reconsider its military 
commitment to Asia, so decline is likely to continue gradually. But confict on the Korean Peninsula, or in 
Taiwan or the South China Sea, in which the United States lost a major asset (such as a military base or 
carrier battle-group) might see a more sudden American re-assessment of its commitments in Asia. The 
third and fourth scenarios are to varying degrees already a reality—China is using its naval capabilities 
to coerce its Southeast Asian neighbours and to demonstrate that standing up to China is too costly. 
The 2016 Australian Defence White Paper, which announced a boost in defence spending and a greater 
focus on maritime capabilities, gave some indication that the government is aware of the challenge 
China’s navy poses. But the “more capable” ADF of which the White Paper boasts is based on a sleight 
of hand. Yes, the ADF of 2035 will be able to do things that the ADF of today cannot, but historical 
comparisons are beside the point. What matters is not capability relative to history, but relative to 
potential adversaries. And as the White Paper’s own numbers demonstrate (fgure 1), Australia will go 
backwards between now and 2035. 
The scale of Australia’s challenge is compounded by growing uncertainty about the future of the US 
presence in the Asia Pacifc. These concerns have in recent times centred on President Trump and his 
hostility to US allies including Japan and South Korea. But it is a mistake to focus on Trump because 
it implies that the United States could return to its traditional leadership role in the post-Trump era, and 
because it suggests that the future regional order will be decided primarily by decisions made in the 
White House.  
The change to the regional order is frst and foremost a function not of American decline but of China’s 
rise. This shift began well before Trump and will continue long after his term of offce. If strategic power 
is largely a product of economic power, then the United States simply cannot keep up with the pace 
of change—the 2017 Australian Foreign Policy White Paper predicts that by 2030, China will have a 
US$42 trillion economy, while the US economy will be worth about US$24 trillion. So the means which 
America has at its disposal to maintain its historic leadership role in the region are eroding, and that 
will continue even if Trump is succeeded by a president who embraces America’s Asian allies and 
reinforces the US military presence in the region. For America to maintain its maritime edge in the 
Pacifc against a rising Chinese navy would require a scale of investment that would be economically  
damaging and politically unattractive. 
7 

 
 
Australia won’t be 
able to focus its 
defence capabilities 
on China’s maritime 
power if this 
arouses suspicion 
from Jakarta. 
It has been argued17 that even with American decline 
taken into account, Asia’s US-aligned middle powers can, 
in concert, do a lot to blunt China’s maritime rise. Japan, 
South Korea and Australia have substantial wealth on their 
side and have already invested in formidable maritime 
forces; they have the time and the resources to do more. 
However, the question of whether Australia, Japan and 
South Korea can indeed be counted together is very 
much open: are their interests in aligning to constrain 
China’s maritime power stronger than their interests in 
maintaining good relations with Beijing? This question 
is even more acute in Southeast Asia, where economic 
inducements combined with coercion and ‘costly  
signalling’ is encouraging states such as Cambodia and 
the Philippines to bandwagon with China because they 
see China as too strong to resist. 
Given America’s continued relative decline and the 
uncertainty around the question of whether regional states 
will coalesce against China, it follows that if Australia 
wants to counter China’s growing maritime power, it must 
to a large degree act independently. Fortunately, in terms 
of maritime strategy and force structure, China itself has 
provided a ready template for how this can be done. 
The effectiveness of China’s A2/AD strategy illustrates 
that smaller powers can deny maritime space to a larger 
adversary, and it can be done without undue distortion of 
the national budget because modern maritime strategy 
and technology favour the defence - it is both easier and 
cheaper to deny sea control to a large surface feet than it is 
to impose such control. 
For Australia,  a maritime strategy based around A2/AD 
would represent a return of sorts to the Defence of Australia 
doctrine of the 1980s, with its emphasis on defending the 
sea-air gap to our north. In the post-9/11 period, when 
counter-terrorism became a higher priority and the maritime  
environment was more benign, Australia’s emphasis shifted  
to improving its expeditionary capabilities. We built a force that could be moved quickly and in large 
numbers to distant theatres of operation; the two Canberra -class large amphibious ships represent the  
culmination of this trend. But in a maritime environment in which China is rising and ambitious, and in 
which our major ally is in relative decline, those capabilities look like expensive luxuries. Australia must  
build an A2/AD force structure with the capabilities to resist any Chinese attempt at coercion. 
Such a force structure is achievable and affordable for Australia if we choose to pursue it.
18 But there  
is a diplomatic challenge attached, one which represents an important caveat to the rule that Australia 
must develop more independent maritime power in future. For if Australia is to return its defence focus 
fully to its north and build more formidable capabilities to disrupt shipping and air activity there, it must 
be done with Indonesia’s tacit consent, and preferably its cooperation. Indonesia is already a major  
regional power and could become the world’s fourth-largest economy by 2050.
19 Well before then, it is 
likely to become a much more signifcant regional defence power. As such, Australia cannot afford to 
alarm or provoke its northern neighbour by failing to make its intentions clear—Australia won’t be able to  
focus its defence capabilities on China’s maritime power if this arouses suspicion from Jakarta, or if it’s  
broader relationship with Indonesia remains so vulnerable to derailment by petty disputes. 
This is not just about neutralising Indonesia. Unlike smaller Southeast Asian states, Indonesia is a  
major power with the capacity and will to resist Chinese coercion and carve out its own distinct and 
independent regional role. Indonesia and Australia may never be allies, but they must be much closer  
partners in a common enterprise to counter-balance Chinese maritime power in our region. 
8 

ANU College of Asia & the Pacific
Policy Recommendations 
òòAustralia must plan for a future in which its major ally is not the uncontested 
maritime leader in our region, and in which America’s will to maintain a pre-
eminent place in the region will be severely tested. Maritime power in North 
Asia will in future be balanced between the United States, China and several 
middle powers, and Southeast Asia will be vulnerable to coercion by Chinese 
maritime forces. 
òòAustralia should follow China’s example by focusing its maritime force structure 
on anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) capabilities. The plan to double the size 
of Australia’s submarine feet is welcome, but given the leaps in Chinese 
capability, there are major questions surrounding the pace of this program. 
òòAustralia cannot pursue an A2/AD strategy without Indonesia’s consent, and 
preferably its cooperation. Our defence diplomacy should be concentrated 
on Jakarta. 
Endnotes 
1  Shannon Tiezzi, ‘Chinese Naval Shipbuilding: Measuring the Waves (An interview with Andrew Erickson)’, The Diplomat, 
25 April 2017, http://thediplomat.com/2017/04/chinese-naval-shipbuilding-measuring-the-waves/. 
2  US Offce on Naval Intelligence, ‘The PLA Navy: New Capabilities and Missions for the 21st Century’, 2015, pp. 13–15, 
http://www.oni.navy.mil/Intelligence-Community/China/. 
3  International Institute for Strategic Studies, ‘The Military Balance 2018: Chapter Six: Asia’, 13 February 2018. 
4  The US currently operates 11 dedicated aircraft carriers and 10 amphibious ships that can act as mini-carriers. 
A number of countries operate multiple ‘fat top’ ships that resemble aircraft carriers but which operate helicopters only, 
while Italy has two small carriers capable of felding fxed-wing combat aircraft. In coming years, both India and the 
UK are likely to operate two large carriers. 
5  Euan Graham, ‘Australia’s Navy needs to mind the missile gap’, The Interpreter, 20 October 2017,  
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/australia-navy-needs-mind-missile-gap. 
6  Rick Joe, ‘The First 055 has been launched: Here’s seven reasons why it’s a big deal’, PLA RealTalk, 26 June 2017 
https://plarealtalk.com/the-frst-055-has-been-launched-heres-seven-reasons-why-it-s-a-big-deal-611de129f4f5. 
7  David Brewster, ‘China’s new network of Indian Ocean bases’, The Interpreter, 30 January 2018,  
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/chinas-new-network-indian-ocean-bases. 
8  Luis Simon, ‘Demystifying the A2/AD buzz’, War on the Rocks, 4 January 2017, https://warontherocks.com/2017/01/ 
demystifying-the-a2ad-buzz/. 
9  Stephen Biddle and Ivan Oelrich, ‘Future Warfare in the Western Pacifc: Chinese Antiaccess/Area Denial, U.S. AirSea 
Battle, and Command of the Commons in East Asia’, International Security 41, no. 1 (Summer 2016); and Alexander 
Neill, Meia Nouwens, and Laurence Taylor, ‘China’s Radar Installations in the Spratly Islands – what do they tell us about 
its ambitions for the South China Sea?’ International Institute for Strategic Studies, 19 February 2018,  
https://www.iiss.org/en/research/defence-s-and-s-military-s-analysis/china-s-security-s-project/china-radar-installations. 
10  Raoul Heinrichs, ‘China’s defence white paper is historic for Australia, and not in a good way’, The Interpreter, 3 June 
2015, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/chinas-defence-white-paper-historic-australia-and-not-good-way. 
11  The options laid out here assume a high level of ‘strategic rationality’—a coherent strategic purpose worked out at the 
highest political level, with a military force structure then put in place to implement it. In practice, of course, the development 
of force structure is usually semi-rational, at best, with bureaucratic and other motives infuencing force-structure decisions 
too. It might be, for instance, that the decision to develop aircraft carriers is simply a refection of the PLA’s desire for a 
prestige weapon, rather than the outcome of a rational, top-down decision-making process. There is some evidence to 
suggest that the carrier program began as a prestige project encouraged by a small group of naval offcers with the help of 
a patriotic businessman. See Minnie Chan, ‘The Inside Story of the Liaoning’, South China Morning Post, 19 January 2015, 
http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1681755/how-xu-zengping-became-middleman-chinas-deal-buy-liaoning. 
12  Andrew Erickson, Abraham Denmark, and Gabriel Collins, ‘Beijing’s ‘Starter Carrier’ and Future Steps: Alternatives and 
Implications,’ Naval War College Review 65, no.1 (2012) pp.14–54. 
13  James Goldrick, ‘China’s new warship and the strategic challenge to America’, The Interpreter, 4 July 2017,  
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/china-new-cruiser-part-strategic-challenge-america. 
14  I thank Professor Hugh White for this idea. 
15  Manjeet S. Pardesi and Robert Ayson, ‘Asia’s Diplomacy of Violence: China–US Coercion and Regional Order’,  
Survival: Global Politics and Strategy 59, no. 2 (2017). 
16  Tanner Greer, ‘Costly Signaling in the South China Sea’, The Scholar’s Stage, 6 July 2016,  
http://scholars-stage.blogspot.com.au/2016/07/costly-signaling-in-south-china-sea.html. 
17  Michael Beckley, ‘The Emerging Military Balance in East Asia: How China’s Neighbors can Check Chinese Naval 
Expansion’, International Security 42, no. 2 (Fall 2017), pp. 78–119. 
18  Timothy Blizzard. ‘The PLA, A2/AD and the ADF: Lessons for Future Maritime Strategy’, Security Challenges 12, no. 3 
(2016), pp. 61–82. 
19  Ken Moriyasu, ‘Indonesia set to become fourth-largest economy’, Nikkei Asian Review, 25 June 2015,  
https://asia.nikkei.com/Politics-Economy/Economy/Indonesia-set-to-become-fourth-largest-economy. 
9 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MASTER OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 
Australia’s foremost Strategic Studies program, offered by the Strategic & 
Defence Studies Centre, at the Coral Bell School of Asia Pacifc Affairs 
A graduate degree combining the theoretical and practical expertise of leading academics and 
policymakers. Develop the analytical frameworks you need to tackle the regional and global strategic 
and security challenges of your career, and graduate a leader in your feld. Students looking to 
undertake a major research essay under the supervision of a leading Strategic Studies scholar should 
consider the Master of Strategic Studies (Advanced) program. 
Major courses include: 
STST8002 The New Power Politics STST8010 Strategic Studies STST8027 Insurgency & 
of Asia Concepts and Methods Counterinsurgency in an Age of Terror 
Course 
 Course 
 Course 
Convenor: Convenor: Convenor: 
Professor  Professor Dr Garth 
Hugh White Evelyn Goh Pratten 
Asia is in the throes of a major power-
political revolution, as a radical change in the 
distribution of wealth and power overtakes 
the old order and forces the creation of a 
new one. Explore three areas of the new 
power politics of Asia: the nature of power 
politics as a mode of international relations; 
the power politics of Asia today, what 
is happening and where it is going; and 
concepts that can help us better understand 
power politics. 
Explore inter-disciplinary concepts, 
theories and methods that inform Strategic 
Studies academic research. Using the 
overarching empirical theme of the Cold 
War, investigate three areas: understanding 
critical developments during the Cold 
War; historiographical and methodological 
debates in the study of the Cold War; 
and theoretical and conceptual methods 
employed by scholars in the most infuential 
works in Strategic Studies. 
To understand contemporary insurgencies 
in places such such as Iraq and Afghanistan 
this course establishes a strong historical 
framework by examining earlier conficts 
from North America to Southeast and South 
Asia. It encourages students to evaluate 
contemporary counter-insurgency practice, 
including those campaigns being waged as 
part of the attempt to defeat transnational 
terrorism, against the backdrop of the 
evolution of counterinsurgency strategies. 
Other courses you can study in your degree include: Strategic Studies; The Resort to Force: Understanding Military Power; 
Australian Strategic and Defence Policy; Great and Powerful Friends: Strategic Alliances and Australian Security; Strategic Studies 
Internship; Special Topics in Strategic Studies; Intelligence and Security; Nuclear Strategy in the Asian Century; China’s Defence and 
Strategic Challenges; Why and How We Fight: Understanding War and Confict; Contemporary Issues in Australian Defence Policy. 
For more information visit: programsandcourses.anu.edu.au 
Coral Bell School of 
Asia Pacifc Affairs 
ANU College of 
Asia & the Pacifc 
Contact 
T 02 6125 7017 
E sdsc@anu.edu.au 
W sdsc.bellschool.anu.edu.au 