Military Review, November-December 2022 edition.

Publishing Disclaimer: In all of its publications and products, Military Review presents professional information. However, the views expressed therein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the Army University, the Department of the Army, or any other agency of the U.S. government.

November-December 2022

Letter from the Editor in Chief: The Next 100 Years …
Col. Todd A. Schmidt, PhD, U.S. Army

2022 General William E. DePuy Special Topics Writing Competition Winners!

2023 DePuy Writing Competition

Some Suggested Writing Themes and Topics—2023

Embracing the Need for Command Climate Change
Maj. Gen. Christopher R. Norrie, U.S. Army
Lt. Col. Jaron S. Wharton, PhD, U.S. Army
Healthy command climates are essential to who we are and how well we fight, so we must continuously challenge how we assess, promote, and value positive command climates.

Cultivating a Coaching Culture
Maj. Christine S. Chang, U.S. Army
There is a gap in what Army doctrine says about leader development and how leaders are executing it in their formations. Coaching is a critical aspect of developing leaders and should be the primary focus of leader development in the Army.

Perception Is Reality: Redefining Capacity to Influence
Maj. Chris Adams, British Army
The Army should adopt a model where perception powers a leader or organization's capacity to influence to promote self-reflection and build emotional intelligence across the force, improve command climates, and generate opportunities in conflict to build advantageous disconnects between enemy perception and reality. This article was the runner-up in the 2022 MacArthur Military Leadership Writing Competition.

And now...Tarawa
J. Michael Orr

Haunted by Clausewitz's Ghost: Moral Forces in the Collapse of the Afghan Military
J. B. Potter
If future U.S. military operations coupled with nation-building are to be successful, American blood and treasure should not be expended abroad unless they lead to civic commitment and defensive determination among the people whom the United States seeks to help. This article was the winner in the 2022 DePuy Special Topics Writing Competition.

Teach as They Fight: Why Preparing Students for America's Future Operational Environment Requires Studying Britain's Military Past
Dr. Jacob Stoil
Dr. Daniel Whittingham
To anticipate and overcome the challenges of a future war, the U.S. Army should gear its professional military education curricula and studies to focus on those who have successfully faced and overcome similar problems—the British Empire.

Four-Dimensional Planning at the Speed of Relevance: Artificial-Intelligence-Enabled Military Decision-Making Process
Col. Michael S. Farmer, U.S. Army
Human learning and even the ability of the most seasoned commander to intuit will not keep pace with the evolving character of war. To shepherd battle-winning insight into the future, there must be an improvement to human cognition, the decision-making process, or its augmentation.

Enhancing Situational Understanding through Integration of Artificial Intelligence in Tactical Headquarters
Maj. Benjamin Scott, U.S. Army
Capt. André Michell, U.S. Army
To meet the demands of modern battlefields, the Army must enhance tactical command posts by integrating artificial intelligence (AI) into its systems. Well-designed AI algorithms and AI-enabled applications will help U.S. maneuver units better understand their operating environment and will enable a more robust common operating picture.

Mission Essential: Digital Interoperability during Multi-National Joint All-Domain Operations
Col. John Bonin, PhD, U.S. Army, Retired
Lt. Col. Mark Balboni, U.S. Army
The authors provide a mathematical modeling framework to explain the relationship between the elements of combat power.

Modernizing Tactical Military Microgrids to Keep Pace with the Electrification of Warfare
Maj. Nicholas Barry, U.S. Army
Surya Santoso, PhD
The electrification of warfare is accelerating at an undeniable rate. To support the growth in emerging technologies and capabilities, the U.S. Army's electrical power systems require significant modernization and development of the Army's microgrids.

Conceptualizing Information Advantage: Using Boyd's OODA Loop
Maj. Christopher Kean, U.S. Air Force
To successfully meet the requirements demanded of multi-domain operations, specifically decision dominance, information will need to become a central aspect of the planning process across all warfighting functions. This article won the 2022 Armed Forces Communications & Electronics Association Writing Contest.

A Balancing Game of Janus: Turkish Armed Forces' Border Security Measures
Col. Özgür Körpe, PhD, Turkish Army
Turkey is one of the main destination and transit countries of migration movements in the world. An assistant professor of military strategy at the Turkish Army War College describes Turkey's efforts to deal with the issue of refugees and illegal migration while maintaining a stable security environment.

Russian Logistics and Forward Urban Defense in the Baltic States
Lukas Milevski
The author considers the plausibility of an urban defense of near-border Baltic cities in the context of Russian military and logistical performance in Ukraine and the threat of Russian incursions into the Baltic States.

To Risk It All: Nine Conflicts and the Crucible of Decision
Mark Montesclaros
The author critiques a book by retired Adm. James Stavridis.

2022 Military Review Index

Source URL: https://www.armyupress.army.mil/Journals/Military-Review/English-Edition-Archives/November-December-2022/
