

This report is available online at www.dia.mil/Military-Power-Publications  
For media and public inquiries about this report, contact DIA-PAO@dodiis.mil 
For more information about the Defense Intelligence Agency, visit DIA's website at www.dia.mil
Cover image, Russian tanks, model T90A. Source: Shutterstock. 
DIA-11-1704-161

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

IV
PREFACE
For more than 50 years, DIA officers have met the full range of security challenges facing our 
great nation. Our intelligence professionals operate across the globe, and our work supports 
customers from the forward-deployed warfighter to the national policymaker. DIA is united in 
a common vision—to be the indispensable source of defense intelligence expertise—and for the 
past five decades we have done just that.
As part of this vision, DIA has a long history of producing comprehensive and authoritative 
defense intelligence overviews. In September 1981, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger 
asked the Defense Intelligence Agency to produce an unclassified overview of the Soviet 
Union’s military strength. The purpose was to provide America's leaders, the national security 
community, and the public a complete and accurate view of the threat. The result: the first 
edition of Soviet Military Power . DIA produced over 250,000 copies, and it soon became an 
annual publication that was translated into eight languages and distributed around the world. 
In many cases, this report conveyed the scope and breadth of Soviet military strength to U.S. 
policymakers and the public for the first time.
Today, we are faced with a complexity of intelligence challenges from multiple threats that we 
cannot afford to misunderstand. In the spirit of Soviet Military Power, DIA is proud to produce 
an unclassified defense intelligence overview of the military capabilities associated with 
the challenges we face—beginning with Russia. This product is intended to foster a dialogue 
between U.S. leaders, the national security community, partner nations, and the public about 
the challenges we face in the 21st century.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
V
The international order established after the Second World War and developed throughout the 
Cold War largely ensured widespread peace and stability even as it saw new conflicts—large and 
small—take place in different regions of the world. This post-war era, underwritten primarily by 
the strength of the United States, also gave rise to the greatest period of prosperity in history, 
witnessing countries rebuild from war and emerge from colonialism to become vibrant and valuable 
members of the international community. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United 
States emerged as a world leader militarily, economically and diplomatically. Today, however, the 
United States faces an increasingly complex array of challenges to our national security.
The resurgence of Russia on the world stage—seizing the Crimean Peninsula, destabilizing eastern 
Ukraine, intervening on behalf of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and shaping the information 
environment to suit its interests—poses a major challenge to the United States. Moscow will continue 
to aggressively pursue its foreign policy and security objectives by employing the full spectrum of the 
state’s capabilities. Its powerful military, coupled with the actual or perceived threat of intervention, 
allows its whole-of-government efforts to resonate widely.
Russia continues to modernize its extensive nuclear forces and is developing long range precision-guided 
conventional weapons systems. It is manipulating the global information environment, employing tools 
of indirect action against countries on its periphery and using its military for power projection and 
expeditionary force deployments far outside its borders. Its ultimate deterrent is a robust nuclear force 
capable of conducting a massed nuclear strike on targets in the United States within minutes.
Within the next decade, an even more confident and capable Russia could emerge. The United States needs 
to anticipate, rather than react, to Russian actions and pursue a greater awareness of Russian goals and 
capabilities to prevent potential conflicts. Our policymakers and commanders must have a complete 
understanding of Russia’s military capabilities, especially as U.S. and Russian forces may increasingly 
encounter each other around the globe. DIA will continue to provide our leaders decision-space, ensuring 
they have the time and information necessary to protect our nation. The wrong decisions—or the right 
ones made too late—could have dire consequences.
This report examines a resurgent Russia’s military power to foster a deeper understanding of its core 
capabilities, goals, and aspirations in the 21st Century.
Vincent R. Stewart
Lieutenant General, USMC 
Director 
Defense Intelligence Agency
Vladimir Putin’s address to the Russian Federal Assembly following the referendum  
on annexation of Crimea, 18 March, 2014:
“The USA prefers to follow the rule of the strongest and not by the international law. They are 
convinced that they have been chosen and they are exceptional, that they are allowed to shape 
the destiny of the world, that it is only them that can be right. They act as they please. Here and 
there they use force against sovereign states, set up coalitions in accordance with the principle: 
who is not with us is against us.”

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
VII
Introduction/Historical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1991–Present: Fall and Rise of the Russian Military . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Russian National Military Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Russia’s Threat Perceptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
National Security Strategy   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Stability Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
External Defense Relations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Defense Budget  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Military Doctrine and Strategy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
Russian Perceptions of Modern Conflict  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Military and Security Leadership  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Main Operations Directorate                                                          25
National Military Command and Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Russian Nuclear Command and Control                                              26
Command and Control of Joint Forces                                                27
Core Russian Military Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Nuclear Forces and Weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
Biological and Chemical Weapons  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
Anti-Access/Area Denial  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
Information Operations                                                                32
Strategic Air Operations                                                              32
Integrated Air Defense System                                                        33
Modern Precision Strike Capabilities                                                    33
CONTENTS

VIII
Precision Strike . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
Space/Counterspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
Cyber  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
Propaganda Helps Shape The Information Environment                            38
Cyber-Enabled Psychological Operations                                              39
Information Defense                                                                    40
Media Laws— A Hedge Against Instability                                            41
Indirect Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
Electronic Warfare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
Power Projection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
Underground Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
Denial and Deception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  45
Outlook: A Modernizing Force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Appendix A: Russian Strategic Rocket Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Appendix B: Russian Ground Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  50
Appendix C: Russian Aerospace Forces  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  58
Appendix D: Russian Navy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  66
Appendix E: Russian Special Operations Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  71
Appendix F: Russian Intelligence Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  72
Appendix G: Defense Industry and Modernization Programs . . . . . . . . . .  75
Appendix H: Arms Sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  85

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
9
Introduction/Historical Overview
1991-Present: Fall and Rise of the Russian Military
ollowing the collapse of the USSR in 
1991, the Russian Federation inher -
ited several formidable tasks and chal -
lenges from its Soviet predecessor. For the new-
ly-formed Russian Ministry of Defense, the most 
immediate challenge was to relocate military 
equipment and personnel from the newly inde-
pendent states of the former USSR and coun -
tries of the disbanded Warsaw Pact into a new 
Russian state.1 The assets of the Soviet Union’s 
nuclear arsenal were of particular importance. 
Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, 
the four states with nuclear weapons in their 
territory, eventually reached an agreement 
to dismantle all tactical and strategic nuclear 
weapons in the non-Russian republics or return 
them to Russia.2 The issue of conventional mili-
tary forces was much more problematic. Forces 
returning from Eastern Europe had to be rein-
tegrated into the new Russian military, while 
F
Kremlin Guards in 2017.  Military power has always been regarded as of critical importance by Russian and 
Soviet leaders, but after the collapse of the USSR, Moscow was left with a dramatically weakened military.
Image Source: Shutterstock

10
those in the newly independent states were 
viewed as the basis for building national mili -
taries for new sovereign countries.3
Returning military forces from Eastern 
Europe were often shipped piecemeal back 
to unprepared bases in the Russian Feder -
ation.4 Other units located in the territory of 
the former Soviet Union were absorbed by the 
newly independent states. In certain cases, 
units such as the Black Sea Fleet in Ukraine 
or the 14th Army in Moldova actively resisted 
the attempts by the Soviet successor states to 
absorb these forces. Some of these stranded 
units became embroiled in ethnic conflicts in 
Moldova, Georgia, and Tajikistan. 5 Most sig -
nificantly for the new Russian military, inte -
rior military districts, which under the Soviet 
Union contained low-readiness mobilization 
forces such as the Moscow and North Cauca -
sus Military Districts, now became “front-line” 
districts bordering foreign states. 6 The Rus -
sian Federation emerged from the collapse of 
the Soviet Union with a much smaller military 
and an entirely new set of security challenges.7
Russia’s new military faced dramatic budget -
ary, readiness, and personnel shortfalls, as 
well as uncertainty of its role as Moscow strug-
gled to determine its place in the post-Cold War 
world.8, 9 Russia cut military spending drasti -
cally during the decade of post-Soviet economic 
turbulence. Fielding of new weapons systems 
slowed to a trickle and eventually halted; the 
huge former Soviet arms industry struggled, 
focusing on gaining hard currency by selling its 
most modern weapons to foreign buyers. 10 At 
the same time, Russian military units lacked 
funding and fuel to train and exercise, and pay 
was often months in arrears. The readiness of 
the force was minimal, and the popular image 
of the Russian military of the 1990s remains 
ships rusting at pier side, pilots unable to fly, 
and Russian officers moonlighting with second 
jobs to make ends meet.11 
Moscow also had difficulty manning its mil -
itary. Press reports on military life that began 
to appear during the glasnost (openness) era of 
the late 1980s highlighted the harshness of the 
conscript’s lot, and in particular the brutal and 
sometimes deadly dedovschina hazing of new 
draftees. Draft evasion became endemic, with 
many young Russian men using any and all legal 
or illegal measures to avoid military service.12, 13 
Troops gathered around a fire for warmth during the 
Chechen conflict; the difficulties Moscow’s weakened 
military faced during its operations against the sep -
aratist republic underscored its deterioration during 
the 1990s.
Image Source: Shutterstock

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
11
Russian generals voiced complaints about the 
poor quality of the conscripts they actually 
received, as they were often unhealthy, poorly 
educated, and sometimes arrived with crimi -
nal records.
14 The military’s most painful trial, 
however, was caused by insurgency within the 
borders of the Russian Federation. From 1994 
to 1995, undermanned and poorly trained 
Russian forces struggled to take and secure 
the breakaway Chechen Republic in the North 
Caucasus.
15 The military’s problems and lim -
itations were widely publicized by the Russian 
and international press, further undermin -
ing its reputation and reinforcing the desire of 
young Russians to avoid service. 
Throughout the post-Soviet era, there was 
a recognized need to reform and modernize 
the military.
16 Not only did the Russian mili -
tary suffer from the readiness and manpower 
shortfalls outlined above, but Moscow’s forces 
retained their cumbersome Soviet-era organi -
zation, designed for the mobilization of mas -
sive numbers of reservists to conduct deep 
mechanized theater operations in the context 
of a major war.
17 The 1990s and first decade of 
the 21st century saw a series of military reform 
efforts announced, discussed, and only abort-
ively implemented. Russia’s first Minister of 
Defense, General Pavel Grachev, (1992–1996) 
posited the creation of a fully manned and 
equipped small “mobile force” component that 
could rapidly move to a conflict area and hold 
the line until additional forces mobilized;
18, 19, 20 
Minister of Defense Igor Sergeyev (1997–2001) 
created a new strategic nuclear deterrence 
force based on his previous service, the Strate-
gic Rocket Forces;
21, 22 and Minister of Defense 
Sergey Ivanov (2001–2007) and Chief of the 
General Staff Yuriy Baluyevsky (2004–2008) 
pushed for the establishment of new regional 
theater commands and filling the military’s 
ranks with professional “contract” person-
nel.
23, 24 By the late 2000s, these reform plans 
remained largely unimplemented, unsuccess -
ful, or abandoned. 
One arguable exception to this series of mil -
itary reform failures was the effort during 
the late 1990s to create “permanently ready 
forces,” a subset of the Russian force struc -
ture made up of units with better manning 
and equipment levels.
25, 26 These units were 
created and used during the second Chechen 
conflict (1999–2004) and enabled Moscow to 
intervene more rapidly and with more capa-
ble forces than during the first Chechen War 
(1994–1995).
27
Russian SS-25 ICBM launcher; given the weakened 
state of its conventional forces in the years after the 
collapse of the USSR, Moscow prioritized the mainte -
nance of its nuclear capabilities.
Image Source: Shutterstock

12
Despite modest improvements and a measure 
of success in the second Chechen conflict, the 
Russian military still entered the first decade 
of the 21st century with a Soviet-era mobiliza-
tion force structure almost completely equipped 
with dated Soviet-era equipment. Shortfalls in 
modern command, control, communications, 
computers, and intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance (C4ISR) equipment and capa -
bilities were particularly notable. Russian mil-
itary limitations were fully on display during 
the August 2008 “five-day war” with Georgia.28 
Russian forces prevailed and defeated their rel-
atively weak Georgian opponents, but after-ac-
tion analysis by the Russian military high -
lighted many failings. Air and artillery strikes 
missed their targets, an army commander had 
to resort to a cell phone to contact a higher 
headquarters,29 and several aircraft were lost 
to Georgian air defenses. While internationally 
Transition to the New Look Program
Moscow’s limitations in modernizing its military had led to heavy dependence on its aging 
nuclear forces to defend the state. But while the presence of a robust nuclear deterrent 
dissuaded potential aggressors from directly attacking the Russian Federation, it was 
not flexible enough for Moscow to use in small, local conflicts such as Georgia or as a 
tool of power projection. The New Look program was a comprehensive and massive effort, 
aimed to change the Russian military from a Cold War-style mobilization force to a more 
ready, modern, and professional military able to respond to 21st century conflicts. 30  Par-
tially-manned Soviet-style divisions were reorganized into what were planned to be ful -
ly-manned brigades; officer ranks were trimmed from 350,000 billets to initially 150,000, 
although later the number rose to 220,000; the contract manning effort was reshaped and 
reinvigorated, with a goal of 425,000 professional enlisted personnel in the force by 2017; 31  
the six extant military districts were reshaped initially into four joint strategic commands, 
which controlled all military assets in their areas in peace and war; and lastly, a massive 
state armaments program was initiated, allocating 1.1 trillion rubles over 10 years, aiming 
at fielding a Russian military with 70% new or modernized equipment by 2020. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37
Minister of Defense Shoygu at the 2014 Victory Day 
Parade; since 2012, Shoygu has presided over the 
continued modernization of the Russian military as 
well as its operations in Ukraine and Syria.
Image Source: Shutterstock

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
13
many were impressed by the ability of the 
Russian military, so derelict in the 1990s, to 
accomplish its mission, Moscow was spurred 
by what it viewed as critical shortfalls in Geor-
gia to rapidly push forward a whole new set 
of reforms—known as the “New Look”—which 
had been under discussion before the conflict.
38 
The New Look was controversial and painful 
for many in or associated with the Russian 
military establishment. 39, 40, 41 Even military 
education and medical support organiza-
tions became targets for major reductions. In 
late 2012, the unpopular Minister of Defense 
associated with the reform effort, Anatoliy 
Serdyukov, left office and the former head of 
the Emergency Situations Ministry, Sergey 
Shoygu, took over.
42 Shoygu proved adept at 
easing some of the most unpopular aspects 
of the New Look while largely retaining and 
refining the essence of the reform program.43
The years of Shoygu’s tenure have seen the 
New Look military engaged in a series of active 
operations. In early 2014, Russian naval infan-
try, special forces, and airborne troops rapidly 
seized control of the Crimean Peninsula.
44 
While they faced almost no opposition, the 
operation gave the world its first look at a mil-
itary that appeared surprisingly disciplined 
and well-equipped for those whose image of 
Russian forces was formed during the years 
of decay in the 1990s. Although their presence 
was denied by Moscow, Russian special forces 
and troops operated to mobilize, lead, equip, 
and support separatist militias in the Donbas 
region of eastern Ukraine from spring 2014 to 
the present. Ukrainian forces have stressed 
the capabilities of the Russian-enabled sepa -
ratist units, especially with respect to C4ISR, 
artillery firepower, and air defense.
45, 46 In Sep-
tember 2015, Moscow launched its first expedi-
tionary operation since the Soviet era, deploy-
ing fixed-wing and helicopter aviation assets to 
Syria. Combined with other military support 
to the Asad regime such as intelligence infor -
mation, advisors, ammunition, and artillery, 
Russian action arrested the decline in the Syrian 
regime’s military position.
47 
The Russian military today is on the rise—not 
as the same Soviet force that faced the West 
in the Cold War, dependent on large units 
with heavy equipment, but as a smaller, more 
mobile, balanced force rapidly becoming capa-
ble of conducting the full range of modern war-
fare. It is a military that can intervene in coun-
tries along Russia’s periphery or as far away as 
the Middle East. The new Russian military is 
a tool that can be used to underpin Moscow’s 
stated ambitions of being a leading force in a 
multipolar world. 

14
Russia National Military Overview
Russia’s Threat Perceptions
Russia has established five Joint Strategic Commands (Obyedinennoye Strategicheskoye Komandovaniye – 
OSK) to deal with perceived threats from the west, south, east, and Arctic. 48
Russian Joint Strategic Commands
1612-11168
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
ince returning to power in 2012, Rus -
sian President Putin has sought to 
reassert Russia as a great power on 
the global stage and to restructure an interna-
tional order that the Kremlin believes is tilted 
too heavily in favor of the United States at 
Russia’s expense.49 Moscow seeks to promote a 
multi-polar world predicated on the principles 
of respect for state sovereignty and non-inter -
ference in other states’ internal affairs, the 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
15
primacy of the United Nations, and a careful 
balance of power preventing one state or group 
of states from dominating the international 
order.50 To support these great power ambi -
tions, Moscow has sought to build a robust 
military able to project power, add credibility 
to Russian diplomacy, and ensure that Rus -
sian interests can no longer be summarily dis-
missed without consequence.51
Russia’s assertive promotion of its national 
interests, punctuated by its military actions in 
Ukraine and Syria, demonstrates a more con -
fident and somewhat less risk averse Kremlin, 
but it also has revived international concerns 
about the re-emergence of a more militaristic 
Russia. Russian military forces played a key 
role in the seizure of Crimea and fomenting an 
artificial separatist revolt in eastern Ukraine, 
blunting Kyiv’s aspirations to join NATO, at 
least for the foreseeable future. 52 Addition -
ally, Russia’s military intervention in Syria 
has changed the entire dynamic of the conflict, 
bolstering the Asad regime and ensuring that 
no resolution to the conflict is possible with -
out Moscow’s agreement. Nevertheless, these 
actions also belie a deeply entrenched sense of 
insecurity regarding a United States that Mos-
cow believes is intent on undermining Russia 
at home and abroad.53
Moscow undoubtedly views the United States 
and its NATO partners as the principle threat 
to Russian security, its geo-political ambitions, 
and most importantly, the Kremlin’s contin -
ued hold on power. This perception of vul -
nerability vis-à-vis the United States is most 
clearly evident in the latest Russian National 
Security Strategy published in December 2015. 
The document identifies the United States and 
its NATO allies as Russia’s main threat, and 
accuses the West of pursuing a deliberate pol -
icy of containment against Russia to sustain 
its domination of the post-Cold War interna -
tional order and deprive Moscow of its rightful 
place on the world stage.54, 55 It explicitly states, 
“the Russian Federation's implementation of 
an independent foreign and domestic policy 
is giving rise to opposition from the United 
States and its allies, who are seeking to retain 
their dominance in world affairs.” The security 
strategy also cites the buildup of NATO mili -
tary capabilities closer to the Russian border, 
the deployment of U.S. missile defense capabil-
ities in Europe, and the ongoing U.S. pursuit 
of strategic non-nuclear precision weapon sys -
tems as a serious threat to Russian security.56
Russia also has a deep and abiding distrust of 
U.S. efforts to promote democracy around the 
world and what it perceives as a U.S. campaign 
to impose a single set of global values. Moscow 
worries that U.S. attempts to dictate a set of 
acceptable international norms threatens the 
foundations of Kremlin power by giving license 
for foreign meddling in Russia’s internal affairs. 
The December 2015 National Security Strategy 
warns of the importance of preserving tradi -
tional Russian spiritual and cultural values 
against foreign Western ideas and influences 
aimed at undermining Russia from within. 57 
The Kremlin is convinced the United States 
is laying the groundwork for regime change in 
Russia, a conviction further reinforced by the 
events in Ukraine. Moscow views the United 
States as the critical driver behind the crisis in 

16
Ukraine and the Arab Spring and believes that 
the overthrow of former Ukrainian President 
Yanukovych is the latest move in a long-es -
tablished pattern of U.S.-orchestrated regime 
change efforts, including the Kosovo campaign, 
Iraq, Libya, and the 2003–05 “color revolutions” 
in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan.58
Russian threat perceptions are not limited to the 
United States, and Moscow views the danger 
posed by Islamic militants and terrorists with 
grave concern.59 The Kremlin is particularly sen-
sitive to the growth and spread of these ideologies 
and their potential to further radicalize Russian 
Muslims in the turbulent North Caucasus and 
other Muslim areas of central Russia. Russian 
military operations in Syria are also intended to 
eliminate jihadist elements operating there that 
originated in the territory of the former Soviet 
Union, to prevent them from returning home and 
posing a threat to Russia. At the same time, Mos-
cow remains anxious about the deteriorating situ-
ation in Afghanistan and the potential for Afghan-
based Islamic extremists to spill over into the  
Central Asian states of the former Soviet Union 
and ultimately into Russia.60
Russian threat perceptions with regard to China 
are more divided and nuanced. Russian officials 
regularly praise the cooperative nature of the 
bilateral relationship, and Putin himself 
has declared that the current Russian-Chinese 
relationship is the best it has been in decades. In 
fact, the Russian National Security Strategy lists 
developing a strategic partnership with China as 
one of Russia’s most important goals.61 Moscow 
and Beijing share a common interest in weaken-
ing U.S. global influence and are actively coop-
erating in that regard.62, 63 Military cooperation 
between the two countries is slowly expanding, 
as are economic ties.64 Nevertheless, some Rus-
sians are keenly aware of the growing power dis-
parity between Russia and an ascendant China 
and worry that Moscow is at risk of becoming Bei-
jing’s junior partner.65 Others continue to harbor 
suspicions that China over the longer term will 
once again become a military threat to Russia.66, 67
National Security Strategy
Russia’s current National Security Strategy was 
signed by President Vladimir Putin on 31 Decem-
ber 2015 as an update to the previous National 
Security Strategy published in 2009. The National 
Security Strategy is the Kremlin’s foundational 
planning document and is intended for domes-
tic and external audiences.68 It codifies Moscow’s 
strategic interests and national priorities for at 
least the next 6 years. The national priorities 
were consistent with those identified in previous 
strategies; however, the tone of this update was 
harsher than the 2009 strategy, reflecting Mos-
cow’s view of worsening relations with the West.
The 2015 strategy identifies Russian national 
interests as strengthening the country’s defense, 
ensuring political and social stability, raising the 
living standard, preserving and developing cul-
ture, improving the economy, and strengthening 
Russia’s status as a leading world power. These 
national interests are to be achieved through con-
centration on eight strategic national priorities:
• National defense
• State and public security

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
17
• Economic growth
• Science, technology, and education
• Healthcare
• Culture
• Ecology of living systems and rational  
use of natural resources
• Strategic stability and equal strategic 
partnership
In the 2015 document, the sections on national 
defense, internal stability, economy, and culture 
were significantly expanded.69 Moscow identified 
new threats to state and public security posed by 
foreign nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 
“color revolutions,” and the use of social media to 
foment unrest and undermine political and social 
stability,70 reflecting Russian officials’ allegations 
that Western powers seek to provoke regime 
change in Russia.71 The culture priority contains 
some of the strategy’s most significant revisions, 
emphasizing the need to preserve and strengthen 
“traditional Russian spiritual and moral values,” 
and indicating that Moscow views culture, lan-
guage, and history as a tool for influence.
Unlike the 2009 version, the new National Secu-
rity Strategy directly accuses the United States 
and NATO of pursuing actions that cause insta-
bility and threaten Russian national security.72 
The importance of a strong military for a lead-
ing world power is acknowledged; the strategy 
states that “the role of force as a factor in inter-
national relations is not declining.” The new 
strategy reiterated key concepts outlined in Rus-
sia’s 2014 military doctrine on the importance of 
deterrence and conflict prevention, nuclear and 
nonnuclear deterrence, and the need to improve 
Russia’s mobilization process.73 The National 
Security Strategy reflects a Russia more confi-
dent of its ability to defend its sovereignty, resist 
Western pressure, and contribute to the resolu-
tion of conflicts abroad (or insecurity).
Stability Issues
The Kremlin views internal political stability as 
a critical component of national strength and pro-
jecting power abroad, as evidenced by the empha-
sis placed on it in the National Security Strategy. 
Since returning to the presidency in 2012, Russian 
President Putin has worked to consolidate power. 
His efforts to further centralize control have been 
challenged by a slowing economy, lower energy 
prices, and growing public discontent with a sys-
tem that lacks any genuine pluralism.74 Putin has 
tried to deflect from these concerns by promising 
to restore Russia to great power status, on par 
with the United States, to mobilize public support 
and secure his legitimacy.75, 76
The Kremlin has taken steps to neutralize polit-
ical opposition by expanding laws to impose 
harsh sentences that discourage public pro -
tests and encourage self-censorship. 77 It has 
also restructured its internal security forces to 
ensure a more loyal and responsive apparatus. 
Russia maintains security forces that are not 
subordinate to the military to conduct a range of 
internal security and policing functions. None-
theless, the Kremlin will likely face continu -
ing challenges to its rule from democracy and 
anti-corruption activists, labor unrest, as well 
the ever present threat of terrorism emanating 
from Russia’s restive North Caucasus region. 

18
Insurgency in the South
Russia’s enduring insurgency in its restive North Caucasus region continues at a consistent 
but low level. Stemming directly from its two conflicts in Chechnya in 1994–96 and then reig-
niting in 1999, Moscow largely declared an end to major operations by 2009, although it still 
retains a sizeable military and security force structure and counterterrorism regime in the 
region.84 Still a volatile region, a general level of order is maintained via a mix of local and 
federal-level Russian forces, including Chechen forces loyal to Moscow headed by Chechen 
President Ramzan Kadyrov.85
Once the center of insurgent activity, levels of instability in Chechnya gradually have plateaued 
over the years, while those in its neighboring Muslim provinces such as Dagestan and Ingushe-
tia have experienced sporadic upswings in activity over time. Although large groups of insur-
gents are now primarily a thing of the past, smaller bands still exist with affiliations to various 
nationalist and extremist groups such as ISIS-Caucasus and the Imarat Kavkaz. These groups 
and their members conduct small-scale operations and bombings against Russian forces—pri-
marily from the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) police or the National Guard. Although daily 
attacks have largely abated since late 2013, pervasive socio-economic issues, corruption, and 
heavy-handedness (real or perceived) by Russian authorities will continue drive feelings of disen-
franchisement amongst the populace, providing a steady source for radicalization in the region. 
Ministries with Internal Security Missions
1612-11145
Ministry/Agency Mission
Personnel  
(Number of Troops)
National Guard Regime and internal security,  
federal law enforcement (200,000)78
Ministry of Internal Affairs 
(MVD)
Civil policing and local law 
enforcement 904,800
79
Federal Security Services 
(FSB) Border Troops Border security: ground and maritime (170,000)*
80
Ministry of Justice (UIN) Civil judicial system, prison guarding 32,000*81
Ministry of Emergency 
Situations (EMERCOM)
Civil defense, disaster response, 
humanitarian relief, firefighting 289,000 (7,500)
82
Federal Protection Service 
(FSO)
Presidential, VIP, and regime 
protection 20,000
83
 *Estimate 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
19
External Defense Relations
The Commonwealth of Independent States 
(CIS) was a regional coordination body cre -
ated among a number of the former Soviet 
states in the wake of the dissolution of the 
former Soviet Union. Nine states remain 
members, with Ukraine and Turkmenistan 
retaining associate member status. Russia’s 
most important defense and security rela -
tionships are with its allies in the CIS Collec -
tive Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)—
Belarus, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
and Tajikistan. Based on the 1992 Tashkent 
Collective Security Agreement, the CSTO was 
established in 2002 as part of a larger Rus -
sian effort in the post-Soviet environment 
to create a more structured military organi -
zation capable of implementing the security 
guarantees stipulated in the agreement. Since 
then, the CSTO has developed a bureaucratic 
staff under the organization’s secretary gen -
eral and a rapid reaction force to respond to 
various contingencies that might impact the 
security of the member states. The CSTO con -
ducts yearly joint military exercises address -
ing various scenarios such as peacekeeping 
or counterterrorism operations. 86 Russia also 
maintains an airbase at Kant, Kyrgyzstan, 
under the auspices of the CSTO.
Nonetheless, Russian efforts to build the 
CSTO into a more structured and capable 
organization on par with NATO largely have 
floundered. Some of the non-Russian member 
states worry that Moscow is using the orga -
nization to undermine their sovereignty and 
independence and are cautious of deepening 
military cooperation with Russia, as evidenced 
by Uzbekistan’s withdrawal in 2007. Differ -
ing threat perceptions, an absence of trust 
amongst the members, and funding shortfalls 
have further plagued the organization.87, 88, 89, 90
Russia also is building cooperative defense 
relationships with other various countries 
throughout the Middle East, Latin America, 
Africa, and Asia, but its engagement is far less 
robust than in the former Soviet Union. Mos -
cow appears to no longer be interested in fund-
ing Soviet-style patronage relationships, and 
Russian policy remains largely transactional 
aimed at expanding arms sales and other Rus-
sian economic interests, which has contributed 
to the limited nature of these ties. 91, 92 Never-
theless, the Kremlin continues to view its mil -
itary outreach to these countries as important 
to enhancing its global stature and strengthen-
ing its regional influence.
Defense Budget
Russian government spending on national 
defense has generally grown over the last 
decade and in 2016 reached a post-Soviet 
record. This increase in defense spending 
was enabled by both a general increase in 
the size of Russia’s GDP and a political deci -
sion to increase the defense burden—the 
share of national wealth devoted to defense.
In 2015, Russian defense spending reached a 
then-record $52 billion (in 2017 dollars) and 
the defense burden was nearly 4% of GDP.  

20
The 2016 budget, which was initially to 
decrease defense spending, was amended 
late in the year to increase defense spend -
ing to $61 billion, a 4.5% defense burden 
on GDP. 93, 94, 95 By contrast, in 2006 defense 
spending was $27 billion, and the defense 
burden was 2.4%. 96, 97
Moscow’s ambitious rearmament program has 
driven the increase in defense spending. The 
Strategic Armament Program (SAP) called 
for spending 19.4 trillion rubles (equivalent 
to $285 billion) to rearm Ministry of Defense 
forces from 2011 through 2020. Each year the 
SAP is implemented through the State Defense 
Order (SDO), Moscow’s purchase of new weap-
onry, investment in weapons-related research 
and design, and expenditure on modernization 
and repair of existing weaponry.101 Funding for 
the 10 year program was heavily back-loaded 
such that just 31% was to be spent in the first 
5 years (2011–2015) and nearly 70% was to be 
spent from 2016 to 2020. 102 In order for Mos -
cow to meet its original target for SAP spend -
ing and maintain its operational spending at 
current levels, defense spending from 2016 
through 2020 will have to increase substan -
tially over 2011–2015 levels.
Russian defense spending, however, is poised 
to decrease in 2017. 103 The 2017 budget calls 
for 2.8 trillion rubles to be spent on national 
defense, equivalent to $42 billion. 104 This con -
stitutes a 30% real cut in defense spending 
Russia's Official Defense Spending 2006-2017 (billions of 2017 dollars)9 8 ,9 9 ,1 0 0
1612-11108
27.026 29.024 30.754 34.412 32.375 33.345 37.862 40.762 43.416 51.519 60.825 42.278
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 20172016
Real defense expenditures US$ % of GDP (nominal NCU based expenditures)#
2.4 2.3 2.4
2.9
2.6 2.5
2.8
3.0 3.1
3.8
4.5
3.1

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
21
from 2016 levels, and if it is not amended to 
increase funds mid-year, it would be the lowest 
budget for national defense since 2013. 105, 106, 107 
According to Russian press and Ministry of 
Finance announcements, from 2017 through 
2019 Russian defense spending will be essen -
tially frozen in nominal terms—and therefore 
declining in real terms.108, 109
Russian government revenues are highly 
dependent on oil prices, and Moscow’s deci -
sion to base its budget for 2017–2019 on 
low projected oil prices in 2017–2019 is 
largely responsible for the glum outlook 
for government revenue and low projected 
GDP growth rates. 110 According to the Inter -
national Monetary Fund and a number 
of prominent economists, Russia faces a 
growth ceiling; absent structural reforms, 
Russian GDP growth would probably reach 
only 1 to 2 percent per year, even were oil 
prices to increase significantly. 111, 112

22
ince at least 1991, the Russian per -
ception of the nature of modern con -
flict has evolved. Russia views wars as 
often undeclared, fought for relatively lim -
ited political objectives, and occurring across 
all domains, including outer space and the 
information space. 113 Russian leaders have 
noted the tendency for crises to arise quickly 
and develop impetuously, and to potentially 
escalate from local wars into global ones. 114, 115 
In addition, Moscow judges that modern con -
flicts are characterized by a destructive and 
rapid “initial period of war”—a subject on 
which Russian military leaders and theorists 
have written extensively since the 1920s—
which is becoming more decisive than ever 
before. In modern cyber-enabled informa -
tion and battlefield spaces, this destructive 
non-kinetic initial period can be reduced to 
milliseconds, and kinetically to hours. 116
Moscow fears that the speed, accuracy, and 
quantity of non-nuclear strategic preci -
sion-guided weapons can achieve strategic 
effects on par with nuclear weapons, 117 one 
of the primary reasons that since at least 1993 
(and most recently codified in the 2014 Mili -
tary Doctrine) Russia has reserved the right to 
a nuclear response to a non-nuclear attack that 
threatens the existence of the state. 118, 119, 120 In 
addition to rejecting no-first-use, Moscow has 
discussed using nuclear weapons to de-escalate 
a conflict. 121, 122 While most military theorists 
and leaders believe great-power conflict is 
unlikely, they nevertheless express concern 
about the usability of the information space to 
achieve state goals.123 Russia has tied this deci-
sive and shortened initial period to the idea that 
only more proactive or even preemptive action 
is required to counter it.124, 125, 126 Russian devel-
opments in precision-guided munitions indicate 
a desire for “deep strike” capability to preempt 
attacks from an adversary.
Russia’s Military Doctrine, last updated in 
December 2014, contained several new ele -
ments not in the 2010 Doctrine, which reflect 
Moscow’s military focus and threat per -
ceptions. First codified in the doctrine was 
the concept of non-nuclear deterrence, an 
idea that has been evolving since the Soviet 
period. The doctrine also underscored per -
ceived threats to Russia’s domestic security 
and described the military’s requirement to 
inflict unacceptable damage on any adversary 
at any time. This requires the military to cal -
culate or understand what level of damage 
would constitute unacceptable damage to an 
adversary.127, 128, 129 Mobilization readiness of 
the state was stressed, as were measures to 
unify state, societal, and individual efforts to 
protect Russia and increase the effectiveness 
of military-patriotic indoctrination of citizens 
and their preparation for military service. 130
Military Doctrine And Strategy
Russian Perceptions of Modern Conflict

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
23
The concepts of readiness, non-nuclear deter -
rence, and unacceptable damage are closely 
linked in Russian thinking; Russian military 
leaders judge that a highly ready non-nuclear 
force, able to inflict unacceptable damage on 
an aggressor—including against its economy—
at any moment, is its own deterrent. 131, 132, 133, 134  
For Moscow, the word translated as “deter -
rence” (
 ) is more closely linked 
to a concept of active restraint, or literally to 
hold back something moving with force. 135 In 
the West, deterrence is often seen as an estab-
lished condition, whereas in Moscow it is an 
active, flexible process that continues through-
out the conflict spectrum.
The Russians define strategic deterrence as a 
package of coordinated political, diplomatic, 
economic, ideological, moral, spiritual, informa-
tional, scientific, technological, military, and 
other actions taken by a country to demonstrate 
the decisiveness of the political leadership to 
tap all instruments of state power consecutively 
or simultaneously—to stabilize the military, 
political, and strategic environment, to antic -
ipate aggression, and to deescalate military 
conflict. 136, 137, 138, 139, 140 Some Russian theorists 
break deterrence down further into non-force -
ful and forceful means and even into deterrence 
by “type” (economic, military, nuclear, non-nu-
clear, etc.).141
Closely linked to strategic deterrence is the 
concept of strategic stability. At its basic level, 
Russia’s concept of deterrence, appropriately 
applied in its view, assures strategic stability. 
Strategic stability is the sum total of political, 
economic, military, and other measures (e.g., 
force) retained by states in a stable balance 
whereby neither side has the opportunity, inter-
est, or intent to carry out military aggression.142
Russia has observed modern conflicts and incor-
porated aspects of these observations into its 
deterrence and warfighting strategies. Russia 
seeks to shape the environment in peacetime 
to avoid or deter conflict and, if war does occur, 
will use its military force to establish a favor -
able outcome for Moscow. 143, 144 Moscow’s warf-
ighting strategy includes use of indirect action 
and asymmetric responses, including using 
technical and psychological operations to dis -
rupt technical systems, influence public opin -
ion, and “erode the opponent’s resolve.”145, 146, 147 
The modernization of its nuclear and conven -
tional forces to include precision-guided strike 
weapons provide it a major military force to 
shape the outcome of war along the entire spec-
trum of modern conflict.
Military and Security 
Leadership
Decisionmaking in Russia is highly centralized, 
and President Vladimir Putin dominates Russia’s 
decisionmaking, including for military and secu-
rity issues. His constitutional responsibilities 
include appointing the prime minister, chairman 
of the Central Bank, government ministers, and 
judges; he may announce State Duma elections 
or dissolve it. His annual address to the Federal 
Assembly sets guidelines for national internal 
and foreign policies, and he resolves internal 
governmental disputes. The Russian president  

24
governs foreign policy, signs international trea-
ties, forms and heads the Security Council, and 
approves military doctrine.148 The Russian pres-
ident serves as the Supreme Commander in 
Chief of the Russian military, and in times of 
emergency he may introduce martial law.149
The Russian Ministry of Defense is subordinate 
to President Putin as Supreme Commander in 
Chief and is charged with implementing presi-
dential policy within the military, overseeing 
all readiness, manpower, and procurement 
issues.150, 151, 152 The defense minister has the 
legal authority to oversee and direct opera -
tions of the General Staff.153
Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu was appointed 
Defense Minister on 6 November 2012, after 
18 years leading the Ministry of Emergency 
Situations. 154 Shoygu’s introduction of fre -
quent strategic-level, no-notice inspections 
in Russia’s military districts, unprecedented 
in number and scope for the post-Soviet Rus -
sian military, has been critical in assessing 
and increasing combat readiness in the armed 
forces, as well in as refining defense reforms.155
The General Staff’s primary mission is to 
ensure the military security of the Russian Fed-
eration (RF), that is, to protect the vital inter -
ests of the state and society from internal and 
external threats. The General Staff is responsi-
ble for monitoring and characterizing the threat 
environment and developing strategic and 
operational plans to equip, mobilize, employ, 
command, and control the armed forces. 156, 157 
According to a 2013 presidential edict describ-
ing General Staff missions and functions, its 
range of responsibilities was broadened to 
include coordination of all activity undertaken 
by federal executive organizations to ensure 
defense capability and security.158
The chief of the General Staff, Gen-Army Valeriy 
Gerasimov, serves as the military head of the 
Russian Armed Forces.159 Gerasimov previously 
served as deputy chief of the General Staff from 
December 2010 until May 2012, when he was 
appointed commander of the Central Military 
District.160 He became chief of the General Staff 
in November 2012. He is a respected armor 
officer with substantial combat experience and 
time in command in Russia’s restive North 
President Vladimir Putin
 Gen-Army Valeriy Gerasimov
Image Source: Open source
Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu


RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
25
Caucasus region.161, 162, 163 Since his appointment, 
Gerasimov has focused largely on dealing with 
military readiness, modifying defense reforms 
carried out by his predecessor, and preparing 
for security concerns.164, 165, 166, 167
Main Operations Directorate
The Main Operations Directorate (GOU) of the 
General Staff has operational control of the 
armed forces, organizes strategic and opera -
tional force planning; executes military exer -
cises and operational training, and engages 
with multilateral military-security organiza -
tions such as the CSTO, CIS, and Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization.168 The GOU shapes 
the Defense Plan of the Russian Federation, 
identifies sources of threats to Russia for strate-
gic planning, and works with the General Staff’s 
Military-Scientific Committee (VNK) to draft 
the State Armament Program.169, 170, 171, 172, 173
General Lieutenant (Gen-Lt, two stars) Sergey 
Rudskoy served as first deputy chief of the 
GOU for 9 years before becoming its chief in 
November 2015, Rudskoy has been the Gen -
eral Staff’s senior representative at interna -
tional forums, and he will likely leverage this 
experience to enhance coordination with other 
militaries operating in Syria.174, 175
National Military Command 
and Control
At the pinnacle of Russian military command 
and control is the Russian president, Vladi -
mir Putin, who serves as the Supreme Com -
mander in Chief of the armed forces. As such, 
he is the primary decisionmaker and is autho-
rized to assume direct command and control 
during times of crisis and martial law.176, 177 The 
minister of defense is appointed by the presi -
dent and is charged with implementing presi -
dential policy within the Ministry of Defense. 
This includes overseeing all hiring, equipping, 
training, care, and feeding of military person -
nel. With the implementation of Russia’s New 
Look military reforms, the minister of defense 
now has legal authority to oversee and direct 
operations of the General Staff. 178 The chief of 
the General Staff is also appointed by the pres-
ident and serves as the military head of the 
armed forces. 179 The General Staff’s primary 
mission is to ensure the military security of the 
Russian Federation and is responsible for mon-
itoring and characterizing the threat environ -
ment and developing strategic and operational 
plans to equip, mobilize, employ, command, and 
control the armed forces.180, 181 The service chiefs 
Gen-Lt Sergey Rudskoy
Image Source: Open source

26
have the responsibility of organizing, training, 
and equipping their forces to meet current and 
future national security challenges.
182
The Russian military has established a redun-
dant and survivable command and control 
(C2) system to control its forces that serves 
as a force-enabler. Russia’s C4ISR complex 
uses multiple capabilities ranging from tech -
nologically advanced systems to mechanically 
simple, legacy Soviet devices intended to cen-
tralize control of the military while providing 
intelligence support to speed up decisionmaking 
cycles and carry out joint operations.
183, 184
Russia’s C2 system has six key characteristics:
•  Centralized. The president of the Rus -
sian Federation is the commander in chief 
of the armed forces and is authorized to 
assume direct C2 over the military via 
the Ministry of Defense and General Staff 
during times of crisis and martial law.
185
•  Redundant. Multiple C2 systems are used 
at each echelon to disseminate commands 
and for the transmission of orders.
186
•  Geographically dispersed. Russia’s 
key C2 nodes and facilities are distributed 
throughout the country to increase surviv-
ability and limit single points of failure.
187
•  Secure. Moscow is upgrading C2 systems 
to take advantage of modern and secure 
digital communications networks.188
•  Reliable. Russia routinely conducts snap 
and other training exercises to test the sys-
tems’ capabilities to pass information and 
increase decisionmaking efficiency.189
•  Built for the worst case scenario. Rus-
sian C2 systems are designed to enable 
the dissemination of launch orders while 
under nuclear attack through several C2 
systems, including Perimetr, sometimes 
referred to as the “Dead Hand.”
190
Russian Nuclear Command 
and Control
Maintaining control of its nuclear arsenal is of 
critical importance to Moscow. During the Cold 
War, Russia developed a centralized nuclear 
C2 system capable of meeting its three primary 
requirements: reliability, speed, and security. 
President Putin with the nuclear briefcase.
Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
27
To accomplish these goals, strategic planners 
designed a complex system-of-systems that pro-
tects weapons from unauthorized or accidental 
use and centralizes command authority at the 
highest echelon, while guaranteeing the ability 
to quickly launch when necessary.191
Russian military doctrine underscores the cen-
tral role of the Russian president in authorizing 
the use of nuclear weapons. He uses the nuclear 
briefcase, which is carried by officers who 
always remain near the president. The General 
Staff monitors the status of the weapons of the 
nuclear triad and will send the direct command 
to the launch crews following the president’s 
decision to use nuclear weapons. The Russians 
send this command over multiple C2 systems, 
which creates a redundant dissemination pro -
cess to guarantee that they can launch their 
nuclear weapons. Moscow also maintains the 
Perimetr system, which is designed to ensure 
that a retaliatory launch can be ordered when 
Russia is under nuclear attack.192, 193, 194
Command and Control of  
Joint Forces 
Moscow Implemented a Joint Strategic Com -
mand (OSK) structure in 2010 to better 
facilitate joint military operations. Russia 
converted its six military districts into four 
OSKs.197, 198 In 2015, Russia created a fifth 
OSK, the OSK Northern Fleet, to improve its 
capability to project military power into the 
Arctic and to take advantage of the opening 
of the Russia’s Northern Sea Route. 199
In contrast to pre-reform military districts 
that were primarily land force commands, 
the new OSKs are joint force elements that 
have control in times of peace and war over 
all general purpose forces stationed in—or 
deployed to—their territories. The phrase 
“military district” still exists and refers to 
specific geographic boundaries, but an OSK 
is the command element for that area. For 
example, the Eastern Military District covers 
President Putin and Defense Minister Shoygu at the 
NTsUO, November 2015.
Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright
National Defense Management Center (NTsUO), 
November 2015. 195, 196
Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright

28
the geographic territory from eastern Siberia 
to the Pacific Ocean, but it is commanded by 
OSK East. 200, 201 These reforms resulted in a 
reduced command structure, both vertically 
and horizontally, which is more streamlined, 
efficient, and flexible. 202, 203
Moscow’s National Defense Management 
Center (NTsUO), which came online in 2014, 
is a key component of the overall Russian C2 
system. The NTsUO works with subordinate 
regional and territorial defense management 
centers to coordinate ministry and department 
activities among lower echelons in accordance 
with national defense and security directives 
while liaising with municipal authorities.204

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
29
ussia is one of the oldest nuclear 
powers, first detonating a nuclear 
device in 1949.205 As heir to the former 
Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal, Russia has 
one of the world's two largest inventories of 
strategic weapons. While participating in stra-
tegic arms reduction treaties (START) with 
the United States, Russia is also committed 
to maintaining and modernizing its nuclear 
forces. Land-based intercontinental ballistic 
missiles are controlled by the Strategic Rocket 
Forces (SRF), and the sea-based and air stra -
tegic systems are managed by the Navy and 
Aerospace force, respectively. Moscow plans to 
spend about $28 billion by 2020 to upgrade the 
capacity of its strategic nuclear triad.206
• In the first leg of the triad the SRF operates 
three older ICBM systems for more than half 
of their land-based nuclear delivery vehi -
cles. The oldest ICBMs in the arsenal are 
the silo-based liquid-fueled SS-18 (deployed 
in 1988–92) and SS-19 (deployed in 1979-
84). These missiles carry, respectively, 10 
and 6 multiple independently-targeted 
Dolgorukiy Class Nuclear Powered Ballistic Missile Submarine. 
Core Russian Military Capabilities
Nuclear Forces and Weapons
Image Source: AFP

30
reentry vehicles (MIRVs). The solid-propel-
lant, single-warhead SS-25 was deployed in 
1985–92 as a road-mobile ICBM. As these 
aging missiles reach the end of their oper -
ational lives, they will be withdrawn from 
service by 2019–2021 and replaced with 
newer, modern road-mobile and silo-based 
ICBMs by 2020. The SRF's missile invento-
ries will be equally split between road-mo-
bile and silo-based ICBMs.207
• The second element of the nuclear triad is 
a fleet of at least 10 nuclear-powered bal -
listic missile submarines (SSBN) under 
administrative control of the Naval High 
Command. The Russian strategic Navy 
is modernizing, mainly by building and 
deploying the DOLGORUKIY-class SSBN 
platform for the new SS-N-32 BULAVA 
sea-launched ballistic missile (SLBM).208
• The third element of the nuclear triad is the 
Russian Aerospace Force's fleet of strategic 
bombers, which forms the core of the Long-
Range Aviation (LRA) Command. Like 
other components of the triad, the LRA is 
modernizing, to continue operating Tu-95 
BEAR and Tu-160 BLACKJACK bombers 
beyond 2030. The last “new” BLACKJACK 
was added to the fleet in 2005, and all exist-
ing Tu-160s will be upgraded to Tu-160M1 
or M2. Russia has announced that it will 
resume production of Tu-160M2 bombers 
and complete development of a new genera-
tion bomber (Russian designation: PAK-DA) 
within a decade, but timelines for both pro-
grams may slip if financial difficulties arise. 
The new bomber design is expected to have 
some stealth and short- or rough-runway 
capabilities, and employ both conventional 
and nuclear armament.209, 210
The main function of strategic forces is effec -
tive, reliable deterrence. Scenarios for the use of 
strategic nuclear forces fall into three main cat-
egories: preemptive strike (first strike), coun -
terstrike (launch on warning, prior to impact 
in-country), and retaliatory strike (response to 
impacts in-country). Because the retaliation 
option imposes the most difficult situation on 
the strategic forces—which must respond even 
Russian Tu-160 heavy bomber and Il-78M tanker.
Image Source: AFP
Russian SS-27 Mod 2 road-mobile ICBM.
Image Source: AFP

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
31
after an enemy's strategic strike has impacted 
and disabled elements of the force—strategic 
forces, weapons, and battle management sys-
tems are designed and built to be hardened, 
stealthy, redundant, and reliable—and trained 
to function in a WMD-degraded environment.
211
Russia continues to retain a sizable nuclear 
stockpile even after several decades of arms 
reduction treaties. Russia has a large nuclear 
weapons infrastructure and a production base 
capable of producing large numbers of new 
nuclear weapons annually.
212, 213
The U.S.-Russia New Strategic Arms Reduction 
Treaty (New START), signed on 8 April 2010, 
sets for each country a limit of 1,550 warheads 
on strategic platforms, including one warhead 
attributed to each heavy bomber. There is also 
a combined limit of 800 deployed and non-de -
ployed ICBM and SLBM launchers and heavy 
bombers equipped for nuclear armaments, and a 
separate limit of 700 deployed strategic systems 
overall. The treaty will last 10 years, with cen-
tral limits to be met by 2018 with the option for a 
single extension of another 5 years. Colonel Gen-
eral Sergey Karakayev, commander of the SRF, 
has stated that an arsenal of 1,500 nuclear war-
heads would provide Russia a sufficient deter-
rent against attack.
214 According to Russia’s New 
START Treaty data provided on 1 April 2017, 
Russia declared 1,765 warheads on 523 deployed 
ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers.
215
Russia currently has an active stockpile of 
approximately 2,000 non-strategic nuclear 
weapons. These include air-to-surface mis -
siles, short-range ballistic missiles, gravity 
bombs, and depth charges for medium-range 
bombers, tactical bombers, and naval avia -
tion, as well as anti-ship, anti-submarine, and 
anti-aircraft missiles, and torpedoes for sur-
face ships and submarines. There may also 
be warheads remaining for surface-to-air and 
other aerospace defense missile systems.
216,217
Russia’s nuclear forces modernization goals 
include: replace Soviet-legacy systems with 
modern nuclear weapons, maintain rough 
parity with the U.S. nuclear arsenal, improve 
the survivability and efficiency of its nuclear 
weapons, and maintain prestige on the inter-
national stage. Russia’s nuclear moderniza -
tion includes both strategic and non-strate -
gic nuclear weapons.
218,219,220,221
Biological and 
Chemical Weapons
In 1992, then-Russian President Boris Yeltsin 
admitted having an offensive biological weap -
ons program and publicly committed to its ter-
mination. Subsequently, the Russian govern -
ment reversed itself and now claims neither 
the Soviet Union nor Russia has ever pursued 
an offensive biological weapons program.
222
In 1997, Moscow declared the world’s larg -
est stockpile of chemical agents and muni-
tions—40,000 metric tons of agents—under the 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The 
declared inventory consisted of a comprehensive 
array of traditional chemical warfare agents 
filled in munitions such as artillery, bombs, and 
missile warheads, as well as stored in bulk.
223 

32
As a state party to the CWC, Russia is obligated 
to destroy its chemical weapon stockpile.
As of January 2017, Russia had destroyed 
96.4% of its declared chemical weapons stock -
pile, according to press reporting. 224 Russia 
intends to complete destruction of its remain -
ing declared stockpile by 2020. 225 Moscow has 
completed destruction activities and closed the 
facilities in Gornyy, Kambarka, Maradykovs -
kiy, Leonidovka, Schchuch’ye, and Pochep and 
continues destruction of its remaining chemi -
cal weapons stockpile at a facility in Kizner.226
Russia used chemical incapacitants to resolve 
the Dubrovka Theater hostage situation in 
2002 and may consider using them in other 
counterterrorism actions.227
Anti-Access/Area Denial
Anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) refers to pre -
venting an adversary from operating in a par -
ticular region or area. Russia repeatedly cites 
in open source literature the need to repel or 
defend against a Western aerospace attack. 
Russia would seek to deter any Western use of 
aerospace power against Russia using its con -
ventional, non-strategic nuclear, and, in extreme 
circumstances, its strategic nuclear forces. Rus-
sian military theorists have examined the likeli-
hood of a great power war arising out of a local 
conflict, similar to the events leading up to World 
War I, and escalating to combat with U.S./NATO 
or another peer.228 Based on insight gleaned from 
studies of warfare since 1991, Russia would seek 
to limit the capability of an adversary to conduct 
aerospace strikes on its territory.229,230
Russian strategy for A2/AD would focus on a 
combination of various elements that military 
planners and theoreticians have identified as 
critical to the development of a comprehen -
sive approach to A2/AD.231,232 These involve the 
incorporation of the following elements.
Information Operations
Information operations are seen as a critical 
capability to achieve decisive results in the ini-
tial period of conflict with a focus on control 
of the information spectrum in all dimensions 
of the modern battle space. Authors often cite 
the need in modern warfare to control informa-
tion—sometimes termed “information block -
ade” or “information dominance”—and to seize 
the initiative early and deny an adversary 
use of the information space in a campaign so 
as to set the conditions needed for “decisive 
success.” Russia continues to emphasize elec -
tronic warfare and other information warfare 
capabilities, including denial and deception as 
part of its approach to all aspects of warfare 
including A2/AD.233
Strategic Air Operations
Russian military theorists continue to empha -
size the key importance of strategic air opera -
tions in modern war. This concept originated 
in the 1920s, where Soviet planners viewed 
the initial period of war as the time that avi -
ation would strike deep in enemy rear areas to 
destroy mobilization and concentration areas. 
At the same time, air forces would also priori -
tize the defense of the country against enemy 
air attack and conduct close air support of 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
33
ground operations, achieving air supremacy in 
the first days of the war using all means.234 This 
concept was underscored in 1993, when Defense 
Minister Grachev indicated that “war will begin 
with an offensive aerospace operation on both 
sides.”235 Russian planners have indicated that 
in such a war there will be no front and no rear, 
with space emerging as an independent theater 
of military operations. Russian doctrine, down 
to the present day, continues to emphasize that 
strategic objectives can be achieved with mass 
aerospace strikes early in a conflict with victory 
achieved without the seizure and occupation of 
territory by forces.236
Russian planners have analyzed U.S. oper -
ations such as DESERT STORM, NOBLE 
ANVIL, and IRAQI FREEDOM for insight, 
observing military art at the strategic, oper -
ational, and tactical levels in campaigns that 
displayed U.S. aerospace capabilities and 
underscored the importance of developing 
comparable indigenous capabilities that can 
be employed defensively. 237,238 This empha -
sis on strategic air operations is reflected in 
long-term procurement goals of platforms and 
weapons focused on space, aerospace defense, 
and precision-guided munitions.239,240
Integrated Air Defense System
Russian doctrine places a great deal of empha-
sis on aerospace defense as a key component 
in its overall A2/AD strategy.241,242 Though still 
in development, Russia’s 21st century inte -
grated air defense system will be designed to 
integrate future and existing systems around 
a central command structure that is designed 
to promote the interaction of all air defense 
forces and weapons. 243, 244 Capabilities opti -
mized against cruise missiles are key to this 
defense component, not just those optimized to 
target aircraft.
Modern Precision Strike Capabilities: 
Air and Sea Systems in Combination 
with Older Technologies245, 246
Russia continues to develop a variety of sea- 
and aerospace-based programs that offer a 
variety of offensive and defensive capabilities 
that could enable the implementation of its 
integrated A2/AD strategy. 247, 248 These include 
the continued production and deployment of 
coastal defense cruise missiles, air/surface/
sub-surface-launched anti-ship cruise missiles 
(ASCMs), 249 submarine-launched torpedoes, 
and naval mines, along with Russian fighter, 
bomber, and surface-to-air missile capability.  
Russian S-400 Surface-to-air missile systems – a key 
component of Moscow’s A2/AD strategy.
Image Source: AFP

34
These are intended provide Russia with the 
ability to limit access to its territory and 
extend its strategic depth by providing long 
range kinetic strike capability.
Precision Strike
Russian doctrine on Precision Strike is 
essentially a 21st century extension of the 
Russian doctrine of “deep battle” initially 
codified during the 1920s and 1930s by 
Chief of the General Staff Marshal Mikhail 
Tukhachevskiy and represents an attempt to 
incorporate new technology into traditional 
Russian strategic, operational, and tactical 
strategy. Deep battle was a strategic concept 
that focused on terminating, overwhelming, 
or dislocating enemy forces not only at the 
line of contact, but throughout the depth of 
the battlefield. Deep battle encompassed 
maneuvers by multiple Soviet Army front-
size formations simultaneously. It was not 
meant to deliver a victory in a single oper -
ation; instead, multiple operations, which 
might be conducted in parallel or succes -
sively, would induce a catastrophic failure 
in the enemy's defensive system. Initially, 
deep battle focused on improved ground and 
air forces and was influential in Soviet oper -
ations in World War II from 1943 onward. 
Chief of the General Staff Marshal Niko -
lay Ogarkov, writing in the 1970s to 1980s, 
updated the deep battle concept to develop 
a more aerospace-centric approach in an 
attempt to incorporate traditional Russian 
doctrine with precision technology. 250
Ogarkov theorized throughout his tenure as 
chief of the Soviet General Staff that conven -
tional precision-guided munitions were part 
of a revolution in military affairs. In an influ -
ential 1983 Krasnaya Zvezda article, Ogar -
kov took notice of the impact of new types of 
precision weapons and micro-circuitry on the 
development of conventional capabilities. For 
Ogarkov, the development of new conventional 
forms of non-nuclear weapons would enable 
the sorts of multi-front operations that were 
envisioned in the original deep battle concept. 
On a theoretical basis, Ogarkov forecast that 
precision strike could exercise a direct and 
decisive outcome of a future war.251, 252
Despite enthusiasm by the Soviet General 
Staff, very little progress was made in the 
development of precision-guided munitions 
except at the theoretical level for the remain -
der of the Soviet period. In 1991, DESERT 
STORM provided the Soviet military with proof 
of concept regarding the use of precision-guided 
munitions. Former Soviet officials and Russian 
authorities argued that the DESERT STORM 
campaign demonstrated the capability of preci-
sion-guided airstrikes in the land attack role to 
paralyze the rear area and an adversary’s econ-
omy. Targets could include vulnerable areas of 
the economy, command and control centers, 
and transportation centers. The introduction of 
precision-guided munitions changed the nature 
of modern war by reinforcing traditional con -
cepts that emphasized decisive action during 
the initial stage of warfare and at the same 
time undermined the traditional Russian reli -
ance on large ground force groupings to achieve 
tactical and strategic objectives.253

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
35
Russia was unable to achieve real progress in 
the development of precision strike until the 
first decade of the 21st century, when it was 
able to create a viable state armaments pro -
gram that allowed prioritization of certain key 
components of 21st-century warfare. Between 
2010 and 2015, Russia’s strategic forces, space 
and aerospace defense platforms, and preci -
sion-guided munitions254 such as ISKANDER, 
KALIBR, or KH-101 were defined as priori -
ties, and system development, production, 
and testing occurred. The effectiveness of pre -
cision-guided munitions are being tested in a 
variety of settings, including Command Staff 
exercises KAVKAZ-2012, VOSTOK-2014, and 
KAVKAZ-2016, as well as operationally against 
targets in Syria beginning in 2015.255, 256, 257
Space/Counterspace
The Russian General Staff postulates that 
modern warfare is increasingly reliant on infor-
mation, particularly from space, because of the 
expansion of the geographic scope of military 
action and the information needs of high-pre -
cision weapons. 258 Russia has a significant 
constellation of satellites in orbit. According 
to Colonel Sergey Marchuk, chief of the Main 
Test Space Center, Russia has more than 130 
spacecraft, civilian and military, performing 
communications, navigation, geodetic survey 
support, meteorological, reconnaissance, and 
intelligence gathering missions.259
Russia’s space program is both formidable and 
in a state of rebuilding. Moscow seeks to main-
tain the health of its current constellations 
while deploying a next-generation architecture 
on par with Western space systems. Over the 
next several years, Russia will prioritize the 
modernization of its existing communications, 
navigation, and earth observation systems, 
while continuing to rebuild its electronic intelli-
gence and early warning system constellations.
Russia’s current systems provide an array of 
capability including high-resolution imagery, 
terrestrial and space weather, communica -
tions, navigation, missile warning, electronic 
intelligence, and scientific observations. With 
a long-standing heritage in space, Russia gains 
a sense of national pride from its space pro -
gram, which has included manned missions 
and leading the world in space launches. Cur -
rently ranked third in total number of satel -
lites in orbit behind the United States and 
China, the figure below displays a breakdown 
of Russia’s satellites in orbit.
Kh-101/102 air-launched cruise missiles on a Tu-95MS 
heavy bomber; Moscow first used its precision strike 
arsenal in combat during a series of 2015 strike opera-
tions by sea- and air-launched cruise missiles against 
targets in Syria.
Image Source: Shutterstock

36
Russia has concluded that gaining and main -
taining supremacy in space has a decisive 
impact on the outcome of future conflicts. 261 
According to Russia’s 2010 military doctrine, 
militarization of outer space is a “main exter -
nal military danger.” 262 The 2014 update to 
Russia’s military doctrine calls out Western 
global strike capability by name. 263 Russia, in 
military journals, has observed that Western 
operations have shifted to non-contact opera -
tions that rely on long-range, space-supported 
precision-guided munitions.264, 265, 266 Russia has 
been very vocal expressing its concerns about 
Western precision strike capabilities and mis -
sile defense plans. Deputy Prime Minister 
Dmitry Rogozin compared U.S. ballistic mis -
sile defense efforts in Eastern Europe to the 
Strategic Defense Initiative of 1983 and stated 
that such an effort justifies the development of 
Russian counterspace programs.
The Russian General Staff argues for pursuing 
in wartime such strategies as disrupting foreign 
military C2 or information support because they 
are so critical to the fast-paced, high-technology 
conflicts characteristic of modern warfare.267, 268 
Russia believes that having the military capa-
bilities to counter space operations will deter 
aggression by space-enabled adversaries and 
enable Russia to control escalation of conflict 
if deterrence fails. 269 Military capabilities for 
space deterrence include strikes against satel-
lites or ground-based infrastructure supporting 
space operations.270
On 1 August 2015, Russia created the Rus -
sian Federation Aerospace Forces by merging 
Russian satellites in orbit, 5 October 2016 260
1612-11112
Communication Navigation Science
and Tech
Earth
Observation
Relay
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
70 5 20 33 12
Civil CommercialMilitary

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
37
the former Air Force and Aerospace Defense 
Troops. Defense Minister Shoygu stated the 
change was “prompted by a shift in the center 
of gravity… towards the aerospace sphere” and 
as a counter to the U.S. Prompt Global Strike 
doctrine.271, 272 This merged force includes Rus -
sia’s space forces who have the mission of con-
ducting space launches and maintaining the 
ballistic missile early warning system, the 
satellite control network, and the space object 
surveillance and identification network.273, 274, 275
Russia also reorganized its space industry 
responsible for space research, design, and pro-
duction. Russia merged the government-owned 
United Rocket and Space Corporation (ORKK), 
which previously absorbed the majority of the 
space industry corporations in 2013, with the 
Federal Space Agency. 276, 277 President Putin 
finalized the dissolution of the Federal Space 
Agency on 1 January 2016, naming the joint 
organization the Roscosmos State Corporation.
Cyber
Russia views the information sphere as a key 
domain for modern military conflict. 278, 279 
Moscow perceives the information domain as 
strategically decisive and critically important 
to control its domestic populace and influence 
adversary states. Information warfare is a key 
Russia’s planned space launches through 2019280
1612-11105
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2018 20192017
Communications
33
Earth
Observation
16
Navigation
20
Science & Tech
40
ELINT
2
EWS
1
Unknown
1

38
means of achieving its ambitions of becoming a 
dominant player on the world stage.281
Since at least 2010, the Russian military has 
prioritized the development of forces and means 
for what it terms “information confronta -
tion,”282, 283 which is a holistic concept for ensur-
ing information superiority, during peacetime 
and wartime.284 This concept includes control of 
the information content as well as the technical 
means for disseminating that content. Cyber 
operations are part of Russia’s attempts to con-
trol the information environment.
The weaponization of information is a key 
aspect of Russia’s strategy and is employed 
in time of peace, crisis, and war. In practice, 
information battles draw upon psychologi -
cal warfare tactics and techniques from the 
Soviet Era for influencing Western societies.285 
Moscow views information and psychological 
warfare as a measure to neutralize adversary 
actions in peace to prevent escalation to crisis 
or war.
Chief of the General Staff Gerasimov announced 
that “information operations troops” were 
involved for the first time in the Kavkaz-2016 
strategic command staff exercise in Septem -
ber 2016, demonstrating Russian military 
commitment to controlling the information 
domain. 286, 287, 288
Propaganda Helps Shape The 
Information Environment
Russian propaganda strives to influence, con -
fuse, and demoralize its intended audience, 
often containing a mixture of true and false 
information to seem plausible and fit into the 
preexisting worldview of the intended audi -
ence. Russian propaganda targets a wide variety  
Information Confrontation
“Information confrontation,” or IPb (informatsionnoye protivoborstvo), is the Russian govern-
ment’s term for conflict in the information sphere. IPb includes diplomatic, economic, mili -
tary, political, cultural, social, and religious information arenas, and encompasses two mea-
sures for influence: informational-technical effect and informational-psychological effect.289, 290
• Informational-technical effect is roughly analogous to computer network operations, 
including computer-network defense, attack, and exploitation.
• Informational-psychological effect refers to attempts to change people’s behavior or 
beliefs in favor of Russian governmental objectives.
IPb is designed to shape perceptions and manipulate the behavior of target audiences. Infor-
mation countermeasures are activities taken in advance of an event that could be either 
offensive (such as activities to discredit the key communicator) or defensive (such as mea -
sures to secure Internet websites) designed to prevent an attack.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
39
of audiences, including its own population, 
selected populations of other countries, domes-
tic and foreign political elites, and the West 
writ large. 291, 292 The variety of techniques for 
disseminating Russian propaganda include 
pro-Kremlin “news” websites and TV and radio 
channels such as Russia Today and Sputnik 
News, bots and trolls on social media, search 
engine optimization, and paid journalists in 
Western and other foreign media.
Cyber-Enabled 
Psychological Operations
One of the newest tools in Russia’s information 
toolkit is the use of cyber-enabled psychological 
operations that support its strategic and tacti-
cal information warfare objectives. These new 
techniques involve compromising networks for 
intelligence information that could be used to 
embarrass, discredit, or falsify information. 
Compromised material can then be leaked to 
the media at inopportune times.
• Hacktivists. Russian intelligence services 
have been known to co-opt or masquerade 
as other hacktivist groups. These groups 
appeal to Russia due to the difficulty of 
attribution and the level of anonymity pro-
vided. It is widely accepted that Russia, via 
patriotic hackers, conducted a cyber attack 
on Estonia in 2007. 293 Under the guise of 
hacktivism, a group called “CyberCaliph -
ate,” seemingly ISIS associated, conducted 
a hack against French station TV5 Monde 
in January 2015. The CyberCaliphate 
group was later linked to Russian military 
hackers. The same group hijacked the Twit-
ter feed of the U.S. Central Command.294
• CyberBerkut – A False Persona. Rus -
sian hackers also use false personas. 
CyberBerkut is a front organization for 
Russian state-sponsored cyber activity, 
supporting Russia’s military operations 
and strategic objectives in Ukraine. 295 
CyberBerkut employs a range of both 
technical and propaganda attacks, 
consistent with the Russian concept 
of “information confrontation.” Since 
emerging in March 2014, CyberBerkut 
has been implicated in multiple incidents 
of cyber espionage and attack, includ -
ing distributed denial of service attacks 
against NATO, Ukraine, and German 
Major themes of Russian propaganda include:
The West’s liberal world order is bankrupt and should be replaced by a Eurasian neo-conserva-
tive post-liberal world order, which defends tradition, conservative values, and true liberty.296
The West demonizes Russia, which is only trying to defend its interests and sovereignty and 
act as an indispensable nation in world affairs.
The United States is determined to interfere with and overthrow sovereign governments 
around the world.297

40
government websites. More recently, it 
has focused on the online publication of 
hacked documents, ostensibly obtained 
from the Ukrainian government and 
political figures’ computers. CyberBer -
kut uses information gained through 
these hacks to discredit the Ukrainian 
government. The intent is to demoral -
ize, embarrass, and create distrust of 
elected officials.298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303
•  Trolls. Russia employs a troll army of paid 
online commentators who manipulate or 
try to change the narrative of a given story 
in Russia’s favor. Russia’s Troll Army, also 
known as the Internet Research Agency, is 
a state-funded organization that blogs and 
tweets on behalf of the Kremlin. 304 Trolls 
typically post pro-Kremlin content and 
facilitate heated discussions in the com -
ments sections of news articles. Their goal 
is to counter negative media and “Western 
influence.” While the goal of some trolls is 
to simply disrupt negative content, other 
trolls promote completely false content.305
• Bots. Another way Russia manipulates the 
information space is through the use of bots. 
Bots are automated pushers of content on 
social media. These bots vary in sophistica-
tion and can continuously push content or 
imitate real life patterns. Bots can drown 
out unwanted content or push a specific 
message. Bots have the ability to overwhelm 
the information space and discourage read-
ers from looking for real content.306, 307
Information Defense
The Russian Federation Security Council’s 
2016 Information Security Doctrine mandates 
protecting Russian citizens from outside threats 
to the information sphere. The doctrine aims to 
secure Russian information freedom and pro -
tect information technologies from foreign influ-
ence, cyberattacks, intelligence collection, and 
terrorism. The doctrine emphasizes the need to 
develop a national system for government con-
trol of the Russian Internet, information war -
fare forces, and cyber weapons.308
Since at least 1999, Russia has attempted to 
gain consensus on international governance of 
the Internet and international norms and rules 
X&sU-! @#Tg^ e$4*!
Russia uses a Troll Army to disseminate and over -
whelm blogs and twitter communications. 
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
CyberBerkut Arm Patch. 
Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
41
guiding the behavior of states in the information 
space. A major component of the proposal pertains 
to a state’s ability to govern its information space 
as a means of maintaining state sovereignty and 
preventing an arms race in cyberspace. Although 
state sovereignty traditionally refers to domes-
tic enforcement law, Russia commonly uses this 
term to denounce other nations meddling in their 
internal affairs. Russia also proposed a code of 
conduct for cyberspace with specific dictums 
regarding non-state cyber-actors, such as crimi-
nal hackers involved in cyber activities.309, 310
Media Laws – 
A Hedge Against Instability
In the past decade, Russia has implemented 
numerous laws curbing domestic media in broad-
cast, print, and cyber media, taking an abrupt 
turn from the post-Soviet glasnost policies of 
media “openness” and its own constitutional guar-
antees of freedom of speech.311 The use of social 
media to organize opposition street protests in 
2011 and 2012 prompted a reappraisal of official 
internet policy. Since then, the authorities have 
treated the Internet as a serious threat, pushing 
through laws increasing government controls 
over technology and content giving the state pow-
ers to block content, ban websites, monitor online 
activity, and limit media ownership.312 The ulti-
mate goal of this policy appears to be to create 
what some have called a "sovereign internet.”313
The Kremlin's strategy of reducing foreign influ-
ence on the media has not been confined to the 
internet. Numerous other pieces of legislation 
have been passed restricting the level of foreign 
ownership of the media, impeding the work of 
the foreign NGOs supporting independent media 
in Russia and forcing Russian media to account 
for any foreign funding they receive. A recent 
law has even banned foreign companies from 
conducting TV audience research in Russia.314
Indirect Action
Indirect action is a component of Russia’s stra-
tegic deterrence policy developed by Moscow in 
recent years. Its primary aim is to achieve Rus-
sia’s national objectives through a combina -
tion of military and non-military means while 
avoiding escalation into a full blown, direct, 
state-to-state conflict.315 Drawing on a combi -
nation of facets from Russia’s whole-of-govern-
ment or interdepartmental strategy and overt 
or covert military means, indirect action seeks 
to exploit weaknesses and fissures in target 
countries in order to fulfill Moscow’s desired 
national goals.316
The Internet Research Agency in St. Petersburg.
Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright

42
In Ukraine, indirect action manifested itself 
in non-military measures first, with less visi -
ble efforts taken to exert pressure on Kiev, like 
restricting food imports to Russia, but then 
broadening to wider actions involving financial, 
economic, and information warfare. Later, this 
was followed by unconventional military action 
involving Russian Spetsnaz and other non-at -
tributable military units in Crimea and east -
ern Ukraine.317 This phase involved the actual 
seizure of facilities and infrastructure by these 
covered units, along with the use of local agents, 
sympathizers, and irregular forces in the vicin-
ity to cause unrest and subversion, all of which 
are distinct hallmarks or evolutions of Soviet-era 
Spetsnaz wartime operations.318
Electronic Warfare
Based on authoritative military academic writ-
ings, the Russian military views electronic 
warfare as an essential tool for gaining and 
maintaining information superiority over its 
adversaries. Russia’s world-class electronic war-
fare forces support denial and deception opera-
tions and allow identification, interception, dis-
ruption, and, in combination with traditional 
fires, destruction of adversary command, control, 
communications, and intelligence capabilities.
In addition to technical disruption, effective use 
of electronic warfare can confuse adversary com-
manders and decisionmaking at any or all levels, 
demoralize opposing troops, and allow Russian 
forces to seize the operational initiative.319, 320, 321 
Russia has fielded a wide range of ground-based 
electronic warfare systems to counter GPS, tac-
tical communications, satellite communications, 
and radars.322 Further, military academics have 
suggested that electronic warfare fuse with cyber 
operations, allowing electronic warfare forces to 
corrupt and disable computers and networked 
systems as well as disrupt use of the electro -
magnetic spectrum.323, 324 Russia has aspirations 
to develop and field a full spectrum of electronic 
warfare capabilities to counter Western C4ISR 
and weapons guidance systems.
Power Projection
Moscow continues to prioritize modernizing its 
military forces, viewing military power as crit-
ical to achieving key strategic objectives and 
global influence. Russian acquisition plans for 
its ground, air, naval, and missile forces are 
designed to enable the ability to conduct out of 
area operations during peacetime and to contest 
Russian jammer on display at Kubinka in 2016; Mos -
cow has invested heavily in developing sophisticated 
electronic warfare capabilities. 
Image Source: Shutterstock

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
43
U.S./NATO military superiority in the event of 
a regional conflict. The rebuilt Russian mili -
tary includes modernized, agile general pur -
pose forces, vital to limited out-of-area power 
projection. While the objectives of the Russian 
military do not suggest a return to the Cold War 
posture, Moscow intends to use its military to 
promote stability on its own terms and to assert 
its great power status.
Russia’s State Armaments Program will con -
tinue to emphasize priority programs related to 
the development of a viable 21st-century mili -
tary, prioritizing strategic forces, space, preci -
sion-guided munitions, and aerospace defense 
capabilities. Russia’s strategic triad along with 
the increasing capability of its conventional 
forces remains a critical deterrent in preventing 
an attack. Russian long-range aviation remains 
a priority for Russian leadership as a key part of 
its strategic deterrent capability, while also pro-
viding an advanced conventional option to rap-
idly project power well beyond Russian borders. 
Russia is also modernizing its naval forces, which 
conduct operations globally in order to “show the 
flag” and contribute to Moscow’s narrative of 
Russia’s re-emergence as a global power. Russia 
is also focused on enhancing its C4ISR capabil-
ities, which will enable improved targeting and 
timely responses to perceived threats.
• Long-Range Aviation: Russia periodically 
deploys assets of its LRA bomber force to con-
duct limited out-of-area operations as a power 
projection tool. LRA operations have included 
activity in the Pacific, the Arctic, and even as 
far south in 2008 as Venezuela. The capabil-
ities of LRA aircraft allow for missions as far 
as 5,000–10,000 kilometers away.325
• Naval Forces:  The Russian Navy will 
continue to conduct operations in parts of 
the world that are deemed important to 
national objectives. In recent times, these 
have included operations in the Mediterra-
nean,326 the Arctic, 327 and periodic deploy -
ments to the western hemisphere 328 and 
the Indian Ocean.329 Russia’s naval recapi-
talization program will focus on the devel -
opment of modern general purpose sub -
marines and surface combatants to enable 
continued out-of-area operations.330, 331
• Expeditionary Operations:  Along with 
more conventional power projection mis -
sions, Russia has displayed a new capa -
bility to field an expeditionary force capa -
ble of intervening in a foreign conflict. In 
Syria, Russia used a mix of maritime and 
air assets to forward deploy its forces, 
and Russia will almost certainly be able 
to logistically support its current level 
of operations in Syria via a mix of those 
means for the foreseeable future.332
After politically supporting the Syrian regime 
throughout the Syrian civil war, Moscow began 
to deploy military forces to Syria in September 
2015, likely both to shore up the regime and 
assert Russia’s status as a military player and 
powerbroker in the Middle East.333 The majority 
of Russian air strikes and artillery operations 
have supported regime ground offensives and 
focused on opposition targets, with an increased 
focus against Islamic State forces at certain 
points in their campaign.334, 335, 336
Russia has also sought to use the Syrian interven-
tion as a showcase for its military modernization 
program and advanced conventional weapons  
systems, including employing systems from out-

44
side of Syrian territory to demonstrate its power 
projection capacity. Moscow has launched Kalibr 
land-attack cruise missiles from naval units in 
the Caspian Sea and the Mediterranean Sea, 
demonstrated new capabilities with air-launched 
cruise missiles from its Tu-160M1 BLACKJACK 
and Tu-95MS BEAR H heavy bombers, for -
ward-staged long-range Tu-22M3 BACKFIRE 
bombers for strikes from Iranian territory, and 
deployed some of its most advanced air and air 
defense systems to Syria.337, 338, 339, 340 These oper-
ations are meant to demonstrate strategic capa-
bilities and message the West about the manner 
in which the Russian military could operate in a 
major conventional conflict, while also providing 
combat experience for the personnel and allow-
ing the systems to be field tested.341, 342
Underground Facilities
Russia inherited a vast underground facilities 
(UGFs) program from the Soviet Union, primarily 
designed to ensure the survival of the leadership 
and military command and control in wartime. 
This program involved the construction of under-
ground bunkers, tunnels, secret subway lines, 
and other facilities beneath Moscow, other major 
Russian cities, and the sites of major military 
commands. Although the majority of these hard-
ened facilities are near-surface bunkers, many 
critical sites are built deep underground and, in 
some cases, are hundreds of meters deep.343
Deep underground command posts both within 
and outside of Moscow are interconnected by a 
network of special deep subway lines that pro-
vide leadership a quick and secure means of 
evacuation. The leadership can move from their 
peacetime offices through concealed entryways 
to protective quarters beneath the city. A deep 
underground facility at the Kremlin and an enor-
mous underground leadership bunker adjacent 
to Moscow State University are intended for the 
National Command Authority in wartime. They 
are estimated to be 200–300 meters deep and 
can accommodate an estimated 10,000 people.344
The leadership can remain beneath Moscow or 
travel along the special subway lines that con-
nect these urban facilities to their preferred 
deep underground command posts outside the 
city, and possibly to the VIP terminal at Vnu -
kovo Airfield, 27 kilometers southwest of the 
Kremlin. Two of the most important under -
ground complexes for the National Command 
A Russian naval task force centered on its only air -
craft carrier, the Admiral Kuznetsov, conducted  
a 5-month deployment to the Mediterranean to 
support strike operations in Syria. 
Image Source: AFP

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
45
Authority and General Staff are located some 
60 kilometers south of the city.345
The support infrastructure for the UGFs in 
and around Moscow is substantial. A highly 
redundant communications system, consisting 
of both on-site and remote elements, allows the 
leadership to send orders and receive reports. 
Highly effective life support systems may per -
mit independent operations for many months 
following a nuclear attack.346
Russian military officials suggest the UGF pro-
gram has been retained. In October 2014, chief 
of the General Staff’s Main Operations Direc-
torate, General-Lieutenant Andrey Kartapolov, 
told a Rossiyskaya Gazeta correspondent that 
the new National Defense Management Cen -
ter in Moscow is safe from a nuclear strike. The 
National Defense Management Center became 
operational in December 2014 and is at the apex 
of the national command structure. General 
Kartapolov noted that protection against nuclear 
strike is always considered in building the most 
important facilities.347
Denial and Deception
The Russian military relies on extensive use of 
denial and deception ( maskirovka) to obscure 
intentions and conceal military movement. The 
family of capabilities that composed traditional 
maskirovka includes camouflage, deception, 
denial, subversion, sabotage, espionage, propa-
ganda, and psychological operations.
Russian operational and tactical maskirovka is 
a form of operational combat support. It encom-
passes a set of interrelated organizational and 
technical measures and practical actions of staffs, 
troops, and facilities intended to deceive foreign 
intelligence. Maskirovka promotes surprise, 
maintenance of combat capability, and surviv-
ability. For example, maskirovka in rocket units 
and subunits is organized and carried out for the 
purpose of ensuring that the enemy experiences 
maximum difficulty in collecting intelligence 
data to reduce the effectiveness of strikes, but 
is also carried out to create the false appearance 
of a combined unit in support of deception at the 
operational level of war.348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 353
Moscow employed maskirovka at the beginning 
of the 2014 conflict in Ukraine, when media 
reported on the presence of “little green men” 
in Crimea who strongly resembled Russian 
soldiers although they wore uniforms without 
insignia identifying their origins. President 
Putin insisted they were “self-defense groups” 
or “volunteers.” By the time Moscow admitted 
to the presence of Russian troops in Crimea, 
this deception had created enough confusion to 
forestall significant international intervention 
in the conflict, and the ground reality was irre-
versibly tipped in Russia’s favor.354, 355, 356, 357, 358
Moscow used troops without insignia – the “little 
green men” – to seize the Crimean Peninsula in early 
2014, claiming these forces were local militia. 
Image Source: Shutterstock

46
Outlook: A Modernizing Force 
he Russian military has built on the mil-
itary doctrine, structure, and capabilities 
of the former Soviet Union, and although 
still dependent on many of the older Soviet plat-
forms, the Russians have modernized their mili-
tary strategy, doctrine, and tactics to include use 
of asymmetric weapons like cyber and indirect 
action such as was observed in Ukraine.
One of Russia’s biggest hurdles since the dis -
solution of the former Soviet Union has been 
its need to rely heavily on its nuclear forces to 
deter aggression, resulting in its stated willing-
ness for first-use of nuclear weapons.359, 360 Russia 
has been building its conventional force capabil-
ity along with modernizing its nuclear forces to 
create a more balanced military. Moscow has 
stressed development of conventional preci -
sion-strike weapons, a critical gap in its inven-
tory, and recently has tested them in combat in 
Syria, providing it with an advanced non-nuclear 
capability to impact the battlefield.
In 2009, after almost two decades of deteriora-
tion and neglect of the Russian military, Moscow 
began developing a more modern military force 
capable of power projection outside Russia’s bor-
ders. The New Look reforms instituted struc -
tural and organizational reforms and the State 
Armaments Program emphasized development 
of modernized platforms and weapons’ systems. 
In 2013, readiness became an additional area 
of emphasis with institution of no-notice “snap” 
exercises and accompanying mobilization and 
deployments. Moscow’s long-term goal is build-
ing a military prepared to conduct the range of 
conflicts from local war through regional conflict 
to a strategic conflict that could result in massive 
nuclear exchange.
Recently, Russian forces have been involved in 
conflict in Ukraine and conducted an expedi -
tionary deployment to Syria, providing experi-
ence in combat operations, and employing new 
tactics and advanced weapons systems. This 
more flexible and modern Russian force did 
not spring up overnight but is a result of years 
of concentrated effort to develop and field an 
improved military force.
Russia’s desire to be a leader in a multipolar 
world and recapture the “great power” sta -
tus it had in Tsarist times and the latter days 
of the Soviet Union requires a force capable of 
deterring aggression, fighting the range of con-
flicts from local crises to nuclear war, projecting 
power and employing force if necessary to inter-
vene in conflicts across the globe. Despite an 
economic slowdown that will affect the Russian 
military’s timeline for building all of its planned 
capabilities, Russia is rapidly fielding a modern 
force that can challenge adversaries and support 
its “great power” aspirations.
Russia’s commitment to building its military 
is demonstrated by its retention of the draft. 
All Russian males are required to register 
for the draft at 17 years of age and all men 
between the ages of 18 and 27 are obligated 
by law to perform one year of military service.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
47
The Strategic Rocket Forces (SRF) (Russian 
name: Raketniye Voyska Strategicheskovo Naz-
nacheniya [RVSN]), is one of the most potent mis-
sile forces in the world.361, 362 The SRF was estab-
lished as a separate military service in December 
1959 to operate the first nuclear-armed intercon-
tinental-range land-based ballistic missile (SS-6), 
as the third element of Russia's growing strate-
gic nuclear force deterrent triad.363, 364
The Russian SRF headquarters is in Moscow. 
The SRF's three missile armies—the 27th, 
31st, and 33rd—have a total of 12 subordinate 
missile divisions. Eight of the divisions operate 
road-mobile ICBMs, with the other four armed 
with silo-based missiles.365, 366 The Russian SRF 
have approximately 60,000 personnel.367
In 2016, the SRF had deployed 299 operational 
missiles, with half that number equipped with 
Appendix A: Russian Strategic Rocket Forces
Russia Strategic Rocket Forces
1612-11167
Locations of Strategic Rocket Forces missile divisions. 368, 369, 370
Image Source: DIA. D3 Design

48
multiple independently-targetable reentry 
vehicles (MIRV) payloads. The SRF arsenal 
includes three older ICBM types—46 SS-18s 
and 30 SS-19s in silos, and 72 road-mobile 
SS-25s—and two newer ICBM types—60 silo-
based and 18 road-mobile SS-27 Mod 1s, and 
73 of the most modernized SS-27 Mod 2s.371, 372
The development of new ballistic missile systems 
is a high priority for Russia. The Russian mili-
tary has outlined that the SRF should be com-
pletely re-armed with modern (post-Soviet) mis-
sile systems by 2022.373 Russia has stated that it 
will soon begin testing a developmental, heavy, 
liquid-propellant ICBM called the Sarmat to 
replace the aging SS-18. Russia’s goal is to begin 
Sarmat deployment in the 2018–2020 timeframe. 
Russia has announced a new missile called the 
Rubezh (Border) or RS-26, which is smaller than 
the SS-27 Mod 2 ICBM and will be deployed in 
2017.374 According to the SRF commander, the 
RS-26 is envisioned as a mobile system and 
has been referred to by Russian Vice-Premier 
Rogozin as a “missile defense killer.”375 Russian 
industry officials also claim development of the 
Barguzin rail-mobile ICBM is continuing. A 
decision on full development, production, and 
deployment will occur in the coming months.376
The currently deployed SS-18, which Russia 
plans to replace with the Sarmat, is a silo-
based, 10-MIRV heavy ICBM first deployed 
in 1988; it needs to be replaced by 2018–2020, 
when the SS-18s' 27- to 30-year service lives 
expire.377 The SS-19 is a silo-based, six-MIRV 
ICBM that entered service in 1980, which the 
SRF will replace with silo-based SS-27 Mod 2 
by 2019, as the SS-19s retire.378
The SS-25 solid-propellant, single-warhead, 
road-mobile ICBM was first deployed in 1985 and 
will retire by 2019–2021, to be replaced by regi-
ments of new production SS-27 Mod 2s, and possi-
bly the two-stage, road-mobile RS-26 Rubezh.379, 380
In addition, Russian leadership claims a 
new class of hypersonic glide vehicle is being 
developed to allow Russian strategic missiles 
to penetrate missile defense systems. Hyper -
sonic glide vehicles (HGVs) are maneuver -
able vehicles that travel at hypersonic (typi -
cally greater than Mach 5) speed and spend 
most of their flight at much lower altitudes 
than a typical ballistic missile. The combina -
tion of high speed, maneuverability, and rel -
atively low altitude makes them challenging 
targets for missile defense systems. 381
Russia’s overall number of strategic systems 
is constrained by the New Strategic Arms 
Reduction Treaty (START), which entered 
into force on 5 February 2011. This treaty 
limits the United States and Russia to no 
more than 1,550 deployed warheads each 
(including warheads on ICBMs and SLBMs, 
and counting each heavy bomber as one war -
head) 7 years after entry into force. 382
Russia retains about 1,200 nuclear warheads for 
ICBMs. Most of these missiles are maintained 
on alert, capable of being launched within min-
utes of receiving a launch order. Although the 
number of missiles in the Russian ICBM force 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
49
will continue to decrease because of arms con -
trol agreements, aging missiles, and resource 
constraints, Russia intends to retain the largest 
ICBM force outside the United States.383
Despite Russia’s modernization efforts, the 
size of the SRF may drop below 300 deployed 
ICBMs by the early 2020s, but most of those 
missiles will be equipped with multiple war -
heads. The composition of the force is chang -
ing significantly to meet the deployed strategic 
warhead total limit of 1,550. Notably, prior 
to 2010, no SRF road-mobile ICBMs carried 
MIRVs; by the early 2020s, all will do so.384
Russian ICBM Systems385
1612-11143
System
Number 
of Stages Warheads Propellant
Deployment 
Mode Max Range km
SS-18 
MOD 5 2 + PBV 10 LIQUID SILO 10,000+
SS-19 
MOD 3 2 +PBV 6 LIQUID SILO 9,000+
SS-25 3 + PBV 1 SOLID ROAD-MOBILE 11,000
SS-27 
MOD 1 3 + PBV 1 SOLID SILO and 
ROAD-MOBILE 11,000
SS-27 
MOD 2 3 + PBV Multiple SOLID SILO and 
ROAD-MOBILE 11,000

50
APPENDIX B: Russian Ground Forces
Russian Ground Forces
The Russian ground forces are composed of the 
Ground Troops, Airborne Troops (VDV), Naval 
Infantry, Coastal Troops, Coastal Missile Artil-
lery Troops, and National Guard. The Russian 
Federation armed forces are geographically dis-
tributed across four military districts: Western, 
Southern, Central and Eastern. The Western 
Military District has three numbered com -
bined-arms armies (CAAs), the Southern and 
Central Military Districts each have two, and 
the Eastern Military District has four.
The Ground Troops
The Ground Troops, or Sukhoputniye Voyska, 
are the land warfighting component of the Rus-
sian Ministry of Defense. The Ground Troops 
constitute the largest component of the Russian 
Federation armed forces. The Ground Troops 
are currently organized into approximately 40 
active and reserve maneuver brigades and eight 
maneuver divisions.386 There are about 350,000 
military personnel in the ground troops.387
According to Russia's Ministry of Defense, the 
roles of its Ground Troops include repelling 
enemy aggression and the protection of Rus -
sia's territorial integrity and Russian national 
interests.388 Its main peacetime missions include 
maintaining adequate combat readiness, partici-
pating in international peacekeeping operations, 
participating in disaster recovery efforts, and 
assisting in the maintenance of internal security, 
if needed. Examples of what Moscow designates 
peacekeeping operations include ongoing efforts 
in breakaway enclaves in Georgia and Moldova.389
In times of heightened tension, the Ground 
Troops will mobilize forces, operationally deploy 
to threatened areas, call up and train reservists, 
and prepare for defensive operations. Finally, 
in a time of war, Russia's Ground Troops are 
charged to suppress military conflicts if possible, 
repulse enemy aggression, conduct defensive 
and counter-offensive operations to defeat the 
aggressor, and defend critical infrastructure.390
Organizationally, the Ground Troops are com-
posed of main combat components—motorized 
rifle, tank, missile and artillery, and air defense 
units. Support elements for these units include 
Russian armored fighting vehicles parade in Red 
Square; ground forces have historically played a dom-
inant role in Russian military issues and leadership.
Image Source: AFP

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
51
reconnaissance, engineer, nuclear, biological 
and chemical defense, and signal troops.
• Motorized Rifle Troops units are the 
most abundant formations in Russia's 
Ground Troops. Essentially mounted infan-
try, these are highly mobile forces tasked 
with holding territory, repulsing enemy 
attacks, breaking through enemy defenses, 
capturing important areas, and defeating 
the enemy.
391
• Tank Troops are the main strike compo-
nent of the Ground Troops. They support 
Motorized Rifle Troop missions with direct 
fires during meeting engagements.
392
• Missile Troops and Artillery are the 
main means of indirect fires for Russian 
combined arms operations. Missile Troops 
and Artillery forces are organized into mis-
sile, rocket-artillery, and combined artillery 
units.
393 Missile units operate close/short-
range ballistic missiles. Rocket-artillery 
units operate multiple rocket launchers 
(MLRs), and combined artillery units oper-
ate composite towed or self-propelled artil-
lery and MLRs.
• Air Defense Troops provide air defense for 
the Ground Troops. These units are equipped 
with anti-aircraft missiles, anti-aircraft artil-
lery, anti-aircraft gun-and-missile systems, 
and portable anti-aircraft missile systems.
394
• Reconnaissance Troops perform a 
wide range of tasks in order to provide 
decision makers with information about 
enemy strength, disposition, terrain, and 
weather conditions.
395
• Engineer Troops perform a variety of 
specialized tasks, including the construc -
tion of fortifications, installation of obsta-
cles (mine fields, etc.), the preparation of 
field deployment locations, the preparation 
and maintenance of deployment routes, 
the construction of bridges and ferry cross-
ings, and water purification.
396
• Nuclear Biological Chemical Defense 
Troops are specialized forces tasked with 
mitigating the effects of nuclear, biological, 
or chemical contamination.
397
• Signal Troops are specialized forces 
designed for the deployment and mainte -
nance of mobile redundant command, con-
trol, and communications systems.
398
The New Look Reforms and  
the Ground Troops
The centerpiece of the 2008–2009 New Look 
reforms was the elimination of the divisional/
regimental structure and its replacement by the 
brigade. The Russian Ground Troops currently 
have about 40 combined arms brigades.
399 In the 
winter of 2013, one motorized rifle brigade and 
one tank brigade were reformed as divisions, 
and in the spring of 2016, it was announced 
that four new divisions would be formed in the 
Western and Southern Military Districts and 
one in the Central Military District.
400
The transition to the brigade structure was 
intended to optimize Russia's ground forces 
to fight in what the Russians call "local wars 
and armed conflicts," limited wars along Rus-
sia's periphery, which the Russian General 
Staff believes to be very likely under modern 
conditions. In November 2011, then-Chief of 
the General Staff Nikolai Makarov said: "The 
possibility of local armed conflicts virtually 

52
along the entire perimeter of the border has 
grown dramatically." 401 The Russian ground 
forces fielded brigades of this type that had been 
field tested in Afghanistan (1979–1989) and 
had proved to be quite effective in combat.402
Another development that had received great 
impetus in the Afghanistan war was the rein -
forced battalion, or battalion tactical group 
(BTG), a motorized rifle or tank battalion, 
strengthened by other assets, such as artillery, 
reconnaissance, and air defense resources. BTGs 
are similar to NATO battalion task forces and 
are ad-hoc organizations, individually created 
and optimized to fulfill a particular mission.403
The new Russian divisions are much smaller 
than their Soviet predecessors. While a Soviet 
motorized rifle division numbered around 
13,000 officers and soldiers, Russia's new 
motorized rifle divisions number around 9,000.
A proponent of the mixed division-brigade ground 
forces, then-acting chief of the ground forces, 
General Lieutenant Vladimir Popov, stated that 
Russia's combined arms brigades “in terms of 
structure are intended for fighting in local wars," 
but that they also "can be successfully employed 
in large-scale wars. They differ from divisions by 
lesser numbers of personnel and military equip-
ment and are capable of executing missions with 
the very same high effectiveness as divisions, 
but in a smaller zone of responsibility." 404 The 
re-introduction of some smaller divisions may be 
based more on their potential intimidation value 
than they are on their potential value in combat.
These positive developments have led some 
analysts to claim that Russia is developing 
entirely new military concepts. Modern Rus -
sian tactics show a strong continuity with past 
practices. Recent Russian activity in eastern 
Ukraine, for example, demonstrates a creative 
use of their traditional combined arms and 
reconnaissance-strike tactics combined with 
a more aggressive application of information 
warfare concepts that date back to the Soviet 
period. Russian ground forces troops have coop-
erated with non-traditional semi-military forces 
such as partisans and Cossacks for centuries.405 
Regardless, the contemporary Russian ground 
forces pose a serious challenge to U.S. military 
planners, and they should be seen as neither a 
simple continuation of past Soviet practices, nor 
an entirely new force employing entirely new 
military concepts, but a highly nuanced and 
adaptive combination of both.406
The main combat power of the Ground Troops 
is centered in tank and motorized rifle divisions 
and separate tank and motorized rifle brigades 
that are normally subordinate to combined arms 
armies. Although Russia's military strategy is 
officially defensive, the Russian Ground Troops 
basic principle of land warfare is violent, sus -
tained, and deep offensive action, just as it was 
during the Soviet era. Mechanized and armored 
formations supported by aviation and artillery 
are to seize the initiative at the outset of hostil-
ities, penetrate the enemy's defenses, and drive 
deeply and decisively into the enemy's rear area.
Combined Arms Armies
The combined arms army is an operational 
and administrative organization that forms 
the basis of the Russian field army. A typical 
combined arms army includes two to four com-
bined arms brigades, usually motorized rifle 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
53
brigades and in a few cases a tank brigade, plus 
artillery, missile, air defense, engineer, chem -
ical defense, communications, intelligence and 
reconnaissance, and rear support units. By 
altering the mix of motorized rifle and tank 
formations and artillery and missile support, 
the army can operate in either offensive or 
defensive roles in different geographical areas 
and under various operational constraints.
The Tank Army
The Russian armed forces currently only have 
one tank army, the First Guards Tank Army 
(1st GTA). It, like the combined arms army, 
is both an operational and administrative 
unit. Currently, the 1st GTA includes a tank 
division, a motorized rifle division, and a tank 
brigade, plus artillery, missile, air defense, 
engineer, chemical defense, communications, 
intelligence and reconnaissance, and rear 
support units. The traditional role of a tank 
army is to exploit penetrations deep into the 
enemy's rear areas.
The Separate  
Combined-Arms Brigade
The primary combat formation of the Ground 
Troops is the separate combined-arms brigade, 
either motorized rifle (MR) or tank. There are 
three basic tables of organization and equip -
New Look Motorized Rifle Brigade Table of Organization  
and Equipment: Primary and Supporting Subunits407
1612-11131
Bde Cdr Headquarters
MR BN x3
510
43 MT -LBV
8 2S12
T ank BN
41 T-7 2
Officers
327
NCOs
1,005
Enlisted
3,061
Civilians
128
TOTA L
4,521
SP Arty BN x2
18 2S19
MRL BN
18 BM-21
Signal BN
223
19
227
CBT Engr BN
246
Recon BN Material Support BN
193 280
Repair BN
81
CBR Defense Company
102
Electronic Warfare Company
48
Commandant Company
60
Medical Company
130
16 2S6M1
6 SA13
AD MSL Arty BNA T Arty BN
12 MT -12
24 9P162
AD MSL BN
12 SA-15B TLAR
9x SA-18 MANPADS

54
ment (TO&Es) for separate MR brigades and 
one for separate tank brigades. All Russian 
combined-arms brigades, however, regardless 
of specific primary combat vehicle, are orga -
nized in essentially the same manner.408
Tank and MR brigades differ in organization 
in that where the MR brigade has three MR 
battalions, one tank battalion, and an anti -
tank (AT) battalion, the independent tank bri-
gade reverses this basic structure with three 
tank battalions, one motorized tank battalion, 
and no AT battalion. 409 The three MR TO&Es 
differ from one another in their primary com -
bat vehicle, either wheeled armored person -
nel carrier (APC) or tracked infantry fighting 
vehicle (IFV). 410 The organizational structure 
of a typical tracked APC-equipped indepen -
dent MR brigade is shown in the accompa -
nying illustration. 411 In addition, the primary 
equipment of a separate motorized rifle bri -
gade is shown in the table below.
Battalion Tactical Groups
BTGs are task-organized battalion-plus-sized tac-
tical combat entities that are capable of perform-
ing independent combined-arms combat mis -
sions. They are similar in purpose, structure, and 
tactical use to U.S. Army battalion task forces. 
Most, if not all, New Look maneuver brigades 
Russian Separate Motorized Rifle Brigade Personnel  
and Primary Offensive Equipment412
1612-11142
Nomenclature Quantity
Personnel 4521
T-72B3 Main Battle Tank 41
BMP-3 Infantry Fighting Vehicle or 129
BMP-2 Infantry Fighting Vehicle or 129
MT-LBV Tracked Armored Personnel Carrier 129
BTR-82A Wheeled Armored Personnel Carrier 129
2S19 152-MM SP Howitzer 18
BM-21 Multiple Rocket Launcher 18

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
55
have one BTG, manned entirely or mostly with 
contract soldiers, that is used to perform the most 
difficult or complicated combat tasks assigned to 
the brigade. An order issued on 19 September 
2012 required all maneuver brigade commanders 
to create a contract-manned BTG within the bri-
gade if they had not already done so.413
The need to have effective BTGs is a primary 
driver of the New Look structural reforms. BTGs 
have their theoretical origins in the late Soviet 
period, where they were envisioned to fight 
against NATO on both a nuclear or non-nuclear 
battlefield in a nonlinear, large-scale environ -
ment. BTGs have been used in every local war 
or armed conflict in which Soviet and Russian 
forces have been involved since the Afghanistan 
War (1979–1989).414 The tactical use of BTGs 
in combat has impacted the tactical principles 
that govern their construction and use. BTGs 
currently serve—and will continue to serve—
as Russia's primary tactical fighting unit in all 
tactical circumstances, both in large-scale and 
small-scale conflicts, well into the future.
The Airborne Troops
Russia's Airborne Troops, or VDV ( Vozdush-
no-Desantniye Voyska), is an independent arm 
of service within the Russian Federation armed 
forces. It is composed of four maneuver divi -
sions, four maneuver brigades, and a separate 
special purpose (Spetsnaz) reconnaissance bri-
gade.415 The VDV serves as Russia's high-mo -
bility initial invasion and rapid response 
force.416, 417 In its role as rapid response or initial 
assault forces, the VDV may be used to achieve 
specific objectives that shape the battlespace for 
follow-on ground forces. These may include:
• Seizing key terrain (i.e., bridges, airports, 
and seaports)
• Establishing blocking positions and verti-
cal envelopment of a retreating enemy
• Disrupting enemy logistical supplies, com-
munications, and command centers
• Destroying high value targets418
Maneuver formations within the VDV are des-
ignated as either parachute or air assault, the 
primary difference being in whether they arrive 
at their objective via airdrop or overland means. 
In all cases, VDV personnel are trained to oper-
ate both ways. Major VDV formations are:
• Two parachute divisions – the 98th 
Guards and 106th Guards
• Two air assault divisions – the 7th 
Guards Mountain and 76th Guards
• Four air assault brigades – the 11th, 31st, 
56th, and 83rd
• One special-purpose reconnaissance bri -
gade – the 45th Spetsnaz 419
In line with its highly mobile function, the VDV 
is equipped with a large number of amphibious 
air droppable combat vehicles, the BMD-se -
ries IFVs and BTR-D series APCs. The VDV's 
increased mobility comes at the expense of 
armor and firepower; its primary combat vehi-
cles are generally lighter than their Ground 
Troops counterparts. In late 2016, however, the 
air assault divisions and brigades received up 
to a company (10 to 13) of T-72-series main bat-
tle tanks. The tank companies within these air 
assault units will very likely increase to tank 

56
Russian VDV Primary Combat Vehicles
1612-11144
System Function
Capacity  
(Crew/Dismounts)
BMD-2 Infantry Fighting Vehicle 2/5
BMD-4M Infantry Fighting Vehicle 3/5
BTR-D Tracked APC 3/10
BTR-MDM Tracked APC 3/10
2S9 120-mm SP Combination Gun 3
2S25 125-mm Tracked SP Antitank Gun 3
battalions (30 to 42) by the end of 2018. 420, 421 
The MBTs are not intended for air drops, but 
will accompany VDV ground maneuver forma-
tions to increase firepower and lethality.
Naval Infantry
Russian Naval Infantry is organized into 
units that are operationally subordinate to 
fleet commanders. Naval Infantry is focused 
on amphibious assaults, coastal defense, 
counterterrorism, anti-piracy, and ship secu -
rity missions. The organization and equip -
ment of Naval Infantry units are generally 
similar to that of motorized rifle units in the 
Ground Troops. 422
The Naval Infantry consist of four indepen -
dent brigades, one separate brigade, and 
three separate battalions. 423
Coastal Troops
The Russian Coastal Troops consist of Coastal 
Missile Artillery Forces (CMAF) and Coastal 
Troops. CMAF consist of three independent 
brigades, two independent regiments, and one 
independent battalion.
The Coastal Troops are organized as ground 
forces but are subordinate to the Navy. The 
Coastal Troops consist mainly of motor -
ized rifle brigades and artillery brigades.  
Their primary mission is coastal and regional 
defense.424 The Navy Ground and Coastal 
Troop Headquarters, a command unit based 
in Moscow, heads the Coastal Troop force, but 
coastal missile units likely take operational 
orders from their respective fleets. 425, 426, 427
Russia’s coastal missile and artillery forces 
provide anti-ship defenses for Russia’s coast -

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
57
line and littoral regions. Coastal missile 
defense in Russia is primarily centered on 
anti-ship missile systems. Most units are still 
dependent on two systems that entered pro -
duction in the late 1970s to early 1980s—the 
STYX and SEPAL. Efforts are underway to 
rearm the coastal missile force with new, lon -
ger-range missile systems. 428 These systems 
include the BAL and BASTION, and they are 
slowly being introduced to the force. 429
BASTION Coastal Defense Missile Launcher. 
Image Source: AFP

58
APPENDIX C: Russian Aerospace Forces
The former Russian Federation Air Forces and 
Aerospace Defense Troops merged to create the 
Russian Federation Aerospace Forces (VKS) in 
August 2015. The merger places former space 
and aerospace defense assets vital to strategic 
aerospace operations under one organizational 
structure.430, 431 The Russian Aerospace Forces 
include four tactical air armies, which are aligned 
with the military districts. They also contain the 
Long-Range Aviation (LRA) and Military Trans-
port Aviation (VTA), as well as the Space Troops, 
which are not subordinate to the military dis -
tricts but to Aerospace Command in Moscow.432 
Overall manpower for the Russian Aerospace 
Forces is listed at 148,000 including conscripts.
The 6th Air Force and Air Defense Army 
(AFADA) is subordinate to the Western Military 
Russian Air Forces Air Bases433
1612-11135
Moscow maintains aviation units in Armenia and Kyrgyzstan, represented on the map by the two 
fighter base symbols outside Russia’s borders.
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
59
District, the 14th Air Force and Air Defense 
Army to the Central Military District, the 11th 
Air Force and Air Defense Army to the Eastern 
Military District, and the 4th Air Force and Air 
Defense Army to the Southern Military District.
Long Range Aviation:  The LRA is the 
bomber force of the Russian Aerospace Forces 
and operationally subordinate to the Supreme 
High Command of the Russian armed forces. 
The LRA is tasked with long-range bombard -
ment of strategic targets with conventional 
or nuclear weapons. Currently, TU-95MS 
aircraft are being modernized to include the 
Kh-101/102 missile system.434 The LRA has an 
inventory of 16 Tu-160, 60 Tu-95MS, and more 
than 50 Tu-22M3 bombers.435
Military Transport Aviation:  The VTA is 
subordinate operationally to the Supreme High 
Command of the Russian armed forces and is 
the main provider of the air lift for Russian 
troops and equipment. The recent Ukraine 
and Syria conflicts have resulted in heavy 
Russian Air Forces Order-of-Battle436
1612-11136
Aircraft Type Total Number Most Capable
Bomber 141 Tu-160
Fighter 420 MiG-29
Fighter Ground Attack 345 Su-35S
Attack 215 Su-25SM
ELINT 32 Il-22M
Airborne Warning and Control 22 A-50
C2 6 Il-86VKP
Tanker 15 Il-78M
Heavy Transport 122 An-124
Training 198 Yak-130

60
use of the VTA forces, allowing pilots to gain 
significant flight hours. The primary aircraft 
operated by the VTA include the Il-76, An-124, 
An-22, An-26, An-72, and An-12. The various 
sizes of aircraft allow the VTA to support many 
different missions from VIP flights, to small 
cargo, to transporting tanks and aircraft. Addi-
tionally, these aircraft tend to have larger fuel 
tanks allowing for extended missions without 
refueling to increase efficiency.437
Space Troops: 438 These forces within the 
Aerospace Forces have the mission of conduct-
ing space launches and maintaining the ballis-
tic missile early warning system, the satellite 
control network, and the space object surveil -
lance and identification network.439, 440, 441

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
61
Russian Combat Aircraft – Fighters 442, 443, 444, 445, 446
1612-11138
Fighter Aircraft Entered Service Role
Operational
Su-35S 2014 Multi-Role Fighter
Su-30SM 2014 Multi-Role Fighter
Su-34 2012 Multi-Role Fighter-Bomber
MiG-31BM 2012 Fighter Interceptor
Su-27SM3 2011 Multi-Role Fighter
MiG-29K/KUB 2009 Multi-Role Naval Fighter
Yak-130 2009 Light Attack Fighter-Trainer
MiG-29N/SE 2009 Multi-Role Fighter
MiG-29SMT 2006 Multi-Role Fighter
MiG-29UBT 2006 Multi-Role Fighter
Su-27SM 2006 Fighter Interceptor
Su-30M2/MK2 2003 Multi-Role Fighter
Su-33 1994 Naval Multi-Role Fighter
Su-27P/S 1986 Fighter Interceptor
Su-27UB 1990 Fighter Interceptor
MiG-29 1983 Multi-Role Fighter
MiG-31 1981 Fighter Interceptor
Developmental
MiG-29M/M2 2018 Multi-Role Fighter
MiG-35S 2018 Multi-Role Fighter
PAK-FA 2020 5th Generation Multi-Role Fighter
LMFS Circa 2030 Light Weight Multi-Role Fighter
PAK-DP Circa 2030 Multi-Role Fighter Interceptor

62
Russian Bombers 4 4 7 ,4 4 8 ,4 4 9 ,4 5 0 ,4 5 1
1612-11107
Bomber Aircraft Entered Service Role
Tu-95MSM BEAR 2015 Modified Strategic/Tactical Bomber 
Tu-160M BLACKJACK 2014 Modified Strategic/Tactical Bomber
Tu-22M3M BACKFIRE 2014 Modified Regional Bomber 
Tu-160 1987 Legacy Strategic Bomber 
Tu-95MS 1983 Legacy Strategic Bomber 
Tu-22M3 1981 Legacy Regional Bomber
Developmental
Tu-160M2 2020 New Build Strategic/Tactical Bomber
PAK-DA 2025+ Future Strategic/Tactical Bomber
Integrated Air Defense System
Russia employs what is considered to be among 
the very best of modern military integrated air 
defense systems. Historically, Russia has been 
a leader in developing technologically advanced 
detection and engagement elements. During the 
1990s, Russia largely maintained its research 
and development programs for air defense equip-
ment.452 During this period, Russia purchased 
very few of these systems for domestic use. 453 
However, the State Armaments Program of 2015, 
and the subsequent 2020 plan, significantly 
enhanced support for the purchase and employ-
ment of the newest and most capable air defense 
equipment including radar, surface to air mis-

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
63
siles, command and control, and electronic war-
fare equipment. Concurrent to the acquisition 
plan, Russia continues to support research and 
development efforts in the air defense realm.454
The military integrated air defense system kill 
chain provides the framework for the Russian 
design, deployment, and command hierarchy of 
deployed air defense assets. The kill chain con-
tains the seven elements that a fully functional 
Russian military integrated air defense system 
would employ in an air defense scenario.
To support the kill chain (outlined below), Russia 
employs redundant and overlapping systems.455
Russia employs its military integrated air defense 
system at home and abroad. The military inte-
Russian Military Integrated Air Defense System Kill Chain
1612-11110
Kill Chain Element Associated Equipment/Process
Indications and 
warning
Human intelligence, signals intelligence, open-source information, 
over-the-horizon radar
Detection
Air surveillance radar, airborne early warning and control radar, 
passive Detection system, ship-based radar, visual observation, 
secondary surveillance radar
Identification Secondary surveillance radar, visual identification, non-conformity 
with approved routes
Tracking Integration of detection data into data processing and command & 
control elements to maintain positional data on an airborne threat
Assignment
Command & control (variable echelon, based on threat condition 
and other factors) takes track data and assigns target tracks to 
weapons platforms
Engagement Surface to Air Missiles, Air to Air Missiles, Air Defense Artillery, 
Electronic Warfare
Assessment
Verification of engagement: air surveillance radar, airborne early 
warning and control radar, passive detection system, ship-based 
radar, visual observer, secondary surveillance radar in conjunction 
with command & control elements

64
grated air defense system also plays a significant 
role in Russia’s domestic defense and expedition-
ary operations.456 Russia’s initial deployments to 
Crimea and Syria included the Pantsir and S-300 
air defense systems. These systems allowed Rus-
sia to build an echelon-based air defense system 
in the Crimean Peninsula. 457 At a later point 
in the Crimean and Syrian operations, Russia 
deployed long-range strategic surface to air mis-
sile systems in both countries.458
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
In 2008, Russia lagged behind the world in devel-
opment of UAVs. However, the 2008 Georgia 
conflict accelerated efforts with initial require-
Russian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles459, 460
1612-11113
UAV Entered Service Role
Operational
Pchela-1K 2009 Tactical UAV 
Zala 421-08
Grusha / Granat-1
2010 Tactical UAV 
Zastava 2013 Tactical UAV 
Orlan-10 2013 Tactical UAV 
Forpost 2013 Tactical & Strategic UAV 
Rubezh-20 / Granat-4 2013 Tactical UAV 
Takhion 2014 Tactical UAV 
Developmental
Orion/Inokhodets 2018 Tactical & Strategic UAV
Altius-M 2019 Strategic UAV
Gonshchik 2020+ Tactical & Strategic UAV
Okhotnik-B/U 2025+ Medium Weight UCAV

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
65
ments focused on tactical reconnaissance sys -
tems that currently dominate inventory. Russia 
has introduced a class of mini-UAVs for use by 
the military, but the most significant defense 
developments are occurring with larger, more 
capable systems for tactical and strategic use. 
Russia is also working on unmanned combat 
aerial vehicles (UCAVs).461
Russia’s fleet of aircraft is aging, but they are 
rapidly modernizing their air force as well as 
their air defense systems. When the Soviet 
Union collapsed in 1991, Russia’s air force 
entered a decline as industry and operational 
units languished. Since 2008, however, the Rus-
sian Air Force and Navy have invested unprec-
edented financial resources toward airpower to 
include the upgrade and/or new build of approx-
imately 700 combat fighter/bomber aircraft 
through 2020 to replace legacy systems.462, 463, 464
Newly modified aerodynamic systems in 
Syria demonstrate that Russian airpower 
has returned in limited numbers. Similar 
efforts with newly upgraded air combat sys -
tems have been used in the Crimea/Black Sea 
and Baltic regions with Russian expectations 
that provocative moves by the United States 
and/or NATO will be met with more capable 
Russian air power. Finally, a slowly improved 
strategic bomber force (i.e., Tu-95MS BEAR 
and Tu-160 BLACKJACK) is again using 
Cold War concepts to conduct international 
flights that impinge upon the sovereign bor -
ders of foreign nations. 465

66
APPENDIX D: Russian Navy
The disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, 
as well as the economic stagnation that followed, 
led to a severe downsizing for the Navy. Naval 
construction ground to a halt, and the fleet fell 
into disrepair and obsolescence.
466 Under Vlad-
imir Putin, however, the Russian military’s 
capabilities have undergone significant improve-
ment, and the Navy is no exception.
The Russian Navy has approximately 130,000 
personnel.
467 The combined major forces of the 
current Russian Navy number about one-
sixth to one-quarter of what was the Soviet 
Navy in its heyday. That legacy force today 
has an average age exceeding 20–25 years. 
With the economic stabilization of the Rus-
sian Federation in the early 2000s, the past 
10 years have seen a steady increase in the 
maintenance, training, and deployment activ-
ity of the Navy and, more importantly, the 
activation of a broad submarine and ship con -
struction program to recapitalize the fleet. 
The Navy’s missions remain focused on stra -
tegic deterrence and homeland defense. Peri -
odic distant deployments support the Russian 
Federation’s global foreign policy interests.
The Navy operates nuclear-powered ballistic 
missile submarines, which are an essential 
arm of Russia’s nuclear triad and capable of 
delivering nuclear warheads from thousands 
of kilometers away. This strategic capability 
puts the Russian Navy in the top tier of for -
eign navies.
468
Russian Navy Organization
1612-11111
Russian Navy
Northern Fleet 
Joint Strategic 
Command (OSK)
Northern 
Fleet Pacific Fleet Baltic Fleet Black Sea 
Fleet
Caspian 
Flotilla
Eastern  
Military  
District/(OSK)
Western 
Military  
District/(OSK)
Southern 
Military 
District/(OSK)
Southern 
Military 
District/(OSK)

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
67
Structure
The headquarters of the Russian Navy is 
located in St. Petersburg. The Russian Fed -
eration Navy consists of four fleets (Baltic, 
Black Sea, Northern, and Pacific) and a flotilla 
in the Caspian Sea. The fleets receive admin -
istrative orders and guidance from the Navy 
Staff in St. Petersburg, whereas operational 
orders are issued from the various Joint Stra -
tegic Commands (OSKs). 469 Each fleet and the 
Caspian Flotilla is operationally subordinate 
to one of these OSKs. 
Northern Fleet
The Northern Fleet is Russia’s most capable 
naval force. Based in Severomorsk, located in 
the Kola Gulf (the only ice-free direct access 
to the North Atlantic), its seven operational 
ballistic missile submarines provide the bulk 
of the firepower for the Navy’s arm of the stra-
tegic nuclear triad.470 Russia’s only operational 
aircraft carrier is also based in the Northern 
Fleet, along with the Navy’s only nuclear-pow-
ered heavy cruiser.471 Surface combatants and 
submarines deploy worldwide from the Kola 
Gulf, playing an active role in the ongoing 
Syria crisis, conducting counter-piracy patrols 
off the Horn of Africa, along with power projec-
tion in the North Atlantic and Caribbean. The 
Northern Fleet’s two primary missions are to 
provide strategic deterrence with its ballistic 
missile submarines and to defend the mari -
time approaches to northwest Russia.472
Pacific Fleet
The Pacific Fleet lags behind the Northern 
Fleet in terms of maintenance and overall capa-
bility; however, it is still able to conduct strate-
gic nuclear strikes against the U.S. mainland, 
and its surface units are active from the Pacific 
region to the Horn of Africa.473 The Pacific Fleet 
has its headquarters in Vladivostok, but its 
forces are split between two main locations with 
the majority of surface ships and diesel powered 
submarines in the Vladivostok region and the 
nuclear powered submarines, including the 
SSBNs, located in Petropavlovsk-Kamchats -
kiy.474, 475 The workhorses of the PACFLT are 
four UDALOY-class destroyers, which are regu-
larly deployed throughout the region.476
Black Sea Fleet
The Black Sea Fleet for years has been a fleet in 
decline, forced to operate with a handful of Sovi-
et-era vessels. Beginning in 2014 after the occu-
GRIGOROVICH  frigate. 
Image Source: AFP

68
pation of Crimea, new units began to enter the 
order of battle including modern coastal missiles 
and naval infantry.477 Then in 2015, new subma-
rines and surface combatants began to arrive to 
bolster the fleet. Now armed with the KALIBR 
missile system, the Black Sea Fleet is a signif-
icant force in the region and over the next few 
years could have as many as six new attack sub-
marines and six new surface ships, which can 
not only exert control on the Black Sea, but can 
operate in the Mediterranean to counter NATO 
forces and support operations in Syria.478
Baltic Fleet
The majority of Baltic Fleet vessels are located at 
Baltiysk in the Kaliningrad Oblast with a handful 
further north near St. Petersburg.479 Headquar-
tered at Kaliningrad, the fleet’s mission focuses 
on specifically ensuring sea-lines of communica-
tion and trade are open between Kaliningrad and 
St. Petersburg, and in countering NATO forces in 
the region.480, 481 The Baltic Fleet has also been a 
key player in support of Russian interests in the 
Eastern Mediterranean Sea and Horn of Africa.482 
With the arrival of two KALIBR-equipped ves-
sels in 2016, the Baltic fleet presents a significant 
long-range precision conventional and theater 
nuclear strike threat to Western Europe.
Caspian Sea Flotilla
The Caspian Sea Flotilla is the dominant naval 
force on the Caspian Sea and was the first Rus-
sian surface force operationally equipped with 
the KALIBR missile system. Russia’s naval 
superiority ensures Moscow has leverage in 
regional economic disputes. The KALIBR land 
attack cruise missile gives Moscow a preci -
sion strike weapon that can range targets in 
Central Asia, the Middle East, and parts of 
Europe, as evidenced by strikes into Syria in 
October 2015. 483 Most of the flotilla’s combat 
power (all of the KALIBR shooters) are based at 
Makhachkala, possibly to be closer to regional 
threats and also to avoid having to navigate 
the Volga River Delta to reach the sea, as is the 
case with ships based at Astrakhan.484, 485
Naval Aviation
Naval aviation assets are spread through 
four fleet air forces, each with composite reg -
iments under their command. The main mis -
sions of naval aviation are to track and destroy 
enemy submarines and warships and also help 
achieve air superiority where the fleet is oper-
ating.486 Most naval aviation aircraft are land-
based; the only aircraft carrier, ADMIRAL 
KUZNETSOV, can accommodate 22 strike air-
craft and 17 attack helicopters.487
Submarine Forces
Russia’s sea-based strategic deterrent is deployed 
in the Northern and Pacific Fleets. There are six 
DELTA IV SSBNs, one DOLGORUKIY SSBN, 
and one remaining TYPHOON SSBN used as a 
test platform in the north. Three DELTA III and 
two DOLGORUKIY SSBNs are in the Pacific. All 
sea-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) carried 
by these submarines—SS-N-18 (DELTA III), 
SS-N-23 (DELTA IV), and SS-N-32 (DOLGORU-
KIY)—can reach U.S. targets from their home -

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
69
base piers and, if required, could be launched 
with the submarines on the surface. 
These SSBNs are protected by nuclear-pow -
ered cruise missile and torpedo attack subma -
rines, which also engage enemy surface and 
submarine forces and pose a land attack cruise 
missile threat against an enemy homeland. In 
the Northern Fleet, these attack submarines 
include three OSCAR II and one SEVEROD -
VINSK SSGNs and three VICTOR III, six 
AKULA I/II, and four SIERRA SSNs. The 
SEVERODVINSK class is new, extremely quiet 
and is armed with a wide range of advanced 
cruise missiles to destroy enemy ships and tar-
gets ashore. The Pacific Fleet has five OSCAR 
II SSGNs and four AKULA I SSNs. It will even-
tually receive SEVERODVINSK SSGNs. A new 
fifth-generation general purpose nuclear-pow -
ered submarine is under development.
Non-nuclear diesel-electric submarines round out 
the Russian submarine forces. These units are 
assigned to all fleets for close-in area defense mis-
sions in adjacent seas. Older and newer versions 
of the KILO class comprise most of this force: six 
in the Northern Fleet, two in the Baltic, three new 
KALIBR-equipped units in the Black Sea, and 
eight older KILO class in the Pacific. The new-
est KILO version continues in construction with 
three more units destined for the Black Sea Fleet 
and eventually another six for the Pacific Fleet. 
A single PETERSBURG-class improved design 
experimental unit is in the Northern Fleet with 
two additional units to be completed. A future 
non-nuclear, KALINA design, likely having an 
air independent propulsion plant, is in develop-
ment with construction projected after 2020.
Surface Forces
The Russian Navy’s major combatant surface 
ships, frigates and larger, comprise some 32 
units assigned across all 4 fleets. 
• The Northern Fleet has Russia’s only air-
craft carrier (KUZNETSOV), one nucle -
ar-powered KIROV-class cruiser, one con -
ventionally powered SLAVA-class cruiser, 
and four UDALOY-class destroyers. The 
first new GORSHKOV-class (KALIBR) 
guided missile frigate was recently commis-
sioned with more expected. This fleet also 
has 12 minor anti-ship and anti-subma -
rine combatant ships, as well as 4 ROPU -
CHA-class amphibious assault ships. 
• The Baltic Fleet has nine major ships—two 
older SOVREMENNYY-class destroyers 
and seven frigates: one KRIVAK-class, two 
NEUSTRASHIMYY-class, and four new 
STEREGUSHCHIY-class units. It recently 
received two SVIYAZHSK-class (KALIBR) 
guided missile patrol ships. These are sup-
plemented by 18 minor combatants and 4 
amphibious assault ships. 
• The Black Sea Fleet has one SLAVA-class 
cruiser, one 47-year-old KASHIN-class 
destroyer, two older KRIVAK-class frig -
ates, and the first of a planned six new 
GRIGOROVICH-class (KALIBR) frigates. 
More new construction units are expected 
for the Black Sea Fleet. The fleet is sup -
plemented by 15 minor combatants and 7 
amphibious assault ships. 
• The Caspian Flotilla has two GEPARD-class 
frigates (one with KALIBR) and recently 
received two new ASTRAKHAN-class patrol 
ships and three SVIYAZHSK-class (KALI-
BR-capable) guided missile patrol ships. 

70
• Finally, the Pacific Fleet has seven major 
ships: one SLAVA-class cruiser, four UDALOY-
class and two SOVREMENNYY-class destroy-
ers. These are supplemented by 24 minor 
anti-ship and anti-submarine combatants 
and 4 amphibious assault ships.
The Russian Navy has several weapons upgrade 
programs in progress. The new SS-N-32 
BULAVA submarine launched ballistic missile 
is being produced for the DOLGORUKIY-class 
SSBNs. The most consequential development 
is that Russia plans to deploy KALIBR capabil-
ity on all new design construction nuclear and 
non-nuclear submarines, corvettes, frigates, and 
larger surface ships. KALIBR provides even 
modest platforms, such as corvettes, with sig -
nificant offensive capability and, with the use of 
land attack missiles, all platforms have a signif-
icant ability to hold distant fixed ground targets 
at risk using conventional warheads. The prolif-
eration of this capability within the new Russian 
Navy is profoundly changing its ability to deter, 
threaten, or destroy adversary targets. 
Although the Navy is mainly made up of Sovi-
et-era surface ships and submarines, an exten-
sive modernization program is underway, 
focusing first on the submarine force. 488, 489, 490 
Progress in submarine modernization is under-
way; however, the majority of the naval inven-
tory still consists of aging units from the 1980s 
and 1990s. While more new classes of ships 
are planned, the Navy will have to maintain 
its older fleet for several years until these new 
vessels come online. Despite this, Russia is 
still capable of deploying its assets worldwide, 
best evidenced by continuous support to Rus -
sian operations in Syria since 2012 and recur -
ring counter-piracy deployments to the Gulf of 
Aden since 2008.491, 492

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
71
APPENDIX E: Russian Special Operations Forces
Russia’s special operations forces are popu -
larly known by the abbreviation “Spetsnaz,” 
short for Spets ial’noye naznacheniye , a 
term meaning “special purpose.” Spetsnaz, 
although similar to special operations forces 
in Western countries, retains a slightly differ -
ent set of roles and missions than those com -
monly found elsewhere. The current incarna -
tion of Spetsnaz traces its origin back to naval 
and ground units created back in the mid-
1950s to establish a dedicated special pur -
pose force to operate with the armed forces, 
although its wider lineage can be attributed 
to counterrevolutionary and partisan units 
formed during the Russian Revolution and 
World War II, respectively. 493
These predecessor units became pivotal in 
defining the hallmark missions of the mod -
ern Spetsnaz force, from diversionary acts 
conducted by partisan units behind German 
lines in World War II to deep reconnaissance 
and intelligence collection, reflecting the post-
war perception of a potential conflict with 
the West during the Cold War. 494 These tra -
ditional missions—with slight modifications 
and variations—still manifest themselves in 
Spetsnaz doctrine and are associated with 
Moscow’s recent strategy of using indirect 
action, albeit with the wider aim of achieving 
goals while avoiding a large-scale conflict.
Within Russia, the term Spetsnaz is often 
misappropriated and misattributed. Moscow’s 
true Spetsnaz force is a relatively small, select 
group of mission-dedicated special purpose 
forces, primarily belonging to the military 
and its Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) 
(e.g., the Defense Ministry’s ground and naval 
Spetsnaz units), and to a lesser extent, the 
security services of the National Guard, Fed -
eral Security Service (FSB), Foreign Intelli -
gence Service (SVR), and Justice and Emer -
gency Situations Ministries. 495 Estimated to 
number 20,000–30,000 personnel, Spetsnaz 
units in these organizations all retain distinct 
and separate missions from one another. The 
single largest contingent with which recent 
and visible exploits of Spetsnaz are attributed 
reside with the GRU.

72
APPENDIX F: Russian Intelligence Services
Russia has three primary intelligence ser -
vices: the Federal Security Service (FSB), the 
Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), and the 
Main Intelligence Directorate of the General 
Staff (GRU). The FSB and SVR trace their 
lineage to the old Soviet Committee of State 
Security (KGB). Although the FSB and SVR 
are considered military services under Rus -
sian federal law, they are more akin to civil -
ian intelligence agencies. 496
The Federal Security Service 
The FSB has three primary missions: counter-
ing foreign intelligence services, combatting 
organized crime, and ensuring economic and 
financial security. It is also the Russian lead 
counterterrorism organization. 497 President 
Vladimir Putin launched a major reorganiza -
tion of the FSB during his first term, placing 
the organization under the president’s direct 
control. The FSB has continued to grow, inte -
grating the Border Guard Service of Russia 
and the Federal Agency of Government Com -
munication and Information (FAPSI). 
The Foreign Intelligence Service 
The SVR is Russia’s main external intelligence 
agency; it focuses on civilian affairs, whereas 
the GRU focuses on military affairs. According 
to Russian law, the SVR is authorized to carry 
out the following missions:498
• Conduct intelligence.
• Implement active measures (disinformation, 
propaganda, etc.) to ensure Russia's security.
• Conduct military, strategic, economic, 
scientific, and technological espionage.
• Protect employees of Russian institutions 
overseas and their families.
• Provide personal security for Russian  
government officials and their families.
• Conduct joint operations with foreign 
security services.
• Conduct electronic surveillance in  
foreign countries.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
73
Responsibilities of Russian Intelligence Services499, 500, 501, 502
1612-11140
Political  
Intelligence
Economic 
Intelligence
Military  
Intelligence
Measures of 
Support
Counter- 
Intelligence
Political 
Security
Law 
Enforcement
Soviet 
KGB
Main Intelligence 
Directorate 
(GRU)
Federal 
Security 
Service (FSB) 
Foreign 
Intelligence 
Service (SVR)
Federal 
Protection 
Service (FSO)
Interior 
Ministry 
(MVD)
National 
Guard 
(developing)
Main Role Subsidiary Role

74
The Main Intelligence Directorate  
of the General Staff
The GRU is the Ministry of Defense’s for -
eign intelligence organization that provides 
military intelligence for the General Staff,  
Ministry of Defense, and senior government 
officials.505, 506, 507, 508 The GRU’s responsibilities 
include providing senior political and mili -
tary leadership with all-source intelligence, 
including indications and warning of stra -
tegic threats and information to assist leader -
ship in making decisions regarding Russia’s 
armaments program. 509, 510 GRU operations 
abroad involve human intelligence (HUMINT) 
collection on potential enemies’ military-  
industrial capabilities, troop movements, and 
weapon systems.511, 512 The GRU manages mil -
itary attachés, intelligence analysis, cryptanal-
ysis, space-based assets, telecommunications 
intercept capabilities, and radio-electronic 
and telecommunications-based offensive capa-
bilities.513, 514 It also oversees Spetsnaz units 
and special operations forces. 515, 516, 517, 518 GRU 
operational combat and advisory roles have 
expanded dramatically in the past decade, 
involving military operations in Ukraine’s 
Crimea region, eastern Ukraine, and Syria.  
519, 520, 521, 522, 523, 524, 525, 526
GRU Headquarters Moscow. 503, 504
Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
75
APPENDIX G: Defense Industry and Modernization Programs
Russia’s huge defense industrial complex 
focuses predominantly on weapons production, 
though the goal is to move toward a combina -
tion of military and non-military products. 527 
President Vladimir Putin and Deputy Premier 
Dmitriy Rogozin, whose government portfolio 
covers the defense industry, have said that high 
levels of spending on the military and defense 
industrial complex will benefit the entire 
economy.528, 529 In April 2016, Putin announced 
Russia’s arms sales from the last year had been 
higher than planned, totaling $14.5 billion, 
with additional orders for $56 billion, the high-
est since 1992. 530, 531 However, while Moscow’s 
pursuit of arms trade deals abroad may help 
partially offset challenging financial conditions 
and support continued military modernization 
goals, significant problems remain. 
Challenges, partly due to Western sanctions, 
have slowed production for some weapons and 
equipment. Russian industry’s dependence on 
weapons production, the depreciation of the 
ruble, and growing interest rates on industrial 
loans, which are used to finance facility modern-
ization and production expenses, have increased 
business costs for Russian defense firms. 532 
Russian economists have warned that the 
resulting imbalance between civilian and mili-
tary spending could be problematic.533, 534, 535, 536
Russia’s 2011–2020 State Armaments Pro -
gram reflects President Putin’s ambitious 
mandate that 70% of Russia’s weapons inven -
tory consist of new or upgraded equipment by 
2020.537, 538 In pursuit of that goal, Putin person-
ally makes decisions about the defense indus -
try’s weapons modernization, production, and 
financing. Putin reestablished the Military 
Industrial Commission (VPK) in 2007 to bet -
ter manage state control of defense production 
and acquisition.539, 540
Since May 2013, Putin has chaired week-long 
working groups with the Defense Ministry and 
defense industry leadership twice a year to 
monitor program implementation and oversee 
adjustments. 541, 542, 543 By 2014, Putin decreed 
himself Chairman of the VPK, probably to 
ensure that defense modernization efforts 
were fulfilled within economic constraints.544, 545 
At the same time, Defense Minister Shoygu set 
up a half dozen new Defense Ministry scien -
tific and technical organizations, headed by 
military scientists, to place priority on defense 
orders that were cutting-edge, Russian-made, 
and technologically feasible.546, 547 

76
The following are examples of weapons sys -
tems in active production, testing, or assimila-
tion into military use, indicating current Rus -
sian leadership priorities for defense industry.
Ballistic Missile Sector
A key area of development detailed in Russia’s 
2011–2020 State Armament Program are the 
ballistic missile forces, which form the back -
bone of Moscow’s nuclear triad.548, 549 Russia has 
three competent bureaus that specialize in the 
design and development of ballistic missiles.550 
Russia’s modernization efforts are driven by an 
aging missile inventory, the need to maintain 
a credible launch capability, and concern with 
the deployment of anti-missile defense systems 
by the United States.551 As of 2015, modernized 
systems only made up 56% of the missile force; 
they are scheduled to reach 100% by 2022.552
Intercontinental Ballistic  
Missiles (ICBM) 
Russia has several legacy ICBMs in its active 
inventory, including the SS-18, SS-19, and 
SS-25 that are being replaced by the SS-27, Sar-
mat, and SS-27 Mod 2; replacements should be 
completed by 2022.553, 554, 555
The SS-27 is a solid-propellant ICBM (silo and 
mobile variants), which uses a delivery vehi -
cle made by the Minsk Heavy Wheeled Vehi -
cle Factory in Belarus with launch equipment 
added by TsKb Titan in Volgograd. The SS-27 
missile was designed by several institutes: the 
Moscow Institute of Thermal Technology for 
the overall design, NPO Soyuz in Lubertsy for 
the three solid rocket motors, the All-Union 
Scientific Research Institute of Experimental 
Physics in Sarov for the nuclear warhead, and 
GPO Votkinskiy Mekhanicheskiy Zavod in 
Votkinsk for final assembly.556, 557, 558
The Sarmat heavy ICBM is still in testing with 
the State Missile Center Makeyev and is sched-
uled to complete development around 2018. 559 
The missile will be manufactured by the Kras-
noyarsk Machine Building Plant, while the 
NPO Energomash-designed motor will be pro -
duced by Proton-PM based in Perm.560 
A new solid-propellant ICBM, the RS-26 
(Rubezh), was developed as a lighter version of 
the SS-27 and will only be deployed as a mobile 
variant sometime in 2017.561 The missile’s lower 
weight increases mobility and survivability, and 
the RS-26 will make use of various countermea-
sures to penetrate anti-missile defense systems.562
SS-27 Mod 2 ICBM.
Image Source: Shutterstock

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
77
In addition, Russian officials claim a new class 
of hypersonic vehicle is being developed to allow 
Russian strategic missiles to penetrate missile 
defense systems. Hypersonic glide vehicles are 
maneuverable vehicles that travel at hypersonic 
(typically greater than Mach 5) speed and spend 
most of their flight at much lower altitudes 
than a typical ballistic missile. Press reporting 
claimed a successful test of this system from an 
SS-19 booster occurred in April 2016.563
Submarine-Launched  
Ballistic Missiles (SLBM)
The SS-N-18 SLBM, first deployed in 1978, is a 
two-stage liquid-propellant system designed to 
be launched from a DELTA III submarine. The 
latest version, the SS-N-18 Mod 3, can carry 
up to three warheads to a maximum range of 
over 5,500 kilometers.564
The SS-N-23, initially deployed in 1989, is a 
three-stage, liquid-propellant missile designed 
by the State Missile Center Makeyev. It can 
carry four warheads to a range of over 8,000-
km and is launched from Delta IV subma -
rines.565 An upgrade of the SS-N-23, known as 
SINEVA, was completed in 2007 by the Kras -
noyarsk Machine Building Plant.566 
The SS-N-32 BULAVA is a solid-propellant, 
sea-launched ballistic missile that underwent a 
19-year development cycle at the Moscow Insti-
tute of Thermal Technology. 567  The BULAVA 
can carry up to six independent nuclear war -
heads to a range of around 8,000 kilometers, is 
in service on the DOLGORUKIY-class subma-
rines, and is replacing older SLBMs in the Rus-
sian inventory.568, 569  
Short-Range Ballistic Missiles (SRBM)
The SS-21 TOCHKA is a mobile, single-stage, 
solid-propellant missile; it originally entered ser-
vice around 1976. The latest TOCHKA-U version 
entered service in 1990 and is the most capable 
system (maximum range of 120 kilometers, iner-
tial navigation with GLONASS updates, and 
radar or optical terminal guidance).570, 571   
SS-26 ISKANDER -M is a mobile, sin -
gle-stage, solid-propellant missile that is 
replacing the SS-21. The ISKANDER  is 
equipped with an inertial/GLONASS guid -
ance system and either radar, electro-op -
tical, or infrared image matching termi -
nal guidance system, enabling it to strike  
moving targets. 572 
Russian ISKANDER-M missile system.
Image Source: AFP

78
Cruise Missile Sector 
Russia’s 2011–2020 State Armament Program 
also places a priority focus on the development 
and production of highly capable cruise missile 
systems.573 Russia has invested heavily in the 
development of air-, ground-, and sea-launched 
cruise missiles, and the development or refur -
bishment of associated launch platforms. 574 In 
addition to developing domestic variants, Russia 
is focused on producing export variants of sev-
eral cruise missile systems to remain competi-
tive in the international arms market.575 
Russia’s Tactical Missile Corporation 
Russia’s Federal Target Program for “Restruc-
turing and Development of [the] Defense Indus-
try (2002–2006)” and a Presidential decree in 
January 2002 prompted the establishment of the 
Tactical Missile Corporation (KRTV). The corpo-
ration, which has oversight of 30 weapon manu-
facturing enterprises, is Russia’s largest devel-
oper and producer of anti-ship, anti-radar, and 
multipurpose missiles for tactical airborne, ship 
borne, and coastal cruise missile systems.576, 577  
In 2014, the General Director of KRTV reported 
that the corporation received about $1 billion 
from the Federally Targeted Program for the 
Development of the Defense Industry (OPK) 
through 2020 to help modernize and re-equip 
production facilities. 578, 579 To increase produc -
tion capacity, Russia focused on improving 
production facilities in anticipation of the high 
production demands under the State Arma -
ment Program 2020.580 
Air-Launched Cruise Missiles (ALCM)
Russia is in the process of refurbishing its 
long-range strategic bombers to carry the new-
est air-launched cruise missiles, the Kh-101 
(conventional) and the Kh-102 (nuclear-vari -
ant). These missiles were developed by the 
Raduga Science and Production Association 
[Machine-Building Design Bureau], a Tacti -
cal Missile Corporation subsidiary located in 
Dubna.581 The missiles are the follow-on sys -
tem to the Kh-55, the main armament of Rus -
sia’s Tu-95 and Tu-160 bombers.582, 583 
Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCM)
The KALIBR-family of cruise missiles are 
some of Russia’s most capable systems. 
Designed by the Novator Design Bureau, a 
subsidiary of Almaz-Antey, the  KALIBR-class 
missiles are the more capable domestic ver -
sions of the CLUB-family, which Russia has 
exported for several years. 584 The  KALIBR  
class of missiles reportedly has an operational 
range up to 2,500 kilometers and has a lower 
flight profile than other Russian cruise mis -
sile systems. 585, 586 The 3M-14 (SS-N-30A) is a 
long-range, land-attack cruise missile capa -
ble of carrying conventional or nuclear war -
heads.587 The 3M-54 (SS-N-27A) is an anti-
ship missile, capable of being launched from 
submarine and surface ships. 588 
The ONIKS (SS-N-26) anti-ship cruise mis -
sile is another capable weapon system pro -
duced in Russia that also has a land-based 
variant, the BASTION mobile shore-based  
missile complex.589 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
79
Russia is also developing and testing the 
TSIRKON, its first hypersonic anti-ship cruise 
missile. This missile, which is expected to enter 
service in 2018, will have a 500 to 1,000-km 
range.590 Once operational, the nuclear-pow -
ered guided missile cruiser ADMIRAL NAKH-
IMOV will be one of the first naval vessels to 
carry these cruise missiles.591
Russia demonstrated some of its newest capa -
bilities in military technology in its Syria cam-
paign. Russia’s use of the KALIBR sea-launched 
cruise missile, including launches from a sub -
merged submarine, and of the Kh-101 air-
launched cruise missile for the first time in a 
combat situation demonstrated its advance -
ments in precision-guided munitions.592 
Surface-to-Air Missiles (SAM)
Russia’s surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems 
remain among the best in the world, and Russia 
maintains a robust production capacity to sat -
isfy both domestic and export requirements. In 
recent years, Russia has also developed several 
highly-capable SAM systems and has invested 
in new infrastructure to support aggressive 
SAM production schedules.593 Many countries, 
including China, are interested in acquiring 
some of Russia’s longer-range systems.594 
Almaz-Antey is Russia’s primary company 
responsible for development and production of air 
defense systems, including land-based and naval 
short, medium, and long-range air defense mis-
sile systems, ground surveillance radar stations, 
and automated control systems. Almaz-Antey 
formed in 2002 as a result of a merger between 
Antey Corporation and NPO Almaz.595, 596 
Long-Range SAMs
Russia is adding new defense infrastructure 
to increase production of its newest long-range 
SAM system, the S-400; S-400 (SA-21) regi -
ments are operational throughout Russia.597, 598
The ANTEY-2500 is a long-range air defense 
system that reportedly can engage short-and 
intermediate-range ballistic missiles, cruise 
missiles, precision-guided weapons, strategic 
and tactical aircraft, as well as early warning 
and electronic warfare aircraft.599  
S-400 long-range SAM system.
Image Source: AFP
ANTEY-2500 long-range SAM system.
Image Source: AFP

80
Short-to-Medium Range  
Priority SAMs
The PANTSIR-S/S1 is a short-range air defense 
system developed by the KBP (Instrument Design 
Bureau) Tula. It is armed with 12 missiles and two 
30-mm anti-aircraft guns; for target acquisition and 
tracking it uses two radars and an electro-optical 
system. It was designed to defend ground instal-
lations and longer-range SAM systems against a 
variety of weapon systems, including fixed-wing 
aircraft and helicopters, precision guided missiles 
and cruise missiles, and unmanned air vehicles.600 
It is usually deployed as a battery of 4–6 combat 
vehicles per site and each combat vehicle can 
engage up to four targets simultaneously. Russian 
air force plans to acquire 100–120 PANTSIR-S/S1 
combat vehicles by 2020.601  
Developmental Systems
The S-500 is a developmental system expected to 
have the capability to simultaneously engage 10 
targets at a maximum range of 600 kilometers; 
it is expected to be operational around 2020.602 
The Vityaz is a short-to-medium-range SAM 
system; Russia hopes to produce up to 30 sys -
tems by 2020.603 The Vityaz system reportedly 
can carry two types of missiles, the 9M96E 
missiles or the 9M100.
Air Sector
In 2006, Russia’s United Aircraft Corpora -
tion (UAC) was created to consolidate air -
craft design and production companies under 
one state controlled corporation. UAC con -
trols 18 companies responsible for the design 
and production of most military and civilian 
aircraft. 604, 605 UAC will have to deliver over 
1,000 new airplanes and helicopters to Rus -
sia’s military forces by 2020 to meet modern -
ization goals established in the 2011–2020 
State Armament Program. 606 
Bombers
Russia plans to upgrade and operate its fleet 
of Tu-160/ BLACKJACK, Tu-95MS BEAR H, 
and Tu-22M/ BACKFIRE bombers beyond 
2030.607, 608 The upgrades are intended to keep 
older aircraft operational until the fifth-gener-
ation PAK-DA bomber reaches production. The 
PAK-DA will have new navigation systems and 
the capability to deploy Kh-101/Kh-102 air-
launched cruise missiles (ALCMs).609, 610, 611, 612, 613
Russia has restarted Tu-160M2/ BLACKJACK 
initial production to fill a critical gap in air -
craft availability. Serial production of new 
Tu-160M2/BLACKJACK bombers is scheduled 
to begin no earlier than 2023 at the Kazan Air-
craft Plant. The new bombers will have NK-32 
PAK-FA (T-50) fighter.
Image Source: AFP

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
81
engines, which will be produced at the Sama -
ra-based enterprise Kuznetsov, currently being 
modernized to start production by 2020.614 
Fighters
Russian fighter production occurs at several 
plants, including the Sukhoi Aircraft-Man -
ufacturing Plants in Komsomolsk, Irkutsk and 
Novosibirsk, which produce the Su-30SM, 
Su-34, and Su-35; the MiG plants in Lukhovitsy 
and Nizhniy Novgorod produce the MiG-29.615 
The fifth-generation fighter (PAK-FA) pro -
gram began in 2008 and is a high-priority item 
for the Russian air force. Six flying prototype 
aircraft were completed through 2016, with 
additional prototype aircraft in testing by the 
end of 2016. The Ministry of Defense plans to 
start serial production this year with the goal 
of producing 12 for the air force by 2020.616, 617 
Helicopters
The state corporation Russian Helicopters 
operates five primary helicopter plants that 
produce the Ka 52 and Mi-28 attack variants, 
Mi-8/17, Mi-35, Mi-26, and ANSAT for the 
armed forces and for export.618, 619 Moscow’s pre-
vious reliance on helicopter engines produced 
in Ukraine has not adversely affected Russia’s 
ability to meet the needs of its military.620  
Transport Aircraft
The UAC is responsible for operating two large 
aircraft production plants at Kazan and Uly -
anovsk. Russia is producing its new transport, 
the Il-76MD-90A, which is a redesign of the 
Il-76/CANDID transport, and plans to produce 
39 Il-76MD-90A planes by 2020. 621 The Ily -
ushin Design Bureau has begun development 
of the Il-78MD-90A refueler and the Il-112 
light military transport, based on Il-76 air -
frame design.622, 623 
Naval Sector
In an effort to streamline the design and con -
struction of surface ships and submarines, 
President Putin established the United Ship -
building Corporation in 2007 to provide over -
sight of all major domestic military and civil -
ian shipbuilding. The corporation includes 
approximately 40 companies, including design 
bureaus and shipyards. Russia is currently 
upgrading and modernizing its naval fleet, con-
structing multi-role platforms with modular  
designs. 624  However, some new platforms 
have taken up to, or over, a decade to com -
plete construction and to enter into service as 
Russia’s shipbuilding industry is besieged by 
sanctions. Moscow is working to overcome the 
negative effects of international sanctions by 
becoming more self-reliant, indigenously pro -
ducing components formerly purchased from 
foreign suppliers. 625
Russia currently has eight operational shipyards 
dedicated to surface ship and submarine con -
struction. While construction of patrol boats and 
corvettes has continued at a steady pace, major 
combatants and amphibious ships have encoun-
tered significant delays. For example, the Yantar 
Shipyard has faced difficulties meeting produc-
tion deadlines during construction of the GRIG-
OROVICH FFG and IVAN GREN LST.

82
Surface Combatants
Construction of the ADMIRAL GRIGOR -
OVICH and GORSHKOV-class frigates, along 
with the STEREGUSHCHIY-class corvette, 
was to mark Russia’s return as a shipbuilding 
power and are intended to become the back -
bone of the fleet. A total of 17 of the ships (6 
GRIGOROVICH, 4 GORSHKOV, and 8 STE -
REGUSHCHIY) were ordered to be built. Final 
delivery of over half of these ships was dis -
rupted due to the lack of gas turbine and die -
sel engines from Ukraine’s Zorya-Mashproyekt 
State Gas-Turbine Manufacturing Enterprise.
626
Delivery of three GRIGOROVICH and two 
GORSHKOV frigates were eventually can -
celled because domestically-produced gas-tur-
bine engines would not be ready before 2020. 
The imported engines for the STEREGUSH-
CHIY corvettes have been replaced by domes -
tic diesel engines produced by the Kolomna 
Engine Plant in Moscow, allowing for the pro-
duction of corvettes and patrol boats to con -
tinue at a steady pace in spite of construction 
delays to the larger ships.
627 
The Russian Navy has one operational air -
craft carrier in its inventory, the 26-year-
old ADMIRAL KUZNETSOV, which is 
expected to enter a 2- to 3-year overhaul 
period beginning in 2018. This overhaul is 
not scheduled to consist of any major mod-
ernization or modifications and will keep 
the KUZNETSOV in the fleet until a new 
aircraft carrier becomes operational.
628 The 
Murmansk Shipyard is planning to convert 
and enlarge its drydock to overhaul the 
KUZNETSOV and to provide maintenance/
repair service for large commercial ships. 
When complete, the result will be the coun -
try’s largest drydock (400 x 80 meters).
629 
Russia is planning to start the design of 
a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier (the 
Shtorm) in 2020, with completion by 2030. 
Based on a model mock-up and initial infor-
mation, the carrier will have a beam of 40 
meters and draft of 11 meters. Shtorm will 
be 330 meters in length, shorter than the 
U.S. Navy’s newest carrier but 10% lon -
ger and wider than the KUZNETSOV. The 
Shtorm will have RITM-200 nuclear reac -
tors, a catapult, and two ski-jump ramps for 
launching aircraft and will be able to carry 
up to 90 aircraft and helicopters.
630 
Submarines
Historically the backbone of the Russian Navy, 
75% of the 61 operational submarines are over 
20 years old and are slowly being replaced. Rus-
sia will continue production of its fourth-gen -
eration DOLGORUKIY-class submarines 
through 2020. There are currently three in 
GORSHKOV-class Frigate.
Image Source: Shutterstock

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
83
service, with an additional eight scheduled to 
enter service in the coming years. Russia is also 
planning to construct a fifth-generation strate-
gic missile SSBN between 2031 and 2050.631, 632  
The YASEN-class SSGN (Project 855, aka 
SEVERODVINSK) will replace aging VICTOR 
III SSNs. The YASEN is produced at the 
Sevmash shipyard; the first of up to 10 hulls 
was delivered to the Navy in 2014, but the 
program has encountered delays. The flagship 
of the class (hull 1) required 16 years to com -
plete; hull 2 should soon be completed after 
7 years.633 Modernization and upgrade efforts 
are occurring on the OSCAR II SSGN and 
SIERRA II SSNs. The improved KILO SSK 
class (Project 636.3) is being produced with -
out significant delays. The initial order of 6 
was expanded to 12 in early 2016. The first 
three KILOS were delivered to the Black Sea 
Fleet in 2014–2015. 634 
Ground Arms
Since 2010, there have been significant improve-
ments in the condition of Russian ground arms, 
including the modernization and upgrade of 
the main battle tank (MBT) inventory. The 
active inventory includes the T-72, T-80U, and 
T-90 MBTs.635 The T-72 is one of Russia’s oldest 
active MBTs and has been upgraded to include 
substantial enhancements in explosive reactive 
armor, electronic components, and enhanced 
navigation systems.636 Russia’s newest in-service 
MBT, the T-90, features the new Sonsa-U sight-
ing systems and Shtora soft-kill active protection 
system.637  While Russia’s Ministry of Defense 
planned to phase out the T-80, the Omsk Trans-
port Machine Building Plant, one of Russia’s two 
MBT production and modernization facilities, is 
planning to upgrade the T-80U with Sosna-U, 
Relikt third-generation dynamic protection com-
plex, and advanced radio and C2 systems. 638
New Technology 
The Uralvagonzavod (UVZ) Corporation is Rus-
sia’s primary MBT production and moderniza-
tion center and is responsible for the production 
of Russia’s newest MBT (the Armata) to fulfill 
part of the 2020 and 2025 State Armament Pro-
gram.639, 640 The new-generation T-14 Armata 
MBT is being used as a common chassis for the 
Army’s heavy armored vehicles, including the 
T-15 Armata heavy infantry fighting vehicle 
(IFV) and the Koalitsiya-SV 2S35 self-propelled 
howitzer.641 This universal platform offers the 
Russian defense industry a more streamlined 
YASEN SSGN Hull 1.
Image Source: Shutterstock

84
means of armored vehicle production and will 
reduce maintenance and modernization costs in 
the future. 
Like the Armata, the Kurganets-25—slated 
to begin production in 2018—will provide a 
lighter, universal tracked platform for new 
IFVs and armored personnel carriers. 642 The 
Bumerang wheeled armored personnel car -
rier has completed preliminary testing as of 
June 2016. 643, 644 Russia will continue to field 
the BMP-3 (~700 units), BMP-2 (~1,800 units), 
and BMP-1 (~500 units) while new systems 
are designed and produced. 645 The BMP-3 is 
Russia’s most modern IFV in service.646
Russian artillery modernization efforts include 
the Koalitsiya-SV 2S35 152-mm self-propelled 
howitzer, which is intended to be the future of 
Russian self-propelled artillery units and will 
ultimately phase out the 2S19 Msta-S.647  Several 
of Russia’s multiple rocket launchers (MRLs) 
have also been improved: the URAGAN 220mm 
MRL, the SMERCH 300mm MRL, and the new 
TORNADO-2 300 MRL, which is a modernized 
version of the SMERCH.648 Russian MRLs are 
produced in large quantities for the Russian 
Army and export customers worldwide.649
T-14 Armata Tank.
Image Source: AFP

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
85
APPENDIX H: Arms Sales
Russia remains the second largest arms 
exporter worldwide, in terms of the annual 
value of both its export contracts and equip -
ment deliveries. Russia’s arms export strat -
egy included planning $13 billion in annual 
sales through 2016, and thereafter seeking 
growth until 2020.650 In 2016, Russian officials 
announced that Moscow exported $14.5 billion 
in military products in 2015.651
Russia is an exporter of nearly every category 
of conventional military equipment, from small 
arms to long-range air defense systems and 
submarines. Moscow sees great prospects in the 
global arms marketplace for many of its prod -
ucts. In the aircraft sector, Su-35, Su-30 and 
MiG-29 fighter aircraft, Yak-130 combat train-
ers, and a variety of Mil and Kamov helicopters 
are key products. In the air defense sector, S-400 
TRIUMF, ANTEY-2500, BUK-M2E, and TOR-
M2E surface-to-air missile systems, the PAN-
TSIR-S1 air defense missile/gun system, and 
IGLA-S MANPADS are top sellers. Frigates, 
submarines, and patrol boats are best-selling 
naval exports. Russia’s land warfare products 
are centered on T-90 tanks, BMP-3 infantry 
fighting vehicles, and Tigr armored cars.652 
Marketing, contracting, and exporting Rus -
sian defense products is executed by state 
company Rosoboronexport (ROE). ROE typi -
cally accounts for approximately 85% of Rus -
sia’s total exports of weapons and military 
hardware. It ships Russian defense products 
to about 70 countries and cooperates with 
over 700 Russian defense industry companies. 
ROE is incorporated into Rostec (formerly 
known as Russian Technologies or Rostech -
nologii), the state corporation established in 
2007 to promote the development, production, 
and export of civilian and military high tech -
nology products. 653 Although ROE manages 
the majority of Russian arms trade, over 15 
companies are authorized to export products 
abroad directly, most often spare parts and 
maintenance services, and these contracts 
account for about $2 billion annually. 654
Russia’s largest export markets for arms are 
the Middle East/North Africa and the Asia-Pa-
cific regions. Russia also maintains sales in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and some 
parts of Europe, although at a much lower 
level.655 Moscow is seeking to grow its market 
share in Southeast Asia and Latin America 
especially. Russia also is committed to expand-
ing high-level military technical cooperation 
with other member states of BRICS (Brazil, 
Russia, India, China, and South Africa).656, 657
Russia is taking steps to overcome challenges 
and remain competitive in the global arms mar-
ket. ROE increasingly has been offering com -
mercial credit for arms transactions, especially 
to countries in Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa 
that cannot afford to purchase expensive equip-
ment or upgrade their armed forces without 
financial assistance. Similarly, Russian officials 
have acknowledged that exchanging arms for 
access to customers’ natural resources may be 

86
necessary to stave off competition from other 
suppliers. 658 President Putin has expressed 
Moscow’s willingness to improve financing 
options for contracts, expand offerings for joint 
production and local assembly of defense equip-
ment in customers’ countries, and improve upon 
post-sale support and equipment servicing.659
Moscow casts itself as a reliable and predict -
able arms trade partner that does not make 
its commitments dependent on market prefer -
ences or political trends. 660 Russia also is tout-
ing the effectiveness of its combat operations 
in Syria and using this to add cachet to its 
military products for export. Moscow believes 
that advertising many of its weapons systems 
as combat-proven will generate additional 
interest and orders from customers. 661

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
89
1 Dick, Charles J. “A Bear Without Claws: The Russian Army 
in the 1990s.” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies, vol. 10,  
no. 1, March 1997, pp. 1–2.
2 Miller, Steven E. “Moscow’s Military Power: Russia’s Search 
for Security in an Age of Transition.” The Russian Military: 
Power and Policy, edited by Steven E. Miller and Dmitri V. 
Trenin, MIT Press, 2004, pp. 2, 7.
3 Dick, p. 2.
4 Dick, pp. 1–2.
5 Allison, Roy, “Russia, Regional Conflict, and the Use of 
Military Power.” The Russian Military: Power and Policy, 
edited by Steven E. Miller and Dmitri V. Trenin, MIT Press, 
2004, pp. 132–133.
6 Dick, p. 2.
7 Miller, p. 1.
8 Arbatov, Alexei G, “Military Reform: From Crisis to Stagna-
tion.” The Russian Military: Power and Policy, edited by Steven 
E. Miller and Dmitri V. Trenin, MIT Press, 2004, p. 100.
9 Dick, pages 3–4.
10 Shurygin, Vladislav. "The Russian Army: Chronicle of 
Collapse." Internet Agenstvo Federalnykh Rassledovaniy, 
6 Nov 2006, www.apn.ru/publications/print1253.htm. 
Accessed 7 Jan 2007.
11 Unattributed. “Army Officers Moonlighting to Avoid Star-
vation.” Moscow Russian Television Network, 27 Oct 1996. 
Accessed 27 Oct 1996.
12 Golts, Aleksandr, “The Social and Political Condition of the 
Russian Military.” The Russian Military: Power and Policy, ed-
ited by Steven E. Miller and Dmitri V. Trenin, MIT Press, 2004, 
pp. 73–74.
13 Dick, p. 4.
14 Dick, pp. 4–5.
15 Barabanov, Mikhail, “Hard Lessons Learned: Russian Mili-
tary Reform up to the Georgian Conflict.” Brothers Armed: Mil-
itary Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, edited by Colby Howard 
and Ruslan Pukhanov, East View Press, 2014, pp. 80–81.
16 Barabanov, “Hard Lessons,” p. 75.
17 Barbanov, “Hard Lessons,” p. 76.
18 Pallin, Carolina Vendil. Russian Military Reform: A failed exer-
cise in defense decision making. Routledge, 2009, pp. 71–74.
19 Barabanov, Mikhail (ed), Russia’s New Army. Centre for 
Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, Moscow, Russia, 
2011, pp. 10–13.
20 Barabanov, “Hard Lessons,” pp. 79–80.
21 Pallin, pp. 94–96.
22 Pavlovskiy, Nikolay. “Good Bye, Soviet Army.” 
Boss Magazine, 15 Feb 2010. Accessed 25 Feb 2010.
23 Barabanov, “New Army,” pp. 17–18.
24 Barabanov, “Hard Lessons,” p. 85.
25 Barabanov, “New Army,” pp. 13–14.
26 Barabanov, “Hard Lessons,” p. 82.
27 Barabanov, “New Army,” pp. 15–16.
28 Barabanov, “New Army,” pp. 19–20.
29 Tamantsev, Yaroslav. “Where the Military Shambles in Russia 
Is Leading.” Internet SEGODNYA.ru, 16 Dec 2008, 
wwwsegodnia.ru/content/19109. Accessed 29 Dec 2008.
30 Shurygin, Vladislav. “Full text from the Press conference 
with General Makarov.” Kommersant-Vlast, 13 Jul 2009, 
www.kommersant.ru/vlast. Accessed 16 Jul 09.
31 Unattributed, “The Contract Fad.” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye 
Obozreniye Online, 22 Nov 2013, nvo.ng.ru/. Accessed 26 
Nov 2013.
32 Telmanov, Denis. “General Staff Submitted a Modernization 
Plan to the State Duma.” Moscow Gazeta Online, 13 Nov 
2008, http://gzt.ru/. Accessed 18 Nov 2008.
33 Barabanov, Mikhail. “Reform of the Combat Spirit.” Kom-
mersant-Vlast, 20 Oct 2008, www.kommersant.ru/vlast.
aspx?issueid=41901. Accessed 21 Oct 2008.
34 Unattributed. “Chief of Russian General Staff Army Gen Ni-
kolay Makarov meets with foreign military attaches.” Moscow 
Interfax, 21 Dec 2009, http://www.militarynews.ru/. Accessed 
22 Dec 2009.
REFERENCES

90
 35 Unattributed. “The General Staff Has Laid Out a New 
Strategy.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 30 Dec 2009, www.Ng.ru/
nvo/2009-12-30_genshtab.html. Accessed 31 Dec 2009.
36 Barabanov, pp. 20–28.
37 Unattributed, “The Contract Fad.” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye 
Obozreniye Online, 22 Nov 2013, nvo.ng.ru/. Accessed 26 
Nov 2013.
38 Rastopshin, Mikhail. “Unprepared for the Noncontact 
Operations of the 21st Century.” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye 
Obozreniye, 15 Aug 2008, www.nvo.ng.ru/wars/2008-08-
15/8_ossetia.html. Accessed 29 Aug 2008.
39 Kotenok Yuriy. "The Army Needs to Be Protected from 
Dilettantes." Utro.ru, 21 Oct 2008, www.utro.ru/arti-
cles/2008/10/21/776199.shtml. Accessed 22 Oct 2008.
40 Khramchikhin, Aleksandr. "The Army is Cut Off at Its Knees: 
However, So Far There Are No Answers to the Questions: 
Why and to What End." Moscow Nezavisimoye Voyennoye 
Obozreniye, 24 Oct 08. Accessed 3 Nov 2008.
41 Tamantsev, Yaroslav. “Where the Military Shambles in Russia 
Is Leading.” Internet SEGODNYA.ru, 16 Dec 2008, www.
segodnia.ru/content/19109. Accessed 29 Dec 2008.
42 Bratersky, Alexander and Earle, Jonathan. “Shoigu Inherits 
Armed Forces at Crossroads.” The Moscow Times, 9 Nov 
2012, http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/
shoigu-inherits-armed-forces-at-crossroads/471212.html.  
Accessed 9 Nov 2012.
43 Nikolskiy, Aleksey, and Kostenko, Natalya. "Shoygu's Army." 
Vedomosti Online, 8 Nov 2012, http://www.vedomosti.ru/. 
Accessed 15 Nov 2012.
44 Unattributed. “Analysis: Russian Military Manpower - 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Ukraine Standoff.” Caversham BBC 
Monitoring, 15 May 2014, Bbc/co/uk. Accessed 15 May 2014.
45 Unattributed. “Advanced Russian Weapons Deployed in 
Donbass.” Internet Kyiv Defense Express, 17 Feb 2015, http://
www.defense-ua.com. Accessed 17 Feb 2015.
46 Unattributed. “More Russian Troops, Hardware Spotted in 
Ukraine.” 5 Kanal TV in Ukrainian. Accessed 3 Oct 2014.
47 Sutyagin, Igor, “Detailing Russian Forces in Syria.” RUSI 
Defense Systems, 13 Nov 2015, https://rusi.org/publication/
rus-defense-systems/detailing-russian-forces-syria.  
Accessed 25 Oct 2016.
48 “Northern Fleet.” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federa-
tion, http://structure.mil.ru/structure/okruga/north/news.htm.
49 Frolov, Vladimir, president of LEFF Group, a government re-
lations and PR company. “Putin Seeks entente Cordiale with 
the West.” Opinion: The Moscow Times Online, 8 Mar 2016, 
http://www.themoscowtimes.com. Accessed 8 Mar 2016.
50 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approving 
appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National Security 
Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Federation Presi-
dent, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
51 Trenin, Dmitri. “The Revival of the Russian Military: How Mos-
cow Reloaded,” Foreign Affairs, May/Jun 2016, pp. 23–29.
52 Lukyanov, Fedor. “Putin’s Foreign Policy: The Quest to Re-
store Russia’s Rightful Place.” Foreign Affairs, May/Jun 2016, 
pp. 30–38.
53 Lukyanov, “Putin’s Foreign Policy,” pp. 30–38.
54 Lukyanov, “Putin’s Foreign Policy,” pp. 30–38.
55 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approving 
appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National Security 
Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Federation Presi-
dent, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
56 Trenin, “The Revival of the Russian Military,” pp. 23–30.
57 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approv -
ing appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National 
Security Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Feder -
ation President, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 
5 Jan 2016.
58 Lukyanov, “Putin’s Foreign Policy,” pp. 30–38.
59 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approving 
appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National Security 
Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Federation Presi-
dent, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
60 Unattributed. “Russian presidential representative to Afghan-
istan expressed his deep concerns regarding the expanding 
ISIL activities in Afghanistan.” TEHRAN (FNA), 24 Apr 2016, 
http://www.english.farsnews.com. Accessed 25 Apr 2016.
61 Government of the Russian Federation. “Deputy Secretary of 
the Russian Security Council Yevgeniy Lukyanov has issued a 
commentary on the most recent version of the National Security 
Strategy.” Official website of the Russian Federation Government, 
18 Jan 2016, http://government.ru. Accessed 18 Jan 2016.
62 Kashin, Vasiliy and Pyatachkova, Anastasiya. "On The Road 
to an Alliance? How Far Rapprochement Between Russia and 
China Could Go." Internet: Moscow Lenta.ru in Russian, 25 
Aug 2016, http://lenta.ru/. Accessed 30 Aug 2016.
63 Nechepurenko, Ivan. “Russia-China Alliance Could Launch 
New World Order.” The Moscow Times Online, 14 Jun 2014, 
http://www.themoscowtimes.com/. Accessed 16 Jun 2014.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
91
64 Kashin and Pyatachkova, "On The Road to an Alliance? How 
Far Rapprochement Between Russia and China Could Go."
65 Trenin, Dmitriy. "Russia's Foreign Policy in the Coming Five 
Years: Goals, Stimuli, Reference Points." Politkom.ru, 29 Apr 
2016, http://politikom.ru. Accessed 10 May 2016.
66 Cohen, Josh. “Putin's Fear of China Weakens Russia's 
Asia Pivot.” The Moscow Times, 17 Dec 2014, http://www.
themoscowtimes.com/. Accessed 24 Dec 2014.
67 Melnikova, Kseniya citing experts Gabuyev, Aleksandr and 
Bordachev, Timofey. "Restless Neighborhood.” Moscow 
Lenta.ru in Russian, 15 Jul 2015, http://www/lenta.ru/.  
Accessed 19 Jul 2016.
68 Yegorov, Ivan. “Challenge Accepted; Nikolay Patrushev: 
National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation Has 
Been Updated.” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 22 Dec 2015, www.rg.
ru/2015/12/22/patrushev-site.html. Accessed 28 Dec 2015.
69 Official government document. “The Russian Federation 
National Security Strategy Through 2020.” Russian Federation 
Security Council Website, 12 May 2009, www.scrf.gov.ru. 
Accessed 15 May 2009.
70 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approving 
appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National Security 
Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Federation Presi-
dent, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
71 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approving 
appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National Security 
Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Federation Presi-
dent, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
72 Official government document. “The Russian Federation 
National Security Strategy Through 2020.” Russian Federation 
Security Council Website, 12 May 2009, www.scrf.gov.ru. 
Accessed 15 May 2009.
73 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approving 
appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National Security 
Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Federation Presi-
dent, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
74 Yaffa, Joshua. “ What the Russian Protests Mean for Putin,” 
27 March 2017, www.thenewyorker.com.
75 Yaffa, Joshua. “ What the Russian Protests Mean for Putin,” 
27 March 2017, www.thenewyorker.com.
76 Lipman, Maria. “How Putin Silences Dissent: Inside the Krem-
lin’s Crackdown,” Foreign Affairs, May/June 2016, pp. 38-47.
77 Lipman, Maria. “How Putin Silences Dissent: Inside the Krem-
lin’s Crackdown,” Foreign Affairs, May/June 2016, pp. 38-47.
78 Unattributed. “Russian National Guard to have central 
command point (Part 2).” Moscow Interfax, 9 Jul 2016, 
http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 10 Jul 2016.
79 Unattributed. “Maximal size of Russian Interior Ministry's 
staff cut to 904,800 - presidential order.” Moscow Interfax, 19 
Sep 2016, http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 20 Sep 2016.
80 Sokirko, Viktor. “Interview with Vladimir Pronichev.” Kom-
somolskaya Pravda Online, 11 Oct 2011, http://www.kp.ru/. 
Accessed 15 Oct 2011.
81 Russia Federal Penitentiary Service. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Federal_Penitentiary_Service. Accessed 25 Oct 2016.
82 Unattributed. “Putin caps Emergencies Ministry headcount.” 
Moscow TASS, 30 Jul 2016, http://tass.ru. Accessed 31 Jul 2016.
83 Wilson, Kyle. “Australia: The puzzle of Putin’s insecurity: prae-
torian guards, Stalinist blueprints.” The Strategist, 23 May 2016, 
http://www.aspistrategist.org.au. Accessed 24 May 2016.
84 Unattributed. “Chechnya Move Worries Russian Press.” 
BBC News Online, 17 Apr 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/. 
Accessed 17 Apr 2009.
85 Milashina, Yelena. "How Putin Has Liquidated Kadyrov's 
Army. Edict on the Formation of the National Guard Will Have 
Colossal Consequences for Chechnya." Novaya Gazeta 
Online, 10 Apr 2016, http://www.novayagazeta.ru/. Accessed 
26 Apr 2016.
86 Unattributed. “CSTO peacekeepers in exercise in Belarus to 
practice creation of corridors for refugees.” Moscow Interfax, 24 
Aug 2016, http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 25 Aug 2016.
87 Unattributed. “CSTO's draft strategy views NATO approach 
toward CSTO states' borders as threat to their security – Rus-
sian envoy Vasilyev (Part 2).” Moscow Interfax, 29 Jun 2016, 
http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 30 Jun 2016.
88 Unattributed. “Soldiers from the Collective Security Treaty 
Organisation (CSTO) have called on simulated NATO peace-
keeping forces to surrender as part of exercise ‘Cooperation 
2016.’" Moscow Zvezda TV, Ministry of Defense TV channel, 
19 Aug 2016.
89 Korostikov, Mikhail. "Tajik Mountains Can Barely Hold Out. 
Dushanbe Combating Terrorists and Drug Traffickers Using 
Chinese Jeeps and American Weapons." Kommersant Online, 
29 Apr 2016, http://kommersant.ru/. Accessed 29 Apr 2016.
90 Unattributed. "Hopeless Dead End. The Resolution of the 
Karabakh Conflict Requires a Minimum Trust, Which Is Com-
pletely Absent.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 16 Oct 2016, www.
Ng.ru/nvo/. Accessed 16 Oct 2016.

92
91 Karaganov, S.A. “A Strategy for Russia; Russian Foreign 
Policy: The End of The 2010s to the Beginning of the 2020s." 
Council for Foreign and Defense Policy, 6 Jun 2016, http://
www.svop.ru. Accessed 22 Jul 2016.
92 Karaganov, Sergey. "Russian Foreign Policy: New Stage? 
– Group of Established Experts Have Presented Their View of 
the Priorities of Russian Foreign Policy.” Rossiyskaya Gazeta 
Online, 24 May 2016, http://rg.ru/. Accessed 29 May 2016.
93 Bocharova, Svetlana. “Siluanov Explained the Growth of the 
Classified Budget Expenditures.” RBC.ru, 17 Oct 2016. www.
rbc.ru. Accessed 20 Oct 2017.
94 Economist Intelligence Unit. Russia GDP , Exchange Rate, 
GDP deflator. eiu.com. Accessed Jun 2017.
95 Unattributed. “Putin signs 2016 Budget Amendments, 
Deficit Rises to 3 Trillion Rubles.” Interfax, 24 Nov 2016, http://
www.interfax.com/. Accessed 24 Nov 2016.
96 Economist Intelligence Unit. Russia GDP , Exchange Rate, 
GDP deflator. eiu.com. Accessed Jun 2017.
97 Russian Federation Ministry of Finance. “Annual information 
about execution of the federal budget (data from 1 January 
2006).” National defense line item, http://minfin.ru/ru/statis-
tics/fedbud/#. Accessed 28 Nov 2016.
98 Economist Intelligence Unit. Russia GDP , Exchange Rate, 
GDP deflator. eiu.com. Accessed Jun 2017.
99 Russian Federation Ministry of Finance. “Annual information 
about execution of the federal budget (data from 1 January 
2006).” National defense line item, http://minfin.ru/ru/statis-
tics/fedbud/#. Accessed 28 Nov 2016.
100 State Duma draft law 2428-7. “On introducing amend-
ments in the Federal Law ‘On the Federal Budget in 2016,’” 
Appendix No. 3 of Explanatory Note, “Expenditures of the 
Federal Budget in 2016 in Framework of Sections and Sub-
sections of Categories of Expenditures of the Federal Budget.” 
duma.gov.ru. Accessed 31 Oct 2016.
101 Cooper, Julian. “Russian State Armament Programme to 
2020: a quantitative assessment of implementation 2011–
2015.” SIPRI, Mar 2016, p. 20.
102 Cooper, p. 14.
103 Prokopenko, Aleksandra. “Расходы прорвали линию 
обороны.” Vedomosti Online, 9 Sep 2016.
104 Bocharova, “Siluanov Explained the Growth of the Classi-
fied Budget Expenditures.”
105 Economist Intelligence Unit. Russia GDP , Exchange Rate, 
GDP deflator. eiu.com. Accessed Jun 2017.
106 Russian Federation Ministry of Finance. “Annual infor-
mation about execution of the federal budget (data from 1 
January 2006).” National defense line item, http://minfin.ru/ru/
statistics/fedbud/#. Accessed 28 Nov 2016.
107 State Duma draft law 2428-7, “On introducing amend-
ments in the Federal Law ‘On the Federal Budget in 2016,’” 
Appendix No. 3 of Explanatory Note, “Expenditures of the 
Federal Budget in 2016 in Framework of Sections and Sub-
sections of Categories of Expenditures of the Federal Budget.” 
duma.gov.ru. Accessed 31 Oct 2016.
108 Unattributed. “Russian Finance Ministry suggests 5% 
budget cuts in 2017.” ITAR-TASS News Agency, 7 Jul 2016. 
Accessed 7 Jul 2016.
109 Kuvshinova, Olga. “Доходы бюджета в 2019 году 
снизятся до 20-летнего минимума” [Budget Outlays in 2019 
Will Sink to 20-Year Low]. Vedomosti Online, 4 Sep 2016, 
www.vedomosti.ru. Accessed 13 Sep 2016.
110 Unattributed. “Potential exists for Bashneft sale, but timing 
of Rosneft privatization needs analysis.” Interfax, 22 Jun 2016, 
www.interfax.com. Accessed 23 Jun 2016.
111 “Interfax Russia & CIS Banking and Finance Weekly.” Inter-
fax, 12 Aug 2016, www.interfax.com. Accessed 12 Aug 2016.
112 Prokopenko, Alexandra. “Experts Predict 'Lost Decade' 
for Russia's Stagnating Economy.” The Moscow Times, 
19 Aug 2016, themoscowtimes/articles/experts-pro -
claim-lost-decade-for-russias-stagnating-economy-55039. 
Accessed 19 Aug 2016.
113 Gerasimov, Valery. “Ценность Науки В Предвидении 
Новые Вызовы Требуют Переосмыслить Формы И 
Способы Ведения Боевых Действий” [The Value of Science 
is in Foresight: New Challenges Demand Rethinking of the 
Forms and Methods of Conducting Combat Actions]. Mili-
tary-Industrial Courier, 27 Feb 2013.
114 Unattributed. “Russian Chief of General Staff Makarov 
Addresses Academy of Military Sciences.” Moscow Nezavisi-
moye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 19 Feb 2012, http://nvo.ng.ru/. 
Accessed 19 Feb 2012.
115 Unattributed. “Numerous military conflicts may devel -
op into full-fledged war – Makarov (Part 2).” Interfax-AVN 
Online in English, 7 Dec 2011, http://www.militarynews.ru. 
Accessed 7 Dec 2011.
116 Chekinov, Sergey.G. and Bogdanov, Sergey A. “Initial Peri-
ods of Wars and Their Impact on a Country's Preparations for 
a Future War.” Military Thought, 31 Dec 2012.
117 Gerasimov, “The Value of Science is in Foresight.”

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
93
118 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
119 Unattributed. “К Вопросу o Ядерном Сдерживании” [On the 
Question of Nuclear Deterrence]. Military Thought, 1 Dec 2002.
120 Felgengauer, Pavel. “Rybkin’s Preventive Strike.” Moscow 
Segodnya, 14 Feb 1997.
121 Unattributed. “Russia Classifies Information on Pre-emptive 
Nuclear Strikes – Military.” Interfax-AVN Online, 5 Sep 2014, 
http://www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 5 Sep 2014.
122 Unattributed. “On Employing Nuclear Weapons to De-Es-
calate Military Operations.” Military Thought, 1 May 1999.
123 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
124 Malashenko, E.I. “Creation and Employment of Strategic 
Reserves.” Military Thought, vol. 1, 2006.
125 Garayev, M.A. "Lessons and Conclusions Drawn from the 
Experience of the Great Patriotic War for Building Up and 
Training the Armed Forces.” Voyennaya Mysl, 5 May 2010.
126 Bogdanov, S.A. "Features of The Initial Period of Past and 
Future Wars." Voyennaya Mysl, 1 May 2003.
127 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
128 President of the Russian Federation. “2010 Military Doc-
trine of the Russian Federation.” 5 Feb 2010, http://www.
kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Feb 2010.
129 Radchuk, V.A. “Determination of Levels of Unacceptable 
Damage to State Economic System: A Methodological Ap-
proach.” Military Thought, vol. 3, 2008.
130 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
131 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
132 Burenok, F.M. and Achasov, O.B. “Russia: Non-Nuclear 
Deterrence.” Military Thought, 1 Jan 2008.
133 Chekinov, S.G. and Bogdanov, S.A. “Strategic Deterrence 
and Russia's National Security Today.” Military Thought,  
1 Jan 2012.
134 Radchuk, V.A. “Determination of Levels of Unacceptable 
Damage to State Economic System: A Methodological Ap-
proach.” Military Thought, vol. 3, 2008.
135 Ozhegov, S.I. and Shvedova, N.Yu. Encyclopedic Dictio-
nary of the Russian Language. Russian Academy of Science 
Institute of the Russian Language, 1999, p. 707.
136 Unattributed. “К Вопросу o Ядерном Сдерживании” [On the 
Question of Nuclear Deterrence]. Military Thought, 11 Jan 2002.
137 Unattributed. “Strategic Deterrence and Russia's National 
Security Today.” Military Thought, 3 Aug 2012.
138 Unattributed. “Issues of Strategic Deterrence in Current 
Conditions.” Military Thought, 17 Feb 2010.
139 Barynkin, V.M. “Assessment of Effectiveness of Measures 
to Resolve Military Conflicts in the Early Stages of Their Devel-
opment.” Military Thought, 1 Mar 1996.
140 Tsgychko, V.N. “Balance of Forces’ Category in Potential 
Military Conflicts.” Military Thought, Mar 2002.
141 Unattributed. “К Вопросу o Ядерном Сдерживании” [On the 
Question of Nuclear Deterrence]. Military Thought, 11 Jan 2002.
142 Unattributed. “К Вопросу o Ядерном Сдерживании” [On the 
Question of Nuclear Deterrence]. Military Thought, 11 Jan 2002.
143 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
144 Official President Edict. “Presidential Edict 683 approving 
appended text of ‘The Russian Federation's National Security 
Strategy.’” Official website of the Russian Federation Presi-
dent, 31 Dec 2015, www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
145 Chekinov, S.G. and Bogdanov S.A. “Asymmetrical Ac -
tions to Maintain Russia’s Military Security.” Military Thought, 
20 Jun 2013.
146 Bikkenin, R. “Questions of Theory: Information Conflict in 
The Military Sphere: Basic Elements and Concepts.” Informa-
tion Conflict in Military Sphere, 18 Sep 2003, pp. 38–40.
147 Giles, Keir. “Russia’s New Tools for Confronting the West.” 
Research Paper, Chatham House, Mar 2016, https://www. 
chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/publications/
research/2016-03-21-russias-new-tools-giles.pdf. Accessed 
28 Mar 2016.
 

94
148 “Constitution of Russia, chapter 4. The President of the 
Russian Federation.” Wikisource, amended 30 Dec 2008, 
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Constitution_of_Russia#CHAP-
TER_4._THE_PRESIDENT_OF_THE_RUSSIAN_FEDERATION. 
Accessed 14 Dec 2016.
149 Unattributed. “1.18 The Powers of the Russian-Federation 
President in the Sphere of Command and Control of the Rus-
sian-Federation Armed Forces in Peacetime and Wartime.” 
Chernyye Dyry V Rossisykom Zakondatelstve, 1 Oct 2007, 
www.K-press.ru/bh. Accessed 8 Nov 2007.
150 Unattributed. “Defense Minister General of the Army Sergey 
Shoygu Conducted a Teleconference with Armed Forces Key 
Personnel.” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 8 
Apr 2013, www.mil.ru. Accessed 8 Apr 2013.
151 Unattributed. “Ministry of Defense Concludes First Contract 
for Delivery of Over 100 Armata Tanks.” Moscow RIA Novosti, 
6 Sep 2016, www.rian.ru. Accessed 7 Sep 2016.
152 Unattributed. “Russian Federation Ministry of Defense: 
Russia is Preparing a Response to USA Prompt Global 
Strike." ITAR-TASS, 2 Jun 2014, http://www.itar-tass.com/. 
Accessed 3 Jun 2014.
153 Unattributed. “Defense Minister General of the Army Sergey 
Shoygu Conducted a Teleconference with Armed Forces Key 
Personnel.” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 8 
Apr 2013, www.mil.ru. Accessed 8 Apr 2013.
154 Yershov, Yevgeniy. “Shoygu the All-Purpose and... the 
Only.” Moscow Polit.ru, 6 Nov 2012, http://polit.ru/.  
Accessed 7 Nov 2012.
155 Unattributed. “General of the Army Sergey Shoygu, Rus-
sian Defense Minister, Has Summed Up the Outcome of Snap 
Inspections of the Combat Readiness of the Troops (Forces).” 
Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 3 Aug 2015, 
http://www.mil.ru. Accessed 4 Aug 2015.
156 Miranovich, Gennadiy. “Defense of the Country: Scientific 
Approach.” Moscow Krasnaya Zvezda, 31 Jan 2014, http://
www.redstar.ru. Accessed 19 Feb 2014.
157 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine 
of the Russian Federation, approved by Russian Feder -
ation President V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian 
Federation president, 31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. 
Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
158 President of the Russian Federation. “Statute on the 
Russian Federation Armed Forces General Staff.” Official 
website of the Russian Federation president, 25 Jul 2012, 
http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 30 Jul 2013.
159 Unattributed. “1.18 The Powers of the Russian-Federation 
President in the Sphere of Command and Control of the Rus -
sian-Federation Armed Forces in Peacetime and Wartime.” 
Chernyye Dyry V Rossisykom Zakondatelstve, 1 Oct 2007, 
www.K-press.ru/bh. Accessed 8 Nov 2007.
160 Unattributed. “GEN. Gerasimov Becomes Central Military 
District Commander.” Moscow Interfax, 11 May 2012, http://
www.interfax.com. Accessed 11 May 2012.
161 BBC Monitoring. “BBCM Profile: Russia's New Armed 
Forces Chief, Valeriy Gerasimov.” BBC Monitoring, 9 Nov 
2012, www.monitor.bbc.co.uk. Accessed 9 Nov 2012.
162 Unattributed. “Traditions will be Continued.” Moscow 
Krasnyy Voin, 3 Apr 2009. Accessed 4 Apr 2009.
163 Unattributed. “Gerasimov Will Bring Better Organization to 
General Staff – Experts.” Moscow Interfax-AVN, 9 Nov 2012, 
http://www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 9 Nov 2012.
164 Unattributed. “The General Staff Planned a Complex of 
Measures for Strategic Deterrence for the Provision of Military 
Conflicts - Chief of the General Staff.” Moscow Interfax-AVN. 27 
Jan 2014. http://www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 5 Feb 2014.
165 Unattributed. “Russian General Staff Chief Outlines 'Prob-
lematic Issues' with NATO.” Moscow Rossiya 24 TV, 23 Jan 
2014, Vesti.ru. Accessed 23 Jan 2014.
166 Gerasimov, Valeriy. “First Main Test: Russia's Nuclear Arse-
nal Remains the Most Important National Security Guarantee.” 
Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer (VPK), 3 Sep 2014, http://
vpk-news.ru/articles/21648. Accessed 5 Sep 2014.
167 Unattributed. “Russia Taking Measures to Prevent US, 
NATO military superiority.” Moscow Interfax-AVN, 30 Jan 
2015,, http://www.interfax.ru/. Accessed 30 Jan 2015.
168 Unattributed. “Functions of the Main Operations Directorate 
of the General Staff.” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federa-
tion, 30 May 2013, http://www.mil.ru. Accessed 31 May 2013.
169 Unattributed. “Chief of Main Operations Directorate Sergey 
Rudskoy Speech During Briefing on Terrorism.” Ministry of 
Defense of the Russian Federation, 2 Dec 2015, http://www.
mil.ru. Accessed 3 Dec 2015.
170 Tikhonov, Aleksandr. “Where the Threats to Peace Come 
from.” Moscow Krasnaya Zvezda, 28 May 2014, http://www.
redstar.ru. Accessed 2 Jun 2014.
171 Unattributed. “Out of 550 Proposals for RDT&E Costing 
120 Billion, Only 146 Costing About 20 Billion Were Included 
in Gosoboronzakaz-2011.” Moscow Interfax-AVN, 4 Mar 2011, 
http://www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 4 Mar 2011.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
95
172 Unattributed. “Russian General Gives Data On Military 
Research.” Moscow Interfax-AVN, 4 Mar 2011, http://www.
militarynews.ru. Accessed 6 Mar 2011.
173 Unattributed. “Russian Army Revises State Defense Order, 
Suspends Military Education Reform.” Moscow Interfax-AVN, 14 
Nov 2012. http://www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 14 Nov 2012.
174 Unattributed. “Russia, Syria did not strike at areas agreed 
on in Geneva in past week – Rudskoi.” Interfax in English, 19 
Sep 2016, http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 19 Sep 2016.
175 Unattributed. “Russia, U.S. exchange info on ceasefire in 
Syria - Russian Defense Ministry.” Interfax in English, 27 Feb 
2016, http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 27 Feb 2016.
176 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Biography of Russian Pres-
ident Putin.” http://eng.mil.ru/en/management/leader.htm. 
Accessed 14 Oct 2016.
177 Unattributed. “1.18 The Powers of the Russian-Federation 
President in the Sphere of Command and Control of the Rus-
sian-Federation Armed Forces in Peacetime and Wartime.” 
Chernyye Dyry V Rossisykom Zakondatelstve, 1 Oct 2007, 
www.K-press.ru/bh. Accessed 8 Nov 2007.
178 Petrov, Ivan. "Young and Stern: The Generals Will Be 
Discharged by a 42-Year-Old Veteran of the State Emergency 
Committee." RBK Daily, 6 Nov 2008.
179 Unattributed. “1.18 The Powers of the Russian-Federation 
President in the Sphere of Command and Control of the Rus-
sian-Federation Armed Forces in Peacetime and Wartime.” 
Chernyye Dyry V Rossisykom Zakondatelstve, 1 Oct 2007, 
www.K-press.ru/bh. Accessed 8 Nov 2007.
180 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
181 Miranovich, Gennadiy. “Defense of the Country: Scientific 
Approach.” Moscow Krasnaya Zvezda, 31 Jan 2014, http://
www.redstar.ru. Accessed 19 Feb 2014.
182 tUnattributed. “Personnel Training System for Russian 
Ground Forces Will Be Improved – Commander-in-Chief.” 
Moscow Interfax-AVN, 3 Oct 2014, http://www.interfax.com/. 
Accessed 3 Oct 2014.
183 Yarynich, Valery E. “C3: Nuclear Command, Control, Co-
operation.” Conference paper, 2003. Source is former Russian 
General Staff officer and SRF member.
184 Bozhov, Oleg. "How They Will Wage War in the Future: 
Tanks Rumbled Across the Sky." MK Online, 13 Aug 2016, 
http://mk.ru/. Accessed 13 Aug 2016.
185 Unattributed. “1.18 The Powers of the Russian-Federation 
President in the Sphere of Command and Control of the Rus -
sian-Federation Armed Forces in Peacetime and Wartime.” 
Chernyye Dyry V Rossisykom Zakondatelstve, 1 Oct 2007, 
www.K-press.ru/bh. Accessed 8 Nov 2007.
186 Yarynich, “C3: Nuclear Command, Control, Cooperation.”
187 Yarynich, “C3: Nuclear Command, Control, Cooperation.”
188 Litovkin, Dmitriy. "The Military Go on the Net." Izvestiya Online. 
18 Oct 2010. http://www.izvestia.ru/.Accessed 18 Oct 2010.
189 Yarynich, Valery E. “Russian Missile Programs, The MTCR 
and the Future of U.S. Russian Arms Control.” Conference 
paper. 21 Jul 1995.
190 Yarynich, “C3: Nuclear Command, Control, Cooperation.”
191 Yarynich, “C3: Nuclear Command, Control, Cooperation.”
192 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine 
of the Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation 
President V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation 
president, 31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 
Dec 2014.
193 Yarynich, “C3: Nuclear Command, Control, Cooperation.”
194 Hoffman, David E. The Dead Hand: The Untold Story of 
the Cold War Arms Race and its Dangerous Aftermath. 
Doubleday, 2009.
195 Russian Ministry of Defense. http://function.mil.ru/news_
page/country/more.htm?id=12066124@egNews&_print=true. 
Accessed 17 Nov 2015.
196 Russian Ministry of Defense. http://function.mil.ru/news_
page/country/more.htm?id=12066124@egNews&_print=true. 
Accessed 17 Nov 2015.
197 Unattributed. “President Signs Decree On Four Joint Strate-
gic Commands in Russia.” ITAR-TASS in English, 15 Jul 2010.
198 Belousov, Yuriy and Tikhonov, Aleksandr. "From the Volga 
to the Yenisey." Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 10 Nov 2010, http://
www.redstar.ru. Accessed 10 Nov 2010.
199 Stepanov, Aleksandr. "Russia Expands Arctic Military Group-
ing. Air Force and Air Defense Army to Be Part of Northern Fleet." 
MK Online, 3 Aug 2015, http://mk.ru/. Accessed 3 Aug 2015.
200 Belousov and Tikhonov, "From the Volga to the Yenisey."
201 Unattributed. “Organization of Russia's new operational-stra-
tegic commands will be over in 2010.” Interfax-AVN, 12 Jun 
2010, http://www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 12 Jun 2010.
202 Belousov and Tikhonov, "From the Volga to the Yenisey."
 

96
203 Unattributed. “Organization of Russia's new operational-stra-
tegic commands will be over in 2010.” Interfax-AVN, 12 Jun 
2010, http://www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 12 Jun 2010.
204 Unattributed. “Russia opens regional defense control 
center in Yekaterinburg.” Interfax, 31 Mar 2014, http://www.
interfax.com/. Accessed 31 Mar 2014.
205 Dyachenko, A.A. Опаленные В Борьбе При Создании 
Ядерного Щита Родины: Научно-Публицистическая 
Монография. Chapter 4: Nuclear Test Site in The Arctic. 
Edited by V.N. Mikhaylov, Moscow, 2008, pp. 465–471.
206 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
207 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
208 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
209 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
210 Unattributed. “Upgraded Russian-made Tu-160M2 bomber 
to perform first flight in 2019.” TASS World Service, 2 Mar 2016.
211 Podvig, Pavel, et al. “Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces.” Cen-
ter for Arms Control, Energy and Environmental Studies at the 
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, English language 
edition supported by the Security Studies Program at the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, MIT Press, 2001. pp. 50–51.
212 Rosatom Annual Report – 2014.
213 Unattributed. “Medvedkov: The Creation of Infrastructure 
for the Nuclear Deterrence Forces Is our Main Administration's 
Key Task.” Interfax, 3 Aug 2016, http://www.interfax.com/. 
Accessed 16 Aug 2016.
214 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
215 U.S. Department of State. “Bureau of State, Bureau of 
Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance, New START 
Treaty Aggregate Numbers of Strategic Offensive Forces, Fact 
Sheet, Washington, DC.” 1 April 2017, http://www.state.gov/t/
avc/newstart/269496.htm.
216 Sutyagin, Igor. “Royal United Services Institute Occasion-
al Paper; Atomic Accounting: A New Estimate of Russia’s 
Non-Strategic Nuclear Forces.” Nov 2012, p. 5.
217 Arbatov, Alexei. “Nuclear Threat Initiative. A Russian 
Perspective on the Challenge of U.S., NATO, and Rus-
sian Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons.” NATO Parlia-
mentary Assembly, Science and Technology Committee, 
www.nti.org/media/pdfs/NTI_Framework_Chpt8b.pd-
f%3F_%3D1322702907+&cd=5&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us.
218 Unattributed. “Report: Russian Military Modernization 176 
STC 15 E.” 11 Oct 2015.
219 Andreyev, Oleg. “RVSN Given Six Years to Rearm; Moscow 
Adjusts Plans to Enhance Combat Readiness of the Armed 
Forces.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 18 May 2016, http://www.
ng.ru/. Accessed 19 May 2016.
220 Unattributed. "Source Names Timeframe for Troops to Get 
New Sarmat Missile." Moscow Lenta.ru, 5 Sep 2016, http://
lenta.ru/. Accessed 15 Sep 2016.
221 Bodner, Matthew. “Kremlin Threatens Response to U.S. 
Nuclear Bomb Deployment in Germany.” Moscow Times 
Online in English, 23 Sep 2015, http://www.themoscowtimes.
com. Accessed 24 Sep 2015.
222 Leitenberg, M and Zilinskas, R. The Soviet Biological 
Weapons Program: A History. Harvard University Press, 2012.
223 “Note by The Director General Overall Progress with Re-
spect to the Destruction of the Remaining Chemical Weapons 
Stockpiles.” OPCW, EC-80/DG.22, 28 Sep 2015.
224 “Update on destruction of Russian chemical weapons 
released”, 12 January 2017, BBCMIR2017, 12 January 2017
225 “Report of the Visit by the Chairperson of the Executive 
Council and Representatives of the Executive Council to the 
Kizner Chemical Weapons Destruction Facility the Russian 
Federation, 25–29 Apr 2016.” OPCW, EC-82/1, 30 May 2016.
226 “Remarks by Director-General Ahmet Üzümcü Closing 
Ceremony of Maradykovsky Chemical Weapons Destruction 
Facility.” OPCW, 30 Oct 2016.
227 Riches, James. “Analysis of Clothing and Urine from Mos-
cow Theatre Siege Casualties Reveals Carfentanil and Remifen-
tanil Use.” Technical analysis from Porton Down, 2012.
228 Zaretsky, B.L. “Russia's Aerospace Security.” Moscow 
Military Thought, vol. 24, no. 3, 2015, pp. 24–30.
 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
97
229 Cherednikov, I.Yu., et al. “Protection of Critical Assets from 
Missile Attacks by Sabotage and Reconnaissance Groups.” 
Moscow Military Thought, vol. 24, no. 1, 2015, pp. 39–44.
230 Khmara, Yu, Lutovinov, V. “Military Security of the Russian 
Federation: How to Ensure It under Present Conditions.” Mos-
cow Military Thought, vol. 25, no. 1, 2016, pp. 26–40.
231 Belomytsev, A.V., et al. “How to Fight an Enemy Coming from 
Aerospace.” Moscow Military Thought, no. 5, 2014, pp. 41–43.
232 Falichev, Oleg. “We Cannot Allow Ourselves to Purchase 
Bad Armaments." Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 2 Mar 
2011, http://vpk-news.ru/. Accessed 2 Mar 2011.
233 Cheltsov, B.F. “Approaches to the Creation of the National 
Aerospace Defense System in Light of Future Network-Centric 
Wars.” Moscow Military Thought, vol. 4, 2008, pp. 1–11.
234 “Questions of strategic and Operational Art in Sovi-
et Military Labor (1917–1949)” [Вопросы стратегии и 
оперативного искусства в советских военных трудах 
(1917– 1949). М.: Воениздат]. Moscow Military Publishers, 
1965, p. 636.
235 Fitzgerald, Mary. “The New Revolution in Russian Military 
Affairs Royal United Services Institute for Defense Studies.” 
Whitehall Paper Series, 1994, p. 3.
236 “Questions of strategic and Operational Art in Soviet 
Military Labor (1917–1949)” [Вопросы стратегии и 
оперативного искусства в советских военных трудах 
(1917–1949). М.: Воениздат]. Moscow Military Publishers, 
1965, p. 636.
237 Aleksandrov, A. Ye. “Prospects for the Introduction of Net-
work-Centric Concepts.” Moscow Military Thought, vol. 23, 
no. 2, 2014, pp. 49–58.
238 Kalinkin, D.A., et al. “Strategic Deterrence against the U.S. 
Global ABM System and Prompt Global Strike Capabilities.” 
Moscow Military Thought, Vol. 24, no. 1, 2015, pp. 1–7.
239 Oya, Yelena. “Interview: Star Wars. How Russian Air 
Defenses Will Respond to the Latest Threats from the Skies. 
The Deputy Commander in Chief of the Russian Federation's 
Aerospace Forces Has Told Life.ru About New Armament in 
Service with the Russian Army.” Russkaya Sluzhba Novostey 
Online (RSN), 21 Aug 2016, http://www.rusnovosti.ru/.  
Accessed 28 Aug 2016.
240 Falichev, Oleg. “We Cannot Allow Ourselves to Purchase 
Bad Armaments." Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 2 Mar 
2011, http://vpk-news.ru/. Accessed 2 Mar 2011.
241 Solovyov, I.Ye and Tsurilov, Yu.N. “Executive Planning Princi-
ples for the Development of the CIS Joint Air Defense System.” 
Moscow Military Thought, vol. 23, no. 3, 2014, pp. 132–140.
242 Akhmerov, D.Ye, et al. “Antiaircraft Defense Task Forces 
in Strategic Areas.” Moscow Military Thought, vol. 24, no. 4, 
2015, pp. 62-69.
243 Unattributed. “Advanced control systems to strengthen 
Russian air defense systems.” Interfax, 9 Oct 2015, http://
www.interfax.com/. Accessed 9 Oct 2015.
244 Zakharov, V.A., “Antiaircraft Forces in an Active Global 
Defense System.” Moscow Military Thought, no. 4, 2014.
245 Ilyin, Yu.D., et al. “Development Outlook for High-Precision 
Ammunition.” Moscow Military Thought, Vol. 23, no. 2, 2014, 
pp. 98–111.
246 Litvinenko, V.I. “Generalized Assessment of the Effective-
ness of Conventional Arms and Weapons Based on New 
Physical Principles.” Moscow Military Thought, vol. 24, no. 4, 
2015, pp. 69–77.
247 Kiselyov, V.A. and Vorobyov, I.N. “Trends in the Tactics of 
Network-Centric Operations.” Moscow Military Thought, 
vol. 23, no. 2, 2014, pp. 33–41.
248 Korabelnikov, A.P . “Promising Trends in the Development 
of Aerospace Defense Forms and Methods in the Russian 
Federation.” Moscow Military Thought, vol. 24, no. 4, 2015, 
pp. 145–155.
249 Litvinenko, V.I. and Rusanov, I.P . “Basic Trends in Firepower 
Employment in Modern-Day Operations (Combat Actions).” 
Moscow Military Thought, vol. 23, no. 4, 2014, pp. 40–48.
250 Simpkin, Richard. Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal 
Tukhachevsky. Brassey's Defence, 1987.
251 Ogarkov, N.V. “A Reliable Bastion of Socialism and Peace.” 
Krasnaya Zvezda, 23 Feb 1983, p. 2.
252 Fitzgerald, Mary. “Marshal Ogarkov on the Modern Theater 
Operation.” Center for Naval Analysis, CRM 86-238, Nov 1986.
253 Fitzgerald, Mary. “The Soviet Military and the New Air War 
in the Persian Gulf.” Airpower Journal, 1991.
254 Falichev, Oleg. “We Cannot Allow Ourselves to Purchase 
Bad Armaments." Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 2 Mar 
2011, http://vpk-news.ru/. Accessed 2 Mar 2011.
255 Khayrullin, Shamil. “Salvos Thunder in the Caspian...” 
Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 17 Jan 2013, http://www.redstar.ru. 
Accessed 18 Jan 2013.
256 Mukhin, Vladimir. “Wars and Armies: Putin Saw the Maneu-
vers through Shoygu's Eyes: They Verified the Effectiveness of 
the Nuclear and Precision-Guided Weapons Platforms at the 
Vostok-2014 Exercises.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 Sep 2014, 
http://www.ng.ru/. Accessed 25 Sep 2014.

98
 
257 Unattributed. “Kalibr Missile Launches in Kavkaz-2016 
Exercise.” Moscow Zvezda TV, 9 Sep 2016, http://www.
tvzvezda.ru/tv. Accessed 9 Sep 2016.
258 Ganin A.V. and Korolyov I.I. and Pavlov, V.N. “Electronic 
Information Blockades by Combined-Arms EW Forces.” 
Moscow Military Thought, vol. 22, no. 3, 2013, pp. 17–25.
259 Koybletskiy, Oleg. “From Above We Can See Everything!” 
Moscow Oriyentir Online, 14 Sep 2016, http://orientir.milportal.ru/. 
Accessed 5 Oct 2016.
260 UCS Satellite Database. Union of Concerned Scientists. 
http://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/space-weapons/
satellite-database#.V_Uj1TZf0-4, 5 Oct 2016.
261 Morozov, Igor Vitalyevich. “Space and the Nature of 
Contemporary Military Operations: Gaining and Maintaining 
Supremacy in the Information and Space Spheres Has a De -
cisive Impact on the Course and Outcome of a Contempo -
rary High-Tech Armed Confrontation.” Vozdushno-Kosmich -
eskaya Oborona, 14 Jul 2009, http://www.vko.ru/. Accessed 
25 Aug 2009.
262 President of the Russian Federation. “2010 Military Doc-
trine of the Russian Federation." 5 Feb 2010, http://www.
kremlin.ru. Accessed 5 Feb 2010.
263 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of 
the Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation 
President V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Fed -
eration president, 31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. 
Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
264 Raskin, Aleksandr, "Are Net 'Battles' Coming? We Contin-
ue the Discussion on the Nature and Look of Possible Wars of 
the Future." Armeyskiy Sbornik, monthly journal of the General 
Staff of the Russian Federation Armed Forces, 30 Sep 2005. 
Accessed 15 Dec 2005.
265 Rog, Valentin. “Will We Respond to The Challenges of the 
Time?” Armeyskiy Sbornik, 1 Apr 2005, ed. 4, pp. 10–13.
266 Khudoleyev, Victor. “Troops for the Battle in the Ether.” 
Krasnaya Zvezda, 15 Apr 2014, http://redstar.ru/index.php/
newspaper/item/15511-vojska-dlya-srazheni. Accessed 23 
Apr 2014.
267 Kupriyanov, G.P . “Principal Trends in The Evolution of Space 
Warfare.” Moscow Military Thought, vol. 14, no. 1, 2005.
268 Chekinov, S.G. and Bogdanov S.A. “Asymmetrical Actions to 
Maintain Russia’s Military Security.” Military Thought, 20 Jun 2013. 
Accessed 21 Jun 2013.
 
 
269 Bogdanov S.A. and Chekinov, S.G. “Strategic Deterrence 
and Russia's National Security Today.” Moscow Military 
Thought, no. 3, 2012, pp. 11–20.
270 Oleinikov, I.I., et al. “A Space Monitoring System as Part of 
Strategic Deterrence.” Moscow Military Thought, vol. 24, no. 3, 
2015, pp. 16–23.
271 Unattributed. “New branch of Armed Forces, Aerospace 
Forces, created in Russia – Shoygu.” Interfax, 3 Aug 2015. 
http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 3 Aug 2015.
272 Golts, Alexander. “Russia's Aerospace Forces Will Never 
Take Off.” The Moscow Times Online, 10 Aug 2015,  
http://www.themoscowtimes.com/. Accessed 13 Aug 2015.
273 Bodner, Matthew. “Russian Military Merges Air Force and 
Space Command.” The Moscow Times Online, 3 Aug 2015, 
http://www.themoscowtimes.com/. Accessed 3 Aug 2015.
274 Unattributed. “Russia's Space Troops: Armaments and 
Facilities.” Voyennoye Obozreniye, 25 Mar 2011, http://topwar.ru/. 
Accessed 29 Mar 2011.
275 Durnovo, Aleksey. "Aerospace Defense Troops Space Com-
mand's Primary Mission Is to Ensure Russia's Security in Space." 
Ekho Moskvy Online, 9 Dec 2014, http://www.echo.msk.ru. 
Accessed 9 Dec 2014.
276 Unattributed. “Yury Vlasov Appointed Acting United Rocket 
and Space Corporation General Director.” Interfax, 2 Feb 2015, 
http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 2 Feb 2015.
277 Unattributed. “Yury Vlasov Appointed Acting United Rocket 
and Space Corporation General Director.” Interfax, 28 Dec 2015, 
http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 29 Dec 2015.
278 Unattributed. “The Army: We Are Awaiting Assistance 
from Military Science and the Defense Industrial Complex: 
We Will Not Manage to Create State-Of-The-Art Armed 
Forces Without this.” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 8 Feb 
2012, http://vpk-news.ru. Accessed 19 Feb 2012.
279 Chekinov, S.G. and Bogdanov S.A. “Asymmetrical Actions to 
Maintain Russia’s Military Security.” Military Thought, 20 Jun 2013. 
Accessed 21 Jun 2013.
280 “Plan of Russian Space Launches (part 2).” NASA Space-
flight Forum, 5 Oct 2016, http://forum.nasaspaceflight.com/
index.php?topic=26990.880.
281 Chekinov, S. and Bogdanov, S. “The Nature and Content 
of a New Generation War.” Voennaya Mysl, no. 4, 2013.
282 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation.” Official website of the Russian Federation pres-
ident, 5 Feb 2010, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 9 Feb 2014.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
99
283 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
284 Prudnikov, D. P . “State Information Policy in the Defense 
Area: An Initial Definition.” Military Thought 2008
285 Darczewska, Jolanta. “The Anatomy of Russian Information 
Warfare. The Crimea Operation, a Case Study.” OSW Point of 
View, no. 42, May 2014.
286 Solopov, Maksim. “Kavkaz with A Syrian Bias: The General 
Staff Has Summed Up the Results of the Kavkaz-2016 
Exercises.” Gazeta.ru, 13 Sep 2016, http://www.gazeta.ru/. 
Accessed 20 Sep 2016.
287 Russian Federation Security Council. "Information Security 
Doctrine of the Russian Federation (Draft)." Security Council of 
the Russian Federation, 23 Jun 2016, http://www.scrf.gov.ru. 
Accessed 20 Jun 2016.
288 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine 
of the Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation 
President V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation 
president, 31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 
Dec 2014.
289 Rozhkov, Roman. “Many Troubles, One Runet. Prospects 
for Russia’s ‘Digital Sovereignty.’” Kommersant Online, 6 Jan 
2015, http://kommersant.ru. Accessed 25 Dec 2016.
290 Unattributed. “Putin signs law on industrial policy.” Moscow 
Interfax, 31 Dec 2014, http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 30 
Nov 2016.
291 Haines, John R. “Russia’s Use of Disinformation in the Ukraine 
Conflict.” Foreign Policy Research Institute, 17 Feb 2015.
292 Darczewska. “The Anatomy of Russian Information War-
fare. The Crimea Operation, a Case Study.”
293 Denning, Dorothy. “The Rise of Hacktivism.” Georgetown 
Journal of International Affairs, 8 Sep 2015, http://journal.george-
town.edu/the-rise-of-hacktivism/. Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
294 Leyden, John. “IT’S WAR: Hacktivists Throw in Their Lot 
with Spies and the Military.” The Channel Register, 20 Apr 2015, 
http://www.channelregister.co.uk/2015/04/20/Hactivists_and_
spies_feature_isis_anonymous. Accessed 30 Aug 2016.
295 Unattributed. “Russia’s Use of Disinformation in the 
Ukraine Conflict. Russian strategy analysis.” Eurasia Review, 
18 Feb 2015, http://www.eurasiareview.com/18022015-rus -
sias-use-of-disinformation-in-the-ukraine-conflict-analysis/. 
Accessed 19 Mar 2015.
296 Darczewska. “The Anatomy of Russian Information War-
fare. The Crimea Operation, a Case Study.”
297 Pomerantsev, Peter and Weiss, Michael. “The Menace of 
Unreality: How the Kremlin Weaponizes Information, Culture, 
and Money.” The Interpreter, Institute of Modern Russia, 22 
Nov 2014, p. 5, http://www.interpretermag. com/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2014/ll/The_Menace_of_ Unreality_Final.pdf. 
Accessed 2 Aug 2015.
298 Haines, “Russia’s Use of Disinformation in the 
Ukraine Conflict.”
299 Unattributed. “CyberBerkut – The New Russian Proxy?” 
SecuInsight, 12 Jun 2014, http://www.secuinsight.
fr/2014/06/12/is-cyberberkut-the-new-russian-proxy/. Ac-
cessed 18 Mar 2015.
300 Unattributed. “Pro-Russian Hackers Claim 1,100 Ukrainian 
Soldiers Killed in Past Two Weeks." RIA Novosti, 28 Jan 2015, 
http://ria.ru/. Accessed 28 Jan 2015.
301 Unattributed. “Ukrainian Presidential Election: Security Ser-
vice Thwarts Cyber Plot to Rig Results.” Kyiv Post Online, 25 
May 2014, http://www.kyivpost.com/. Accessed 25 May 2014.
302 Unattributed. “Ukrainian State Agency Refutes Reports 
of Hacker Attack on Central Elections Commission Web-
site.” UNN Online, 25 Oct 2014, http://www.unn.com.ua/. 
Accessed 25 Oct 2014.
303 Unattributed. “Alert: Ukrainian State Agency Confirms 
DDoS Attack on Central Elections Commission Website.” 
UNN Online, 25 Oct 2014, http://www.unn.com.ua/. Ac-
cessed 25 Oct 2014.
304 Chen, Adrian. “The Agency.” New York Times, 2 Jun 2015, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/07/magazine/the-agency.
html?_r=0. Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
305 Walker, Shaun. “Salutin’ Putin: Inside a Russian Troll 
House.” Guardian, 2 Apr 2015, http://www.guardian.co.uk. 
Accessed 2 Apr 2015.
306 Garfield, Leanna. “5 Countries that use bots to spread 
political propaganda.” Tech Insider, 16 Dec 2015, http://www.
techinsider.io/political-bots-by-governments-around-the-
world-2015. Accessed 28 Sep 2016.
307 Chen, Adrian. “The Agency.” New York Times, 2 Jun 2015, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/07/magazine/the-agency.
html?_r=0. Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
308 Yegorov, Ivan. "Network Requires Protection. New Information 
Security Doctrine to Be Adopted This Year.” Rossiyskaya Gazeta 
Online, 18 Jul 2016, http://rg.ru/. Accessed 29 Sep 2016.

100
309 Baikova, Tatyana. "It Would Be Better for America to Ratify 
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty." Izvestiya, 10 
Sep 2016.
310 Unattributed. “Central Asia Military.” Highlights: Central 
Asia Military Issues, 17 Aug 2016, http://www.interfax.com/. 
Accessed 4 Nov 2016.
311 Unattributed. “Russia’s Duma Adopts Revised Anti-Terror 
Bill.” RIA Novosti, 24 Jun 2016, http://ria.ru/. Accessed 24 
Jun 2016.
312 Afanasyeva, Anna. “With Share of Loyalty. Why State Is 
Taking Control Not Just of Media.” Kommersant Online, 30 
Dec 2016, http://kommersant.ru/. Accessed 4 Jan 2017.
313 Unattributed. “Communications Ministry Mulls Total Control 
over Russian Sector of the Web - Reports.” RT Online, 19 Aug 
2016, http://rt.com/. Accessed 19 Aug 2016.
314 Unattributed. “Putin Bans Foreigners from Russian TV 
Audience Research.” TASS, 4 Jul 2016, http://tass.ru/. Ac-
cessed 4 Jul 2016.
315 Rogozin, D.O. Ed. “War and Peace: Terms and Definition—
Voyna I Mir V Terminakh I Opredeleniyakh.” Military-Political 
Dictionary,, ProRog, 2011.
316 Rogozin, “War and Peace: Terms and Definitions—Voyna I 
Mir V Terminakh I Opredeleniyakh.”
317 Borkovskyy, Antin. "Andriy Illarionov on Prospects for 
Cease-Fire, Putin's 'Ukrainian Plan,' Likelihood of Use of 
Nuclear Weapons." Espreso TV Online, 26 May 2015, 
http://www.espreso.tv. Accessed 26 May 2015.
318 Suvorov, Viktor, “Chapter 8: The Agent Network.” 
Spetsnaz: The Inside Story of the Soviet Special Forces. W.W. 
Norton, 1988.
319 Kuznetsov, V.I., et al. “Electronic Warfare and Information War-
fare: How They Compare.” Military Thought, vol. 1, 1 May 2013.
320 Dvornikov V.A., et al. “Tactics of Electronic Warfare Forces.” 
Military Thought, vol. 1, 2015.
321 Donskov, Col. Yu. Ye. and Nikitin, Lt. Col. O. G. “Special In-
formation Operations in Armed Conflicts.” Military Thought; 30 
Sep 2005. The authors are leading Russian military scientists.
322 Melnikov, Igor. “Weapons of Assymetrical Response.” Ros-
tov-na-Donu Voyennyy Vestnik Yuga Rossii, 11 Apr 2015.
323 Donskov “Special Information Operations in Armed Conflicts.”
324 Dvornikov, “Tactics of Electronic Warfare Forces.”
325 Durnovo, Aleksey. “Long Range Aviation -- Air Force's Main 
Strike Force.” Ekho Moskvy Online, 26 Feb 2016.
326 President of Russia. “Visit to the Armed Forces Central 
Command Centre, 6 Jun 2013.” Official Website of the Rus -
sian Federation President, 7 Jun 2013, http://eng.kremlin.ru/. 
Accessed 7 Jun 2013.
327 Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation. “The Navy 
Begins the Implementation of the Long-Range Maritime Zone 
Support Vessel Renewal Program.” Russian Federation Min-
istry of Defense Information and Press Service Directorate, 21 
Jan 2013, http://www.mil.ru. Accessed 21 Jan 2013.
328 Unattributed. “Russia, Venezuela to Have Joint Naval Drill in 
Atlantic Ocean.” Agentstvo Voyennykh Novostey, 8 Sep 2008, 
www.militarynews.ru. Accessed 8 Sep 2008.
329 Unattributed. "The Large ASW Ship Severomorsk Is 
Escorting Another Convoy of Three Ships." Severnyy Flot, 
22 Mar 2013, http://pressa-sf.livejournal.com/. Accessed 
22 Mar 2013.
330 Unattributed. "The Large ASW Ship Severomorsk Is 
Escorting Another Convoy of Three Ships." Severnyy Flot, 
22 Mar 2013, http://pressa-sf.livejournal.com/. Accessed 
22 Mar 2013.
331 Unattributed. "The Large ASW Ship Severomorsk Is Escort-
ing Another Convoy of Three Ships." Severnyy Flot, 22 Mar 
2013, http://pressa-sf.livejournal.com/. Accessed 22 Mar 2013.
332 Unattributed. “Syria Conflict: US Presses Russia on Military 
Buildup.” BBC, 16 Sep 2015.
333 Unattributed. “Russia starts ground operations in Syria.” 23 
Nov 2015, Al Bawaba Business.
334 Quinlivan, James T. “War on the Rocks—Artillery Returns to 
the Battlefield in the War Against ISIL.” 11 Jan 2016.
335 Unattributed. “RPT – Fight for Syria’s Aleppo Exposes 
Limits of Russian Air Power.” Reuters, 30 Aug 2016.
336 Unattributed. “Syria: Russia’s continuing war.” BBC, 27 
Apr 2016.
337 McInnis, J. Matthew. “What does Iran Really Want in Ye-
men?” AEI Ideas, 13 Apr 2015.
338 Unattributed. “Fight for Syria’s Aleppo Exposes Limits of 
Russian Air Power.” Channel Newsasia, 29 Aug 2016.
339 Unattributed. “Russian Cruise Missiles Target Syria.” Zaman 
al-Wasl, 19 Aug 2016. Accessed 19 Aug 2016.
340 Unattributed. “Syria: Russia’s continuing war.” BBC, 27 
Apr 2016.
341 Kozhanov, Nikolay. “What’s at stake for Russia in Syria?” 
BBC, Chatham House, 21 Sep 2015.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
101
342 Lavrov, Anton and Ramm, Aleksey. “Retribution without 
Refueling: Operation in Syria Reveals Weak Points in Aero -
space.” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 6 Apr 2016, http://
vpk-news.ru/. Accessed 13 Apr 2016.
343 1991 Military Forces in Transition. U.S. Department of 
Defense, Sep 1991, p. 41.
344 1991 Military Forces in Transition. U.S. Department of 
Defense, Sep 1991, p. 40.
345 1991 Military Forces in Transition. U.S. Department of 
Defense, Sep 1991, p. 40.
346 1991 Military Forces in Transition. U.S. Department of 
Defense, Sep 1991, p. 40.
347 Gavrilov, Yuriy. “The Order Will Come from the Center: 
National Defense Management Center, a Top-Secret Complex, 
Will Go On Alert Duty on 1 Dec.” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 
27 Oct 2014, http://rg.ru/. Accessed 1 Nov 2014.
348 Military Encyclopedic Dictionary of the Strategic Rocket 
Forces. Ministry of Defense, 1999, p. 521.
349 V.D. Zabolotin and N.E. Dimitriev. “Operational-Tactical Ma-
skirovka.” Slovar’ voyennykh terminov” [Dictionary of Military 
Terms], 2000, p. 95. The Dictionary was the definitive General 
Staff Academy reference work on Russian military terminology 
at the time of publication.
350 Ministry of Defense. “Maskirovka.” Military Encyclopedia, 
vol. 5, p. 23.
351 V.D. Zabolotin and N.E. Dimitriev, “Surprise.” Slovar’ 
voyennykh terminov [Dictionary of Military Terms], 2000, p. 24.
352 Pynnoniemi, Katri and Racz, Andraz, Eds. Fog of Falsehood: 
Russian Strategy of Deception and the Conflict in Ukraine. The 
Finnish Institute of International Affairs, Report 45, 2016.
353 Robert, James Q. “Maskirovka 2.0 Hybrid Threat, Hybrid 
Response.” Joint Special Operations University – Center for 
Special Operations Study and Research, Dec 2015.
354 Pomerantsev and Weiss, “The Menace of Unreality.”
355 Chekinov, S., Bogdanov, S., “The Nature and Content 
of a New Generation War,” Voennaya Mysl, no. 4, 2013.
356 Shevchenko, Vitaly. “Little green men or Russian invad-
ers?” BBC News, 9 Mar 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/
world-europe-26532154. Accessed on 9 Mar 2015.
357 President of the Russian Federation. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation, approved by Russian Federation President 
V. Putin.” Official website of the Russian Federation president, 
31 Dec 2014, http://www.kremlin.ru. Accessed 31 Dec 2014.
358 Darczewska, “The Anatomy of Russian Information War-
fare. The Crimea Operation, a Case Study.”
359 Website of the Russian President. “Military Doctrine of the 
Russian Federation.” 31 Dec 2014.
360 Felgengauer, Pavel. “Rybkin’s Preventive Strike.” Moscow 
Segodnya, 14 Feb 1997.
361 “Strategic Missile Troops (RVSN).” Russian Military Anal -
ysis, http://warfare.be/db/catid/239/linkid/2244/. Accessed 
5 Sep 2016.
362 “Russia Country Profiles.” http://www.nti.org/country-pro-
files/russia/. Accessed 21 Sep 2016.
363 Podvig, Pavel, et al. “Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces.” Cen-
ter for Arms Control, Energy and Environmental Studies at the 
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, English language 
edition supported by the Security Studies Program at the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, MIT Press, 2001. pp. 4–5.
364 “Russian Strategic Missile Forces.” www.ausairpower.net/
APA-RVSN-Analysis.html. Accessed 6 Sep 2016.
365 “Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces.” http://russianforces.
org/current/. Accessed 6 Sep 2016.
366 “No plans to reduce the number of missile divisions.” http://
russianforces.org/blog/02/no_plans_to_reduce_the_number.
shtml. Accessed 6 Sep 2016.
367 Unattributed. “No reductions planned in Russian Strategic 
Rocket Forces.” Interfax in English, 18 Feb 2016, http://www.
interfax.com/. Accessed 18 Feb 2016.
368 Unattributed. “Key Russian Strategic Missile Deployments.” 
Jane's CBRN Assessments, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 25 Apr 2016.
369 Multiple location name searches. www.google.com/maps. 
Accessed 28 Nov 2016. “Google Maps” is a free online map-
ping service.
370 “Comprehensive Control Inspections of Results of Winter 
Training Period Have Commenced in Strategic Missile Troops.” 
Moscow Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 
www.mil.ru. Accessed 9 Apr 2015.
371 “Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces.” http://russianforces.
org/current/. Accessed 6 Sep 2016.
372 “Strategic Rocket Forces.” http://russianforces.org/mis-
siles/. Accessed 6 Sep 2016.
373 Andreyev, Oleg. “RVSN Given Six Years to Rearm; Mos-
cow Adjusts Plans to Enhance Combat Readiness of the 
Armed Forces.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 18 May 2016, http://
www.ng.ru/. Accessed 19 May 2016.

102
374 Unattributed. “Rubezh Missile Will Enter Duty in a Year.” 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 12 May 2016, http://rg.ru/. Ac-
cessed 12 May 2016.
375 Unattributed. “‘Missile defense killer’: Russia finalizes test-
ing on prototype ICBM.” RT, 8 Jun 2013, www.rt.com/news/
missile-defense-killer-prototype-411/. Accessed 28 Mar 2017.
376 Litovkin, Viktor. “RS-26 Antimissile Defense 'Killer' Flies 
Where It Must.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 9 Oct 2013, 
http://www.ng.ru/. Accessed 16 Oct 2013.
377 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
378 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
379 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Strategic Weapon System, Russian 
Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 6 Sept 2016.
380 “Russian Nuclear Forces, 2016.” http://dx.doi.org/10.1080
/00963402.2016.1170359. Accessed 6 Sep 2016.
381 Bozhyeva, Olga. "Sources: Russia Successfully Tested 
New Missile Superweapon: Developers Called Launch of 
Sarmat ICBM Warhead a 'Fantastic Success.'" MK Online, 
21 Apr 2016. http://mk.ru/.
382 NEW START TREATY Text. 8 Apr 2010.
383 Andreyev, Oleg. “RVSN Given Six Years to Rearm; 
Moscow Adjusts Plans to Enhance Combat Readiness of 
the Armed Forces.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 18 May 2016, 
http://www.ng.ru/. Accessed 19 May 2016.
384 “Russian Nuclear Forces, 2016.” http://dx.doi.org/10.1080
/00963402.2016.1170359. Accessed 6 Sep 2016.
385 Unattributed. “Key Russian Strategic Missile Deployments.” 
Jane's CBRN Assessments, 25 Apr 2016, www.janes.com. 
Accessed 25 Apr 2016.
386 “Russian Army Order of Battle.” Globalsecurity.org, 27 Aug 
2016. Accessed 29 Aug 2016.
387 “Chapter Five: Russia and Eurasia, The Military Balance,” 2017, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/04597222.2017.1271211, p. 211.
388 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
389 Luca, Ana Maria. “Post-Soviet Russian Military Interven-
tions.” Beirut NOW, 21 Oct 2015, www.nowlebanon.com. 
Accessed 22 Oct 2015.
390 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
391 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
392 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
393 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
394 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
395 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
396 Russian Ministry of Defense. “Ground Troops.” Website 
of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 2 Sept 2016.
397 “Ground Troops.” Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, 
structure.mil.ru. Accessed 2 Sep 2016.
398 “Ground Troops.” Russian Ministry of Defense, 2 Sep 2016, 
structure.mil.ru. Accessed 2 Sep 2016.
399 Barabanov, Mikhail, Ed. Novaia armiia Rossii [The New 
Military of Russia]. Moscow, Center for the analysis of strategy 
and technology, 2010.
400 First Tank Army and 2nd Taman Division resubordinated to 
20th Army. “Russia Is Closing the ‘Black Hole’ on the Border 
with Ukraine.” Vzglyad Online, 5 Jun 2015, http://vzglyad.ru/.
401 Bridge, Robert. "Border Alert: Nuke risk rising." Russia Today, 
17 Nov 2011, www.russiatoday.com. Accessed 19 Nov 2011.
402 Grau, Lester W. and Gress, Michael (translated and edited). 
The Soviet-Afghan War: How a Superpower Fought and Lost. 
University of Kansas Press, 2002.
403 Vorob'ev I. and Kiselev V. "Taktika otriadno-gruppovogo 
boia" [The tactics of detachment-group combat]. Armeiskiy 
sbornik, [Army Digest], no. 9, Sep 2013, pp. 11–13. 

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
103
404 Popov, Vladimir. "Sukhoputnye voiska Rossii segodnia i 
zavtra" [The ground forces of Russia today and tomorrow]. 
Rossiiskoe voennoe obozrenie [Russian military review], 
no. 3, Mar 2016, pp. 10–13.
405 Kiselev, V. “Gibridnaia voina kak novyi tip voiny budushche-
go” [Hybrid warfare as a new type of future war]. Armeyskiy 
Sbornik [Army Digest], no. 12, Dec 2015); and Kiselev, V.A. and 
Vorob’ev, I.N. “Gibridnye operatsii kak noviy vid protivoborstva” 
[Hybrid warfare as a new type of confrontation]. Voennaia Mysl’ 
[Military Thought], no. 5, Apr 2015.
406 Giles, Keir. “Russia’s New Tools for Confronting the West.” 
Research Paper, Chatham House, Mar 2016, https://www.
chathamhouse.org/sites/files/ chathamhouse/publications/
research/2016-03-21-russias-new-tools-giles.pdf. Accessed 
28 Mar 2016.
407 Barabanov, Mikhail (ed). Russia’s New Army. Centre for 
Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, 2011, pp. 23–24.
408 Anisimov, Vladimir. “Five Primary Missions: The Arrival of 
Over 3,000 Models of Arms and Military Equipment in the 
Ground Troops Is Planned in the Near Future.” Voyenno-
Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 1 Jul 2009, www.vpk-news.ru. 
Accessed 21 Jul 2009.
409 Anatoliy-K (forum moderator pseudonym). “Al'ternativnaya 
OShS Otdel'noy tankoviy batal'yon tankovoy brigady" [Alter-
native TOEs for Separate tank battalions of tank brigades]. 
Voyniy Rubezh, 2 Jun 2009. Accessed 2 Jun 2009.
410 Anatoliy-K (forum moderator pseudonym). “Noviye Mo-
totrelkoviye Brigady - 3 Chast” [New Motorized Rifle Brigades, 
Part 3]. Voyniy Rubezh, 26 July 2009. 26 July 2009.
411 Anatoliy-K (forum moderator pseudonym). “Noviye Mo-
totrelkoviye Brigady - 3 Chast” [New Motorized Rifle Brigades, 
Part 3]. Voyniy Rubezh, 26 July 2009. 26 July 2009.
412 Anatoliy-K (forum moderator pseudonym). “Noviye Mo-
totrelkoviye Brigady - 3 Chast” [New Motorized Rifle Brigades, 
Part 3]. Voyniy Rubezh, 26 July 2009. 26 July 2009.
413 Kirichenko, Ivan. “Unready Brigades: The Military Reform 
ala Serdyukov and Makarov Has Returned to Where It Be-
gan.” Svobodnaya Pressa, 20 Sep 2012, http://svpressa.ru/
society/article/58846/. Accessed 20 Sep 2012.
414 Mikhaylov, Viktor. “The Russian Military Brigade Contract.” 
Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 22 May 2009,  
http://nvo.ng.ru/. Accessed 28 May 2009.
415 Gavrilov, Yuriy. “Tests of the Latest ‘Rakushka’ BTR Will Be 
Conducted near Tula.” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 7 Jan 2015, 
www.rg.ru. Accessed 7 Jan 2015.
416 Unattributed. “The VDV Will in the Coming Years Be -
come Part of the Rapid-Response Force.” Argumenty i Fak -
ty, 4 Jun 2015, www.aif.ru/society/army/vdv_v_blizhayshie_
gody_voydut_v_sostav_voysk_bystrogo_reagirovaniya. 
Accessed 7 Jun 2015.
417 “The Soviet Army: Special Warfare and Rear Area 
Support.” U.S. Army, FM100-2-2, pp. 2-2–2-3.
418 “The Soviet Army: Special Warfare and Rear Area 
Support.” U.S. Army, FM100-2-2, pp. 2-2–2-3.
419 “VDV ORBAT.” globalsecurity.org, 2015.
420 Ptichin, Sergey. "Authority": "Air Assault Force Will Change 
to Tanks." Moscow Rossiskaya Gazeta online in Russian, 
24 May 2016.
421 Unattributed. "All Airborne Assault Formations of the Air-
borne Troops will Receive Tank Companies." Moscow Lenta.
ru in Russian, 1 Aug 2016.
422 “The Soviet Army: Special Warfare and Rear Area Support; 
Amphibious Operations.” U.S. Army, FM100-2-2, p. 4 1.
423 2017 Jane's World Navies, https://janes-ihs-com.pen-
tagonlibrary.idm.oclc.org/WorldNavies/Display/1322754.
424 Official Press Release. “Motorized Riflemen and Naval 
Infantrymen of the Baltic Fleet Are Performing Life-Fire Drills as 
Part of Squads.” Moscow Ministry of Defense of the Russian 
Federation, 11 Jul 2016, function.mil.ru/news page/country/
more?id12089569@egNews. Accessed 12 Jul 2016.
425 Khudoleyev, Victor. “Country Celebrated Missile Troops and 
Artillery Day on 19 Nov": "Heading for a Reconnaissance-Fire 
Delivery System.” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 21 Nov 2014, 
http://www.redstar.ru. Accessed 12 Dec 2014.
426 Unattributed. “PF coastal troops redeployed as part of sur-
prise checks into combat readiness.” Interfax, 15 Sep 2014, 
http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 15 Sep 2014.
427 2017 Jane's World Navies, https://janes-ihs-com.pen-
tagonlibrary.idm.oclc.org/WorldNavies/Display/1322754.
428 Avdeyev, Yuriy. “Navy Coastal Troops' Acquisition of New 
Missile Systems Continues.” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 2 Nov 
2015, http://www.redstar.ru. Accessed 9 Nov 2015.
429 Unattributed. “Pacific Fleet Bal Coastal Missile System 
Battalion Starts Field Training in Primorye.” Ministry of Defense 
of the Russian Federation, 17 Feb 2016, http://www.mil.ru. 
Accessed 3 Mar 2016.
430 Bodner, Matthew. “Russian Military Merges Air Force and 
Space Command.” The Moscow Times, 3 Aug 2015.
 

104
431 Unattributed. “Russian Air Force/Aerospace Reorganiza-
tion.” Fortuna’s Corner, 1 Jan 2015, http://fortunascorner.
com/2015/01/02/russian-air-force-reorganization/.
432 “Aerospace Forces.” Ministry of Defence of the Russian 
Federation, http://eng.mil.ru/en/structure/forces/type/vks.htm. 
Accessed 26 Oct 2016.
433 Air Forces Intelligence Database. 28 Sep 2016, 
www.airforcesintel.com.
434 Tuchkov, Vladimir. “The Strategic Aircraft, of Which the 
U.S. Is Frightened, Increases Its Might: With What Can 
America Counter the Tu-160M2 Missile-Equipped Aircraft.” 
Svobodnaya Pressa, 10 Aug 2016, http://www.svpressa.ru/. 
Accessed 15 Aug 2016.
435 Tuchkov, Vladimir. “The Strategic Aircraft, of Which the 
U.S. Is Frightened, Increases Its Might: With What Can 
America Counter the Tu-160M2 Missile-Equipped Aircraft.” 
Svobodnaya Pressa, 10 Aug 2016, http://www.svpressa.ru/. 
Accessed 15 Aug 2016.
436 “Chapter Five: Russia and Eurasia, The Military Balance.” 
2015, 115:1, 159-206.
437 Gordon, Yefim. Russian Air Power. Military Transport 
Aviation, 2009.
438 Unattributed. “New branch of Armed Forces, Aerospace 
Forces, created in Russia – Shoygu.” Interfax, 3 Aug 2015, 
http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 3 Aug 2015.
439 Bodner, Matthew. “Russian Military Merges Air Force and 
Space Command.” The Moscow Times Online. 3 Aug 2015. 
http://www.themoscowtimes.com/. Accessed 3 Aug 2015.
440 Unattributed. “Russia's Space Troops: Armaments and 
Facilities.” Voyennoye Obozreniye, 25 Mar 2011, http://
topwar.ru/. Accessed 29 Mar 2011.
441 Durnovo, Aleksey. "Aerospace Defense Troops Space 
Command's Primary Mission Is to Ensure Russia's Security in 
Space." Ekho Moskvy Online, 9 Dec 2014, http://www.echo.
msk.ru. Accessed 9 Dec 2014.
442 “World Air Forces 2016.” FlightGlobal Insight, 2016.
443 “The Military Balance.” International Institute for Strategic 
Studies, 2014.
444 Newdick, Thomas. “Russia’s New Air Force is a Mystery.” 
War is Boring, 21 Feb 2014.
445 Butowski, Piotr. “Russian Airpower: Almanac 2015.” Air 
Force Magazine, 2015.
446 “Russian Air Force.” Combat Aircraft.
447 “World Air Forces 2016.” FlightGlobal Insight, 2016.
448 “The Military Balance.” International Institute for Strategic 
Studies, 2014.
449 “Russia’s New Air Force is a Mystery” Thomas Newdick, 
War is Boring, 21 Feb 2014.
 
450 Butowski, Piotr. “Russian Airpower: Almanac 2015.” Air 
Force Magazine, 2015.
451 “Russian Air Force.” Combat Aircraft.
452 Dawisha, Karen and Parrott, Bruce. Russia and the New 
States of Eurasia: The Politics of Upheaval. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1994, p. 170.
453 Unattributed. “Aerospace Forces/Russian Federation Aero-
space Forces.” Milkavkaz.net, 23 Dec 2015, www.milkavkaz.
net. Accessed 12 Oct 2016.
454 Unattributed. “Chief of Russian air defence enterprise out-
lines plans for new Systems.” Moscow Vesti TV, 11 Sep 2007, 
Vesti.ru. Accessed 15 Sep 2015.
455 Unattributed. “Aerospace Forces/Russian Federation Aero-
space Forces.” Milkavkaz.net, 23 Dec 2015, www.milkavkaz.
net. Accessed 12 Oct 2016.
456 Unattributed. “Russia Transports Ultra-Modern OSA Air 
Defense Missile Systems to the Crimea: Russian Military 
Equipment is not Remaining in Place and it is Travelling 
Further to the Crimean Peninsula.” Kyiv UNIAN, 18 Mar 2014, 
http://www.unian.net/. Accessed 18 Mar 2014.
457 Unattributed. “Russian Defense Ministry explains S-300 
deployment in Syria citing need for protection of Russian 
military bases.” Interfax, 10 Oct 2016, Interfax.com. 
Accessed 10 Oct 2016.
458 Unattributed. “Russian Defense Ministry explains S-300 
deployment in Syria citing need for protection of Russian 
military bases.” Interfax, 10 Oct 2016, Interfax.com. Accessed 
10 Oct 2016.
459 “The Military Balance.” International Institute for Strategic 
Studies, 2014.
460 Butowski, Piotr. “Unmanned Russia.” Air International, Sep 
2013, pp. 60–63.
461 Butowski, Piotr. “Unmanned Russia.” Air International, Sep 
2013, pp. 60–63.
462 Oxenstrierna, Susane and Westerlund, Fredrik. “Arms pro-
curement and the Russian Defense Industry: Challenges Up to 
2020.” Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 2013.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
105
463 Bender, Jeremy. “Russia is Modernizing its increasingly ag-
gressive air force.” Business Insider, 18 Mar 2015, www.busi-
nessinsider.com/russia-is-modernizing-its-air-force-2015-3.
464 Bender, Jeremy. “Russia is Modernizing its increasing -
ly aggressive air force.” Business Insider, 18 Mar 2015, 
www.businessinsider.com/russia-is-modernizing-its-air-
force-2015-3.
465 Vaev, Pavel K. “Russian Air Power Tool Brittle for 
Brinkmanship.” Ponars Eurasia, Policy Memo 398, Nov 2014.
466 Truffer, Patrick. “The Development of Russian Naval 
Capabilities After the Cold War.” CIMSEC, 24 Nov 2015, 
http://cimsec.org/development-russian-naval-capabili-
ties-cold-war/20147.
467 “Military balance 2015.” Annual periodical on World Military 
Forces. Routledge, 2015.
468 Polmar, Norman. Guide to the Soviet Navy. Naval Institute 
Press, 1985.
469 Pasyakin, Vladimir. “At the Highest Level of Coordination.” 
Sevastopol Flag Rodiny, 20 Dec 2014, www.sc.mil.ru/. Ac-
cessed 25 Jul 2016.
470 List of current ships of the Russian Navy – 2016. russian-
ships.info, 8 Jun 2016, http://russianships.info/eng/today.
471 List of current ships of the Russian Navy – 2016. russian-
ships.info, 8 Jun 2016, http://russianships.info/eng/today.
472 Flake, Lincoln Edson. “Russia’s Security Intentions in a 
melting Arctic.” Military and Strategic Affair Publication, vol. 6, 
no. 1, Mar 2014.
473 Zhunusov, Oleg. “Rosneft' Is Taking 'Zvezda' From OSK: A 
Consortium Will Help the Primorskiy Shipbuilders.” Kommer-
sant Online, 22 Aug 2013, http://kommersant.ru/. Accessed 
24 Aug 2013.
474 “Vladivostok.” Globalsecurity.org/Vladivostok. Accessed 18 
Aug 2016.
475 The split of forces can be observed on Google Earth. 
Accessed 17 Aug 2016.
476 “List of current ships of the Russian Navy.” russianships.
info, http://russianships.info/eng/today. Accessed 8 Jun 2016.
477 Zavolokin, Pavel. “The Crimea – Is Under Protection.” 
Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 6 Feb 2015, http://www.redstar.ru. 
Accessed 6 Feb 2015.
478 Unattributed. “Russia to end production of Varshavyanka 
Kilo-class submarines.” Moscow RIA Novosti, 4 Sep 2015, 
http://ria.ru/. Accessed 7 Sep 2015.
 
479 List of current ships of the Russian Navy – 2016. russian -
ships.info, 8 Jun 2016, http://russianships.info/eng/today.
480 Yurov, Dmitriy. “Service Reinforced by the Way of Life.” 
Moscow Krasnaya Zvezda, 16 May 2006, http://www.redstar.
ru. Accessed 23 May 2006.
481 Russiannavy.com. Information on tasks, roles, and 
missions. Accessed 18 Aug 2016.
482 Unattributed. "Russian Navy to use up to ten civil vessels 
for military supplies to Syria.” Interfax, 15 Oct 2015, Interfax.
com. Accessed 15 Oct 2015.
483 Unattributed. “Caspian Flotilla ships carrying Kalibr-NK mis-
siles depart for tactical drills.” Interfax, 25 Apr 2016, Interfax.
com. Accessed 25 Apr 2016.
484 Unattributed. “Caspian Flotilla force ends tactical exercis-
es.” Interfax, 8 Jul 2016, Interfax.com. Accessed 8 Jul 2016.
 485 Unattributed. “Caspian Flotilla ships carrying Kalibr-NK 
missiles depart for tactical drills.” Interfax, 25 Apr 2016, Inter-
fax.com. Accessed 25 Apr 2016.
486 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – Rus-
sia and the CIS, Navy, Russian Federation.” IHS Jane’s 360, 
10 Aug 2016, www.janes.com.
487 Wertheim, Eric. The Naval Institute Guide to Combat Fleets 
of the World, 16th Edition. Naval Institute Press, 2013, p. 573.
488 Litovkin, Dmitriy. "Deep Rising. Russia's Nuclear Sub-
marine Fleet Is Being Rapidly Upgraded and Renewed.” 
Moscow Vzglyad, 28 Jul 2014, http://www.vz.ru/soci -
ety/2014/7/28/697642.html. Accessed 3 Aug 2014.
489 Unattributed. "Nuclear Submarine Severodvinsk Strikes 
Coastal Training Target from Barents Sea." RIA Novosti, 2 May 
2016, http://ria.ru/. Accessed 2 May 2016.
490 Khodarenok, Mikhail. “Strategic Ocean Operations No 
Longer Are Being Planned: Current Russian Navy Status.” 
Moscow Gazeta, 31 Jul 2016, http://www.gazeta.ru/. 
Accessed 6 Aug 2016.
491 Blechschmidt, Peter. “War Ships Against Pirates.” Munich 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung, 21 Nov 2008, Sueddeutsche.de. 
Accessed 21 Nov 2008.
492 List of current ships of the Russian Navy – 2016. russian-
ships.info, 8 Jun 2016, http://russianships.info/eng/today.
493 Suvorov, Viktor. “Chapter 3. A History of Spetsnaz.” 
Spetsnaz: The Inside Story of Soviet Special Forces. Translat-
ed from Russian by David Floyd. Norton & Company, 1988.

106
494 Suvorov, Viktor. “Chapter 3. A History of Spetsnaz.” 
Spetsnaz: The Inside Story of Soviet Special Forces. Translat-
ed from Russian by David Floyd. Norton & Company, 1988.
495 Galeotti, Mark. “The rising influence of Russian special forc-
es.” Jane's Intelligence Review, 24 Nov 2014, https://janes-
ihs-com.pentagonlibrary.idm.oclc.org/Janes/Display/1729350.
496 Федеральный конституционный закон "О Правительстве 
Российской Федерации" [Federal Constitutional Law “Direc-
torates of the Russian Federation”]. 17 Dec 1997.
497 Schneider, Eberhard. "The Russian Federal Security Ser-
vice under President Putin.” Politics and the Ruling Group in 
Putin’s Russia, Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2008, pp. 42–62.
498 Littell, Jonathan. The Security Organs of the Russian Federa-
tion. A Brief History 1991–2004. Psan Publishing House, 2006.
499 Galeotti, Mark. “Putin’s Hydra: Inside Russia’s Intelligence 
Services.” European Council on Foreign Relations, May 2016, 
www.ecfr.eu.
500 “Tests Complete for New Staff Module for Russia Power 
Ministries.” RIA Novosti, 13 Jun 2016.
501 “In Russia the National Guard is Created.” Rossiiskoe 
Voennoe Obozrenie, Issue 4; 30 Apr 2016.
502 “National Guard Conducted RCB (NBC) Training of its Units 
in Volga NG Administrative District (MD).” Vremenniy Informat-
sionniy Tsentr, FSBNGRF, 27 Sept 2016.
503 “GRU.” Special Services, http://specialsluz.my1.ru/index/
gru/0-13.
504 Russian News Agency, http://ru-an.info/новости/
шпионские-тайны-гру/.
505 Safronov, Ivan. "Intelligence to Remain In-House. Who 
Could Replace Igor Sergun in the Post of Chief of the GRU?" 
Kommersant Online, 14 Jan 2016, http://kommersant.ru/. 
Accessed 14 Jan 2016.
506 Unattributed. “GRU on 91st Anniversary.” Moscow Vzglyad, 
5 Nov 2009, www.vzglyad.ru. Accessed 7 Nov 2009.
507 Mikhaylov, Aleksey. "Control of the Main Strike. What 
Problems Can the New GRU Chief Resolve?" Voyenno-Pro -
myshlennyy Kuryer, 10 Feb 2016, http://vpk-news.ru/. 
Accessed 12 Feb 2016.
508 Galeotti, “Putin’s Hydra: Inside Russia’s Intelligence Services.”
509 Unattributed. “GRU on 91st Anniversary.” Moscow Vzglyad, 
5 Nov 2009, www.vzglyad.ru. Accessed 7 Nov 2009.
510 Mikhaylov, "Control of the Main Strike. What Problems Can 
the New GRU Chief Resolve?"
511 Unattributed. “GRU on 91st Anniversary.” Moscow Vzglyad, 
5 Nov 2009, www.vzglyad.ru. Accessed 7 Nov 2009.
512 Mikhaylov, "Control of the Main Strike. What Problems Can 
the New GRU Chief Resolve?"
513 Unattributed. “GRU on 91st Anniversary.” Moscow Vzglyad. 
5 Nov 2009. www.vzglyad.ru. Accessed 7 Nov 2009.
514 Mikhaylov, "Control of the Main Strike. What Problems Can 
the New GRU Chief Resolve?"
515 Unattributed. “GRU on 91st Anniversary.” Moscow Vzglyad. 
5 Nov 2009. www.vzglyad.ru. Accessed 7 Nov 2009.
516 Mikhaylov, "Control of the Main Strike. What Problems Can 
the New GRU Chief Resolve?"
517 Unattributed. “Russian MP Antoshkin, Recently Back from 
Syria, says Airstrikes Exceptionally Precise.” Interfax, 15 Oct 
2015, http://www.interfax.com/.
518 Gorbenko, Aleksandr. "The Russian Military Space Program 
of Tomorrow: What will This Be?" Odnako Online, 19 Jun 
2013, http://www.odnako.org/magazine/new.
519 Unattributed. “Russian Military Intelligence Chief Dies 
Unexpectedly.” Charter 97, 5 Jan 2016, http://www.charter97.
org/en/news/.
520 Galeotti, Mark. “The Unexpected Death of Russia’s Military 
Intelligence (GRU) Chief, Igor Sergun.” Moscow’s Shadows, 
4 Jan 2016, www.inmoscowsshadows.wordpress.com. 
Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
521 Safronov, Ivan. "Intelligence to Remain In-House. Who 
Could Replace Igor Sergun in the Post of Chief of the GRU?" 
Kommersant Online, 14 Jan 2016, http://kommersant.ru/. 
Accessed 14 Jan 2016.
522 Unattributed. “Russian GRU Military Spy Chief Igor Sergun 
dies.” BBC Online, 5 Jan 2016, http://www.bbc.co.uk. 
Accessed 5 Jan 2016.
523 Unattributed. “More evidence that captured Russians were 
military intelligence officers.” Prava Lyudyny v Ukrayini, 25 Nov 
2015, http://khpg.org.ua. Accessed 25 Nov 2015.
524 Pereborshchikov, Georgiy. "‘You could say we proved 
ourselves.’ War stories from Russians returned from fighting in 
eastern Ukraine." Meduza, 22 Feb 2016, https://meduza.io/
en. Accessed 22 Feb 2016.
525 Unattributed. “Russia Ramps Up Syria Military Involvement: 
Pro-Assad.” Beirut NOW, 27 Aug 2015, www.nowlebanon.
com. Accessed 27 Aug 2015.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
107
526 “On Zaslon in Syria.” Russian Centre for Analysis of 
Strategies and Technologies (CAST). LiveJournal, 19 Oct 
2015, Livejournal.ru. Accessed 25 Oct 2015.
527 Butrin, Dmitriy. "The Prime Minister's Eyes Opened to the 
Budget—The 'Open Government' Proposes to Buy Textbooks 
Rather Than Tanks." Kommersant Online, 10 Aug 2012, 
http://kommersant.ru/.
528 Hobson, Peter. “The Cost of Russia's War in Syria.” The 
Moscow Times Online, 21 Oct 2015, http://www.themoscow-
times.com/. Accessed 21 Oct 2015.
529 Smirnov, Roman. "Russia's Defense Industry Complex 
Ready to Fire Salvo at The Crisis." Nezavisimoye Voyennoye 
Obozreniye Online, 4 Oct 2015, http://nvo.ng.ru/.
530 "Weapons of mass Acquisition." Оборона и 
безопасность, 1 Apr 2016.
531 “With a Key from the Sky—President.” Оборона и 
безопасность, 1 Apr 2016.
532 Zubarevich, Natalya. “Russian Economic Crisis Risks 
Stagnation, Degradation (Op-Ed).” Moscow Times Online in 
English, 25 Mar 2016, http://www.themoscowtimes.com. 
Accessed 31 Mar 2016.
533 Butrin, "The Prime Minister's Eyes Opened to the Budget"
534 Pismennaya, Yevgeniy, et al. "Medvedev's Concern That 
the Military Is Considered Too Expensive for the Country." 
Vedomosti Online, 22 Dec 2011, www.vedomosti.ru/newsline/
news/1448040/oshibka_medvedeva. Accessed 22 Dec 2011.
535 Unattributed. “Russia's anti-crisis commission to soon 
consider support for auto industry.” Interfax, 6 Feb 2015, 
www.interfax.com. Accessed 6 Feb 2015.
536 Ivankhnik, Aleksandr. "Resuscitation of Economic Council." 
Politkom, 22 Nov 2013, http://politcom.ru/.
537 Falichev, Oleg. "A Contingency Order.” Voyenno-Promysh -
lennyy Kuryer, 26 Jan 2015, http://vpk-news.ru/. Accessed 
26 Jan 2015.
538 Unattributed. "Russia is proud of you." Rossiya 24 
Television, 17 Mar 2016. Accessed 17 Mar 2016.
 539 Falichev, Oleg. "Soldiers to Order; Military Robots Being 
Rid of Outside Elements." Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer,  
4 Jun 2015, http://vpk-news.ru/. Accessed 4 Jun 2015.
540 Russian Federation Defense Ministry Press Service and 
Information Directorate. "Specialists from the Russian De -
fense Ministry Main Directorate of Scientific Research Activity 
Are Taking Part in the Work of a Military Industry Conference 
on the Development of Robotics for the Security Agencies." 
Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 2 Oct 2014, 
http://www.mil.ru. Accessed 2 Oct 2014.
541 President of Russia. "Meeting on armed forces develop-
ment on 9 Nov 2015 in Sochi." Official Website of the Russian 
Federation President, 10 Nov 2015, http://eng.kremlin.ru/. 
Accessed 10 Nov 2015.
542 Unattributed. “Pace of fulfilling presidential instructions 
for military-industrial complex must be maintained - Putin.” 
Interfax, 12 May 2015, http://www.interfax.com. Accessed 
12 May 2015.
543 President of Russia. “Putin Chairs Meeting on Defence 
Procurement.” Official Website of the Russian Federation 
President, 15 May 2014, http://eng.kremlin.ru/. Accessed  
15 May 2014.
544 Safronov, Ivan. “Supreme decision-making commander.” 
Kommersant Online, 5 Sep 2014, http://www.kommersant.ru/
doc/2559841. Accessed 5 Sep 2014.
545 Safronov, Ivan and Kozichev, Yevgeniy. "The Supreme 
Decider-in-Chief: Vladimir Putin will also Head the Military 
Industrial Commission." Kommersant Online, 6 Sep 2014, 
http://kommersant.ru/. Accessed 6 Sep 2014.
546 Unattributed. "Russian Scientists Present Unique Projects 
to the Ministry of Defense." ITAR-TASS, 4 Dec 2012.
547 “Шойгу С Рогозиным Задумали Эксперимент.” Nezavisi-
maia Gazeta, Issue 89, 29 Apr 2013. Accessed 29 Apr 2013.
548 “Russia will develop strike weapons to defeat US missile 
defences – Putin.” Rossiya 24 Television, 10 Nov 2015.
549 Gorenburg, Dmitry. “How is Economic Crisis Affecting 
Russian Military Modernization?” Russia Insider, 14 Apr 2016, 
http://russia-insider.com/en/how-economic-crisis-impacting-rus-
sian-military-modernization/ri13882. Accessed 26 Aug 2016.
550 Marakhonov, Vladimir. "So Who Among Us Favors Strong 
Russia? Conflict with Ukraine Has Cost Our Country Half 
Its Nuclear Potential.” Novaya Gazeta Online, 20 Jul 2015, 
www.novayagazeta.ru. Accessed 20 Jul 2015.
551 Vyatkin, Yaroslav. "Hypersonic Weapons: Even Alien Invaders 
Have Failed to Help the United States." Argumenty Nedeli Online, 
4 May 2016, http://argumenti.ru. Accessed 27 Jul 2016.
552 Unattributed. “The Acceptance in the Inventory of the RS-26 
‘Yars-M’ Missile Complex Is Planned in 2017.” Vzglyad Online, 
12 May 2016, www.vzglyad.ru. Accessed 12 May 2016.
553 Litovkin, “The Army: They Will Test Sarmat Near the 
Hawaiian Islands: They Will Lay Out a New Route for the New 
Ballistic Missile." Izvestiya Online, 4 Jul 2016, www.izvestiya.ru. 
Accessed 4 Jul 2016.

108
554 Unattributed. “Russia Test Fires ICBM to Target in Kazakh-
stan.” Fars News Agency, 28 Dec 2013, http://www.english.
farsnews.com. Accessed 21 Sep 2016.
555 Summary of Reporting on Russian and FSU Nuclear Issues. 
Los Alamos National Laboratory, 1 Dec 2014. Accessed 27 
Nov 2016.
556 Marakhonov, "So Who Among Us Favors Strong Russia? 
Conflict with Ukraine Has Cost Our Country Half Its 
Nuclear Potential.”
557 Litovkin, Dmitriy. “The Army: They Will Test Sarmat Near the 
Hawaiian Islands: They Will Lay Out a New Route for the New 
Ballistic Missile." Izvestiya Online, 4 Jul 2016, www.izvestiya.
ru. Accessed 4 Jul 2016.
558 Russian Space Web. Topol-M, online missile guide, 2 Nov 
2014, www.russianspaceweb.com/topolm.html. Accessed 10 
Sep 2016.
559 Litovkin, “The Army: They Will Test Sarmat Near the 
Hawaiian Islands.”
560 Unattributed. “Testing of heavy strategic missile ‘Sarmat’ 
to start promptly.” Interfax, 10 Aug 2016, www.interfax.com. 
Accessed 11 Aug 2016.
561 Unattributed. “The Acceptance in the Inventory of the RS-
26 ‘Yars-M’ Missile Complex Is Planned in 2017.” Vzglyad On-
line, 12 May 2016, www.vzglyad.ru. Accessed 12 May 2016.
562 Unattributed. "Rubezh Missile Will Enter Duty in a Year." 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 12 May 2016, www.rg.ru. 
Accessed 12 May 2016.
563 Gertz, Bill. “Russia Tests Hypersonic Glide Vehicle on 
Missile.” The Washington Free Beacon, 22 Apr 2016, http://
freebeacon.com/national-security/russia-tests-hyperson-
ic-glide-vehicle/.
564 NASIC; “Ballistic & Cruise Missile Threat; 2013; http://www.
dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a582843.&#65279;pdf
565 NASIC; “Ballistic & Cruise Missile Threat; 2013; http://www.
dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a582843.&#65279;pdf
566 Unattributed. “Offensive weapons, Ballistic missiles, 
Russian Federation, R-29RM Shetal/Sineva (RSM-54/3M27).” 
Jane's Strategic Weapon Systems, 18 Dec 2015.
567 Litovkin, “The Army: They Will Test Sarmat Near the 
Hawaiian Islands.”
568 Petrov, Vladimir. “Russia announces deployment plans for 
Bulava missile and Borey-class submarine.” Jane's Defence 
Weekly, 30 Sep 2008, www.janes.com.
569 Kristensen, Hans and Norris, Robert. “Russian nuclear 
forces, 2016.” Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, vol. 72, no. 3, 
13 Sep 2016, pp. 125–134.
570 “OTR-21 Tochka.” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
OTR-21_Tochka. Accessed 16 Sep 2016.
571 Unattributed. “SS-21 `Scarab' (OTR-21/9M79 Tochka).” Jane's 
Strategic Weapon Systems, 19 Jul 2005, www.janes.com.
572 Unattributed. “SS-26 'Stone' (9M720 Tender/Iskander-E).” 
Jane's Strategic Weapon Systems, 19 Jul 2005, www.janes.com.
573 Barabanov, Mikhail. "The Reason We Need a Combat 
Aircraft.” Odnako Online, 18 Aug 2011, http://odnakoj.ru/. 
Accessed 18 Aug 2011.
574 Unattributed. "RF Long-Range Aviation Will Test New 
Cruise Missiles in 2014." RIA Novosti Online, 28 Jan 2014, 
http://ria.ru/. Accessed 28 Jan 2014.
575 Khudoleyev, Konstantin, et al. “Serve Russia.” Zvezda TV, 
9 Feb 2014.
576 Unattributed. "Tactical Missiles Corporation to Showcase 
Modern Weapons.” Aviapanorama, 21 Aug 2013, Accessed 
21 Aug 2013.
577 Tactical Missile Corporation, http://eng.krtv.ru/about_eng. 
Accessed 18 Aug.
578 Unattributed. “V. Putin summarized series of Meetings, 
Dedicated to Fulfillment of the GOZ and Outfitting the [State 
Armaments Program] RF Armed Forces with Modern ViVT.” 
Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 9 Dec 2013, http://vpk-news.ru/. 
Accessed 9 Dec 2013.
579 President of Russia. “Russian leader, Defence Plant Chiefs 
Discuss Production, Overhaul of Facilities.” Official website of 
the Russian Federation President, 29 Nov 2013, http://eng.
kremlin.ru/. Accessed 29 Nov 2013.
580 President of Russia. “Russian leader, Defence Plant Chiefs 
Discuss Production, Overhaul of Facilities.” Official website of 
the Russian Federation President, 29 Nov 2013, http://eng.
kremlin.ru/. Accessed 29 Nov 2013.
581 Yesin, Viktor. "Peace Vehicles—Part II: It Is Time to Eliminate 
the Gap Between Advanced Engineering Solutions and 
Defense-Industrial Complex Production Capabilities.” 
Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 27 Feb 2015, http://vpk-
news.ru/. Accessed 27 Feb 2015.
582 Mardasov, Anton. “Voyevoda and Stilet Will Reach America 
Without Ukraine. How Far the Rupture with Kyiv Threatens the 
Effectiveness of Russian ICBMs and Cruise Missiles.” Moscow 
Svobodnaya Pressa, 24 Aug 15, http://svpressa.ru/war21/
article/130231/. Accessed 30 Aug 2015.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
109
583 “Cruise Missiles: Kh-101/102.” Missile Threat: A Project 
of the George C. Marshall and Claremont Institutes, 
missilethreat.com. Accessed 18 Aug 2016.
584 Capaccio, Anthony. “Russia Deploys Advanced Cruise 
Missiles in Major Navy Reboot.” Bloomberg, 30 Dec 2015, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-30/rus-
sia-deploying-advanced-cruise-missiles-in-major-navy-reboot. 
Accessed 18 Aug 2016.
585 Capaccio. “Russia Deploys Advanced Cruise Missiles in 
Major Navy Reboot.”
586 “U.S. Debates Cruise Missile Procurement.” Jane’s Intelli-
gence Review, 7 Jul 2016.
587 Akulov, Andrei. “Kalibr: Russia’s Naval System Upping 
Cruise Missile Game.” Strategic Culture Foundation, 24 May 
2016, http://www.strategic-culture.org/news/2016/05/24/
kalibr-russia-naval-system-upping-cruise-missile-game.html. 
Accessed 18 Aug 2016.
588 Akulov. “Kalibr: Russia’s Naval System Upping Cruise 
Missile Game.”
589 “Jane’s P-800 Oniks/Yakhont (SS-N-26 Strobile).” Jane’s 
Defense Industry-Weapons: Naval.
590 Vyatkin, Yaroslav. "Hypersonic Weapons: Even Alien Invad-
ers Have Failed to Help the United States." Argumenty Nedeli 
Online, 4 May 2016, http://argumenti.ru. Accessed 27 Jul 2016.
591 Vyatkin, Yaroslav. "Hypersonic Weapons: Even Alien 
Invaders Have Failed to Help the United States." Argumenty 
Nedeli Online, 4 May 2016, http://argumenti.ru. Accessed 
27 Jul 2016.
592 Unattributed. “Russian Defence Ministry Praises New Ka -
libr Missile launches on Syria targets.” TASS Russian News 
Agency, 9 Dec 2015, http://tass.ru/ed/defense/842799. 
Accessed 20 May 2016.
593 Mukhin, Vladimir. “Russian Arctic Will Be Protected by the 
Triumf; Production of Aerospace Defense Assets Will Increase 
Tenfold in Near Future.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 2 Mar 2016, 
http://www.ng.ru/. Accessed 4 Mar 2016.
594 Kozhin. “Negotiations on sale of S-400 surface-to-air 
missile systems to China and India ongoing, but priority their 
supply to Russian Armed Forces.” Moscow Interfax, 18 Apr 16, 
http://www.interfax.com. Accessed 18 Apr 2016.
595 “Concern PVO “Almaz-Antey”/Concern Aerospace 
Defense [PVO].” GlobalSecurity.org, 29 Mar 2016 http://
www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/russia/concern-pvo.
htm. Accessed 23 Aug 2016.
596 “Aerospace and Defense: Company Overview of Joint-
Stock Company Concern Almaz-Antey.” Bloomberg, http://
www.bloomberg.com/Research/stocks/private/snapshot.
asp?privcapid=34169028. Accessed 23 Aug 2016.
597 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Russia-Air Force.” IHS Jane’s 360, 10 
Aug 2016, www.janes.com.
598 Mukhin, Vladimir. “Russian Arctic Will Be Protected by the 
Triumf; Production of Aerospace Defense Assets Will Increase 
Tenfold in Near Future.” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 2 Mar 2016, 
http://www.ng.ru/. Accessed 4 Mar 2016.
599 “Antey-2500 Long-range Air Defense Missile System.” 
Military Today, http://www.military-today.com/missiles/an-
tey_2500.htm. Accessed 23 Aug 2016.
600 “Pantsyr S1 Close Range Air Defense System, Russia.” 
Army-Technology.com, www.army-technology.com. 
Accessed 22 Aug 2016.
601 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – Rus-
sia and the CIS, Russia-Air Force.” IHS Jane’s 360, 10 Aug 
2016, www.janes.com.
602 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – 
Russia and the CIS, Russia-Air Force.” IHS Jane’s 360, 10 Aug 
2016, www.janes.com.
603 Unattributed. “Jane's, Sentinel Security Assessment – Russia 
and the CIS, Russia-Air Force.” IHS Jane’s 360, 10 Aug 2016, 
www.janes.com.
604 “Aircraft industry of Russia: Military aircraft.” Wikipedia, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aircraft_industry_of_Russia#Mili-
tary_aircraft. Accessed 2 Sep 2016.
605 “United Aircraft Corporation.” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/United_Aircraft_Corporation. Accessed 2 Sep 2016.
606 Gorengurb, Dmity. “Russia’s State Armaments Program 
2020: Is the Third Time the Charm for Military modernization?” 
PONARS Eurasia policy memo, 12 Oct 2010.
607 “Modernized Strategic Bombers to Debut in Victory Day 
Parade Over Moscow.” Jane’s Defence Weekly, 14 Apr 2016, 
janes.com. Accessed on 4 Aug 2016.
608 Harress, Christopher. “Russia Tupolev 22M3 Bombers Up-
grade: Modernized Jets to be in Service by the End of 2015.” 
International Business Times, 17 Jul 2015, www.ibtimes.com.
609 “Modernized Strategic Bombers to Debut in Victory Day 
Parade Over Moscow.” Jane’s Defence Weekly, 14 Apr 2016, 
janes.com. Accessed on 4 Aug 2016.
610 “Aircraft Upgrades/Tupolev Tu-160.” Janes, 15 Dec 2015, 
janes.com. Accessed 8 Aug 2016.

110
611 Unattributed. “Russian Air Forces to Take Delivery of More 
than 10 Upgraded Tu-95 Bombers in Two Years.” Russian Avia-
tion, 30 Mar 2015, www.ruaviation.com. Accessed 9 Aug 2016.
612 Unattributed. “Russia Plans to Complete Tu-22M3 Bomber 
Modernization Program by 2019.” Russian Aviation, 12 Jan 
2016, www.ruaviation.com. Accessed 2 Aug 2016.
613 “Development of PAK-DA Bomber Moved from Preliminary 
Design State to Research and Development Work.” Russian Avi-
ation, 2 Jul 2015, www.ruaviation.com. Accessed 8 Aug 2016.
614 Jane’s Information Group, “Kuznetsov NK-321.” Jane’s 
Aero-Enginesm, Aero-engines - Turbofan, Russian Federa -
tion, 4 May 16.
615 Shapkin, Dmitriy. “They Have Pulled Out of the Dive: 
Combat Aircraft.” Kommersant Online, 21 Aug 2013, 
http://kommersant.ru. Accessed 24 Aug 2013.
616 Litovkin, Dmitriy. “The Army: The T-50 Fighter Aircraft Is 
Ready for Series Production: The Delivery of the Aircraft to the 
Troops Will Begin in 2017.” Moscow Izvestiya Online, 15 Jun 
2016, http://www.izvestia.ru/. Accessed 15 Jun 2016.
617 Khodarenok, Mikhail. “Long Restrained, We Will Fly Quickly; 
Fifth-Generation Russian Fighter Will Be Serially Produced in 
2017.” Moscow Gazeta.ru, 1 Sep 2016. Accessed 13 Sep 2016.
618 Unattributed. “Nothing critical happens to Russian Heli-
copters holding as result of imposition of Western sanctions.” 
Moscow Interfax, 8 Sep 2016, http://www.interfax.com/. 
Accessed 8 Sept 2016.
619 Kramnick, Ilya. “Preserving the Heights: A Series of Ad-
vanced Helicopters Must Help Russia to Not Lose Its Place 
in the World Market.” Moscow Vzglyad Online, 10 Dec 2012, 
http://www.vz.ru/. Accessed 20 Dec 2012.
620 Unattributed. “Russian Helicopters business unaffected by 
extension of Ukrainian sanctions.” Moscow Interfax, 25 Oct 
2016, http://www.interfax.com/. Accessed 25 Oct 2016.
621 Fedorov, Konstantin. “Modernization of Russian Mili-
tary-Transport Aviation: Russia's Military-Transport Aviation: 
Need for Radical Renewal.” Moscow Segodnya.Ru, 3 Jun 
2015, http://www.segodnia.ru/. Accessed 5 Jun 2015.
622 Fedorov, “Modernization of Russian Military-Transport Aviation.”
623 Zhuravlev, Nataliya. “A Hope for a Trillion: Plans Were 
Expressed on the Sale of the Latest Version of the Veteran 
Transport.” Moscow Vzglyad Online, 26 Dec 2012, http://
www.vz.ru/. Accessed 5 Jan 2013.
624 “Jane’s World Navies – Russian Federation.” IHS Jane’s, 
30 Jun 2016, pp. 27–28.
625 Unattributed. "Saylut Scientific Production Center Upgrades 
Test Stands for Ship Engines." RIA Novosti, 23 Aug 2016, 
www.ria.ru. Accessed 23 Aug 2016.
626 Ishchenko, Sergey. “Squadron Losing Way: Construction of 
17 Surface Combatants for Our Navy Under Threat of Disrup-
tion.” Moscow Svobodnaya Pressa, 19 Mar 2015, http://www.
svpressa.ru/. Accessed 26 Mar 2015.
627 “Jane’s World Navies – Russian Federation.” IHS Jane’s, 
30 Jun 2016, pp. 27–28.
628 “Kuznetsov Overhaul Designed to Maintain Carrier Capa -
bility While Russia Considers Future Carrier Options.” Jane’s 
Navy International, 30 Jun 2016.
629 Litovkin, Dmitriy. “A Unique Dock Will Be Built to Accom-
modate the Aircraft Carrier Admiral Kuznetsov.” Izvestiya On-
line, 7 Jun 16, http://www.izvestia.ru/. Accessed 12 Jun 2016.
630 Unattributed. “Shtorm aircraft carrier design to begin in 
2020.” Moscow Interfax, 30 Jun 16, http://www.interfax.com. 
Accessed 1 Jul 2016.
631 “Russia’s New Maritime Doctrine.” Jane’s Defense Weekly, 
14 Aug 2015, p. 4.
632 “Jane’s World Navies – Russian Federation.” IHS Jane’s, 30 
Jun 2016, p. 31.
633 “Jane’s World Navies – Russian Federation.” IHS Jane’s, 30 
Jun 2016, p. 30.
634 “Jane’s World Navies – Russian Federation.” IHS Jane’s, 30 
Jun 2016, p. 30.
635 de Larrinaga, Nick. “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground 
Forces Modernisation.” Jane’s Defence Weekly, 8 Mar 2016.
636 de Larrinaga, “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground Forces 
Modernisation.”
637 de Larrinaga, “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground Forces 
Modernisation.”
638 Koryakin, Oleg. “T-80 Tank Is Being Modernized with 
Relikt and Sosna-U: Omsk Armorers Took on Modernization 
of T-80BV Tank.” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 14 Jul 2016, 
http://rg.ru/. Accessed 15 Jul 2016.
639 Golts, Aleksandr. “Higher Arithmetic of the Russian De -
fense-Industrial Complex.” Moscow Yezhednevnyy Zhurnal, 
15 May 2015, www.ej.ru. Accessed 18 May 2015.
640 Frolov, Andrey. “An Obstacle for the Aircraft Carrier. The 
State Armaments Program to 2025 Fits Ill with Economic Re-
alities.” VPK Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 16 Mar 
2016, vpk-news.ru. Accessed 21 Mar 2016.

RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
111
641 de Larrinaga, “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground  
Forces Modernisation.”
642 Fedyushko, Dmitriy. “BMP-3's Second Youth. Vehicle 
Designed a Quarter of a Century Ago Has Become the Basis 
for the Newest Developments.” VPK Voyenno-Promyshlennyy 
Kuryer Online, 23 Sep 2015, http://www.vpk-news.ru/arti-
cles/27164. Accessed 26 Oct 2015.
643 Frolov, Andrey. “An Obstacle for the Aircraft Carrier. The 
State Armaments Program to 2025 Fits Ill with Economic 
Realities.” VPK Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 16 
Mar 2016, vpk-news.ru. Accessed 21 Mar 2016.
644 Official government statement. “Preliminary Testing of 
State-of-Art Boomerang Armored Personnel Carrier Will Be 
Completed in 2016.” Moscow TASS, 3 Jun 2016, tass.ru/. 
Accessed 6 Jun 2016.
645 de Larrinaga, “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground Forces 
Modernisation.”
646 de Larrinaga, “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground Forces 
Modernisation.”
647 de Larrinaga, “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground Forces 
Modernisation.”
648 de Larrinaga, “Return of the Bear: Russian Ground Forces 
Modernisation.”
649 “Ukraine mobility upgrades for Russian rocket launchers.” 
Jane’s International Defence Review, vol. 44, no. 3, Mar 2011, 
pp. 31–33.
650 “Rosoboronexport outlines 2020 strategy.” Jane's Defence, 
Industry Market Intelligence, 18 Nov 2013.
651 Safronov, Ivan and Dzhordzhevich, Aleksandr. “Demand 
Gives Rise to Armament -- Russian Military Exports Beat 
Records.” Moscow Kommersant Online, 23 Mar 2017, 
http://kommersant.ru/. Accessed 29 Mar 2017.
652 Safronov, Ivan. “‘Our Goal is to Hold on to Russia’s Second 
Place in the Arms Delivery Sphere.’ Rosoboronexport General 
Director Anatoliy Isaykin Talks About 2013’s Results and 
the Prospects for 2014.” Kommersant Online, 27 Jan 2014, 
www.kommersant.ru. Accessed 27 Jan 2014.
653 Unattributed. “Rosoboronexport's sales reach $6.5 bln 
in H1 (Part 2).” Interfax, 15 Aug 2013, www.interfax.com. 
Accessed 15 Aug 2013.
654 Unattributed. “Arms export costs account for $2 bln 
- $2.5 bln in Russia's arms exports – Military-Technical 
Cooperation Service.” Interfax, 16 Jun 2015, www.interfax.com. 
Accessed 16 Jun 2015.
655 Unattributed. “Russia broadens geography of military 
produce exports in 2014 – service.” Interfax, 26 May 2015, 
www.interfax.com. Accessed 27 Mar 2015.
656 President of Russia. “Russian President Addresses Arms 
Exports Commission Meeting.” Russian Presidential Website, 
27 Jan 2015, www.eng.kremlin.ru. Accessed 27 Jan 2015.
657 Unattributed. “Patrushev seeks broader military-
technological cooperation within BRICS (Part 2).” Interfax, 
26 May 2015, www.interfax.com. Accessed 26 May 2015.
658 Safronov, Ivan. “’Our Goal is to Hold on to Russia’s Sec -
ond Place in the Arms Delivery Sphere.’ Rosoboronexport 
General Director Anatoliy Isaykin Talks About 2013’s Results 
and the Prospects for 2014.” Kommersant Online, 27 Jan 2014, 
www.kommersant.ru. Accessed 27 Jan 2014.
659 President of Russia. “Russian President Addresses Arms 
Exports Commission Meeting.” Russian Presidential Website, 
27 Jan 2015, www.eng.kremlin.ru. Accessed 27 Jan 2015.
660 President of Russia. “Russian President Addresses Arms 
Exports Commission Meeting.” Russian Presidential Website, 
27 Jan 2015, www.eng.kremlin.ru. Accessed 27 Jan 2015.
661 Vlahovic, Branko. "Price Tag of Russian Weapons After 
Syria." Belgrade Vecernje Novosti, 4 Apr 2016, www.novosti.rs. 
Accessed 4 Apr 2016.

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

WWW.DIA.MIL

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Security Archive,  
Suite 701, Gelman Library, The George Washington University,  
2130 H Street, NW, Washington, D.C., 20037,  
Phone: 202/994‐7000, Fax: 202/994‐7005, nsarchiv@gwu.edu 
