China's Science of Military Strategy (2013) - Federation of American Scientists
Updated below
In 2013, the Academy of Military Sciences of the People’s Liberation Army of China issued a revised edition of its authoritative, influential publication “The Science of Military Strategy” (SMS) for the first time since 2001.
“Each new edition of the SMS is closely scrutinized by China hands in the West for the valuable insights it provides into the evolving thinking of the PLA on a range of strategically important topics,” wrote Joe McReynolds of the Jamestown Institute.
A copy of
the 2013 edition of the Science of Military Strategy
— in Chinese — was obtained by
Secrecy News
and is posted on the Federation of American Scientists website (in a very large PDF).
“The availability of this document could be a huge boon for young China analysts who have not yet had the chance to buy their own copy in China or Taiwan,” said one China specialist.
An English translation of the document has not yet become publicly available.
But an overview of its treatment of nuclear weapons policy issues was provided in
a recent essay
by Michael S. Chase of the Jamestown Institute.
“Compared to the previous edition of SMS, the 2013 edition offers much more extensive and detailed coverage of a number of nuclear policy and strategy-related issues,” Mr. Chase
wrote
.
In general, SMS 2013 “reaffirms China’s nuclear No First Use policy…. Accordingly, any Chinese use of nuclear weapons in actual combat would be for ‘retaliatory nuclear counterstrikes’.”
With respect to deterrence, SMS 2013 states that “speaking with a unified voice from the highest levels of the government and military to the lowest levels can often enhance deterrence outcomes. But sometimes, when different things are said by different people, deterrence outcomes might be even better.”
SMS 2013 also notably included the first explicit acknowledgement of Chinese “network attack forces” which perform what the U.S. calls “offensive cyber operations.”
In a separate essay on “China’s Evolving Perspectives on Network Warfare: Lessons from the Science of Military Strategy,”
Joe McReynolds wrote
that the SMS authors “focus heavily on the central role of peacetime ‘network reconnaissance’ — that is, the technical penetration and monitoring of an adversary’s networks — in developing the PLA’s ability to engage in wartime network operations.”
On July 28, the Congressional Research Service updated its report on
China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities — Background and Issues for Congress
.
Update
:
The Union of Concerned Scientists has published
a detailed review
of the 2013 Science of Military Strategy, including translations of some key passages.
Global Risk
Blog
The Aftermath: The Expiration of New START and What It Means For Us All
The last remaining agreement limiting U.S. and Russian nuclear weapons has now expired. For the first time since 1972, there is no treaty-bound cap on strategic nuclear weapons.
02.05.26
|
13 min read
read more
Global Risk
Blog
The Pentagon’s (Slimmed Down) 2025 China Military Power Report
The Pentagon’s new report provides additional context and useful perspectives on events in China that took place over the past year.
01.09.26
|
7 min read
read more
Global Risk
Report
On the Precipice: Artificial Intelligence and the Climb to Modernize Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications
Successful NC3 modernization must do more than update hardware and software: it must integrate emerging technologies in ways that enhance resilience, ensure meaningful human control, and preserve strategic stability.
01.08.26
|
2 min read
read more
Global Risk
Blog
What’s New for Nukes in the New NDAA?
The FY2026 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) paints a picture of a Congress that is working to both protect and accelerate nuclear modernization programs while simultaneously lacking trust in the Pentagon and the Department of Energy to execute them.
12.18.25
|
5 min read
read more