JFQ 103, 4th Quarter 2021
Understanding 
the Vulnerabilities 
in China’s New 
Joint Force
By David Bickers
O
ver the past 5 years, China has 
undertaken radical reform of 
the People’s Liberation Army 
(PLA). This modification is sweeping 
in its scope (encompassing changes 
to strategy, force structure, and 
technology) and clear in its purpose 
to create, in the words of Xi Jinping, a 
joint force that can “fight and win.”1 If 
this reform succeeds, China’s regional 
neighbors and the United States could 
find that the People’s Republic, whose 
leadership is already demonstrating 
an increased assertiveness, will be 
emboldened further still. Successful 
reform is not assured—indeed, many 
of China’s previous attempts at military 
transformation have failed—but Xi 
does wield near-unprecedented power 
to force change. It is therefore prudent 
to assume this reform will succeed and 
understand both its consequences and 
how best to respond.
This article analyzes PLA reforms 
and identifies vulnerabilities in China’s 
new joint force. The first section analyzes 
the changes to the Central Military 
Commission (CMC), the highest level 
of the PLA, set in the context of China’s 
model of national decisionmaking and 
civil-military relations. The second 
section considers the restructuring of 
the PLA, focusing particularly on its new 
Colonel David Bickers is a Defence Policy Advisor 
in the Cabinet Office at the United Kingdom 
Ministry of Defence. The views expressed in the 
article are those of the author and do not reflect 
those of the UK Ministry of Defence.
Chinese President Xi Jinping meets 
with delegates to First Party Congress 
of People’s Liberation Army Joint 
Logistic Support Force in Wuhan, Hubei 
Province, October 18, 2019 (Xinhua/
Alamy Live News/Li Gang)

JFQ 103, 4th Quarter 2021 
Bickers 79
Strategic Support Force (SSF) and revised 
theater-level organization. The third 
section explores the measures that could 
disrupt and defeat this new joint force via 
targeting the vulnerabilities identified in 
sections one and two.
The article anticipates that four 
key vulnerabilities will exist within 
the reformed PLA. First, the joint 
force will embrace a model of highly 
centralized decisionmaking, which 
could prove ill-suited to the demands 
of major combat operations. Second, 
the reformed PLA force will struggle to 
integrate multidomain operations at the 
joint theater level. Third, the reformed 
PLA will lack the capabilities to project, 
sustain, or command its forces across 
the spread of China’s global interests. 
And last, the PLA is currently hindered 
by a lack of meaningful operational 
experience.
CMC Reform and the Nature 
of Decisionmaking in China
Xi demonstrates a highly centralized 
style of decisionmaking, even by 
Chinese authoritarian standards. 
During routine national management, 
a mix of negotiation, bargaining, and 
consensus-building were traditionally 
required to fully mobilize the Chinese 
polity. But in times of crisis, this 
fragmented and somewhat lethargic 
system would typically transform into 
a more centralized, autocratic system 
demonstrating greater ideological 
decisionmaking, a pronounced 
monopoly of decisionmaking by senior 
party leaders, and a severe constraining 
of any latitude previously granted to 
subordinates.2 Such a style of crisis 
command was observed in China’s 
response to severe acute respiratory 
syndrome in 2003, the Sichuan 
province earthquake in 2008, and, most 
recently, the coronavirus pandemic. 
The typical characteristics of crisis 
command are strict prioritization by 
the highest echelons of the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP), mobilization 
of state media, and significant pressure 
placed on lower levels of the party for 
successful implementation. In the Xi 
era, however, even routine national 
management has taken on these crisis 
command characteristics. As CCP 
general secretary, Xi has amassed 
an unusually high concentration of 
decisionmaking authority across a broad 
range of policy areas. The result is that 
the machinery of state government has 
become inured to almost a decade of 
highly centralized command.
The relationship between the PLA 
and the CCP is a close one. Under 
China’s National Defense Law, the 
PLA’s loyalty is to the CCP rather 
than to China’s constitution or central 
government. PLA officers are invariably 
party members, and a cadre of uniformed 
commissars exists to defend the CCP’s 
interests. While not directly responsible 
for internal security, the PLA has taken 
on such roles when crises arise. Both 
the Cultural Revolution and Tiananmen 
Square protests, for instance, required 
PLA intervention to restore party 
control. The PLA prefers not to perform 
such tasks (due to potential reputational 
damage) but ultimately remains the 
CCP’s last line of defense against 
instability and chaos.
Despite this closeness, the CCP-PLA 
relationship is more one of shared inter-
ests than of symbiosis. Over time, clearer 
institutional boundaries have led to 
functional differentiation and bifurcation 
of civilian and military elites.3 Indeed, a 
former CMC vice chairman, speaking in 
2013, warned that the PLA must “reso-
lutely refute and reject the erroneous 
political viewpoints of disassociating the 
military from the party, depoliticizing 
the armed forces, and putting the armed 
forces under the state.”4
Against this backdrop, Xi’s reform 
of the CMC has sought to strengthen 
political control of the PLA beyond the 
already high levels typically seen in a 
Leninist military. An integrated party and 
state institution, the CMC sets defense 
policy and provides the highest level of 
military command in peace and war. As 
chairman, Xi reduced the CMC from 11 
to 7 members, removing service chiefs, 
reorganizing its general departments, 
and delegating some functions to a 
new Joint Staff Department.5 Released 
of the responsibility to act as an army 
headquarters (the army becomes a 
ground force component on par with the 
air force and navy), the CMC can focus 
on Xi’s priority of building a joint force 
and supervising both military readiness 
and operations. Not all CCP general 
secretaries have exerted such absolute 
control over the CMC. Indeed, the 
CMC has previously seen the chairman 
role divorced from that of CCP general 
secretary (for 2 years during the Hu 
Jintao era) or authority delegated to 
its uniformed CMC vice chairmen.6 
Xi, however, leads through a “CMC 
chairman responsibility system” in which 
even day-to-day defense matters elevate 
to him as CMC chairman.7
Overall, the nature of CCP deci-
sionmaking and its relationship to the 
PLA represent vulnerabilities. First, this 
centralized system could fail under the 
highest levels of strategic complexity. 
Most management theory would argue 
that decentralized decisionmaking best 
suits complexity, but Xi’s normalization 
of centralized decisionmaking is depriving 
his machinery of government experience 
with decentralization and delegation. 
Natural and health disasters have revealed 
weaknesses within his regime, and war 
could do the same. Any conflict with 
China should seek to maximize the num-
ber and variety of strategic challenges it 
faces to disrupt the CCP’s efficient man-
agement of war. Enacting measures that 
promote internal disorder and force the 
PLA to focus attention and resources on 
internal security would be one approach. 
Second, the complicated relationship 
between the CCP and the PLA could be 
targeted. The two should be treated as 
separate entities; careful targeting (exacer-
bating what Joel Wuthnow describes as a 
latent distrust between Xi and his military 
advisors) may help divide the CCP and 
the PLA and diminish the overall unity of 
Chinese command.8
Theater Level: Structural and 
Operational Weaknesses
The PLA has made significant changes 
to its force structure. The army is 
the main loser, being relegated to a 
national-level ground force on a par 
with the navy and air force rather

Formation of People’s Liberation Army Rocket 
Force takes part in grand military parade 
celebrating 70th anniversary of founding of 
People’s Republic of China in Beijing, October 1, 
2019 (Xinhua/Alamy Live News/Xing Guangli)

82 Features / Understanding China’s New Joint Force 
JFQ 103, 4th Quarter 2021
than being administered directly by 
general departments of the CMC. Also 
elevated to the status of a service is the 
Second Artillery Force (renamed the 
PLA Rocket Force), which remains 
responsible for China’s land-based 
nuclear and conventional missiles. The 
final element of structural change is 
the creation of a new Strategic Support 
Force, which assumes responsibility 
for the information domain (which 
in Chinese conception encompasses 
cyber; electronic warfare; intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance [ISR]; 
and space).
The SSF offers important insights 
into how China expects to conduct 
future warfare. Observing the U.S. 
military’s prosecution of the first Gulf 
War, the PLA pinpointed the critical 
importance of information technology 
and its integration into a joint force.9 
This concept took root in China’s 2014 
military strategy as “informationized 
local wars,” with a 2015 white paper then 
elevating information to a “leading role” 
rather than just an “important condition” 
of warfare.10 Under this concept, the PLA 
expects to conduct operations principally 
in the maritime and air domains but with 
actions also in cyberspace, outer space, 
and across the electromagnetic spectrum. 
This conceptual development and its 
strategic articulation were precursors 
to and justification for the subsequent 
radical structural change. The ability 
to integrate information technology 
into its operations should be the West’s 
measure of success for the PLA joint 
force; the SSF plays a critical role in this 
integration, and its development will be 
the leading indicator of China’s ability to 
turn a vision of information warfare into 
a reality.
The SSF delivers this role by 
collocating capabilities previously 
distributed across various parts of 
the PLA, including the General Staff 
Department. It has grouped cyber 
espionage and technical reconnaissance 
from the Third Department, cyber 
targeting and attack from the Fourth 
Department, and information system 
defense from the Informatization 
Department. This combination allows 
the SSF to undertake a span of cyber 
operations that the Chinese term 
integrated reconnaissance, attack, 
and defense. The SSF is the lynchpin 
in enabling Chinese antiaccess/area 
denial. Although many ground-based 
conventional strike assets fall under 
the PLA Rocket Force, all intelligence, 
surveillance, target acquisition, and 
missile guidance rely on the SSF. The SSF 
also supports PLA power projection in 
the East and South China seas, with all 
space-based surveillance, satellite relay 
and communications, telemetry, tracking, 
F/A-18E Super Hornet assigned to “Tomcatters” of Strike Fighter Squadron (VFA) 31 takes off from flight deck of USS Theodore Roosevelt, South China Sea, 
February 14, 2021 (U.S. Navy/Dylan Lavin)

JFQ 103, 4th Quarter 2021 
Bickers 83
and navigation required for maritime and 
strategic air deployments controlled by 
the SSF.11
Another key objective of Xi’s reforms 
is to transform the PLA into a fully joint 
force. A Chinese joint force sees the 
army’s domination of the PLA reduced 
by placing it on a par with the navy and 
air force. A joint operational command 
system is established at two levels: a Joint 
Staff Department (JSD) reporting to 
the CMC, and a theater level formed 
through the reorganization of seven 
administrative military regions into 
five joint theater commands. Whereas 
previously command authority remained 
vested in each service, it now rests with 
these theater commands, with services 
maintaining responsibility only for 
administrative tasks (such as equipment 
and workforce issues).12 The PLA has 
further signaled its intent to become a 
more joint force by giving two of the five 
theater commands to nonground force 
officers.13
The new joint theater command 
system, in theory, will make China more 
combat ready. Previous military regions 
did not serve as wartime headquarters 
(instead, the CMC would activate an ad 
hoc theater command); however, the new 
theater headquarters maintains command 
across both peace and war, meaning 
the transition from one to another 
should prove relatively seamless.14 Each 
theater also has set an assigned primary 
mission (the Eastern Theater maintains 
responsibility for Taiwan and the East 
China Sea; the Southern Theater, the 
South China Sea and borders with 
Southeast Asian countries; the Western 
Theater, borders with India and Central 
Asian neighbors; the Northern Theater, 
Korea; and the Central Theater, the 
defense of Beijing).15 Theater commands 
assume responsibility for aligning training 
with potential combat operations.16 
This means that intelligence collection 
against Eastern and Southern theater 
exercises could provide insights into PLA 
operational contingencies against Taiwan 
and in the East and South China seas.
On paper, these reforms should 
transform the PLA into a joint force, 
increase its readiness for war, and 
prioritize operations in space, cyber, 
and electromagnetic domains; in 
reality, the reform will face significant 
impediments. The first is that classic 
Chinese fragmented authoritarianism 
could prove to frustrate reform. An 
analysis of previous attempts to transform 
China’s military strategy, however, 
suggests that the two factors needed 
to best ensure success—a significant 
change in the character of conflict and a 
united CCP—are in place (through the 
heightened importance of information 
technology and Xi’s centralized 
command, respectively).17 The second is 
the organizational frictions typical in any 
large structural change. These tensions 
could cause reform to take years to 
deliver higher operational performance 
(one commentator considers 2030 a 
realistic target).18 It could also prove that 
the PLA has a reduced appetite to engage 
in offensive operations until reform is 
complete and it has full confidence in its 
new joint force.
Even if these organizational 
impediments are overcome, structural 
vulnerabilities within the reformed 
PLA will still exist. The first is the 
army’s ability to conduct multidomain 
operations at theater level. Theater 
commands have been allocated only for 
ground, naval, and air forces. Rocket 
Force command and control remains 
highly centralized, with the CMC 
potentially directly handling those Rocket 
Force brigades located within theaters.19 
The SSF’s capabilities also report directly 
to the CMC (most likely through 
the JSD).20 The result is a significant 
difference between the commands of the 
traditional domains (land, marine, air), 
nontraditional domains (space, cyber, 
and the electromagnetic spectrum), and 
missile forces (both conventional and 
nuclear). These differences have the 
potential to hinder the integration of 
effects across all domains at the theater 
level during both joint training and war. 
The Eastern Theater commander, for 
instance, in executing operations against 
Taiwan, would plan and deliver land, 
maritime, and air effects but would need 
to coordinate effects in space, cyber, and 
the electromagnetic spectrum with the 
SSF, and coordinate missile operations 
with the Rocket Force. This arrangement 
may work for a relatively short operation, 
but it is difficult to imagine that anything 
but a more delegated and decentralized 
command construct would bring the 
PLA success in a sustained, high-intensity 
campaign against a peer.
The second structural vulnerability is 
that the reformed PLA will remain unable 
to project, sustain, or command forces 
across the global spread of its national 
interests. The number and geographic 
range of these interests have increased 
significantly since Xi launched the Belt 
and Road Initiative in 2013. The PLA, 
however, does not possess the power 
projection capabilities needed to secure 
these forces beyond East Asia, and the 
PLA Navy, although deploying outside 
Asia more often than it did before, is 
incapable of protecting the sea lines of 
communication across the One Belt One 
Road infrastructure. It could take decades 
for the PLA to grow offensive carrier 
strike capability on a par with that of the 
U.S. Navy.21
Neither could the PLA sustain 
overseas operations. In 2017, the PLA 
established China’s first overseas military 
base in Djibouti to support its maritime 
operations in the Gulf of Aden.22 The 
commander of the PLA General Logistic 
Department has written in support of 
creating further overseas footholds, but 
there is no evidence of such efforts being 
carried out.23 In addition, the PLA has 
known deficiencies in its strategic airlift 
capabilities, constraining its ability not 
only to deploy forces out of area but 
also to redeploy forces the long inter-
nal distances between China’s theater 
commands.24
In terms of command of overseas 
operations, the responsibilities of the 
theater commands are limited to China’s 
interior and near abroad, with command 
of global operations retained by the CMC 
through the JSD.25 This arrangement 
would mean, for instance, that although 
the Eastern Theater commander would 
control maritime operations during war 
with Taiwan, the JSD would command 
the PLA Navy’s associated deep operations 
in the Western Pacific.

84 Features / Understanding China’s New Joint Force 
JFQ 103, 4th Quarter 2021
The similarity of Xi’s PLA reforms 
with the command structure changes 
enacted by the U.S. military under 
the Goldwater Nichols Department of 
Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 is 
clear. It could be the case, however, that 
the PLA is adopting a similar structure 
just as the U.S. military is identifying the 
shortcomings of its own system—par-
ticularly its ability to integrate global 
operations. The U.S. military global cam-
paign and contingency plans coordinate 
global responses across all geographic 
and functional combatant commands 
through a nominated global integrator 
(typically one of the geographic combat-
ant commanders). It has been suggested, 
however, that the coordinating authori-
ties granted to these global integrators 
are insufficient to successfully execute 
these plans.26 The U.S. military should 
take all necessary steps to improve its 
ability to integrate global operations; its 
ability to hold China’s global liabilities 
at risk via horizontal escalation of any re-
gional conflict is a competitive advantage 
it must maintain.
The number of responsibilities 
centralized and retained by the CMC 
presents another vulnerability. The 
post-reform command arrangements are 
such that in war the CMC is responsible 
for commanding and coordinating 
across multiple theaters, retaining 
direct command of the Rocket Force 
(conventional and nuclear strike), 
retaining direct command of SSF 
capabilities, coordinating Rocket Force 
and SSF actions with theater commands, 
and commanding directly any overseas 
operations beyond China’s near abroad. 
The impact of not delegating more 
responsibilities to theater commands 
is that the CMC could find itself 
significantly overmatched in a conflict 
that escalates both vertically and 
horizontally.
The vulnerabilities of the reformed 
PLA are further compounded by the 
lack of any meaningful joint operational 
experience. The PLA last fought a major 
conflict in 1979, during which an inferior 
Vietnamese military defeated a larger 
Chinese force.27 One must look further 
back to 1955 to see its first and last joint 
operation (its attack and conquest of the 
Yijiangshan Islands).28 The PLA has two 
ways to build its experience base short of 
actual combat. The first is through de-
manding and realistic joint training. The 
scale, complexity, and number of PLA 
exercises have increased over the past 10 
years. It is not clear, however, the extent 
to which this growth represents meaning-
ful joint training. An exercise in 2015, for 
instance, saw components fighting one 
another rather than alongside one an-
other.29 Nonetheless, observation of the 
scope of the PLA’s training could prove 
a useful indicator of the army’s develop-
ment as a joint force.
Marine Corps UH-1Y Huey from 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit departs USS New Orleans flight deck in preparation for Maritime Raid Force training 
evolution with USS America and USS Germantown, East China Sea, June 14, 2021 (U.S. Navy/Desmond Parks)

JFQ 103, 4th Quarter 2021 
Bickers 85
The second way the PLA is seeking 
to build experience is through a relatively 
modest set of overseas operational 
tasks (for example, disaster relief and 
international peacekeeping). United 
Nations deployments and China’s 
establishment of a Military Operations 
Other Than War Research Centre in 
2011 testify to this effort, as do several 
disaster relief training exercises conducted 
with other countries (including the 
United States).30 The U.S. military and 
its allies should be cautious of passing 
competence to the PLA, even in what 
may appear to be benign areas; such 
training may simply be its entry point for 
developing a better joint force.
Disrupting and Defeating 
the PLA Joint Force
The United States and other countries 
troubled by the authoritarian nature 
of China should be wary of a stronger 
and more effective PLA. To defeat this 
army in a future confrontation, the 
U.S. military must consider that it is 
currently in the shaping phase of that 
altercation. A future defeat of the PLA 
comes by taking measures now to better 
understand and disrupt reforms—and 
then targeting its vulnerabilities across 
multiple points in its system.
To better understand the PLA, 
intelligence collection should observe 
the nature of crisis decisionmaking at the 
state level. Natural and human disasters 
could offer insights as much as security 
crises. Areas of divergence between the 
CCP and PLA should be identified for 
future exploitation. Better understanding 
is required of the PLA force structure 
evolution and, in particular, the 
command relationships among the 
JSD, theater commands, SSF, and PLA 
Rocket Force. Finally, training exercises 
should be monitored to track the PLA’s 
expansion as a joint force and to spot 
operational contingencies for Taiwan and 
the China seas.
There are several ways to disrupt PLA 
reform. One is to prevent the army from 
achieving its planned technological aims. 
The development of advanced technology 
is critically important to delivering PLA 
reform. Xi has acknowledged this fact 
by including at the core of his plan a 
civil-military integration (CMI) strategy 
to significantly increase civilian-military 
synergy across technology development. 
CMI seeks to merge previously separate 
civilian and military research and 
development initiatives for a more 
synergistic effort, which would deliver 
“leapfrog” development.31 This means 
that military requirements are introduced 
at the highest level of state planning.
As an example, the Chinese Next-
Generation AI Development Plan named 
CMI as one of its “six main duties.”32 
Dual-use technology already plays an 
important role in army operations, such 
as the Gaofen-4 satellite supporting 
the PLA long-range precision strike 
kill-chain.33 The SSF in particular needs 
CMI to drive the Chinese commercial 
sector to improve its military command, 
control, communications, computers, 
ISR systems; it has signed cooperation 
agreements with nine research 
institutions and created informal ties with 
private enterprises as a result.34 The West 
can expect the SSF to exploit emerging 
technologies (artificial intelligence, 
quantum computing, and space-based 
ISR) for this purpose. Successful 
development would allow the PLA to 
extend the range and lethality of its kill-
chain, potentially as far as the Second 
Island Chain, thus allowing China to 
further boost the assertiveness of its 
foreign policy.
Policymakers and private enterprise 
across the West should understand 
that the civilian and military sectors 
in China are fused and that, when 
dealing with Chinese private enterprise, 
they are, in effect, dealing with the 
PLA by proxy. Chinese investments in 
Western technology firms dealing in 
sensitive national security areas need 
to be screened and restricted when 
necessary. Those governments that lack 
the legislation to carry out such actions 
should write and pass it expeditiously.
Forming and maintaining regional 
allegiances and partnerships across 
the Indo-Pacific region, together 
with sharing antiaccess/area-denial 
capabilities where appropriate, will 
complicate Chinese escalation, reducing 
China’s ability to mitigate the PLA’s 
lack of combat experience through a 
consequence-free operational rehearsal. 
A combination of dynamic force 
employment, troop rotations, forward 
presence, and the expansion of access, 
basing, and overflight agreements would 
further this end. In addition, the U.S. 
military should ensure that it does not 
inadvertently assist in developing the 
PLA’s joint force expertise, even via 
seemingly benign matters such as disaster 
relief or evacuation operations, lest such 
learning is repurposed to more aggressive 
ends.
Once in a confrontation, the PLA, 
with its highly centralized nature of 
state decisionmaking, will struggle to 
cope with a complex, sustained, and 
high-tempo security crisis. The CMC 
should be stressed to the breaking 
point. Multiple diplomatic, economic, 
and security crises, including domestic 
insecurity, should therefore be provoked 
to draw the PLA into internal policing. 
Horizontal escalation, through 
operations that threaten multiple points 
around the Chinese periphery, will stress 
the CMC’s ability to coordinate across 
multiple theaters and the PLA’s logistical 
deficiencies in redeploying forces between 
them. Deep operations will strain the 
PLA’s ability to both integrate global 
operations and secure global interests, 
forcing a yet greater decisionmaking 
load on the CMC. Operations also 
must maximize all-domain threats, 
compounding this overload by exploiting 
the CMC’s lack of delegation across 
cyber, electronic warfare, and space 
capabilities. Divisions in the CCP-PLA 
relationship could also be exacerbated 
through targeted information operations 
to reduce Chinese unity of command. 
All these effects could be compounded 
by multiple precision strikes across 
the Chinese system, prioritizing the 
destruction of communication nodes 
between the CMC and the joint force, 
and SSF capability (representing as it does 
a center of gravity for China’s concept of 
operations).
A successfully reformed PLA backed 
by an increasingly powerful state will 
be a potent fighting force, but like any

86 Features / Understanding China’s New Joint Force 
JFQ 103, 4th Quarter 2021
fighting system, it will have weaknesses 
that can lead to its defeat. In the case of 
China’s new joint force, an incomplete 
set of theater-level command delegations 
and the high level of centralization that 
remains with the CMC could constitute a 
significant vulnerability. JFQ
Notes
1 Joel Wuthnow and Phillip C. Saunders, 
“Introduction,” in Chairman Xi Remakes the 
PLA, ed. Phillip C. Saunders et al. (Washing-
ton, DC: NDU Press, 2019), 1.
2 Sebastian Heilmann, ed., China’s Political 
System (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield 
Publishers, 2016), 158.
3 Michael Kiselycznyk and Phillip C. 
Saunders, Civil-Military Relations in China: 
Assessing the PLA’s Role in Elite Politics, China 
Strategic Perspectives, no. 2 (Washington, DC: 
NDU Press, 2010), 1.
4 Quoted in David M. Finkelstein, “Break-
ing the Paradigm: Drivers Behind the PLA’s 
Current Period of Reform,” in Saunders et al., 
Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA, 50.
5 Wuthnow and Saunders, “Introduction,” 11.
6 Andrew Scobell, “China’s Evolving Civil-
Military Relations: Creeping Guojiahua,” in 
Chinese Civil Military Relations: The Transfor-
mation of the People’s Liberation Army, ed. Nan 
Li (New York: Routledge, 2006).
7 Phillip C. Saunders and Joel Wuthnow, 
“China’s Goldwater-Nichols? Assessing PLA 
Organizational Reforms,” Joint Force Quarterly 
82 (3rd Quarter 2016), 72.
8 Joel Wuthnow, System Overload: Can 
China’s Military Be Distracted in a War over 
Taiwan? China Strategic Perspectives, No. 15 
(Washington, DC: NDU Press, 2020), 27.
9 Edmund J. Burke and Arthur Chan, 
“Coming to a (New) Theater Near You: Com-
mand, Control, and Forces,” in Saunders et al., 
Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA, 229.
10 M. Taylor Fravel, “Shifts in Warfare and 
Party Unity: Explaining China’s Changes in 
Military Strategy,” International Security 42, 
no. 3 (2018), 80–81.
11 John Costello and Joe McReynolds, 
“China’s Strategic Support Force: A Force for 
a New Era,” in Saunders et al., Chairman Xi 
Remakes the PLA, 446–455.
12 Heilmann, China’s Political System, 152.
13 PLA Navy Vice Admiral Yuan Yubai to 
the Southern Theater and PLA Air Force Lieu-
tenant General Yi Xiaoguang to the Central 
Theater. See Shane A. Smith, Thomas Hender-
schedt, and Timothy D. Luedecking, “Reverse 
Engineering Goldwater-Nichols: China’s Joint 
Force Reforms,” Joint Force Quarterly 90 (3rd 
Quarter 2018).
14 Jeffrey Engstrom, “China Has Big Plans 
to Win the Next War It Fights,” The National 
Interest, February 9, 2018.
15 Wuthnow and Saunders, “Introduction,” 
8.
16 Mark R. Cozad, “Toward a More Joint, 
Combat-Ready PLA?” in Saunders et al., 
Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA, 215.
17 Fravel, “Shifts in Warfare,” 83.
18 Burke and Chan, “Coming to a (New) 
Theater Near You,” 246.
19 David C. Logan, “PLA Reforms and 
China’s Nuclear Forces,” Joint Force Quarterly 
83 (4th Quarter 2016), 60.
20 Ibid.
21 Andrew Scobell and Nathan Beauchamp-
Mustafaga, “The Flag Lags but Follows: The 
PLA and China’s Great Leap Outward,” in 
Saunders et al., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA, 
180.
22 Burke and Chan, “Coming to a (New) 
Theater Near You,” 279.
23 Andrea Ghiselli, “Civil-Military Relations 
and Organisational Preferences Regarding the 
Use of the Military in Chinese Foreign Policy: 
Insights from the Debate on MOOTW,” Jour-
nal of Strategic Studies 43, no. 3 (2018).
24 Michael S. Chase et al., China’s In-
complete Military Transformation: Assessing 
the Weaknesses of the People’s Liberation Army 
(PLA) (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015).
25 Smith, Henderschedt, and Luedecking, 
“Reverse Engineering Goldwater-Nichols.”
26 Daniel Sukman, “Global Contingency 
Plans: A New Look at War Planning,” Military 
Review (2019), 115.
27 Timothy R. Heath, “China’s Untested 
Military Could Be a Force—or a Flop,” Foreign 
Policy, November 27, 2018.
28 Ian Burns McCaslin and Andrew S. Er-
ickson, “The Impacts of Xi-Era Reforms on the 
Chinese Navy,” in Saunders et al., Chairman 
Xi Remakes the PLA, 138.
29 Ibid., 140.
30 Ghiselli, “Civil–Military Relations and 
Organisational Preferences Regarding the Use 
of the Military in Chinese Foreign Policy.”
31 Brian Lafferty, “Civil-Military Integration 
and PLA Reforms,” in Saunders et al., Chair-
man Xi Remakes the PLA, 632–635.
32 Lorand Laskai, “Civil-Military Fusion and 
the PLA’s Pursuit of Dominance in Emerging 
Technologies,” China Brief 18, no. 6 (2018), 
13.
33 James S. Johnson, “China’s Vision of 
the Future Network-Centric Battlefield: Cyber, 
Space, and Electromagnetic Asymmetric Chal-
lenges to the United States,” Comparative 
Strategy 37, no. 5 (2018), 378.
34 Laskai, “Civil-Military Fusion and the 
PLA’s Pursuit of Dominance in Emerging 
Technologies,” 14.
New from NDU 
Press
for the Center for Strategic Research
Strategic Forum 308
Baltics Left of Bang: The Southern 
Shore
By Marcel Hadeed, Mariusz Kaminski, 
Monika Sus, Brett Swaney, and Amelie 
Theussen
Deterring 
and defend-
ing against 
Russian 
aggression 
in the Baltic 
Sea region 
prior to open 
hostilities, 
or “left of bang,” is a political 
problem that requires a coordi-
nated regional approach by the 
Baltic southern shore states—
Poland, Germany, and Denmark—
in conjunction with their North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO) and European Union 
(EU) allies. Despite common 
membership in NATO and the 
EU, the southern shore states 
hold differing strategic perspec-
tives that reflect the challenges of 
a coordinated approach. These 
states should prioritize Baltic 
maritime security, regional mobil-
ity, and unconventional warfare 
capabilities in coordination with 
regional allies and partners. They 
should also leverage or enhance 
EU capabilities in cyber, informa-
tion, and strategic communica-
tions to better deter and defend 
against Russian hostile measures.
Visit the NDU Press Web site for  
more information on publications  
at ndupress.ndu.edu