AL QAEDA, TRENDS IN TERRORISM AND FUTURE POTENTIALITIES:  AN ASSESSMENT
Bruce Hoffman
P-807 8

Published 2003 by RAND
1700 Main Street, P .O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
1200 South Hayes Street, Arlington, VA 22202-5050
201 North Craig Street, Suite 202, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-1516
RAND is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking
through research and analysis. Papers are issued by RAND as a service to its
professional staff. They are personal products of the authors rather than the results of
sponsored RAND research. They have not been formally reviewed or edited. The
views and conclusions expressed in Papers are those of the authors and are not
necessarily shared by other members of the RAND staff or by its research sponsors.
RAND
® is a registered trademark. 
For more information or to order RAND documents, see RAND’s URL
(http://www.rand.org) or contact Distribution Services, RAND, 1700 Main Street,
P.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138, phone (310) 451-7002; Fax: (310) 451-
6915; Email: order@rand.org

AL QAEDA, TRENDS IN TERRORISM AND FUTURE
POTENTIALITIES: AN ASSESSMENT
Bruce Hoffman
The RAND Corporation, Washington, D.C.
This paper assesses current trends in terrorism and future
potentialities.  It examines first the presumed state of al Qaeda today
with particular reference to its likely agenda in a post-Iraq war
world.  It then more broadly focuses on some key current terrorism
trends in order to understand better both how terrorism is changing
and what the implications of these changes are in terms of possible
future attacks and patterns.  The discussion is organized along four
key questions:
• What is the state of al-Qa’ida today and what effects have 18
months of unremitting war had on it?
• What are the challenges in countering this particular
adversary—and, specifically, can al Qa'ida survive bin Laden?
• What do some other trends in terrorism today tell us about
potential developments in the future?
• How should we be thinking about terrorism today and
tomorrow?
What is the state of al Qa'ida today?
The headline at the top of the Washington Post's  front page last
Christmas Eve brought neither cheer nor comfort to a city still reeling
from the terrorist attacks that had laid waste to the World Trade
Center and destroyed part of the Pentagon fifteen months before.
_________
 Paper presented at the RAND Center for Middle East Public Policy and
Geneva Center for Security Policy 3 rd  Annual Conference, "The Middle East
After Afghanistan and Iraq," Geneva, Switzerland, 5 May 2003.  A synopsis of
this paper was also presented a meeting of the Council on Foreign Relations,
Washington, D.C. Office, 8 May 2003.

- 2 -
"In U.S.," it read, "Terrorism's Peril Undiminished: Nation Struggles on
Offense and Defense, and Officials Still Expect New Attacks."  The
gloomy prognosis of senior Bush Administration officials and
intelligence and law enforcement experts was reflected in their
conviction that it was only a matter of time before another major
attack targeted the nation's capital.  Al Qa'ida's penchant to return to
targets that previous attacks had failed to destroy consumed their
thoughts and therefore they viewed the White House and U.S. Capitol
as at the top of the terrorists' hit list.  So likely was such an attack
that one White House counterterrorism official interviewed for the
story had actually come to fear for his own safety.  "They are going
to kill the White House," he remarked.  "I have really begun to ask
myself whether I want to continue to get up every day and come to
work on this block."
1
Less than three months later, however, a dramatically different
view was showcased in another front page  Washington Post  story on
the same subject.  "Al Qaeda's Top Primed To Collapse, U.S. Says," it
trumpeted, explaining that the recent arrest of Khalid Sheik
Mohammed, al Qa'ida's titular operations chief and reputed
mastermind of the 9/11 attacks, and the "mother lode" of
information, consisting of "hundreds of leads," found on computers
and other documents seized with him, accounted for this dramatic
volte-face.  "I believe the tide has turned in terms of al Qaeda,"
Congressmen Porter J. Goss, the chairman of the U.S. House of
Representatives Intelligence Committee and himself a former CIA
case officer, was quoted.  "We're at the top of the hill."  "It's a very,
very big deal," enthused Director of Central Intelligence George
Tenet.  "We've got them nailed," said an unnamed intelligence expert,
who still more expansively declared, "we're close to dismantling
them."
2
_________
1 Barton Gellman, .  "In U.S., Terrorism's Peril Undiminished: Nation
Struggles on Offense and Defense, and Officials Still Expect New Attacks,"
Washington Post , 24 December 2002.
2 Dana Priest and Susan Schmidt, "Al Qaeda's Top Primed To Collapse, U.S.
Says ," Washington Pos t, 16 March 2003.

- 3 -
The new-found optimism of Administration officials and
intelligence experts alike about al Qaeda's declining fortunes was
further evidenced this past month after Usama bin Laden's and some
of his most devoted follower's repeated threats of renewed attack in
retaliation for invasion of Iraq failed to materialize.
3  Citing
Administration sources, an article in the Washington Times  on 24
April reported the increasingly prominent view of official
Washington that al Qa'ida's "failure to carry out a successful strike
during the U.S.-led military campaign to topple Saddam Hussein has
raised questions about their ability to carry out major new attacks."
4
Without doubt, Bin Laden and al Qa'ida's inability to make good
on any of their pre-invasion threats is a monumental setback given
that he has long considered himself—and styled the movement he
leads—as the true defenders of Muslims everywhere.  Al Qa'ida's
conspicuous inaction is if anything all the more galling to its
sympathizers, supporters and perhaps even rank-and-file in light of
a long string of past pronouncements decrying the mistreatment of
Iraqis under the yoke of the American-influenced, United Nations-
imposed, sanctions and oft-lamented alleged deaths of literally
hundreds of thousands of Iraqi children.
5  Yet, while developments
in recent months present new evidence of significant progress in the
war against global terrorism, it would be imprudent to write al
Qa'ida's obituary just yet—much less discount its ability to mutate
into new, more pernicious forms.  In this respect, there are at least
six reasons cautious and careful assessment:
_________
3 See, for example, CNN, "Alleged bin Laden tape a call to arms," at
http://cnn.com/2003/WORLD/meast/02/11/sprj.irq.wrap  and bin Laden's                                                                                                         
statement, "We want to let you know and confirm to you that this war of the
infidels that the U.S. is leading with its allies . . . we are with you and we will
fight in the name of God."
4 David R. Sands, "Al Qaeda's credibility 'on the line' as war in Iraq winds
down," Washington Times , 24 April 2003.  See also, Dennis Pluchinsky, "Al
Qaeda Identity Crisis," Washington Times , 28 April 2003.
5 See "Declaration of War Against the Americans Occupying the Land of
the Two Holy Places," Azzam Publications translation in Yonah Alexander and
Michael S. Swetnam, Usama bin Laden's al-Qaida: Profile of a Terrorist Network
(Ardsley, NY: Transnational Publishers, 2001), Appendix 1 A, p. 19.

- 4 -
1. Disagreement over precisely what al Qa'ida is
2. The propaganda value of bin Laden's prescient analysis
3. The imperative of individual jihad fused with revenge
4. The operational possibilities presented by the occupation of
Iraq
5.
 The competence and determination of the remaining al Qa'ida
leadership cadre
6.
 The resiliency of al Qa'ida and the likelihood of a post-bin
Laden al Qa'ida
Let us briefly consider each.
Disagreement of what precisely al Qa'ida is.  It is remarkable
that more than a decade after its founding, six years after it first
came to international attention, and 18 months after the
simultaneous attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon
catapulted it to prominence, al Qa'ida remarkably remains so poorly
an understood phenomenon.  The ways in which it is variously
described or perceived is a case in point.  Is it a monolithic,
international terrorist organization with an identifiable command
and control apparatus or is it a broader, more amorphous movement
tenuously held together by a loosely networked transnational
constituency?  Has it become a franchise operation with like-minded
local representatives independently advancing the parent
organization's goals or does it still function at the direction of some
centralized command nucleus?  Is al Qa'ida a concept or a virus?  An
army or an ideology?  A populist transnational movement or a vast
international criminal enterprise?  All of the above?  None of the
above?  Or, some of the above?  The fact that this question provokes
more disagreement than agreement in government, intelligence and
academic circles suggests that any claims of certitude about this or
that development having incontrovertibly affected al Qa'ida's health
and longevity should be viewed with skepticism.  The widely
divergent views of Khalid Sheik Mohammed's role and importance is
a case in point.  While he is lauded by some as a prize catch at the

- 5 -
nexus of all past and future al Qa'ida operations; others dismiss him
as a small fish, maintaining that, while Mohammed may have "huge
knowledge of 9/11," he has little knowledgeable of subsequent al
Qa'ida operations, none of future planned attacks and has had no
contact with bin Laden for more than a year..
6
The propaganda value of bin Laden's prescient analysis .  To bin
Laden's loyal followers, active supporters and passive sympathizers,
the analysis he first presented in the seminal August 1996 fatwa, the
"Declaration of War Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the
Two Holy Places," comes across, if anything, as only more prescient
and accurate today.
 7  Seven years ago, he argued that the "Crusader
military forces" of the U.S. and U.K. had established a beach head in
Saudi Arabia from which they intended to impose a new imperialism
on the Middle East in order to gain control over the region's oil
wealth.
8  To those already inclined to this view, recent events cannot
unreasonably be seen to have provided further evidence of the
acuity of bin Laden's analysis.
9  Given the long-established
sophistication of bin Laden and al Qa'ida's propaganda
efforts—employing multi-media means vehicles, including pre-
_________
6 The view expressed by at least some European and American analysts
with access to senior intelligence sources in their respective countries.
7 "My Muslim Brothers of The World," bin Laden wrote.  "Your brothers
in Palestine and in the land of the two Holy Places are calling upon your help
and asking you to take part in fighting against the enemy your enemy and
their enemy the Americans and the Israelis.  they are asking you to do
whatever you can, one own means and ability, to expel the enemy, humiliated
and defeated, out of the sanctities of Islam . . .".  See Ibid., Appendix 1 A, p. 21.
8 "Destruction of the oil industries.  The presence of the USA Crusader
military forces on land, sea and air of the states of the Islamic Gulf is the
greatest danger threatening the largest oil reserve in the world.  The
existence of these forces in the area will provoke the people of the country
and induces aggression on their religion, feelings and prides and push them to
take up armed struggle against the invaders occupying the land; therefore
spread of the fighting in the region will expose the oil wealth to the danger of
being burned up."  Ibid., Appendix 1 A, p. 8.
9 See, for example, Thom Shanker and Eric Schmidtt, "Pentagon Expects
Long-Term Access to Four Key Bases in Iraq," New York Times , 19 April 2003;
and, "Rumsfeld Denies the U.S. Has Plans for Permanent Iraq Bases," 21 April
2003 at http://www.nytimes.com/2003/04/22/international
/worldspecial/22PETN.html.

- 6 -
recorded video and audio tapes, CD-Roms, DVDs, and the Internet;
dramatically choreographed and staged dissemination opportunities;
and other mass outreach techniques (e.g., via al Qa'ida's phantom al-
Neda web site and those of sympathetic, above-ground radical
Islamic sites and organizations)
10—it is likely that this message will
be peddled with increasing fervor for its intended motivational and
recruitment value.  If the American military presence in Iraq is
prolonged and if al Qa'ida is able to commence a sustained guerrilla
warfare campaign against American forces stationed in Iraq or
positioned in the region, this propaganda would likely strike a
responsive chord throughout the Muslim world and possibly
rejuvenate the flagging movement.
The imperative of individual jihad fused with collective revenge .
Bin Laden has long defined the imperative of jihad as an individual
responsibility incumbent upon Muslims everywhere.  "It is no secret
that warding off the American enemy is the top duty after faith and
that nothing should take priority over it," bin Laden wrote in his
1996  declaration of war.  "Without shedding blood no degradation
can be removed from the forehead I remind the youths of the
Islamic world," he had also stated.
11  Two years later, bin Laden
reiterated how all ulema "are unanimous that it is an individual duty
to fight an invading enemy,"
12  This was repeated again in his
message of 9 December 2001, when bin Laden declared that "jihad
has become fard-ain [obligatory] upon each and every Muslim . . . .
The time has come when all the Muslims of the world, especially the
youth, should unite and soar against the kufr and continue jihad till
_________
10 See the analysis in Bruce Hoffman, "Underground Voices: Insurgent
and Terrorist Communication in the 21 st  Century," unpublished paper
presented at the August 2002 meeting of the Insurgency Board, held at RAND's
Washington, D.C. office.
11 "Declaration of War Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the
Two Holy Places," in Alexander and Swetnam, Usama bin Laden's al-Qaida,
Appendix 1 A, p. 19.
12 Quoted in Anonymous, Through Our Enemies' Eyes: Osama bin Laden,
Radical Islam, and the Future of America  (Dulles, VA: Brassey's, 2002), pp. 53 &
70.  This book, written by a 20 year veteran of the CIA's operations directorate,
is without doubt the preeminent work on bin Laden and al Qa'ida
.

- 7 -
these forces are crushed to naught, all the anti-Islamic forces are
wiped off the face of this earth and Islam takes over the whole world
and all other the other false religions."
13
Though tempting to dismiss such appeals as anachronistic
braggadocio, they may yet acquire new resonance at a time when
Muslims reportedly harbor a deep sense of humiliation and
resentment over the relatively bloodless conquest of Baghdad and
the perceived unbridled projection of American power and influence
into the region.
 14  To al Qa'ida's skillful propagandists, recent
developments might be effectively parlayed as the latest in an
ignominious series of historic Muslim defeats by the West that must
now be avenged.  Indeed, the concept of vengeance has long figured
prominently as a rallying cry in both bin Laden's and al Qa'ida's
messages.  As previously noted, the requirement to avenge the
shedding of innocent Muslim blood and especially that of Muslim
children in Iraq and Palestine have been persistent bin Laden, cum
al Qa'ida themes.
15  In his December 2001 message, for example, bin
Laden struck a familiar note when he warned: "Those [Westerners]
who talk about the loss of innocent people didn’t yet taste how it
feels when you loose a child, don't know how it feels when you look
in your child's eyes and all you see is fear.  Are they not afraid that
one day they [will] get the same treatment?"
16  Particularly at a time
when al Qa'ida is weakened, the call for revenge coupled with the
regenerative power of a single, new dramatic terrorist attack could
breathe new life into the movement.
_________
13 Ben Venzke and Aimee Ibrahim, The al-Qaeda Threat: An Analytical
Guide to al-Qaeda's Tactics and Targets  (Alexandria, VA: Tempest Publishing,
2003), p. 160.
14 Professor John Esposito makes this latter point in his book, The Islamic
Threat: Myth or Reality  as quoted and discussed in Anonymous, Through Our
Enemies' Eyes , p. 10.
15 "More than 600,000 Iraqi children have died due to lack of food and
medicine and as result of the unjustifiable aggression (sanction) imposed on
Iraq and its nation," bin Laden wrote in 1996.  See "Declaration of War Against
the Americans Occupying the Land of the Two Holy Places," in Alexander and
Swetnam, Usama bin Laden's al-Qaida, Appendix 1 A, p. 19.
16 Quoted in Anonymous, Through Our Enemies' Eyes , p. 47 .

- 8 -
The operational possibilities presented by the occupation of
Iraq .  Since at least 1996, bin Laden has argued about the
asymmetric virtues of guerrilla warfare and repeatedly extolled the
victory he claims was achieved with this tactic in Somalia against
American forces in October 1993.
17  "[I]t must be obvious to you," bin
Laden declared in his 1996 declaration of war, "that, due to the
imbalance of power between our armed forces and the enemy forces,
a suitable means of fighting must be adopted, i.e., using fast moving
light forces that work under complete secrecy.  In other word to
initiate a guerrilla warfare, where the sons of the nation, and not the
military forces, take part in it."
18
A virtually identical call to arms was issued just two months ago
when Qa'ida released the fifth and sixth installments of a series of
articles, entitled, In The Shadow of the Lances , that had begun to
appear shortly after the 9/11 attacks.  Although the previous
installments had been written by al Qa'ida's putative spokesman,
Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, the two latest were authored by Saif al-Adel,
one of the movement's most senior operational commanders and a
former Egyptian Army Special Forces officer who joined al Qa'ida
with the 1998 merger of Ayman Zawahiri's Egyptian Islamic Jihad.
In it, al-Adel advocates the use of guerrilla warfare tactics against
the American and British forces in Iraq and provides detailed
practical advice on its implementation.
19  Further, in a 9 April 2003
declaration posted on al Qa'ida's phantom web site, al Neda, which
_________
17 Specifically, the events where 18 U.S. Army Rangers and Delta Force
commandos were killed in fighting with Somali militiamen and allegedly al
Qa'ida fighters.  See Mark Bowden, Black Hawk Down: A Story of Modern War
(Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1999), passim .
18 "Declaration of War Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the
Two Holy Places," in Alexander and Swetnam, Usama bin Laden's al-Qaida,
Appendix 1 A, p. 11.
19 See "Al-Qa'ida Organization Addresses a Message to Iraqi, Islamic
Peoples (Internet) www.alfjr.com WWW in Arabic in Arabic, 5 March 2003.
[Posting by "Ayn al-Haqiqah," entitled "The al-Qa'ida Organization Writes a
Letter to the Iraqi People" in the "Issues of the Islamic Nation" section of the
chatroom of www.alfjr.com, on 5 March 2003.  See also, Ben Venzke and Aimee
Ibrahim, al-Qaeda 's Advice for Mujahideen in Iraq: Lessons Learned in
Afghanistan, v 1.0  (Alexandria, VA: IntelCenter, 14 April 2003), passim.

- 9 -
was clearly written after American forces had entered Baghdad, the
virtues of guerrilla warfare are again lavishly extolled. Under the
caption, "Guerrilla Warfare Is the most Powerful Weapon Muslims
have, and It is The Best Method to Continue the Conflict with the
Crusader Enemy," prominent lessons of history are invoked to rally
the jihadists for renewed battle.  "With guerilla warfare," the
statement explains,
the Americans were defeated in Vietnam and the Soviets
were defeated in Afghanistan.  This is the method that
expelled the direct Crusader colonialism from most of the
Muslim lands, with Algeria the most well known.  We still
see how this method stopped Jewish immigration to
Palestine, and caused reverse immigration of Jews from
Palestine.  The successful attempts of dealing defeat to
invaders using guerilla warfare were many, and we will not
expound on them.  However, these attempts have proven
that the most effective method for the materially weak
against the strong is guerrilla warfare. . . .
20
If it is accepted that one of bin Laden's aims in the 9/11 attacks
was to draw the U.S. into a costly ground campaign in Afghanistan,
where American forces would be ground up and defeated much as
the Red Army was more than a decade ago, then Iraq arguably
presents him with a crucial, second (final?) bite of the apple.  Iraq
may thus prove an irresistible opportunity for the mjuhadideen to
avenge the stunning defeat of the Taleban and al Qa'ida in
Afghanistan a year ago.  In this respect, what we in the U.S. and the
West would regard as a decisive victory, bin Laden and his followers
(however illusory) likely dismiss as a one setback or a mere lost
battle in a long war.  Further, whereas we have become accustomed
to measuring wars that are fought and won in a few months, if not a
matter of weeks, our adversaries see this conflict as an epic contest
_________
20 MEMRI Special Dispatch - Jihad and Terrorism Studies, 11 April 2003,
no. 493 quoting
http://www.cubezero.nt/vhsvideo/imagis/?subject=2&rec=1043 .                                                                                                                     

- 10 -
lasting years, if not decades.  As such, as the deployment of
American military forces from Djibouti to the border of Iran, may
now be seen by al Qa'ida strategists as presenting the movement
with a "target rich environment" alongside multiple new operational
opportunities and as such simply the next phase in a long struggle.
The competence and determination of the remaining al Qa'ida
leadership cadre .  To date, nearly half of the senior al Qaeda
leadership has been killed or captured.  Among them are important
operations commanders like Khalid Sheik Mohammed, Mohammed
Atef and Abu Zubayda (Zayn al-Abidin Mohammed Husayn), as well
as key financiers like Mohammed Mustafa Ahmed Hawsawi (who
was arrested with Mohammed).  Their deaths and apprehension have
appreciably weakened al Qa'ida and undermined its operational
capabilities.  But, at the same time, the vital core leadership arguably
remains at large or at least unaccounted for.  Among them are the
nucleus of fighters from EIJ (Egyptian Islamic Jihad) that Ayman
Zawahiri brought into al Qa'ida in 1998.  This is particularly
significant with respect to al Qa'ida's longevity and regenerative
capacity, since this group are among the best educated, most highly
skilled and motivated, and competent cadre in the movement.
Indeed, only one of the original EIJ operatives in al Qa'ida's upper
echelon (Atef) has been among those senior cadre killed or arrested
since 9/11.  Accordingly, the movement's core competency arguably
remains intact.  In this respect, if bin Laden himself were killed or
captured, bin Laden's deputy, Zawahiri, would presumably replace
him.  As Zawahiri is often cited as the real "brains" behind bin Laden,
and was certainly instrumental in al Qa'ida's transformation to a
terrorist group with real global reach after its merger with EIJ, the
implications of his accession to power cannot be blithely dismissed.
Moreover, given that Zawahiri lost both his wife and only son as a
result of a U.S. air strike in Afghanistan in November 2001, a strong
personal motive of uncompromising enmity motivated by a burning
vengeance (especially since one of the deaths involved Zawahiri's
lone son—the only progeny of Zawahiri's who could carry on the

- 11 -
family name) might possibly impel what is left of al Qa'ida towards
aspirations of renewed and intensified violence.
It must also be said that, even in the post 9/11-era, when Al
Qa'ida has been relentlessly tracked, harassed and weakened, a
“corporate succession” plan of sorts has seemed to function.  Al-
Qa’ida thus appears to retain at least some depth in numbers as
evidenced by its replenishment abilities to produce successor
echelons for the mid-level operational commanders who have been
killed or captured.  This may be a reflection of the vast reservoir of
trained jihadists that al-Qa’ida at least theoretically can draw from.
In his January 2003 state-of-the-union speech, President Bush
himself referred to tens of thousand of persons who had been
trained during the past decade in al-Qa’ida camps in the Sudan,
Yemen, and Afghanistan and thereby comprise this cadre.  More
recently, the head of Germany's intelligence service put their number
at some 70,000 world-wide.
21  Even if this figure is grossly
exaggerated in terms of those individuals who swore the oath of
allegiance to bin Laden and were inducted into al Qa'ida proper (as
opposed to being trained as Taleban militiamen for the civil war
being fought against the Northern Alliance), the potential pool of
even a few thousand well-trained and battle hardened fighters
ensures at least a sufficiently deep well of expertise from which to
continue to draw.
Moreover, in terms of al Qa'ida's finances, sufficient monetary
reserves likely still exist.  According to one, open source estimate,
some $120 million of identifiable  al Qa'ida assets to date has been
seized or frozen.
22  Given that bin Laden reputedly amassed a war
chest in the billions of dollars, ample funds may still be at the
disposal of his minions.  At one point, for example, bin Laden was
reputed to own or control some 80 companies around the world.  In
the Sudan alone, according to Peter Bergen, he owned all of that
_________
21 Statement made at the World Economic Forum, Davos, Switzerland, 23
January 2003.
22 Electronic newsletter of the Orion Group, 24 April 2003.

- 12 -
country's most profitable businesses, including construction,
manufacturing, currency trading, import-export and agricultural
enterprises.
23  Not only were many of these well-managed to the
extent that they regularly turned a profit, but this largesse in turn
was funneled to local al Qa'ida cells that in essence became entirely
self-sufficient, self-reliant terrorist entities within the countries they
operated.
24
The resiliency of al Qa'ida and the likelihood of a post-bin Laden
al Qa'ida .  In the final analysis, al-Qa’ida's resiliency (and longevity)
is not predicated on the total number of jihadists that it may have or
have not trained in the past, but on its continued ability to recruit, to
mobilize, and animate both actual and would-be fighters, supporters
and sympathizers.  In this respect, it is significant that, despite the
punishment meted out to al Qa'ida during the past 18 months—the
arrests and personnel losses, the dismantling of its operational bases
and training camps in Afghanistan, the smashing of its headquarters
and its mass expulsion from that country—as early as March 2002
the movement quickly recommenced active propaganda and
communication efforts.  A professionally produced al Qa'ida
recruitment video, for example, suddenly appeared which was
circulated around various foreign Muslim communities in hopes of
attracting new martyrs to bin Laden’s cause.  The seven minute
video tape, seized by American authorities sometime during the
spring of 2002, openly extolled the virtues of martyrdom and
solicited new recruits to bin Laden’s cause.  It presented various
scenes of jihadists in combat that were followed by the images of 27
martyrs shown in rapid succession with the name of each listed,
where they are from and where they died.  Twelve of the martyrs
were then featured in a concluding segment accompanied by the
voice over: “They rejoice in the bounty provided by Allah: And with
regard to those left behind who have not yet joined them in their
_________
23 Peter Bergen, Holy Terror, Inc.: Inside the Secret World of Osama bin
Laden  (NY: Free Press, 2001),  pp.  47-49.
24 Anonymous, Through Our Enemies' Eyes , p. 34.

- 13 -
bliss, the martyrs glory in the fact that on them is no fear, nor have
they cause to grieve.”  The video closes with a message of greeting
from the “Black Banner Center for Islamic Information” along with
accompanying contact details for those interested in joining al Qa'ida
for the purpose of becoming a martyr.  At a time when the greatest
military onslaught directed against a terrorist group in history had
crushed al Qa'ida’s infrastructure in Afghanistan, it is remarkable
that this terrorist movement was still actively seeking to rally its
forces and attract new recruits to a struggle that it clearly regarded
as far from over.  Abu Ghaith, the group's chief spokesman, said as
much.  “Those youths that destroyed Americans with their planes,"
he declared, "they did a good deed.  There are thousands more young
followers who look forward to death like Americans look forward to
living.”
25
The persistent re-appearance of the al Neda web site is another
example of al Qa'ida's unremitting recruitment and morale
strengthening efforts.  The site, which is published in Arabic only,
continues to disseminate its anti-American and anti-Western
messages.  Three basic themes are emphasized:
• The West is implacably hostile to Islam
• The only way to address this threat and the only language
that the West understands is the logic of violence
• Jihad is the only option
The theory of jihad in particular is elaborated in great detail with
continued exhortations to Muslims that Islam involves commitment
to spread the faith by the sword.  In addition, regular summaries are
posted of news affecting the Islamic struggle against the West,
including al Qa'ida’s own accounts of ongoing fighting and
skirmishing with American and allied forces both in Afghanistan and
_________
25 Unclassified portions of Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of
Operations, classified title, 3 April 2002, p. 9.

- 14 -
Pakistan, along with a selection of suggested readings, including
books by approved authors. 26  Justification is also provided for the
September 11 th  attacks, with video clips and other messages praising
the operation and citing Islamic legal arguments to justify the killing
of civilians.  As with many other terrorist group sites, poetry is also
used to glorify the sacrifices of martyrs and the importance of
unrelenting struggle against Islam’s enemies.  According to British
journalist, Paul Eedle, the “site works to maintain the morale of al-
Qa'ida supporters in the face of obvious reverses since September
11.”
27   In particular, articles posted on the site have sought to draw
a connection between the destruction of the World Trade Center and
the cumulative blow struck against the U.S. economy by the
September 11
th  attacks.  Among the claims of proof the site offers are
the weakening strength of the American dollar, the precipitous
decline of the U.S. stock market, and the loss of confidence both at
home and abroad in the American economy.  Parallels are drawn
with the decline and ultimate demise of the Soviet Union precipitated
by the mujahideen and the jihad in Afghanistan during the 1980s.
28
Indeed, this has long been a consistent theme of bin Laden’s
propaganda: where the U.S. is often described as a “paper tiger”: on
the verge of financial ruin and total collapse much as the USSR once
was—with the power of Islam poised similarly to push America over
the precipice.  In bin Laden’s last publicly known address to his
fighters in December 2001, he played up that theme, stating that,
“America is in retreat by the grace of God Almighty and economic
attrition is continuing up to today.  But it needs further blows.  The
young men need to seek out the nodes of the American economy and
strike the enemy’s nodes.”
29
_________
26 Presentation made by the British journalist Paul Eedle, “The Language
of Jihad” at the Third Annual Conference of the Centre for the Study of
Terrorism and Political Violence, St Andrews University, Scotland, 8 June 2002.
27 Eedle, “Terrorism.com,” The Guardian  (London),. 17 July 2002.
28 Eedle, “Terrorism.com,” 17 July 2002.
29 Translation by, and personal communication with, Eedle, 31 July 2002.

- 15 -
Al Qa'ida's ability to carry on the struggle, however, has also not
been predicated on propaganda alone.  Despite its crushing defeat in
Afghanistan, during 2002, terrorist incidents linked to al Qa'ida
occurred in places as diverse as Tunisia, Pakistan, Jordan, Indonesia,
Kuwait, the Philippines, Yemen, and Kenya.  Targets included
German, Australian and Israeli tourists, French engineers and a
French oil tanker—as well as such longstanding ones as American
diplomats and servicemen.  Al-Qa’ida has continued to use suicide
bombing tactics—both at sea and on land—and on one occasion
kidnapped and subsequently executed an American journalist (Daniel
Pearl).  Commercial aviation also remained a significant al-Qa’ida
target.  In December 2001, for example, a terrorist with a bomb
hidden in his shoe attempted to blow up a U.S. aircraft en route from
Paris to Miami.  Eleven months later, a group in Kenya linked to Al-
Qa’ida tried to shoot down an Israeli charter flight with a hand-held
surface-to-air missile.
In this respect, the post-9/11 al-Qa’ida has shown itself to be a
remarkably nimble, flexible and adaptive entity.  In fact, al-Qa’ida
appears almost as the archetypal shark in the water, having to
constantly move forward, albeit changing direction slightly, in order
to survive.  Hence, the loss of Afghanistan may not have affected al-
Qa’ida's ability to mount terrorist attacks to the extent we imagine.
Afghanistan’s main importance to al-Qa’ida was a massive base from
which to prosecute a conventional civil war against the late Ahmad
Shah Masoud’s Northern Alliance.  Arms dumps, training camps,
staging areas and networks of forward and rear headquarters were
therefore required for the prosecution of this type of conflict.  These
accoutrements, however, are mostly irrelevant to the prosecution of
an international terrorism campaign.  The al-Qa’ida attacks
successfully perpetrated in Tunisia and Pakistan last spring, Bali,
Yemen, and Kuwait in October, and Mombassa in November attest to
this.  Indeed, previous “high-end” al-Qa’ida plots predating its
comfortable relationship with the Taleban in Afghanistan
demonstrate that the movement’s strength is not in geographical
possession or occupation of a defined geographical territory, but in

- 16 -
its fluidity and impermanence.  The activities of the peripatetic
Ramzi Ahmad Yousef, reputed mastermind of the first World Trade
Center bombing, during his sojourn in the Philippines during 1994
and 1995 is a case in point.  Yousef's grand scheme to bomb
simultaneously 12 American commercial aircraft in mid-flight over
the Pacific Ocean (the infamous "Bojinka" plot), for example, did not
require extensive operational bases and command and control
headquarters in an existing country to facilitate the planning and
execution of those attacks.
Rather, what was critical to the success of 9/11 were three
capabilities that al Qa'ida likely still retains.  First, was the ability to
identify of a key vulnerability or gap in the defenses of its principal
enemy—America—that could be mercilessly exploited (e.g., the U.S.
commercial aviation security structure).  Second, was the effective
use of deception on board the four hijacked aircraft where, the
passengers and crew, were deliberately lulled into believing that if
they behaved and cooperated as they were told—the standard
operating procedure for crew and passengers on hijacked aircraft
that historically had enhanced chances of survival—they would not
be harmed.  Third, suicide attack was employed to ensure the
attack’s success.  None of these essential qualities was dependent on
al Qa'ida having a base of operations in Afghanistan—and thus could
likely be replicated in some future plan that successfully identifies
and exploits a gap in our defenses and then cleverly and adroitly
assembles the operational requirements for that attack to succeed.
Even if the 2002 al Qa'ida attacks pale in comparison and
sophistication with such spectaculars as the 1998 embassy bombings,
the attack on the U.S.S. Cole  in 2000 and 9/11, the potential
rejuvenating power of a terrorist spectacular—however crude and
directed against a soft target, such a bar in Bali on Saturday
night—nonetheless demonstrates the ability of even one significant,
new terrorist incident to instantly re-ignite world-wide fears and
concern.
In addition, the means and knowledge to continue to prosecute
the struggle have been disseminated throughout the world.  The 13

- 17 -
volume Encyclopedia of Jihad  and one volume Jihad Manual  have
been loaded onto the world-world web, transferred onto discs and
CD-Roms and e-mailed to jihadists and would-be jihadists.  As a
review text with which to brush up on one’s skills, a training manual
to impart information and instruction to others, or even as a
recruitment vehicle, al-Qa’ida’s abiding faith in the power of
communication, whether through propaganda or instructional
treatises has ensured a steady of information to its far-flung
sympathizers and supporters.
Finally, bin Laden has likely prepared for his own death and in
turn has formulated a succession plan of his own, not necessarily
with regard to who will replace him as leader, but in order to ensure
the continuation of the movement and revolution that he set in
motion.  On several occasions , for example, bin Laden has spoken of
his own martyrdom and openly welcomed it.  In August 1998, he
declared that "I am fighting so I can die a martyr and go to heaven to
meet God.  Our fight is now against America.  I regret having lived
this long.  I have nothing to lose."  And, again four months later, he
proclaimed, "I am not afraid of death.  Rather, martyrdom is my
passion because martyrdom would lead to the birth of 1,000s of
Osamas."
30
What do broader current trends tell us about future
potentialities?
First, and foremost (and at the risk of stating the obvious) it
must be said that we are in a transitional state, with our
counterterrorism measures improving and becoming stronger while
al-Qa’ida constantly scrambles and struggles to adapt itself to the
new, less congenial operational environments in which it must exist.
During this period of adaptation, there will be continued low-level
attacks and, as has been the pattern of late, mostly against accessible,
soft targets.  Particular emphasis will continue to be laid on the
exploitation of local causes with which al Qa'idas ongoing propaganda
_________
30 Quoted in Ibid., pp. 31 and 6.

- 18 -
efforts will be re-aligned to fit its pan-Islamist ideology.  In many
instances, these local cells will also continue to be surreptitiously co-
opted by al-Qa’ida so that, unbeknownst to their rank-and-file, the
group will in fact pursue al-Qa’ida’s broader, long-range goals in
addition to or instead of its own, more parochial goals.  This process
has been evident in some of the Jemmah Islamiya attacks in
Indonesia and Singapore as well as among some Algerian terrorist
cells operating in European countries.  During this transition, we are
also likely to see increased recruitment targeting second and third
generation European Muslims living in Diaspora communities there.
Particular recruitment efforts have already been focused, for
example, on Muslim youth living in the Netherlands whom it was
previously assumed had been completely assimilated into their new
host countries and cultures.
31  Al-Qa’ida operatives will thus seek to
embed themselves in, and draw new sources of support from,
receptive established Muslim communities.  In this way, new recruits
can be drawn into the movement who may not have previously come
under the scrutiny of local or national law enforcement.
The main challenge for al-Qa’ida, however, will be to promote
and ensure its durability as an ideology and concept.  It can only do
this by staying in the news; by elbowing any would-be terrorist
competitors out of the lime-light and through new attacks promoting
its continued relevance to Muslim affairs.  Violence will continue to
be key to ensuring its continued presence as an international force.
Critical to this will be its ability to mount a guerrilla, cum terrorist
campaign against American forces both in Iraq and deployed in
support of those operations throughout the Middle East.  If, six
months from now, this promised campaign has not materialized and
we experience no more significant al Qa'ida terrorist attacks
anywhere (e.g., along the lines of even the October 2002 Bali
bombings), only then may we begin writing al Qa'ida's obituary.
_________
31 See General Intelligence and Security Service , Recruitment for the
jihad in the Netherlands: from incident to trend  (The Hague: Ministry of the
Interior and Kingdom Relations, December 2002).

- 19 -
Second, while what al Qa'ida might do and how it would do it is
of course unclear, developments in Israel over the past year or 18
months provide some important clues not just as models for potential
future al Qa'ida operations, but as possible templates for attacks by
other terrorist groups.  The Israelis at times perhaps overstate the
point that the type of terrorist attacks experienced in Israel or
directed against Israeli targets elsewhere rarely remain confined to
Israel and Israelis alone: eventually expanding to embrace other
countries in different situations and circumstances.  Indeed, as one
leading Israeli strategist and military analyst reflected in a recent
discussion of potential future terrorist trends and tactics: “We had
the same discussion back in 1968 when El Al aircraft were hijacked
and people said this is your problem, not ours.”
32  As we know only
too well today: ensuring the security of civil aviation remains a
pervasive, global, challenge.  Accordingly, it may be useful to look at
recent trends in terrorism in Israel for the clues and insight they
potentially offer with respect to threats other Western countries—and
especially the U.S—might face.  In this respect, there are least four
potentially significant developments of which note should be taken:
1.
 The sustained campaign of suicide bombing that has
convulsed Israel since the start of the Second Intifada in
September 200.  Although this tactic surfaced in Israel in
1993, and thereafter became a regular security problem,
fully 70% of all such incidents have occurred during the past
20 months.  Indeed, of the approximately 700 Israelis killed
since then, suicide bombers are responsible for the deaths of
nearly half.;
2.
 The attempt to bomb a large gas works on Ramat Ha-Sharon,
a Tel Aviv suburb, that would have a potentially catastrophic
impact not just on the city and its inhabitants but on nearby
_________
32 Interview, Dan Scheuftan, National Security Studies Center, Haifa
University, December 2002 .

- 20 -
vital, sensitive, government installations, whose destruction
were considered the attack’s secondary targets;
3. The use of SAM-7 surface-to-air missiles in an attempt to
shoot down a charter Israeli passenger aircraft as it took off
from the Mombasa, Kenya airport; and,
4.
 The growing use of poisons in suicide bomb attacks and
attendant increase of interest in chemical warfare among
some Palestinian groups.
At least two of the above attacks that were foiled (the gas works and
SAM attack) came uncomfortably close to succeeding.  Given that
none had any especially unique operational or technical requirement,
the ease of their implementation in other countries cannot be
discounted.  Indeed one has to ask whether American or any
European society can easily bear any one of those types of attacks?
Worse still, between and beyond the above attacks, one can
conjure up immense concerns that fit uncomfortably with the
capabilities found across the terrorist technological spectrum.  The
Israeli concept of “mega terrorism” is particularly instructive in this
respect.  This concept embraces not only the obvious—terrorist use of
WMD or more discrete CBR weaponry, the targeting of infrastructure
and mass casualty events, but arguably more prosaic types of
incidents such as suicide bombings, terrorist attacks on
kindergartens and primary schools, the assassination of a range of
political leaders below that of presidents or prime
ministers—including mayors, high court judges, leading
parliamentarians, etc.—in ways that while perhaps not causing
extensive human loss of life or physical damage, would nonetheless
have profound, far-reaching psychological repercussions on the
targeted society.  In other words, a deliberate and calculated
infliction of sharp, almost unbearable pain— but in modest
amounts—that would nonetheless be designed to attempt to bring
society to its knees.  The sniper incidents in and around metropolitan
Washington, D.C. last fall provide an uncomfortable example of the

- 21 -
comparative ease at which such societies can be profoundly affected
and unsettled.
How should we be thinking about terrorism today and
tomorrow?
In the post-9/11 environment, terrorism’s power to coerce, and
intimidate, to force changes in our normal behavior, and to influence
our policies and affect how and on what we spend money, have all
increased enormously.  In this respect, the stakes have not only
grown, but public fears and expectations have as well.  More and
more, the metric of success in the war on terrorism is defined as the
ability of intelligence agencies and law enforcement organizations to
prevent, pre-empt and deter attacks.  Conversely, the metric of
success for the terrorists has become simply the ability to act.
Although there is a world of difference between bombing a bar in
Bali and attacking the Pentagon, the impact is not necessarily as
dissimilar.  Al-Qa’ida’s power and receptiveness in parts of the world
today is in fact based on the extraordinary success achieved and
attention generated by the 9/11 attacks.  Accordingly, the enormous
rejuvenating and regenerative capacity of a new, successful, attack
cannot be under-estimated.
Also, given that the war on terrorism will itself inevitably
change during this third phase (now that the war in Iraq has been
won) to become primarily a war of attrition, we have to be careful to
avoid fatigue and impatience—and not least over-optimism.  The
problem is that countering terrorism is akin to taking a time series of
photographs.  The image captured on film today is not the same as
yesterday nor will it be the same tomorrow.  The fundamental
nature and character of terrorism changed with 9/11 and moreover
has continued to change and evolve since then.  It is becoming
increasingly difficult to categorize or pigeon-hole as an identifiable
phenomena, amenable to categorization or clear distinction.  The
traditional way of understanding terrorism and looking at terrorists
based on organizational definitions and attributes in some cases is no
longer relevant.  Increasingly, lone individuals with no connection

- 22 -
with or formal ties to established or identifiable terrorist
organizations are rising up to engage in violence.  These individuals
are often inspired or motivated by some larger political movement
that they are not actually a part of, but nonetheless draw spiritual
and emotional sustenance and support from.  Indeed, over the past
10 years or so—with the exception of the two World Trade Center
attacks and that on the Pentagon—all of the most significant terrorist
incidents that occurred in the U.S. were perpetrated either by a lone
individuals very tight two or three-man conspiratorial cells.  The
“Unabomber,” Theodore Kacyzinski; Timothy McVeigh; Eric Rudoloph,
who bombed the 1996 Atlanta Olympics as well as gay bars and
abortion clinics; the lone gunman of Palestinian extraction who
opened fire on the observation deck of the Empire State Building in
1997, the two Palestinians, who later that year, plotted a suicide
bombing attack on the New York City subway, the July 4
th  shooting at
Los Angeles International Airport by a naturalized American born
who had emigrated from Egypt, and the sniper, John Muhammad and
John Lee Malvo, demonstrate the power to inculcate fear and
terrorize in a target society by even very modest levels of, albeit
well-calculated, pain.
In conclusion, whatever the future holds for bin Laden and al
Qa'ida, it is indisputable that they have had a seismic effect on the
U.S. and the entire world.  Bin Laden is in fact one of few people alive
who can claim to have fundamentally changed the course of history.
And, in this respect, the epic battle that he launched is not over yet.
The multi-year planning period of all previous al Qa'ida spectaculars
alone suggests that it is too soon to write off either bin Laden or his
jihadists.  Accordingly, some monumental new operation may have
been set in motion before 9/11 that is now slowly and inexorably
unfolding.  Indeed, because of the destruction of the Taleban and
because of what al Qa'ida sees as America's global "war on Islam," the
movement's sense of commitment and purpose today is arguably
greater than ever.