AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN 
SUBCONTINENT:
The Nucleus of Jihad in South Asia
 THE SOUFAN CENTER
 JANUARY 2019

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
!1

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN 
SUBCONTINENT (AQIS): 
The Nucleus of  Jihad in South Asia 
THE SOUFAN CENTER 
JANUAR Y 2019 
 
!2


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
CONTENTS 
List of  Abbreviations	 4 
List of  Figures & Graphs	 5 
Key Findings 	 6 
Executive Summary	 7 
AQIS Formation: An Afﬁliate with Strong Alliances	 11 
AQIS Leadership	 19 
AQIS Funding & Finances	 24 
Wahhabization of  South Asia	 27 
A Region Primed: Changing Dynamics in the Subcontinent	 31 
Global Threats Posed by AQIS	 40 
Conclusion 	 44 
Contributors 	 46 
About The Soufan Center (TSC) 	 48 
Endnotes	 49
!3

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AAI 	 	 Ansar ul Islam Bangladesh  
ABT 	 	 Ansar ul Bangla Team  
AFPAK 	 Afghanistan and Pakistan Region  
AQC 	 	 Al-Qaeda Central  
AQI	 	 Al-Qaeda in Iraq 
AQIS 		 Al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent  
FATA	 	 Federally Administered Tribal Areas 
HUJI 		 Harkat ul Jihad e Islami  
HUJI-B	 Harkat ul Jihad e Islami Bangladesh 
ISI 	 	 Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence  
ISKP 	 	 Islamic State Khorasan Province  
JMB	 	 Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh 
KFR	 	 Kidnap for Randsom 
LeJ 	 	 Lashkar e Jhangvi  
LeT 	 	 Lashkar e Toiba  
TTP 	 	 Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan  
  
!4

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
LIST OF FIGURES & GRAPHS 
Figure 1: Map of  South Asia	 9 
Figure 2: AQIS-Lashkar e T oiba(LeT) Nexus	 15 
Figure 3: AQIS Afﬁliates in South Asia	 18 
Figure 4: AQIS Leadership	 21 
Figure 5: Bangladesh’s Victims	 35 
Figure 6: Rohingya Timeline	 37 
Figure 7: Myanmar’s Fleeing Rohingya	 39
Graph 1: AQIS Attacks with other T errorist Organizations	 12 
Graph 2: Funding Sources of  AQIS India Cell	 25 
Graph 3: Saudi Funding of  Mosques & Madrassas	 30 
Graph 4: Bangladesh: Civilians & Jihadist Militants Killed	 41
!5

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
KEY FINDINGS  
•Over the last three decades, Islam in South Asia has undergone a gradual shift, from moderate 
and pluralistic to a more puritan Wahhabi brand practiced in Saudi Arabia. The spread of  
thousands of  Saudi-funded madrassas and Wahhabi mosques across South Asia is proving to be 
an ideal recruiting base for al-Qaeda and other jihadist groups throughout the region. 
•AQIS is a major node in a broad-based, loosely organized jihadist network that has deep roots 
in South Asia. Until recently , AQIS has relied on traditional methods of  clandestine terrorist 
activity , like using person-to-person contacts for recruitment, training, and indoctrination. Still, it 
seems inevitable that the group’s efforts, both in terms of  recruitment and spreading its 
propaganda, will continue to migrate more pervasively to the Internet and social media. 
•The growing communal divide and increased incidences of  violent attacks on Muslims in India 
has created an atmosphere of  fear and exacerbated tensions between Hindus and Muslims in the 
region. AQIS is attempting to exploit this hostility through repeated Urdu language rhetoric in 
the form of  propaganda pushed out on various social media channels. 
•The common notion that al-Qaeda and its afﬁliates only operate and thrive in conﬂict zones, 
such as Y emen, Libya, and Syria, is incorrect. AQIS illustrates how al-Qaeda successfully 
inﬁltrates, operates, and spreads its ideology in countries experiencing relative calm, like India. 
This model may prove to be al-Qaeda’s blueprint for the future.  
•The principal success of  AQIS has been its ability to rewrite the global jihadist narrative from a 
regional perspective: a narrative with local roots but global aspirations. AQIS has adopted a 
deliberate strategy of  eschewing the savage tactics of  the Islamic State (IS). AQIS’ new code of  
conduct is a deliberate attempt to reestablish al-Qaeda as the leader of  global jihad, a position it 
had lost to IS since the latter’s rise in 2014. 
•Even though the majority of  recent analysis on foreign terrorist ﬁghters focuses on the so-called 
Islamic State, it is important to realize that, behind the mobilization to Syria and Iraq, the next 
largest mobilization of  foreign ﬁghters was the Afghan jihad. Given the history of  failed states 
and civil wars, along with ungoverned spaces and porous borders, in South Asia, countries like 
Afghanistan and Pakistan will continue to be attractive destinations for foreign terrorist ﬁghters. 
•The United States in particular and the West in general continue to remain al-Qaeda’s primary 
targets. AQIS poses a threat to other states in the international system, such as China, which is 
increasing its presence in South Asia. Recent attacks like the shooting at the Chinese consulate in 
Karachi and the killing of  a prominent Chinese businessman, while not tied to AQIS directly , 
offer clear signals that China is also a legitimate target for terrorists in the region. 
!6

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Seventeen years after the 9/11 attacks, al-Qaeda has survived, due in large part to a deliberate 
strategy focused on gaining the support of  the masses by “going local.” Al-Qaeda in the Indian 
Subcontinent (AQIS), the youngest afﬁliate of  al-Qaeda, is in many ways the realization of  that 
new strategy . Western counterterrorism circles are slowly recognizing the viability of  al-Qaeda’s 
reach into South Asia, as AQIS appears to be building its capabilities throughout the region as 
other terrorist groups, including the Islamic State’s regional afﬁliate, Islamic State Khorasan 
Province (ISKP), bear the brunt of  global counter-terrorism operations. This paper takes a fresh 
look at the emergence of  AQIS— its leadership, funding sources, and future role as a dominant 
actor in the global jihadist movement. Moreover, this paper assesses the group’s ability to target 
the U.S. homeland and its assets abroad. 
AQIS was, in the words of  Ayman Al Zawahiri, “a result of  years of  efforts to bring together 
various jihadist factions under one banner.” Because AQIS is so closely tied to Zawahiri, this 
speciﬁc afﬁliate seems to be the perfect blueprint for al-Qaeda Core (AQC) to use as a litmus test 
for current and future franchise groups and afﬁliates. Therefore, a proper assessment of  AQIS 
must be contextualized within the broader regional and geopolitical dynamics, but also 
predicated upon an analysis of  AQC and its status nearly two decades after the attacks of  9/11.  
The principal success of  AQIS has been its ability to rewrite the global jihadist narrative from a 
regional perspective, what the authors refer to as the ‘Glo-cal’ jihad: a narrative that has local 
roots but global aspirations. This proved to be a masterstroke for al-Qaeda, as it opened access to 
recruits to replenish its dwindling cadre and leadership. This Glo-cal jihad employs local 
resources to launch attacks on global targets. To ensure success of  this model, Al-Qaeda has 
allowed its afﬁliates to rebrand and transform themselves into groups focused mainly on regional 
political agendas. This was a conscious effort to gain a wider domestic support base, while 
allowing al-Qaeda to exploit support from local populations more interested in seeking solutions 
!7

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
to their domestic issues than working for the success of  something as far removed from their lives 
as global jihad. 
V ery early on, AQIS demonstrated its own capability by launching a spectacular, though 
abortive, attack on a Pakistan Navy frigate, the PNS Zulﬁqar. Its connections to the region mean 
that AQIS has both the capabilities and logistical support to plan and execute similar spectacular 
attacks in the future. Close geographical and ideological proximity to AQC allows for a more 
ﬂuid command and control apparatus. While the group is in its nascent stages, it has already 
proven itself  as an adaptive adversary able to capitalize upon local grievances and serve as a 
facilitator for other terrorist groups in the broader jihadist network that stretches throughout the 
region. 
Between 2014 and 2015, AQIS’ leadership suffered heavy losses at the hands of  both Pakistani 
and U.S. counter-terrorism operations. After a string of  defeats, many knowledgeable observers 
believed that AQIS, like the majority of  terrorist organizations, would not survive past its ﬁrst few 
years. However, al-Qaeda’s South Asian progeny demonstrated remarkable resilience and now 
seems to be on course for a comeback, not just in South Asia, but into Afghanistan and beyond. 
Beginning late 2016, the group attempted to recast itself  in the wake of  massive upheavals in the 
jihadi world, beginning with the demise of  the caliphate in Iraq and Syria. Its emergence as one 
of  the most dominant afﬁliates of  al-Qaeda is attributed not only to its geographical and 
operational proximity to AQC, but also to its success in weaving the local narrative into the 
broader discourse of  the global jihadist movement. 
Like most terrorist groups that are successful in ﬁnancing their organizations, AQIS maintains a 
diverse funding portfolio that includes donations from individuals and charities, Kidnapping for 
Ransom (KFR), and money solicited or siphoned from other terrorist groups, including Lashkar e 
Toiba (LeT). Since nearly one-third of  AQIS’ operating budget is derived from donations from 
individual citizens, this will make it extremely difﬁcult to counter the group’s ﬁnances, a major 
long-term challenge in combating the group overall. 
With its deliberate strategy of  shunning coercion and its rejection of  brutal Islamic State tactics, 
AQIS is attempting to reach out to local leaders and broader community members within the 
Muslim world. The emphasis on tolerant rules, like abstaining from attacking noncombatant 
Buddhists, Christians, and Hindus, is a strategic move to gain support from less radical jihadi 
outﬁts operating in South Asia and elsewhere. This AQC strategy , of  which AQIS is an integral 
part, is a calculated attempt to regain the leadership of  global jihad and provide al-Qaeda with 
momentum as it seeks to capitalize upon the momentary demise of  IS. 
!8

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Wahhabi inﬂuence has resulted in an increase in Islamist violence in Pakistan, Indian Kashmir, 
and Bangladesh. Most of  the governments in these South Asian countries have made a clear 
connection between money and resources provided by the Kingdom of  Saudi Arabia and the 
radicalization of  Islam in their own countries. There appears to be a strong linkage between the 
spread of  Wahhabism and increasing conservatism in South Asia. Though the assumption that 
madrassas (religious seminaries) are principal engines of  global Islamic terrorism is ill-founded, it 
is certainly true that many Wahhabi madrassas in South Asia have been directly linked to Islamic 
radicalism, something which was absent in the Suﬁ-Islam dominated region a few decades ago. 
Figure 1: Map of  South Asia 
!9


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
The disagreements between al-Qaeda’s senior leadership and al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI), the 
precursor to IS, in the mid-2000s fundamentally shaped al-Qaeda’s strategic shift. The failure of  
AQC to reign in the brutality of  AQI provided an important lesson to the parent organization, 
namely , that it needed to exercise more moral, and at times operational, control over its afﬁliates.  
Further, the success of  IS in Iraq, which was predicated upon support it received from local 
Sunni groups, solidiﬁed AQC’s realization of  the need to focus more aggressively on developing 
local roots, cultivating these ties and ultimately strengthening its base in South Asia—the region 
that hosted its ﬁghters for more than a decade and a half. AQC wanted to move from being a 
guest, dependent on the benevolence of  its hosts, to being a host itself.  
Importantly , the current socio-political dynamics in South Asia will play a critical role in the 
expansion or contraction of  AQIS’ appeal. The ampliﬁcation of  an inter-communal divide and 
growing sectarian violence  in the region has the potential of  serving the jihadists’ cause. AQIS is 
exploiting these narratives by calling on Indian Muslims to join the jihad to defend their religion 
and their honor. The situation in Kashmir has also taken an unprecedented turn. For the ﬁrst 
time since the onset of  conﬂict in Kashmir, the region is responding to the appeal of  groups like 
al-Qaeda. Local Kashmiris lead the AQIS wing in the contested territory , which reﬂects the 
growing Islamization of  Kashmiri militancy . AQIS is also gaining momentum in Bangladesh. 
Though there is considerable concern about Southeast Asian jihadists joining on behalf  of  the 
Rohingya cause, a far bigger concern should be AQIS hijacking the Rohingya insurgency , as 
AQIS is both organizationally and geographically closer to the core of  the Rohingya crisis. 
The chances of  AQIS conducting a successful attack on U.S. soil are negligible, although the 
group still poses a signiﬁcant threat to U.S. interests at the regional level, where militants could 
target embassies, hotels or other areas frequented by Westerners. Further, given China’s vested 
political and economic interests throughout South Asia—investment and infrastructure carried 
out by state-owned enterprises—it is of  pivotal importance that China can guarantee the security 
of  its citizens and protect its investments abroad. 
In late December 2018, President Trump announced that the United States would begin 
withdrawing approximately 7,000 troops from Afghanistan, effectively cutting the U.S. military 
presence in that country in half. The drawdown of  U.S. troops comes at a critical time, just as al-
Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS) is embedding more of  its ﬁghters as both military 
trainers and advisers to the Afghan Taliban. With fewer troops to combat a growing AQIS 
presence in Afghanistan, 2019 could very well witness a surge in al-Qaeda’s operational 
capabilities throughout South Asia, especially as the remaining U.S. troops are focused on 
ﬁghting militants from the Islamic State Khorasan Province (ISKP) and training and advising the 
struggling Afghan National Security Forces.  
!10

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
AQIS FORMATION: AN AFFILIATE WITH 
STRONG ALLIANCES 
On September 3, 2014, a group of  ofﬁcers within the Pakistan Navy led an audacious attack on 
the naval dockyard in Karachi, in an attempt to hijack the PNS Zulﬁqar, a sophisticated Pakistan 
Navy frigate. These ofﬁcers were aligned with the newly announced afﬁliate of  al-Qaeda, 
Jamaa’at Qaidat- al- Jihad – ﬁ- Shibhi at Qarrah at Hindiyah, translated as “Group of  the Base 
of  Jihad in the Indian Subcontinent,” or al-Qaeda in Indian Subcontinent (AQIS). Its 
penetration of  military and security institutions is a growing concern for a number of  countries, 
not just Pakistan, but India and the United States, too, two countries that AQIS is likely to target. 
For al-Qaeda, the formation of  a South Asian afﬁliate was a realization of  one of  bin Laden’s 
long cherished dreams. Indeed, if  the creation of  AQIS demonstrates one characteristic of  al-1
Qaeda above all others, it is the strategic patience of  the group. Of  course, it should come as no 
surprise that al-Qaeda has sought to expand throughout South Asia, as the historical legacy of  
the region extends to the terrorist group’s earliest days. Fazlur Rahman, emir of  the Jihad 
Movement in Bangladesh, was one of  the signatories of  Osama bin Laden’s 1998 fatwa, World 
Islamic Front Statement Urging Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders. From providing safe haven to key 2
personnel in al-Qaeda’s top leadership cadres, South Asia has long been an integral part of  the 
global jihadist movement. And as the Abbottabad Papers revealed, prominent jihadists like 
Rahman were among those that maintained working relationships with Pakistani authorities, 
even though they were known to be among bin Laden’s closest allies. 3
The creation of  AQIS took several years and was a critical pillar of  al-Qaeda’s objective of  
extending its brand. With a Muslim population of  over 550 million, bin Laden long recognized 4
that al-Qaeda had inexplicably neglected the jihadi potential of  the subcontinent. The former al-
Qaeda chieftain strongly believed that an environment of  heightened tensions between India and 
!11

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Pakistan would be ideal for announcing the South Asia chapter, as it would rally millions of  
Muslims to the “cause of  Islam.” This possible scenario of  an Indian-Pakistan conﬂict nearly 5
played out when AQIS attempted to hijack the PNS Zulﬁqar (along with the PNS Aslat, there 
was also an intention to attack Indian naval ships and a U.S. naval vessel, the USS Supply). The 6
attack on an Indian naval vessel by a Pakistani Navy frigate would invariably be seen as an act of  
war by India. The terrorists hoped that before India could realize that this was a terrorist attack 
by a non-state actor, the retaliatory action would have occurred. The involvement of  Pakistani 
Navy ofﬁcers would have further escalated the situation. 
Graph 1: AQIS Attacks with other T errorist Organizations 
Over the last two and a half  decades, AQC has maintained close working relationships with 
various Pakistani militant groups, including Lashkar e Toiba (LeT), Harkat ul Jihad e Islami 
(HUJI), and Lashkar e Jhangvi (LeJ). This is hardly surprising, since some of  al-Qaeda’s top 7
lieutenants had long used South Asia as an operational hub. For example, Al Qaeda’s chief  
operational planner, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, relied on a range of  militant groups in Pakistan
—including LeT , HUJI, LeJ, Harkat ul Mujahideen, Jaish e Mohammed, and Sipah e Sahaba 
Pakistan—to provide him with safe houses and other logistical support after the attacks of  9/11.  8
!12


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
These groups provided logistical support and resources to AQC, but this support was mostly 
informal and discreet. Groups like LeT did not want to be seen providing direct support to AQC 
by Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), an entity with signiﬁcant inﬂuence in shaping 
Pakistan’s foreign and security policy . The formation of  AQIS was a step to establish a formal 
institutional relationship with these groups, with a focus on local capacity building for al-Qaeda. 
Al-Qaeda leadership described the formation of  AQIS as a product of  more than two years of  
work in uniting pre-existing jihadist groups in the Indian Subcontinent.  
The formation of  AQIS “further demonstrates Core Al Qaeda’s shift from an Arab to a South 
Asian demographic base,” according to terrorism expert Bruce Hoffman. There is a ﬂuidity to 9
the membership of  groups in South Asia, many of  which have overlapping ties. Most of  the top 
leadership of  AQIS was earlier aligned with various domestic jihadist and sectarian outﬁts like 
HUJI, LeJ and Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP), also known as the Pakistani Taliban . The 10
merger of  various factions of  these jihadi groups into a single organization underscores the 
importance al-Qaeda attaches to the South Asian region. The decision behind the creation of  a 
South Asian afﬁliate, therefore, was perhaps “less operational than political.” In short, this was 11
a deliberate move designed to accelerate the growth of  the organization and rejuvenate al-
Qaeda’s posture throughout South Asia.  
In the past few years, al-Qaeda has reformulated its strategy in order to survive and thrive.  It 12
made a concerted attempt to distance itself  from “lone wolf ” attacks in Europe and the U.S., thus 
deﬂecting a direct onslaught on its members and assets. Al-Qaeda was able to slowly rebuild its 
degraded capacity and waning inﬂuence, initially at the regional level. The formation of  AQIS 
was an important milestone in this process of  rebuilding. After initial successes, AQIS struggled 
to make its presence felt in the subcontinent. Many of  its operatives and leaders were killed in 
drone strikes in tribal areas of  Pakistan. Security analysts wrote off  AQIS as a doomed afﬁliate. 
This inevitably led to a complacent response toward the threats posed by the group. However, 
AQIS proved to be resilient and persistent. Over the past few years, the group has expanded its 
zones of  operation both ideologically and practically .  
While many terrorism analysts might think of  al-Qaeda as primarily an Arab organization, the 
group has deep connections within South Asia. The region also proved to be al-Qaeda’s ultimate 
refuge. Al-Qaeda was founded in 1988 in the northwestern region of  Pakistan, and has since then 
maintained its presence in the region.  Prior to 9/11, the group fostered longstanding 13
relationships with other terrorist outﬁts throughout South Asia, which they have successfully 
maintained. AQIS has steadily built on existing relationships and cultivated new ones and today , 
the AQIS network spans across almost all the countries of  South Asia, including Myanmar. 
!13

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
AQIS - Lashkar e T oiba (LeT) Linkages 
With most of  its leadership based in Pakistan, AQIS has successfully exploited its local 
connections to sustain itself. Its relationship with LeT is particularly strong. Al-Qaeda ties with 
LeT go back to the anti-Soviet war. One of  LeT’s founders, Abdul Rehman Sareehi, had close 
ties with both Abdullah Azzam and Osama bin Laden.  At a time when most of  the jihadi 14
outﬁts in Pakistan were either Deobandi or Jamaat e Islami, LeT was the ﬁrst Ahle hadith  15
group, whose ideology was identical to the Salaﬁ ideology practiced by al-Qaeda. LeT , which 
continues to enjoy robust support from ISI, provided material and logistical support to individual 
al-Qaeda members. Abu Zubaiyada’s arrest in 2005 from one of  the LeT safe houses is well 16
documented. 
Documents reviewed by the authors provide strong evidence about AQIS-LeT ties and their 
willingness to share operational space in South Asia. ISI has been willing to turn a blind eye or 17
even lend surrogate support to AQIS as long as the latter remains operationally India-focused. 18
A key member of  the AQIS India cell, Abdul Rahman, travelled to Pakistan in 2014 as an LeT 
recruit. ISI facilitated his entry into Karachi via Dubai, but once inside Pakistan, Rahman met 
with several high-ranking AQIS leaders, including its chief, Asim Umar. Through his LeT 
contacts, Rahman later joined AQIS. The indictment documents of  Abdul Rahman reveal that 
numerous LeT leaders visited AQIS headquarters in South Waziristan. Further, Sajid Majeed, 
the LeT commander and mastermind of  the Mumbai attacks, shares a close association with 
Asim Umar. Majeed, who Abdul Rehman knew by the name Aamir Qasim, emerged as a 19
master strategist during the investigations of  the Mumbai attacks conducted by both the FBI and 
Indian intelligence agencies. Sajid Majid heads the India Wing of  LeT and has the ability to not 
only manipulate AQIS assets, but also to pool LeT and AQIS resources to mount future attacks 
in India. 
!14

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Figure 2: AQIS-Lashkar e T oiba(LeT) Nexus 
 
!15


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
The T aliban Factor 
AQIS has also been able to forge a working relationship with the Afghan Taliban, a collaboration 
that goes beyond simple terrorist operations. AQIS today plays the same role that AQC played 
after the Taliban’s defeat in November 2001, in that it provides crucial support to Taliban 
insurgency warfare against Afghan and U.S. forces. Jihad in Afghanistan still enjoys a larger 
currency amongst Pakistan-based groups than jihad against India or the Pakistani state. AQIS 
operations in Afghanistan are, therefore, largely in support of  the Taliban to highlight its 
commitment towards jihad against the West. AQIS helps the Taliban in its operations, and the 
Taliban, as quid pro quo, helps to cement the AQIS presence inside Afghanistan. As al-Qaeda 
expert Thomas Joscelyn has noted, “ Al-Qaeda’s decision to operate clandestinely in Afghanistan 
should not be mistaken for evidence that it lacks a signiﬁcant footprint.” 20
AQIS operates both independent of, and in concert with, the Taliban, including its ability to 
establish training camps in various Afghan provinces. This collaboration has boosted AQIS’ 
conﬁdence to expand to new areas in Afghanistan in recent years. The discovery of  a massive 
AQIS camp that spanned thirty square miles in the Shorabak district of  Kandahar in 2015, 
where “ AQIS and the Taliban were working together,” is noteworthy . The AQIS-run camp was 21
described as “probably the largest [al-Qaeda] camp discovered in the country after 9/11.” Al-22
Qaeda’s ability to operate across both sides of  the border speak to its strength, which is 
predicated on its ability to coordinate with, or use, individuals and networks. 
Tribal Networks 
Due in part to AQC’s history in the region, AQIS members have established deep ties with tribes 
in both North and South Waziristan, especially the Mehsud subtribe. Muhammad Asif, the head 
of  AQIS India, provided Indian investigators with vital insights into the linkages between AQIS 
and Mehsuds of  Waziristan . Asif  trained in the same camp where former TTP chief, 23
Hakimullah Mehsud, was killed in a drone strike in 2013. Asim Umar, according to Asif, spends 
most of  his time in and around South Waziristan. In return, AQIS provides ﬁnancial resources to 
these terrorist groups based in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) region and many 
times plays the role of  mediator in the resolution of  tribal disputes. AQIS has also assisted the 
TTP in carrying out attacks against the Pakistani state.  According to data provided by the 24
Global Terrorism Database at the University of  Maryland’s National Consortium for the Study 
of  Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, AQIS collaborated with TTP in at least half  a dozen 
attacks in Pakistan. 
!16

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
These ties with various local militant partners have also bolstered AQIS’ role as a consultant and 
local conﬂict-shaper, which has arguably deepened al-Qaeda’s reach and inﬂuence into mainland 
Pakistan. Al-Qaeda’s continued ability to maintain close ties to the Afghan Taliban—despite the 
deaths of  Mullah Omar and Mullah Akhtar Mansour—and to incorporate members or former 
members of  the 313 Brigade, LeT , and Harakat ul-Jihad al-Islami (HUJI) into its ranks, are 
concerning in this regard, as this bolsters al-Qaeda’s ability to radicalize and operationalize 
members of  Pakistan’s military . Most of  these groups have longstanding ties with ISI and many 
times these ties have transgressed beyond the professional patron-client relationship into more 
personal ones.  
!17

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Figure 3: AQIS Affiliates in South Asia 
!18


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
AQIS LEADERSHIP 
Until early 2016, the real identity of  AQIS leadership was completely obfuscated. There was 
much debate in security corridors about the choice of  Asim Umar as the head of  AQIS. Most 
analysts believed that Umar was a Pakistani cleric who had a decade-long association with 
various jihadi entities in Pakistan. Moreover, until July 2014, Umar released his audio messages 
and videos as a senior member of  TTP . It now has emerged that Umar was closely associated 
with al-Qaeda since 2010. Long before announcing the formation of  its subcontinent chapter, al-
Qaeda nurtured a potent South Asia wing which coordinated operations between various 
domestic jihadi groups. In 2013, Riyaz Bhatkal, the Pakistan-based chief  of  Indian 
Mujahideen, visited North Waziristan and met Umar. Bhatkal told his Indian counterpart, 25
Yasin aka Ahmed, that the person in charge of  al-Qaeda’s operations for South Asia was a man 
from Uttar Pradesh (UP) in India. Bhatkal also told Ahmed that the person was ‘mast’ (cool), a 
code for being pious and talented. 26
In 2009, Indian agencies collected intelligence that one Indian citizen, Sanaul Haq, was 
associated with al-Qaeda and TTP . However, agencies were unaware that Haq was actually Asim 
Umar. The arrests of  more than half  a dozen AQIS operatives in India in late 2015 and early 
2016 offered Indian security agencies critical insight into the leadership and organizational 
structure of  AQIS. It was only then that the agencies discovered that Asim Umar was Sanaul 
Haq, who had spent most of  his young days in the seminaries of  Deoband in UP .  
After reaching Pakistan, Umar studied in Jamia Uloom ul Islamia at Binori Town in Karachi. 27
Binori Town madrassa is a Deobandi seminary , which in the 1990s served as a breeding ground 
for jihadists belonging to Harkat ul Mujahideen and HUJI. Umar then joined Harkat ul 
Mujahideen and taught at Darul uloom Haqqania in Peshawar until 2004. Hamid Mir, a 
Pakistani journalist, met Umar in 2005 in Ghazni province, where he was ﬁghting alongside the 
Afghan Taliban. Mir says he met Umar again in 2007 in North Waziristan. Umar, Mir claims, 
!19

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
was forced to move out of  Ghazni when a local Taliban commander accused him of  being an 
Indian spy . 28
After the Lal Masjid incident in 2007, Umar is said to have joined Illyas Kashmiri’s 313 Brigade 
and through Kashmiri, he met leaders from both TTP and AQC. From 2007 to 2013, Umar 
continued to remain aligned with TTP and quickly rose among its ranks to become an important 
leader, issuing statements and video messages asking Indian Muslims to join the global jihad. As-
Sahab media foundation, al-Qaeda’s media wing, identiﬁed Umar as the head of  al-Qaeda’s 
sharia committee for Pakistan prior to his appointment as AQIS emir. 29
Indian security agencies have credible information that Asim Umar, aka Sanaul Haq, spends 
most of  his time traveling between South Waziristan and Peshawar. Muhammad Asif, the chief  
of  an AQIS India cell who has been arrested and is now in custody , told his interrogators that he 
had stayed with Haq in Peshawar. Giving details about Umar’s headquarters in Peshawar, Asif  30
revealed that the headquarters were close to an army establishment there. This has led to a 
section within Indian intelligence to believe that Umar and AQIS are being shielded by some 
elements within ISI.  
Omar Khattab, aka Omar Mansoor, was another top leader of  AQIS who was killed by allied 
forces in Afghanistan in December 2017. U.S. intelligence ofﬁcials described him as deputy to 
Asim Umar. Khattab belonged to Dera Ismail Khan in Pakistan. He was the overall operations 
head of  AQIS, and its primary contact with the Afghan Taliban. According to an intelligence 
ofﬁcial, who wished to remain anonymous, Omar Khattab was probably the most important 
AQIS leader killed thus far.  
Sayeed Akhtar, who comes from the same town as Asim Umar, is another important member of  
AQIS. The arrested operatives of  AQIS’ India cell revealed that Akhtar acts as Operations 
Commander of  AQIS for India, a position he is believed to have occupied after the death of  
Ustad Umar Farooq in a U.S. drone strike in early 2015. Reports within the Indian intelligence 31
community reveal that Akhtar is being groomed as a possible successor to Umar. Akhtar controls 
the operations within India and is in charge of  recruitment for AQIS. Akhtar handled most of  
the operatives in the AQIS India cell. For example, the AQIS chief  for India, Muhammad Asif, 
followed Akhtar’s instructions to cross into Pakistan through Iran. The intelligence reports about 
Akhtar describe him as having good connections with Iranian intelligence. The other important 32
leaders of  AQIS, both serving and dead, are shown in Figure 4.  
!20

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Figure 4: AQIS Leadership 
 
!21


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Recruitment Strategy: Tradition over Innovation 
With the unraveling of  an extensive AQIS cell in late 2015, Indian agencies were surprised at the 
surreptitious manner in which al-Qaeda had managed to spread its tentacles across the country 
with minimal use of  the internet and social media, even though AQIS has repeatedly 
demonstrated its ease with technology . The indictment by Indian agencies against ﬁve arrested 33
AQIS operatives revealed that AQIS had used human contacts for recruitment, training, 
indoctrination, and other traditional strategies of  a terrorist organization. All members of  this 
cell were recruited through human networks run personally by the AQIS leader Asim Umar, aka 
Sanaul Haq.  
AQIS provides a two-week in-person religious training course in FATA to further indoctrinate its 
new recruits. Such radicalization curriculum is hard to ﬁnd in recent years, when IS has been 
successfully using the internet and social media to indoctrinate hundreds of  potential jihadists all 
over the world. All the members of  the AQIS India cell were trained in religious madrassas in the 
Afghanistan-Pakistan (AFPAK) region. 34
AQIS seems to be willing to take the risk of  transporting its members from India and Bangladesh 
to the AFPAK region. The recruits move either through Iran or through Turkey . In the case of  
Iran, from Tehran, using a well-established network of  local guides, the new recruits enter 
Baluchistan after crossing Zahedan province. Once in Quetta, the recruits are then shifted to the 
FATA region, mostly through the Ghazni province of  Afghanistan, thus avoiding the more 
surveilled route within Pakistan. This method, though operationally effective, gives Iran leverage 
over al-Qaeda, something Iran has strategically orchestrated after 9/11. 35
Perhaps anticipating this, recent arrests of  AQIS members have revealed that AQIS is attempting 
to increase its recruitment of  new members within India and Bangladesh. To accomplish this, the 
organization has been trying to recruit low-level religious preachers from various parts of  India, 
speciﬁcally within Delhi, Hyderabad, and the western states, and within Bangladesh.  36
Softening of  Narrative and Global Jihadi Leadership 
In June 2017, AQIS released a 20-page document that laid down a new code of  conduct for 
jihadists to follow all over the world. The code of  conduct is meant not only for members of  al-37
Qaeda, it addresses jihadists operating across various organizations and regional theaters, who 
either are allied with al-Qaeda or operate separately . AQIS appears to be using its media 
capabilities to push propaganda geared toward bringing together splintered groups with local 
grievances, focusing more on the “near enemy” and appealing to what is likely a popular message 
at the grassroots level.  38
!22

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
The release of  al-Qaeda’s future vision through AQIS also serves the ﬁner point that AQIS is 
perhaps the only regional afﬁliate over which the al-Qaeda core exercises direct control. The 
geographically coterminous location of  both AQC and AQIS also adds to this phenomenon. The 
AQIS document should thus be seen more as a message from al-Qaeda core. The release of  the 
code at a time when IS has effectively been dealt a serious blow in the Middle East is of  critical 
importance. The contents of  the document serve as a message to those who “got swayed” by the 
brutal savagery of  IS and subsequently shifted their allegiance to the group.  
The Letters from Abbottabad, discovered in 2011, along with additional al-Qaeda documents, 
revealed that bin Laden and al-Qaeda were concerned about the use of  indiscriminate violence 
by groups like TTP and AQI.  Al-Qaeda believed that the brutal fate which many “non-39
conforming” Muslims suffered at the hands of  AQI caused a revulsion in the Islamic lands 
against AQI and its jihadi tactics. The Code of  Conduct says that al-Qaeda “forbids hitting or 
killing targets permissible in sharia when hitting or killing such targets does more harm than good 
to the jihadi movement.” 40
With IS on the margins, Jabhat Fateh al-Sham (now Hayat al Tahrir al Sham) is poised to play a 
bigger role in Syria. Similarly , AQIS, has been aggressively attempting to increase its footprint in 
India and Bangladesh. The release of  the ‘code of  conduct’ document was intended to serve as a 
wake-up call for Muslims in India and Bangladesh to be part of  domestic jihad in Kashmir, 
Myanmar, and Bangladesh. The support from Kashmiri militant groups could be an important 
force multiplier for AQIS, which until 2015, struggled to attract new members in India.  
The emphasis on a code of  conduct and adding more tolerant rules like abstaining from 
attacking noncombatant Buddhists, Christians, and Hindus, should be seen as an attempt by al-
Qaeda to garner more support or maybe attract less hostility from a wider group of  people who 
could view al-Qaeda as less radical than IS, hence avoiding the Western onslaught on its 
members. Such an insistence on adherence to the code of  conduct at a time when IS has almost 41
been neutralized also drives home a deeper message that al-Qaeda intends to convey: the defeat 
of  IS was a direct result of  ignoring jihadi guidelines set by al-Qaeda and bin Laden, who is 
touted as the “Reviver of  Jihad” in the latest document.  42
To that end, the fall of  IS is being attributed to growing alienation and disapproval of  its methods 
by the Muslim masses across the world. The document stresses that “al-Qaeda forbids carrying 
out operations that are beyond the understanding of  Muslim masses and repulses them from 
Jihad.” With its regional afﬁliates in Syria, Y emen, and South Asia gaining more traction than 
IS’s regional provinces, al-Qaeda’s new code of  conduct is a deliberate attempt to reestablish 
itself  as the leader of  the global jihadist movement, a position it had lost to IS. 43
!23

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
AQIS FUNDING & FINANCES 
Most al-Qaeda afﬁliates function autonomously and have their own funding sources. With the 44
advent of  a strong international counter terror-ﬁnancing regime to choke off  the funding of  
terrorist groups, many have resorted to alternative methods— including proceeds gained from 
criminal activity—to ﬁnance their actions. The emergence of  methods of  payment through new 
developments in information technology , like virtual currencies and e-lotteries, present an 
additional avenue for terror groups to ﬁnance their activities.  45
Though the granular details about AQIS funding are still largely unknown, the recent arrests of  
some of  its operatives have provided interesting insights. AQIS is different from other al-Qaeda 
afﬁliates in that it both receives from and provides funding to AQC. The other known sources 46
of  AQIS funding are kidnappings for ransom, donations from individuals, donations from 
charitable foundations and religious charities including zakat, occasional state sponsorship, and 47
proceeds from counterfeit currency . 
Kidnapping for Ransom (KFR) has emerged as perhaps the most successful source of  ﬁnancing 
for AQIS. It is highly likely that the huge ransoms AQIS has been able to secure in the past few 
years go toward supporting AQC activities. AQIS was reportedly involved in the kidnapping of  48
Ali Gilani, the son of  former Pakistan Prime Minister Y ousaf  Reza Gilani, and Anwar Shah, son 
of  the Chief  Justice of  Sindh High Court. Though Pakistani authorities claim that Ali Gilani 
escaped AQIS, there are many within the Pakistani establishment who believe that the Gilanis 
paid millions of  dollars as ransom. Indian intelligence and the National Directorate of  Security  49
of  Afghanistan believe that money was paid. There were credible reports that a U.S. Navy Seal 
team rescued him. 50
!24

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Graph 2: Funding Sources of  AQIS India Cell 
Funding from individual citizens is also a signiﬁcant source of  revenue for AQIS. The 
preeminence of  locals as both members and leaders affords the group opportunities to exploit 
personal contacts to raise funds for terror missions and to facilitate the process of  recruitment. 
According to Indian counter-terror ofﬁcials, both Asim Umar and Sayeed Akhter, top leaders of  
AQIS, used their personal contacts to fund the travel of  new AQIS recruits to Pakistan. Sayeed 
Akhtar, AQIS India operations head, asked his childhood friend and accomplice, Zaffar Masood, 
a resident of  India, to provide Muhammad Asif  with $2,000 to travel from India to Pakistan for 
training with AQIS. The group also receives funding from international private donors. 
AQIS also beneﬁts from its strong linkages with some ISI-funded groups. In certain instances, 
LeT funds have made their way to members of  AQIS. Abdur Rehman, an AQIS member who 
went to Pakistan as an LeT member but later joined AQIS, received $20,000 from LeT over a 
period of  two years, which he used for activities within AQIS. 51
!25


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
AQIS generates ﬁnances in Pakistan through traditional models. In Karachi, AQIS has divided 
its network into several cells, with at least one completely dedicated to raising ﬁnances. That cell 52
aims to discreetly solicit donations including zakat from businesspersons under the guise of  
support for Islamic charities. The money collected, which runs in the thousands of  dollars, is then 
sent to AQIS leadership in South Waziristan. From Karachi, the money is ferried to Waziristan 
through Quetta and Southern Afghanistan. 53
AQIS uses a combination of  formal and informal channels to move money internationally . The 
most prominent informal remittance mechanism is hawala. Indian authorities discovered that 54
AQIS used Hindu hawala operators to transfer money from Dubai to New Delhi for its members 
in India. Most terrorist groups prefer the system, as it provides a fast and discreet method for 
worldwide remittance of  money . 55
!26

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
WAHHABIZATION OF SOUTH ASIA 
Over the last three decades, Islam in South Asia has witnessed a gradual, but steady shift from a 
moderate Suﬁ-inﬂuenced faith to a more puritan, hardline Salaﬁ brand, akin to the austere brand 
of  Wahhabism practiced in Saudi Arabia.  
The spread of  thousands of  Saudi-funded madrassas and Wahhabi mosques in an attempt to 
popularize the Wahhabi brand of  Islam has been reasonably successful in South Asia. Evidence 
has shown that some of  the leaders and key members of  al-Qaeda and LeT in the region have 
been directly associated with such Wahhabi madrassas. Wahhabi inﬂuence has resulted in an 56
increase in Islamist violence in Pakistan, Indian Kashmir, and Bangladesh. Most of  the 
governments in these South Asian countries have made a clear connection between Saudi money 
and the radicalization of  Islam in their own countries, making it clearer that spread of  
Wahhabism is increasing conservatism in South Asia. 57 58
The modern Saudi state, which is predicated on the close connection between the descendants of  
al Saud and Wahhabi ulemas, faced its ﬁrst formidable threat from Gamal Abdel Nasser's cry for 
Arab Nationalism. This period in 1950s and 1960s saw unending streams of  anti-Nasser Salaﬁ 
ulemas and members of  the Muslim brotherhood coming into Saudi Arabia to teach in Saudi 
schools, seminaries, and mosques, with an intent to indoctrinate the huge immigrant workforce. 
This workforce took Wahhabi ideas with them when they returned to their home countries in 
North Africa, South East Asia and South Asia, with some of  them forming Wahhabi 
organizations in their respective countries. 59
However, the twin shocks of  1979—the siege of  the Grand Mosque in Mecca and the Islamic 
revolution in Iran—shook the foundations of  the al Saud family’s legitimacy to rule. The siege of  
the Grand Mosque was organized by a group of  ardent ultra-radical Wahhabis led by Juhayman 
al Utaibi, who accused the Saudi regime of  not being Islamic enough. This drove the regime 
!27

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
closer to the Wahhabi clergy as a way to display its commitment to Wahhabism.  At the same 
time, Saudi rulers embarked on a mission to blunt the growing appeal of  the Iranian revolution 
by exporting Wahhabism to other parts of  the Islamic world. The global Islamic reassertion, 
spearheaded by Saudi Arabia and Arab petro-dollars, viewed South Asia as a potential region to 
spread Wahhabi ideals to neutralize the effect of  Iran on the large Shiite population in the 
region.  
The drift towards Wahhabism in Pakistan preceded the trend in Bangladesh and India. The Zia 
regime in the 1980’s readily accepted Saudi funding with a design to Islamize the Bhutto-
supporting seculars of  the country . There are, today , more than 24,000 madrassas in Pakistan 60
and more than half  of  them are Saudi funded. The madrassas in Akora Khattak in Peshawar 61
and Binori Town in Karachi have produced hundreds of  Taliban and al-Qaeda ﬁghters. The 
Federal Investigation Agency of  Pakistan concluded that the conspiracy to kill Benazir Bhutto 
was hatched at Akora Khattak Madrassa.  62
In 2015, the state government closed 165 madrassas in Karachi alone for illegally receiving 
money from Saudi-based charitable foundations. However, this action was only against smaller 63
madrassas and none of  the more powerful seminaries were touched. Pakistani indulgence of  
Saudi-backed and militant-group controlled madrassas has affected Muslim communities far 
beyond Pakistan’s borders. For example, Tafsheen Malik, one of  the shooters in the IS-linked San 
Bernardino, California, terrorist attack was a student of  one such all-female madrassa. Almost all 
the al-Qaeda, LeT , and TTP recruits undergo indoctrination programs in these Wahhabi 
madrassas. 
India: Growing Wahhabi Inﬂuence 
Indian Muslims have largely been successful in warding off  Wahhabi enticements for a long time. 
For the Kingdom of  Saudi Arabia, however, around 200 million Sunnis of  India were 
ideologically far too lucrative to be left untouched, since Riyadh believes that Iran holds 
considerable inﬂuence over a large number of  Shias in India.  In the past two decades, the 64
number of  Wahhabi and Ahl e Hadith madrassas and mosques has shown a meteoric increase.  65
Although the Indian establishment initially seemed reluctant to acknowledge the impact of  Saudi 
funding to the madrassas in north India, the arrest of  over two dozen madrassa students involved 
in terrorist incidents across the country sounded a warning bell. According to Indian intelligence 
agencies, between 2011 and 2013 alone, approximately 25,000 Saudi clerics arrived in India, 
with more than $250 million to build mosques and universities and to hold seminars. Similarly , 66
the famed Suﬁ traditions of  Kashmir are increasingly coming under threat from the more 
!28

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
conservative Wahhabi construct. The Ahle Hadith sect, which closely resembles the Wahhabi 
strand, has been receiving millions of  dollars from Saudi funders. Scarcely visible a decade and a 
half  ago, the Jamaat e Ahle Hadith today runs over 700 Wahhabi madrassas and mosques in 
Kashmir. The new generation of  youth in Kashmir is talking more about the Islamic Caliphate, 
rather than the decades-old rallying cry of  independence from India.  
Bangladesh and the Wahhabi Slide 
Bangladesh, a state that grew out of  Bengali nationalism, initially followed a secular constitution. 
Most Muslims in this South Asian nation are Hanaﬁs, a moderate form of  Islam. After its 
liberation in 1971, Bangladesh was eager to gain recognition from major Islamic countries like 
Saudi Arabia in order to provide an uptick to the economy and gain access to overseas labor 
markets. Today , Saudi Arabia has about two million Bangladeshi migrant workers who send 
billions of  dollars home annually , making remittances a vital contribution to the economy of  the 
country where one-third of  the population lives in abject poverty . Bangladesh has been plagued 
by many of  the same ills commonly associated with failed states—porous borders, poor 
governance, corruption, high unemployment, and a population inﬂuenced by extremist 
viewpoints. Bangladesh allowed Saudi funds to build mosques and provide Islamic education to 
its poor citizens.  
Today , Saudi inﬂuence and money has created a formidable radical Islamic movement in 
Bangladesh, which is threatening to tear apart the social fabric of  the country . Hifazat e Islam 
(Protection of  Islam), a conglomerate of  Wahhabi and Deobandi groups, controls over 14,000 
mosques and madrassas and around 1.4 million Bangladeshi children go to these madrassas. Part 
of  the blame must be attributed to the inability of  the country’s two main political parties to 
compromise on even simple objectives. The level of  polarization threatened to derail the 
country’s fragile democratic system. The Awami league government has pursued a relentless 67
campaign against political opposition and civil society , thereby allowing radical groups an 
opportunity to garner support from opposition groups like Jamaat e Islami. As a result, millions 
of  Jamaat e Islami followers have joined the ranks of  these Wahhabi organizations.  
The Wahhabi surge in Bangladesh should indeed worry Western governments as more and more 
local terrorist networks are competing to align with the global jihadist movement. The spate of  
killings in Bangladesh by IS and al-Qaeda-afﬁliated groups has alarmed international observers 
over the extent of  radicalization in Bangladesh.  
The Wahhabization of  Bangladesh is both a potent and probable threat. It seems unlikely that 
Bangladesh would earnestly want to move away from the Saudi relationship. The Awami league 
!29

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
government in Bangladesh, which is facing a lot of  criticism at home, wants to cultivate powerful 
international allies to offset domestic instability . Bangladesh joined the Saudi-led alliance against 
Y emen in December 2015. As a reward, Bangladesh recently received about 1 billion U.S. dollars 
to build mosques and madrassas throughout the country . 68
Graph 3: Saudi Funding of  Mosques & Madrassas 
!30


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
A REGION PRIMED: CHANGING DYNAMICS IN 
THE SUBCONTINENT 
Realizing South Asia’s Jihadi Potential  
The principal success of  al-Qaeda in South Asia has been its ability to rewrite the global jihadist 
narrative from a regional perspective. Al-Qaeda has allowed its afﬁliates to rebrand and 
transform themselves into groups focused mainly on regional political agendas. This was a 
conscious effort to reach a wider domestic support base, while allowing al-Qaeda to exploit 
support from local populations more interested in seeking solutions to their domestic issues than 
working for the success of  something as removed from their lives as global jihad.  
This glo-cal jihad employs local resources to launch attacks on global targets. AQIS has 
systematically expanded its inﬂuence into other countries in South Asia, including Bangladesh, 
where it had no previous operational presence. Instead of  directly occupying operational space, 
AQIS has built new networks and usurped existing ones, collaborating with local jihadi groups in 
order to gain local roots. Such an alliance is mutually advantageous for both groups: for a local 69
group, a partnership with al-Qaeda boosts its jihadi credentials and provides access to al-Qaeda’s 
resources; at the same time, it allows al-Qaeda to manipulate the afﬁliate’s resources and 
specialized knowledge for its global jihadist agenda, while cloaking itself  in parochial concerns 
and issues germane to the local environs. This strategy has allowed AQIS to diversify its target set 
and accomplish more of  its goals.  
A video released by the group in March 2016 demonstrates how AQIS has strategically 
integrated its global jihadi narrative with a thread of  regional issues in South Asia in order to 
expand its inﬂuence. The video shows the United States at the apex of  its target ladder, 70
followed by the military , intelligence, and security agencies in Pakistan. The atheists, blasphemers, 
!31

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
and nonbelievers who actively oppose Islam are also in the priority zone of  targeting, something 
which AQIS had already been doing in Bangladesh.  71
The expansion of  al-Qaeda’s local activity has been most apparent through AQIS’ targeting of  
prominent activists, intellectuals, and writers in Bangladesh. Between June 2013 and May 2016, 
AQIS claimed credit for thirteen separate attacks in Bangladesh, resulting in the deaths of  eleven 
individuals who defended secular ideas and institutions, or were involved in a range of  
progressive causes. These attacks have helped AQIS and its local afﬁliates gain publicity , 72
achieve notoriety and position themselves as defenders of  those who oppose and violently contest 
secular and liberal ideas. The goal of  AQIS is to manipulate the local security environment and 
to shape the landscape in ways that are beneﬁcial to al-Qaeda’s long-term agenda of  targeting 
the far enemy . Like other successful terrorist groups throughout the Islamic world, AQIS is 73
looking to serve as the vanguard of  conservative elements of  society and act as defenders against 
change. 
India – Increasing Communal Divide 
Indian Muslims have mostly managed to ignore the lure of  jihadi narratives, in spite of  being 
precariously close to the geographical center of  al-Qaeda. Expressing his disappointment, Asim 
Umar lamented the lack of  jihadi spirit within Indian Muslims in a video message released in 
June 2013, loosely translated as: “Why is there no storm in your ocean?” Umar chastised Indian 
Muslims for not supporting the cause of  both global and regional jihad.  74
Analysts believe, however, that the rise in inter-religious clashes in India are due to changing 
political discourse, which have resulted in further division between Hindus and Muslims. As an 
example, the increasing incidents of  violent attacks on Muslims in India who are accused of  
eating beef  has contributed to an atmosphere of  fear and hatred between Hindus and Muslims. 
The killings of  young Muslim men by the so-called “cow vigilantes” are worrying even the elite 
within Muslim society . A report released in 2017 by IndiaSpend, an Indian NGO focused on 
“promoting governance, transparency and accountability in the Indian government,” indicated 
that more than 60 incidents of  cow-related attacks on Muslims have occurred in the last three 
years. Groups like AQIS are exploiting this to incite Indian Muslims to join what is being called 75
a ﬁght for their honor. Arrested AQIS operatives have cited the growing violence against 76
Muslims as one of  the principal drivers for joining jihadist groups. 77
!32

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Kashmir  
In recent years, the Indian state of  Kashmir has 
experienced unprecedented violent demonstrations 
and a shift in the militant narrative. Al-Qaeda 
appreciates that the Kashmir dispute remains an 
emotive issue for millions of  Muslims in Pakistan 
and India. Al-Qaeda is also making efforts to 
reframe the jihadi narrative in Kashmir, which will 
in turn bolster its operations in India. Since 2007, 
al-Qaeda has worked to delegitimize Pakistan’s role 
in the Kashmir conﬂict through a targeted Urdu-
language messaging campaign. It has repeatedly 78
posited Kashmir militancy as an ISI-sponsored 
jihad, rather than a legitimate jihad, and wants to 
wrest control of  jihad in Kashmir from Pakistan.  79
The primary argument is that the Pakistani regime, due to its close relationship with and support 
for the United States, especially in the areas of  security and counterterrorism, is an apostate un-
Islamic government (taghut). Such a framing has helped al-Qaeda to claim that Pakistan, and its 
militant proxies focused on Kashmir, are ﬁghting a corrupt jihad and misappropriating critical 
resources that could be harnessed by al-Qaeda toward more effective ends.  
While al-Qaeda's appeal in Kashmir was limited in the past, the formation of  AQIS has shown 
that these limitations are rapidly fading. AQIS has become intimately involved in the Kashmir 
conﬂict through its afﬁliate Ansar Ghazwat ul Hind. A potent faction of  Hizbul Mujahideen, a 
Kashmir-based militant group, headed by Zakir Musa, has pledged allegiance to AQIS—an 
unprecedented event in the history of  militancy in Kashmir. The new group is named Ansar 
Ghazwat ul Hind (Helpers in Battle of  India). Additionally , al-Qaeda’s ideological inﬂuence over 
groups like HUJI and Jaish e Muhammad, which have historically operated in Kashmir, is also 
strengthening its narrative in Kashmir. This demonstrates the prospective threat posed by AQIS 
through its efforts to shift both the ideological terms of  the jihad and the source of  the conﬂict’s 
legitimacy in an effort to transform Kashmir into the center of  gravity for jihadists in South Asia. 
In a recently released statement, Musa declared, “Kashmir jihad should be exclusively for 
implementing sharia and not for nationalist ideas. There is no Islam in Pakistan so we have to do 
jihad against Pakistan as well.”  80
Such an alignment of  interests between AQIS and local Kashmiri groups will not only transform 
the political struggle of  Kashmiris into a religious one, but will also pose a grave threat to the 
!33

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Indian hinterland. India may see a revival of  the violence of  the 1990s, when Kashmiri groups 
launched frequent attacks. 
Bangladesh: The Sinister Game Plan 
Bangladesh has witnessed rapid religious radicalization and the growth of  extremist ideas. The 
increasing political and social asymmetries in the country have contributed to this rapid pace of  
radicalization. Further, Bangladesh experienced a gradual increase in religion-based politics after 
the ﬁrst nationalist government of  Shiekh Mujbir Rehman was toppled in a coup led by Major 
General Zia-ur -Rehman in 1975. 81
In the last decade or so, a number of  homegrown terrorist groups have emerged and are staging 
violent attacks in Bangladesh in the name of  Islam, with a view of  establishing a Caliphate there. 
The spread of  Salaﬁ jihadism, because of  the extensive Saudi-funded Salaﬁ madrassa network, is 
also anathema to the secular cultural identity of  Bangla nationalism. These groups have 
undertaken a concerted campaign to undermine the nationalist and secular values of  Bangla 
culture by targeting artists, secular intellectuals, and academics. In February 2015, Avijit Roy , a 
well-known Bangladeshi-American online activist was hacked to death by terrorists claiming to 
belong to AQIS. The violence reached its apogee with the attack on Holey Artisan bakery in 82
Dhaka in July 2016, which resulted in the deaths of  a number of  foreigners.  T h e  a t t a c k e r s  83
belonged to a faction of  a homegrown terror group, Jamaat ul Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB), 
which had pledged allegiance to IS.  
Another local group, named Ansar ul Bangla Team (ABT), and its afﬁliate, Ansar ul Islam 
Bangladesh (AAI), operate as the Bangladeshi wing of  AQIS. In the last few years, ABT has 84
killed many secular intellectuals and bloggers in Bangladesh, including Xulhaz Mannan, Senior 
Editor of  the Bangladeshi LGBT magazine Roopbaan.  According to Bangladeshi ofﬁcials, 85
ABT is one of  the most active terrorist groups in the country , which has outstripped both HUJI-
Bangladesh (HUJI-B) and JMB. ABT is following al-Qaeda’s guidelines of  ﬁrst strengthening its 86
roots within the conservative section of  Bangladeshi Muslim society . Consequently , ABT has 87
refrained from attacking the state or its structure and seems to be focused on eradicating critics of  
its fundamentalist narrative. The targeting of  LGBT activists and liberal bloggers has enabled it 
to exact support from some sections of  society who see ABT as doing the pious work of  silencing 
critics of  Islam. 
!34

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Figure 5: Bangladesh’s Victims 
!35


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
In its ﬁrst public message in the September 2014 issue of  its English language magazine 
Resurgence, AQIS advocated attacks to protest alleged atrocities against Muslims in Bangladesh. 88
AQIS carefully selected its narrative by invoking the message of  Haji Shariatullah, leader of  a 
revivalist movement, which originated in Bengal in the 19th century . This strategically crafted 
message again highlighted al-Qaeda’s revised strategy of  adopting domestic narratives to 
galvanize local support for its global cause. 
Interestingly , Bangladesh has also become a focal point for competition between IS and al-Qaeda 
as each seeks to spread its own ideology and propaganda. Both JMB and ABT have been 
competing for dominance of  jihadi space in the region. Given its geographic disadvantage, IS has 
used social media and online propaganda to spread its message through JMB. It would be 
appropriate to categorize JMB as an IS-inspired group rather than being an IS-afﬁliated group. 
The inspiration has started dwindling as the Caliphate has collapsed. Conversely , AQIS has tried 
to establish its base by directly collaborating with local jihadi groups for its cause. The 
geographical proximity of  AQIS and its long-standing ties with earlier jihadi groups like HUJI-B 
enables it to extend direct physical and logistical support to its Bangladeshi afﬁliates. This also 
provides al-Qaeda with direct access to disenfranchised youth and politically marginalized groups 
to spread its message and recruit new members.  
Bangladesh, with its large diaspora in North America and Europe, also provides AQIS with the 
opportunity to use disgruntled elements within its diaspora to target the “far enemy .” AQIS 
growth in Bangladesh represents a broadening of  the group’s operational footprint in the region 
by institutionalizing and expanding existing 
relationships and developing new ones. 
Rohingya Cause  
Around 1.1 million Rohingyas live in apartheid-
like conditions in Rakhine state in Myanmar 
(formerly Burma), where serious ethnic clashes 
between the Muslim Rohingyas and Rakhine 
Buddhists have resulted in the exodus of  over 
one million Rohingyas. Recognizing the 
emotional capital of  the Rohingya issue, the 
plight of  the Rohingya has ﬁgured prominently 
in AQIS statements and videos. In September 
2017, al-Qaeda issued a statement describing 
the attacks on the Rohingya as part of  a global  
!36

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Figure 6: Rohingya Timeline 
campaign against Muslims.  T h e  89
statement urges Muslims in India, Pakistan, 
and the Philippines to migrate to Myanmar 
to help the Rohingya cause. The Rohingya 
issue provides a beﬁtting opportunity for 
AQIS to implement its strategy of  
networking with local jihadi groups while 
working to gain credibility among the 
grassroots. Several international entities 
now have come to refer to the Rohingya 
population’s situation in Myanmar as a 
genocide.  90
Amidst the continuing instability, the 
emergence of  Haraka al Yakin (The 
Movement of  Faith), a newly created 
Rohingya militant group, signals a 
menacing new phase that could see an 
uptick in violent incidents in both 
Myanmar and India. Although Haraka is 
by no means the ﬁrst Rohingya militant 
group, it is deﬁnitely the ﬁrst group to 
exhibit considerable presence in the 
region. The group is gaining traction in 91
the Rohingya-dominated areas of  Rakhine 
state. There are unveriﬁed reports that 
Haraka is associated with AQIS. Al-Qaeda 
central has offered rhetorical support to the 
Rohingya while simultaneously issuing 
threats against the government in 
Myanmar. In September 2017, the group 
stated: “The savage treatment meted out to 
our Muslim brothers…shall not pass 
without punishment.” 92
Haraka al Yakin is reportedly led by a 
!37
2017


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Pakistani-born Rohingya Muslim named Ataullah. Karachi, where Ataullah claims to have 93
been born, hosts around 300,000 Rohingyas who migrated to Pakistan in the  
1970s and 1980s. Some Rohingya Muslims in Karachi have been associated with terrorist groups 
like HUJI since the early 1990s. Abdul Qudoos Arakani, a Karachi-based Rohingya, has acted, 
for over two decades as leader of  the HUJI-Arakan chapter. Most of  the leadership of  Haraka 94
is believed to be Urdu-speaking Rohingyas from Karachi, which shows the potential for stronger 
linkages developing between groups in Pakistan and networks of  Rohingya in Myanmar and 
Bangladesh. 
Until now , there is no ﬁrm evidence of  Myanmar’s claim that Haraka has links with both AQIS 
and TTP . However, with AQIS well entrenched in the Rohingya neighborhoods of  Karachi, it 
may well be true that AQIS has already forged links with Haraka. There are also certain 
unveriﬁed reports that suggest well-entrenched links between Haraka and HUJI-Arakan under 
the patronage of  Abdul Qudoos. AQC had longstanding links with the Rohingya Solidarity 95
Organization and HUJI. 
Though there is considerable concern about Southeast Asian jihadists joining the Rohingya 
cause, a far bigger concern should be AQIS hijacking the Rohingya insurgency , as AQIS is both 
organizationally and geographically closer to the core of  the Rohingya crisis. However, the 
biggest casualty of  the jihadiﬁcation of  the Rohingya issue would be the Rohingya issue itself. It 
would provide an opportunity for Myanmar’s government to discredit the entire Rohingya 
movement as a radical insurgent campaign. Concurrently , it would deﬂect the focus of  the West 
from human right issues to a more security-related narrative, portraying the Rohingya refugees as 
a potential security threat to neighboring countries. 
!38

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Figure 7: Myanmar’s Fleeing Rohingya 
!39


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
GLOBAL THREATS POSED BY AQIS 
While AQIS may be regionally focused, its aims and aspirations are not divorced from al-Qaeda’s 
principal aim of  targeting the “far enemy .” The United States remains al-Qaeda’s primary target 
and AQIS has pivoted toward AQC’s principal aim by employing its regional resources for this 
global cause. Given the relationship between AQIS and al-Qaeda’s senior leadership, the most 
persuasive reading is that AQIS ﬁts into al-Qaeda’s 
global strategy; both groups have global designs that 
include attacks on Western countries. 96
AQIS is closely aligning with groups that are 
directly engaged in the ﬁght against the West. As 
stated earlier, the attack on October 2015 on a 
Taliban training center in Southern Afghanistan, 
perhaps one of  the largest assaults of  Operation 
Enduring Freedom, resulted in the killing of  200 
Taliban and AQIS ﬁghters. It provided U.S. 
agencies with insight into an intricate network of  
shared resources and aims of  the Taliban and al-
Qaeda.  
Even though the majority of  recent analysis on foreign terrorist ﬁghters remains focused on the 
so-called Islamic State, it is important to realize that, behind the mobilization to Syria and Iraq, 
the next largest mobilization of  foreign ﬁghters was the Afghan jihad. According to an analysis 97
by Bruce Hoffman, an estimated 800 al-Qaeda ﬁghters are active in Afghanistan and Pakistan, 
and that does not take into account the hundreds, or possibly thousands more, including foreign 
ﬁghters, belonging to other Salaﬁ-jihadist groups that work alongside or in some cases directly 
with al-Qaeda and its afﬁliates. Given the history of  failed states and civil wars in South Asia, 98
!40

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
along with ungoverned spaces and porous borders, countries like Afghanistan and Pakistan will 
continue to be attractive destinations for foreign terrorist ﬁghters, especially given the historical 
continuity of  this trend and the robust infrastructure for jihadist militancy that is already well-
entrenched. 
The embedding of  AQIS recruits in the Taliban provides an opportunity for jihadists to develop 
and reﬁne military skills and a close alliance with the Taliban.  Apart from being a tactical 99
necessity , this serves a strategic purpose for AQIS by conveying al-Qaeda’s commitment to jihad 
against the West in general and against the U.S. in particular. Al-Qaeda leadership appreciates 
that jihad against the U.S. continues to attract attention for al-Qaeda and its cause and generates 
more traction amongst Muslims than targeting so-called deviant Islamic regimes and groups. At 
present, the U.S. relies more on intelligence and information sharing with partner nations in 
Bangladesh and India, while acting unilaterally against AQIS in Afghanistan. 100
Graph 4: Bangladesh: Civilians & Jihadist Militants Killed 
!41


AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
While not the focus of  this paper, it is worth mentioning that the prospect of  an increasingly 
unstable Afghanistan presents not just a security challenge to the United States, but to other great 
powers operating throughout South Asia, including China. Al-Qaeda and IS have long singled 
out China as a legitimate target, mainly due to the state’s treatment of  Uighur Muslims living in 
China’s most western province. Beijing’s increasing presence in South Asia through the Belt and 
Road Initiative (BRI), however, has dramatically augmented the number of  Chinese economic 
and political interests in need of  protection from non-state actors. Given that the majority of  the 
investment and infrastructure laid out under the BRI umbrella are carried out by state-owned 
enterprises, and that BRI is seen as Chinese President Xi Jinping’s most important foreign policy 
legacy , it is of  pivotal importance that China can guarantee the security of  its citizens and protect 
its investments abroad. A failure to do so would signal a failure of  the communist party to exert 
inﬂuence abroad.  
At the end of  2017, Beijing’s concerns over the stability of  Afghanistan materialized in 
backchannel talks with the Taliban. The common security interest in Afghanistan among the 
global community has not only made strange bed fellows of  China and the Taliban, but also 
China and the United States. Although the great power competition between the U.S. and China 
is a real and growing concern, when it comes to Afghanistan, Washington and Beijing are largely 
on the same page. China believes a strong Taliban, together with Afghan government forces, will 
be the right combination to root out IS from Kunar and Nangrahar, and prevent al-Qaeda from 
exploiting the Uighur issue further. China’s increasing involvement in South Asian diplomacy 
and politics, whether driven by a desire to protect economic interests or strengthen its political 
position, signals a shift in the geopolitics of  the region. U.S. and European policy makers must 
take note of  this new reality and understand the drivers behind it in order to devise effective 
policy that is not simply reactionary to Beijing, but instead furthers Western foreign policy 
interests in the long-term.  
Regional violence should not be seen as separate from al-Qaeda’s plans to combat the West. 
Although al-Qaeda’s killing of  a U.S. embassy employee in Bangladesh, atheist bloggers, and 
those in the LGBT community do not pose an immediate threat to the West, they are still part of  
a broader set of  designs that the group has to frame a narrative in which the West, particularly 
the U.S., is seen as source of  all evil. The U.S. defense of  these liberal values gives much-needed 
credence to the AQIS narrative which is based on the ideology of  “bin Ladenism.”  101
Western scholars and security experts have been preoccupied with sectarian and jihadi challenges 
in Afghanistan. Still, there are regional issues to consider, including fundamentalist developments 
in other parts of  South and Southeast Asia. In Bangladesh, the growing radicalization challenges 
the idea of  a tolerant, secular democracy , but also poses a threat to countries outside of  the 
!42

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
region that host substantial numbers of  the Bangladeshi diaspora, as there is growing evidence 
that ties radicalized Bangladeshi youth with the broader global jihadist movement. Singapore, for 
example, has experienced issues with foreign jihadist cells operating on its soil. In December 
2015, Singapore deported 14 Bangladeshi nationals who were accused of  supporting the 
ideology of  al-Qaeda and IS. 102
The challenge facing the U.S. and other governments is AQIS’ ability to operationalize and 
synchronize its attacks as part of  a multi-front campaign targeting various enemies across South 
Asia. The stark reality is, despite relentless strikes against al-Qaeda, the group remains 103
committed and capable enough to foment instability against varied targets in multiple theaters 
across the world. In terms of  launching a direct strike on U.S. soil, the chances of  AQIS being 
capable of  such an attack are negligible. The most likely way for AQIS to have a direct impact on 
the U.S. is through radicalizing individuals already living in the United States by encouraging 
them to act through the dissemination of  propaganda. Accordingly , the most signiﬁcant threat 
that AQIS poses to the United States is at the regional level, where militants could set target 
embassies, hotels or other areas frequented by Westerners, as witnessed with the 2008 bombing 
of  the Marriott hotel in Islamabad, which was linked to al-Qaeda and the Pakistani Taliban. 
Terrorist groups have also kidnapped Western aid workers and diplomats in an effort to drive a 
wedge between the U.S. and its allies in the region. 
!43

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
CONCLUSION  
As IS suffers devastating setbacks in Syria and Iraq, al-Qaeda continues to pose a formidable 
threat, principally through its regional afﬁliates in North Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia. 
At a time when IS seemed unstoppable, with its displays of  brutal savagery and increasing 
control over large swaths of  land, al-Qaeda adopted a strategy of  lying low and expanding its 
regional presence. The decline of  IS, as al-Qaeda initially predicted, would bring jihadists back 
into the latter’s fold.  
The creation of  AQIS largely formalized an institutional relationship and local capacity-building 
process that AQC had been involved in for more than a decade. The top leaders of  AQIS come 
from India, a country with the highest number of  Muslims worldwide only after Indonesia and 
one long seen as an attractive arena for recruitment, even as it has mostly remained immune 
from global jihadi impulses. Though it has since been unraveled, the existence an extensive AQIS 
cell with local leadership in India in 2016 is seen as a blueprint for future AQIS strategy , as AQIS 
leaders of  Indian origin were credited with recruiting most of  the members of  this cell.  
After suffering initial reverses, AQIS has been able to make an impressive comeback. Al-Qaeda 
maintains longstanding relationships with jihadi groups in the AFPAK region, and AQIS has also 
been relatively successfully in exploiting these local connections, steadily building on existing 
relationships while cultivating new ones. As of  late 2018, the AQIS network spans across nearly 
the entire subcontinent. Moreover, AQIS has successfully managed to establish its footprint in 
Kashmir, a contested region and one of  longstanding importance to an array of  jihadist groups, 
especially those based in Pakistan. The region may yet again witness a revival of  the violence it 
experienced during the 1990s.  
Wahhabism has slowly gained considerable inﬂuence among Muslim communities in South Asia. 
This change in the nature of  South Asian Islam has been associated with a drastic increase in 
!44

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
violent incidents in the region. Moreover, a sizable chunk of  madrassa-educated young Wahhabi 
followers is proving to be an ideal recruiting base for al-Qaeda and other radical groups in the 
region. Though the assumption that madrassas are principally engines of  global Islamic terrorism 
is ill-founded, it is certainly true that many Wahhabi madrassas in South Asia have been directly 
linked to Islamic radicalism, something which was absent in the Suﬁ-Islam dominated region a 
few decades ago. 
AQIS is working to position its assets to operationalize and synchronize terrorist attacks as part of  
a multi-front campaign to target the U.S. and its allies. AQIS is already targeting U.S. forces in 
Afghanistan by embedding its ﬁghters deep within Taliban ranks. The spread of  AQIS inﬂuence 
in Bangladesh and other South Asian countries does not bode well for the U.S., as it hosts a 
sizable Bangladeshi diaspora.  
With its deliberate strategy of  shunning coercion and rejection of  brutal IS tactics, AQIS is 
attempting to reach out to local leaders and broader community members within the Muslim 
world. The emphasis on discipline, like abstaining from attacking noncombatant Buddhists, 
Christians, and Hindus, is a strategic move to gain support from less radical jihadi outﬁts 
operating in South Asia and elsewhere. This new strategy of  al-Qaeda comes across as a 
calculated attempt to regain the leadership of  global jihad. In many ways, AQIS is a throwback 
to the state of  AQC in the 1990s, a patchwork of  militant groups with a shared ideology and 
common enemies. Given the potential it has already demonstrated, AQIS could very well serve as 
the bulwark to lead al-Qaeda into its next decade.  
!45

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
CONTRIBUTORS  
Sajid Farid Shapoo 
Senior Fellow 
Sajid Farid Shapoo is a highly decorated senior (two star) Indian counter terror and law 
enforcement ofﬁcial. He is currently a Phd scholar at Woodrow Wilson Scholar, Princeton 
University . He is also a Senior Fellow at The Soufan Centre. Sajid has taught at John Jay College 
of  Criminal Justice as an Adjunct Associate Professor. He is among the few Indian Police Service 
ofﬁcers to have been awarded the Gallantry Medal twice by the President of  India. He holds a 
Master's degree from Columbia University with specialization in the Middle East. His papers and 
articles have been published in The National Interest , The Diplomat, Small Wars Journal etc.  
Colin P . Clarke 
Senior Research Fellow 
Colin P . Clarke is a Senior Research Fellow at The Soufan Center. Clarke has briefed his research 
at a range of  national and international security forums, including the U.S. Army War College, 
US Air Force Special Operations School, Society for Terrorism Research International 
Conference, the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) and the Counter ISIS Financing 
Group (CIFG), which is part of  the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS.  
Meriem El Atouabi 
Intern 
Meriem El Atouabi has supported The Soufan Center with long and short-term research 
projects. She also assisted in translating Arabic and French documents and media. 
!46

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
Mohamed H. El Shawesh  
Multimedia Coordinator  
Mohamed H. El Shawesh assists The Soufan Center with multimedia editing. El Shawesh has an 
MBA in Media Management from the Metropolitan College of  New Y ork through a Fulbright 
scholarship granted to him by the US State Department. 
Stephanie Foggett 
Strategic Partnerships and Engagement  
Stephanie Foggett, Program Coordinator, focuses on international security , terrorism, and 
strategic communication at The Soufan Center.  
Mollie Saltskog 
Intelligence Analyst 
Mollie Saltskog is an Intelligence Analyst at The Soufan Group. She has global experience in 
international security , speciﬁcally on issues related to terrorism, geopolitics, and foreign policy .  
Meredith Stricker 
Executive Director 
Meredith Stricker is Executive Director of  The Soufan Center. She has extensive experience in 
the human rights, peace and security , and development sectors.  
!47

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
ABOUT THE SOUFAN CENTER (TSC)  
The Soufan Center (TSC) is a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to serving as a resource and 
forum for research, analysis, and strategic dialogue related to global security issues and emergent 
threats. TSC ﬁlls a niche-role by producing independent, quality research and hosting proactive 
events in order to effectively equip thought leaders, policy makers, governments, bi- and 
multilateral institutions, the media, funders, and those in the non-proﬁt and academic 
communities to engage in strategic security-related practices. Our work focuses on a broad range 
of  complex security issues—from international and domestic terrorism, to humanitarian crisis 
analysis, to refugee and immigrant issues, and more.  
TSC’s dynamic team of  research and policy analysts, with diverse professional, educational and 
cultural backgrounds—including experience in human rights; inter- national development; 
federal, state and local government; law enforcement; and military—leverage subject matter 
expertise against real-world experience to offer world-class investigative methodologies, 
innovative analytical tools, and contextualized, actionable solutions.  
!48

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 
ENDNOTES 
 Lahoud et al.“Letters from Abbottabad: Bin Ladin Sidelined?” Harmony Program. Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, May 3, 2012. 1
https://ctc.usma.edu/letters-from-abbottabad-bin-ladin-sidelined/.
 Gilles Kepel and Jean-Pierre Milelli, eds., Al Qaeda in Its Own Words, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010, pp.53-56; see also, Rohan 2
Gunaratna, Inside Al-Qaeda: Global Network of  T error, New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2002, p.45. 
 Thomas Joscelyn, “The Al Qaeda Files,” The W eekly Standard, March 30, 2015, https://www .weeklystandard.com/thomas-joscelyn/the-al-qaeda-3
ﬁle  
 Reed, Alastair. “ Al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent: A New Frontline in the Global Jihadist Movement?” The International Centre for Counter-4
Te r ro r i s m – The Hague 8, no. 1 (2016): 5-6. 
 Ibid.5
 Shapoo, Sajid Farid. “How Non-State Actors Could Cause War in South Asia.” The Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2016/11/how-non-6
state-actors-could-cause-war-in-south-asia/.
 Roggio, Bill. “ Al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent Incorporates Regional Jihadist Groups” FDD’s Long War Journal, September 5, 2014. 7
www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2014/09/analysis_al_qaeda_in.php.
 Rassler, Don. “ Al-Qaida and the Pakistani Harakat Movement: Reﬂections and Questions about the Pre-2001 Period.” Perspectives on Terrorism 11, 8
no. 6 (2017): 45.
 Hoffman, Bruce. “ A First Draft of  the History of  America’s Ongoing Wars on Terrorism.” Studies in Conﬂict & T errorism 38, no. 1 (January 2, 9
2015): 80. https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610X.2014.974405.
 Swami, Praveem, “More Qaeda-Pak Links: AQIS Chief  Was at ‘ISI’ PoK Camp.” The Indian Express, March 13, 2015. https://10
indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/more-qaeda-pak-links-aqis-chief-was-at-isi-pok-camp/.
 Mendelsohn, Barak. The Al-Qaeda Franchise: The Expansion of  Al-Qaeda and Its Consequences. Oxford ; New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2016:196.11
 Burke, Jason. “‘ A More Dangerous Long-Term Threat’: Al-Qaida Grows as Isis Retreats.” The Guardian, December 29, 2016. https://12
www .theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/a-more-dangerous-long-term-threat-al-qaida-grows-as-isis-retreats.
 Wander, Andrew . “ A History of  Terror: Al-Qaeda 1988-2008.” The Observer, July 12, 2008. https://www .theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/13/13
history .alqaida.
 Mir, Amir. “Slow Pace of  26/11 Attacks Case Exposes Pakistan’s Patchy Counter-Terrorism Efforts.” Asia Times, June 20, 2016. http://14
www .atimes.com/article/slow-pace-of-2611-attacks-case-exposes-pakistans-patchy-counter-terrorism-efforts/.
 The Ahle Hadeeth are Sunni Muslims who adhere to the pristine teachings of  Islam as enshrined in the Holy Quran and Sunnah. They 15
condemn Suﬁ practices as Bidah (interpolations). They prefer to call themselves Salaﬁs. 
 Tankel, Stephen. Storming the World Stage: The Story of  Lashkar-e-T aiba. First Printing edition. Oxford University Press, 2011: 60-61.16
 Authors’ own interviews; counterterrorism documents accessed by authors. 17
!49

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 Joscelyn, Thomas. “ AQIS Emphasizes Allegiance to Ayman Al Zawahiri, Taliban in New ‘code of  Conduct’” FDD’s Long War Journal, June 26, 18
2017. www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2017/06/aqis-emphasizes-allegiance-to-ayman-al-zawahiri-taliban-in-new-code-of-conduct.php.
 Indictment Report of  crime number 67 dated 12/14/2015 before the Fast track Court in New Delhi. 19
 Joscelyn, Thomas. “US Service Member Killed during Battle with Al Qaeda in Afghanistan” FDD’s Long War Journal, November 27, 2018. 20
www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2018/11/us-service-member-killed-during-battle-with-al-qaeda-in-afghanistan.php.
 Stenersen, Anne. “ Al-Qa`ida’s Comeback in Afghanistan and Its Implications.” CTC Sentinel 9, no. 9 (September 7, 2016): 9. https://21
ctc.usma.edu/app/uploads/2016/09/CTC-SENTINEL_V ol9Iss93.pdf 
 Ibid.22
 Indictment Report against AQIS by Delhi Police. In the section of  narration of  charges against Muhammad Asif  contained in the indictment 23
of  Asif  by Indian agencies.
 Ibid.24
 Indian Mujahideen is a homegrown terror group in India. It has been involved in scores of  bomb blasts across the country25
 Tripathi, Rahul. “Yasin Bhatkal’s Interrogation Led to Busting of  the First Al-Qaeda Module in India.” The Economic Times, July 13, 2018. 26
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/yasin-bhatkals-interrogation-led-to-busting-of-the-ﬁrst-al-qaeda-module-in-india/
articleshow/50226103.cms.
 Indictment documents submitted by Delhi Police before an Anti-Terrorism court in New Delhi27
 Chakraborty , Nayanika. “ Al-Qaeda Regional Chief  an Indian, Met Him Twice: Pakistani Journalist Hamid Mir.” The Indian Express, October 28
19, 2014. https://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/al-qaeda-regional-chief-an-indian-met-him-twice-pakistani-journalist-hamid-
mir/.
 Joscelyn, Thomas. “Social Media Jihad: Open Interview with Al Qaeda’s Sharia Ofﬁcial in Pakistan” FDD’s Long War Journal, April 9, 2014. 29
www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2014/04/social_media_jihad_open_interv .php.
 Ibid.30
 Joscelyn, Thomas, and Bill Roggio. “US Killed AQIS Deputy Emir, Shura Member in January Drone Strikes” FDD’s Long War Journal, April 12, 31
2015. www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2015/04/us-killed-aqis-deputy-emir-shura-member-in-january-drone-strikes.php.
 Javaid, Azaan. “ Arrested AQIS Operative Speaks of  an Arrangement between Al Qaida and Iranian Security Agencies.” DNA. December 17, 32
2015. https://www .dnaindia.com/india/report-arrested-aqis-operative-speaks-of-an-arrangement-between-al-qaida-and-iranian-security-
agencies-2156480.
 Roul, Animesh. “ Al-Qaeda’s Quiet Resurgence in India.” T errorism Monitor 15, no. 16 (August 15, 2017): 6–7. https://jamestown.org/program/33
al-qaedas-quiet-resurgence-in-india/. 
 For a detailed background on madrassas in Pakistan, see: Gall, Carlotta. The Wrong Enemy: America in Afghanistan, 2001-2014. Boston: Houghton 34
Mifﬂin Harcourt, 2014.
 For more on the relationship between Iran and Al Qaeda, see: Riedel, Bruce. “The Al Qaeda-Iran Connection.” Brookings, November 30, 2001. 35
https://www .brookings.edu/opinions/the-al-qaeda-iran-connection/.; Jones, Seth G. “ Al Qaeda in Iran.” Foreign Affairs, January 29, 2012. 
https://www .foreignaffairs.com/articles/iran/2012-01-29/al-qaeda-iran.; and Joscelyn, Thomas, “Twenty Y ears Ago Al Qaeda Bombed Two 
U.S. Embassies Killing 224 People. Iran Helped Them Do It.” The Weekly Standard, August 7, 2018. https://www .weeklystandard.com/thomas-
joscelyn/iran-helped-al-qaeda-with-the-1998-u-s-embassy-bombings-in-africa.
 Authors’ own interview with an Indian counter terror investigator looking after the AQIS investigations.36
 As-Sahab Media Subcontinent. “Code of  Conduct: Al-Qaeda in the Subcontinent,” June 2017. https://azelin.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2017/06/37
al-qacc84_idah-in-the-indian-subcontinent-22code-of-conduct22-en.pdf.; Zimmerman, Katherine. Testimony: Al Qaeda’s strengthening in the 
shadows, House Homeland Security Committee Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and Intelligence (2017). http://www .aei.org/publication/
testimony-al-qaedas-strengthening-in-the-shadows/. 7.
 Novenario, Celine Marie I. “Differentiating Al Qaeda and the Islamic State Through Strategies Publicized in Jihadist Magazines.” Studies in 38
Conﬂict & T errorism 39, no. 11 (November 1, 2016): 953–67. https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610X.2016.1151679.
 Lahoud et al.“Letters from Abbottabad: Bin Ladin Sidelined?” Harmony Program. Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, May 3, 2012. 39
https://ctc.usma.edu/letters-from-abbottabad-bin-ladin-sidelined/.
 As-Sahab Media Subcontinent. “Code of  Conduct: Al-Qaeda in the Subcontinent,” June 2017. https://azelin.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2017/06/40
al-qacc84_idah-in-the-indian-subcontinent-22code-of-conduct22-en.pdf
!50

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 Hughes, Michael. “U.S. Support for Al Qaeda-Linked Rebels Undermines Syrian Ceaseﬁre.” Hufﬁngton Post, May 22, 2016. https://41
www .hufﬁngtonpost.com/michael-hughes/us-support-for-al-qaeda-l_b_10089410.html.; Clarke, Colin P . “The Moderate Face of  Al Qaeda.” 
Foreign Affairs, October 24, 2017. https://www .foreignaffairs.com/articles/syria/2017-10-24/moderate-face-al-qaeda.
 Joscelyn, Thomas. “ AQIS Emphasizes Allegiance to Ayman Al Zawahiri, Taliban in New ‘code of  Conduct’ | FDD’s Long War Journal.” 42
FDD’s Long War Journal (blog), June 26, 2017. www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2017/06/aqis-emphasizes-allegiance-to-ayman-al-zawahiri-
taliban-in-new-code-of-conduct.php.
 Clarke, Colin P ., and Moghadam, Assaf. “Mapping Today’s Jihadi Landscape and Threat.” Orbis, Stabilizing the Fertile Crescent after the Fall 43
of  the Caliphate, 62, no. 3 (January 1, 2018): 347–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orbis.2018.05.006.
 Gómez, del Cid, and Miguel, Juan. “ A Financial Proﬁle of  the Terrorism of  Al-Qaeda and Its Afﬁliates.” Perspectives on Terrorism 4, no. 4 44
(November 30, 2010). http://www .terrorismanalysts.com/pt/index.php/pot/article/view/113.
 For more on terrorists’ use of  virtual currencies, see: Manheim et al. “ Are Terrorists Using Cryptocurrencies?” Foreign Affairs, April 21, 2017. 45
https://www .foreignaffairs.com/articles/2017-04-21/are-terrorists-using-cryptocurrencies.
 Craig, Tim. “ An Offshoot of  Al-Qaeda Is Regrouping in Pakistan.” Washington Post, June 3, 2016. https://www .washingtonpost.com/world/46
asia_paciﬁc/an-offshoot-of-al-qaeda-is-regrouping-in-pakistan/2016/06/03/4d0995bc-2752-11e6-8329-6104954928d2_story .html.; Intelligence 
and counterterrorism report documents reviewed by the authors. 
 “Zakah,” in John L. Esposito, ed., The Oxford Dictionary of  Islam, Oxford University Press, 2003; Current Online Edition 2003.47
 Chandran, Anurag. “ Al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent: Almost Forgotten.” Critical Threats, September 3, 2015. https://48
www .criticalthreats.org/analysis/al-qaeda-in-the-indian-subcontinent-almost-forgotten.
 “ Ali Haider Gilani Remains Tight-Lipped about Kidnapping Ordeal.” DAWN.COM, May 12, 2016. http://www .dawn.com/news/1257917.49
 Authors’ personal interviews; Mir, Amir. “How the Abducted Son of  the Former Pakistani PM Was Rescued” Asia Times, May 19, 2016. http://50
www .atimes.com/article/how-the-abducted-son-of-the-former-pakistani-pm-was-rescued/.
 Indictment Report of  Delhi Police against AQIS. 51
 Mir, Amir. “Jihadist Penetration of  Pakistani Armed Forces May Be Deeper than Feared | Asia Times.” Asia Times, June 9, 2016. http://52
www .atimes.com/article/jihadist-penetration-of-pakistani-armed-forces-may-be-deeper-than-feared/.
 Ibid.53
 The word hawala is of  Arabic origin and means “to transfer or change hands.” Immigrants from the Middle East have traditionally used this 54
system to send money to their families. It is a system based on trust, and is therefore considered to be highly reliable.
 Indictment documents against AQIS members ﬁled by Indian security agencies accessed by the authors.55
 Khokhar, Moniza. “Reforming Militant Madaris in Pakistan.” Studies in Conﬂict & T errorism 30, no. 4 (March 20, 2007): 353–65. https://doi.org/56
10.1080/10576100600932751.
 Wahhabism takes its name after Muhammad Abdul ibn Wahhab, an 18th-century cleric who founded it. A literalist, ultra conservative form of  57
Sunni Islam, its adherents often denigrate other Islamic sects as well as Christians and Jews.
 Pillalamarri, Akhilesh. “The Radicalization of  South Asian Islam: Saudi Money and the Spread of  Wahhabism.” Georgetown Security Studies 58
Review, December 20, 2014. http://georgetownsecuritystudiesreview .org/2014/12/20/the-radicalization-of-south-asian-islam-saudi-money-and-
the-spread-of-wahhabism/.
 Shapoo, Sajid Farid. “Salaﬁ Jihadism - An Ideological Misnomer” Small Wars Journal. Accessed December 18, 2018. http://59
smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/salaﬁ-jihadism-an-ideological-misnomer.
 For background, see: Jones, Owen Bennett. Pakistan: Eye of  the Storm. 2 edition. New Haven, Conn. ; London: Yale University Press, 2003.60
 Waterman, David. “Saudi Wahhabi Imperialism in Pakistan: History , Legacy , Contemporary Representations and Debates.” Socialinių Mokslų 61
Studijos 6, no. 2 (January 29, 2015): 242–258. https://doi.org/10.13165/SMS-14-6-2-02. 
 Sherazi, Qaiser. “Conspiracy Hatched at Akora Khattak: FIA | The Express Tribune.” The Express T ribune. May 26, 2010. https://62
tribune.com.pk/story/16267/conspiracy-hatched-at-akora-khattak-ﬁa/.
 Craig, Tim. “Pakistan Is Still Trying to Get a Grip on Its Madrassa Problem.” Washington Post, December 16, 2015. https://63
www .washingtonpost.com/world/pakistan-is-still-trying-to-get-a-grip-on-its-madrassa-problem/2015/12/16/e626a422-a248-11e5-9c4e-
be37f66848bb_story .html.
!51

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 Singh, Sushant. “In WikiLeaks, How Saudi Arabia Wanted to Match Iranian Inﬂuence over India | India News, The Indian Express.” The 64
Indian Express, December 19, 2018. https://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/in-wikileaks-how-saudis-wanted-to-match-iranian-
inﬂuence-over-india/.
 Pandya, Abhinav . “Does Saudi-Funded Muslim Radicalization Threaten India? - Middle East News - Haaretz.Com.” Haaretz, April 16, 2018. 65
https://www .haaretz.com/middle-east-news/does-saudi-funded-muslim-radicalization-threaten-india-1.6008341.
 “How Saudi Arabia Exports Radical Islam.” The W eek, August 8, 2015. https://theweek.com/articles/570297/how-saudi-arabia-exports-66
radical-islam.
 Khalidi, Touﬁque Imrose. “Behind the Rise of  Bangladesh’s Hifazat.” Al-Jazeera, May 9, 2013. https://www .aljazeera.com/indepth/features/67
2013/05/201356134629980318.html.
 Rozario, Rock Ronald, and Stephan Uttom Rozario. “How Saudi Arabia Finances Radical Islam in Bangladesh- Ucanews.Com,” December 68
27, 2017. https://www .ucanews.com/news/how-saudi-arabia-ﬁnances-radical-islam-in-%20%20%20%20%20%20%20Bangladesh/79312.
 For more on how jihadist groups in South Asia cooperate and compete with each other, see: Jadoon, Amira. “ Allied and Lethal: Islamic State 69
Khorasan’s Network and Organizational Capacity in Afghanistan and Pakistan.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, December 3, 2018. 
https://ctc.usma.edu/app/uploads/2018/12/Allied-Lethal.pdf.
 SITE. “ AQIS Introduces ‘ Al-Hadeed News Report,’ Releases First Episode in Series.” SITE Intelligence Group, March 8, 2016. https://70
news.siteintelgroup.com/Jihadist-News/aqis-introduces-al-hadeed-news-report-releases-ﬁrst-episode-in-series.html.
 Watson, Ivan. “Bangladeshi Al Qaeda Declares War on Atheists.” CNN, April 9, 2016. https://www .cnn.com/2016/04/09/asia/bangladesh-71
al-qaeda-atheists/index.html.
 Manik, Julﬁkar Ali, and Barry , Ellen. “Bangladesh Police Suspect Islamist Militants in Professor’s Killing.” The New Y ork Times, December 21, 72
2017. https://www .nytimes.com/2016/04/24/world/asia/bangladesh-professor-killed.html.
 Zelin, Aaron. “How Al-Qaeda Survived Drones, Uprisings, and the Islamic State.” Policy Focus. The Washington Institute, June 2017. https://73
www .washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/how-al-qaeda-survived-drones-uprisings-and-the-islamic-state.
 Joscelyn, Thomas. “Pakistani Taliban Leader Discusses ‘global Jihad,’ Syria in Al Qaeda Video | FDD’s Long War Journal.” FDD’s Long War 74
Journal, July 24, 2013. //www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2013/07/_umar_is_the_author.php.
 Rao, Ojaswi, and Delna Abraham. “84% Dead In Cow-Related Violence Since 2010 Are Muslim; 97% Attacks After 2014.” India Spend (blog), 75
June 28, 2017. http://archive.indiaspend.com/cover-story/86-dead-in-cow-related-violence-since-2010-are-muslim-97-attacks-after-2014-2014.
 Singh, Aarti. 2018. "Zakir Musa Slams Indian Muslims For Not Joining Jihad, Calls Them ‘World’S Most Shameless' - Times Of  India . The 76
Times Of  India. https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/india/zakir-musa-slams-indian-muslims-for-not-joining-jihad-calls-them-worlds-most-
shameless/articleshow/59010014.cms.
 Indictment document against 13 AQIS members by the Indian Police. 77
 Raﬁq, Arif. “The New Al Qaeda Group in South Asia Has Nothing to Do With ISIS.” The New Republic, September 5, 2014. https://78
newrepublic.com/article/119333/al-qaeda-indian-subcontinent-not-response-islamic-state.
 Shapoo, Sajid Farid.“How Non-State Actors Could Cause War in South Asia.” The Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2016/11/how-non-79
state-actors-could-cause-war-in-south-asia/. 
 Audio statement of  Zakir Musa translated by authors. https://jihadology .net/2017/08/31/new-video-message-from-an%E1%B9%A3ar-80
ghazwat-al-hinds-dhakr-musa-on-the-occasion-of-id-al-a%E1%B8%8D%E1%B8%A5a/
 Riaz, Ali. “Traditional Institutions as Tools of  Political Islam in Bangladesh.” Journal of  Asian and African Studies 40, no. 3 (June 1, 2005): 171–96. 81
https://doi.org/10.1177/0021909605055072 
 Barry , Ellen and Manik, Julﬁkar Ali.“ Al Qaeda Claims Responsibility for Attacks on 2 Publishers in Bangladesh.” The New Y ork Times, December 82
21, 2017, https://www .nytimes.com/2015/11/02/world/asia/bangladesh-publishers-attacked-al-qaeda-claims-responsibility .html.
 Callimachi, Rukmini. “ISIS Seems to Tailor Attacks for Different Audiences.” The New Y ork Times, December 21, 2017, https://83
www .nytimes.com/2016/07/03/world/middleeast/isis-muslim-countries-bangladesh.html.
 Al-Mahmood, Syed Zain. “Bangladesh Grapples With Islamist Militancy .” Wall Street Jour nal, October 4, 2015, https://www .wsj.com/articles/84
bangladesh-islamists-gain-ground-1443981583.
 Fair, C. Christine. “Political Islam and Islamist Terrorism in Bangladesh: What Y ou Need to Know .” Lawfare, January 28, 2018. https://85
www .lawfareblog.com/political-islam-and-islamist-terrorism-bangladesh-what-you-need-know.
!52

AL-QAEDA IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT: THE NUCLEUS OF JIHAD IN SOUTH ASIA
 Riaz, Ali. “Who Are the Bangladeshi ‘Islamist Militants’?” Perspectives on Terrorism 10, no. 1 (February 23, 2016). http://86
www .terrorismanalysts.com/pt/index.php/pot/article/view/485.
 Roul, Animesh. “How Bangladesh Became Fertile Ground for Al-Qa`ida and the Islamic State.” CTC Sentinel 9, no. 5 (May 25, 2016): 27–33.87
 Joscelyn, Thomas. “ Analysis: Al Qaeda’s ‘Resurgence’ Focuses on Indian Subcontinent.” FDD’s Long War Journal, October 23, 2014. 88
www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2014/10/al_qaedas_resurgence-2.php. 
 Barker, Anne. “ Al Qaeda Issues Global Call to Arm Rohingya with Weapons.” ABC News, September 14, 2017. https://www .abc.net.au/news/89
2017-09-14/al-qaeda-urges-muslims-globally-to-aid-rohingya-in-myanmar/8946390.
 To date, the United States Department of  State has not made an ofﬁcial designation using the term genocide. On December 13, 2018, the 90
United States House of  Representatives approved a resolution by a vote of  394-1 declaring Myanmar's military campaign against the Rohingya 
minority a genocide (Chabot, Steve. H.Res.1091 - 115th Congress (2017-2018): Expressing the sense of  the House of  Representatives that 
atrocities committed against the Rohingya by the Burmese military and security forces since August 2017 constitute crimes against humanity and 
genocide and calling on the Government of  Burma to release Burmese journalists Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo sentenced to seven years 
imprisonment after investigating attacks against civilians by the Burmese military and security forces, and for other purposes, Pub. L. No. 1091 
(2018). https://www .congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-resolution/1091/text.); This decision follows a report by the United Nations in 
August 2018 which stated: “The crimes in Rakhine State, and the manner in which they were perpetrated, are similar in nature, gravity and scope 
to those that have allowed genocidal intent to be established in other contexts.”(“Myanmar: Tatmadaw Leaders Must Be Investigated for 
Genocide, Crimes against Humanity , War Crimes – UN Report.” OHCHR, August 27, 2018. https://www .ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/
DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=23475&LangID=E.)
 Rohingya Solidarity Organization(RSO) and Arakan Rohingya National Organization have long been raising the issue of  Rohingya ethnic 91
cleansing by Myanmar state.
 “ Al Qaeda Warns Myanmar of  ‘punishment’ over Rohingya.” Reuters, September 13, 2017. https://www .reuters.com/article/us-myanmar-92
rohingya-alqaeda-idUSKCN1BO0NI.
 Beech, Hannah. “Rohingya Militants V ow to Fight Myanmar Despite Disastrous Cost.” The New Y ork Times, December 22, 2017, https://93
www .nytimes.com/2017/09/17/world/asia/myanmar-rohingya-militants.html.
 Rana, Muhammad Amir. A to Z of  Jehadi Organizations in Pakistan. Mashal, 2004.94
 Roggio, Bill. “Jihadists Seek to Open New Front in Burma | FDD’s Long War Journal.” FDD’s Long War Journal (blog), July 15, 2013. 95
www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2013/07/jihadists_seek_to_op.php.
 Gartenstein-Ross, Daveed. “ AQIS Fits Into Al Qaeda’s Global Strategy .” The Cipher Brief, April 14, 2017. https://www .thecipherbrief.com/aqis-96
ﬁts-into-al-qaedas-global-strategy-2. 
 Isabelle Duyvesteyn and Brahm Peeters, “Fickle Foreign Fighters? A Cross-Case Analysis of  Seven Muslim Foreign Fighter Mobilisations 97
(1980-2015)” International Centre for Counter-Terrorism (ICCT)- The Hague, ICCT Research Paper, October 2015, https://icct.nl/
publication/ﬁckle-foreign-ﬁghters-a-cross-case-analysis-of-seven-muslim-foreign-ﬁghter-mobilisations-1980-2015/ ; see also, Thomas 
Hegghammer, “The Rise of  Muslim Foreign Fighters,” International Security , Vol.35, No.3, Winter 2010/11, pp.53-94, https://
www .belfercenter.org/sites/default/ﬁles/legacy/ﬁles/The_Rise_of_Muslim_Foreign_Fighters.pdf 
 Bruce Hoffman, “ Al-Qaeda’s Resurrection,” Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), March 6, 2018, https://www .cfr.org/expert-brief/al-qaedas-98
resurrection 
 Roggio, Bill. “Taliban Commander Admits Thousands of  Foreign Fighters Are Embedded within Group” FDD’s Long War Journal, December 99
18, 2018. www .longwarjournal.org/archives/2018/12/taliban-commander-admits-thousands-of-foreign-ﬁghters-are-embedded-within-
group.php. 
 Faber, Pamela G., and Powell, Alexander. “ Al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS): An Al-Qaeda Afﬁliate Case Study .” 2Rev . Center for 100
Naval Analyses, 2017. https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/1041741.pdf.
 Soufan, Ali. Anatomy of  Terror: From the Death of  Bin Laden to the Rise of  the Islamic State. 1 edition. New Y ork: W . W . Norton & 101
Company , 2017.
 Manik, Julﬁkar Ali. “Terrorism Charges in Bangladesh for 14 Men Deported From Singapore.” The New Y ork Times, January 19, 2018. https://102
www .nytimes.com/2016/01/24/world/asia/terrorism-bangladesh-singapore.html.
 Zelin, Aaron. “How Al-Qaeda Survived Drones, Uprisings, and the Islamic State.” Policy Focus. The Washington Institute for Near East 103
Policy , June 2017. https://www .washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/how-al-qaeda-survived-drones-uprisings-and-the-islamic-state.
!53

