Harmony Program
Letters from Abbottabad:
Bin Ladin Sidelined?

 
 
 
 
 
 
Letters from Abbottabad: Bin Ladin Sidelined? 
 
Nelly Lahoud 
Stuart Caudill 
Liam Collins 
Gabriel Koehler-Derrick 
Don Rassler 
Muhammad al-`Ubaydi 
 
HARMONY PROGRAM 
THE COMBATING TERRORISM CENTER AT WEST POINT 
 
www.ctc.usma.edu 
 
3 May 2012 
 
 
The views expressed in this report are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the Combating 
Terrorism Center, U.S. Military Academy, Department of Defense or U.S. government.

May 3, 2012 
 
Foreword 
The death of Usama bin Ladin one year ago understandably generated a significant 
amount of interest in the professionals who carried out the raid in Abbottabad, 
Pakistan, on the night of May 2
nd. Lost in the focus on this single mission is the fact that 
United States Special Operations Forces (SOF) have conducted thousands of 
comparable missions in Afghanistan and Iraq since 2001. The success of “Neptune 
Spear” was the cumulative result of the experience, relentless focus and professionalism 
of a community that has been conducting these types of missions for over ten years. 
  
A second feature of the raid and one much less apparent to the general public is that the 
professionals conducting this operation were trained to survey the site and collect any 
electronic media, papers, or pocket litter that might inform future operations. As 
discussed in the report, this process, known as F3EA (Find, Fix, Finish, Exploit and 
Analyze), has helped to revolutionize the fight against al-Qa`ida and created a cyclical 
operational process for combating networked actors. The end of the raid in Abbottabad 
was the beginning of a massive analytical effort as experts from across the Intelligence 
Community (IC) worked to exploit these captured documents, which in turn 
undoubtedly contributed to additional operations. 
 
The Combating Terrorism Center, housed within the Department of Social Sciences at 
West Point, has long recognized that captured battlefield documents have enormous 
value to students of terrorism. Since 2005 the longstanding partnership between the 
CTC and our colleagues who manage the Harmony database has facilitated the release 
of hundreds of documents to the public, with the intention of advancing the study of 
terrorism and political violence. In its own small way, this report and the release of 
some documents from the Abbottabad compound to the public are simply a 
continuation of this partnership. 
 
The CTC is proud to continue in this role by publishing these documents, and as with 
previous releases two cautions are worth highlighting. First and most importantly is 
that these documents likely represent only a fraction of the materials reportedly taken 
from the compound. If declassification of  subsequent documents from Abbottabad or 
new caches of materials from other locations is forthcoming, this would inevitably 
necessitate additional analysis and reflecti on. Thus, the report that accompanies the 
documents must be understood as an effort  to help reassess what we know about the 
group, but not as a definitive commentary on al-Qa`ida’s evolution or the group’s 
current status, and we should be extremely cautious of the notion that al-Qa`ida has 

been defeated. Rather, the problems presented by jihadism and violent extremism more 
broadly will continue to shift and mutate.  
 
Second, as with all Harmony projects, analysis based on captured documents alone is 
fraught with risk. While they may offer unique insights, these are most valuable when 
contextualized with information drawn from other sources. It is our sincere hope that 
the initial commentary and the release of these documents will not be the last word on 
the subject but simply the opening foray into a much larger academic debate and 
discussion which will further our understanding of al-Qa`ida and terrorism more 
broadly. 
 
The decision to release these documents to the CTC is an affirmation of the values of 
West Point and the Center’s mission. It is my expectation that as long as the Center 
continues to focus on its core competencies — embracing the unique responsibility to 
prepare cadets to think critically about the challenges they will face during war and 
peace; producing academically rigorous and theoretically sound research; and 
leveraging its deep expertise to further the public’s understanding of terrorism — it will 
continue as an enduring national resource for the study of terrorism.  
 
 


 
Acknowledgements 
 
While this report was authored by a small team of researchers at the CTC, we are 
conscious of the enormous debt of gratitude we owe to the "army" of supporters and 
institutions that helped make this project possible. We are indebted to Dr. Thomas 
Hegghammer who provided a masterful review and detailed critique of the draft in 
light of the documents. We are also grateful to colleagues and friends who provided 
internal reviews of the report: Lieutenant Colonel Jon Brickey, Brian Dodwell, Colonel 
Cindy Jebb, Colonel Mike Meese, Dr. Arie Perliger, Dr. Roland Rich, Major Todd 
Schultz and Rachel Yon. We are particularly thankful to Erich Marquardt who was 
peerless in his meticulous editing and proofing of the report. 
 
Though self-evident, it is important to ac knowledge that this project would not have 
been possible without the support of some la rger institutional friends of the CTC. We 
are thankful to the office of the Director of  National Intelligence for entrusting us with 
the analysis and release of these documents to the public for the first time. Thanks also 
to U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM); to our colleagues who manage the 
HARMONY project; and to our friends at the Norwegian Defense Research Institute 
(FFI) for their support of the CTC and contributions to the study of terrorism. 

1 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
This report is a study of 17 declassified documents captured during the Abbottabad 
raid and released to the Combating Terrorism Center (CTC). They consist of electronic 
letters or draft letters, totaling 175 pages in the original Arabic and 197 pages in the 
English translation. The earliest is dated September 2006 and the latest April 2011. Some 
of the letters are incomplete and/or are missing their dates, and not all of the letters 
explicitly attribute their author(s) and/or indicate the addressee. In addition to Bin 
Ladin, the recognizable individuals who appear  in the letters either as authors or as 
recipients are `Atiyyatullah and Abu Yahya al-L ibi, both of whom are al-Qa`ida leaders; 
Adam Yahya Gadahn, the American al-Qa`ida spokesman and media advisor; Mukhtar 
Abu al-Zubayr, the leader of the Somali militant group Harakat al-Shabab al-Mujahidin; 
Abu Basir (Nasir al-Wuhayshi), the leader of the Yemen-based al-Qa`ida in the Arabian 
Peninsula (AQAP); and Hakimullah Mahsud, the leader of Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan 
(TTP). Given the small collection of documents released to the CTC, it is impossible to 
construct a coherent evolution of al-Qa`ida or its current state. “Letters from 
Abbottabad” is an initial exploration and contextualization of 17 documents that will be 
the grist for future academic debate and discussion. 
 
In contrast to Bin Ladin’s public statements that focused on the injustice of those he 
believed to be the “enemies” ( a`da’) of Muslims, namely corrupt “apostate” Muslim 
rulers and their Western “overseers,” the focus of his private letters is Muslims’ 
suffering at the hands of his jihadi “brothers” ( ikhwa). He was at pains advising them to 
abort domestic attacks that cause Muslim civilian casualties and instead focus on the 
United States, “our desired goal.” Bin Ladi n’s frustration with regional jihadi groups 
and his seeming inability to exercise control over their actions and public statements is 
the most compelling story to be told on the basis of the 17 declassified documents. The 
main points from each of the report’s four sections are briefly summarized below. 
 
Al-Qa`ida and Regional Jihadi Groups 
Al-Qa`ida 
•  On the basis of these documents, the relationship between what has been labeled 
“al-Qa`ida Central” (AQC) under the leadership of Bin Ladin is not in sync on 
the operational level with its so-calle d “affiliates.” Bin Ladin enjoyed little 
control over either groups affiliated with al-Qa`ida in name (e.g., AQAP or 
AQI/ISI) or so-called “fellow travelers” such as the TTP. 
•  The documents show that al-Qa`ida’s relati onship with its so-called “affiliates” is 
a contested one among the senior leaders, and three different positions exist 

2 
 
within al-Qa`ida on this subject. Some urge senior leaders to declare their 
distance, and even to dissociate themselves, from groups whose leaders do not 
consult with al-Qa`ida but act in its name. Others urge the opposite, believing 
that the inclusion of regional jihadi groups in the fold contributes to al-Qa`ida’s 
growth and expansion. Bin Ladin represented a third position; he wanted to 
maintain communication, through his own pen or that of others in his circle, 
with “brothers” everywhere, to urge restraint and provide advice even if it fell 
on deaf ears, without granting them formal unity with al-Qa`ida. 
 
The Affiliates  
Rather than a source of strength, Bin Ladin was burdened by what he viewed as the 
incompetence of the “affiliates,” including thei r lack of political acumen to win public 
support, their media campaigns and their poor ly planned operations which resulted in 
the unnecessary deaths of thousands of Muslims.  
•  Islamic State of Iraq/Al-Qa`ida in Iraq (ISI/AQI) : The documents conclusively 
demonstrate that the failures of ISI/AQI weighed heavily on Bin Ladin, as he 
urged other groups not to repeat their mistakes. Adam Gadahn advised that al-
Qa`ida should publicly dissociate itself from ISI/AQI. 
•  Al-Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) : While routinely described as “the 
most dangerous” al-Qa`ida affiliate, as of 2010-2011 Bin Ladin seemed to have 
spent more time worrying about this group than appreciating its contributions. 
In a strongly worded letter, the leader of AQAP, Nasir al-Wuhayshi, was directly 
warned against pursuing any expansionist plan, such as declaring an Islamic 
state in Yemen, and was urged to refocus his efforts on attacking the United 
States, not the Yemeni government or security forces. 
•  Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) :  The TTP seems to have come incredibly close to 
provoking a direct and public confrontation with al-Qa`ida’s leadership. Its 
indiscriminate attacks against Muslims caused `Atiyyatullah and Abu Yahya al-
Libi to write to TTP leader Hakimullah Mahsud to express their displeasure with 
the group’s “ideology, methods and behavi or.” They also threatened to take 
public measures “unless we see from you serious and immediate practical and 
clear steps towards reforming [your ways] and dissociating yourself from these 
vile mistakes [that violate Islamic Law].” 
•  Al-Shabab: Bin Ladin appeared to have seen little practical value in formally 
recognizing the group’s pledge of loyalty ( bay`a). His motivations for 
withholding this recognition were largely pragmatic and reflected his concern 
over their poor governance and inflexible administration of hudud (deterrent 
penalties for certain crimes). He also wanted them to focus on “construction and 

3 
 
development” and feared that a formal merger with al-Qa`ida would prevent 
investment and foreign aid in Somalia. 
•  Al-Qa`ida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), the Taliban and Jaysh al-Islam : While there 
is mention of these groups in the documents released to the CTC, these 
discussions are not substantive enough to inform an understanding of the 
relationship between al-Qa`ida’s senior leaders and these groups.   
 
Al-Qa`ida Ties to Iran and Pakistan? 
While not extensive, the discussions of Iran and Pakistan in the documents suggest that 
al-Qa`ida’s relations with both countries were fraught with difficulties.   
•  References to Iran show that the relationship is not one of alliance, but of indirect 
and unpleasant negotiations over the release of detained jihadis and their 
families, including members of Bin Ladin ’s family. The detention of prominent 
al-Qa`ida members seems to have sparked a campaign of threats, taking hostages 
and indirect negotiations between al-Qa`ida and Iran that have been drawn out 
for years and may still be ongoing. 
•  The discussion of Pakistan is scarce and inconclusive. Although references are 
made about “trusted Pakistani brothers,” there are no explicit references to any 
institutional Pakistani support for al-Qa`ida or its operatives. 
 
Bin Ladin’s Plans 
One of the 17 documents is a letter dated A pril 2011 authored by Bin Ladin in response 
to the “Arab Spring,” which he considered to be a “formidable event” ( hadath ha’il) in 
the modern history of Muslims. This letter re flected his intended strategy of responding 
to the new political landscape that was emerging in the Middle East and North Africa. 
•  In the Arab world, Bin Ladin wanted al -Qa`ida to focus its efforts on media 
outreach and “guidance.” He believed that a media campaign should be 
launched to incite “people who have not yet revolted and exhort them to rebel 
against the rulers” ( khuruj ‘ala al-hukkam ) .  B u t  h e  a l s o  w a n t e d  t o  i n v e s t  i n  
guidance, “educating and warning Muslim people from those [who might tempt 
them to settle for] half solutions,” such as engaging in the secular political 
process by forming political parties. 
•  In Afghanistan, Bin Ladin wanted jihadis to continue their fight against the 
United States. He believed that their efforts weakened the United States, enabling 
Muslims elsewhere to revolt against their rulers, no longer fearing that the 
United States would be in a powerful position to support these rulers. 
•  It is possible that Ayman al-Zawahiri is the author of one or more of the 
anonymous letters (see Appendix). Base d on the 17 documents, `Atiyya was 
closest to Bin Ladin. 

4 
 
Introduction 
 
“I plan to release a statement [announcing] that we are starting a new phase to correct 
[the mistakes] we made; in doing so, we sha ll reclaim, God willing, the trust of a large 
segment of those who lost their trust in the jihadis,”
1 wrote Usama bin Ladin in 2010. In 
contrast to his public statements that focused on the injustice of those he believed to be 
the “enemies” ( a`da’) of Muslims, namely corrupt “apostate” Muslim rulers and their 
Western “overseers,” the focus of Bin Ladin’s private letters was Muslims’ suffering at 
the hands of his jihadi “brothers” ( ikhwa). He was at pains advising them to abort 
domestic attacks that caused Muslim civilian casualties and, instead, focus on the 
United States, “our desired goal.” Bin Ladi n’s frustration with regional jihadi groups 
and his seeming inability to exercise control over their actions and public statements is 
the most compelling story to be told on the basis of the 17 declassified documents 
captured during the Abbottabad raid in May 2011.  
 
This report is a study of these 17 document s, but it is by no means an exhaustive 
analysis of the information revealed in them. It consists of four sections. The first section 
describes the documents’ format, the typi cal journey captured battlefield documents 
undergo before declassification, and the limitations imposed on assessing the state of al-
Qa`ida today in light of these 17 documents alone. The second section argues that on 
the basis of these documents, the relationship between what has been dubbed “al-
Qa`ida Central” (AQC) under the leadership of Bin Ladin is not in sync on the 
operational level with its so-called “affiliates.” The third section discusses al-Qa`ida’s 
relationship with Iran and Pakistan. With respect to Iran, the documents show that it is 
an antagonistic relationship, largely based on  indirect and unpleasant negotiations over 
the release of detained jihadis and their families, including members of Bin Ladin’s 
family. Relations with the Pakistani government are not discussed; the documents do 
not explicitly point to any institutional Pakistani support for Bin Ladin. The fourth 
section covers miscellaneous subjects raised in the documents that point to what the 
future might hold for al-Qa`ida, including Bin Ladin’s response to the “Arab Spring” 
and how he planned to convert jihadi activities into missionary activities in the Middle 
East and North Africa, but not in Afghanista n, as well as the conspicuous distance of 
                                                           
1 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 15. The pages of the documents received by the CTC are not all numbered in the 
original Arabic version. The English translation numbers the pages to correspond to the content of each 
page of the Arabic version. As a result, most Arabic pages take more than a single page when translated 
(except when the Arabic font is very large as with SOCOM-2012-0000016), so the reader will find that the 
page number of the Arabic version is included on a separate line in the text of the English translation. To 
avoid confusion, this report refers to the page number in the Arabic version so that the reader can easily 
find it in the English translation. 

5 
 
Ayman al-Zawahiri from Bin Ladin in the documents released to the Combating 
Terrorism Center (CTC) at West Point.  
 
I- From Abbottabad to the CTC: The 17 Declassified Documents 
It was reported that “thousands of item s” were captured from Usama bin Ladin’s 
compound during the Abbottabad raid.
2 To date, however, only 17 documents have 
been declassified and provided to the CTC, all of which are hereby released with the 
publication of this report.
3 They consist of electronic letters or draft letters, totaling 175 
pages in the original Arabic and 197 pages in  the English translation. They were written 
over several years. The earliest is dated September 2006 and the latest April 2011, a 
week before Bin Ladin’s death. Some of the letters are incomplete and/or are missing 
their dates, and not all the letters explicitly attribute the author(s) and/or indicate the 
addressee. Given that they are all electr onic documents presumably saved on thumb 
drives, memory cards or the hard drive of hi s computer, except for the letters addressed 
to Bin Ladin it cannot be ascertained that letters explicitly authored by him reached 
their intended destinations. 
 
In addition to Bin Ladin,
4 the recognizable individuals who appear in the letters either 
as authors or as recipients of letters are Mahmud/`Atiyya 5 and Abu Yahya al-Libi, 6 both 
                                                           
2 David Ignatius, “A Lion in Winter,” Washington Post, 18 March 2012. 
3 The quality of the English translation provided to the CTC is not adequate throughout. When the 
translation was deemed inadequate, quotations cited in this report have either been amended or 
translated anew by Nelly Lahoud. Furthermore, the conversion of the dating of the letters from the Hijri 
to the Gregorian calendar is inaccurate in some places. The Appendix provides corrected dates to some of 
the letters, along with some pointers on how some letters relate to others. 
4 Usama bin Muhammad bin `Awad bin Ladin was born on 10 March 1957, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. He 
is the founder of Tandhim al-Qa`ida (al-Qa`ida Organization), which carried out the attacks on the World 
Trade Center and the Pentagon on 11 September 2001. The literature on Bin Ladin is extensive. For an 
informative account of his early life, see Jonathan Randal, Osama: The Making of a Terrorist (New York: 
Vintage, 2005). On 2 May 2011, President Barack Obama announced that Usama bin Ladin was killed in 
his compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan. For details, see “Remarks by the President on Osama Bin Laden,” 
Office of the Press Secretary, 2 May 2011. 
5 He is also known by the alias Abu `Abd al-Rahman and `Atiyyatullah, and is one of the leading public 
faces of al-Qa`ida. His real name is Jamal Ibrahim Ishtiwi al-Misrati. He was born in 1970 in Misrata, 
Libya. `Atiyya pursued Islamic religious studies in Mauritania, then joined jihad in Algeria. He went to 
Afghanistan in the late 1990s and was killed in a drone strike in Pakistan on 22 August 2011. For details, 
see the biography Ayman al-Zawahiri provided in his eulogy for `Atiyya: “Risalat al-amal wa al-bishr li 
ahlina fi Misr,” 8th episode, http://www.aljahad.com/vb/showthread.php?t=14008 (accessed 25 April 
2012). 
6 Hasan Qa’id/Abu Yahya al-Libi is an al-Qa`ida leader and ideologue, as well as a former member of the 
Libyan Islamic Fighting Group. Al-Libi is believed to have traveled to Afghanistan in the early 1990s, 
then to Mauritania to study Islamic religious sciences before returning to Afghanistan. He was captured a 

6 
 
of whom are al-Qa`ida leaders; Adam Yahya Gadahn, the American al-Qa`ida 
spokesman and media advisor; 7 Mukhtar Abu al-Zubayr, 8 the leader of the Somali 
militant group Harakat al-Shabab al-Mujahidin — whose 2009 pledge of allegiance to 
al-Qa`ida was recognized by Ayman al-Zawahiri in February 2012;
9 Abu Basir (Nasir al-
Wuhayshi), the leader of the Yemen-based al-Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula 
(AQAP);10 and Hakimullah Mahsud, the leader of Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP).11 
 
Before delving into an analysis of the docume nts, it is critical to address the academic 
limitations of studying declassified captur ed battlefield documents. Such a study is 
fraught with risks, not least because the academic community is not involved in the 
process of declassification and is therefore unaware of the larger classified corpus of 
documents. The academic community’s access to captured battlefield documents is at 
the end of a journey that often starts with Special Operations Forces (SOF)
12 capturing 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
year after 9/11 by Pakistani authorities and handed to U.S. authorities. He was sent to Bagram prison 
from where he and several other high-profile captives escaped on the night of 10 July 2005. For details, 
see Michael Moss and Souad Mekhennet, “Rising Leader for Next Phase of Al Qaeda’s War,” New York 
Times, 4 April 2008. 
7 Adam Gadahn was born on 1 September 1978, in California. Gadahn converted to Islam in 1995 and 
subsequently traveled to Pakistan to study. Gadahn made his first public appearance as an al-Qa`ida 
member in a videotape in 2004 under the kunya `Azzam al-Amriki. For details, see John M. Broder, 
“American Being Sought by the FBI Found his Place in Islam, Relatives Say,” New York Times, 28 May 
2004. 
8 His name is Ahmed Abdi Godane. For details, see “Who are Somalia’s Shabaab?” BBC, 23 February 
2012.  
9 Nelly Lahoud, “The Merger of Al-Shabab and Qa`idat al-Jihad,” CTC Sentinel 5, no. 2 (2012). 
10 Nasir `Abd al-Karim al-Wuhayshi is a Yemeni citizen and the leader of al-Qa`ida in the Arabian 
Peninsula. Al-Wuhayshi served as a private secretary to Usama bin Ladin for years in Afghanistan but 
left in 2001 and was soon arrested by Iranian authorities. Two years later, they transferred him to Yemen 
where he was imprisoned without charges. In February 2006, Nasir al-Wuhayshi was one of 23 Yemeni 
captives who escaped from custody from a maximum security prison in Sana`a and was acknowledged as 
the group’s leader shortly thereafter. For details, see Gabriel Koehler-Derrick, ed., “A False Foundation? 
AQAP, Tribes, and Ungoverned Spaces in Yemen,” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point (2011), 35, fn 
82, 36.  
11 Zulfiqar Mahsud was born in 1981. He was elevated to the position of amir (leader) of Tehrik-e-Taliban 
Pakistan (TTP) after its previous leader, Baitullah Mahsud, was killed in a drone strike in August 2009. 
See “Profile: Hakimullah Mahsud,” BBC, 3 May 2010.  
12 SOF is often confused with Special Forces (SF). The term Special Forces or SF applies to only a small 
subset of Special Operations Forces which consist of U.S. Army Green Berets. Special Operations Forces 
consist of forces from all four services including (1) Special Forces (SF), Ranger, Army Special Operations 
aviation, Special Operations MISO, and Special Operations Civil Affairs units from the Army; (2) SEAL, 
SEAL delivery vehicle, and special boat teams from the Navy; (3) Special Operations flying units 
(includes unmanned aircraft systems), special tactics elements (includes combat control, pararescue, 
weather, and select tactical air control party units), and aviation FID units from the U.S. Air Force; and (4) 

7 
 
them. The captured data is then passed to the intelligence community for (further) 
exploitation before it is declassified, in part or in its entirety, and released to the public 
or to an academic center such as the CTC to contextualize before its public release.  
 
What then is the path that characterizes the journey of declassified captured battlefield 
documents?  
Underlying the mystique that Navy SEALs and other SOF hold in the public’s common 
perception is their superior ability to conduct “direct action” (DA) raids like the one 
carried out in Abbottabad to capture or kill Us ama bin Ladin. In reality, direct action is 
only one of eleven core activities or tasks conducted by SOF.
 13  Since 9/11, one of their 
major core activities has been counterterrorism operations, which include conducting 
sensitive site exploitation (SSE). An SSE is similar to gathering evidence during a 
domestic criminal investigation, although the period allowed for military forces to 
gather information is much shorter, consisting  of minutes as opposed to hours, days or 
weeks. Much like a criminal investigation where the information is used to build a case 
against a suspect, the information gathered from a military target is analyzed for 
tactical, operational and strategic purposes. For example, the information may provide 
details on an impending attack, or specific s about the larger network that provides new 
leads or insight into the individual’s or the organization’s strategic plans.  
 
The military in general and SOF in particular have always recognized the importance of 
capturing information about the enemy on the battlefield. Indeed, starting from the first 
operations in Afghanistan in October 2001, SOF built an SSE into every operation it 
carried out, seizing countless computers, phones, photographs, paper documents and 
other electronic media. When the SEALs conducted Operation Neptune Spear on 2 May 
2011,
14 capturing or killing Bin Ladin was only  one of their objectives; another main 
objective was the SSE of the compound to gather everything that could be exploited 
from an intelligence perspective.  
 
The SSE often yields unique and valuable information. Sometimes the information can 
be exploited immediately, but often it will ta ke additional time and capabilities in order 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Marine Special Operations battalions. See Joint Publication 3-05, Special Operations, 18 April 2011, II-1, II-
2. 
13 SOF Core Activities or Tasks include the following: direct action (DA), special reconnaissance (SR), 
counter-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (CP of WMD), counterterrorism (CT), 
unconventional warfare (UW), foreign internal defense (FID), security force assistance (SFA), 
counterinsurgency (COIN), information operations (IO), military information support operations (MISO), 
civil affairs operations (CAO). See Joint Publication 3-05, Special Operations, May 5, 2011, II-5, II-19. 
14 It should be noted that the Abbottabad raid fell on May 1 in the United States and May 2 in Pakistan. 

8 
 
for it to be properly exploited. The collected data is then shared with the broader 
intelligence community for further analysis. Typically, the government agency that 
acquires the data effectively “owns” it and determines its classification, as well as 
controls its distribution and declassification . The standard procedure is to classify the 
data in the immediate phase following the SOF operation. From the intelligence 
community’s perspective, many reasons just ify immediate classification, including the 
possibility that its public release could cause other elements of the terrorist network to 
move or go into hiding, making it harder to  locate and capture them. In the case of the 
Abbottabad raid, it is possible that declassification of additional documents or items is 
forthcoming. It is also possible that the remaining items are of no value to the public 
(e.g., books, movies, or grocery lists), and the intelligence agency that owns them made 
the decision that declassifying such items did not warrant the cost involved, or the time 
and energy of its staff.  
 
It is only after the intelligence community has exhausted the data for tactical and 
strategic purposes that it is declassified. Therefore, when an academic center, such as 
the CTC, is provided declassified documents to study and analyze before releasing 
them to the public, its researchers have no part in the selection of documents to be 
declassified and are privy only to declassified documents. Like with any research 
project, a researcher does not always have at their disposal all the materials to study a 
given topic and must therefore extrapolate that which is unknown from that which is 
known. In some cases, such extrapolations may le ad to firm conclusions. In other cases, 
however, conclusions reached on the basis of extrapolations — even when these are 
based on well-founded research — may need  revision when previously unavailable 
materials are declassified. When scholars pursue a research topic that involves materials 
subject to classification by the government, they face what one may term the 
“(de)classification challenge.” They have no choice but to wait for materials to be 
declassified, however frustrating the waiting period may be. The process of 
declassifying materials could occur all at once or in different stages; if it is the latter, it is 
even harder to reach firm or even plausible conclusions.  
 
Whereas in the eyes of the SOF commun ity the Abbottabad raid was successfully 
completed, the academic community studying al-Qa`ida has much work ahead before 
an authoritative study of al-Qa`ida can be expected. If the mission of the SEALs met all 
of its objectives – find, fix, finish, exploit, and analyze (F3EA)
15 – the academic 
community is still in the find stage of the necessary documents to accomplish its task. 
                                                           
15 Michael T. Flynn, Rich Juergens and Thomas L. Cantrell, “Employing ISR: SOF Best Practices,” Joint 
Forces Quarterly, no. 50 (2008), 56-61. F3EA describes the processes of finding a particular individual; fixing 

9 
 
 
From an academic perspective, in view of the thin volume of the documents and their 
spread over a period of six years, there is little hope of writing a coherent study of the 
evolution of al-Qa`ida since 2006 based exclusively on these letters. As it stands, 
analyzing the state of al-Qa`ida on the basis of the documents is like commenting on the 
tailoring of a jacket when only a sleeve is available. Although a sleeve cannot substitute 
for the remaining parts of the jacket, it can still offer important features about the 
overall jacket: it can indicate its color, its te xtile design, and most likely the quality of its 
stitches and lining.  
 
II-  Al-Qa`ida and Regional Jihadi Groups 
To appreciate the new insights gained from the documents, it is helpful to place them in 
the context of what is previously known about al-Qa`ida as an organization through the 
lens of publicly available documents meant to be internal to the organization.
16 The 
founders of al-Qa`ida envisaged their organizat ion as an international entity, serving as 
a “wellspring for expertise in military training and [the art of] fighting.” 17 Al-Qa`ida’s 
“by-laws” are explicit that this “wellspring of expertise” would also serve to enable 
other jihadi groups around the world, stating that “our relationship with sincere jihadi 
groups and movements is premised on cooperation [to advance] righteousness and 
piety.”
18 In this collaborative spirit, when al-Qa`ida was operating in the open in the late 
1980s and throughout the 1990s, it made its guesthouses ( madafat) and its training 
camps in Pakistan and Afghanistan availabl e to anyone who sought military training 
(i`dad) before engaging in fighting ( jihad) either in Afghanistan or other locations. This, 
however, did not mean that those who received training in al-Qa`ida’s camps 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
the precise location of the enemy target; finishing the target by either capturing or killing it; exploiting data 
or information on target or at a later date; and finally analyze the data, in combination with existing 
intelligence to identify new lines of operation and new starting points to continue the cycle. 
16 Following the U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, materials were captured on the battlefield and 
have since been stored in the Department of Defense’s Harmony database. While they are illuminating, 
analyzing them is fraught with certain risks since it is difficult to assess how representative they are of the 
larger corpus of materials that exist. 
17 AFGP-2002-000078, page one of the Arabic document, but the document starts on page nine. 
18 AFGP-2002-600048, 4-5. Translation amended. It is worth noting that the by-laws state different types of 
relationships that al-Qa`ida can or cannot have: “our  relationship with Islamic non-jihadi groups is 
premised upon love, friendship and advice; we ackn owledge their good deeds but, if need be, make 
evident to them what we believe to be their shortcom ings.” Also see: “our position with respect to the 
idols, secular and national parties and their ilk is to dissociate from them and to declare our ongoing 
enmity against their unbelief until they believe in nothing but God. We shall not [compromise] with them 
on the basis of half-solutions, or [agree] to a dialog ue with them or even flatter them [to further our 
agenda].” 

10 
 
automatically became members of the group; 19 by the same token, when al-Qa`ida 
assisted other jihadi groups it did not make its collaboration conditional on the group 
joining al-Qa`ida. In practical terms, the collaboration meant that al-Qa`ida and another 
jihadi group could come to a mutual agreement to carry out a joint operation or another 
militant activity together, yet the same jihadi group maintained its own autonomy, 
including its ideology (fikr) and activities.
20 The relationship between Indonesia’s Jema`a 
Islamiyya (JI) and al-Qa`ida typifies this dynamic. In the words of a JI member who 
personally liaised with al-Qa`ida, the dynamic is like that of “a business affiliate, we can 
ask them (i.e., al-Qa`ida) for an opinion but they have no authority over us. We are free. 
We have our own funds, our own men. We ar e independent, like Australia and the U.S. 
But when it comes to an operation we can join together.”
21 
 
Despite its collaboration with various jihadi groups around the world, al-Qa`ida did not 
seek to formalize these relationships in to a unified command under its umbrella. 
Indeed, members of al-Qa`ida see themselves as part of a distinct entity that is separate 
from and even superior to other jihadi groups.
22 It was only when al-Qa`ida lost its 
sanctuary following the U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001 that a trend of regional 
jihadi groups pledging allegiance to al-Qa`ida or acting in its name emerged. 
Paradoxically, this may have been due to the fame that the 9/11 attacks generated in the 
jihadi world and at the same time al-Qa`ida’s inability to be in control of its 
organization after it lost its sanctuary. More precisely, it was in 2003 that the branding 
al-Qa`ida took off when Saudi militants adopted the name “al-Qa`ida on the Arabian 
Peninsula” (QAP).
23 In 2004, Abu Mus`ab al-Zarqawi’s Jama`at al-Tawhid wa-al-Jihad 
group pledged allegiance to al-Qa`ida, an d Usama bin Ladin publicly acknowledged 
the group as “al-Qa`ida in Mesopotamia,” or  al-Qa`ida in Iraq (AQI). Al-Zarqawi’s 
group was the only regional group that Bin Ladin formally admitted into al-Qa`ida; 
others were later announced publicly by Ayman al-Zawahiri.
24 
                                                           
19 Fadil Harun, al-Harb ‘ala al-Islam: Qissat Fadil Harun  1, 71. On the dynamics of collaboration but not 
union between al-Qa`ida and other jihadi groups, see Lahoud’s forthcoming report that examines 
Harun’s autobiography. 
20 Fadil Harun, al-Harb ‘ala al-Islam 2, 426. 
21 Quinton Temby, “Informal Networks – Unraveling Al-Qaeda’s Southeast Asia Alliances,” IHS 
Defense, Security and Risk Consulting, March 2012. Nelly Lahoud is grateful to Quinton Temby for 
making his research available to her prior to its publication. 
22 Fadil Harun, al-Harb ‘ala al-Islam 1, 9. 
23 Thomas Hegghammer, Jihad in Saudi Arabia: Violence and Pan-Islamism since 1979 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010), 37. 
24 In 2012, Ayman al-Zawahiri announced al-Qa`ida’s merger with al-Shabab. See Ayman al-Zawahiri, 
“Bushra Sarra” (Glad Tidings), http://as-ansar.com/vb/showthread.php?t=55735 (accessed 26 April 2012). 
In November 2007, al-Zawahiri and Abu al-Layth al-Libi announced al-Qa`ida’s merger with the Libyan 

11 
 
 
The proliferation of regional jihadi groups affiliating themselves with al-Qa`ida and the 
continued existence of core al-Qa`ida leaders believed to be based in Pakistan and/or 
Afghanistan led to the perception that al-Qa`ida was expanding. It was assumed that al-
Qa`ida was able to rebuild across Pakistan’s northwest frontier following the losses it 
suffered in the immediate aftermath of the U.S.-led military campaign in Afghanistan in 
2001. Rejuvenated, al-Qa`ida is believed to have been able to “act as an organization,”
25 
and the intelligence community labeled this revived entity “al-Qa`ida Central” (AQC) – 
both in reference to the geographical presence of the core senior leaders who were said 
to report to Bin Ladin to seek his approval for major decisions,
26 and also to indicate 
that there is at least a symbiotic relati onship between “AQC” and regional jihadi 
groups, dubbed as AQC’s “affiliates.” According to this argument, AQC  “gives 
strategic guidance to its regional affiliates”  and it is assumed that the affiliates act 
largely in compliance with AQC’s directives.27  
 
The Construction of an “Al-Qa`ida Central” 
The documents reveal a different story about the relationship between AQC and the 
affiliates, and about Bin Ladin’s role in global jihadi activities. The documents show that 
this relationship is a contested one among se nior leaders, and three different positions 
exist within al-Qa`ida on this subject. Adam Gadahn’s letter to an unknown “shaykh” 
represented those who want to remain faithful to the principles for which they believe 
al-Qa`ida stands, and urged senior leaders to declare their distance or dissociate 
themselves from groups whose leaders do not consult with al-Qa`ida yet have the 
chutzpa to act in its name. Others, represented by an anonymous letter, urge the 
opposite, believing that the inclusion of region al jihadi groups in the fold contributes to 
al-Qa`ida’s growth and expansion. Bin Ladin represented a third position, as he wanted 
to maintain communication, through his own pen or that of his inner circle, with 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Islamic Fighting Group. See “Wahdat al-Saff,” http://www.paldf.net/forum/showthread.php?t=185737 
(accessed 26 April 2012). In May 2006, al-Zawahiri and Muhammad Khalil al-Hakaymah announced al-
Qa`ida’s merger with the Egyptian Islamic Group, “Communiqué from Those Adhering to the Covenant 
in the Egyptian Islamic Group,” http://al-qimmah.net/showthread.php?t=6224&langid=2 (accessed 26 
April 2012). In September 2006, al-Zawahiri announced al-Qa`ida’s merger with the Salafist Group for 
Preaching and Combat (GSPC). See “Qadaya Sakhinah ma’ al-Sheikh Ayman al-Zawahiri,” 
http://www.tawhed.ws/r?i=efaperre (accessed 26 April 2012). 
25 Craig Whitlock, ‘The New al-Qaeda Central,” Washington Post, 9 September 2007. Whitlock based his 
argument on interviews he had with senior U.S. intelligence officials. 
26 Ibid. 
27 Eric Schmitt, “Jet Plot Shows Growing Ability of Qaeda Affiliates,” New York Times, 31 December 2009. 
Schmitt based his article on interviews with U.S. counterterrorism officials. 

12 
 
“brothers” everywhere, to urge restraint and provide advice, without granting them 
formal unity with al-Qa`ida. 
 
The documents show that some of the affiliate s sought Bin Ladin’s blessing on symbolic 
matters, such as declaring an Islamic state, and wanted a formal union to acquire the al-
Qa`ida brand. On the operational front, ho wever, the affiliates either did not consult 
with Bin Ladin or were not prepared to follow his directives. Therefore, the framing of 
an “AQC” as an organization in control of regional “affiliates” reflects a conceptual 
construction by outsiders rather than the messy reality of insiders. Judging by the 
letters, a relationship, at least via correspondence, clearly existed between Bin Ladin 
and regional jihadi leaders. But it is in the second half of 2010,
28 in a long and detailed 
letter addressed to `Atiyya, that Bin Ladin, alarmed by the “increased mistakes” 
committed by the “brothers” who are spread over “many regions,” 29 s o u g h t  t o  b r i n g  
regional jihadi groups in line with al-Qa`ida’s  vision and code of conduct. The reader 
should note that when Bin Ladin used terms such as “brothers” ( al-ikhwa) or “we,” he 
was not always referring to members of al-Qa`ida. Except for the “apostates” 
(murtaddun), by which he meant Muslims who act as the West’s agents ( wukala’) against 
the interests of the umma (global community of Muslims),
30 all Muslims were 
considered to be “we” in his eyes. 31 In the same spirit of unity, all jihadis were 
“brothers” in Bin Ladin’s parlance — including those whose actions he chastised (e.g., 
TTP, AQAP),32 and those whose request for formal un ity with al-Qa`ida he denied (e.g., 
al-Shabab).33  
 
                                                           
28 SOCOM-2012-0000019. The content of the letter makes it evident that it is authored by Bin Ladin. The 
letter, however, is not dated, but the author referred to a statement released by Sa`id al-Shihri concerning 
the arrest of Hayla al-Qasir in Saudi Arabia, who was accused of collecting money for the jihadis. The 
author also referred to the following report by the satellite channel al-‘Arabiyya, which is dated 4 July 
2010: “‘Nisa’ al-Qa`ida,” al-‘Arabiyya, http://www.alarabiya.net/articles/2010/06/04/110439.html (accessed 
26 April 2012). Therefore, the letter must have been composed after 4 July 2010 but before 21 October 2010 
because parts of SOCOM-2012-0000015 (which is dated 21 October 2010) follow up on issues raised in 
SOCOM-2012-0000019. 
29 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 3.  
30 See SOCOM-2012-0000016, 16, for an explanation of the connotation associated with the term “agents.” 
31 In Islam, the spirit of unity among Muslims is an important tenet of the faith. That is why it is common 
for Muslims to highlight that believers are brothers in religion (cf. Q. 49:10). Thus, Bin Ladin’s use of 
“brothers” is in reference to being brothers in religion, but not necessarily “brothers”/members in the 
same organization. 
32 See section below on the “Affiliates.” 
33 SOCOM-2012-0000005, and discussion of al-Shabab below. 

13 
 
In 2010, Bin Ladin asked `Atiyya to prepare a memorandum of understanding 
(mudhakkira) that would require regional jihadi groups to consult with AQC before they 
act.34 It is ironic that Bin Ladin deemed it fitting to appropriate the expression “AQC” 
from the media to clarify the plan he sought  to implement. “This expression [AQC],” he 
wrote to `Atiyya, “is a technical term ( istilah) used in the media to distinguish between 
al-Qa`ida in Afghanistan and Pakistan and al-Qa`ida in the rest of the regions ( aqalim). I 
do not object to using it initially to clarify the objective [of the centralization 
endeavor].”
35  
 
Far from being in control of the operational side of regional jihadi groups, the tone in 
several letters authored by Bin Ladin makes it  clear that he was struggling to exercise 
even a minimal influence over them. It is further evident that although he did not 
consider publicly dissociating ( tabarru’ min ) himself and al-Qa`ida from the actions of 
regional groups, as Adam Gadahn strongly urged the senior leadership to do,
36 Bin 
Ladin largely disapproved of their conduct. High on his list of concerns was their 
flexible understanding of tatarrus, which resulted in the unnecessary deaths of Muslim 
civilians.37 Tatarrus refers to special circumstances when it is permissible, from an 
Islamic law of war perspective, for a military commander to attack enemy territory, 
even if the attack may result in the deaths of non-combatants, including Muslim women 
and children.
38 In modern political parlance, it is comparable to civilians dying in war as 
collateral damage. Bin Ladin was concerned th at regional jihadi groups had expanded 
the meaning of a classical legal concept meant to be applied in rare circumstances and 
turned it from an exception into the norm. As a result, the jihadis, he worried, have lost 
considerable sympathy from the Muslim public; this loss was compounded when “the 
mistakes of the jihadis were exploited by the enemy, [further] distorting the image of 
the jihadis in the eyes of the umma’s general public and separating them from their 
popular bases.”
39 
 
                                                           
34 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 9. 
35 Ibid., 17. Linguistically, the Arabic expression Bin Ladin uses for AQC is rather sloppy. He uses “al-
Qa`ida fi al-markaz.” A more appropriate designation would be ‘Tanzim al-Qa`ida al-Markazi,” or 
“Qiyadat al-Qa`ida al-Markaziyya.” 
36 SOCOM-2012-0000004. 
37 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 4. 
38 See, for example, the discussion in Shaybani’s Siyar in Majid Khadduri, The Islamic Law of Nations: 
Shaybani’s Siyar (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1966), 101-102. The term tatarrus is not used in this 
classical text, but the context of the legal discussion is the same. 
39 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 4. 

14 
 
In practical terms, Bin Ladin wanted the memorandum to include broad guidelines 
concerning both the global military activities of the jihadis and their media releases. The 
two, he believed, should go hand in hand, so that “we do not violate our words with 
some of our practices.”
40 The memorandum should then be sent to the regional 
leaders,41 requesting their responses, 42 and ultimately demanding their “formal 
commitment” ( iltizam).43 As for the military activities, the memorandum should 
stipulate that every regional amir (leader) should take all necessary measures to 
maintain control and discipline over the military activities of his group and avoid a 
flexible approach to the question of tatarrus.
44 In the event that mistakes involuntarily 
occur and non-combatants die as a result, apologies and explanations should follow, 
even if those fallen are sinners ( fussaq). Should the regional leaders fail to apologize, “it 
would be necessary for us [presumably AQC] to take responsibility [for their errors] 
and apologize for what happened.”
45 
 
As for media releases, Bin Ladin wanted the memorandum to include a commitment to 
centralize all jihadi media releases. The importance of having a sophisticated and 
coherent media strategy was critical for Bi n Ladin, believing it to be “a principal 
element of the battle.”
46 In a different letter, he (and possibly `Atiyya) stressed that 
winning “the media occupies the greater portion of the battle today,” wittily adding 
that “the satellite channels today are worse than the satiric poets ( shu`ara’ al-hija’) of the 
pre-Islamic era.”
47 The poetic genre of hija’ to which he is referring had a powerful 
                                                           
40 Ibid., 15. 
41 Ibid., 9. 
42 Ibid., 15. 
43 Ibid., 14. 
44 Ibid., 9. 
45 Ibid., 10. 
46 SOCOM-2012-0000015, 5. 
47 SOCOM-2012-0000016, 18. This letter may not have been authored by Bin Ladin. It may be helpful to 
understand it in the context of the following: SOCOM-2012-0000015, authored by Bin Ladin, noted on 
page 5 that he is enclosing a file consisting of parts of a letter that he would like `Atiyya to edit for the 
purpose of sending to Abu Basir (Nasir al-Wuhayshi), the leader of AQAP. He indicated that `Atiyya is 
better placed than him to draft it because he knows the “brothers” there in Yemen. He also asked him to 
share with him the final format of the letter. SOCOM-2012-0000017 consists of many paragraphs and 
notes that do not form an internally coherent essay/letter. Some of these are identical to paragraphs 
included in Letter 13. It is therefore possible that SOCOM-2012-0000017 was the draft that Bin Ladin 
enclosed to `Atiyya; in turn, `Atiyya used parts of SOCOM-2012-0000017 and transformed them into a 
coherent letter to Abu Basir, and this coherent letter is SOCOM-2012-0000016 – which is not signed – to 
share with Bin Ladin before sending. It is not clear whether Bin Ladin wanted `Atiyya to sign it in his or 
Bin Ladin’s name. The line on “hija” is not included in SOCOM-2012-0000017; if it is `Atiyya who edited 
it, then this would be his colorful language, not Bin Ladin’s. 

15 
 
resonance in that distant era, and Arabs today understand too well the connotations it 
imparts. In the words of Pellat, the purpose of hija’ “was to stigmatize the failings that 
were the antithesis of the qualities glorified.”48 
 
Bin Ladin explained to `Atiyya that “we are in need of sincere internal advice and a 
constructive critical evaluation of all our politics and [media] releases be they from 
AQC or from regional groups.” He advised that two “competent brothers,” internal to 
the organization, should devote all their en ergy to this task and also seek help 
externally to find a trusted and learned person to assist in “correcting and developing” 
our politics.
49 Bin Ladin was not alone in being concerned about the mediocre state of 
jihadi media. Adam Gadahn was highly critical of the inadequate level, even vulgarity, 
he found to be characteristic of jihadi media. In a letter composed in early 2011 and 
forwarded to Bin Ladin,
50 Gadahn wrote about jihadi forums with utter disdain, 
believing them to be “repulsive to most Muslims” and a liability to al-Qa`ida. He 
argued that most of their participants are characterized by religious fanaticism and 
biases, and therefore “distort to some extent the image of al-Qa`ida.”
51 
 
Beyond centralizing jihadi releases, Bin Ladin was keen to create a credible jihadi media 
so that it becomes a reference point for ma instream Muslims interested in learning 
about jihad and jihadis. It bothered him that he watched a television program on al-
Jazeera, al-Islamiyyun, which ran an episode littered with factual errors about him.
52 
Although Bin Ladin did not generally come across  as egotistical, in this instance it is 
clear that he worried about his legacy. “He who does not make known his own history 
                                                           
48 Ch. Pellat, “Hidja’,” Encyclopedia of Islam, second edition. There is also a poetic genre for the purpose of 
glorification, the genre of “madh.” 
49 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 15. 
50 SOCOM-2012-0000004. This letter does not explicitly indicate who the author is or to whom it is 
addressed. Since the author remarked that the American television channel ABC broadcast a part of a 
statement he gave on the fourth anniversary of 9/11, this suggests that it was authored by Adam Gadahn 
who did indeed release a statement then, part of which was broadcast on ABC. The content suggests that 
it was not addressed to Bin Ladin since Gadahn refers to him in the third person. It is also not dated, but 
it must have been authored either in January 2011 or soon thereafter, since the author referred to the 
resignation of Keith Olbermann from MSNBC on 21 January 2011. The letter is in essence responding to 
many of the requests/queries that Bin Ladin made in SOCOM-2012-0000015, particularly those 
concerning a media strategy for the ten year anniversary of 9/11. It is likely that `Atiyya shared SOCOM-
2012-0000015 with Gadahn, and SOCOM-2012-0000004 basically addressed the questions in SOCOM-
2012-0000015. 
51 SOCOM-2012-0000004, 4. 
52 Bin Ladin is referring to a program on al-Jazeera. The specific episode to which he is referring is entitled 
“Man huwa Bin Ladin” (Who is Bin Ladin). It may be viewed at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Yd2NPKuJJA (accessed 30 April 2012). 

16 
 
[to the world],” he wrote to `Atiyya, “[runs the risk that] some in the media and among 
historians will construct a history for him, using whatever information they have, 
regardless of whether their information is accurate or not.”
53 
 
Bin Ladin clearly sought to centralize global jihadi activities so that AQC could oversee 
the affairs of regional groups and, if needed, ve to certain decisions. It is possible that he 
wanted to make the most out of a bad, perhaps even doomed situation that al-Qa`ida 
was confronting after almost ten years of war. Indeed, the letter in which he proposed a 
blueprint for centralization is one of two letters that stand out for their reflective tone.
54 
Not only is it the longest, consisting of 44 pages, but also because Bin Ladin comes 
across as someone taking stock of world events since the 9/11 attacks, burdened by the 
plethora of mistakes committed by regional  jihadi groups, and eager to engage in a 
serious “assessment of jihadi activities” ( taqyim al-`amal al-jihadi ) as well as ways to 
ensure its sound “development/evolution” (tatwir).
55  
 
It is also possible that Bin Ladin may have had other strategic considerations in mind, 
namely to find an alternative framework for mounting operations from outside 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. That is because the year 2010, during which he put these 
reflections in writing, witnessed the deaths  of numerous senior al-Qa`ida leaders in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The same letter in which Bin Ladin proposed centralization 
was also a letter of condolences to `Atiyya whom he notified of several leadership 
appointments, including his own as the successor of Mustafa Abu’l-Yazid.
56 Abu’l-
Yazid had served as the operational leader of al-Qa`ida in Afghanistan, 57 and had 
recently been killed in May 2010.58 
 
This must have been a particularly tough period for al-Qa`ida because another letter 
that Bin Ladin wrote to `Atiyya shortly after also started with lines of condolences, 
indicating additional losses.
59 Thus, the losses al-Qa`ida suffered in 2010 in Waziristan 
and the poor conduct of regional jihadi groups compelled Bin Ladin to reassess existing 
                                                           
53 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 44. 
54 The other letter is SOCOM-2012-0000010 in response to the Arab Spring, likely the last one he wrote. 
55 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 3. 
56 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 1-2. 
57 He was announced as leader of al-Qa`ida in Afghanistan in 2007. See the following report about him by 
al-Sharq al-Awsat, 25 May 2007. 
58 Frank Gardner, “Death of Mustafa Abu al-Yazid ‘Setback’ for al-Qaeda,” BBC, 1 June 2010. It was 
reported that a U.S.-operated unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) killed him in Pakistan’s North Waziristan 
tribal area. 
59 SOCOM-2012-0000015, 1. 

17 
 
strategies. Two major concerns seem to have preoccupied him. First, he was keen for the 
talented “brothers” either to be evacuated safely from Waziristan or, if they must stay, 
to take stringent measures to avoid being captured or killed.
60 Bin Ladin’s letter was 
littered with detailed instructions to be followed to ensure the safety and security of the 
remaining “brothers” even if the work “sho uld proceed at a slower pace during this 
period.”61  
 
Bin Ladin’s second main concern was to find alternative places outside Afghanistan and 
Pakistan to mount “external operations.” He had received a letter from a “Shaykh 
Yunis” presenting him with a strategy on  how al-Qa`ida could focus on putting 
together a secret operational force that could evade the eyes of the authorities. It is not 
clear whether this operational force was alread y in existence or whether it was meant to 
be a new one that Yunis developed and Bin Ladin should work on establishing. This 
force, Yunis explained, required coordination between AQC leaders and leaders of 
jihadi regional groups, but such a plan, he  added, involves positive and negative 
consequences. On the positive front, the coordination between the leadership in 
Khurasan/Waziristan and the leaders of jihadi regional groups could yield productive 
results in operational terms.
62 In Yunis’ words: 
 
We (i.e., the operational force) do not need to claim/announce our [jihadi] 
activities – i.e., the activities that we carry out. There is a side [by which he 
implicitly refers to Bin Ladin] that is the focus of the eyes and hearts’ 
attention…that could claim [our jihadi activities]; alternatively you could advise 
[jihadi leaders] in the regions to claim it…this would allow the party involved in 
the [operational] work the freedom of movement, not to mention [the possibility] 
of perfecting means and ways of forgery ( tazwir) and smuggling ( tahrib) to 
become proficient in such skills. [We would also] train members to blend in with 
the public. All of this would allow us to melt/disappear ( dhawaban) whenever we 
want, and this would have a more profound impact on covering our tracks after 
[we carry out] attacks.
63 
 
                                                           
60 Ibid., 2. 
61 Ibid., 3. 
62 The term Khurasan is often used in jihadi literature to designate Central Asia, but it is also used to refer 
to Afghanistan. See the discussion: al-Malahim wa-al-Fitan, “Khurasan: hal hiya Afghanistan?” 
http://alfetn.net/vb3/showthread.php?t=17231 (accessed 26 April 2012). Although it could not be asserted, 
the location of Yunis was likely Waziristan.  
63 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 46. 

18 
 
Yunis then added some concerns. The first concern pertained to some of the “brothers’” 
unproductive enthusiasm for jihad which causes failures in security; the other pertained 
to extremism and fanaticism in religion by some “brothers” who claim to be affiliated 
with al-Qa`ida. Yunis was referring to takfiris, i.e., jihadis who readily declare fellow 
Muslims to be unbelievers liable to be killed if they disagree with them over religious 
doctrines.
64 “You [i.e., Bin Ladin] experienced th is problem [first hand] in Peshawar [in 
the 1980s] and you [also] saw its outcome in [Algeria],” 65 he warned Bin Ladin. In other 
words, Yunis warned Bin Ladin that unless th e enthusiasts and religious extremists are 
brought in line, they would be a liability for such a strategy.  
 
Shaykh Yunis is probably Yunis al-Muritani who was captured in Quetta, Pakistan, in 
September 2011.
66 He is reported to be in his mid-30s, and if he is indeed the same 
“Shaykh Yunis” it suggests that al-Qa`ida  has managed during the past decade to 
attract jihadis who are distinguished by their strategic and operational visions. Yunis’ 
letter clearly left a powerful mark on Bin Ladin; Yunis’ strategic operational vision and 
his erudition, evidenced by citing examples  from Islamic history in the appropriate 
places, must have immediately impressed Bi n Ladin. He referred to Yunis as “shaykh,” 
not “brother” ( akh), bestowing upon him a seniority status that Bin Ladin seemed to 
reserve for leaders of AQC, compared with the brotherly language he used when 
referring to regional jihadi leaders. He further shared Yunis’ letter with `Atiyya and 
instructed him to let Yunis know that he is to be dispatched to Africa and West Asia 
and be responsible for the “external work”
67 t o  b e  c a r r i e d  o u t  “ i n s i d e  W e s t e r n  
countries.”68  
 
Bin Ladin’s appointment of Yunis to head al-Qa`ida’s “external work” is a testament to 
his appreciation of Yunis’ letter. It is re markable that Bin Ladin, who did not take 
appointing leaders lightly, nominated Yunis to  a highly sensitive post even though he 
appeared to have known little about his bac kground. In the same letter where he asked 
                                                           
64 On the liability of takfiris to jihadism, see Nelly Lahoud, The Jihadis’ Path to Self-Destruction (New 
York/London: Columbia University Press/Hurst, 2010), 1-14. 
65 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 48. For an expanded discussion of al-Qa`ida’s ideology as understood by its 
members in comparison with the rigid/extremist religious ideology as espoused by other jihadi groups, 
see Nelly Lahoud’s forthcoming CTC report based on Fadil Harun’s autobiography al-Harb ‘ala al-Islam 
(The War Against Islam: The Story of Fadil Harun). 
66 “Al-Qaeda Chief Younis al-Mauritani Held, Says Pakistan,” BBC, 5 September 2011; Mazin Aman, “al-
‘Arabiyya tazur usrat ‘Yunis al-Muritani’,” al-‘Arabiyya, 7 September 2011; “I`tiqal fi Pakistan ma` 
`Unsurayn Barizayn bi-al-Tanzim,” al-‘Arabiyya, 5 September 2011. 
67 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 31. 
68 SOCOM-2012-0000015, 5. This reference suggests that Bin Ladin is clarifying what he wrote before, 
which suggests that the document was composed after SOCOM-2012-0000019. 

19 
 
`Atiyya to appoint him to head the “external work,” he also asked him to send “at the 
earliest convenience a report about Shaykh Yunis that would include his date of birth, 
upbringing, academic studies, social status, experiences and skills; and also include 
[description] about his character and his manner of dealings with the jihadis and his 
relationship with them; and also the date when he joined [al-Qa`ida] ( dukhulihi ma` al-
multazimin) and when he began to take part in jihad [on the battlefield] ( nafiruhu 
liljihad).”
69 
 
Other letters authored by Bin Ladin suggest th at he was quite selective in his choice of 
leaders. It seems that Abu Basir (the alias of Nasir al-Wuhayshi) had suggested Anwar 
al-`Awlaqi to be his replacement as the leader of AQAP in Yemen, but Bin Ladin 
politely rejected the suggestion. If ever a slap and a kiss could be combined, Bin Ladin’s 
response to Abu Basir could count as on e. He complimented Abu Basir on being 
“qualified and competent” to manage the affairs of Yemen, but added that although his 
“positive attestation of al-`Awlaqi is duly acknowledged, we would like further 
assurances; for example, over here we are generally assured after people go to the 
battlefield and are tested there.”
70 Despite the preoccupation with al-`Awlaqi among 
U.S. analysts and the intelligence community, this in itself does not appear to have 
earned him recognition in Bin Ladin’s mi nd. Bin Ladin, wanting more evidence about 
al-`Awlaqi’s suitability, asked that Abu Basir, Abu Sufyan, Sa`id al-Shihri and al-
`Awlaqi write him separately with a “detailed conceptualization” of the way they each 
conceived of the events in Yemen. It is as if Bin Ladin was getting his red pen ready to 
grade, and even fail, the essays of each of these leaders. 
 
How might centralization of global jihadi media and operational activities serve Bin 
Ladin’s strategy? The plethora of mistakes that Bin Ladin enumerated about the 
conduct of regional jihadi groups suggests that he would partner with them only if they 
agreed to play by AQC’s rules, hence th e need for a memorandum. Bin Ladin perhaps 
reasoned that he would withhold the symbolic public blessing that seemed to matter to 
regional leaders in return for their compliance; since he was prepared to apologize for 
mistakes such as unintended civilian casualties, he may have even been willing to 
bestow the brand “al-Qa`ida” publicly if they would commit to the memorandum in 
writing. 
 
The documents suggest that Bin Ladin also needed regional groups to give cover to al-
Qa`ida’s “external work” since the landscape of Waziristan was too closely monitored 
                                                           
69 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 33. 
70 SOCOM-2012-0000003, 2. 

20 
 
by U.S. intelligence to permit the safe work of the “brothers.” Bin Ladin, therefore, 
looked for alternative geographical arenas to facilitate either the continuation of 
“external work” in Western countries, with the United States on the top of his list, or 
start a new initiative. His immediate plan was to dispatch Yunis either to Yemen or 
Algeria or the surrounding areas of these two countries and wanted the leaders of 
AQAP, Nasir al-Wuhayshi, and AQIM, Abu Mus`ab al-Wadud, to give Yunis their full 
cooperation. Specifically, Bin Ladin instructed `Atiyya to write to these two leaders 
asking them “to make their utmost efforts to cooperate with Shaykh Yunis in 
everything he asks of them,” and further asked the “brothers in the Islamic Maghrib to 
provide Yunis the financial support he n eeds, which may reach 200,000 euros in the 
next six months.”
71 The request for such a sum may suggest that AQC’s financial 
situation was not self-sufficient if it needed to  seek the assistance of the “affiliates,” and 
it may also suggest that Bin Ladin had a specific operation in mind that he wanted 
Yunis to carry out.  
 
If the above speculations are plausible, the documents suggest that an AQC in sync 
with the affiliates on the operational level was being forged in 2010 to advance al-
Qa`ida’s “external operations.” Even if the speculations are not entirely plausible, AQC 
and the affiliates appear to have had more differences than commonalities.  
 
It is difficult to speculate on the prospects of Bin Ladin’s strategy. Still, even if its 
chances of success are slim, Bin Ladin’s strategy to centralize the public statements and 
activities of regional jihadi groups in the interest of efficiently advancing “external 
operations” is carefully considered. This strategy, along with Bin Ladin’s detailed 
instructions on the kind of measures the “brothers” must adopt to evade the authorities, 
are far more developed than the explicit oper ation he outlined to assassinate President 
Barack Obama and/or General David Petraeus who, at the time, was serving as the 
NATO commander of the International Securi ty Assistance Force. Bin Ladin had asked 
`Atiyya’s predecessor, Mustafa Abu al-Yazid, to task Ilyas, presumably Ilyas Kashmiri, 
to set up two units, one in Pakistan and another in Bagram, Afghanistan, to target 
airplanes known to be carrying President Obama and/or General Petraeus on their visits 
to these areas. He only wanted President Obama and General Petraeus to be targeted. 
He explained that the death of President Obama would see the “utterly unprepared” 
Vice President Joe Biden automatically assu me the presidency, which would cause the 
United States to enter into crisis mode, and “the killing of Petraeus would have a 
serious impact on the course of the war,” as Bin Ladin considered him to be “ the man of 
                                                           
71 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 32. 

21 
 
this [critical] phase.” 72 Bin Ladin did not explain, however, why he did not want 
“Secretary of Defense Gates or the Joint Chiefs  of Staff Mullen or the Special Envoy to 
Pakistan and Afghanistan Holbrooke” to be targeted. 73 It is possible that Bin Ladin had 
prepared a more detailed plan in a previous letter, which might explain why the brief 
description available reads as an amateurish plot or just wishful thinking. 
 
The Affiliates 
The documents show that the so-called “affiliates” have not just been a problem for al-
Qa`ida in terms of harming its image in the eyes of the majority of Muslims who have 
been the primary victims of their attacks, but the affiliates have also caused internal 
debates among the senior leadership. A panoramic view of the documents points to 
three different positions within al-Qa`ida on the subject. There are what one may term 
the “principled,” represented by Adam Gadahn, urging senior leaders to declare their 
distance and even to dissociate themselves from groups whose leaders do not consult 
with al-Qa`ida yet still act in its name. There are those represented by an anonymous 
author urging the opposite, believing that the inclusion of regional jihadi groups into 
the fold contributes to al-Qa`ida’s growth and expansion.
74 Bin Ladin represented a 
third position. Bin Ladin wanted to maintain  communication, through his own pen or 
that of `Atiyya, with “brothers” everywhere, at least to urge restraint and provide 
advice even if it fell on deaf ears, but without franchising the brand. 
 
The groups for which there is enough substantive content in the documents to gain a 
meaningful understanding of al-Qa`ida’s relationship with them are: Islamic State of 
Iraq (ISI/AQI), al-Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan 
(TTP) and to a lesser extent al-Shabab. AQIM  is mentioned in a number of letters, but 
not as a separate subject of discussion that discerns how Bin Ladin viewed the group. 
There is also a letter dated 2006 forwarded to a certain `Abd al-Hamid. The actual letter 
was addressed to `Atiyya, consisting of legal questions from the group called Army of 
Islam ( Jaysh al-Islam ) based in Gaza.
75 The gist of the letter makes it known that the 
group is in need of financial assistance “to support jihad,” and the questions largely 
                                                           
72 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 35-36. 
73 Ibid. 
74 SOCOM-2012-0000006, 1. 
75 SOCOM-2012-0000008. The letter is forwarded to a certain `Abd al-Hamid. Jaysh al-Islam emerged on 
the political scene in 2006 when it mounted a joint operation (with the support of the military wings of 
both Hamas and Fatah) that resulted in the kidnapping of the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit. See the analysis 
by Marwan Shehade, “Jaysh al-Islam al-Filastini `ala Khuta al-Qa‘ida al-`Alami,” Majallat al-`Asr, 5 July 
2006. Their relationship with Hamas quickly deteriorated and their questions to `Atiyya makes this clear; 
their global religious ideology was not compatible with Hamas’ nationalist focus. 

22 
 
pertain to the permissibility of accepting financial assistance from other militant 
Palestinian groups that are not purely fighting to establish God’s Law in the eyes of 
Jaysh al-Islam (e.g., groups that are nationalists or supported by Iran).
76 The significance 
of the letter pertains to `Atiyya’s legal knowledge, but it does not point to a firm 
relationship between al-Qa`ida and Jaysh al-Islam. 77 `Atiyya comes across as cordial but 
distant. He responded strictly to the questions posed but refrained from giving any 
strategic advice. It is possible that Jaysh al -Islam was “testing the water” to see whether 
al-Qa`ida would lend them financial suppo rt, not least because Hamas was fighting 
against them.
78  
 
Given that the documents leave out many jihadi groups, the rest of the discussion in 
this section is thus limited to ISI/AQI, AQAP, TTP and al-Shabab.  
 
Islamic State of Iraq/AQI 
It should not come as a surprise to learn that Bin Ladin’s public admission of Abu 
Mus`ab al-Zarqawi’s group in Iraq
79 into the al-Qa`ida fold in December 2004 80 referred 
to in the secondary literature as AQI, became a liability, not an asset. 81 Al-Zarqawi’s 
group launched several indiscriminate attack s against Shi’ite civilians, and when Iraqi 
Sunni militants disapproved of his tactics he turned against them. 82 The group’s 
                                                           
76 SOCOM-2012-0000008, 1. 
77 It is noteworthy that `Atiyya refrained from answering questions that he did not deem himself qualified 
to address, such as whether it is lawful to invest money in the stock market if the profit is used to 
advance the cause of jihad. `Atiyya confessed that this question required expertise he lacked and advised 
them to seek the opinion of learned legal scholars who specialize in these technical issues. He did not 
suggest the names of any legal scholars who have the necessary expertise, which may be an additional 
indication that he wanted to maintain a cordial but distant relationship with the group. 
78 See, for instance, Hamas’s actions against Jaysh al-Islam over the kidnapping of the BBC reporter Alan 
Johnston, whose release Hamas secured. “Hamas Arrests over BBC Reporter,” BBC, 2 July 2007. 
79 Al-Zarqawi’s group was called Jama`at al-Tawhid wa-al-Jihad; when it was admitted into al-Qa`ida, it 
became known as al-Qa`ida in Mesopotamia. After he was killed in 2006, and Abu Hamza al-Muhajir and 
Abu `Umar al-Baghdadi succeeded him, the group declared itself as the Islamic State of Iraq. The new 
name was highly controversial in jihadi circles. 
80 Usama bin Ladin, “Risala ila al-Muslimin fi al-‘Iraq Khasatan wa-al-Umma al-Islamiyya ‘Ammatan,” 
December 2004 (CTC Library). 
81 See, for instance, Ayman al-Zawahiri’s letter to Abu Mus`ab al-Zarqawi, 
http://www.ctc.usma.edu/posts/zawahiris-letter-to-zaraqawi-original, and `Atiyyatullah al-Libi’s letter to 
al-Zarqawi, http://www.ctc.usma.edu/posts/atiyahs-letter-to-zarqawi-original.  
82 The Islamic Army of Iraq, “Rad al-Jaysh al-Islami fi al-`Iraq `ala Khitabat al-akh Abi Omar al-
Baghdadi,” http://www.arab-eng.org/vb/showthread.php/50571-رد-الجي-الاس-ف-الع-عل-
القاعs=26ba96a7fa433f7ed50ff41cd2654c96 (accessed 25 April 2012). See the discussion in Nelly Lahoud, 
The Jihadis’ Path to Self-Destruction, 205-211. 

23 
 
indiscriminate attacks did not improve with al-Zarqawi’s death; Abu `Umar al-
Baghdadi and Abu Ayyub al-Misri, who succeeded him and declared an Islamic State of 
Iraq (ISI), were perceived by jihadi leaders to be more repulsive and dangerous than al-
Zarqawi.
83 By 2007, Bin Ladin was publicly expre ssing his disappointment with jihadis 
in Iraq, urging them to form a unified front.84  
 
The documents confirm and provide additional insight into the grief ISI/AQI caused in 
many jihadi circles. A letter dated 28 March 2007,
85 addressed to a legal scholar by the 
name of Hafiz Sultan, 86 and authored by someone who is clearly of Egyptian origin, 87 
shows that the author was alarmed by AQI’s conduct and urged Sultan to write to its 
leaders to correct their ways: “I fear for the brothers from committing political mistakes, 
you have no doubt heard Abu `Umar [al-Bagh dadi’s] recent speech; in my view, it 
contains obvious mistakes.” In his mind, not only was the speech unfitting for a leader 
to make, but it also revealed that “they are extremists ( mutashaddidun)…[and that his 
speech] is repulsive and lacks wisdom.”
88 The author was by no means a distant or 
otiose observer; he assured Sultan that “I [already] wrote to them and rebuked them.” 
H e  w a s  a p p e a l i n g  t o  S u l t a n  b e c a u s e  h e  k n e w  h i m  t o  b e  r e s p e c t e d  b y  a n d  p o s s i b l y  
related to “al-Karrumi,” presumably Abu Hamza al-Muhajir/Abu Ayyub al-Misri, and 
wanted Sultan to exert pressure on him.
89  
 
The author of the letter also urged Sultan to respond to the letters and grievances of 
“our brothers [Jaysh] Ansar al-Sunna, for they await your correspondence and 
responses to their complaints and letters.”
90 It seems that Ansar al-Sunna, the temporary 
                                                           
83 SOCOM-2012-0000011, 1. This letter is incorrectly dated in the English translation as 28 March 2011. It 
should be 28 March 2007. It was composed a few months before Ansar al-Sunna formed an alliance with 
other Sunni militant groups excluding AQI. The new alliance was formed in July 2007. 
84 Usama bin Ladin, “Ila Ahlina bi-al-‘Iraq,” http://www.iraqipa.net/10_07/21_25/News/a1_25okt07.htm 
(accessed 13 April 2012) 
85 SOCOM-2012-0000011.  
86 Hafiz Sultan is probably the same person who wrote articles for the magazine Vanguards of Khurasan. 
The magazine can be accessed on Minbar al-Tawhid wa-al-Jihad at http://www.tawhed.ws. 
87 SOCOM-2012-0000011. The author uses Egyptian colloquial terms, such as “aw haddi min ikhwanina,” 
and “ma ykhissinash.” 
88 Ibid., 1. 
89 Abu Hamza al-Muhajir/Abu Ayyub al-Misri is not reported to be known by the name al-Karrumi. 
However, since his name is used in the same sentence as Abu `Umar al-Baghdadi and since he is 
presumed to be in a leadership position, it would not be farfetched to assume that al-Karrumi is the same 
man.  
90 SOCOM-2012-0000011, 1. 

24 
 
name of Ansar al-Islam, 91 had threatened to denounce AQI, and the author wanted to 
prevent this by asking Sultan to write to th em, sympathize with their concerns, but also 
warn them that fitna (sedition/division) is worse and they must therefore stick with 
their fellow jihadis. His concerns were well placed. Within a few months of his letter, 
Ansar al-Sunna returned to using its original name Ansar al-Islam and formed an 
alliance with other Sunni militant groups, an alliance that excluded AQI.92  
 
A few months before Hafiz Sultan was urged to write to and counsel the leaders of AQI, 
it seems that a dispute was raging among religious scholars in Saudi Arabia. The 
dispute is discussed in one of the letters au thored by an intermediary between some of 
these scholars and `Atiyya, to whom the letter is addressed.
93 The letter was authored in 
early 2007 shortly after private meetings th e intermediary held with several religious 
scholars during the Hajj (December 2006-January 2007). What is known publicly is a 
statement released in November 2006 and signed by 38 Saudi scholars in support of 
Iraq’s Sunnis. It is characterized by a highly sectarian tone, accusing the Twelver Shi’ites 
of Iraq, whom they consider to be rafida (rejectionists), of “embracing the Crusaders and 
protecting their backs,” putting into practice their “hateful creeds” (` aqa’iduhum al-
baghida) against Sunnis.
94 This was followed by a statement that `Atiyya released 
praising these scholars, taking it to mean support for jihadis, and singling out two of 
them, `Abd al-Rahman al-Barrak and `Abdallah al-Ghunayman. `Atiyya then added 
what was missing in their statement, calling on Sunnis in Iraq to join and support the 
                                                           
91 The group is based in Kurdistan. According to Abu `Abdallah al-Shafi`i, the leader of Ansar al-Islam, 
the group was established in 2001, but it had to change its name to Ansar al-Sunna because it was the 
target of U.S. occupation forces in 2003. For some time, he explained, the group changed its tactics and 
expanded its operations to cover all of Iraq, and as of November 2007 the group resumed using its 
original name, Ansar al-Islam. The changing of its name in 2007 may have been to signal its separation 
from AQI. His statement is available on Archive al-Jihad, 
https://www.jarchive.net/b/details.php?item_id=3511 (accessed 22 April 2012). He was reported to have 
been arrested by the U.S. Army in May 2010. See Shirzad Sheikhani, “Za`im ‘Ansar al-Islam’ Yantahi fi 
Qabdat al-Jaysh al-Amriki,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 5 May 2010. 
92 Brian Fishman, Dysfunction and Decline: Lessons Learned from Inside al-Qa`ida in Iraq, Combating 
Terrorism Center at West Point (2009). 
93 SOCOM-2012-0000014. 
94 “Nida’ li-Ahl al-Sunna fi al-`Iraq wa-ma Yajibu `ala al-Umma min Nasratihim,” al-Muslim, 
http://almoslim.net/node/46629 (accessed 22 April 2012). The term rafida is literally “those who reject.” It 
is used in a pejorative way against Shi’ites to denote that they reject the legitimacy of the first three 
caliphs the Sunnis consider to have been lawful. The Twelver Shi’ites consider that `Ali (the fourth caliph 
from the Sunnis’ perspective) to have been the first lawful imam. For an academic study of the evolution 
of sects in Islam, see Patricia Crone, God’s Rule - Government and Islam: Six Centuries of Medieval Political 
Thought (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005), chapters 2-11. 

25 
 
Islamic State of Iraq (i.e., AQI).  95  The Islamic State of Iraq also released its own 
statement “blessing” the scholars’ statement.96 
 
According to the account of `Atiyya’s intermediary, the meeting during which Saudi 
scholars signed the statement was attended by 70 scholars, 32 of whom abstained from 
signing. Some, he related, disagreed with its wording, while others cited their fear of 
being suppressed or closely monitored by the authorities to justify their abstention.
97 
More importantly, `Atiyya’s intermediary was told that the statement originally 
included four additional lines that were critic al of the Islamic State of Iraq, declaring it 
to be unlawful. However, a group of scholars, led by al-Barrak, insisted on deleting 
these lines, which forced others to concede in view of the importance of releasing the 
statement against the “Rafida” and ensuring that al-Barrak was among the signatories 
to the statement.
98 
 
A biography of al-Barrak available on the internet indicates that he is a retired professor 
of religious sciences, who supervised many doctoral and masters’ theses, but refused 
several offers to become a member on the council that delivers formal legal opinions.
99 
The explicit reference to his refusal is another way of making known that he refuses to 
hold an office that might compromise his principles and render him accountable to the 
ruling Saud family. In his meeting with `Atiyya’s intermediary, al-Barrak expressed that 
he was touched and honored when `Atiyya singled him out in his statement and prayed 
for “victory for and consolidation of the Islamic State of Iraq.”
100 `Atiyya’s intermediary 
could not meet in person with `Abdallah al-Ghunayman, the other scholar singled out 
in `Atiyya’s statement, but he met with one of his students. He was told that al-
                                                           
95 `Aityyatullah, “Tabshir Qulub al-Mujahidin bi-Talahumi ahli al-`Ilmi wa-al-Mujahidin,” Multaqa 
Hadramut, http://www.hdrmut.net/vb/t227524.html (accessed 22 April 2012). 
96 Islamic State of Iraq, “Dawlat al-‘Iraq al-Islamiyya tubarik bayan ‘Nida’ li-Ahl al-Sunna fi al-‘Iraq wa-
ma Yajibu ‘ala al-Umma,” 
http://www.alaqsagate.org/vb/showthread.php?t=726&s=0c7651228409936e43d02f96df7fc84b (accessed 26 
April 2012). 
97 A number of the scholars who signed the statement are reported to be imprisoned by Saudi authorities. 
See Minbar al-Tawhid wa-al-Jihad. 
98 SOCOM-2012-0000014, 4. This is a highly difficult text to read in Arabic; it was written in a hurry, it is 
littered with spelling mistakes and it lacks clarity in several critical places. 
99 “Nabdha Mukhtasara `an al-Sira al-Dhatiyya li-al-Sheikh `Abd al-Rahman al-Barrak Hafizahu Allah,” 
http://www.saaid.net/Warathah/1/albarak.htm (accessed 22 April 2012). For informative background of 
the role of al-Barrak and other Saudi scholars in supporting jihadis, see Stephane Lacroix, Awakening 
Islam: The Politics of Religious Dissent in Contemporary Saudi Arabia (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
2011), particularly chapter 5. Also see Hegghammer, Jihad in Saudi Arabia, particularly chapter 7. 
100 SOCOM-2012-0000014, 4. 

26 
 
Ghunayman had made a promise not to publish his books during his lifetime, but 
happily changed his mind when one of his students suggested that he should publish 
them and donate the proceeds to the jihadis.
101 Al-Ghunayman is a renowned religious 
scholar, having occupied several prestigi ous faculty positions, and his classes are 
reported to be highly sought after.102 
 
It is not clear from the letter if the support of these religious scholars extended beyond 
preaching and writing in support of jihadis. Yet the letter points to a certain “Shaykh 
Abu Zifr/Zafr” who is clearly in contact with `Atiyya on a more operational level 
through a different intermediary. His relati onship with `Atiyya must have involved 
sensitive matters because he complained that the current intermediary through whom 
he communicated with `Atiyya was not trustworthy and could not be trusted with 
secrets if arrested.
103 He also indicated that of the 38 scholars who signed the statement 
in support of Iraq’s Sunnis, they do not all deserve to be praised, remarking that they 
are likely to “turn against you”; however, he did not object to singling out al-Barrak and 
al-Ghunayman, both of whom are deserving of his praise.
104 Shaykh Abu Zifr/Zafr’s 
name does not appear in the statement; it is possible that it is an alias and that is why he 
could not be identified. 
 
Three years after these debates, Bin Ladin remained concerned about divisions among 
jihadi groups in Iraq and hoped that they wo uld re-unite after the killing of Abu `Umar 
al-Baghdadi and Abu Ayyub al-Misri. He asked `Atiyya to write him a report about 
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and his deputy, Abu Sulayman al-Nasir, the new leaders of 
AQI.
105 He further added that “I would like for you to ask our brothers in Ansar al-
Islam about their stance vis-à-vis the new leaders…and remind them to exert their 
utmost efforts to seek unity and resolve differences between the different jihadi entities 
in Iraq.”
106  
 
In view of AQI’s liability to the image of jihad generally and of al-Qa`ida in particular, it 
stands to reason that it should serve as a point of contention among senior AQC 
leaders. No one among the main personalities who star in the documents comes across 
                                                           
101 Ibid., 5. 
102 `Abdallah bin Muhammad al-Ghunayman, http://www.alukah.net/Web/goniman/CV/ (accessed 22 
April 2012). 
103 SOCOM-2012-0000014, 1-2. 
104 Ibid., 2. 
105 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 34. They were announced as leaders on 15 May 2010. See al-Shumukh, 
http://www.shamikh1.info/vb/showthread.php?t=62187 (accessed 12 April 2012). 
106 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 34. 

27 
 
more righteously critical than America’s own Adam Gadahn. Gadahn’s letter was 
meant to respond to Bin Ladin’s queries about an effective media strategy, including 
engineering a way that would get American television channels to broadcast a speech 
by Bin Ladin on the tenth anniversary of 9/11.
107 Among the reasons Bin Ladin wanted a 
new strategy was to “make known the justice of our cause” to the world. 108 Gadahn 
c a p i t a l i z e d  o n  t h e  “ j u s t i c e  o f  o u r  c a u s e ”  a n d  u s e d  i t  a s  a n  o p e n i n g  t o  h i g h l i g h t  t h e  
injustices he believed the jihadis are committing, with AQI and TTP occupying the 
lion’s share of his criticism. 
 
Gadahn had planned to prepare an Arabic statement addressed to Christian Arabs. He 
wanted to warn them against collaborating with  “the enemies of Islam,” invite them to 
join Islam, and welcome today’s “Islamic conquest,” presumably by the jihadis, just as 
their ancestors did when the second Caliph `Umar conquered Jerusalem.
109 In the 
collective memory of Muslims and Arab Christians, `Umar is reputed for his respect of 
the religious rights of Christians. It is reported that on his tour of Jerusalem, `Umar 
visited Christian churches but refrained from  performing the Muslim prayer in one of 
them, likely the Holy Sepulcher, lest it be tu rned into an Islamic shrine after his death; 
he thus prayed outside the church where al-Aqsa Mosque was later built.
110 Gadahn 
wanted to invoke the spirit of Islamic tolerance that `Umar’s reign evokes. His plan was 
thwarted, however, when a Catholic church in Baghdad was attacked by AQI, the 
organization “that we support and which – like it or not […] – is known to the people as 
an Iraqi branch of the organization of al-Qa`ida.”
111 He thus cancelled his plan because 
his appeal to Arab Christians would have no credibility in view of ISI/AQI’s attacks 
targeting Christian churches. 112 He compared AQI’s policy to that of President George 
W. Bush, who, in his mind, repelled the Europeans and the intellectuals of the world. In 
a perhaps constructive criticism of Bin Ladin, and to highlight the need for al-Qa`ida to 
dissociate itself from ISI/AQI, Gadahn passio nately asked: “is this the justice that we 
preach and that Shaykh [Bin Ladin] preaches in his statements and letters?”
113 
 
Gadahn was clearly highlighting to AQC’s leaders that they were just as guilty of the 
double standards they accused the West of perpetuating in the Muslim world. He was 
                                                           
107 SOCOM-2012-0000004. 
108 SOCOM-2012-0000015, 8. 
109 SOCOM-2012-0000004, 6. 
110 S.D. Goitein, “al-Kuds,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, second edition, online edition (accessed 28 April 2012). 
111 SOCOM-2012-0000004, 6. 
112 Ibid. On attacks against churches in Iraq, see Anthony Shadid, “Church Attack Seen as Strike at Iraq’s 
Core,” New York Times, 1 November 2010. 
113 SOCOM-2012-0000004, 7. 

28 
 
alarmed by the gap between “the statements of our leaders and religious scholars and 
the actions of those who are said to be affiliated to or allied with them.” 114 He thus 
advised that al-Qa`ida should take decisive p ublic measures to dissociate itself from the 
“ignorant/ungodly criminality” ( al-ijram al-jahili ) of jihadi groups. 115 In his words, al-
Qa`ida should publicly: 
 
…declare its disapproval of these and other actions that the organization so-
called the Islamic State of Iraq (i.e., AQI) is carrying. [It should be made clear that 
AQI’s actions are being taken] without the orders of or consultation with al-
Qa`ida. I believe that sooner or later – hopefully sooner – it is necessary that al-
Qa`ida publicly announces that it severs  its organizational ties with the Islamic 
State of Iraq, and [to make known] that the relationship between its leadership 
and that of the State [i.e., ISI/AQI] have not existed for several years, and that the 
decision to declare a State was taken without consultation with the leadership, 
and this [ill-considered] innovation ( qarar ijtihadi) led to divisions among jihadis 
and their supporters inside and outside Iraq. [Thus] all that remains between al-
Qa`ida and the State (i.e., AQI) is the tie that unites Muslims on the basis of faith, 
namely Islam, which makes it incumbent up on us Muslims to give advice [to our 
fellow Muslims when we deem it necessary], to command right and forbid 
wrong, and support and encourage doing good deeds.
116 
 
To date, none of the senior leaders have followed Gadahn’s advice, and it seems that he 
would not act unilaterally. He assured the pers on to whom he addressed his letter that 
“I only discuss this subject with shaykhs lik e you and occasionally with my brothers at 
al-Sahab.”
117 By April 2011, it does not look like progress was made on the Iraq front. 
Bin Ladin was eager for `Atiyya to inform him about “correspondence with the brothers 
in Iraq, the details of its progress and the reasons behind its scarcity.”
118 It  is possible 
that this scarcity was due to security cons traints facing AQI in Iraq. Alternatively, 
communicating with AQC leaders may not have been a priority for the “brothers” in 
Iraq, or they may have responded but `Atiyya did not share their letters with Bin Ladin. 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
114 Ibid., 8. 
115 Ibid., 18. 
116 Ibid., 8. 
117 Ibid., 5. 
118 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 4. 

29 
 
AQAP 
If the criticisms of AQI in the documents ar e not particularly surprising, the concerns 
Bin Ladin expressed about AQAP will  no doubt be revealing to many. 119 It is widely 
believed that AQAP is a success story from al-Qa`ida’s perspective, especially since it is 
regularly described by senior U.S. government officials as the “most dangerous” of al-
Qa`ida’s affiliates. 120 Yet the documents show that at least in 2010 Bin Ladin was far 
from being impressed with the “brothers in Ye men.” He comes across as critical of both 
their words and deeds, in particular the group’s  attacks in Yemen, its lack of acumen to 
win the Yemeni people’s support, and the ill-adv ised public statements of its leaders. In 
fact, with the possible exception of AQI, none of the other “affiliates” appear to be more 
of a source of concern for Bin Ladin than AQAP.  
 
To start with, Bin Ladin was anxious that AQAP was attempting to accomplish more 
ambitious actions than it was capable of sustaining. Even before the protests of 
February and March 2011 paralyzed the country,  as thousands of Yemenis inspired by 
events in Tunisia and Egypt took to the streets,
121 AQAP was feeling emboldened. It 
appears that Abu Basir (Nasir al-Wuhayshi) had sent a letter either to Bin Ladin or 
`Atiyya in which he wrote that “if ever you wanted Sana`a, today is the day,”
122 by 
which he meant that AQAP was ready to declare an Islamic state in Yemen and was 
possibly seeking a public blessing from AQC for its takeover plan. It also seems that 
Abu Basir had requested that a senior leader be dispatched to Yemen to help in the 
operational work.
123 Before responding to Abu Basir, 124 Bin Ladin had written at length 
to `Atiyya about Yemen and told him that, in his mind, such an Islamic state, if 
prematurely declared before developing a firm foundation, is doomed to fail
125 and is 
likely to lead “to aborting the work [of jihad].” 126 At the time Bin Ladin was writing, in 
2010, he believed that the circumstances were not yet ripe for declaring an Islamic state; 
                                                           
119 For further discussion of AQAP in light of the “documents,” see forthcoming CTC paper by Gabriel 
Koehler-Derrick. 
120 “CIA Chief: Yemen Qaeda Affiliate Most Dangerous,” Reuters, 13 September 2011.   
121 These events culminated in former President Salih’s formal ceding of power in late November 2011 in a 
deal negotiated by the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). See Brian Whitaker, “Yemen’s Ali Abdullah 
Saleh Resigns—But it Changes Little,” Guardian, 24 November 2011.  
122 SOCOM-2012-0000016, 1. The letter is authored either by Bin Ladin or `Atiyya and the way it is 
composed makes it evident that the author was responding to several queries already put to him by Abu 
Basir in a letter that is not available. 
123 Ibid., 4. 
124 SOCOM-2012-0000016 is a letter addressed to Abu Basir, but it cannot be ascertained whether the letter 
reached him or not. 
125 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 19. 
126 Ibid., 23. 

30 
 
instead, Yemen should serve as a reserve and support base for jihadis engaged in 
warfare on the open fronts (i.e., occupi ed Muslim countries such as Iraq and 
Afghanistan).127 
 
Underlying Bin Ladin’s concern was a seeming distrust of AQAP’s competence as a 
jihadi entity, not least its lack of a sound understanding of politics. It is possible that the 
2003 premature campaign in Saudi Arabia by QAP — the group that merged with the 
Yemeni group in 2009 to form AQAP — weighed on his mind.
128 It would be naïve to 
assume, Bin Ladin wrote to `Atiyya, that the general public would be prepared to fight 
simply because a group declared jihad to  bring down the regime/state. Unless the 
timing is correct and the jihadis are capable of governing, he warned, a fragile Islamic 
state would let people down, “burdening them with pressure they cannot handle,” and 
expecting them to suffer this pressure would have grave consequences.
129 People are 
likely to fight, Bin Ladin explained, when there is an external enemy, whose enmity 
they understand, occupying their country. Ab sent that, the tribal character of Yemen 
and the tribes’ disposition to fight among themselves makes it highly likely that a civil 
war would erupt if AQAP entered into a long fight with the government.
130 AQI’s loss 
of the tribes’ support in Iraq appears to have been on Bin Ladin’s mind. The 2003 U.S.-
led occupation of Iraq saw Iraqi tribes jo ining forces with AQI to fight against the 
Americans, but when AQI began targeting members of the Anbar tribes, Bin Ladin 
lamented, the tribes turned against AQI with a vengeance.
131  
 
The Saudi government’s response to an Isla mic state in Yemen was an additional risk 
that entered Bin Ladin’s calculations. Saudi rulers, he wrote to `Atiyya, are already 
concerned about the jihadis’ presence in ne ighboring Yemen, believing them to be 
“their worst enemies.” Should the jihadis go on  to declare an Islamic state, Saudi rulers 
would interpret such a declaration to be a threat to their stability; accordingly, they are 
sure to “pump vast amounts of money to mobilize Yemeni tribes to fight against us.”
132 
The documents make clear that as of 2010, Bin Ladin believed that AQAP had neither 
the financial resources nor the manpower to withstand a sustained assault from the 
Yemeni government, Saudi money, and U.S. support. In the end, an ongoing civil war, 
                                                           
127 Ibid., 19. 
128 Ibid., 6. 
129 Ibid., 23-24. 
130 Ibid., 26-27. 
131 SOCOM-2012-0000016, 12. 
132 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 29-30. 

31 
 
he feared, would make secular governments appealing to the general public since they 
promote the slogan of compromise to appease the interests of all parties.133  
 
Beyond domestic considerations, Bin Ladin was worried about the amateurish, ill-
advised and badly timed public statements rele ased by AQAP’s leaders, which is one of 
the reasons he suggested centralizing media releases. He was particularly disappointed 
with a public statement by one of the deputi es of Abu Basir, Sa`id al-Shihri (known as 
Abu Sufyan al-Azdi), in which he demanded the release of Hayla al-Qasir who was 
arrested in Saudi Arabia for collecting money — more than $500,000 according to media 
reports — to support jihadis.
134 Bin Ladin did not object to al-Shihri wanting to protect 
jealously the honor of Muslim women, but he was furious that al-Shihri chose to release 
his public statement at the same time the “Freedom Flotilla” was heading to Gaza to 
break Israel’s blockade and bring aid to the people of Gaza. When Israeli forces killed 
some of the activists onboard, Bin Ladin obse rved, “Western politicians were forced to 
talk about this and criticize the Israelis.”
135 In Bin Ladin’s mind, the cause al-Shihri was 
voicing, notwithstanding his “praiseworthy jealousy,” should not compete or even 
compare with the plight of a million and a half Palestinians in Gaza, many of whom are 
women and children, in addition to the 10,000 prisoners in Israeli jails.
136  
 
On the basis of Bin Ladin’s concerns and po ssibly those of `Atiyya, the letter addressed 
to Abu Basir
137 is unambiguous and somewhat condescending in its tone. On the 
question of declaring a state, the author wrote: “[of course] we want [an Islamic state] in 
which we would establish God’s Law,” but only if “we are capable of holding on to 
it.”
138 As if AQAP does not follow the news, the author deemed it necessary to explain 
the basics, namely that the United States, “despite it being weakened militarily and 
economically before and after [the attacks of 9/11], continues to have capabilities that 
would enable it to bring down any state that we might establish, even if the United 
States is incapable of maintaining the stability [of the countries it invades].”
139 The 
author reminded Abu Basir that if jihadis were unable to hold on to Afghanistan as an 
Islamic state in the face of the U.S.-led inva sion in 2001, the chances of jihadis holding 
on to Yemen are even slimmer. The author warned that if jihadis do not learn from their 
                                                           
133 Ibid., 26. 
134 Nasir al-Haqabani, “Hayla al-Qasir tajma` al-tabarru`at li-al-Qa `ida wa-ta’wi al-matlubin wa-tujannid 
al-Nisa’,” al-Hayat, 4 June 2010. 
135 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 12. 
136 Ibid., 11-13. 
137 SOCOM-2012-0000016. 
138 Ibid., 1. 
139 Ibid., 2. 

32 
 
past mistakes, it “would make us like he  who builds [a building] on the path of a 
torrential stream. If the building is swept away by the torrent and the owner decides to 
rebuild it on the same path, the people would run away.”
140 As to Abu Basir’s request 
for a senior leader to be dispatched to Yemen to assist in the operational work, this was 
politely denied, citing security related reasons that necessitated the avoidance of any 
movement except under special circumstances. This denial is quite telling. Although Bin 
Ladin was planning on dispatching Shaykh Yunis to the region and wanted him to link 
up with AQAP’s representatives so that they would give him money, Bin Ladin was not 
prepared to compromise the autonomy of Shaykh Yunis’ mission and ask him to 
“work” with them.  
 
In practical terms, the letter to Abu Basir (Nasir al-Wuhayshi) advised him to reach, 
through the mediation of scholars and tribal leaders, “a fair truce to bring stability to 
Yemen,”
141 without agreeing to being disarmed. 142 It is possible that the author feared 
that in the event that AQAP agreed to be disarmed, the group might be tempted to turn 
itself into a political party. 143 In reality, the author of letter 13 is not optimistic that such 
a truce would be successful; in fact, he is confident that `Ali `Abdallah Salih, Yemen’s 
president until 27 February 2012, would not agree to it. The intent, however, was to 
show the Yemeni public that jihadis seek peace and stability unlike the Yemeni 
government. More precisely, the author of the letter was confident that external 
pressures on the Yemeni government, particularly from the United States, would make 
it prone to making more mistakes, especially  in its dealings with the tribes; thus, if 
jihadis forge good relationships with the tribes, they would stand to gain from the 
government’s losses.
144  
 
In the meantime, and on the domestic front,  jihadis should devote their energy not to 
jihad but to i`dad, or “preparing for jihad,” and the longer the regime clings to power 
and fails the people, the more time jihadis have for i`dad and to win the sympathy of the 
public.
145 At the same time, work must continue “to exhaust [economically and 
militarily] America from outside Yemen”; in this respect, Yemen would serve as a base 
from where jihadis could leave to mount “external operations.”
146 Lest he is 
misunderstood, the author of letter 13 specifically warned against targeting the Yemeni 
                                                           
140 Ibid. 
141 Ibid., 3. 
142 Ibid., 5. 
143 Ibid., 18-19. 
144 Ibid., 14. 
145 Ibid., 3. 
146 Ibid. 

33 
 
army and its police force: “The Americans are our desired goal,” 147 he stressed, and any 
work that is not directed against them weakens the mission. The author patiently 
explained this strategy to Abu Basir, using the metaphor of a tree: 
 
The enemies of the umma today are like a malignant tree: it has a 50 cm American 
trunk and branches that differ in sizes, consisting of NATO members and many 
[apostate] regimes in the [Middle East and North Africa] region. We want to 
bring down the tree by sawing [its trunk], but our force and capability is limited. 
Thus, the sound and effective way to bring the tree down would be to focus our 
saw on its American root. [To be precise] if while [our energy] is focused on the 
trunk and we reach say 30 cms into its depth, should the opportunity of sawing 
into the British branch of the tree present s itself, we would not take it. [That is 
because preoccupying ourselves with the branches] would disrupt our efforts 
and energy; that is why we should stick to sawing the American trunk, for when 
the trunk is [sawn], the [branches] would all fall, if God so pleases.
148 
 
The fact that AQAP continues to mount attacks against the Yemeni army and police 
since the letter was composed suggests that al-Wuhayshi either did not receive the letter 
or, if he did, was displeased with its content and ignored its directives.
149 
 
Despite the clarity of Bin Ladin’s (and possib ly `Atiyya’s) strategic vision, there is an 
aura of insincerity or perhaps partial amnesia to the claim that al-Qa`ida has always 
focused on mobilizing the jihadis’ energy exclusively against the United States. While it 
is true that on the operational level al-Qa`ida’s attacks focused on the United States 
(e.g., 1998 East Africa embassy bombings, 2000 USS Cole bombing, the 9/11 attacks), Bin 
Ladin’s public statements have often called on the youth in Muslim countries to rebel 
against their rulers, and jihad inside Saudi Arabia was the focus of one of his most 
aggressive statements. In December 2004, Bin Ladin confronted the “ruling family” 
directly, accusing it of “oppressing eve ry reformist movement…on behalf of America 
and its allies.” He proceeded to say that “it is not permitted for Muslims to agree to be 
governed by such rulers,” concluding that the solution to the situation, “as explicitly 
stated in [God]’s Law,” entails “deposing the ruler.” If the ruler refuses to step aside, 
Bin Ladin explained, “it would be necessary to rise up against him with arms to depose 
                                                           
147 Ibid., 4. 
148 Ibid., 7. 
149 For attacks in Yemen since then, see, for example, Robert Worth, “Chaos in Yemen Creates Opening for 
Islamist Gangs,” New York Times, 27 June 2011; Laura Kasinof, “Death Toll Rises in Attack on Yemeni 
Army Base,” New York Times, 5 March 2012. 

34 
 
him.” He further encouraged the jihadis to focus their attacks on what hurts most, 
namely oil infrastructure in the region.150  
 
One of the letters (document 15) dated September 2006 from a “loving brother” 
addressed to Bin Ladin is a serious rebuke of this policy, including the December 2004 
statements that focused on Saudi Arabia, the place where the author of the letter was 
residing at the time (Riyadh).
151 The author included all the necessary respectful 
rhetorical tools, referring to Bin Ladin as “Honorable Shaykh,” acknowledged that Bin 
Ladin’s gift to and precedence in the field of jihad “does not escape anyone during this 
era,” and expressed his “continued love and appreciation” despite circumstances 
preventing “ongoing correspondence” between the two.
152 The author’s tone quickly 
changed, however, as he alerted Bin Ladin that  when one is distant from reality, as Bin 
Ladin was because of security measures he was forced to take, the soundness of one’s 
judgment was bound to be impaired. 153 In a more aggressive tone, the author asked Bin 
Ladin about the rationale of focusing his energy on “Islamic countries in general and 
the Arabian Peninsula in particular.” The author reminded Bin Ladin that the Arabian 
Peninsula has a number of features that distinguish it, not least its financial support of 
the jihadis, serving “as the rear base of all jihadi activities around the world, from 
Afghanistan to Chechnya, Iraq and Palestine.”
154 Among the numerous negative 
consequences of engaging in jihad inside Saudi Arabia, the author informed Bin Ladin 
that people are now repulsed by the technical term “jihad” and it is even forbidden to 
use it in lectures. The author strongly advised Bin Ladin to change his policy, consoling 
him that even the seventh century commander Khalid bin al-Walid erred; in other 
words, Bin Ladin would still be in good company but only if he took measures to rectify 
his recent mistakes.
155 
 
Despite its damning critique of hi s policy, Bin Ladin kept the letter.
156 While the 
anonymous author’s advice is echoed in Bi n Ladin’s letters composed in 2010, the letter 
did not cause him to alter his public statements and does not explain the inherent 
                                                           
150 Usama bin Ladin, “Risala ila Ahl Bilad al-Haramayn Khasatan wa-Bilad al-Muslimin ‘Ammatan’,” 16 
December 2004 (CTC Library). 
151 It is difficult to guess the identity of this “loving brother.” Is it possible that he might be AFGP-2002-
003251 (Harmony document), Abu Hudhayfa, ‘ila al-Akh al-Fadil al-Sheikh al-Jalil Abi `Abdallah, dated 
20 June 2000. He has a similar style: cordial but does not hesitate to criticize in a blunt manner. 
Regardless, the author clearly knows Bin Ladin well. 
152 SOCOM-2012-0000018, p. 1. 
153 Ibid. 
154 Ibid., 4. 
155 Ibid., 8. 
156 Unless the document was deleted and recovered. 

35 
 
contradiction between his earlier speeches and his disapproval of rebelling against the 
Yemeni government as the letter to Abu Basir makes clear. That is because as late as 
2009, almost three years after receiving this le tter, Bin Ladin continued to call on people 
to depose their rulers. In March 2009 and in a statement he released about Palestine, Bin 
Ladin warned that “unless we understand that our countries are occupied in the 
interests of the rulers and their mandators/overseers ( muwakkilihim),” by which he 
meant Western powers, “and unless we work to uncover the truth of [these rulers], fight 
against them, depose them and liberate ourselves from their dominion, we shall never 
be able to liberate Palestine.”
157 
 
One cannot help but wonder whether Abu Basir responded to Bin Ladin’s (or `Atiyya’s) 
letter, if he ever received it. If he did not receive it, the public release of the letter with 
this report might give him the opportun ity to reflect not just on Bin Ladin’s 
inconsistencies, but also on how little the “shaykh” thought of AQAP. It was probably 
the lack of discipline among AQAP’s members and the enthusiasm and ignorance of 
“the new generations of young men who joined the path of jihad”
158 t h a t  c a u s e d  B i n  
Ladin to conclude that AQAP could not be trusted to mount qualitative attacks inside 
Yemen without massive civilian casualties.  
 
TTP 
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) is believed to be one of al-Qa`ida’s primary partners in 
that region. Although the TTP has not pledged allegiance to al-Qa`ida, it is reported that 
al-Qa`ida fighters active in the Waziristan region have had operational ties to factions of 
the TTP and have conducted joint operations in Afghanistan.
159 Al-Qa`ida leaders active 
in the Waziristan region have also operated in the same social orbit as former TTP 
leader Baitullah Mahsud (and, after his de ath, current leader Hakimullah Mahsud) and 
worked together to address disputes.
160 
 
Letters authored by Bin Ladin did not discu ss at length his views of the TTP, but the 
few scattered references in which he ment ioned the group are far from flattering. 161 The 
documents make it clear that Bin Ladin was not informed of the TTP’s planned 
                                                           
157 Usama bin Ladin, “Khutuwat `Amaliyya li-Tahrir Filastin,” March 2009 (CTC Library). 
158 SOCOM-2012-0000016, 6 
159 For example, see “Hearing to Continue to Receive Testimony on the Situation in Afghanistan,” Senate 
Armed Services Committee, 16 June 2010, 14. 
160 For example, see Joby Warrick, The Triple Agent: The al-Qaeda Mole who Infiltrated the CIA (New York: 
Doubleday, 2011), 72.  
161 For further analysis of the TTP in light of the “documents,” see forthcoming CTC paper by Don 
Rassler. 

36 
 
bombing of Times Square in New York City, a failed attack on U.S. soil attempted by 
Faisal Shahzad in May 2010. Bin Ladin was fo llowing Shahzad’s trial in the news and 
was disappointed by his performance, which he thought distorted the image of jihadis: 
 
You have perhaps followed the media trial of brother Faisal Shahzad, may God 
release him, during which the brother was asked to explain his attack [against 
the United States] in view of having taken an oath [not to harm it] when he was 
awarded his American citizenship. He responded that he lied [when he took the 
oath]. It does not escape you [Shaykh `Atiyya] that [Shahzad’s lie] amounts to 
betrayal (ghadr) and does not fall under  permissible lying to [evade] the enemy 
[during times of war]…please request from our Pakistani Taliban brothers to 
redress this matter…also draw their attent ion to the fact that brother Faisal 
Shahzad appeared in a photograph alongside Commander Mahsud. I would like 
to verify whether Mahsud knew that when a person acquires an American 
citizenship, this involves taking an oath, swearing not to harm America. If he is 
unaware of this matter, he should be informed of it. Unless this matter is 
addressed, its negative consequences ar e known to you. [We must therefore act 
swiftly] to remove the suspicion that jihadis violate their oath and engage in 
ghadr.
162 
 
This is not the only instance that Bin Ladin  worried about jihadis violating their oaths. 
The letter addressed to Abu Basir in which he is asked to focus on operations inside the 
United States (instead of Yemen) alerted him to focus on Yemenis “who hold either 
visas or U.S. citizenships to carry out operations inside America as long as they did not 
take an oath not to harm America.”
163 Underlying Bin Ladin’s thinking is a distinction 
between a visa ( ishara), acquired citizenship — which involves taking an oath (` ahd) — 
and citizenship by birth — which does not entail taking an oath. From an Islamic law 
perspective, it is not lawful to violate one’s oath ( naqd al-`ahd  or naqd al-mithaq ). 
Accordingly, Bin Ladin wanted to promote th e image that jihadis are disciplined and 
conform to Islamic Law. Faisal Shahzad’s boasting that he lied during his oath not to 
harm the United States, therefore, is antithet ical to the image of jihadis that Bin Ladin 
wanted the world to see.
164 
                                                           
162 SOCOM-2012-0000015, 7. 
163 SOCOM-2012-0000016, 4. 
164 Bin Ladin may also have had in mind the debate between Ayman al-Zawahiri and his former mentor, 
Dr. Fadl. The latter reneged on his jihadi views and among the accusations he made was that the 9/11 
hijackers violated the terms of their visa, interpreting it as a form of aman (safe passage) from an Islamic 
law of war perspective. Thus, from Bin Ladin’s perspective, it is only when a Muslim takes an oath that 
he must be bound by it; a visa and citizenship by birth do not qualify as an oath. 

37 
 
 
It is not just the lapses in the public statements of TTP that worried Bin Ladin. The 
group’s indiscriminate attacks against Muslims are also a subject of concern that he 
raised with `Atiyya. In particular, he drew his attention to an operation the TTP carried 
out against one of the tribes on the basis th at the tribe was against the Taliban. “Even if 
this were to be proven, it does not justify the operation in view of the non-combatants 
who died, for that would contradict the [Isl amic] legal basis of our politics,” Bin Ladin 
wrote. “I therefore urge you to continue advising TTP [to reform their ways].”
165 This 
TTP attack was not an isolated incident; their indiscriminate attacks, including targeting 
Muslims in mosques, is the subject of a long list of serious concerns that Adam Gadahn 
enumerated in his letter.166  
 
It was left to `Atiyya and Abu Yahya al-Libi to write a letter addressed to the “respected 
brother” Hakimullah Mahsud, the leader of the TTP. Its content hardly reflected any 
respect for Mahsud. The authors did not mince words, explicitly stating their 
dissatisfaction with the TTP’s “ideology, methods and behavior.” These, they stated, are 
marred with “clear legal errors and dangerous lapses,” and unless the group changes its 
ways, its errors would be a “cause of great corruption of the jihadi movement in 
Pakistan.” News had reached `Atiyya and al-L ibi that Mahsud had declared himself to 
be “the singular leader to whom everyone must pledge allegiance and declaring anyone 
who rebels against him ( kharij `alyhi) or is not in his Tehrik to be a rebel ( baghi).”
167 In 
classical Islamic political parlance, dissenters ( khawarij) and rebels ( bughat) who 
renounce the authority of the legitimate imam are subject to jihad and liable to be killed. 
Thus, Mahsud’s announcement amounted to declaring himself to be the great imam 
with political authority over all Muslims, so `Atiyya and al-Libi found it necessary to 
point out to him that there is a difference “between the [minor] position of leader of 
jihad and that of great imam,” a distinction with which Mahsud should familiarize 
himself.
168 
 
It also seems that Mahsud or members of his group had referred to al-Qa`ida as 
“guests.” In response, `Atiyya and al-Libi explained to Mahsud that “we in al-Qa`ida 
(Tanzim Qa`idat al-Jihad) are an international Islamic-jihadi organization, we are not 
bound by country or race. In Afghanistan, we pledged allegiance to the Commander of 
the Faithful Mullah Muhammad `Umar, [we recognize him to be] a mujahid and the 
                                                           
165 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 9. 
166 SOCOM-2012-0000004, 11-13. 
167 See Khadduri, Islamic Law of Nations, 230, footnote 1. 
168 SOCOM-2012-0000007, p. 1. 

38 
 
commander of the faithful of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. From his side, it is 
permitted for us to be involved in general jihadi work…we would like to make clear to 
you that this description [of ‘guests’] lacks a legal basis, and that Muslims are brothers 
in religion.”
169 The letter concluded with an unambiguous threat: “unless we see from 
you serious and immediate practical and clear steps towards reforming [your ways] 
and dissociating yourself from these vile mistakes [that violate Islamic Law], we shall 
be forced to take public and firm legal steps from our side.”
170 `Atiyya’s and al-Libi’s 
letter was not the first warning issued to the TTP by the leadership of al-Qa`ida. In light 
of its rebuking tone, an examination of some of `Atiyya’s and Mustafa Abu’l-Yazid’s 
statements a year prior to the drafting of the letter makes it clear that their 
condemnation of the indiscriminate targeting  of Muslims in mosques and marketplaces 
was an implicit criticism of the TTP.
171 It is either that the TTP was too slow to 
understand that these public statements were implicitly criticizing their actions or 
simply pretended that they did not understand. 
 
Al-Shabab  
Al-Shabab is not extensively discussed in the documents, but there are enough 
references that reflect Bin Ladin’s displeasure with the group’s style of governance. 
There is also a letter authored by Bin Ladin and addressed to the leader of al-Shabab, 
Mukhtar Abu al-Zubayr. It seems that Abu al -Zubayr had sent a letter to Bin Ladin in 
which he requested formal unity with al -Qa`ida and either consulted him on the 
question of declaring an Islamic state in Somalia or informed him that he was about to 
declare one.  
 
On the question of formal unity with al-Qa`ida, Bin Ladin politely declined, although he 
acknowledged that this is a “legal duty” ( wajib shar`i), by which he meant that such a 
duty is incumbent upon all Muslims to work towards and implement when 
circumstances are conducive. Bin Ladin cited two reasons to explain why he 
discouraged formal unity. First, he indicated  that it would give the “enemy” the excuse 
to mobilize its forces against Somalia; further, without formal unity, it would remain 
feasible for foreign aid to reach Muslims in need in Somalia.
172 The second reason Bin 
Ladin cited is the extreme poverty in Somalia as a result of ongoing wars. He further 
wanted to promote economic development to enhance people’s lives. “I am 
                                                           
169 Ibid. 
170 Ibid., 2. 
171 Mustafa Abu’l-Yazid, “Blackwater and the Pesh awar Bombings,” al-Sahab, 11 November 2009; 
“Statement by Shaykh Atiyatallah about the Pesh awar Bombings,” November 2009 (Released by Al-
Fallujah Islamic Forum in January 2010).    
172 SOCOM-2012-0000005, pp. 1-2. 

39 
 
determined,” he wrote to Abu al-Zubayr, “to urge merchants in the Gulf states in one of 
my public statements to [invest] in effective and important developmental projects. 
These would not be too costly, we have already tested such projects in Sudan. Thus the 
absence of a public affiliation between the jihadis [in Somalia] with al-Qa`ida would 
strengthen the position of merchants who de sire to help their [Muslim] brothers in 
Somalia.”
173 
 
On the question of declaring a state ( dawla), Bin Ladin advised against it. Yet if al-
Shabab believed it was necessary to formaliz e their authority in Islamic terms, Bin 
Ladin suggested that the group declare an imara, an emirate/province, not a state, and 
call it “the Islamic Emirate of Somalia.”
174 In Islamic political parlance, an imara is part 
of a broader Islamic state/dynasty; it is headed by an amir who is a representative of the 
caliph/greater imam. As with Yemen, Bin Ladin urged Abu al-Zubayr to restrain his 
ambitious plans. He concluded his letter to Abu al-Zubayr with gentle advice on 
governance: “[just as] I urge myself, I urge you to hold on to piety, patience, and 
perseverance and to adhere to noble characters, those to which when an amir adhere, 
the affairs of his citizenry would improve.” He further explained to Abu al-Zubayr that 
the leader’s wisdom is manifest through “his forgiveness, justice, patience and good 
relationship with his citizenry.”
175 Bin Ladin’s advice is not for stylistic flourish; it is 
intended to signal to Abu al-Zubayr that his leadership is ultimately measured by how 
well Somalis are governed and their needs met.  
 
Bin Ladin’s concern over al-Shabab’s mode of governance was explicitly articulated in a 
letter to `Atiyya. He asked `Atiyya to enquire from “the brothers in Somalia” about the 
economic situation of the states under their authority: “it does not escape you [Shaykh 
`Atiyya] that attending to people’s livelihood is an important objective, according to the 
Law, and it is one of the most important duties of the leader. It is therefore necessary to 
seek to create an economic force [in Somalia towards achieving this end].” Bin Ladin 
had apparently sent `Atiyya some suggestions on how to improve the economy, but 
`Atiyya either ignored them or had not attended to them.
176  
 
In addition to al-Shabab’s neglect of building a viable economy, Bin Ladin was also 
worried about the group’s rigid approach to Islamic Law, specifically its inflexible 
                                                           
173 Ibid., 2. 
174 Ibid., 1. 
175 Ibid., 3. 
176 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 5. 

40 
 
application of the hudud, or deterrent penalties for certain crimes. 177 He must have 
thought that the group was applying penalties with excess and asked `Atiyya to write 
“to our brothers in Somalia with some advice on how to deal with those whose offenses 
are ambiguous ( al-mushtabah bihim ) so that they may heed the prophetic hadith ‘avert 
the hadd penalties by means of ambiguous cases’ ( idra’u al-hudud bi-al-shubuhat ).”
178 Bin 
Ladin was referring here to a hadith, a report attributed to the Prophet Muhammad, 
which has served as a basis for jurists to avoid the imposition of severe penalties.
179  
 
Bin Ladin’s letter to Abu al-Zubayr has echoes of the “it’s not you, it’s me” excuse. Why 
should he deny al-Shabab official membership in al-Qa`ida yet still honor Abu al-
Zubayr with a personal and cordial letter that  he could have asked `Atiyya to write on 
his behalf? It is possible that he had been sending personal letters to other regional 
leaders, believing that even though he could not control them, it was still his duty to 
continue to advise them to change their way s, in which case his letter to Abu al-Zubayr 
would fit this pattern. It is also possible th at Bin Ladin’s reasoning may not have been 
entirely noble; it may be that al-Shabab was trying to purchase its way into al-Qa`ida. In 
what was probably his last letter, Bin Ladin asked `Atiyya to inform him of the “sums 
of money in support of jihadis coming from inside and outside Pakistan, and to itemize 
separately the sums arriving from each re gion; and of these to explain what happened 
with respect to the sum from the brothers in Somalia mentioned in your letter.”
180 In 
itself, the reference to a distinct sum from Somalia is obviously not conclusive that al-
Shabab was attempting to purchase use of the brand, but it may suggest that the sum 
from Somalia stood out in relation to others. If this is a plausible observation, then it 
might explain Bin Ladin’s position: although he was not prepared to “franchise” al-
Qa`ida’s brand, fearing that al-Shabab’s shortcomings would be a liability, he still 
deemed it necessary to be cordial to the le ader of al-Shabab to ensure the group’s 
continued financial support of jihadi activities, (mis)leading Abu al-Zubayr to think that 
al-Shabab could eventually be granted membership. Nine months after Bin Ladin’s 
death, Ayman al-Zawahiri delivered to al-Shabab what Bin Ladin had denied them. Al-
Zawahiri and Abu al-Zubayr released a public statement announcing the union 
                                                           
177 On al-Shabab’s rigid application of the hudud, see Al-Qimmah Islamic Network, “Tatbiq Hadd al-Rajm 
wa-Hadd al-Harabah bi-Wilayat Shbili al-Wista al-Islamiya,” http://al-
qimmah.net/showthread.php?t=24727&langid=2 (accessed 26 April 2010). 
178 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 5. 
179 See E.K. Rowson, “Shubha,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition (Brill, 2012). Edited by: P. Bearman; 
Th. Bianquis; C.E. Bosworth; E. van Donzel; and W.P. Heinrichs. 
180 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 8. 

41 
 
between the two groups as a testimony that the “jihadi movement is growing with 
God’s help.”181 
 
Bin Ladin’s decision not to grant al-Shabab a public union with al-Qa`ida is intriguing 
in another respect. A close reading of a related letter may suggest that Bin Ladin’s 
denial was the subject of internal debate within al-Qa`ida and possibly behind his 
back.
182 The author of the letter was concerned with the content of another letter to 
which he was made privy. He referred to it as the “letter of our friend” ( risalat sahibina) 
and explained that: 
 
…it is possible that the reason behind it  is the fear of those brothers from the 
expansion and growth of the size of al-Qa`ida, with God’s grace and power. They 
believe that being burdened by this expansive body is weighty on their neck and 
their capability cannot sustain it. It woul d make them liable to problems with 
m a n y  s i d e s ,  e s p e c i a l l y  s i n c e  t h e y  d e s i r e  o r  h o p e  t o  p u r s u e  t h e  p a t h  o f  
construction and development. That is why they are satisfied with those who 
seek them, but do not see [the need] to go beyond that…That is why I believe it is 
necessary to affirm al-Qa`ida’s ties to its branches and make it public as a fait 
accompli and useless to deny…Therefore, I hope that you would reconsider your 
decision of not declaring publicly the union with the brothers in Somalia simply 
because we might be pressured in the future to declare that we are not affiliated 
with them or others.
183 
 
This letter suggests that Bin Ladin’s position was subject to internal criticism. The 
pursuit of “construction and development,” which Bin Ladin outlined in his letter to 
Abu al-Zubayr was atypical al-Qa`ida discourse and was not welcomed by the author 
of this letter. Furthermore, it suggests th at some were frustrated with Bin Ladin’s 
reluctance to welcome publicly groups pledging allegiance to al-Qa`ida, accusing him 
of “being burdened by this expansive body” instead of seeing it as a sign of “God’s 
grace.” The only regional jihadi group th at Bin Ladin publicly granted a formal 
affiliation is al-Qa`ida in Mesopotamia (AQI); all other groups that were formalized to 
be in the fold of al-Qa`ida were announced by Ayman al-Zawahiri. 
 
                                                           
181 “Bushra Sarra,” Shabakat Shumukh al-Islam, http://www.shamikh1.info/vb/showthread.php?t=148330 
(accessed 30 April 2012). 
182 See Appendix for alternative readings of this letter. 
183 SOCOM-2012-0000006, 1. 

42 
 
If Bin Ladin was in charge of AQC, the content of his correspondence suggests that he 
did not enjoy a symbiotic relationship with th e affiliates on the operational front. The 
documents reveal that Bin Ladin was burdened  by what he viewed as the affiliates’ 
incompetence: specifically a lack of political acumen, an inability to win public support, 
and most importantly poorly planned operat ions that resulted in the deaths of 
thousands of Muslims. If AQC lacks the ability to exert control over its supposed 
affiliate groups — whether distant groups like AQAP or so called “fellow travelers” like 
the TTP that are active in the geographical space where it is based — it stands to reason 
that the power and clout AQC is meant to exer t over the global jihadi landscape is most 
doubtful. 
 
  
III- Al-Qa`ida Ties to Iran and Pakistan? 
While the documents speak volumes about Bin Ladin’s dwindling control over the 
movement that he helped to cultivate and inspire, they are less clear on the role of two 
powerful regional actors, Iran and Pakistan, frequently accused of enjoying ties to the 
group. Nonetheless, given the limited amount of reliable available information on this 
issue, the documents shed some light on how al-Qa`ida viewed these two key actors. 
Relations between al-Qa`ida and Iran appear to have been highly antagonistic, and the 
documents provide evidence for the first time  of al-Qa`ida’s covert campaign against 
Iran. This battle appears to have been an attempt to influence the indirect and 
unpleasant negotiations over the release of jihadis and their families, including 
members of Bin Ladin’s family, detained by Iran. References to Pakistan are much too 
scattered to provide a coherent presentatio n of al-Qa`ida’s relationship with the 
Pakistani government, but the few mentions of the Pakistani security forces in the 
document do not explicitly point to any institutional Pakistani support to Bin Ladin.  
 
Iran 
The relationship between al-Qa`ida and Iran is one of the least understood aspects 
about al-Qa`ida’s history. Due to the scarcity of reliable public information to elucidate 
the nature of this connection, theories vary widely.
184 The Western frontier of 
                                                           
184 One of the earliest reported links between al-Qa`ida and Iran comes from the testimony of Jamal al-
Fadl – a former member of al-Qa`ida who defected and became an informant for the U.S. government. 
During his trial testimony (against Bin Ladin) in February 2001, al-Fadl described contact that four al-
Qa`ida members – Abu Talha al-Sudani, Abu Jaffar al-Misri, Sayf al-Misri (see below), and Sayf al-`Adl – 
allegedly had with Hezbollah operatives in Lebanon in the 1990s.  To the authors’ knowledge, this 
information has not been corroborated. See USA v. Osama bin Laden, et. al., United States District Court 
Southern District of New York, 6 February 2001, http://cryptome.org/usa-v-ubl-02.htm. For background 

43 
 
Afghanistan bordering Iran was considered by  al-Qa`ida strategists as an alternative 
base for their activities to escape and evade the intrusion of U.S. Special Operations 
Forces that were targeting them prior to th e U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001. 
Sayf al-`Adl, one of al-Qa`ida’s tier-one leaders, related in his publicly available 
writings that the choice of this geographical location was due to its close proximity to 
the safest route available to the “brothers,” namely Turkey-Iran-Afghanistan. “Pakistani 
authorities,” he explained, “were beginning to exert pressure on us and closely monitor 
our movements, making it very difficult for Arab brothers and others to reach 
Afghanistan via Pakistan.” Al-`Adl further related that they established links with some 
supporters in Iran, but not with the Iranian government; some “brothers” from 
Gulbuddin Hikmatyar’s Islamic Party (al-Hizb al-Islami) made available to them some 
apartments and farms that they owned in Iran. Many families, he wrote, headed to Iran 
following the U.S.-led invasion in 2001 presumably expecting to be left alone, but before 
long Iranian authorities, pressured by th e U.S. government in his view, began a 
campaign of arresting people and deporting them to their home countries.
185  
 
When he wrote this article, al-`Adl himself was believed to be detained by Iranian 
authorities, and this may have constrained his ability to provide elaborate details as to 
the Iranian regime’s rationale with respect to detaining jihadis. Nevertheless, his 
account provides a plausible rationale as to why al-Qa`ida would look to Iran, namely 
as a passage or a base that appeared to prov ide safety for its members or other jihadis. 
Al-Qa`ida did not appear to have looked to Iran from the perspective that “the enemy 
o f  m y  ( A m e r i c a n )  e n e m y  i s  m y  f r i e n d , ”  b u t  t h e  g r o u p  m i g h t  h a v e  h o p e d  t h a t  “ t h e  
enemy of my (American) enemy would leave me alone.” Al-`Adl’s explanation about 
the clampdown by Iranian authorities, however, is not satisfactory because they did not 
deport all jihadis, and the documents reveal that Iran was releasing jihadis and their 
families as recently as 2011. 
 
The documents provide insights on al-Qa`ida and Iran starting in 2009. In a letter dated 
11 June 2009, authored by `Atiyya and addressed to “our venerable shaykh,” Bin Ladin 
or possibly another senior leader, he wrote th at “I am delighted to inform you that the 
Iranians released a group of brothers in several batches last month.”
186 The list included 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
on these debates, see Bruce Riedel, “The Mysterious Relationship between al-Qa`ida and Iran,” CTC 
Sentinel 3, no. 7 (2010). 
185 Sayf al-`Adl, “Tajrubati ma` Abu Mus`ab al-Zarqawi,” Minbar al-Tawhid wa-al-Jihad, 
http://www.tawhed.ws. 
186 SOCOM-2012-0000012, 1. The names of the released and their profiles are as quoted in the letter: “`Abd 
al-Muhayman al-Misri and his family; Salim al-Misri (of the Jihad Group) – the term used for “of” (amta`) 
could mean “of the baggage” – which could imply a pejorative sense) – and his family; Abu Suhayb al-

44 
 
a number of legacy al-Qa`ida members (descr ibed as mid-level brothers) whose ties to 
the group stretch back to the 1990s. 187 In the document, `Atiyya further indicated that 
the Iranians told the person liaising between the two parties that they would soon be 
delivering to him the family of “Azmarai” (Bin Ladin), “perhaps even within a week.”
188 
The initial promise was that they would release “the family (women and children, 
excluding the men).” 189 The Iranians also leaked to those whom they released that they 
planned to free more prisoners in the near future.190 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Makki (of Yemeni origin: during the Crusader campaign, he served as the bodyguard of Shaykh Abu 
Suleiman al-Makki al-Harbi) and his family; al-Zubayr al-Maghribi (a brother who used to work with the 
Libyan Fighting Group) and his family; on his way (he might be in Quetta or thereabout, importantly, he 
crossed the Iranian border, and may God deliver him [safely] is Khalifa al-Misri and his family.” 
187 SOCOM-2012-0000012, 2; According to Fadil Harun, al-Harb `ala al-Islam, p. 374, `Abd-al-Muhayman’s 
family was chosen to be among those families to live in the newly constructed compound in Kandahar, 
Afghanistan, in 1998, illustrating that he has been associated with the group since at least that time. See 
also Harmony document AFGP-2002-600046, 2. Salim al-Misri was an explosives trainer at al-Qa`ida’s 
Jihad Wal camp in the late 1990s. He was also one of the al-Qa`ida members believed to have received 
training from Hezbollah in explosives. See USA v. Osama bin Laden, et. al., United States District Court 
Southern District of New York, 6 February 2001, http://cryptome.org/usa-v-ubl-02.htm. In 1996, Salim al-
Misri lived in Saudi Arabia and members of his family in Sudan. See Harmony document AFGP-2002-
000232, 9 (of the original Arabic); Abu Suhayb al-Makki (Muhammad Ali Qasim Yaqub) was detained by 
Pakistani authorities in Karachi several weeks after Bin Ladin’s death.  According to press accounts, Abu 
Suhayb al-Makki is “said to have worked directly under the al-Qaida leadership along the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border.” See Declan Walsh, “Pakistan Hones in on Osama bin Laden Network with Arrest of 
al-Qaeda Man,” Guardian, 17 May 2011. 
188 Although this cannot be ascertained, it is possible that Ezedin Abdel Aziz Khalil (aka Yasin al-Suri) 
and/or Salim Hasan Khalifa Rashid al-Kuwari helped to facilitate the transfer and travel of these 
individuals from Iran to Pakistan.  See “Treasury Targets Key Al-Qa’ida Funding and Support Network 
Using Iran as a Critical Transit Point,” 28 July 2011. 
189 SOCOM-2012-0000012, 2. 
190 According to `Atiyya, the next group would include Abu Hafs al-`Arab, Abu Ziyad al-`Iraqi, and Abu 
`Amru al-Misri. See SOCOM-2012-0000012, 2. In an interview conducted by al-Hayat, a former al-Qa`ida 
member “Muhammad al-Tamimi” mentioned the name Abu Hafs al-`Arab as one of the leaders of the 
Egyptian Jihad Group who was among those he met in al-Dahhak house in Kandahar in December 2001. 
See http://www.jammoul.net/forum/showthread.php?t=1628 (accessed 30 April 2012); Abu Hafs al-
`Arab’s name is also mentioned in a captured document that summarizes the interrogations of several 
Arabs detained by al-Qa`ida and the Taliban on suspicions that they were spying for foreign intelligence 
services during the late 1990s. The document suggests that Abu Hafs al-`Arab had a relationship with 
Sayf al-`Adl and could have been involved in security issues. See Harmony document AFGP-2002-800775, 
75. Two other Harmony documents identify Abu Hafs al-`Arab as a member of al-Qa`ida. See AFGP-
2002-600046, 2 and AFGP-2002-600177, 2. Abu Ziyad al-`Iraqi’s name appears in a letter sent from `Abd 
al-Wakil al-Somali to Abu al-Faraj. In the letter, Abu al-Faraj is informed that Abu Ziyad will be coming 
to his area per the direction of “Shaykh Abu Hafs” (likely a reference to Abu Hafs al-Misri). The 
document suggests that Abu Ziyad knew Abu Hafs or worked on his behalf. See Harmony document 
AFGP-2002-800636, 1. For additional background on other al-Qa`ida members believed to be in Iran, see 

45 
 
 
If `Atiyya’s explanation is credible, then the Iranians were not releasing jihadi prisoners 
to forge a bond or strengthen an existing one with al-Qa`ida. Rather, `Atiyya was of the 
view that “we believe that our efforts, which included escalating a political and media 
campaign, the threats we made, the kidnapping of their friend the commercial 
counselor in the Iranian Consulate in Peshawar, and other reasons that scared them 
based on what they saw [we are capable of], to be among the reasons that led them to 
expedite [the release of these prisoners].”
191 The commercial counselor at the Iranian 
Consulate to whom `Atiyya was referring is Hesmatollah Atharzadeh-Nyaki; he was 
kidnapped in Peshawar in November 2008
192 and released in March 2010. 193 A few 
weeks before he was kidnapped, Abdul Khaliq Farahi, the Afghan consul general in 
Peshawar, was also kidnapped. Six months into his ordeal, he found himself sharing a 
room on and off for a year with none other than Atharzadeh. Farahi believed that his 
kidnappers were al-Qa`ida, and they seemed to have had links with Pakistani 
militants.
194  
 
It is significant to note that the Iranians do not appear to have made direct contact with 
al-Qa`ida, at least not in the initial stage. `Atiyya’s frustration could not be clearer: “But 
the criminals did not send us any letter, nor did they send us a message through any of 
the brothers [they released]! Such behavior is  of course not unusual for them; indeed, it 
is typical of their mindset and method. They do not wish to appear to be negotiating 
with us or responding to our pressures, as if to suggest that their actions are purely one-
sided and based on their own initiative.”
195 
 
Bin Ladin was equally distrustful of the Iranian regime. The release of his family was 
fraught with hurdles and did not materializ e “within a week,” as `Atiyya was led to 
believe. A seemingly authentic letter authored by Bin Ladin’s son Khalid addressed to 
Iranian Supreme Leader ‘Ali Khameneii in January 2010 has been published. In it, 
Khalid made known to Khameneii that numerous letters requesting the release of 
members of his family were ignored by the Iranian government. It appears that the 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Christopher Boucek, “Examining Saudi Arabia’s 85 Most Wanted List,” CTC Sentinel 2, no. 5 (2009). Iran 
has also “released” Mustafa Hamid (Abu Walid al-Misri), who is not believed to have been an al-Qa`ida 
member but historically an advisor and trainer for the group.    
191 SOCOM-2012-0000012, 2. 
192 Jane Perlez, “An Iranian Diplomat Is Abducted by Gunmen in Pakistan,” New York Times, 13 
November 2008. 
193 Alan Cowell, “Iranian Diplomat in Pakistan Is Freed,” New York Times, 30 March 2010. 
194 Carlotta Gall, “Afghan Tells of Ordeal at the ‘Center of Al Qaeda,” New York Times, 2 March 2011. 
195 SOCOM-2012-0000012, 2. 

46 
 
escape of his sister Iman to the Saudi Emba ssy in Tehran forced the Iranian government 
to admit the presence of Bin Ladin’s family in  Iran. His brother, Sa`d, also “managed to 
escape by himself and he related to us the tr uths of what was happening, that they had 
repeatedly asked to leave Iran but they were beaten and suppressed.” 196 Sa`d was 
reported to have been killed in 2009, 197 and in his last letter Bin Ladin indicated to 
`Atiyya that he was about to send him a copy of a letter Sa`d wrote before he died to be 
included in al-Sahab’s archive “in view of the important information it reveals about the 
truth of the Iranian regime.”
198 
 
It appears that the Iranians promised to release Bin Ladin’s family in exchange for the 
release of Atharzadeh, but they seem to have kept one of his daughters and her 
husband. In the second half of 2010, Bin Ladin asked `Atiyya to correspond with the 
Iranians (not clear if directly or indirectly) to tell them that “they promised that upon 
releasing their captive, they would release my family, which includes my daughter 
Fatima who [should naturally stay in the co mpany of] her husband. It is not fair to 
separate women from their husbands; it is therefore necessary that they release her and 
her husband along with his [second wife] Umm Hafs.”
199 Despite the many hurdles al-
Qa`ida faced from the Iranian regime, the release of detainees in 2010 was timely. As 
noted earlier, Bin Ladin urged `Atiyya to move the “brothers” out of Waziristan, fearing 
for their security. He therefore saw the detain ees released by Iran as a “lifeline” to 
compensate for those who were getting out or being killed. Not all the released 
detainees seem to have been known to al-Qa`ida, for Bin Ladin suggested that they 
should be given an intensive course not ex ceeding three weeks with a heavy emphasis 
on ideological instruction and some basic m ilitary training. He further remarked that 
this should serve as a testing course “through which we get to know their capabilities.” 
Once the talents of the “brothers” were identified, they would be assigned appropriate 
tasks, such as sending them to their home countries to preach, recruit, raise money; 
others were to be kept in Waziristan to develop further their capabilities, and those who 
are disciplined could be sent to the frontlines to fight alongside the Taliban.
200 
 
Although the documents make it clear that the relationship between Iran and al-Qa`ida 
is antagonistic, it is difficult to explain Iran’s rationale for detaining en masse these 
jihadis for years, without due process. One plausible explanation that has been 
                                                           
196 Khalid bin Ladin, “Min Khalid Bin Usama bin Ladin ila Murshid al-Thawra `Ali Khameni’i,” 
http://hanein.info/vb/showthread.php?t=162003 (accessed 23 April 2012). 
197 Eric Schmitt, “U.S. Officials Say a Son of bin Laden May Be Dead,” New York Times, 24 July 2009. 
198 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 10. 
199 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 42-43. 
200 Ibid., 43. 

47 
 
advanced is that Iran held them “in part as a deterrent against a Qaeda attack on 
Iranian soil.”201 Another widely reported explanation is that Iran was holding al-Qa`ida 
members “as a bargaining chip in its war of nerves with the US, and will only allow 
their extradition in return for substantial concessions.”
202 Whether Iran was aware of it 
or not, al-Qa`ida had plans to put the released detainees to “work.” 
 
Pakistan 
Unlike the explicit and relatively substantive references to the Iranian regime, the 
documents do not have such references about Pakistan. Although there are notes about 
“trusted Pakistani brothers,” there are no explicit references to any institutional 
Pakistani support. The one instance Pakistani intelligence is mentioned is not in a 
supporting role: in the course of giving detailed instructions about the passage his 
released family from Iran should take, Bin Ladin cautioned `Atiyya to be most careful 
about their movements lest they be followed. More precisely, he remarked that “if the 
[Pakistani] intelligence commander in the region is very alert, he would assume that 
they are heading to my location and he would monitor them until they reach their 
destination.”
203 This reference does not suggest that Bin Ladin was on good terms with 
the Pakistani intelligence community. Anot her reference worth highlighting in this 
regard, is that Bin Ladin did not appear to enjoy freedom of movement with his family. 
In his long list of security measures to be followed by the “brothers” to evade the eyes 
of the authorities, he wrote to `Atiyya that it is most important not to allow children to 
leave the house except in emergency situations. For nine years prior to his death, Usama 
bin Ladin proudly told `Atiyya that he and hi s family adhered to such strict measures, 
precluding his children from playing outdoors  without the supervision of an adult who 
could keep their voices down.
204 Bin Ladin, it was said, could run but he could not hide. 
He seems to have done very little running and quite a lot of hiding. 
 
Rather than outright protection or assistance from states such as Iran or Pakistan, Bin 
Ladin’s guidance suggests that the group’s lead ers survived for as long as they did due 
to their own caution and operational security protocols.
205 While the release of new 
documents may necessitate a reevaluation of al-Qa`ida’s relations to Iran and Pakistan, 
the documents for now make it clear that al-Qa`ida’s ties to Iran were the unpleasant 
byproduct of necessity, fueled by mutu al distrust and antagonism. The limited 
discussion of the Pakistani military does not lend itself to any final determination on 
                                                           
201 Eric Schmitt, “U.S. Officials Say a Son of bin Laden May Be Dead.” 
202 Dan De Luce, “Iran Holding al-Qaida Men ‘as Bargaining Chip with US’,” Guardian, 7 August 2003. 
203 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 41. 
204 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 8. 
205 See forthcoming article by Liam Collins to be published in the CTC Sentinel. 

48 
 
ties between Bin Ladin and the Pakistani st ate or actors within it, but Bin Ladin’s 
emphasis on security precautions suggests that fear and suspicion dominated his 
calculations. 
 
IV-  Bin Ladin’s Plans 
Among the documents, Bin Ladin’s last private letter is dated 25 April 2011. By then, 
events in the world, as he was observing them on his television screen, were unfolding 
at a pace that caused him to reassess his worldview. He saw the revolutions sweeping 
the Arab world to represent a “formidable event” ( hadath ha’il), a turning point in the 
modern history of the umma. At the time he was writing, the presidents of Tunisia and 
Egypt, Zein al-`Abidin bin `Ali and Husni Mubarak, had fallen. Bin Ladin was 
convinced that their fall was bound to trigger a domino effect, and “the fall of the 
remaining tyrants in the region was inevitable.” Thus, “if we double our efforts towards 
guiding, educating and warning Muslim people from those [who might tempt them to 
settle for] half solutions, by carefully presenting [our] advice, then the next phase will 
[witness a victory] for Islam, if God so pleases.”
206  
 
In line with al-Qa`ida’s traditional stance, Bin Ladin dismissed the Muslim Brotherhood 
(Ikhwan) and similar Islamist groups, accusing them of being in pursuit of “half 
solutions” ( ansaf al-hulul ). This, in his parlance, means that although they raised the 
banner of Islam in their political discourse, they deviated from its teachings when they 
agreed to pursue their objectives through the electoral process. This is the spirit that 
underlies the statements made by al-Qa`ida’s leaders when they accuse Islamists of 
compromising God’s Law when they form political parties and contest elections that are 
regulated by positive law ( qawanin wad`iyya). Nevertheless, Bin Ladin believed that, in 
recent years, some among the Ikhwan have been spreading the “correct understanding” 
of Islam, which caused him to anticipate  that their return to “true Islam” ( al-islam al-
haqq) is merely a matter of time.
207 
 
Thus, within a week of his death, Bin Ladin envisaged two different strategies to be 
deployed in two geographical zones respectively. The first strategy pertains to the Arab 
                                                           
206 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 1. 
207 Ibid., 2. Bin Ladin’s cause for optimism that the Ikhwan may eventually return to “true Islam” is 
largely based on a long question that was addressed to “Abu Muhammad” (Ayman al-Zawahiri). Bin 
Ladin was most likely referring to al-Zawahiri’s 2008 “al-Liqa` al-Maftuh,” an online interview that was 
referred to in the press as the “Town Hall” meeting. It consists of two parts. The question that Bin Ladin 
was likely thinking about is the one posed by a certain “Sayf al-Islam” and it is in the second part. See “al-
Liqa’ al-Maftuh ma` al-Sheikh Ayman al-Zawahiri,” Minbar al-Tawhid wa-al-Jihad, 
http://www.tawhed.ws/r1?i=7534&x=1502092g (accessed 2 April 2012). 

49 
 
region undergoing revolutions, and it en tails “inciting people who have not yet 
revolted and exhort them to rebel against the rulers” ( khuruj ‘ala al-hukkam ); this, he 
believed, should be part of a broader media campaign that should be carefully 
orchestrated and void of any apparent differences among jihadis.
208 The other strategy 
concerns Afghanistan, and it entails continuing to evoke the obligation of jihad there. In 
his mind, Muslims elsewhere regained their confidence and courage to revolt against 
their rulers thanks to the jihadis, who, by fighting against the United States in 
Afghanistan, dragged it into a war of attrition and weakened it. Following his logic, the 
jihadis’ bleeding of U.S. resources in Afgh anistan lifted the “coercive pressure” that the 
United States exercised elsewhere; this, in turn, allowed people previously scared and 
overwhelmed by the United States to rebel against its “agents,” meaning their corrupt 
rulers.
209  
 
Notwithstanding the importance of jihad in  Afghanistan, there was no doubt in Bin 
Ladin’s mind that the “greatest obligation” incumbent upon jihadis during this phase is 
to “guide and advise” (tawjih wa-irshad) the umma, which would involve the clarification 
of fundamental Islamic concepts ( mafahim islamiyya ). This task “ought to occupy the 
largest share of our efforts”;
210 more specifically, this entails “calling upon all those with 
literary capabilities, gifted with rhetorical eloquence be it prose or poetry to be 
delivered as audio, visual or in written [statements].”
211 In his guidance to `Atiyya, Bin 
Ladin asked him to remind the “brothers” in the region undergoing revolutions to be 
patient and warn them against entering into conflicts with Islamic parties. These parties, 
he suspected, will likely form governments in these countries and “our obligation 
during this period is to focus on da`wa among Muslims and win supporters by 
spreading proper understanding [of Islam].”
212 
 
`Atiyya had some different plans with respec t to countries undergoing revolutions. He 
thought that it would be a good idea to send some of the “competent brothers” to their 
home countries to take part in the events and liaise with Islamic forces. Bin Ladin was 
more cautious, urging careful consideration, especially as to whether a safe route may 
be arranged for them. As to those who are too eager to go, he advised `Atiyya that their 
decision should be respected as long as they take as much care as possible as to their 
safety.
213 
                                                           
208 SOCOM-2012-0000010, 3.  
209 Ibid., 2. 
210 Ibid. 
211 Ibid., 3. 
212 Ibid., 4. 
213 Ibid., 7. 

50 
 
 
Bin Ladin made an ambiguous but intriguing reference in relation to Saudi Arabia. It 
appears that the Arab Spring caused some in Saudi Arabia to worry as to whether Bin 
Ladin might call on Saudis to revolt. A cert ain “Sahib al-Tayyib” from Saudi Arabia 
sent a letter to `Atiyya to be shared with Bin Ladin, but its purpose is not explicit. Bin 
Ladin’s guess was that scholars who are either connected to the Saudi regime or who 
themselves believe in the importance of stability in the Saudi kingdom and the Gulf 
region warned al-Tayyib about the danger of stirring up ( ithara) the situation in Saudi 
Arabia so that he may pass on this warning to “us.” Bin Ladin surmised that al-Tayyib 
was hinting too at the importance of stability in Saudi Arabia.
214 If he had a chance to 
call on people to revolt as he advised `Atiyya, it is unlikely that he would have spared 
the people of the Saudi kingdom from his statements.  
 
Bin Ladin’s only public audio statement in re sponse to the Arab Spring, released after 
his death, echoed some of the sentiments he expressed in his letter to `Atiyya. It is 
somewhat of a paradigm shift, as he did not designate the movers of the Arab Spring as 
mujahidun; instead, they are “free revolutionaries” ( thuwaar ahrar) and they are engaged 
in a liberation (tahrir) enterprise. He viewed this as an event like no other event: “ hadath 
tarikhi `azim ” (a great historical event). “With the fall of the tyrant,” he proudly 
continued, “the meanings of submissiveness (dhilla), servility (khunu`), fear and restraint 
(ihjam) have [also] fallen,” and the “meanings of freedom, dignity, courage and audacity 
(iqdam) have arisen.”
215  
 
Within a week of his letter in response to the Arab Spring, Bin Ladin was killed. A 
month later, Ayman al-Zawahiri was announced as his successor. Al-Zawahiri is 
conspicuously distant from people in Bin Ladin’s immediate circle. One of the 
documents consists of an edited copy of al-Zawahiri’s fourth statement in response to 
events in Egypt; the edits are reflected in hi ghlighted passages and bold fonts. It is not 
clear if Bin Ladin did the editing, but wh oever did had solid grammatical foundations 
and prefered a self-effacing writing style. The edits were not included in al-Zawahiri’s 
final speech which was released in a video on 4 March 2011, on jihadi forums.
216 
                                                           
214 Ibid., 6. If Sahib al-Tayyib is one of the unrecognizable personalities in the 17 documents, he could be 
the “middleman” who sent a letter to `Atiyya in 2006, or the person who sent Bin Ladin the critical letter 
in 2006 – but unlikely; or very possibly the mysterious Abu Zifr/Zafr. It is interesting to note that in this 
instance, Bin Ladin slipped and used the term “al-mamlaka” (kingdom) instead of “Jazirat al-`Arab.” 
215 Usama bin Ladin, “ila Ummati al-Muslima” (CTC Library). 
216 SOCOM-2012-0000013, 5. Of the 12 proposed corrections, only one appears in al-Zawahiri’s speech 
(“muwalin” - tanwin bi al-kasr instead of “muwalun” - tanwin bi al-damma). This is an obvious grammatical 
error and the type that any native speaker would automatically correct when reading. It cannot therefore 

51 
 
 
Beyond the presence of this statement by al-Zawahiri in the documents, Bin Ladin 
referred to him (as “Abu Muhammad”) in a number of places, but the references do not 
reflect that he was consulting him in the same manner he did with `Atiyya. If the 
documents are representative of Bin Ladin’s  correspondence pattern and his immediate 
circle over the years, then `Atiyya must have been his closest associate. Of the 17 
documents, eight can be ascertained to have either been authored by or addressed to 
`Atiyya. Not only does he seem to have acted as Bin Ladin’s conduit, but it is also 
possible that he exercised more control than he was authorized. In one of the letters, for 
example, Bin Ladin appeared frustrated that  the audio or visual recordings he was 
sending to `Atiyya were either being delayed or not being released at all.
217 
 
Will there be another “Bin Ladin”? If Bin Ladin ’s instructions are closely followed, then 
the world might hear from Hamza bin Ladin, if he is still alive. 218 Bin Ladin intended for 
his son Hamza — who was released by the Iranians — to go to Qatar to pursue studies 
in religious sciences and preach to the umma the message of jihad. Unlike Arab rulers 
whom he abhors, Bin Ladin could not be accu sed of nepotism, and he certainly did not 
intend for his son to monopolize the right to preach jihadi discourse. Bin Ladin singled 
out Hamza not out of favoritism, but for “legal” convenience. Unlike many jihadi 
leaders — including some of Hamza’s brothe rs — who are on the run and whose public 
statements are therefore constrained by their limited movement,
219 Bin Ladin reasoned 
that his son Hamza might be able to spread the message as a free man. Hamza was 
imprisoned while he was still a child and it wo uld be legally difficult to indict him of 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
be viewed as evidence that Bin Ladin’s edits, if they were his, ever reached al-Zawahiri. Given that the 
remaining grammatical errors were included in the speech, it suggests that this document with edits 
either did not reach al-Zawahiri in time or was never sent. For a version of the video, see: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWOu4Eb3pP4 (accessed 30 April 2012). 
217 SOCOM-2012-0000003, 3. 
218 There were conflicting reports on the status of Bin Ladin’s sons following the raid. Some have reported 
that Hamza possibly escaped. See Muna Khan, “Hamza Bin Laden, ‘Crown Prince of Terror,’ May Have 
‘Escaped’ After US Raid in Pakistan,” al-Arabiya, 11 May 2011. 
219 Sa`d bin Ladin was likely the son most involved in al-Qa`ida, but he is believed to have been killed in a 
U.S. drone strike in winter 2009. See Joby Warrick, “One of Osama Bin Laden’s Sons Reported Dead After 
CIA Missile Strike,” Washington Post, 24 July 2009. The documents confirm his death. Another son, Khalid 
bin Ladin, was living with his father in the Abbottabad compound and was reportedly killed in the raid. 
See Muna Khan, “Hamza Bin Laden, ‘Crown Prince of Terror,’ May Have ‘Escaped’ After US Raid in 
Pakistan,” al-Arabiya. 

52 
 
any crimes. 220 Hamza, Bin Ladin assured, “is of the jihadis; he shares their ideas and 
their sorrows.”221 
 
Conclusion 
On the basis of the 17 declassified documents,  Bin Ladin was not, as many thought, the 
puppet master pulling the strings that set in motion jihadi groups around the world. Far 
from being pleased with the actions of regional jihadi groups claiming affiliation with 
or acting in the name of al-Qa`ida, Bin La din was burdened by what he saw as their 
incompetence. Their lack of political acumen to win public support along with their 
indiscriminate attacks resulting in the deaths of many Muslims is a subject that 
dominates Bin Ladin’s private letters composed in recent years.  
 
The American public might be surprised to  learn that Bin Ladin was unimpressed by 
the recent trend of American populist jihad. For example, he did not hold the American 
jihadi citizen Anwar al-`Awlaqi (killed by a drone strike in Yemen in 2011) in great 
esteem; Bin Ladin was not even inspired by Inspire, AQAP’s English-language 
magazine designed to appeal to Muslim Americans to launch random attacks in the 
United States. He warned of its “dangerous consequences,” presumably due to its 
tasteless content and no doubt to the poor planning of the operations it promotes.
222 
 
In comparison to regional jihadi groups, Bi n Ladin comes across as an outmoded jihadi. 
In contrast to their indiscriminate jihad, he was more interested in carefully planned 
operations. In view of the recent marketin g of “lone wolf” operations as “New Age” 
jihad, Bin Ladin instead urged methodical planning of suicide operations. He asked 
`Atiyya to write to regional “brothers” warning  them “not to send a single brother on a 
suicide fida’iyya operation (`amaliyya fida’iyya); they should send at least two…we tested 
this (i.e., sending a single brother) in many operations and their percentage of success 
was low due to psychological factors that affect the [designated] brother in such a 
situation.”
223 It is noteworthy that Bin Ladin used a secular political expression to 
describe suicide operations rather than th e common religious expression “martyrdom 
operation” (` amaliyya istishhadiyya ) typical of jihadi discourse. The regional groups’ 
eagerness to declare “Islamic states” in their regions was moderated by Bin Ladin 
urging patience to first secure public support; while they aim to win the small short-
term battles, his eyes were on a larger prize:  defeating the United States to undo what 
                                                           
220 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 44. 
221 Ibid. 
222 SOCOM-2012-0000015, 9. 
223 SOCOM-2012-0000019, 35. 

53 
 
he believed to be “apostate” Muslim regimes and liberate his fellow Muslims. Bin Ladin 
knew well how to articulate publicly the grievances that he believed Muslims suffer at 
the hands of their regimes and Western countr ies. His private letters show that saving 
his fellow Muslims from the indiscriminate attacks of his jihadi “brothers” weighed 
even more heavily on his mind. 

54 
 
Appendix 
This appendix attempts to explain how some of the letters related to others, and in one 
instance it provides alternative interpretations of a specific letter. Additionally, the 
appendix includes the author, the recipient an d the date of each letter. The conversion 
from the Hijri to the Gregorian calendar is inaccurate in some of the letters. If there is no 
summary after the basic information, then the letter does not appear to be directly 
related to another. This appendix is not meant to summarize each letter; for a brief 
summary of each of the 17 documents, see the summaries accompanying the 
documents. 
SOCOM-2012-0000003 
From: no name listed (assessed to be Usama bin Ladin) 
To: Shaykh Mahmud 
Date: Thursday, 17 Ramadan, 1431 (26 August 2010) 
SOCOM-2012-0000004 
From: no name listed (assessed to be Adam Gadahn) 
To: unknown 
Date: post-January 2011 
The letter does not explicitly state who is the author or to whom it is addressed. Since 
the author remarked that the American television channel ABC broadcast a part of a 
statement he gave on the fourth anniversary of 9/11, this suggests that it was authored 
by Adam Gadahn who did indeed release a statement then, part of which was 
broadcast on ABC. The letter is unlikely to have been addressed to Usama bin Ladin 
since the author referred to him in the third pers on. It is also not dated, but it must have 
been authored either in January 2011 or soon thereafter since he referred to the 
resignation of Octavia Nasr from CNN in July 2010 (he erroneously stated MSNBC) and 
that of Keith Olbermann from MSNBC on 21 January 2011. The letter is in essence a 
response to many of the requests/queries th at Bin Ladin made in his letter to `Atiyya 
dated October 2010 (SOCOM-2012-0000015), particularly those concerning a media 
strategy for the ten-year anniversary of 9/11. It is possible that `Atiyya shared SOCOM-
2012-0000015 with Gadahn and this letter by Gadahn addressed questions raised in 
SOCOM-2012-0000015. 
SOCOM-2012-0000005 
From: Usama bin Ladin 
To: Mukhtar Abu al-Zubayr 
Date: Friday, 26 Sha`ban, 1431 (6 August 2010) 

55 
 
SOCOM-2012-0000006 
From: unknown 
To: Azmarai 
Date: 6 Muharram [1432] (c. 11/12 December 2010) 
 
The letter is addressed to “the honorable brother Azmarai,” not Zamarai — the other 
name Bin Ladin used as his signature. The on ly other instance Azmarai is used in the 
documents is not by Bin Ladin, but by `Ati yya in his 2009 letter to Bin Ladin (SOCOM-
2012-0000012). It should be noted that Bin Ladin is normally addressed as “shaykh,” not 
as “brother” as the author of this letter addressed Azmarai. Below are two different 
interpretations of this letter. 
 
First Interpretation 
The letter may have been addressed to Zamarai/Bin Ladin, and Azmarai is simply a 
typo. Since it referred to the “brothers in Somalia,” urging reconsideration of Bin 
Ladin’s decision not to declare publicly a union with them, it can safely be dated as 
having been composed post Bin Ladin’s letter to Abu al-Zubayr dated August 2010 
(SOCOM-2012-0000005). Therefore the Hijri date of 6 Muharram should be in 1432, 
which would make it c. 11/12 December 2010. 
 
This letter suggested that Bin Ladin’s position with respect to rejecting formal mergers 
with regional jihadi groups was subject to inte rnal criticism. Instead of seeing it as a 
sign of “God’s grace” and a testament to al-Qa`ida’s growth, Bin Ladin was virtually 
accused of “being burdened by this expansive body.”  
 
Who might this author be? As noted in this report, the only regional jihadi group that 
Bin Ladin publicly admitted into the fold is al-Qa`ida in Mesopotamia (AQI) back in 
December 2004. All other groups that were publicly admitted were announced by 
Ayman al-Zawahiri, who recently admitted al-Shabab into the fold in February 2012. 
Was the author al-Zawahiri? It is difficult to assert, but given his disposition towards 
expanding al-Qa`ida through mergers, it is possible that it was him. If so, al-Zawahiri 
did not share Bin Ladin’s strategic vision with  respect to al-Qa`ida’s relations with the 
affiliates; moreover, unless Bin Ladin chan ged his mind about al-Shabab, then the 
February decision to admit the group in the fold would not have been blessed by Bin 
Ladin if he was still alive. Following the same logic, one also has to wonder whether al-
Zawahiri acted on behalf of Bin Ladin or against his directives when he publicly 
admitted other groups into al-Qa`ida. If al-Zawahiri was doing so against Bin Ladin’s 
directives, then Bin Ladin did not have a firm grip on al-Qa`ida itself, let alone its so-
called affiliates. Given that the documents show that Bin Ladin would not publicly 

56 
 
denounce groups like AQI/ISI, al-Zawahiri might have assumed that Bin Ladin would 
not publicly refute him. 
 
Second Interpretation  
The letter may not have been addressed to Bin Ladin and “Azmarai” is not a typo but 
perhaps a code indicating that it was not addressed to Bin Ladin, but about Bin Ladin. 
Several reasons could justify this alternative reading.  
- As noted earlier, Bin Ladin is addressed as “shaykh,” not as “brother,” as this 
letter does. 
- The author was cryptic, referring to the “letter of our friend” ( risalat sahibina ), 
before switching from the singular when he referred to this “friend” to the plural 
when he referred to the “brothers” even though the two are meant to refer to the 
same person or group. The first reference to “brothers” cannot be to the 
“brothers in Somalia” since the first “brothers” referred to those who were 
fearful of al-Qa`ida’s growth; Bin Ladin’s letter to Abu al-Zubayr showed that al-
Shabab was seeking union with al-Qa`ida. Thus, the “brothers” cannot be 
seeking this union and at the same time fearing it. 
- The author of this letter was explicitly critical of the pursuit of “construction and 
development,” which Bin Ladin explicitly outlined in his letter to Abu al-Zubayr. 
Emphasis on “construction and development” is atypical al-Qa`ida discourse, 
and his own letters show that Bin Ladin was  starting to emphasize it at least for 
Somalia. Yet the author referred to those who wished to pursue this path of 
“construction and development” in the third person plural. If he was addressing 
Bin Ladin directly, why did he not use the second person singular or plural? 
More than likely, the switch from singul ar to plural and from third person to 
second person plural was to make the message all the more cryptic. 
- The reference to those satisfied with people seeking them but not wanting to go 
beyond that may well be a remark about Bin Ladin, who was reluctant to admit 
groups in al-Qa`ida’s fold as the letter to Abu al-Zubayr suggests. The reference 
urging “you” (in the plural) “to reconsider your decision” is a reference to the 
recipient who could in turn exert influence on Bin Ladin to change his mind. 
- Finally, this is the only letter whose author requested that its recipient destroy it 
after reading it. If it was addressed to Bin Ladin, why would the author be 
concerned? 
 
If this letter served as a criticism of Bin Ladin behind his back, it is still possible that 
Ayman al-Zawahiri authored it for the same reasons indicated above. But one might 
justifiably ask why it should be in his electr onic files? One possible explanation is that 
its recipient decided to share it with Bin Ladin  in view of its seriousness and/or out of 

57 
 
loyalty. Alternatively, it may have been on the thumb drive of an operative, perhaps 
`Atiyya, who deleted it (as the author explicitly requested) and used the same thumb 
drive to deliver different letters to Bin Ladin.  
SOCOM-2012-0000007 
From: Mahmud al-Hasan (`Atiyyatullah) and Abu Yahya al-Libi 
To: Hakimullah Mehsud  
Date: 27 Dhu al-Hijja (3 December 2010) 
SOCOM-2012-0000008 
From: Jaysh al-Islam in Gaza 
To: `Atiyya/Shaykh Mahmud 
Forwarded to: `Abd al-Hamid (and later forwarded to Usama bin Ladin) 
Date: Shawwal 1427 (October-November 2006) 
SOCOM-2012-0000009 
From: unknown  
To: unknown 
Date: unknown 
SOCOM-2012-0000010 
From: Abu `Abdallah (Usama bin Ladin)  
To: Shaykh Mahmud/`Atiyya 
Date: Monday, 22 Jumadi al-Awwal 1432 (25 April 2011) 
SOCOM-2012-0000011 
From: unknown (likely of Egyptian origin) 
To: `Adnan (Hafiz Sultan) 
Date:  9 Rabi` al-Awwal (28 March 2007) 
SOCOM-2012-0000012 
From: `Atiyya 
To: Honorable Shaykh (assessed to be Usama bin Ladin or another senior leader) 
Date: Thursday, 11 June 2009 
SOCOM-2012-0000013 
From: unknown  
To: unknown 
Date: unknown 
Publicly available document – a public statement by Ayman al-Zawahiri 

58 
 
SOCOM-2012-0000014 
From: unknown (intermediary between `Atiyya and Saudi religious scholars) 
To: `Atiyya 
Forwarded to: Usama bin Ladin 
Date: Early 2007 
 
SOCOM-2012-0000015 
From: Zamarai (Usama bin Ladin)  
To: Shaykh Mahmud 
Date: Wednesday, 13 Dhu al-Qidah, 1431 (20 October 2010) 
 
SOCOM-2012-0000016 
From: no name listed (assessed to be either Usama bin Ladin and/or `Atiyya) 
To: Abu Basir (Nasir al-Wuhayshi) 
Date: assessed to be post October 2010 (see notes below) 
 
SOCOM-2012-0000017 
From: no name listed (assessed to be Usama bin Ladin) 
To: unknown 
Date: unknown 
 
It may be helpful to approach the above three documents in terms of their possible 
relations to one another in the context of the following: SOCOM-2012-0000015, authored 
by Bin Ladin, noted on page five that he was enclosing a file consisting of parts of a 
letter that he would like `Atiyya to edit for the purpose of sending to Abu Basir (Nasir 
al-Wuhayshi), the leader of AQAP. He indicated that `Atiyya is better placed than him 
to draft it because he knows the “brothers” there (in Yemen). He also asked him to 
share the final format of the letter. SOCOM-2012-0000017 consists of many paragraphs 
and notes that do not form an internally coherent essay/letter. Some of these are 
identical to paragraphs included in the letter to Abu Basir (SOCOM-2012-0000013). It is 
therefore possible that SOCOM-2012-0000017 was the draft that Bin Ladin enclosed to 
`Atiyya; in turn, `Atiyya used parts of SOCOM-2012-0000017 and transformed them 
into a coherent letter to Abu Basir, and this coherent letter is SOCOM-2012-0000016 – 
which is not signed – to share with Bin Ladin before sending. It is not clear whether Bin 
Ladin wanted `Atiyya to sign it in his or Bin Ladin’s name. 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
SOCOM-2012-0000018 
From: unknown based in Riyadh  
To: Honorable Shaykh (assessed to be Usama bin Ladin) 
Date: 08/20/1427 (c. 12-14 September 2006) 
 
SOCOM-2012-0000019 
From: no name listed (assessed to be Usama bin Ladin) 
To: Shaykh Mahmud 
Date: unknown 
 
The content of the letter makes it evident that it is authored by Bin Ladin. The letter is 
not dated, but its author refers to a report, “Nisa’ al-Qa`ida,” on al-Arabiya, dated 4 July 
2010. The letter then had to have been comp osed post 4 July 2010 but before 20 October 
2010 because parts of SOCOM-2012-0000015 (dated 20 October 2010) follow up on 
issues raised in SOCOM-2012-0000019. 