J a n  va n  T o l
with Mark Gunzinger, a ndrew Krepinevich, and Jim Thomas
C e n T e r  f o r  S T r a T e G i C  a n d  B u d G e T a r y  a S S e S S M e n T S
AirSea Battle
A Point-of-Departure 
Operational Concept



AirSeA BA ttle: A Point-of-De PA rture 
oP er A tion Al ConC e P t
Jan van Tol
with Mark Gunzinger, Andrew Krepinevich, and Jim Thomas
2010

© 2010 Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments. All rights reserved.

About the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments
The Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments (CSBA) is an independent, 
nonpartisan policy research institute established to promote innovative thinking 
and debate about national security strategy and investment options. CSBA’s goal is 
to enable policymakers to make informed decisions on matters of strategy,  security 
policy and resource allocation.
 CSBA provides timely, impartial and insightful analyses to  senior decision mak-
ers in the executive and legislative branches, as well as to the media and the broader 
national security community. CSBA encourages thoughtful participation in the de -
velopment of national security strategy and policy, and in the allocation of scarce 
human and capital resources. CSBA’s analysis and outreach focus on key questions 
related to existing and emerging threats to US national security. Meeting these 
challenges will require transforming the national security  establishment, and we 
are devoted to helping achieve this end.

A B out the Author S
Jan M. van Tol , Senior Fellow, is an expert on long-range strategic plan-
ning, military innovation, and wargaming. Prior to his retirement from the 
Navy in 2007, Captain van Tol served as special adviser in the Office of the 
Vice-President. He was a military assistant to Andrew W. Marshall at the 
Department of Defense’s Office of Net Assessment from 1993–96 and again 
from 2001–2003. He commanded three warships, the last of which, USS Essex 
(LHD-2), was a major participant in post-tsunami relief efforts off Sumatra, 
Indonesia. He holds degrees in philosophy and logic from the University 
of Massachusetts and in operations research from the Naval Postgraduate 
School, and graduated with distinction from the Naval War College.
Mark Gunzinger  joined CSBA as a Senior Fellow in February 2010 after 
a distinguished career in public service. He is the principal author or co-
author of five Defense Planning Guidance/Guidance for the Development 
of Forces directives, the key strategic planning guidance documents that 
shape DoD force planning. A retired Air Force Colonel and Command Pilot, 
he joined the Office of the Secretary of Defense in 2004, serving in sev -
eral key positions until his appointment in 2006 to Director for Defense 
Transformation, Force Planning and Resources on the National Security 
Council. He most recently served as senior advisor to the Air Force for the 
2010 QDR. Mr. Gunzinger holds a Master of Science degree in National 
Security Strategy from the National War College (1996), Master of Airpower 
Art and Science degree from the School of Advanced Air and Space Studies 
(1992), and Bachelor’s of Science in Chemistry from the United States Air 
Force Academy (1977). 
Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., President, is an expert on US military strat -
egy, policy and operations, military revolutions, and counterinsurgency. 
He gained extensive strategic planning experience on the personal staff of 
three secretaries of defense, in the Department of Defense’s Office of Net 
Assessment, and as a member of the Defense Policy Board, National Defense 
Panel, the Defense Science Board Task Force on Joint Experimentation, and 

the Joint Forces Command’s Transformation Advisory Board. He is the au -
thor of numerous CSBA reports on such topics as the Quadrennial Defense 
Review, alliances, the war in Iraq, and transformation of the US military. He 
received the 1987 Furniss Award for his book, The Army and Vietnam, and is 
the author of 7 Deadly Scenarios. A graduate of West Point, he retired from 
the US Army in 1993. Dr. Krepinevich holds a Master of Public Affairs and 
Ph.D. from Harvard University. 
Jim Thomas, Vice President for Studies, joined CSBA in April 2009. He pre-
viously served for thirteen years in a variety of policy, planning and resource 
analysis posts in the Department of Defense, culminating in his dual appoint-
ment as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Resources and Plans, and 
Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy. In these capacities, 
he was responsible for the development of the defense strategy, convention -
al force planning, resource assessment, and the oversight of war plans. Mr. 
Thomas spearheaded the 2005–2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), 
and was the principal author of the QDR Report to Congress. Prior to joining 
CSBA, he held the position of Vice President of Applied Minds, Inc., a private 
research and development company specializing in rapid, interdisciplinary 
technology prototyping. A former Reserve Naval officer, Mr. Thomas attained 
the rank of lieutenant commander. He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree with 
high honors from the College of William and Mary, a Masters degree from the 
University of Virginia, and a Masters degree from Johns Hopkins University 
School of Advanced International Studies.
Acknowledgments
The authors give special thanks to Chris Dougherty and Eric Lindsey for their 
research support, to Charlotte Brock and Eric Lindsey for their editorial and 
production support, and to Cutting Edge for their design. The analysis and 
findings presented here are solely the responsibility of the Center for Strategic 
and Budgetary Assessments and the authors.



con T en T s
ix e xecutive s ummary
1 Introduction
9 c hapter 1. What s hould an Air s ea Battle c oncept Do?
17 c hapter 2. o perational Problems Posed by Robust A2/AD s ystems
49 c hapter 3. The s ubstance of an Air s ea Battle c oncept
81 c hapter 4. c andidate Air s ea Battle “Piece-Parts”
95 c hapter 5. A Point-of-Departure c oncept
99 Glossary
103 Tab A. Memorandum of Agreement on U. s . Army-U. s .  
Air Force Joint Development Process
111 Tab B. Implementing an Air s ea Battle c oncept
 F IGUR es
12 Figure 1. Illustrative Distances in the Pacific Theater
13 Figure 2. The Two Island c hains and Major U s Bases  
in the Western Pacific
18 Figure 3. Range of PLA Missiles and s trike Aircraft
22 Figure 4. n otional “Keep- o ut” Zone

24 Figure 5. c ontrasting U s and PLA Approaches
37 Figure 6. e stimated PLA Ballistic Missile Totals (2010)
59 Figure 7 . c hinese Long-Range Radar and s pace Facilities and Air 
Defenses (2010)
65 Figure 8. PLA Ballistic Missile Brigades and Air Defenses (2010)
72 Figure 9. Primary Areas of U s s ubmarine and Anti- s ubmarine 
o perations
77 Figure 10. s hipping Routes to c hina
84 Figure 11. c urrent (and Prospective) U s Long-Range s trike s ystems

e xe C utive Summ A ry
The US military today faces an emerging major operational challenge, particu -
larly in the Western Pacific Theater of Operations (WPTO). The Chinese People’s 
Liberation Army’s (PLA) ongoing efforts to field robust anti-access/area-denial 
(A2/AD) capabilities are threatening to make US power projection increasingly 
risky and, in some cases and contexts, prohibitively costly. If this occurs, the 
United States will find itself effectively locked out of a region that has been de -
clared a vital security interest by every administration in the last sixty years. It 
will also leave longstanding US allies and partners vulnerable to aggression or, 
more likely, subtle forms of coercion. Consequently, the United States confronts 
a strategic choice: either accept this ongoing negative shift in the military bal -
ance, or explore options for offsetting it. This paper does just that. It offers a 
point-of-departure concept designed to maintain a stable military balance in the 
WPTO, one that offsets the PLA’s rapidly improving A2/AD capabilities. We have 
titled this concept “AirSea Battle,” in recognition that this theater of operations 
is dominated by naval and air forces, and the domains of space and cyberspace.
t he u nprovoked Ch A llenge
For well over half a century, the United States has been a global power with global 
interests. These interests include (but are not limited to) extending and defend -
ing democratic rule, maintaining access to key trading partners and resources, 
and reassuring those allies and partners who cooperate with the United States 
in defending common interests. The United States’ ability to project and sustain 
military power on a large scale has been, and remains, essential to this endeavor.
During much of the Cold War the Soviet Union posed a serious military 
challenge to US power-projection capabilities. Fortunately, the two superpow -
ers managed to avoid a major war. Nonetheless, the US military’s unsurpassed 

x  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
ability to project and sustain large forces overseas was demonstrated in limited 
wars in Korea, Vietnam and the Persian Gulf, as well as in numerous other, small-
er contingencies. In the decade or so following the Soviet Union’s collapse the US 
military’s power-projection capabilities in defense of the nation’s interests were 
effectively unchallenged.
This state of affairs is almost certainly ending, with significant consequences  
for US security. With the spread of advanced military technologies and their 
exploitation by other militaries, especially China’s PLA, the US military’s abil -
ity to operate in an area of vital interest, the Western Pacific, is being increas -
ingly challenged. While Beijing professes benign intentions, it is an old military 
maxim that since intentions can change overnight — especially in authoritarian 
regimes — one must focus on the military capabilities of other states. 
Currently there is little indication that China intends to alter its efforts to cre -
ate “no-go zones” out to the second island chain, which extends as far as Guam 
and New Guinea. Unless Beijing diverts from its current course of action, or 
Washington undertakes actions to offset or counterbalance the effects of the 
PLA’s military buildup, the cost incurred by the US military to operate in the 
Western Pacific will likely rise sharply, perhaps to prohibitive levels, and much 
sooner than many expect. 
Hence the United States’ strategic choice: to risk a loss of military access to 
areas vital to its security  — and those of key allies and partners to whom it is 
committed by treaty or law  — or to explore options that can preserve the stable 
military balance that has seen the region enjoy a period of unparalleled peace 
and prosperity.
Recently the United States Air Force and Navy agreed to address the issue. Both 
Service chiefs are committed to pursuing a new operational concept called AirSea 
Battle which appears designed to assess how US power-projection capabilities can 
be preserved in the face of growing anti-access/area-denial challenges, to include 
the most formidable challenge, which is posed by the Chinese military. 
This is not to suggest that the United States seeks a confrontation with China, 
let alone a war. Indeed, even during the period of unparalleled US military dom -
inance following the Cold War, the United States sought to engage China, not 
attack or coerce it. A “roll-back” of the PLA’s military power is not the objective 
here. Nor is containment of China proposed. Rather, we advocate simply offset -
ting the PLA’s unprovoked and unwarranted military buildup. Doing so requires 
an examination of how the US military might minimize Beijing’s incentives to 
achieve its geopolitical ambitions through aggression or, more likely, coercion. 
This requires that the US military sustain its ability to project sufficient power 
in the region to defend US interests and protect its friends and allies. This is the 
key to maintaining the stable military balance that has preserved the peace in 
the Western Pacific. 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept xi
Wh A t Should A n AirSe A  B A ttle Con C ept d o?
An AirSea Battle concept first and foremost must address high-end military op -
erations in the WPTO. To be sure, some of the specific initiatives deriving from a 
viable concept likely would be applicable elsewhere against other A2/AD capable 
adversaries, just as the Army and Air Force employed AirLand Battle principles 
designed to deter the Soviet Union in Central Europe very successfully in both 
Gulf Wars. However, just as the Soviet Union represented the most severe chal -
lenge to the US Army and Air Force during the Cold War, today the PLA repre -
sents by far the most serious A2/AD challenge to the Air Force and Navy. 
As a doctrine for the operational level of war, AirSea Battle should not be seen 
as a “war-winning” concept in itself. Nor should it be viewed through the lens of 
a particular scenario, for example, the defense of Taiwan. Instead, it should be 
considered as helping to set the conditions at the operational level to sustain a 
stable, favorable conventional military balance throughout the Western Pacific 
region. This means maintaining an ability to deter China from acts of aggression 
or coercion in that region and, if necessary, to respond effectively in the event 
deterrence fails.
AirSea Battle must support overall US strategy for preserving stability in the 
WPTO. It must address the critical emerging challenges and opportunities that 
the PLA’s projected A2/AD capabilities will present, and to which currently en -
visioned US forces do not appear to offer a suitable response. It must account 
for the WPTO’s geophysical features, particularly its vast distances compared to 
Europe or the Persian Gulf region and the scarcity of US forward bases, which 
comprise a small number of very large and effectively undefended sites located on 
a handful of isolated islands, all within range of the PLA’s rapidly growing missile 
forces and other strike systems. 
AirSea Battle must account for geostrategic factors, such as US treaty and legal 
obligations to defend formal allies and friends in the region, as well. Even more 
importantly, AirSea Battle is not a US-only concept . Allies such as Japan and 
Australia, and possibly others, must play important enabling roles in sustaining 
a stable military balance.
o per A tion A l p ro B lem S  
p o S ed B y A2/A d  Sy S tem S
In crafting an AirSea Battle concept, it is necessary to identify specific operational- 
level problems a robust A2/AD system would present over the planning horizon, 
which for DoD is typically the next ten to twenty years. This paper assumes that 
China will continue enhancing its A2/AD capabilities. Chinese military writ -
ings suggest that in the event of conflict, the PLA would conduct large-scale 

xii  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
preemptive attacks designed to inflict severe damage on US forces based or oper-
ating in the WPTO; keep other US air and naval forces well out of range or unable 
to penetrate into the homeland; disrupt US command and control (C2) networks; 
and heavily constrain US operational logistics by destroying major supply nodes 
and the relatively few US logistics ships. The overall Chinese strategy appears 
designed to inflict substantial losses on US forces in a very short period of time, 
thereby lengthening US operational timelines and highlighting the United States’ 
inability to defend its allies. Once this is accomplished, China would assume the 
strategic defense and confront the United States with the prospect of either pay -
ing a very high (and perhaps prohibitive) cost for reversing its gains, or accepting 
Beijing’s fait accompli.
US ground, air and naval forces have long been accustomed to operating from 
sanctuary. Their main operating bases, ports and facilities have been largely in -
vulnerable to serious conventional attack since World War II. Navy surface and 
carrier aviation forces are accustomed to operating from sanctuary at sea, enabled 
by the near-absence of hostile long-range detection and targeting capabilities 
and capable enemy navies. And US communications, ISR, and precision-guid -
ed munitions (PGM) are heavily dependent on high-bandwidth connectivity for 
command and control, target detection, precision strike, and post-strike battle 
damage assessment operations. This connectivity is highly reliant on long-haul 
space-based assets that have hitherto also been accorded sanctuary status, save 
for the occasional modest localized jamming. The same can be said with respect 
to cyberspace which, despite numerous and consistent probes by China and other 
states, and by nonstate entities and individuals, has never been seriously com-
promised. The growing Chinese A2/AD capabilities, to include its cyber weapons, 
threaten to violate these long-standing sanctuaries. As this occurs, the conse -
quences for US forces would include:
>> Loss of forward sanctuaries in physical domains and virtual domains (includ -
ing space, cyberspace, and the electromagnetic spectrum); 
>> Denial of access to areas of operations; and consequently
>> Loss of strategic and operational initiative.
While the favorable, stable military balance that has existed in the Western 
Pacific for the last two decades is deteriorating, neither the Defense Department’s 
planning nor its defense program have been sufficiently modified to account 
for this fact. Thus DoD continues emphasizing investments that assume it will 
enjoy sanctuary status as described above, such as short-range rather than long-
range strike systems; vulnerable communications satellites; and elaborate — but 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept xiii
fragile — battle networks. This is done at the expense of investing in (among 
other badly needed capabilities) penetrating, long-endurance ISR and strike 
capabilities, aerial tankers, forward base hardening, the combat logistics force 
(CLF) and directed-energy weapons for missile defense.
t he Su BS t A n C e of A n AirSe A  B A ttle Con C ept
Our candidate AirSea Battle operational concept describes a WPTO military 
campaign against the challenge described above, to include its principal com-
ponents, required missions and tasks, how these would be accomplished, and by 
what forces. Its successful execution would depend on myriad factors, to include 
the active and substantial particpation of key allies and partners, and the Defense 
Department’s ability to make significant changes in its program of record.
The AirSea Battle campaign has two stages. The initial stage, commencing 
with the outbreak of hostilities, comprises four distinct lines of operation:
 
>> Withstanding the initial attack and limiting damage to US and allied forces 
and bases;
>> Executing a blinding campaign against PLA battle networks;
>> Executing a suppression campaign against PLA long-range ISR and strike 
systems;
>> Seizing and sustaining the initiative in the air, sea, space and cyber domains.
These lines of operation and their key sub-components have differing execu -
tion timelines. While some would unfold in parallel, the initiation of others would 
depend on progress being made in other aspects of the campaign. Many forces 
and capabilities would be in high demand across multiple lines of operation, forc-
ing tough decisions regarding their employment.
The follow-on second stage would comprise various operations designed to 
support US strategy by creating options to resolve a prolonged conventional con-
flict on favorable terms. These would include:
>> Executing a protracted campaign that includes sustaining and exploiting the 
initiative in various domains;
>> Conducting “distant blockade” operations;
>> Sustaining operational logistics; and
>> Ramping up industrial production (especially precision-guided munitions).

xiv  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
There would not necessarily be a clean break between stages. Some follow-on 
operations would simply be continuations of those already ongoing. Nor would 
there be a clear temporal distinction between stages, in that certain second-stage 
operations may be conducted while first-stage operations are under way. 
C A ndid A te AirSe A  B A ttle i niti A tive S
Neither the Defense Department’s Program of Record forces and modernization 
profile, nor current Air Force and Navy concepts of operations accord sufficient 
weight to the capabilities needed to execute an AirSea Battle campaign success -
fully along the lines of the one described in this report. This report recommends 
multiple initiatives the Air Force and the Navy should undertake, mostly on a 
dual-Service basis, to field the necessary forces and capabilities for AirSea Battle. 
These include initiatives on:
>> Mitigating the missile threat to Guam and other selected bases, and to mari -
time forces;
>> Correcting the PLA-US imbalance in long-range strike for high-value and/or 
time-sensitive targets, to include developing and fielding greater penetrating 
and stand-off long-range ISR and precision strike capabilities and capacities;
>> Enhancing capabilities for undersea operations, to include submarines, sub -
mersible robotic systems, and mines;
>> Offsetting the vulnerabilities of space-based C2, communications, and ISR 
capabilities and capacities, to include fielding high-capacity airborne C3 relay 
networks to back up space-based systems;
>> Emphasizing future standardization and interoperability of data links, data 
structures, and C2 and ISR infrastructures; 
>> Increasing emphasis on and investment in cross-Service electronic warfare 
capabilities and capacities;
>> Enhancing cyber warfare offensive and defensive capabilities; and
>> Developing and fielding directed-energy weapons.
t he Core of AirSe A  B A ttle 
AirSea Battle rests fundamentally on the tight integration of Air Force and  
Navy operations in the WPTO—each Service plays a key enabling role for the 
other in accomplishing critical missions. Some important instances of mutual 
support include:

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept xv
>> Air Force counter-space operations to blind PLA space-based ocean surveil -
lance systems, thereby preventing the PLA from targeting high-value Navy 
surface units, including carriers, thereby enabling Navy operational freedom 
of maneuver in the maritime domain (Navy platforms could aid counter-space 
operations in support of the Air Force space control missions if required);
>> Navy AEGIS ships supplementing other missile-defense assets in defense of 
Air Force forward bases and Japan;
>> Navy submarine-based and carrier-based (if operating long-range air plat -
forms) ISR and strike support against PLA IADS systems to degrade them and 
thereby enable Air Force strikes;
>> Air Force long-range penetrating strike operations to destroy PLA ground-
based long-range maritime surveillance systems and long-range ballistic mis -
sile launchers (both anti-ship and land-attack) to expand the Navy’s freedom 
of maneuver and reduce strikes on US and allied bases and facilities;
>> Navy carrier-based fighters’ progressive rollback of PLA manned and un -
manned airborne ISR platforms and fighters to enable the forward operation 
of Air Force tankers and other support aircraft; and 
>> Air Force support of the ASW campaign through offensive mining by stealthy 
bombers and persistent non-stealthy bomber strike support of Navy ships 
conducting distant blockade operations.
n eeded: A Sen S e of u rgen C y
If a stable military balance is to be preserved in the WPTO, the United States and 
its regional allies should begin now to develop an AirSea Battle concept and field 
the forces needed to execute it. The PLA’s ongoing military buildup shows no signs 
of abating, and is of growing concern to regional governments. Adding to this 
unease is the perception that despite Defense Secretary Robert Gates’ efforts to 
forge a balanced defense posture, at present the balance seems to be between ad-
dressing the demands of modern irregular warfare and continuing to field forces 
more designed for waging the kinds of security threats that are fading into history 
rather than those now emerging, especially in the form of A2/AD challenges. 
There are encouraging signs the Department of Defense intends to place seri -
ous emphasis and persistent focus on developing the AirSea Battle concept as 
a signal of US commitment to security in the Western Pacific and to reassure 
regional partners in the near-term. Secretary Gates has authorized the Air Force 
and Navy to craft an AirSea Battle concept, and the chiefs of both Services have 
endorsed the effort. 

xvi  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
Finally, AirSea Battle should be encouraged for reasons independent of the 
WPTO. The ability of the Air Force and Navy to execute highly integrated opera -
tions will enhance their effectiveness across a range of contingencies, while the 
long-term cost efficiencies appear highly desirable from a budgetary perspective. 
However, while such reasons might be sufficient to justify AirSea Battle, it is the 
growing military imbalance in the Western Pacific that makes it necessary .

This paper contends that the US military today faces an emerging major opera -
tional problem, particularly in the Western Pacific, as the fielding of robust anti-
access/area-denial (A2/AD)1 systems and operational approaches over time will 
make the current “American way of war” increasingly risky and, in some cases 
and contexts, prohibitively costly. Today the Air Force and the Navy each have 
their own largely independent plans and doctrine designed to preserve a stable 
military balance and, failing that, prevail in potential conflicts involving China 
that could arise in the Western Pacific.
2 It will be argued here that confronting 
this problem successfully will require integrating many of the Air Force and Navy 
operations central to operating successfully in an A2/AD environment. The paper 
will offer some thoughts on key elements comprising an AirSea Battle concept, 
and conclude with some reflections on what it might take to implement it. 
1 For the purposes of this paper, anti-access (A2) capabilities are defined as those associated with 
denying access to major fixed-point targets, especially large forward bases, while area-denial 
(AD) capabilities are those that threaten mobile targets over an area of operations, principally 
maritime forces, to include those beyond the littorals. See Andrew F. Krepinevich, Why AirSea 
Battle? (Washington, DC: CSBA, 2010), pp. 8–11.
2 This is not to say that the AirSea Battle concept presented in this report would be applicable only 
to the Western Pacific Theater of Operations (WPTO). The concept is designed with an eye to -
ward combating advanced A2/AD capabilities, in which the People’s Liberation Army is by far the 
leader. Just as AirLand Battle, a 1980s concept for combating the threat posed to Western Europe 
by the Soviet Union, was employed with great effectiveness in the Middle East during the First 
Gulf War, so too AirSea Battle could prove very effective in a range of contingencies. However, it 
is designed for the most potentially demanding operational contingency, the WPTO. 
i ntrodu C tion 

2  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
B AC kground
For well over half a century, the United States’ position as a global power has been 
underwritten by its ability to project and sustain military power worldwide on a 
large scale to protect and advance its global interests and those of its allies and 
security partners. During much of the Cold War the Soviet Union posed a seri -
ous military challenge to US power-projection capabilities. While the two super -
powers managed to avoid a major war, the US military’s unsurpassed ability to 
project and sustain large forces overseas was demonstrated repeatedly in limited 
wars in Korea, Vietnam and the Persian Gulf, as well as in numerous other small-
er contingencies. For the two decades after the Cold War’s end, the US military’s 
power-projection capabilities were effectively unchallenged.
Today, various long-term trends suggest the US near-monopoly on over -
whelming conventional military power is steadily eroding. The ongoing rise of 
other states in various measures of their “comprehensive national power (CNP)”
3 
including their political, economic and technological dimensions is readily ap -
parent both in absolute and relative terms. In some cases, particularly that of the 
People’s Republic of China, impressive economic progress over two decades has 
enabled the acquisition of substantial military capabilities, quantitatively and, 
increasingly, qualitatively. 
Moreover, various foreign militaries and other observers have closely studied 
“the American way of war” as it was dramatically demonstrated in recent years. 4 
While their motivations for acquiring advanced military capabilities may vary, 
it is clear that some foreign states’ military investment programs have been de -
signed with an eye towards countering US military power projection, should it be 
directed against them.
The case of China is particularly noteworthy for several reasons. First, the 
Chinese decision to initiate large annual increases in military spending, which 
continue unabated through the present, appears to have been taken in direct re -
sponse to the US intervention in the 1995–1996 Taiwan Strait crisis, during which 
the United States sent two carrier strike groups to the area in response to Chinese 
ballistic missile firings near Taiwan. Second, China’s remarkable economic per -
formance of the past two decades has underwritten its financial ability to acquire 
and sustain a large and increasingly sophisticated military establishment. Third, 
Chinese technological prowess continues to increase dramatically, as illustrated  
3 CNP “generally means the sum total of the powers or strengths of a country in economy, mili -
tary affairs, science & technology, education and resources and its influence (China Institute 
of Contemporary International Relations, 2000)” See Hu Angang, “The Rise of Modern China: 
Comprehensive National Power (CNP) and Grand Strategy,” http://www.irchina.org/en/pdf/ 
hag.pdf. 
4 See, for example, Brigadier V.K. Nair, War in the Gulf: Lessons for the Third World (New Delhi, 
India: Lancer International, 1992). Certainly the Chinese military paid close attention to the ef -
fectiveness of US operations during the First Gulf War as well.
Various long-term 
trends suggest the 
US near-monopoly 
on overwhelming 
military power is 
steadily eroding.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 3
by its expanding ability to build (and increasingly design) indigenous high- 
technology products, including the production of airliners, automobiles, informa-
tion technology, and space systems. Fourth, whereas Chinese military equipment 
traditionally was either foreign-bought or built under license, it is increasingly 
being built indigenously.
5 Fifth, the growing sophistication of Chinese weap -
ons and the supporting doctrine, organizational, training, materiel, leadership, 
personnel and facilities (DOTMLPF) and the professionalization of the People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) has been amply documented.
6 
Most importantly, though, many of the capabilities the Chinese military is 
acquiring reflect a deliberate anti-access and area-denial (A2/AD) operational 
approach that is specifically designed to keep the military forces of the United 
States and other potentially unfriendly powers from approaching close to China. 
The PRC appears to be purposefully developing and fielding offensive capabili -
ties that challenge US freedom of action in all domains — space, cyberspace, at sea 
and in the air.
 Chinese military writings strongly support this proposition, despite 
the frequent protestations by China’s leaders that China intends to pursue only a 
“peaceful rise,” and that therefore its growing military capabilities are no threat. 
As Chinese military capabilities steadily develop, the US ability to project pow-
er in the Western Pacific and the credibility of its guarantees to regional security 
partners will inevitably be questioned. Moreover, specific capabilities being de -
veloped and fielded by the PLA7 threaten to turn many of the US military’s most 
expensive and hitherto most formidable platforms into “wasting assets” — that 
is, put them at such risk of damage, loss or ineffectiveness in the event of conflict 
that they effectively become unusable.
8 
This is not to suggest that war between China and the United States is inevi -
table or even likely. Indeed, states and non-state actors in other regions present 
significant actual threats that seem far more immediate to US security interests. 
However, some of the same trends emerging so strongly in China also apply to 
them, particularly the proliferation of technologies with military applications 
that could increasingly threaten US military power projection and forward pres -
ence operations. Thus it is prudent to assume that, in the future, US forces will 
5 See, for example, “Russian arms exports to China in collapse — report,” January 29, 2008, at http://
www.forbes.com/feeds/afx/2008/01/29/afx4585077.html, and Steven Blank, Rosoboroneksport: 
Arms Sales and the Structure of Russian Defense Industry , Strategic Studies Institute, US Army 
War College, January 2007, p. 28,42, at http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pdffiles/
PUB749.pdf. 
6 See, for example, the Department of Defense’s Annual Reports to Congress on “Military Power of 
the People’s Republic of China.” 
7 The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) refers to all components of the Chinese military, including 
the PLA Air Force (PLAAF) and the PLA Navy (PLAN). This paper uses the term “PLA” to refer to 
any or all of these components, depending on the context.
8 For a detailed analysis, see Andrew Krepinevich, “The Pentagon’s Wasting Assets,” Foreign 
Affairs, July–August 2009.
Many of the 
capabilities the 
Chinese military is 
acquiring reflect 
a deliberate 
anti-access and 
area-denial (A2/
AD) operational 
approach.

4  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
face at least some of the elements of an A2/AD operational approach in contexts 
other than that of the Western Pacific. It is, however, in that theater that the A2/
AD challenge is most clearly emerging. 
The challenge posed by rising powers is not new. A century ago, Great Britain, 
then the leading world power, confronted a rising Germany that, while professing 
friendship, had started to build a powerful navy that had the potential to one day 
threaten Britain’s traditional command of the seas. In January 1907, Eyre Crowe, 
an official in the Foreign Office, wrote an influential memorandum to the British 
Foreign Minister, laying out the dilemma:
If it be considered necessary to formulate and accept a theory that will fit all the 
ascertained facts of German foreign policy, the choice must lie between the two 
hypotheses here presented: Either Germany is definitely aiming at a general po -
litical hegemony and maritime ascendency, threatening the independence of her 
neighbours and ultimately the existence of England; [o]r Germany, free from any 
such clear-cut ambition, and thinking for the present merely of using her legiti -
mate position and influence as one of the leading Powers in the council of nations, 
is seeking to promote her foreign commerce, spread the benefits of German culture, 
extend the scope of her national energies, and create fresh German interests all 
over the world wherever and whenever a peaceful opportunity offers... In either case 
Germany would clearly be wise to build as powerful a navy as she can afford. The 
above alternatives seem to exhaust the possibilities of explaining the given facts.
9
As Paul Kennedy writes:
Would Germany be content solely to expand economically, thus contributing greatly 
to the general level of Europe’s prosperity; or would her rulers seek to translate this 
industrial strength into political advantage, by forcing her neighbours to become 
satellite states, by constructing an enormous battlefleet for possible future use, and 
by demanding colonial concessions under the threat of taking military action in 
Europe? It was impossible for Britain’s leaders to know the answer to these ques -
tions — even Crowe’s 1907 memorandum postulated a policy of general, non-violent 
growth for Germany as an alternative to “aiming at general political hegemony and 
maritime ascendancy” — and it was therefore necessary for London both to keep 
a watchful eye upon Berlin and to be willing to explore all occasions which might 
safely lead to the improvement of relations.
10 
Today, it is incontestable that the only state with the long-term potential to 
pose a serious and sustained challenge to US influence and power projection in 
its region for the foreseeable future is China. Complicating matters is China’s lack 
of transparency regarding the basis for its ongoing defense buildup, which has 
9 The complete memorandum text may be found at http://tmh.floonet.net/pdf/eyre_crowe_
memo.pdf. 
10 Paul M. Kennedy, The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism: 1860–1914 , (London: The Ashfield 
Press, 1987), pp.316–317.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 5
been noted by successive US secretaries of defense and other American leaders. 
The situation is exacerbated further still as China is the only great power that has 
failed to embrace democracy. Given these considerations, it becomes imperative 
to assess how the US military might sustain its ability to successfully project mil -
itary power in the region in order to defend US interests and protect its friends 
and allies. 11 This is the key to maintaining the stable military balance that has 
preserved the peace in the Western Pacific for a generation while also enabling 
China to enjoy a period of unprecedented peace and prosperity. Although China’s 
intentions may be peaceful, failure to maintain such a balance may invite acts of 
aggression or, more likely, coercion and “Finlandization.”12
The potential for a mismatch between the capabilities required to project 
power and conduct air, sea, space and cyberspace operations successfully in 
the face of an evolving and increasingly robust Chinese A2/AD network on the 
one hand, and currently planned US military capabilities, force structure and 
operational approaches on the other, clearly suggests the need to explore a new 
concept, “AirSea Battle,” to address this coming challenge.
Air lA nd B A ttle AS  m et A phor
The AirLand Battle concept was developed by the Army and Air Force in the late 
1970s and implemented in the early 1980s in response to a daunting operational 
problem faced by NATO on the European Central Front. By the mid-1970s, the 
growing Soviet conventional superiority on the Central Front, coupled with the 
“hollow Army” that emerged in the post-Vietnam period, raised concerns over 
the stability of the Central European military balance. The rapidity and destruc -
tiveness of the 1973 Yom Kippur War revealed that advances in weapons technol-
ogy could make modern combined-arms conflicts short and brutal affairs. By the 
late 1970s, developments such as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan suggested 
the extent to which Soviet military technology had closed the quality gap with the 
US military while it was preoccupied with Vietnam.
Both the Army and the Air Force had their own largely independent plans and 
doctrine for a Central Front war against Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces. But it was 
increasingly obvious that such a bifurcated approach was insufficient to deal with 
the Soviet challenge. Thus the Army and Air Force confronted a situation where:
11 Note that “power projection” refers both to the ability to deploy forces and capabilities into theater 
and the freedom to maneuver and act in all operational domains.
12 “Finlandization” refers to neutralization of a small country by a superpower, using conciliation, as 
the former Soviet Union did in relation to Finland. See Collins English Dictionary — Complete and 
Unabridged 6th Edition 2003. © HarperCollins Publishers 2003.

6  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
>> NATO would fight badly outnumbered;
>> US and allied forces might not have sufficient qualitative superiority to offset 
their quantitative disadvantage;
>> Contemporary military technology had seemingly increased the lethality of 
battle while decreasing its likely duration;
>> Large Soviet and Warsaw Pact follow-on forces would be able to rapidly exploit 
weaknesses at the Forward Edge of the Battle Area (FEBA) through newly cre-
ated formations such as Operational Maneuver Groups; and 
>> NATO political imperatives precluded any sort of defense-in-depth.
AirLand Battle sought to revitalize and refocus the Army and Air Force after 
a decade of irregular warfare in Vietnam and the concomitant erosion of their 
conventional warfighting capabilities. Enabled by new intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance (ISR) platforms that could “see deep,” while new weapons 
would allow them to “shoot deep,” senior leaders in both Services deliberated 
new concepts such as the “extended battlefield,” which included elements of time 
and air-ground integration, and “fighting deep” beyond the FEBA. Cooperation 
between the two Services was seen as fundamental to successful defense of the 
Central Front in the face of the Soviet threat.
Together, the Air Force and Army envisaged an “extended battlefield” geo -
graphically and temporally. Geographically, this extended battlefield would 
stretch up to 150km beyond the FEBA. Temporally, the ability to attack forces 
at such distances translated into days of delay for enemy forces to be reinforced, 
which would influence actions in the close-in fight along the FEBA. Air Force 
strike aircraft, Army indirect fires, and Special Forces would conduct rear-area 
attacks and interdict second-echelon forces far behind the FEBA, thereby delay -
ing their reinforcement of the enemy vanguard and returning the initiative to US 
and allied forces. This was the essence of AirLand Battle. 
Developing an AirLand Battle concept was considered vital because it would 
provide both a foundation for future Army and Air Force battlefield cooperation 
and the rationale for a new generation of capabilities that would allow US and 
NATO forces to “look deep and shoot deep.”
13 Indeed, in the mid-1980s, the chiefs 
of staff of the Army and Air Force published a Memorandum of Agreement on “US 
Army-US Air Force Joint Force Development Process.” Better known as the “31 
Initiatives” memo, it specified how the Army and Air Force would jointly develop 
a series of capabilities to achieve synergies in procurement and operations.
14 
13 Donn A. Starry, “Extending the Battlefield,” Military Review (March 1981), p.33.
14 The memo appears in Tab A. It can be accessed at http://www.history.army.mil/books/dahsum/
1984/appA.htm.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 7
While some of the initiatives were simply commitments to study a particular 
issue jointly, others had important programmatic outcomes.
In addition to spurring the development of new American tactics and weapons 
systems, the AirLand Battle doctrine also facilitated the development of a similar 
NATO operational concept known as Follow-on Forces Attack (FOFA). 15 In other 
words, AirLand Battle changed the way the defensive problem on NATO’s Central 
Front was viewed, and spurred the development of new platforms, sensors, weap-
ons, and tactics. These changes, in turn, transformed the way that the Army, Air 
Force, and NATO allies planned to deter and if necessary fight the Warsaw Pact 
military forces.
f rom Air lA nd to AirSe A  B A ttle
In practice, the AirLand Battle doctrine ultimately was not a true Joint, or even 
multi-Service, doctrine. Some soldiers and airmen shared a common vision, but 
this vision did not extend throughout either the Army or the Air Force. Most of 
the “31 Initiatives” were not implemented jointly, though the Army or the Air 
Force substantively implemented many on an individual Service basis. Indeed, 
while there was Air Force-Army cooperation, AirLand Battle was primarily an 
Army, not Air Force, doctrine. Much of the subsequent lack of follow-up action 
could be attributed to inherent Service parochialism and bureaucratic opposi -
tion.
16 Thus AirLand Battle should not necessarily be considered as a “tight meta-
phor” for an AirSea Battle concept in the sense of being a successful model for 
inter-Service cooperation. 
Rather, the real metaphor is the intellectual transition from identification of a 
major emerging operational challenge to:
>> Accepting the clear need for new operational approaches and supporting op -
erational concepts in the face of evidence that current ones will likely be insuf-
ficient (or increasingly suboptimal) for addressing new and more threatening 
challenges at the operational level of war to;
>> Investigating and assessing potential alternative multi-Service operational 
concepts to; 
>> Developing guidance for shifts in procurement of capabilities and capacities to 
support the most promising operational concept.
15 See US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Technologies for NATO’s Follow-on Forces 
Attack Concept (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July 1986), available online at 
http://www.fas.org/ota/reports/ 8630.pdf, accessed on March 26, 2008. 
16 Indeed, there has been considerable skepticism of the ASB concept expressed by Air Force and 
Navy participants in recent discussions for arguably the same reasons. In particular, the severe 
historical circumstances that precipitated the thinking that ultimately led to ALB may not be 
perceived by important actors to exist at present. 

8  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
Just as AirLand Battle doctrine development was spurred by the shifting 
military balance in Central Europe, a viable AirSea Battle concept must address 
the implications of a shifting military balance in the Western Pacific. The first 
paper of this two part-series described China’s already burgeoning A2/AD ca -
pabilities in some detail. 17 This report examines how the US military might ad -
dress this challenge by presenting a point-of-departure AirSea Battle operational 
concept, including some candidate metaphorical equivalents to AirLand Battle’s 
“31 Initiatives,” with the goal of sparking some useful debate over this growing 
problem for US security.
17 For a more detailed discussion of the need for an AirSea Battle concept, see Andrew Krepinevich, 
Why AirSea Battle?  (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 
Washington, DC, 2010).

An AirSea Battle concept first and foremost must address high-end military oper-
ations in the Western Pacific Theater of Operations (WPTO) as opposed to being 
a generalized concept. To be sure, some of the specific initiatives deriving from 
a viable concept likely would be applicable elsewhere. However, it seems equal -
ly clear that, absent the emerging operational problems in the Western Pacific, 
there would be considerably less impetus to investigate the risks and opportuni -
ties associated with such a concept.
18 Moreover, it seems unlikely that many of 
the initiatives suggested in this paper would be accorded serious consideration, 
let alone be implemented, absent the specific emerging challenges to the Western 
Pacific military balance. 
It must be emphasized that an AirSea Battle concept is not about war with 
China. Nor is it about “rolling back” Chinese influence, or even about “contain -
ing” China. Rather, it should be seen as part of a larger “offsetting strategy” that 
acknowledges that China’s tremendous economic achievement simultaneously 
enables it to acquire formidable military capabilities. AirSea Battle further af -
firms the continuing US vital interest in maintaining American influence in the 
East Asian region to include preserving a stable military balance — a balance 
that has enabled twenty years of peace and unprecedented prosperity in the re -
gion, with China its greatest beneficiary. One of the key elements of such an off -
setting strategy is demonstrating a continuing US ability to reassure allies and 
partners in the region that they will not be the victims of coercion or a form 
of “Finlandization” on the part of China.
19 To accomplish this, the United States 
18 It should be noted that the joint Air Force-Navy AirSea Battle Concept Development Group (CDG) 
established in mid-2009 to develop an AirSea Battle concept has a wider, more generalized con -
ception of what an eventual concept or doctrine should address. 
19 This is already a matter of concern for some friendly governments in the region. See, for example, 
Mark Thomson, “Trends in US defence spending: implications for Australia,” Policy Analysis Nr. 
56, Australian Strategic Policy Institute, March, 16, 2010.
c h APT e R  1  >  Wh A t Should A n AirSe A  B A ttle Con C ept d o?

10  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
must have a demonstrable ability to intervene effectively in the event of a military 
confrontation or even conventional conflict with China. Although neither side 
desires such an outcome, it could result as a consequence of Beijing’s efforts to 
bring about a major shift in the military balance. The continuing demonstration 
of US ability to dominate at any level of escalation is critical to maintaining crisis 
stability in the event of Sino-US tensions or confrontation. Thus AirSea Battle 
should be seen as an important contribution to prevention of Sino-US conflict 
by — somewhat paradoxically — increasing confidence on the part of all regional 
actors that China would ultimately fail to realize its objectives through military 
aggression or coercion. 
AirSea Battle, as a doctrine for the operational level of war, cannot and should 
not be seen as a “war-winning” concept in itself. Nor should it be viewed through 
the lens of a particular scenario, for example, the defense of Taiwan. Instead, it 
should be considered as helping to set the conditions at the military operational 
level to sustain a stable, favorable conventional military balance throughout the 
Western Pacific region. This means maintaining an ability to deter China from 
acts of aggression or coercion in that region and, if necessary, to respond in the 
event deterrence fails. 
An AirSea Battle concept must do the following:
sTRAT e GI c Leve L .  In the event of actual conflict, AirSea Battle must support 
the United States’ strategy for preserving stability in the Western Pacific. While 
discussion of any such wider war strategy lies beyond the scope of this paper, the 
Western Pacific components of any plausible strategy would include defending 
US territory (e.g., Guam) and bases/facilities; defending key allies; protecting US 
and friendly state seaborne commerce; interdicting Chinese seaborne commerce; 
neutralizing/defeating Chinese military forces; and conducting other power- 
projection operations throughout the Western Pacific as directed.
To preserve stability, AirSea Battle should contribute to a cost-imposing strat-
egy vis-à-vis the Chinese military, inducing or encouraging the PLA to invest in 
more costly counters in areas less dangerous to US forces and operations.
20
oP e RATI on AL  Leve L .  AirSea Battle must address the critical emerging challeng-
es and opportunities that projected Chinese A2/AD capabilities will present, and 
to which currently envisioned US forces do not appear to offer a suitable response. 
In general, since A2/AD capabilities seek to impose ever-greater constraints on 
US operational freedom of action, an AirSea Battle concept must address how the 
challenge can be offset or, failing that, how freedom of action can be regained in 
20 See, for example, Robert Martinage, Dissuasion Strategy , brief to Congress, May 6, 2008, accessed 
at http://www.csbaonline.org/4Publications/PubLibrary/S.20080506.Dissuasion_Strateg/S.  
20080506.Dissuasion_Strateg.pdf.
AirSea Battle, as 
a doctrine for the 
operational level 
of war, cannot and 
should not be seen 
as a “war-winning” 
concept in itself.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 11
at least selected temporal/positional aspects for purposes of power projection. 
Specific challenges posed by A2/AD capabilities will be discussed more fully  
in the next chapter.
T A c TI c AL  Leve L .  The expected character of future combat operations in the 
Western Pacific suggests that the outcomes of certain interactions at the tactical 
level (e.g., offensive missiles versus missile defenses) could have operational-
level consequences. An AirSea Battle concept must therefore address the most  
salient of these.
k ey g eophy S i CA l fAC tor S
A theater’s geophysical features are necessarily a key factor shaping an operation-
al concept. Given that the United States has neither the desire nor the capability 
to conduct major land operations in China proper, the geography of the Western 
Pacific theater dictates that it is primarily an aerospace and maritime theater 
dominated by the Air Force and Navy. 21 Moreover, the theater’s size is enormous 
compared to Europe or the Persian Gulf regions (see Figure 1).
PLA military theorists see two key island chains as forming the geographic 
basis for expanding China’s maritime sphere of influence. While these have not 
been formally defined as such by PLA leaders, the “First Island Chain” is generally 
thought to run from the Japanese main islands through the Ryukyus, Taiwan, 
the Philippines, and Borneo, thus roughly bounding the East and South China 
Seas. The “Second Island Chain” stretches from the north at the Bonin Islands 
southward through the Marianas, Guam, and the Caroline Islands, encompassing 
the western Philippine Sea (see Figure 2).
The US military faces a major basing disadvantage in the Western Pacific. 
Apart from increasingly vulnerable bases and facilities on allied territory, bases 
and facilities on US territory in the Western Pacific comprise a small number 
of very large and effectively undefended sites located on a handful of isolated 
islands, all within range of PLA weapons systems. China, by contrast, as an il -
lustrative comparison, has some twenty-seven airbases within range of Taiwan 
alone, while its mobile ballistic missile forces enjoy the benefit of the country’s 
great size and strategic depth.
21 This is not to say that neither the Army nor the Marine Corps have a role to play in AirSea Battle. 
For comparison, even though the AirLand Battle concept was primarily an Army and Air Force ef -
fort, the Navy also had a role to play in securing the sea lines of communication across the Atlantic 
Ocean and preparing for what was called the Outer Air Battle with Soviet air forces. Likewise, 
the Marines had contingency plans to reinforce Norwegian forces to preclude a Soviet move in 
Scandinavia to turn NATO’s northern flank. Similarly, as the core features of AirSea Battle are 
established, they will likely have significant implications for the two ground Services.
The US military 
faces a major basing 
disadvantage in the 
Western Pacific. 
Concepts of 
operation must 
account for the 
huge asymmetry 
in distances.

12  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
Any consideration of concepts of operation in the Western Pacific must also ac-
count for the huge asymmetry in distances. The US military must transport vir-
tually everything it needs across thousands of miles to sustain operations against 
an adversary operating in its “front yard.” Yet another unfavorable asymmetry 
confronting US forces is the concentration of their logistics around a few key 
nodes. The main Air Force and Navy bases on US territory in the Western Pacific 
are located on the island of Guam, the major logistics node for all US military 
operations in the Western Pacific. This creates enormous logistical vulnerabili -
ties that could offer the PLA the opportunity (and perhaps even the incentive) to 
cripple US power-projection capability by attacking and incapacitating a handful 
of soft facilities. In contrast, China enjoys the advantages of the strategic depth 
conferred by its large landmass. For example, it can rely on a highly distributed 
logistics network as it draws upon supplies stationed on its own territory. Finally, 
the PLA enjoys an asymmetric advantage over the US military in its ability to 
f i g u r e  1 .  i l l u S t r A t i v e  d i S t A n C e S  i n  t h e  pAC i f i C  t h e A t e r
Image: CSBA

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 13
exploit interior lines of communication that enable it to shift its focus much more 
rapidly from one area along its periphery to another, while US forces would have 
to penetrate deeply into defended airspace to attack critical military targets, if 
doing so were necessary.
k ey g eo S tr A tegi C  fAC tor S
The United States is bound by treaty to defend its formal allies, Japan and South 
Korea, and by US law to defend Taiwan should it be subject to armed attack 
by China. These three countries, as island nations (or a de facto island in the 
f i g u r e  2 .  t h e  t W o  i S l A n d  C h A i n S  A n d  m A j o r 
u S  B A S e S  i n  t h e  W e S t e r n  pAC i f i C
Image: CSBA

14  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
case of South Korea), lack strategic depth, and must therefore be supported and 
defended from the sea, or by assets arriving by or over the sea. Since they are 
located so close to China as to be under permanent threat from missile barrages, 
US forces coming to their defense must be able to survive and operate within 
the threat envelope of Chinese weapons systems. A perceived inability on the 
US military’s part to meet its obligations would call into question the credibility 
of US security assurances, might serve to encourage Chinese coercion, if not 
aggression, and could serve as a catalyst for a regional arms race, perhaps 
involving nuclear proliferation.
Given these considerations, it seems likely that in order to sustain the viability 
of US power-projection operations in the Western Pacific Theater, particularly in 
the northeast Asia sub-region, the United States will be dependent to some de -
gree upon Japan’s active support. Japan offers a measure of strategic depth in its 
northern and eastern regions, while the geography of the Ryukyus island chain 
may prove particularly advantageous for anti-submarine warfare (ASW) opera -
tions, for example. Were Japan to cease being a US ally or opt to stay neutral in 
the event of a Sino-US clash, the ability to execute an AirSea Battle concept would 
be made more difficult. Absent Japan’s support, a successful defense of Taiwan or 
South Korea would be problematic, at best. Thus for the purposes of this paper, 
Japan is assumed to remain an active long-term ally of the United States. 
t ime h orizon
From the perspective of 2010, the US Air Force and Navy appear to be as domi -
nant as ever in the Western Pacific. Current Chinese systems that could constitute 
an emerging A2/AD operational approach are in many cases still quite rudimen -
tary and less capable than their US counterparts. But as various Department of 
Defense Annual Reports to Congress on “Military Power of the People’s Republic 
of China” have noted, the rate of both quantitative and qualitative improve -
ments in Chinese military forces have been remarkable as well as sustained.
22 
Extrapolation of current trends suggests the potential for a very robust and com-
prehensive PLA A2/AD system to be in place within this decade. This system will 
significantly alter the regional military balance if not addressed. 23 
22 “Admiral Willard Discusses China, North Korea,” accessed at http://www.eagleworldnews.
com/2009/10/21/adrmiral-willard-discusses-china-north-korea/, on December 9, 2009. Admiral 
Willard, then the new Pacific Command commander, stated that “in the past decade or so, China 
has exceeded most of our intelligence estimates of their military capability and capacity, every 
year. They’ve grown at an unprecedented rate in those capabilities. And, they’ve developed some 
asymmetric capabilities that are concerning to the region, some anti-access capabilities and so 
on.”
23 This growing military imbalance will be further compounded by the steady decline in US Air 
Force and Navy force structure called for in the current Program of Record. 
Current trends 
suggest the 
potential for a 
very robust and 
comprehensive PLA 
A2/AD system to be 
in place within this 
decade.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 15
Thus this paper assumes that absent any current evidence to the contrary, 
China will continue down its well-established path well into the future. The 
discussion of various operational problems this robust A2/AD system will cause 
the US military (and hence what should go into an AirSea Battle concept to counter 
it) are based on this premise. Moreover, as will be seen, many of the elements that 
should go into a viable concept would themselves require considerable time for 
the US military to implement. 
***
The next chapter will discuss the major operational problems that robust PLA 
A2/AD systems may pose for US military forces. Readers already familiar with 
the Western Pacific theater and the A2/AD challenges there may prefer to go 
directly to Chapter 3 (“The Substance of an AirSea Battle Concept”).



Before assessing what an AirSea Battle concept should address and include, it is 
necessary to have an idea of what specific operational-level problems a robust A2/
AD system could create for US military forces in the next ten to twenty years, as -
suming that those forces would reflect logical extensions of the current Program 
of Record and that the US operational approach would remain quite similar to 
what it is today. 
Since an AirSea Battle concept is ultimately about warfighting, a Sino-US con-
flict construct must be posited in order to think about it seriously. This necessar -
ily entails imagining a future scenario in which current military trends continue, 
relations between the United States and China deteriorate greatly over time, and 
events lead to steadily growing tension, confrontation, crisis, and eventually 
open conflict. 
It is worth reemphasizing at this point that thinking about a warfighting 
concept in this way does not imply a belief that a Sino-US war will occur . To 
the contrary, developing a concept whose implementation could preserve a stable 
military balance and demonstrate convincingly that US forces could defeat the 
Chinese A2/AD battle networks in the event of conflict would tend to strengthen 
deterrence. It would also enhance crisis stability and escalation control by 
reducing the likelihood of misperceptions of the Sino-US military balance or 
other sources of serious miscalculation. But to think about what is entailed by that 
logically requires describing what a putative conflict (here in its Western Pacific 
military aspects) could look like, and then assessing what would be required for 
the United States military operationally.
What follows comprises a planning experiment that assumes that China in -
deed continues enhancing its A2/AD system over the next decade, thereby upset-
ting the military balance and, in so doing, dramatically reduces the barriers to 
aggressive action, to include coercion. 
c h APT e R  2  >  o per A tion A l p ro B lem S 
p o S ed B y r o B u S t A2/A d  Sy S tem S
Thinking about a 
warfighting concept 
does not imply a 
belief that a Sino-US 
war will occur.

18  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
A r epre S ent A tive pl A o rder of B A ttle
Based on current trends and plausible defense investment rates, the representa -
tive PLA forces depicted below would seem to be well within the range of fiscal 
and technological possibility over the next decade. Some examples of existing 
and emerging Chinese capabilities include:
>> Kinetic and non-kinetic anti-satellite weapons and supporting space launch 
and space surveillance infrastructure;
>> Sophisticated cyber- and electronic warfare capabilities;
>> Long-range ISR systems (airborne; space-based; land-based over-the-horizon 
radar (OTH-R));
>> Precision-guided conventional land-attack and anti-ship cruise and ballistic 
missiles numbering in the thousands, that can be launched from multiple air, 
naval, and mainland-based mobile ground platforms throughout the theater 
(see Figure 3);
f i g u r e  3 .  r A n g e  o f  p l A  m i S S i l e S  A n d  S t r i k e 
A i r C r A f t  ( C o m B A t  r A d i u S ,  u n r e f u e l e d)
Image: CSBA

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 19
>> Scores of quiet diesel (and some nuclear) submarines armed with supersonic 
sea-skimming anti-ship cruise missiles and advanced torpedoes; 
>> An emerging ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) force; 
>> Very large inventories (tens of thousands) of advanced sea mines; 
>> Multi-layered integrated air defense systems (IADS), including a large nu -
merical superiority in modern fighter/attack aircraft, and fixed and mobile 
surface-to-air missiles numbering in the thousands; 
>> Comprehensive reconnaissance-strike battle networks covering the air, sur -
face and undersea domains; and
>> Hardened and buried closed fiber-optic command and control (C2) networks 
tying together various systems of the battle network.
Operationally, PLA military writings suggest that China’s evolving reconnais -
sance-strike networks are designed to: 24
>> Deny the United States operational sanctuary in space — the PLA is very aware 
of the US reliance on space systems for ISR, C2, communications, precision 
navigation, and precision timing; 
>> Threaten all US operating bases in the Western Pacific, including those in 
Japan, with persistent ballistic and cruise missile attacks — the concomitant 
ability to strike allies and partners has implications for their willingness to 
support US basing access;
>> Threaten major US Navy surface forces out to 1200+ nm, thereby pushing air-
craft carriers far beyond the maximum unrefueled ranges of their current and 
projected strike aircraft (with the notable exception of Navy UCAS 25) and sur-
face warships beyond the range of their land-attack cruise missiles (LACM);
>> Impede US submarine operations in the littorals — while Chinese submarine 
ASW capability is marginal and does not appear to be becoming a primary 
mission area, US undersea operations are likely to be increasingly impeded by 
deployment of advanced arrays of undersea sensors and potentially weapons 
in littoral waters and narrows; 
24 The PLA uses the term Shashoujian, or “Assassin’s Mace,” to characterize its operational approach. 
See Krepinevich, Why AirSea Battle? pp.13–14. 
25 N-UCAS is a projected unmanned strike aircraft with an expected range of over 2,000 miles.

20  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
>> Contest US air operations over or near mainland China and adjacent allied 
territory — expanding advanced IADS with hardened, buried and redundant 
C2 networks coupled with counter-stealth radar, and increasing numbers of 
high-end SAMs and fourth/fifth-generation fighters will make US penetration 
ever more difficult and costly; and
>> Conduct cyber attacks against US battle networks aimed at disrupting logistics, 
corrupting C2 systems, degrading fire control radars, denying essential 
services, and degrading US counter-space control, space situational awareness 
and space ground control stations. These likely would not, however, be limited 
to direct attacks on US military networks, but could be part of a larger Chinese 
cyber offensive against US and allied networks of all kinds globally. Such 
attacks against non-military networks would also impact military operations 
significantly due to the US military’s heavy reliance on the civilian information 
backbone for many communications and support functions. 
An i llu S tr A tive pl A Att AC k
Over the past several years, various researchers have conducted studies examin -
ing what a large-scale attack against US forces and allies in the Western Pacific 
could look like in order to examine what military operations under such condi -
tions could entail. They postulate a potent adversary armed with forces and an 
A2/AD operational approach like those depicted above, and an aggressive strat -
egy to establish long-term regional dominance by recovering Taiwan, keeping 
Japan out of the war or forcing it out if it became engaged, and driving US forces 
out to the Second Island Chain. 
What follows is a summary of postulated PLA A2/AD operations, based on 
PLA writings.
26 The PLA may be planning to conduct large-scale preemptive 
attacks designed to inflict severe damage on Japanese military forces and US 
forces based or operating forward; keep other US air and naval forces well out of 
range or unable to penetrate into the homeland; disrupt US command and con -
trol (C2) networks; and heavily constrain US operational logistics by destroying 
major supply nodes and the relatively few US logistics ships. The overall strategy 
may be to inflict substantial losses on US forces, lengthen US operational time -
lines and highlight the United States’ inability to defend its allies. Once this is 
accomplished, the PLA could assume the strategic defense and deny reinforcing 
US forces access to the theater until the United States determines that it would be 
26 See Roger Cliff, Mark Burles, Michael S. Chase, Derek Eaton, and Kevin L. Pollpeter, Entering 
the Dragon’s Lair: Chinese Anti-Access Strategies and Their Implications for the United States , 
(Santa Monica: RAND, 2007) for a good discussion of such writings.
The overall PLA 
strategy may be to 
inflict substantial 
losses on US 
forces, lengthen 
US operational 
timelines and 
highlight the United 
States’ inability to 
defend its allies.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 21
too costly to undo what would in effect be a fait accompli. In essence, this mimics 
the Imperial Japanese strategy of 1941–1942.27 
To execute such a strategy, the PLA would seek to do the following: 
>> In the opening minutes of a conflict, seek to render US and allied forces “deaf, 
dumb and blind” by destroying or degrading US and allied Low Earth Orbit 
(LEO) ISR, Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS), third-generation Infrared 
System (3GIRS) sensors and communications satellites. This would be accom-
plished by employing directed-energy weapons, direct-ascent and co-orbital 
anti-satellite weapons, or terrestrial jamming, in concert with coordinated  
cyber and electronic warfare attacks;
>> Conduct ballistic missile salvo attacks, complemented by LACMs launched 
from various platform types, against US and Japanese air and naval bases. 
Attacks on Japanese targets could be supplemented by air strikes. Key tar -
gets would include forward air bases including those at Andersen, Kadena and 
Misawa; major logistics nodes such as Guam (airfields and port facilities); and 
key logistics assets such as fuel storage tanks. The PLA’s objective would be to 
deny US forces the ability to generate substantial combat power from its air 
bases in the Western Pacific; 
>> Conduct major strikes using land-based anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBM) 
and anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCM) launched from various platforms and 
submarines against all major US Navy and allied warships at sea within 1,500 
nm of the Chinese coast, with particular emphasis on the maritime areas 
around the PRC’s littorals .
28 The PLA’s objective would be to raise the cost of 
the US and allied fleet operations within this “keep-out” zone to prohibitive 
levels (see Figure 4); and
>> Interdict US and allied sea lines of communication (SLOCs) throughout 
Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific. Nuclear submarines could patrol 
forward near Hawaii in the Pacific and Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean to 
interdict the flow of supplies and reinforcements moving to forward bases;  
attack Navy assets transiting to and from operating areas in the Western 
Pacific; and force the Navy to divert substantial resources to convoy escort 
and anti-submarine warfare (ASW) in non-forward areas.
27 China, of course, will have a far greater supporting industrial and resource base than did Imperial 
Japan.
28 See, for example, Andrew Erickson and David Yang, “On the Verge of a Game-Changer,” US Naval 
Institute Proceedings , May 2009, pp. 26–32, and Kraska, CDR, James, “How the U.S. Lost the 
Naval War of 2015,” FPRI Orbis, Winter, 2010, pp. 40–41. 

22  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
i mpli CA tion S  for u S Str A tegy & o per A tion S
The postulated PLA forces and capabilities, coupled with writings calling for 
an operational approach that seeks to keep US forces, in particular, from in -
tervening against any Chinese effort to conduct aggression or coercion against 
America’s allies and partners, could bring about a major shift in the Western 
Pacific military balance, with all its attendant negative consequences for peace 
and stability in the region. The most salient implications of this shift in the  
balance are discussed below.
f i g u r e  4 .  n o t i o n A l  “ k e e p - o u t ”  zo n e
Image: CSBA

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 23
Consequences of notional l arge-Scale Attacks
As prosecuted over the last sixty years, the “American Way of Power Projection” 
typically comprises these key elements: 29 
>> Rapidly deploying substantial air, ground and naval forces to forward bases 
and littoral seas;
>> Creating rear-area sanctuaries for US forces and logistics build-ups;
>> Tracking enemy activities and denying same to the enemy;
>> Initiating combat operations at a time and place of US choosing; 
>> Generating and sustaining large numbers of air sorties; and (more recently)
>> Activating complex battle networks and buying up satellite bandwidth.
Having enjoyed success with this approach for such an extended period of time, 
some US planners seem to take as a given uncontested air superiority, unimpeded 
flows of personnel and equipment to and within the theater of operations, the 
continuous availability of high-bandwidth unprotected satellite communications, 
and robust military and civilian logistics.
The postulated Chinese A2/AD capability described above would enable the 
PLA to conduct large-scale, theater-wide attacks that would severely challenge 
these assumptions. The consequences for US forces would almost certainly be 
substantially worse in the event of a pre-emptive attack, to include:
>> Loss of forward sanctuaries in physical domains; 
>> Loss of sanctuaries in virtual domains (including space, 30 cyberspace, the 
electromagnetic (EM) spectrum), with all the implications this has for com-
promising US battle networks, to include communications, command and 
control (C2) and ISR connectivity; 
>> Denial of access to areas of operations; and consequently
>> Loss of strategic and operational initiative.
29 See Alan Vick brief, “Does Chinese Military Modernization Threat the American Way of War?”, 
RAND Project Air Force brief, October 7, 2009.
30 “Space” as used in this context refers to the information/data either provided by or relayed via 
on-orbit assets rather than the physical domain itself.

24  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
Loss of Sanctuary/Denial of Access in Physical Domains
US ground, air and naval forces today are accustomed to operating from sanctu -
ary. That is, the main operating bases, ports and facilities from which they are 
supported and resupplied have been largely invulnerable to serious conventional 
attack since World War II.31 Either enemy forces have lacked the ability or reach 
to strike them accurately (aside from minor nuisance attacks), or US and allied 
defenses have been more than adequate to defend them. In this regard, Iraqi 
unguided ballistic missile attacks on Dhahran during the 1991 Gulf War were a 
harbinger. But in a scenario in which an adversary has large numbers of accurate 
guided weapons that can reach “rear areas,” maintaining sanctuary for either op -
erations or logistical build-ups would be difficult, and perhaps infeasible, absent 
cost-effective defenses. The problem is particularly acute for fixed targets such as 
land bases and facilities. 
The inability to use forward operating bases, including port facilities, has sev -
eral important consequences:
>> Substantially reduced strike sortie rates due to the inability to concentrate 
large numbers of strike aircraft forward as a consequence of damaged or 
destroyed runways, fuel storage and transfer structures, and other support 
facilities; 
31 Of course, this would not have been the case in the event of an actual NATO-Warsaw Pact conflict. 
k ey elements of uS Approach  
to p ower projection plA counters
Rapidly deploying air , ground and naval forces 
to forward bases and littorals
employing air , surface and undersea attacks 
against deploying forces
creating rear-area sanctuaries for Us forces 
and logistics depots
conducting air , cruise and ballistic missile 
attacks against forward Us bases
Initiating operations at a time and place of its 
choosing
Initiating hostilities
Generating and sustaining large number of air 
sorties
executing air , cruise and ballistic missile 
attacks against Us airbases and aircraft 
carriers
Relying heavily on complex battle networks conducting anti-satellite, cyber and electronic 
warfare attacks
f i g u r e  5 .  C o n t r A S t i n g  u S  A n d  p l A  A p p r o AC h e S
Source: CSBA

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 25
>> Dramatically reduced maritime ISR and ASW patrol coverage due to longer 
transit ranges (i.e., flying from distant bases) and the correspondingly re -
duced on-station time;
>> Greatly increased demands and stress on the aerial tanker fleet;
>> Substantially reduced operational logistics throughput into the theater of  
operations; and
>> Significantly longer ship and submarine transit times to and from more distant 
resupply points for ordnance reloads, resulting in fewer available on-station 
naval strike platforms and munitions. 
Navy surface and carrier aviation forces have long been accustomed to oper -
ating from sanctuary at sea, enabled by the near-absence of hostile long-range 
detection and targeting capabilities and capable enemy navies. Thus cruise missile- 
equipped surface ships and carrier tactical aviation could rely on launching at -
tacks almost at will, untroubled by serious hostile threats. US carriers could 
easily approach well within the relatively short strike ranges of their current 
inventory of naval strike aircraft. However, the advanced anti-ship sensor and 
weapon systems China is now fielding and will certainly augment in the com-
ing years will make it increasingly difficult for the US Navy to operate such 
ships effectively within adversary weapons ranges at acceptable levels of risk. 
Unfortunately, the ranges of future Chinese anti-ship threats are projected to be 
substantially greater than the effective range of US ship-based offensive strike 
weapons. Simply stated, the PLA’s projected ability to attack ships accurately, and 
at extended ranges from the land, constitutes a threat that the US Navy has not 
experienced since World War II.
32 
Similarly, US sea lines of communication into combat theaters have been ef -
fectively unimpeded since 1945 and have not even been under threat since the 
demise of the Soviet threat to Atlantic convoys after the 1980s. However, as the 
Chinese naval order of battle increasingly includes longer-range submarines and 
long-range maritime strike aircraft, the Navy may have to allocate scarce re -
sources to theater convoy escort tasks, and with a force structure that is both in 
demand for other missions and not ideal for the purpose.
The US Navy’s submarine forces remain very difficult to detect. As previously 
noted, Chinese ASW capabilities remain rudimentary, and Chinese submarines 
32 Of course, Soviet-era land-based bombers equipped with ASCMs posed a serious potential threat 
to US warships, but the Navy acquired substantial defensive capabilities designed to defeat such 
attacks, and in the event happily never had to use them. The British Royal Navy, on the other hand, 
suffered deadly attacks from relatively unsophisticated Argentinian land-based attack aircraft in 
the 1982 Falklands war.

26  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
are not assessed to have ASW as a primary mission at present. On the other hand, 
ASW is also becoming increasingly difficult even for the US Navy as newer class -
es of quiet diesel submarines of the kind employed by the PLA enter service.33 The 
littoral areas within the First Island Chain are a particularly noisy undersea envi-
ronment, further increasing the difficulty of detecting submarines by traditional 
means and methods. However, a new phenomenon is emerging in the scientific 
and commercial sectors, namely increased instrumentation of large undersea ar -
eas for the purpose of environmental monitoring, oceanographic research, and 
exploitation of offshore resources.
34 Arrays utilizing a range of phenomenologies, 
including active transmissions, may potentially provide sensor data exploitable 
for Chinese ASW purposes, particularly if such arrays were also linked to under -
sea weapons such as torpedoes and mobile mines.
35 Moreover, arrays connected 
to shore have considerable advantages in terms of power, communications and, 
most importantly, acoustic window size
36 over autonomous undersea vehicles 
(AUV) or assets operating via tethers from US submarines, which could pro -
vide significant advantages in relative performance. There is already evidence of 
Chinese instrumentation of significant littoral areas in the East and South China 
Seas. Separately, the potential for “acoustic jamming,” i.e., emitting sound energy 
into particular littoral areas to increase the background noise level above that 
of the submarine’s could make traditional US ASW efforts in littoral areas even 
more difficult.37 If current trends continue, it is quite possible that US access to 
undersea areas within the First Island Chain could become far more risky, or at 
least that operational timelines for US undersea operations in the littorals could 
be considerably lengthened. 
In the air domain, the US military has enjoyed undisputed localized air supe -
riority if not outright supremacy since 1945. However, the fielding of sophisticat-
ed, dense integrated air defense systems (IADS) will increasingly challenge the 
33 Air-Independent Propulsion (AIP) submarines have a much-reduced “indiscretion rate” than 
diesel-electric types. AIP submarines can operate for much longer periods without snorkeling, 
thereby greatly reducing the number of detection opportunities.
34 For example, Japan’s ARENA (Advanced Real-time Earth monitoring Network in the Area) under -
sea network has cabled observing systems that can monitor a wide range of undersea natural phe -
nomena over a wide area (linear arrays as long as 125 km; extensions into both the East China Sea 
and the Sea of Japan). See http://homepage.mac.com/ieee_oes_japan/ARENA/ARENA-E.html  
for more information.
35 It can be argued that the distinction between torpedoes, smart mobile mines, and unmanned 
undersea vehicles (UUV) carrying weapons or explosive charges is steadily narrowing.
36 Acoustic window size determines the frequencies of underwater sound that a sensor can detect. 
The lower the sound frequency, the further it will travel, thus increasing the detection opportuni -
ties for ASW forces. Large seabed arrays with large acoustic window size thus have a real advan -
tage over AUVs, since the latter are too small to deploy such arrays.
37 Putting additional acoustic energy into what is already a noisy littoral undersea environment due 
to ambient noise and intense commercial activity would make it even more difficult for US sub -
marines and other undersea sensors to detect hostile submarines. On the other hand, it could also 
reduce the risk of detection of US submarines.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 27
ability of aircraft to penetrate into areas covered by such systems. Moreover, the 
vulnerability of forward air bases and the high risk of conducting carrier opera -
tions near the littoral while Chinese maritime area-denial threats remain opera -
tive suggest that the relatively short-ranged land- and sea-based tactical aircraft 
that comprise a large proportion of the US strike aircraft inventory would either 
require large-scale aerial refueling support or remain out of action. 38 
Loss of Sanctuary/Denial of Access in Virtual Domains
US communications, ISR, and precision-guided munitions (PGMs) are heavily 
dependent on high-bandwidth connectivity for command and control, target de -
tection, precision strike, and post-strike battle damage assessment operations 
over long ranges. This connectivity is highly dependent on long-haul space-based 
assets that have hitherto not been the target of attack except perhaps for occa -
sional localized jamming. However, the PLA is demonstrating growing ability 
to jam or damage on-orbit assets, especially in LEO. In the future, it will likely 
have the ability to comprehensively deny or severely degrade US forces’ theater- 
relevant space assets. Absent an ability to restore some measure of space func -
tionality at least temporarily, and at times and in ways of its choosing, the US 
military could be driven to vulnerable airborne line-of-sight (LOS) networks and 
other suboptimal work-arounds.
As the PLA continues to field such capabilities, the United States may develop 
a commensurate capability to neutralize Chinese space assets. But in a notional 
“space war,” wherein both sides systematically denied each other the use of space, 
the PLA would have asymmetric communications advantages, given its buried 
terrestrial fiber-optic connectivity, its ability to field airborne work-arounds 
based on its home territory and the shorter distances and smaller areas it would 
have to cover. 
The PLA is developing a sophisticated cyber warfare capability. According to 
the Department of Defense, it is investing heavily in computer network opera -
tions capabilities and forces, and has established cyber warfare units tasked with 
preparing attacks on enemy computer networks.
39 Since 2005, the PLA has in -
corporated offensive cyber warfare into its exercises to conduct early non-kinetic 
strikes on enemy computer networks. President Hu has made cyber warfare a top 
funding priority, as reflected in the twelfth Five-Year Plan (2011–2015).40 
38 For example, consider the multiple aerial refuelings F/A-18 aircraft flying from carriers in the 
northern Arabian Sea on missions over Afghanistan require today. The distances entailed in the 
Pacific theater would be considerably greater
39 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s 
Republic of China 2009 (Washington: Department of Defense, 2009), pp. 27–28.
40 Wily Lam, “Beijing Beefs Up Cyber-Warfare Capacity,” Asia Times Online , 9 February 2010, ac -
cessed at http://www.atimes.com/atimes/China/LB09Ad01.html.

28  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
Organizationally, the PLA General Staff’s Fourth Department is currently 
tasked with cyber warfare. Some senior PLA officers also envisage the creation of 
a future “Cyber Command,” akin to the PLA’s Second Artillery Force, which today 
rivals the bureaucratic clout of the PLA Army, Navy and Air Force.41 To man these 
new organizations, the PLA is aggressively recruiting “patriotic hackers.” In sum-
mary, China is well on its way to developing comprehensive computer network 
operations that include: 
>> Conducting peacetime access, reconnaissance and exploitation of enemy 
networks; 
>> Implanting of trap-doors, Trojan Horses, or logic bombs that could be acti -
vated in the event of war; 
>> Executing pre-emptive cyber attacks aimed at corrupting enemy information 
systems, communications, and databases; 
>> Introducing false information into information networks as part of broader 
deception operations; and 
>> Otherwise disrupting the effective use of information systems and networks 
by the enemy.
42 
Such non-kinetic attacks could be aimed at targets such as US command 
and control networks, ground control stations for satellites, or the US military- 
commercial logistical network. These capabilities suggest that “combat” in the 
cyber domain has the potential to become the future equivalent of World War II’s 
constant struggle to break enemy codes and protect one’s own, with the cracking 
of Enigma proving to be of strategic significance. It is surely not an exaggeration 
to suggest that an edge in cyber warfare could similarly prove decisive in a ma -
jor conflict. Like strategic aerial bombardment, cyber warfare could extend well 
beyond the purely military realm, involving comprehensive attacks on financial, 
transportation and other US infrastructure.
A comprehensive discussion of cyber warfare is beyond the scope of this paper. 
However, assuming equal capabilities and competence on both sides, the effects 
would very likely be far more damaging to the US military than the PLA, given 
the former’s heavy reliance on large volumes of information and data transmitted 
via classified and unclassified networks linking military and non-military sys -
tems into an array of networks. For example, in addition to its battle networks, 
a large proportion of the US military’s logistics information and data flows over 
41 Idem.
42 Lieutenant Colonel Timothy L. Thomas, US Army (retired), “China’s Electronic Long-Range 
Reconnaissance,” Military Review , November–December 2008. 
 Like strategic aerial 
bombardment, 
cyber warfare could 
extend well beyond 
the purely military 
realm, involving 
comprehensive 
attacks on financial, 
transportation 
and other US 
infrastructure.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 29
other, non-battle networks, as the supplier base is heavily commercial. This could 
constitute a particularly serious weakness. Sustained disruption, corruption and 
denial-of-service attacks would have substantial impacts on US logistics support. 
Since at least the Cold War’s end, the US military has enjoyed dominance in 
electronic warfare across the electro-magnetic spectrum. Most recent foes have 
had such rudimentary electronic attack and defense capabilities that the Air Force 
and Navy have had little incentive to invest more heavily in this area, particularly 
in countering enemy use of electronic warfare. In the absence of a major chal -
lenge to its use of the electromagnetic spectrum, the US military has arguably 
fallen prey to the assumption that the connectivity underlying US power projec -
tion is robust and will always be there. Thus there has been inadequate planning 
or exercising of operations in denied or degraded connectivity environments.
Loss of Strategic and Operational Initiative
Assuming China is developing and fielding the capabilities to conduct the types of 
preemptive kinetic and non-kinetic blows envisaged in its military’s “Assassin’s 
Mace” concept, it would gain both strategic and operational initiative from the 
outset. Moreover, “flexible deterrence operations” and other pre-conflict mili -
tary activities US forces typically conduct during periods of heightened tensions 
may create substantial additional incentives for the PLA to preemptively strike, 
given the vulnerabilities of US forward forces and facilities to its postulated ro -
bust long-range precision-strike capabilities and the consequent opportunities 
to inflict substantial damage on US forces and bases. Yet failure to respond as 
expected to Chinese threats and provocations could undermine reassurance of 
US allies.
43 Unfortunately, these dynamics would work to decrease crisis stability 
by steadily undermining a stable military balance.
China would seek to achieve its strategic objectives and end hostilities as rap -
idly as possible before US forces could regroup and seize the initiative. Its mili -
tary planning is predicated on achieving its objectives quickly in a “knock-out” 
blow before the United States could project sufficient effective military power 
into the theater to prevent it. After a major pre-emptive attack, China would seek 
to take advantage of initial US and allied losses and possible demoralization to 
consolidate its gains as rapidly as possible in the expectation that US and allied 
forces had been damaged sufficiently to preclude any rapid or effective near-term 
response, and that the American public would not support a prolonged war over 
43 This might be considered somewhat analogous to the dilemma President Roosevelt faced in 
shifting the Pacific Fleet’s main battle force forward to Pearl Harbor in mid-1940. The move was 
intended to deter Japan from exploiting Britain’s dire position following the fall of France and 
the Netherlands by threatening to overrun French and Dutch colonial possessions throughout 
Southeast Asia while cutting off supplies going to China via the Burma Road. However, it rendered 
the fleet far more vulnerable to devastating pre-emptive attack, as was dramatically demonstrated 
in December 1941.
There has been 
inadequate planning 
or exercising of 
operations in 
denied or degraded 
connectivity 
environments.

30  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
ostensibly insufficient stakes. 44 If the United States continued to fight, the PLA’s 
main post-attack objective would be to prevent US forces from seizing the stra -
tegic and operational initiative by continuing attacks on allies while striving to 
prevent US forces from conducting their own offensive operations. 
Ironically, while China would seek a rapid end to hostilities, the short war par-
adigm that permeates contemporary US military thinking about major combat 
operations (as opposed to irregular warfare) would be utterly irrelevant in this 
context. The postulated future difficulty in penetrating the developing Chinese 
A2/AD system, coupled with the vast transit distances in the Western Pacific, 
virtually ensures that there could be no short, even if limited, war with China if 
the United States chose to fight. 
v ulnerability of k ey Allies 
The defense of Japan remains a strategic and operational imperative of the first 
order. Japanese Self-Defense Forces (JSDF) have substantial air and naval forces 
that could augment US forces in selected mission areas, to include submarine- 
and air-based ASW, maritime ISR, maritime strike and ballistic missile defense. 
Still, the major US operating bases and facilities, e.g., air bases on Okinawa 
(Kadena AFB) and Iwakuni, and the naval base at Sasebo, are all within easy 
striking range of Chinese missiles and strike aircraft, as are many JSDF bases in 
western Japan. 
The defense of Taiwan against Chinese attack is already problematic today, 
given the large ballistic missile force that can strike Taiwan, the quantity and 
quality of PLA air and naval forces that can strike approaching US naval forc -
es, and the potent IADS that could make US air operations over Taiwan and the 
Taiwan Strait very costly. Moreover, the large Chinese fighter force, composed in-
creasingly of fourth-generation aircraft, vastly outnumbers what US forces could 
sustain in terms of aircraft numbers, sortie rates, and mission duration. Even 
assuming extremely high probabilities of kill (Pk), US Advanced Medium-Range 
Air-to-Air (AMRAAM)-armed stealth fighters would find it extremely difficult to 
overcome their quantitative inferiority during the critical early days of a conflict 
that occurs with little or no warning.
45 
44 This, of course, is the classic question of fight or flight: would the United States rise up in righteous 
wrath as after Pearl Harbor, or would it conclude that the prize was not worth the cost as after the 
1983 Beirut bombings? Much would depend on Chinese evaluation of likely American responses 
in such a future situation. To the extent that a rising, self-confident China believed the United 
States to be a declining power, the danger that it would conclude the US government and public 
would not have the stomach for such a fight would steadily grow.
45 John Stillion and Scott Perdue, “Air Combat Past, Present and Future,” RAND Project Air Force 
briefing, August 2008.
The short war 
paradigm that 
permeates 
contemporary US 
military thinking 
about major combat 
operations would be 
utterly irrelevant in 
this context.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 31
Similarly, the defense of the Republic of Korea in the unlikely event of a 
Chinese (as opposed to North Korean) attack would be difficult as well for many 
of the same reasons that apply to the Taiwanese case. It would be compounded by 
the fact that the PLA ground forces could have land access to South Korea via the 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK).
Broader Consequences
While the favorable, stable military balance that has existed in the Western Pacific 
for the last two decades is deteriorating, with major consequences for the US 
military’s ability to project power into the region, neither DoD’s planning nor its 
defense program have been significantly modified to account for this fact. Thus 
the Defense Department continues to emphasize investments in short-range 
rather than long-range strike systems; in unprotected communications satellites; 
in elaborate battle networks vice training under denied or degraded battle net -
work conditions. It also continues to under-invest in penetrating, long-endurance 
ISR and strike capabilities, aerial tankers, forward base hardening, the combat 
logistics force (CLF) and directed-energy weapons for missile defense.
The US military is steadily losing its near-monopoly in the precision-guided 
munitions and robust battle networks that have underpinned its dominance. The 
PLA is leveraging the widespread diffusion of military technology, an increas -
ingly skilled and educated manpower base and dramatically larger budgets to 
field long-range precision strike systems and munitions in ever-greater numbers. 
Coupled with the growth of PLA C2 and ISR battle networks, they will constitute 
the heart of China’s A2/AD forces.
As this occurs, the current and projected US force structure will be compelled 
to pay an increasingly high — and perhaps prohibitive — price should Washington 
attempt to conduct traditional types of power-projection (or even forward pres -
ence) operations within China’s A2/AD threat rings. The workhorses of tradition-
al US power-projection operations, to include the short-ranged land-based and 
naval strike aircraft that comprise the bulk of current and projected US air strike 
assets, amphibious forces, and large non-stealthy strike and support aircraft will 
likely find themselves either sitting on the sidelines in the early stages of a con -
flict, or suffering high levels of attrition. In either case, their deterrent value will 
have declined precipitously.
If the ability to deter and defend forward were lost, the US Pacific Command’s 
overall theater military strategy would have to change fundamentally. As noted 
above, a Sino-US conventional conflict likely would devolve into a prolonged war. 
To avoid encouraging Beijing from believing it could prevail in a protracted con -
flict, the US military would need to plan and be prepared to execute a “distant 
If the ability to 
deter and defend 
forward were lost, 
the US Pacific 
Command’s overall 
theater military 
strategy would 
have to change 
fundamentally.

32  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
blockade.”46 Success in an extended conflict may also rest on the US military’s re -
gaining access to forward bases and maritime areas in order to reverse the gains 
of Chinese aggression. This would require reducing the most important elements 
of the Chinese A2/AD system, including the destruction of selected production 
facilities (e.g., ballistic missiles). To this end, the United States’ ability to mobi -
lize key parts of its own defense industrial base, particularly those concerned 
with volume production of long-range precision-guided munitions, will likely be 
a critical factor in its success or failure in the conflict.
47
Critical p roblems, Competitions and Asymmetries
Developing an AirSea Battle concept requires identifying and examining the key 
competitions between particular kinds of US forces and the PLA A2/AD offen -
sive and defensive battle networks. It is only by understanding these key com-
petitions, or interactions, that it becomes possible to assess how the US military 
might sustain or regain adequate freedom of action in the face of the PLA’s efforts 
to deny it the same.
The following operational competitions appear most critical to operational 
success or failure:
>> Battle network versus counter-battle network;
>> Missile attack versus missile defense;
>> Air superiority versus air defense;
>> Sea (and undersea) control versus sea (and undersea) denial; and
>> Force sustainment versus counter-force sustainment.
46 By way of historical analogy, in the years before World War I, the British Royal Navy realized that 
newly developed German Navy “anti-access/area-denial” weapons of their day, such as torpedo 
boats and submarines, rendered its previous doctrine of “close blockade” obsolete. During the 
war, it instead implemented a “distant blockade” that effectively cut off German overseas trade, 
which ultimately contributed greatly to Imperial Germany’s eventual defeat.
47 Every major combat operation since the 1973 Yom Kippur war has seen a far higher than expected 
expenditure rate for precision-guided munitions. Given 1) ordnance accounts are generally early 
“go-to” sources for funds when defense budgets tighten, 2) the high cost of most precision-guided 
munitions, and 3) fears of block obsolescence, the Services have tended to keep overall inventories 
relatively small. As an example, the US Navy maintains perhaps 1.5 ship fills (the total inventory of 
weapons divided by the number of fleet-wide cells that can carry them) worth of Tomahawk cruise 
missiles. Eventual unit costs will be a function of quantities ordered, but they will undoubtedly re -
main considerable. Thus in a major conflict, expenditure rates on both sides could be expected to 
be quite high, which would make the comparative ability to replenish inventories over the course 
of a prolonged conflict an important planning factor.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 33
Battle Network versus Counter-Battle Network
The battle network versus counter-battle network competition has two aspects: 
maintaining US and allied networks in operation despite hostile efforts to de -
stroy, degrade or exploit them; and countering US efforts to destroy, degrade or 
exploit the PLA’s networks.
sPA ce Access ve R s U s sPA ce Den IAL .  Satellites provide ISR such as imag -
ery and electronic intelligence; precision navigation and timing via the Global 
Positioning System; and global military communications. Over time, US mili -
tary forces have become heavily dependent on these space services for theater 
operations and power projection, particularly the large bandwidth capacity that 
satellite communications confers, which allows a tremendous amount of data and 
information to flow between forward units and rear entities. Not surprisingly, US 
planning and combat operations tend to consume large amounts of bandwidth.
China, by contrast, while increasingly a space player, is far less dependent on 
space systems for C2 than is the United States, and there is no compelling need 
for the PLA to become significantly more reliant on satellite communications in 
the coming decade, and thereby forfeit a key source of competitive advantage over 
the United States. For operations in the Western Pacific, the PLA’s command-and-
control network can remain heavily land-based, with key components hardened 
and buried. Its multi-faceted maritime ISR capabilities include over-the-horizon 
radars, large numbers of ISR UAVs, space-based ocean surveillance systems, na -
val and air maritime patrol assets, and commercial surface vessels operating in 
littoral waters that can provide maritime domain reporting en passant .
48
US military forces are heavily dependent on space systems for critical func -
tions besides C2 and ISR. Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites provide 
precision navigation for platforms and, importantly, locational data for a large 
proportion of the total US precision-guided munitions inventory. They also  
provide precision timing, which is critical for the proper functioning of net -
works. One other key role enabled by on-orbit assets is managing data trans -
mission and command and control signals to and from UAVs. The current UAV 
reliance on satellite communications could become a source of vulnerability un -
less new atmospheric communications architectures can be fielded as back-ups, 
48 As an historical example, Japanese fishing trawlers hundreds of miles out to sea provided Tokyo 
with its first and only warning of the Doolittle Raiders in April 1942. The Doolittle Raid was an 
audacious effort to strike back at Japan using land-based Army B-25 bombers launched from an 
aircraft carrier, with the bombers flying on to bases in China after completing their bombing runs. 
The task force hoped to close within 400 nm of the Japanese mainland before launching to give 
the bombers their best odds of mission success, but its sighting by the trawlers forced a premature 
launch while still over 600 nm out. While the objectives of the raid were accomplished, all the 
aircraft were subsequently lost as a consequence of insufficient fuel because of the extra flying 
distance. Fortunately, most of the Raiders survived. See http://www.history.navy.mil/photos/
events/wwii-pac/misc-42/dooltl.htm. 

34  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
or UAVs that are far more capable of conducting autonomous ISR or strike  
missions can be developed.
Given the inherent vulnerability of unprotected space systems, the potent anti- 
space capabilities the PLA is investing in and could acquire in the coming decade, 
and the US military’s high dependence on space systems, China might find deny-
ing US forces the use of space a highly attractive proposition, even at the cost of 
losing its own access to space. On the other hand, China might be relatively more 
dependent on its own space systems, particularly in the early hours of war, for 
support in locating and destroying key enemy systems. In that limited context 
where blinding China’s ISR may be critical to blunt its attack, the advantage may 
lie with the United States.
49
M AI n TAI n I n G  c 2 A n D  I s R c onnec TI v IT y.  The Chinese would almost certainly 
enjoy an advantage in “work-around” efforts to offset the loss of space functional-
ity. There are two generic work-arounds available to each side: robust space re -
constitution capacity (e.g., Operationally Responsive Space (ORS)); and airborne 
line-of-sight networks employing various platforms equipped with sensors and/
or communications and data relay capability. Owing to its positional advantage, 
China has additional options not available to the United States, such as shifting to 
buried fiber-optic terrestrial communications networks to preserve connectivity.
Compared to a Chinese land-based buried fiber-optic network, a US ORS ca -
pability is far more expensive to field, and more importantly, considerably more 
vulnerable to the same types of attacks that resulted in the prior loss of space 
functionality. Moreover, the PLA’s airborne networks, mostly UAV-based, would 
need to cover considerably smaller areas fanning out from the Chinese coast than 
the great distances that their US counterparts would have to cover, particularly 
for long-haul communications purposes to distant command echelons, as well 
as lengthy transit times to and from station that would reduce on-station en -
durance, thereby necessitating considerably larger numbers of airborne assets to 
create and sustain the required number of stations or orbits.
50
To the extent such airborne platforms were non-stealthy, they would likely 
require some form of defense. In providing escorts for airborne ISR platforms, 
once again the PLA could leverage its positional advantage to draw upon land-
based defense assets from dozens of bases. The US escorts, on the other hand, 
would have to be launched from distant bases or naval combatants outside the 
49 Attacks on each side’s space early warning systems would have an immediate effect on strategic 
nuclear and escalation issues. However, this issue lies beyond the scope of this paper and is there -
fore not addressed here.
50 Some US UAVs might be launched by submarine. However, given the high demand for US subma -
rines in AirSea Battle, and their relatively limited payloads, their contribution to sustaining an 
airborne C2 and ISR force would likely be quite limited.
China might find 
denying US forces 
the use of space 
a highly attractive 
proposition, even at 
the cost of losing 
its own access to 
space.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 35
PLA’s A2/AD threat rings, traveling long distances with concomitant demands 
on aerial tankers. 
c y B e R  A TTA c K  ve R s U s c y B e R  De F ense. The cyber competition will be offense-
dominant for the foreseeable future. It will be cheaper and easier to attack in -
formation systems than it will be to detect and defend against attacks. In this  
sub-competition China might have the initial advantage, assuming that it enjoys 
the advantage of striking first, and at a time and place of its choosing. The char -
acter of the US warfighting complex, incorporating as it does globally distributed 
elements both military and commercial, allows a greater range of potential cyber 
access points for intruders. Spread across disparate information networks, the 
various US networks — both for combat and support purposes — may prove dif -
ficult to defend against a determined cyber attack. Cyber defense may be easier 
for China, relying as it does on more closed information systems and buried fiber- 
optic communications that are relatively difficult to access. That said, both sides 
are likely to emphasize offensive cyber operations. The advantage may rest with 
the side that can best integrate offensive cyber operations with other kinetic 
forms of attack.
oRGA n IZATI on AL  I MP e DIM en T s.  Lastly, the Air Force and Navy suffer from a 
self-inflicted connectivity wound: they currently acquire and operate weapons, 
sensors, and communication systems that are often incompatible with one an -
other. As an illustrative example, Navy forces are completely unable to use the 
Air Force’s Digital Common Ground System (DCGS).
51 While there has been 
some attention paid in recent years to greater interoperability (especially regard -
ing common operating pictures, and communications and data link protocols), 
information, intelligence, and data flows are often highly “stove-piped,” not only 
between the two Services, but also within them. 
Missile Attack versus Missile Defense
The core elements of US and projected Chinese long-range precision strike 
(LRPS) differ strikingly. Whereas US conventional strike is heavily based on 
manned land- and sea-based bombers and strike fighters, plus distributed land-
attack cruise missiles, the PLA long-range strike systems are primarily land-
based ballistic missiles, including anti-ship ballistic missiles, complemented by 
anti-ship and land-attack cruise missiles launched from aircraft, ships or sub -
marines. Most PLA land-based ballistic and cruise missiles would be launched 
51 The Air Force’s network-centric Distributed Common Ground System of ground stations, dis -
tributed sites, collaborative work centers, and remote sites produce strategic, operational, and 
tactical intelligence supporting combat operations. See http://www.dvidshub.net/?script=news/
news_show.php&id=41270. 
The core elements 
of US and projected 
Chinese long-range 
precision strike 
differ strikingly.

36  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
from mobile Transporter Erector Launcher (TEL) vehicles, which compounds the 
difficulty of finding and attacking them.
Given these different LRPS architectures, their strengths and weaknesses also 
will be asymmetrical. The effectiveness of US LRPS depends heavily on strike 
aircraft being able to reach their weapons release points successfully, which for 
many targets could require penetrating into China while avoiding or degrading 
robust integrated air defenses. To the extent that many US launch platforms can 
be kept beyond their effective range by Chinese A2/AD forces, the number of 
successful strikes would be greatly reduced. The PLA’s efforts are made all the 
more effective as the US defense program finds the bulk of the most stealthy 
US strike aircraft will be relatively short-ranged late-generation strike fighters 
carrying very small payloads of guided munitions, while US bombers, with their 
much greater payloads, are unlikely to be able to penetrate the PLA’s robust IADS 
systems without considerable risk of loss. Thus bombers will likely be limited to 
standoff attacks employing very expensive missiles that, despite their cost, are 
not particularly effective against mobile or hard and deeply buried targets. 
The PLA LRPS architecture enjoys another major advantage in that its bal -
listic missiles have short times-of-flight, which greatly reduces US and allied 
warning time, making them very difficult and expensive to defend against. The 
timelines entailed in a large-scale missile strike campaign could be compressed, 
possibly measured in only a few days to create shock effect and to enable the PLA 
to seize its objectives rapidly. The overall objective would be to demoralize the 
United States and its allies by the speed of China’s victory and the high cost of 
attempting to reverse it.
52
Ballistic missile defenses currently employ primarily kinetic-kill interceptors 
whose cost typically exceeds by a wide margin the cost of the offensive systems 
they are meant to defend against.
53 Moreover, owing to their high cost, the num-
ber of interceptors available to defend any particular target is likely to be very 
limited, making such targets vulnerable to saturation attacks. Benefiting from 
China’s interior lines, a single PLA long-range ballistic missile could be used to 
hold at risk multiple targets over a wide area, while defenses against such attacks, 
having far less range, must either be concentrated to protect a small number of 
targets or be distributed in small numbers to cover a larger target set. Many of 
52 Again by way of historical analogy, consider Pearl Harbor and the rolling Japanese onslaught 
in Southeast Asia in early 1942. See, for example, Samuel Eliot Morrison, The Rising Sun in 
the Pacific, History of United States Naval Operations in World War II, Vol. 3, (Little, Brown & 
Company: Boston, 1948).
53 For example, Patriot PAC-3 missiles cost about $2 million per round, while the “cheaper” Air-
Launched Hit-to-Kill (ALHK) round, which is a proposed fighter-carried modified AMRAAM, is 
advertised to cost just under $1 million per round. Note, though, that the cost of individual rounds 
is just a small fraction of overall BMD costs. In retrospect, foreign development and fielding of 
conventional ballistic missiles has proven to be an effective cost-imposing strategy on the US 
military.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 37
the offensive missiles would likely carry decoys, further straining the defense. 
Thus ballistic missile offense is likely to dominate ballistic missile defense for the 
foreseeable future, absent technological breakthroughs in non-kinetic defenses.54
Figure 6 shows current estimated PLA ballistic missile inventory sizes. Given 
current build rates, by the 2020s the PLA ballistic missile inventories are likely 
to number in the thousands. A force of this size could, in and of itself, create a 
significant shift in the Western Pacific military balance. To support its efforts 
to force Taiwan and/or Japan into submission before large numbers of US rein -
forcements could be brought to bear effectively, the PLA can be expected to con -
duct large-scale missile attacks on US forward operating bases and facilities to 
put — and keep — them out of action.
55 The PLA’s large missile forces would enable 
it to retain a sizeable reserve. 
54 Andrew Krepinevich, The Quadrennial Defense Review: Rethinking the US Military Posture 
(Washington: CSBA, 2005), p. 18.
55 The implicit assumption is that the PLA would strike US forces based in or operating from Japan. 
Since this would most likely bring Japan into the war, it seems plausible that an early Chinese 
objective would be to force Japan to submit as quickly as possible. Were China to succeed in keep -
ing Japan neutral, the need for the United States to expend resources in its defense would corre -
spondingly disappear.  
f i g u r e  6 .  e S t i m A t e d  p l A  B A l l i S t i C  m i S S i l e  t o t A l S  (2 0 1 0)
Image: CSBA
Source: Department of Defense, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress on the 
Military Power of the People’s Republic of China, 2009, p. 66, accessed at http:/ /www.defense.gov/
pubs/pdfs/China_Military_Power_Report_2009.pdf, on 24 March, 2010.

38  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
On a more favorable note, unlike US long-range strike aircraft, which can be 
reloaded with precision weapons upon returning to base, once a PLA missile is 
fired, it is permanently expended, as is the case with any other munition. Thus, 
the PLA missile force could be seen as a “wasting asset” as missiles are expended. 
A key indicator of China’s military intentions — and its military capability — may 
be seen in its ballistic missile production rate. 
Inducing the PLA to expend its offensive missile inventories in ways that  
are unproductive militarily from the Chinese perspective is key to an effective 
allied defense. Seen this way, one can conceptualize a “competition” between 
the PLA’s relatively scarce supply of offensive missiles and its view of the US and 
allied target set.
Missile defense has both offensive and defensive elements. The best way to 
defend against PLA missile attacks is to destroy them through counterforce op -
erations before they are launched. In other words, “kill the archer, not the arrow.” 
However, this is an extremely challenging task, given several factors: the mobil -
ity of Chinese ballistic and cruise missile launchers, which makes finding and 
rapidly striking them particularly difficult; the sophisticated PLA IADS defend -
ing these missiles that must be dealt with or avoided; and the sheer numbers of 
PLA missiles and TELs. The key enabler for hitting such targets is the persistent 
presence of airborne sensors and weapons platforms. To maintain the persistent 
presence needed to destroy or suppress the PLA missile forces, US systems must 
be able to survive in contested air space and have the appropriate sensors, ord -
nance and connectivity. Given the threat to US and allied forward bases until this 
mission is accomplished, the initial efforts will need to be undertaken by aircraft 
possessing extended range and endurance.
56
Yet even if the US and its allies possessed these capabilities, owing to the sheer 
numbers of PLA missiles and the large area over which they might hide, it seems 
highly unlikely that they could destroy more than a small fraction of them. These 
offensive air operations, however, could disrupt PLA missile command and con -
trol networks, launch operations, and launcher replenishment. Put another way, 
the principal value of the offensive campaign against the PLA’s missiles is likely 
to center on their suppression rather than their destruction. If a significant level 
of suppression is achieved, it may limit the PLA’s ability to fire its missiles in op -
timum salvoes. This could greatly ease the task of US and allied forces engaged 
in missile defense, presenting them with a “drizzle” of PLA missiles rather than 
a “downpour.” 
56 For an analysis of the difficulties of doing persistent operations in defended airspace at extended 
range see Thomas Ehrhard and Robert Work, Range, Persistence, Stealth, and Networking: The 
Case for a Carrier-Based Unmanned Combat Air System (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic 
and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, 2008). 
The best way to 
defend against 
missile attacks 
is to destroy 
them through 
counterforce 
operations 
before they are 
launched — “kill 
the archer, not 
the arrow.” 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 39
Under AirSea Battle, US defenses against PLA missile attacks would vary de -
pending on whether the targets were fixed or mobile. With respect to the former, 
defensive actions include:57
>> Employing active missile defenses to thin raids;
>> Hardening key land-based assets (e.g., air fields) to increase the number of 
missiles required to destroy a target at a particular confidence level and/or 
increasing the required lethality of the missile payload (thereby forcing the use 
of unitary warheads in place of sub-munitions);
>> Proliferating the number of targets (i.e., base diversification);
>> Generating false targets (e.g., through decoys, deception or spoofing); and
>> Rapidly repairing the damage sustained in attacks. 
Neutralizing Chinese ISR is less relevant in defending fixed targets since their 
location will remain known. However, the PLA must still conduct battle damage 
assessments following strikes on fixed targets to determine the need for follow-
on attacks or to determine optimal times to strike (e.g., hitting especially valu -
able aircraft such as stealth bombers or specialized surveillance platforms when 
temporarily on the ground and vulnerable). Should the PLA lose its ability to 
conduct effective BDA, it could be forced to expend its valuable missile assets in  
significantly suboptimal ways, thereby advantaging the defense.
For mobile targets — primarily major surface warships — within missile range, 
preventing the PLA targeteers from detecting and classifying targets could be 
critical to the latter’s survival. Blinding, spoofing or otherwise negating PLA C2 
and ISR capabilities would be essential to an effective defense, as missiles can 
reach their target much faster than the target can escape the enemy’s “sensor 
windows.” Active sea-based missile defense systems could attrite some incom-
ing missiles but would be subject to magazine exhaustion given their limited 
supply, some of which might be expended against various decoys and/or other 
threats such as cruise missiles or strike aircraft.
58 The extremely high cost of 
kinetic interceptors strongly suggests that this situation will not — and should 
57 For a good discussion of active and passive base defense measures, see John Stillion and James 
Perry, “Emerging Threats to US Bases in the Western Pacific,” Northrop Grumman Corporation 
brief, September, 2009. 
58 Such threats could also be apparent as opposed to actual. For example, relatively cheap UAVs or 
older remotely piloted aircraft could be sent out in large numbers to proliferate apparent targets 
that would have to be quickly identified as non-threats or else taken under fire “just in case.”
Under AirSea 
Battle, US defenses 
against missile 
attacks would 
vary depending on 
whether the targets 
were fixed or mobile.

40  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
not — change.59 Ships exhausting their magazines would be compelled to leave the 
theater to rearm since VLS tubes cannot currently be rearmed at sea. These ships 
would be out of action for weeks given the need to transit to and from rear areas, 
further disadvantaging the defense. 
Another important defensive measure would be to proliferate false targets to 
“thin” the PLA inventory of ASBMs. By increasing PLA targeteer uncertainty as 
to which targets were real and which were not, through the use of various opera -
tional deception techniques, could significantly increase PLA missile expenditure 
rates, as all targets might have to be attacked to ensure that the real high-value 
targets were destroyed.
Determining the appropriate degree of hardening selected bases in the theater, 
particularly Guam, to deter or complicate Chinese attacks is difficult. Proponents 
assert that hardened bases significantly increase the number of missiles required 
to put them out of action for a prolonged period. Moreover, they argue, failing to 
harden bases could reduce crisis stability by incentivizing the PLA to attack first, 
before expensive forward-deployed air assets could be dispersed.
60 The principal 
disadvantage of base hardening is the high cost of doing it sufficiently well to pro-
tect key facilities such as large aircraft hangars, fuel system components and piers.
AirSea Battle envisions integrating all aspects of missile defense to defeat the 
PLA’s plans to win a quick victory. If successful, it can contribute significantly to 
maintaining a stable military balance in the Western Pacific region to the benefit 
of all, including China. AirSea Battle’s integrated missile defense concept will be 
elaborated upon in the next chapter.
Air Superiority versus Air Defense
As the PLA’s A2/AD architecture matures, the ability to penetrate into Chinese 
airspace to strike selected high-value targets will be increasingly challenged. 
Given current trends, by the 2020s, the PLA’s IADS would likely include sophisti-
cated components such as fifth-generation fighters and S-300/400 SAM systems 
with ranges of hundreds of kilometers. These defenses would be concentrated 
along China’s coastal areas, and could pose a serious threat to the US military’s 
ability to conduct penetrating long-range precision strike operations, especially if 
the Defense Department executes its current Program of Record. 
59 The situation should not change in that the United States and its allies should not allow them -
selves to be drawn into a competition with the PLA in which the former expend enormous re -
sources to expand their expensive kinetic-kill interceptors while the latter produces additional 
ballistic missiles to offset the defenders’ efforts at a fraction of the cost.
60 In recent discussions allied representatives suggested that failure to harden its Western Pacific 
bases would be interpreted by some in the region as an indicator of weakening US interest in the 
region, thereby affecting regional actors’ longer-term security calculus.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 41
Owing to the asymmetry between Chinese and US long-range precision-strike 
capabilities in the Western Pacific theater, as noted above, the PLA’s central air 
defense problems are significantly different from those confronted by US mis -
sile defenses. Currently, the PLA must deal with the classic air defender problem 
of detecting, tracking and intercepting air platforms (including cruise missiles) 
that are capable of at best supersonic sprint speeds for relatively short periods, 
while US military forces must also defend against large numbers of ballistic mis -
siles.
61 Thus PLA air defenders are not confronted with the problem of defending 
against this class of weapons. In short, US forces at present lack the ability to con-
duct prompt non-nuclear strikes against critical time-sensitive targets or critical  
targets situated well inland.
PLA air defenders would still confront some of the same problems faced by 
their US counterparts. Their SAMs, while quite numerous, will still be “scarce 
resources” in the sense that they could be vulnerable to saturation attacks sup -
ported by employment of plentiful decoys and other operational deception tech-
niques to proliferate “false targets.” Moreover, to present a solid defense against 
next-generation US stealthy air platforms, the PLA would have to substantially 
increase the density of its air defense network, an expensive proposition. The PLA 
SAM sites and their associated C2 networks could also be vulnerable to direct 
kinetic or non-kinetic attack, or rendered ineffective by long-range penetrating 
airborne electronic attack (AEA), although the SAMs’ launchers’ mobility makes 
it difficult to attack them, especially when they are not emitting. 
The PLA air defense problem would be further stressed if it were forced to 
defend its entire border, rather than concentrating its efforts mainly on China’s 
maritime frontier. If US forces possessed a significant long-range strike capa -
bility, thereby enabling them to penetrate China’s borders from all directions, 
then PLA air defenders would be compelled to either thin out their defenses in 
the Western Pacific, divert substantial resources to defending other regions, or  
accept significantly greater vulnerability along undefended areas.
Sea (and Undersea) Control versus Sea (and Undersea) Denial
In both the surface and undersea domains, AirSea Battle’s twin objectives are to 
secure US and allied access while denying the PLA the same. 
61 The US military is constrained by the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty from field -
ing any ground-launched ballistic missiles with ranges between 500 and 5,000 kilometers. US 
naval forces are not currently armed with conventional ballistic missiles. Interestingly, in 2007, 
Russian president Putin stated publicly that adherence to the INF Treaty was no longer in Russia’s 
interest. This suggests that termination of the Treaty by mutual agreement may well be possible if 
both sides deem it advantageous. See http://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/INFtreaty.

42  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
sURFA ce oP e RATI ons.  The projected PLA anti-ship ballistic missile capabil -
ity is clearly the most dramatic emerging threat to US Navy operations in the 
Western Pacific.62 However, the PLA is developing other capabilities to deny the 
US Navy’s surface fleet access to large parts of the Western Pacific at acceptable 
levels of risk.
To complement its land-based over-the-horizon radars, the PLA is projected 
to field robust maritime ISR platforms, including stealthy high-altitude, long-
endurance (HALE) ISR UAVs, and space-based maritime ISR assets.
63 Fielded 
in significant quantities, these assets should give the PLA excellent maritime 
domain awareness, certainly within the First Island Chain and likely well be -
yond it. This capability will provide long-range anti-ship cruise-missile-carrying 
platforms with remote targeting data, further increasing the threat from PLA 
anti-ship cruise missiles, launched from a variety of air, surface and submarine 
platforms, to US warships. 
The PLA’s sizable submarine force can be expected to conduct anti-surface 
warfare, employing anti-ship cruise missiles against high-value US surface war -
ships such as aircraft carriers. ASCM-carrying bombers constitute a longer-range 
threat. Within the First Island Chain, shorter-range strike fighters with maritime 
strike capability, and surface warships, including numerous missile craft, would 
also carry ASCMs. With the density of cruise missile and other precision-guided 
anti-ship munition threats increasing as the distance to the Chinese mainland 
decreases, efforts to thin out these capabilities would be an important element of 
neutralizing the PLA A2/AD threat.
Un D e R se A  oP e RATI ons.  AirSea Battle’s undersea operations center on two 
missions. The first is defeating the offensive PLA submarine threat to US and al -
lied surface forces, auxiliaries, and friendly merchant ships, as well as the threat 
posed to selected US and allied targets on land by any PLA submarines armed 
with land-attack cruise missiles. The second is countering PLA threats to US  
submarines operating within the First Island Chain. 
ASW is becoming increasingly difficult, even for US ASW forces, due to the 
very low signatures of the modern conventionally powered submarines that the 
PLA is expected to have in significant numbers by the early 2020s. While US 
ASW assets will provide some localized defense (i.e., against submarines operat -
ing within torpedo range of naval formations operating in the open ocean), it will 
62 For a notional, if not necessarily realistic, depiction of how a fielded ASBM capability could 
change future US naval operations, see Andrew Erickson and David Yang, “On the Verge of a 
Game-Changer,” US Naval Institute Proceedings , May 2009, p.26–32 and James Kraska, “How 
the United States Lost the Naval War of 2015,” Naval War College Review, Winter 2010, p. 35–45.
63 Department of Defense, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress on the 
Military Power of the People’s Republic of China, 2009 , pp. 23–26.
The projected PLA 
anti-ship ballistic 
missile capability 
is clearly the most 
dramatic emerging 
threat to US Navy 
operations in the 
Western Pacific.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 43
be difficult to assure high probability of detection of all PLA submarines within 
the weapons-release range of their long-range anti-ship cruise missiles. 
Interrupting the receipt of targeting information to PLA submarines would 
clearly aid the defense. However, even denied such information, the subma -
rines would remain threats as long as they remained on patrol since they could 
still locate and target US forces using their own visual, sonar and electronic  
intercept sensors.
To reduce that threat over time requires a systematic ASW campaign combin -
ing the destruction of those Chinese submarines on patrol and denying those 
in port access to the sea. Submarines are generally most vulnerable transiting 
in and out of their bases.
64 Moreover, diesel submarines have much less endur -
ance than do their nuclear counterparts, thus they would need to return to port 
to resupply fairly frequently. These transits would provide potential engagement 
opportunities for US submarines. Deploying smart mobile mines might prove 
particularly effective in attriting PLA submarines and/or blocking them from  
access to their bases.
An attrition campaign would likely take months to materially reduce the 
submarine threat. Moreover, China could exploit its long coastline with its 
numerous bases and ports to diffuse US and allied ASW efforts. Thus an effective 
ASW campaign would likely take months and require considerable resources, 
principally US SSNs. 
The Chinese undersea threat also involves deploying undersea systems to 
provide significant undersea situational awareness. As noted earlier, integrated 
sensor and weapon arrays could pose significant threats to US submarines. At 
the least, they could force substantial lengthening of the operational timelines 
required to complete various missions and tasks as submarines would have to 
proceed much more cautiously. At worst, they could effectively deny significant 
undersea areas to US and allied submarines. Consequently, AirSea Battle accords 
high priority to neutralizing these undersea networks early in a conflict to enable 
US undersea operations, including the swift prosecution of the ASW campaign.
Countering such Chinese systems in a timely manner would entail a high de -
gree of pre-war “intelligence preparation of the undersea battlespace” to include 
recurrent, comprehensive mapping of the PLA’s undersea systems. Such map -
ping would, however, be resource-intensive. While some of this could be done 
by UUVs,
65 significant submarine missions would be required. Given the large 
64 On the premise that China initiated the conflict, all its functional submarines would presumably 
have left port and proceeded to their assigned patrol areas well before hostilities commenced. 
However, they would need to return to port periodically for refueling and rearming.
65 Civilian UUVs are already doing substantial wide-area hydrographic and oceanographic research 
for commercial and scientific purposes. Some of their systems and technologies have military 
applications.
AirSea Battle 
accords high priority 
to neutralizing 
undersea networks 
early in a conflict.

44  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
expanses within the First Island Chain, the specific areas and levels of effort  
invested would need to be carefully prioritized. 
Force Sustainment versus Counter Force Sustainment
There are three separate issues that must be addressed with respect to AirSea Battle 
and force sustainment: force structure and capacity constraints; payload and global 
inventory constraints; and operational logistics and sustainment issues.
Fo R ce sTRU c TUR e A n D  cAPA c IT y c ons TRAI n T s.  Given the current US force 
structure and defense program, projected US forces by the next decade would al -
most certainly be insufficient to preserve a stable military balance and maintain 
a high degree of deterrent capability against the kind of PLA capabilities and op -
erations presented above.66 In particular, the US and its allies would likely suffer 
from significant shortages of submarines, maritime patrol aircraft, long-range 
penetrating bombers, aerial tankers, ballistic missile defenses, survivable satel -
lites, robust battle networks, autonomous unmanned systems, and escort ships.67 
Of course, a weak deterrent invites not only aggression but coercion. It also serves 
to weaken the confidence of American allies in US security guarantees. 
In various analyses of potential future conflict, submarines typically are over-
tasked to conduct strikes (independently or in support of other missions), ISR, 
Special Forces infiltration and exfiltration, ASW (including offensive mining), 
and ASUW concurrently. Some speculate that in the future submarines could 
even be tasked to assist with space asset reconstitution, cyber attack, EW and bal-
listic missile defense. US submarines can do any of the traditional missions — but 
not all at once.
68 
If a future program fields a small number of penetrating bombers, their pri -
mary role will likely be limited to attacks against very high value targets, since 
they will lack the mass for larger-scale attacks. A larger mix of standoff and pen -
etrating platforms could increase the scale and persistence of attacks US military 
forces could conduct, to include targets deep in China’s interior. This would signif-
icantly complicate Chinese defense planning. Conversely, limiting US operations 
66 China’s continued military buildup could stimulate a US response designed to preserve a stable 
military balance. However, as the US experience leading up to World War II is not encouraging, 
this cannot be assumed. Moreover, given the rapidly declining US fiscal posture, it may not have 
the same capacity to respond that it has had over the last century.
67 Based on typical deployment patterns during periods of tension, US forces would have as few as 
fifteen submarines and fifteen long-range penetrating bombers, plus residual B-52 and B-1 bomb -
ers, available in the Western Pacific at conflict’s start. These would not represent much of a deter -
rent when confronted with an adversary with powerful A2/AD-dedicated forces.
68 Submarines are a particularly scarce resource given the heavy mission demands placed upon 
them. This problem will only worsen as the current force of about fifty-five SSNs decreases to as 
few as forty by the late 2020s.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 45
to a single dimension — standoff or penetrating — would dramatically simplify 
the PLA’s defense requirements, leaving more resources for offensive operations.
The PLA’s employment of nuclear submarines (and long-range diesel subma -
rines if fielded) against US SLOCs would require US and/or allied convoy escort 
ships in considerable numbers. At present, these escort tasks could be carried out 
only by AEGIS ships that would be in high demand for other missions. The Navy’s 
Littoral Combat Ships (LCS), scheduled for production in significant numbers 
over the next decade, will not be suitable for such escort duty as currently con -
figured due to their lack of defensive capability against air and surface threats.
The US aerial refueling fleet could be under considerable stress given the large 
Western Pacific intra-theater distances, the need to maintain more orbits to sup -
port operations over a vastly larger expanse than in other theaters, and the added 
demand for fuel if aircraft have to fly much greater distances due to an inability to 
operate from forward bases. Similarly, the maritime patrol aircraft fleet would be 
heavily tasked for surveillance and ASW missions over very large operating areas.
Another force structure constraint during the early stages of a conflict is that 
a large proportion of the available naval forces (i.e., those not in extended main -
tenance periods) based in CONUS would not immediately be available in the -
ater. Given the vast distances involved, reinforcements would take weeks if not 
months to arrive. 
A qualitatively different kind of force structure constraint is presented by the 
de facto inability of significant portions of US programmed military forces (e.g., 
high-value surface units, including aircraft carriers and their short-ranged tacti -
cal strike aircraft, and short-ranged land-based strike aircraft if forward bases 
are damaged) to operate at acceptable levels of risk within the Chinese A2/AD 
threat rings. As long as that threat is not considerably attenuated, these forces 
effectively do not exist for operational purposes. 
One key consequence of these collective constraints is that US forces are un -
likely to be able to conduct the large-scale, near-simultaneous operations that have 
enabled the very short major campaigns to which they have grown accustomed.
P A y L o AD  A n D  G L o BAL  M U n ITI ons Inven T o R y c ons TRAI n T s.  US forces will 
face considerable ordnance constraints. Some shortages will be due to the great 
quantities of ordnance needed to support the type of large-scale operations that 
will be necessary. Others will stem from inherent platform limitations. Still oth-
ers will simply be due to shortages in the US military’s global inventory of partic-
ular types of weapons (e.g., LACMs, ASCMs, SAMs, AAMs, JDAMs, and JASSMs) 
and expendable sensors (e.g., sonobuoys).
69 The US military also lacks depth in its 
sea- and land-based ballistic missile defense magazines. The situation is unlikely 
69 Among the reasons for this are the high unit cost of many such weapons and the potential for block 
obsolescence that could render costly investments in larger stockpiles of rounds worthless.

46  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
to improve as missile attackers will almost certainly retain their advantage as 
long as very expensive kinetic kill interceptors are the only effective means avail -
able to the defense. Peacetime inventories of precision-guided munitions would 
be exhausted quickly in a high-intensity war against a powerful enemy. The 
ability to sustain such a war without a prolonged operational pause potentially  
lasting months would require considerable increases in global inventories. 
Exacerbating these constraints, the US defense industrial base, as currently 
configured, would be unable to ramp up production of many items, given a lack 
of surge capacity and insufficient numbers of highly-trained skilled workers. 
Moreover, the inherent complexity of producing some items (e.g., satellites, air 
platforms) precludes compression of production timelines.
Given the growing PLA ballistic missile threat, there is considerable risk in 
storing large amounts of expensive ordnance at forward bases such as Guam, even 
in hardened storage facilities. But the principal alternative, moving ordnance to 
forward bases on an “as-needed” basis entails shipping it along potentially vul -
nerable SLOCs and assumes that the handling facilities there will remain intact.
Platform payload limitations present a very different kind of constraint. 
Submarines will be able to operate considerably further forward than high-value 
surface warships; however, they carry only a relatively small number of offensive 
weapons.
70 Once these weapons are expended, submarines must transit to rear 
areas to rearm, as they cannot be rearmed at sea.
The Navy’s AEGIS ships are also payload-constrained. Cruisers have 122 ver -
tical launching system (VLS) cells, while the more numerous destroyers have 
96 cells. These normally contain a mix of offensive land-attack cruise missiles 
and defensive SAMs (including anti-ballistic missile variants). 71 Even if all cells 
were dedicated to the air and missile defense role, in the wake of an initial PLA 
ballistic missile barrage (as called for in PLA doctrine), early magazine exhaus -
tion would be highly likely, and would require the ships to retire to rear areas to  
rearm, as they too cannot rearm with missiles at sea. 72 
The short-range stealthy tactical strike aircraft in DoD’s Program of Record 
carry small numbers of munitions internally in order to maintain their 
70 The four Ohio-class SSGNs can carry up to 154 Tomahawk missiles each. However, it is unlikely 
that more than one or two would be available in theater early in a conflict. Even then, there would 
be the question of what difference those relatively few cruise missiles would make in the context 
of a large-scale conflict. The Navy currently has no plans to replace these SSGNs when they reach 
their projected end of service life in the late 2020s.
71 By the end of FY2010, the Navy will have 21 AEGIS ships with BMD defense capabilities, and 32 
by FY2015. The goal is to upgrade all AEGIS ships to make them BMD-capable. 
72 Conservation of rounds is rendered even more difficult in that most operational firing doc -
trines call for firing multiple SAMs per engagement to ensure a sufficiently high probability of 
kill. For example, see General Patrick O’Reilly, USA, unclassified statement before the House 
Appropriations Committee Defense Subcommittee of April 2, 2009, http://appropriations.house.
gov/witness_testimony/DE/Patrick_OReilly_04_02_09.pdf. 
Peacetime 
inventories of 
precision-guided 
munitions would 
be exhausted 
quickly in a 
high-intensity 
war against a 
powerful enemy.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 47
low-observable profile. Thus even if these aircraft were able to reach their targets, 
their limited payloads would require either large numbers of attackers — which 
would be difficult to support with tanker aircraft across the enormous distances 
in the theater — or sustained operations over a long period of time.
oP e RATI on AL  Lo GI s TI cs A n D  sU s TAI n M en T  We AK nesses.  Sustaining op -
erations logistically past the Second Island Chain (i.e., west of Guam) will present 
a particularly difficult challenge for the Air Force and Navy, primarily because of 
the vulnerability of the few US bases in the theater and the small size of the naval 
logistics force. In addition to this, there will be increased demands on the aerial 
tanker fleet if US forces are denied access to forward bases.
There is no “silver bullet” solution to protecting forward bases and restoring 
them to “sanctuary” status. The best that can be hoped for is that some combina -
tion of the standard active and passive defensive measures, coupled with repair 
and remediation capabilities and capacities, can enable their periodic use and 
force the PLA to divert resources in attempting to put them back out of action.
The current naval logistics force is sized to support the peacetime operations 
of deployed naval forces, and is not programmed to increase significantly in size 
or capacity. Thus it is prima facie unable to resupply large numbers of naval re -
inforcements deploying to the Western Pacific. While some work-arounds would 
no doubt become available (e.g., employing allied assets, mobilizing Maritime 
Administration assets), the limited numbers of replenishment ships would impose 
considerable constraints on naval operations during the initial stages of a conflict. 
The shortage of logistics assets will be further aggravated if forward port fa -
cilities become unusable due to PLA missile barrages, air strikes, or attempts 
at blockade through the use of mines and/or submarines. If ships are unable to 
enter port safely or use port facilities, resupply would be limited to underway 
replenishment, since other types of supply ships (i.e., those not built for under -
way replenishment) could not unload their cargoes in port for later loading onto 
moored warships. Rearming forward would not be possible. Here too, the huge 
distances entailed in moving supplies forward to the Western Pacific from rear 
areas would greatly extend operational timelines.
***
Having examined the principle operational problems posed by a robust A2/
AD operational approach in the Western Pacific theater, we now turn to the  
substance of a candidate AirSea Battle concept to address them.
Sustaining 
operations 
logistically 
will present a 
particularly difficult 
challenge for the Air 
Force and Navy.



As stated in Chapter 1, an AirSea Battle concept 73 is primarily about combat at 
the operational level of war in the Western Pacific Theater. To be viable and use -
ful, it must therefore address the operational problems (described in Chapter 2) 
that would be created by a robust PLA A2/AD operational approach designed to 
exclude US military forces from the region. 
In addressing this operational challenge, it is necessary to make some key 
assumptions regarding the characteristics of a major conventional Sino-US 
conflict. These assumptions involve factors that will likely exert a significant in -
fluence on the prospects for a successful allied defense of the Western Pacific. To 
the extent that an assumption works in favor of the United States and its allies, 
the AirSea Battle concept outlined below should also be evaluated in the event 
the assumption proves incorrect. Similarly, in those cases where an assumption 
works against the United States and its allies, the situation should also be as -
sessed should it prove false.
The military balance in Central Europe along the intra-German border 
between NATO and the Warsaw Pact during the Cold War provides a useful 
historical example. Two factors were believed to have a major effect on the military 
balance: the amount of warning time NATO would have prior to a Warsaw Pact 
attack, and alliance cohesion. Thus the viability of NATO’s defense was assessed 
assuming various levels of attack warning; some more favorable, some less so. 
The military balance was also assessed employing different assumptions as to 
whether or not “fault lines” would emerge between the Soviets and their Eastern 
European satellites, and whether or not the NATO allies would respond to an 
attack in “lock-step.”
73 This chapter discusses an AirSea Battle concept, as distinguished from doctrine . Whereas a doc -
trine deals with extant assets, a concept allows for consideration of potential as well as actual 
forces and capabilities that exist in the force now or are in the Program of Record.
c h APT e R  3  >  t he Su BS t A n C e of A n AirSe A  B A ttle Con C ept

50  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
To those who would argue that a Sino-US conflict is “unthinkable,” it should 
be emphasized again that the purpose of “thinking about the unthinkable” is that 
by doing so, ways can be found to sustain and enhance a stable military balance 
in the Western Pacific, thus keeping conflict in the domain of the “unthinkable.” 
Toward this end, AirSea Battle suggests what an overall US Western Pacific 
military campaign might look like, to include its principal components, required 
missions and tasks, how these would be accomplished, and by what forces. 
Important elements requiring consideration include operational timelines and 
the timing, prioritization and sequencing, and tempo of operations. 
Criti CA l A SS umption S
The following assumptions underpin the subsequent discussion of a point-of-
departure AirSea Battle concept:
The Un IT e D  sTAT es W ILL  n o T  In ITIAT e h os TILITI es.  This paper assumes that 
China would have the strategic and operational initiative at the outset of war and 
that, even with warning, US military forces would not be authorized to preempt 
imminent Chinese military action kinetically. Thus the United States must be 
able to recover from the initial blow by aggressor forces and sustain operations 
for the concept to be viable.
M UTUAL  nU c L e AR  De T e RR ence h o LD s.  Tacit agreement not to use or threat-
en the use of nuclear weapons would appear to be in both parties’ interests. There 
have been several wars where weapons of mass destruction were possessed by 
one side or the other, and yet were not employed, even by the defeated power. In 
World War II, Germany accepted a total defeat at the hands of the allies without 
employing its formidable arsenal of chemical weaponry. In the First Gulf War, 
Iraq suffered a severe defeat but did not resort to the use of its chemical weapons. 
If this assumption does not hold and nuclear warfare ensues, then the character 
of the conflict would change so dramatically as to render discussion of major con-
ventional warfare
74 irrelevant. Of course, an AirSea Battle operational concept 
and its associated capabilities are intended to deter conventional acts of coercion 
or aggression, thereby reducing the prospects of a nuclear confrontation.
In T e LLIG ence A n D  W AR n I n G  (I&W) W ILL  Be L IMIT e D .  A notional conflict such 
as that postulated in Chapter 2 could occur after a prolonged period of tension, 
74 The term “conventional war” here denotes a conflict not involving nuclear weapons by either side. 
Such a war likely would involve space warfare and cyber warfare, to a far greater extent than pre -
viously seen in “conventional” wars.
The purpose of 
“thinking about the 
unthinkable” is so 
that ways can be 
found to sustain and 
enhance a stable 
military balance, 
thus keeping conflict 
in the domain of the 
“unthinkable.”

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 51
indirect confrontation, and possibly direct confrontation. While strategic warn -
ing might thus be reasonably assumed, surprise at the operational and tactical 
levels cannot be ruled out.
J APA n A n D  A U s TRALIA  W ILL  Be Ac TI ve U s  A LLI es.  Given the fundamental 
values and interests these allies share with the United States, it seems reasonable 
to assume that if the stakes in a confrontation were sufficiently high to trigger 
a Sino-US conflict, they would be high for US allies as well. Japan’s participa -
tion would significantly complicate Chinese planning and operations by forcing 
a major diversion of military forces that would otherwise be available for use 
against the United States and its allies. In addition to Japan’s capable military 
forces, Japanese territory offers some measure of strategic depth to the allies in 
its eastern and northern regions as well as important physical barriers to enable 
allied ASW operations. Japan also possesses numerous air and port facilities, 
some of which are only targetable by longer-range and thus scarcer PLA ballis -
tic missiles. If Japanese territory were no longer available, US power-projection 
options would be significantly constrained. Similarly, Australia would provide 
strategic depth and capable forces for peripheral campaigns, perhaps involving 
sea control and support operations in the eastern Indian Ocean, Oceania and the 
South China Sea.
n e IT he R  U s  no R  c h I nese Te RRIT o R y W ILL  Be Acco RD e D  sA nc TUAR y 
sTATU s.  Neither belligerent will be off-limits to strikes by the other. At a mini -
mum, selected US conventional counterforce strikes  — both kinetic and non- 
kinetic (e.g., cyber) — inside China will be authorized from the conflict’s onset. A 
limited number of very high-leverage targets, principally those related to China’s 
air defenses, command and control,  ISR, and counter-space/space control, as 
well as fixed-site and mobile ballistic missiles (including production sites), lie 
at the heart of the PLA’s A2/AD operational approach. According these targets 
sanctuary status would severely undermine US attempts to maintain a stable 
military balance in the Western Pacific and, as such, decrease the effectiveness 
of deterrence.
sPA ce W ILL  Be c on T es T e D . If China were willing to take the extreme risk of 
initiating war in the first place, it would hardly hesitate to conduct attacks against 
vulnerable US space systems. The United States would conduct counter-space 
operations upon the outbreak of hostilities.
A P R o L on G e D W AR Wo ULD F A vo R T he Un IT e D sTAT es. Owing to the US advan -
tage in maritime forces and its global basing posture, during a large-scale con -
flict China’s seaborne trade flows would be cut off, with an eye toward exerting 

52  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
major stress on the Chinese economy and, eventually, internal stress.75 Given this 
assumption, a key US objective in any conflict must be to deny China a quick vic-
tory, which it could obtain by inflicting such setbacks to US military capabilities 
and assets that the United States would not elect to continue the conflict; driving 
a major ally (e.g., Japan) out of the war; or making an eventual US victory appear 
so prolonged or costly that the American people would lose the will to sustain  
the war efforts.76 
A C A ndid A te AirSe A  B A ttle C A mp A ign
A candidate AirSea Battle operational concept must take into account various 
important components (both concurrent and sequential) of the overall campaign, 
the size and capabilities of the forces involved, and the geography of the theater of 
operations. Given the assumption that US and allied forces will receive, at best, 
tactical warning, the discussion that follows posits that at the initiation of hostili-
ties US military forces in theater are not fully generated (i.e., reinforced). Given 
strategic warning, these forces might be somewhat greater than those normally 
in theater for deterrence and crisis stability purposes, given the growing tensions 
that would likely precede the conflict. Still, most US forces would remain in or 
near their routine operating areas, and thus need to move into theater following 
the failure of deterrence and the outbreak of conflict.
The successful execution of the AirSea Battle campaign described below would 
depend heavily on whether the US military would have been able to make signifi-
cant changes to the Program of Record over the coming decade. Those changes 
would be designed to reduce the effectiveness of the initial PLA blows, conduct 
vigorous counterattacks to minimize the amount of damage to US and allied forc-
es, and set conditions to sustain a follow-on campaign (prolonged if necessary) to 
achieve US war objectives. 
The AirSea Battle campaign has two distinct stages.
77 The initial, early stage, 
commencing with the outbreak of actual hostilities, would comprise these four 
distinct lines of operation: 
75 As an historical analogy, the Royal Navy’s World War I blockade helped to create major internal 
stresses that significantly contributed to the collapse of the German war effort in 1918.
76 Note, however, that duration in time versus US advantage may not be linear, but might follow a 
bell curve; while China might feel growing pressures for a considerable time, this could become 
offset by growing war-weariness among the US public, especially if persistent cyber attacks and 
negative economic consequences of the conflict exacted growing costs at home.
77 “Stages” is used here advisedly to avoid use of “phases,” which has become associated with distinct 
sequential operations. Thinking in terms of “phases,” as the US military has become accustomed 
to in recent years, would be suboptimal in an AirSea Battle context. It is more useful to think in 
terms of the fluid interplay of lines of operations and the elements comprising them along varying 
timelines, which themselves may change, depending on enemy actions or on suddenly emerging 
opportunities. 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 53
>> Withstanding the initial attack and limiting damage to US and allied forces 
and bases;
>> Executing a blinding campaign against PLA battle networks;
>> Executing a suppression campaign against PLA long-range, principally strike 
systems;
>> Seizing and sustaining the initiative in the air, sea, space and cyber domains.
These lines of operation and their key sub-components would have differing 
execution timelines. While some would unfold in parallel, the initiation of others 
would depend on progress being made in other aspects of the campaign. Many 
forces and capabilities would be in high demand across multiple lines of opera -
tion, forcing tough decisions regarding their employment. Some sub-components 
would likely be resolved much more rapidly than others. For example, efforts to 
deny PLA surface ships access in the East China Sea could be a question of weeks, 
while the ASW campaign to neutralize the PLA submarine force could last for 
months. 
The follow-on second stage would comprise various subsequent operations 
and measures that would contribute to the larger US strategy creating options 
to resolve a prolonged conventional conflict on favorable terms and reverse any 
initial military gains by the adversary. These would include:
>> Executing a protracted campaign that includes sustaining and exploiting the 
initiative in various domains;
>> Conducting “distant blockade” operations;
>> Sustaining operational logistics; and
>> Ramping up industrial production (especially precision-guided munitions).
There would not necessarily be a clean break between stages. Some follow-on 
operations would simply be continuations of those already ongoing. Nor would 
there be a clear temporal distinction between stages, in that certain second-stage 
operations may be conducted while first-stage operations are under way e.g., 
deployment of assets to distant blockade stations). 
Withstanding the i nitial Attack
During the pre-conflict confrontation or crisis period, regional allies and security 
partners clearly would expect US forces to remain forward and be reinforced 
to demonstrate commitment to allies, and to deter further provocative acts by 

54  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
China, to include coercion or aggression. 78 Conversely, evacuating US military 
forces from particularly vulnerable forward bases, for example Kadena Air Base 
or failing to move additional key assets such as strike aircraft to Guam or other 
forward bases could well be seen politically as signs of serious weakness by 
wavering allies. Placing US forces in these vulnerable locations, however, could 
result in greater losses in the event deterrence failed.
Assuming that the United States would have only days of operational and tac -
tical warning, US and allied forces would undertake as many defensive measures 
as possible, while posturing available forces to execute limited high-priority of -
fensive operations while the United States and its allies are weathering the initial 
PLA offensive. Clearly, the greater the warning time, the more thoroughgoing the 
allied defensive preparatory measures would be. 
For air assets, the normal defensive “operating under threat” principles 
and measures pertain, to be carried out as far in advance of possible attack as 
possible.
79 They include:
>> Deploying attack warning systems; 
>> Positioning active and passive base defenses, including moving high-value as -
sets (e.g., stealth aircraft) into hardened shelters and air- and sea-based BMD 
assets to pre-assigned stations (land-based BMD assets would presumably al -
ready be emplaced, though additional assets could be moved into theater if 
circumstances permitted);
80
>> Executing tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs)81 to support short-notice, 
rapid aircraft launch operations, and rapid repair and remediation efforts;
78 This point has been raised in particular by senior foreign military officers participating in various 
CSBA events.
79 Clearly there are implicit assumptions that the prerequisites for carrying out some of these 
measures would have been put in place beforehand. These will be addressed in the “Candidate 
Initiatives” discussion in Chapter 4.
80 The Air Force is studying an Air-Launched Hit-to-Kill (ALHK) ballistic missile defense system 
that envisions fighter aircraft carrying missiles for both boost-phase and terminal-phase in -
terception missions. The operating concept for a Network Centric Airborne Defense Element 
(NCADE) envisions using the host aircraft providing much of the lift needed to position the inter -
ceptor for attack, enabling a relatively small, cheap missile to be employed for the mission. This 
is in contrast to another, nearer-term, concept exploring use of F-15 fighters to carry far more 
expensive PAC-3 missiles for this purpose. See, for example, http://www.spacewar.com/reports/ 
The_Air_Launched_Hit-to-Kill ABM Solution, Part 12_999.html, and http://www.satellitetoday 
.com/smd/Schwartz-Mulls-Aircraft-Mounted-Air-Launched-Hit-To-Kill-Missile-Defense-
Systems_31516.html. In theory this mission could be conducted by both land- and sea-based 
aircraft.
81 Tactics, techniques and procedures (TTP) provide the detailed direction on how various tasks and 
operations are to be carried out. For the purpose of this report, the more familiar term “tactics” 
will be used as shorthand.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 55
>> Executing comprehensive aircraft dispersal operations to rear area bases or 
satellite fields82 (if aircraft can be properly supported logistically there), and
>> Conducting responsive distributed logistics operations to sustain widely dis -
persed air operations.
The principal objectives of these efforts are to minimize the damage to bases 
and air assets, while complicating enemy planning and increasing the PLA’s un -
certainty that their missile offensive will be effective. In so doing, the expectation 
is that the time required to get bases back into at least partial operation, for pur -
poses both of using them and placing additional demands on the PLA’s limited 
supply of longer-ranged ballistic missiles, will be significantly reduced.
Naval forces in port at forward bases (primarily in Japan) would be postured 
to get underway for sustained periods on short notice (24–48 hours). Upon warn-
ing, US and Japanese AEGIS ships would proceed to pre-assigned BMD stations. 
Particularly high-value units such as carriers would remain or move beyond the 
PLA’s A2/AD threat range and operate in accordance with appropriate opera -
tional deception precepts to avoid attack. Assuming the program lives up to its 
supporters’ expectations, carrier-based aircraft could be employed as part of the 
BMD effort if equipped with air-launched hit-to-kill (ALHK) weapons. Assets 
assigned operational deception and electronic warfare missions would move to 
preplanned stations.
US and allied submarines would move to forward stations and commence 
ASW operations (including operations inside the First Island Chain and ASW 
barrier operations along the Ryukyus island chain and across the Luzon Strait). 
US SSGNs and selected SSNs, allied submarines, and other undersea strike sys -
tems would be positioned in Chinese littoral waters for ISR, support for joint 
strike missions (e.g., SEAD), and missions against undersea infrastructure tar -
gets. Local ASW operations would be conducted near the approaches to allied and 
US Western Pacific major ports and naval bases, including Guam and Hawaii.
On the assumption that Kadena, Guam and satellite bases elsewhere in the 
Marianas would be rendered unusable by PLA missile strikes at least temporarily 
early in any major conflict, US air and missile defense reinforcements would flow 
into eastern Japanese bases to reinforce JASDF defenses against PLA air attacks 
coming from across the East China Sea, and possibly the Sea of Japan. Such early 
reinforcements would be important in helping defend targets in Japan and stiffen 
Japanese resistance and resolve. 
From outside the Western Pacific Theater of Operations (WPTO), ongoing 
operations would include:
82 These might include locations such as Tinian, Saipan, and Palau, which have airfields dating back 
to World War II, but which would require substantial improvements to support modern air opera -
tions, including expanded logistical support systems and possibly some hardening.

56  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
>> Moving reinforcing naval and air units into theater; 83
>> Moving additional precision-guided munitions stocks into theater;
>> Initiating convoy escort and other SLOC protection measures.
The great trans-Pacific distances dictate that naval reinforcements based in 
the continental United States (CONUS) would take weeks to arrive in the WPTO. 
Even warships operating in the Persian Gulf would take a week to steam at high 
speed as far as Singapore. Air reinforcements could arrive far more rapidly, but 
their operations could be impeded by damaged bases and operational logistics 
bottlenecks (e.g., insufficient fuel, parts, and ordnance available forward for 
sustained operations).
e xecuting a Blinding Campaign
The central AirSea Battle competition between the PLA and the US and allied 
militaries may be characterized as a “scouting battle” in which both sides strive 
on a continuous basis to find and strike the other’s key targets while denying 
the other side the ability to do the same. This battle would be fought in all war -
fare domains, including space, cyberspace and the undersea. The effectiveness 
of the PLA’s A2/AD battle network is critically dependent on its ability to detect, 
identify and target approaching forces at extended range; indeed, the PLA’s ISR 
systems could be considered the Achilles’ heel of its A2/AD approach. The US 
military is also highly dependent on the functioning of its battle networks. 
Accordingly, both sides would seek to wage “blinding campaigns” whose 
dual objectives are to deny the adversary vital ISR information by destroying or 
degrading its C2 and sensor networks; and to protect its own capabilities. 
The scouting battle would start well before hostilities commenced. Intelligence 
preparation of the battlespace in all domains may have been taking place for years 
beforehand. Non-lethal, non-kinetic and probably unattributable operations 
would be undertaken for the purpose of conducting network reconnaissance and 
implanting the means to execute attacks immediately at the onset of hostilities. 
The cyber, space and undersea domains would have to be “mapped” recurrently 
and as thoroughly as possible to minimize the time required to execute attacks 
against key nodes and sites in these critical domains.
83 Such preparations would normally require several days for ships alerted for possible short-notice 
deployment and longer for those not alerted. Transit times for ships leaving from West Coast bases 
would require additional weeks to arrive in theater. Thus US naval forces in-theater could not be 
readily reinforced for a significant period. Air reinforcements would move mainly to allied bases 
not under direct threat of heavy PLA missile attack (e.g., eastern Japan, Australia), as the move -
ment of additional aircraft to vulnerable Western Pacific bases prior to hostilities would increase 
Chinese incentives to preempt. The ability to use such bases over time would depend heavily on 
the efficacy of base BMD defenses and progress in the missile suppression campaign.
The central 
AirSea Battle 
competition may 
be characterized 
as a “scouting 
battle” in which 
both sides would 
wage “blinding 
campaigns” to deny 
the adversary vital 
ISR information 
by destroying 
or degrading its 
C2 and sensor 
networks.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 57
During the run-up to hostilities, PLA and US forces would conduct “precursor” 
operations consisting of probes and deniable attacks in the cyber and undersea 
domains. Similarly, various measures would be taken to defend US space systems 
while posturing counter-space capabilities to disrupt Chinese space-based ISR. 
At the outset of hostilities, the US would immediately implement its blinding 
campaign. There would be a premium on early execution of offensive blinding ac-
tions, particularly those in the space and cyber domains since success or failure 
in these areas would have substantial second-order effects on the competition 
to exercise control in other domains. Of note, though unlikely, if early action to 
blunt PLA counter-space operations proved successful, US ability to access its 
space systems would provide powerful and cumulative advantages.
Blinding PLA systems is essential for AirSea Battle’s success in every other 
line of operation. The PLA’s loss of its space systems would degrade its ability 
both to target and to conduct battle damage assessments of targets not covered 
by other ISR systems. It would become particularly difficult to monitor US base 
repair and remediation efforts following PLA strikes on allied air bases, which 
is essential to optimize its plans for follow-on strikes. While fixed targets could 
still be struck on a recurring timeline, post-blinding PLA missile shots would  
essentially be “shots in the dark,” accelerating the depletion of the PLA’s long-
range missiles. If the US had established smaller “bare bones” air bases on is -
lands in the Second Island Chain (besides Guam), these bases could allow for 
limited sustained air operations as the PLA is confronted with playing a “shell 
game,” guessing which bases might be in operation and warrant a missile salvo.
Here the integrated aspect of AirSea Battle merits a theoretical example in the 
form of US and allied forward base defense. Let us assume that it takes ten PLA 
missiles to destroy a wholly undefended forward US base. Employing missile de -
fenses might raise the price to twenty PLA missiles. Let us further assume that 
US and allied efforts to blind the PLA’s scouting capability is generally successful 
and that the allies can proliferate the number of bases available for strike opera -
tions from one to, say, five. Now to ensure that forward-based allied strike air -
craft are suppressed, the PLA must target five bases, not one, raising the missile 
expenditure requirement to one hundred (twenty per base). Note that the allies 
would not have to provide missile defenses for each base, only the one base from 
which their strike aircraft are operating.
84 Then assume that each base is hard -
ened. The cost to conduct effective missile suppression operations for the PLA 
rises higher still. Finally, if US and ally suppression operations are even modestly 
successful in reducing the PLA’s ability to conduct optimum salvo missile strikes 
on friendly forward bases, this reduces the stress on allied missile defenses,  
further complicating the PLA’s problem — and raising its costs.
84 The term of art for this form of missile defense is “preferential defense.”
Blinding PLA 
systems is essential 
for AirSea Battle’s 
success in every 
other line of 
operation.

58  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
This brief excursion demonstrates two principles: first, AirSea Battle opera -
tions are strongly integrated; second, the relative ineffectiveness of kinetic kill 
missile defense interceptors does not mean that the allies’ defense of forward 
bases is a lost cause. Of course, mounting such a defense would likely incur sub -
stantial costs, and may pose difficult trade-offs in DoD’s program of record. The 
issue of how trade-offs might be made will be discussed presently.
Similarly, if the PLA could be denied adequate targeting data through disrup -
tion or destruction of its ISR and command-and-control networks, the threat 
from its offensive A2/AD systems against mobile targets (i.e., major surface 
combatants) would be significantly reduced. This would be particularly useful 
in terms of regaining or increasing naval freedom of maneuver over large areas.
Blinding PLA ISR Systems
An AirSea Battle campaign against China’s space-based systems would center 
on two actions: promptly neutralizing PLA on-orbit assets through non-kinetic  
means; and destroying key elements of the PLA’s counter-space capabilities. 
Success here could severely limit the PLA’s space-based situational awareness, 
seriously compromising its ability to attack US space systems, including those 
deployed as replacements for destroyed assets. To preclude continuing (and per -
haps fatal) damage to the US space architecture, these strikes would need to be 
executed promptly.
Other PLA ISR systems would be attacked in much the same way, with a par -
ticular emphasis on destroying or degrading those systems enabling long-range 
attacks. The PLA’s OTH radars constitute a particularly powerful sensor system 
for detecting ships and aircraft at great distances. Disabling these radars with 
kinetic and non-kinetic attacks would be among the earliest US strike priori -
ties. In the undersea domain, early efforts would focus on destroying any PLA  
sea-bottom arrays to facilitate the ASW campaign.
US blinding actions would include (see Figure 7):
>> Conducting early penetrating strikes on selected high-priority targets to deny 
PLA space situational awareness and to destroy key elements of the PLA’s 
ground-based counter-satellite capabilities;
>> Initiating offensive cyber warfare against PLA space systems, including 
ground control stations;85
85 The decision to engage in strategic-level cyber warfare would be made at the most senior level of 
government in view of the strategic and other (e.g., legal) issues entailed. Moreover, such opera -
tions would not necessarily be conducted (solely) by military organizations.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 59
>> Executing early penetrating strikes — both kinetic and non-kinetic — against 
PLA OTH radars and ground-based ISR nodes; 86
>> Disrupting PLA airborne ISR sensor and communications relay platforms; 87 
86 Destroying these radars would be vital to denying targeting data to long-range PLA strike systems 
such as ASBMs and ASCM-armed aircraft and submarines. 
87 Navy fighters operating well away from their carriers, which would remain outside the PLA’s A2/
AD threat range, could play an important role in this mission against such PLA systems operating 
far out to sea.
f i g u r e  7.  C h i n e S e  l o n g - r A n g e  r A d A r  
A n d  S p AC e  f AC i l i t i e S  A n d  A i r  d e f e n S e S  (2 0 1 0)
Image: CSBA
Source: John Pike, “Chinese Space Facilities,” GlobalSecurity.org, last modified August 16, 2009, accessed at http:/ /www.
globalsecurity.org/space/world/china/facility.htm on 24 March, 2010; Sean O’Connor, “China’s Other ASAT,” IMINT & 
Analysis, entry November 3, 2009, accessed at http:/ /geimint.blogspot.com/2009/11/chinas-other-asat.html on 24 
March, 2010; Sean O’Connor, “Worldwide SAM Site Overview,” IMINT & Analysis, entry March 20, 2010, accessed at 
http:/ /geimint.blogspot.com/2008/06/worldwide-sam-site-overview.html on 24 March, 2010.

60  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
>> Deploying area electronic warfare and operational deception platforms to 
deny or spoof PLA ISR systems; and
>> Severing Chinese undersea ISR and communications links. 88
Defensive Measures
Given the US military’s heavy dependence on space systems and the likelihood 
that the PLA will inflict substantial damage on them despite US defensive efforts, 
it would be important to develop alternatives to these systems. Such alternatives 
would include:
>> Deploying back-up airborne C2 and ISR systems to offset, if only partially, the 
loss of space systems;
>> Defending US support aircraft and airborne sensors and communications re -
lay platforms operating over the WPTO against PLA fighters armed with long-
range air-to-air missiles. 89 
Since it would be imprudent to assume US space assets will be spared at -
tack, various airborne sensors and components of battle network systems such 
as Battlefield Airborne Communications Nodes (BACN) should be deployed to 
provide supplementary capability or, in the event of lost space functionality, 
work-arounds. However, even if successful, these efforts will likely provide sig -
nificantly less capacity and bandwidth than on-orbit systems. 
To preserve as much of their effectiveness as possible in a space-degraded or 
space-denied environment, US and allied forces should assume they will conduct 
operations in this environment, and exercise and plan accordingly.
90 Both the Air 
Force and Navy should examine in detail those data flows and types that are es -
sential for operations under differing levels of capacity constraints. Similarly, both 
Services must become deeply familiar with those crucial functionalities and ca -
pacities with an eye toward prioritizing their defense and reconstitution, not only 
for Service-specific missions, but for their combined operational requirements.
91 
88 The severed links would include both civilian telecommunications lines and undersea sensor 
arrays. The latter would be part of the ASW sub-campaign.
89 Similarly, Navy fighters could play an important role in enabling otherwise vulnerable Air Force 
platforms to operate further forward over large ocean expanses than would be the case if they 
were unescorted. The Air Force could of course provide its own fighter escorts, but at the cost of 
imposing added burdens on the aerial refueling fleet.
90 During the latter part of the Cold War, the Navy routinely conducted multi-day “Smallpipe” exer -
cises simulating the loss of satellite communications during which units had to use much lower-
capacity high-frequency (HF) band transmitters and receivers for long-haul communications. 
91 The last US non-space-based electronic navigation system ceased operation on February 8, 2010, 
when the US Coast Guard shut down transmission of most of the LORAN-C navigation system, 
thereby leaving no global back-up system to GPS. See http://coastguard.dodlive.mil/index.
php/2010/02/coast-guard-terminates-loran-c-broadcast/.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 61
The Scouting Battle Continues
Assuming the loss of space systems for both sides, the “scouting battle” would 
continue. The PLA is projected to acquire large numbers of low-observable HALE 
ISR UAVs in coming years.92 Each side would likely attempt to extend its airborne 
ISR networks as far as necessary to accomplish their missions. Thus the PLA 
would extend its airborne ISR sensor and supporting communications relay net -
works, as a complement to its land-based over-the-horizon radars, sufficiently 
far out to keep US aircraft carriers and other surface ships beyond their effec -
tive land-attack ranges. Extended-range low-observable PLA HALE ISR UAVs 
could be used to provide surveillance of Guam and satellite bases and to provide 
Chinese commanders with BDA. 
Similarly, US airborne ISR platforms would extend forward to enable surveil -
lance and strike operations against PLA missile forces, surface ships and sub -
marines; to detect and engage PLA airborne ISR assets; and to defend friendly 
airborne stand-off strike and support platforms and surface ships from PLA  
air threats (possibly equipped with very long-range air-to-air missiles). In es -
sence, these operations would constitute the continuing competition between 
the two sides’ battle networks after their space-based components had been  
degraded or destroyed.
93 
The attrition of PLA ISR battle network components over maritime areas 
would be crucial to neutralizing the Chinese ASBM and long-range air- and sub -
marine-launched ASCM threat to allied surface ships. Classifying detections and 
targeting remains the most challenging aspect of striking mobile targets at sea. 
This is particularly true when operating amid clutter that requires discriminat -
ing among multiple sensor returns/contacts, whether real or apparent (i.e., gener-
ated through various operational deception techniques and means), to determine 
which targets should be attacked. Hence “blinding” PLA maritime targeting  
systems would be vital to reduce the threat to US and allied naval surface forces.
Rolling back PLA airborne ISR battle network elements would be an important 
new mission for carrier strike groups and their air wings in AirSea Battle. Upon 
cueing, carrier-based fighters would intercept and attrite PLA airborne ISR plat -
forms, thus helping to roll back the PLA airborne ISR battle networks. Coupled 
with the possible ALHK-based BMD role discussed earlier, carrier aircraft could 
be used to good effect in roles for which they were not primarily designed until 
92 See Annual Report to Congress on the Military Power of the People’s Republic of China, 2009, pp. 
23–26. Future US long-range/endurance UAVs (e.g., the N-UCAS), could also be deployed with 
sensor packages.
93 Tom Ehrhard and Robert Work have referred to this collision of battle networks as the “Outer 
Network Battle,” an allusion to the Navy’s 1980 “Outer Air Battle” concept. See Thomas P. Ehrhard 
and Robert O. Work, Range, Persistence, Stealth, and Networking: The Case for a Carrier-Based 
Unmanned Combat Air System (Washington: CSBA, 2008), p. 197–222.

62  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
their carriers could enter, at acceptable levels of risk, areas from which they could 
perform more traditional strike operations. 94 
Electronic warfare (EW) is waged to secure and maintain freedom of action 
in the electromagnetic (EM) spectrum. 95 All three of its elements, electronic at -
tack (EA), electronic protection (EP), and electronic support (ES), would be key 
elements of the “scouting battle.”96 PLA military writings place considerable em-
phasis on using various means of electronic attack to interfere with US sensors, 
data links and communications.
97 Thus effective electronic protection to counter 
PLA electronic attacks would be a critical enabler of virtually all other US and 
allied operations.
US military forces would also employ extensive electronic attack operations 
to deny PLA forces use of the EM spectrum. As their objective, these operations 
would degrade and deny PLA C2 and ISR information flows. In this role, US EA 
and ES efforts are critical enablers of offensive operations such as penetrating and 
stand-off strike. Dominating the EW competition as early as possible would be 
critical to winning the scouting battle and eventually prevailing in the conflict.
98 
Various kinds of deception (e.g., electronic deception) and techniques such as 
decoying and spoofing would be particularly useful in complicating PLA efforts 
to target high-value allied assets, especially aircraft and warships that could only 
94 In some sense, this would echo the Navy’s experience in World War II, when many warship types 
ended up being used in roles for which they had not been expressly designed (e.g., aircraft car -
riers emerging as the principle strike platforms, and battleships being used for shore bombard -
ment and anti-aircraft protection of carriers rather than as frontline battle line combatants). In 
another analogy from that war, by 1944–1945 carrier air wings were heavily stocked with fighters 
rather than the previous fighter-bomber mix in order to deal with the primitive “ISR networks” 
of Japanese patrol planes aiding massed kamikazes, which were in essence manned anti-ship 
cruise missiles. Today’s US carriers facing a formidable PLA A2/AD threat may have to be used in 
analogous fashion to deal with a conceptually similar if more formidable threat. This raises the 
question of whether future carriers need to be as sophisticated and costly as today’s are if their 
principal function in high-end A2/AD scenarios is to have their aircraft engaged primarily in roll -
ing back hostile airborne ISR and strike assets while the carriers remain well out of enemy strike 
range. Some observers raised similar questions during the 1980s when it appeared that much of 
a carrier’s air wing was dedicated primarily to defending the carrier against long-range ASCM-
armed Soviet Naval Aviation bombers, viz “the Outer Air Battle” concept that drove many of the 
carrier aircraft designs of the day.
95 Joint Publication 3-13.1, Electronic Warfare, January 27, 2007, p. v–vi, accessed at http://ftp.fas.
org/irp/doddir/ dod/jp3-13-1.pdf.
96 Electronic Warfare, pp. I-2–I-4.
97 See, for example, the 2006 Report to the Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, November 2006, Chapter 3, Section 1, “China’s Military Modernization,” 
pp. 127–138. The entire report may be access at http://www.uscc.gov/annual_report/2006/ 
annual_report_full_06.pdf.
98 One of the less well-known, but extremely important sub-competitions during World War II in 
the European theater was the relentless electronic warfare conducted by Germany and the Allies 
to support their air bombardment campaigns and counter the enemy’s. Efforts included the use 
of (and interference with) electronic navigation as well as early versions of many EA and EP tech -
niques in use today. Winning the EW sub-competition in a Sino-US conflict would almost cer -
tainly be at least as critical to success as it was nearly seventy years ago.
Dominating the 
EW competition as 
early as possible 
would be critical 
to winning the 
scouting battle and 
prevailing in the 
conflict.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 63
be struck by relatively scarce (and costly) PLA assets such as long-range air-to-air 
missiles and ASBMs.99 Ideally, such deception operations would cause the PLA to 
further deplete its inventories of key ordnance against false or low-priority targets.
Recurrently Probing PLA A2/AD Systems  
to Assess Level of Degradation
The scouting battle will not “stay won.” That is, there will be continuous efforts by 
both sides to mitigate, reconstitute or work around losses to their respective C2 
and ISR systems. Consequently, one of the most challenging problems confront -
ing allied forces involves performing continuous assessments of the state of PLA 
A2/AD battle networks, including particular sub-components, to determine the 
extent to which they are degraded or exhausted as a result of allied combat opera-
tions. The ability to conduct effective battle damage assessment operations is key 
to determining progress in the “scouting battle” and in setting the conditions for 
conducting allied follow-on operations in an extended conflict. 
Conducting such assessments is often challenging. The challenge will be 
greater still if the space-based assets that provide much of the US ISR intelli -
gence data are no longer available. Should this occur, it would put a premium 
on stealthy, long-range ISR platforms capable of penetrating into PLA-defended 
air space and surviving while loitering in search of high-value targets to con -
duct strike and ISR missions, including, inter alia , BDA. (Moreover, penetrat -
ing strike platforms equipped with ISR capabilities could provide near-real-time 
BDA on their own weapons effects.) Given the large intra-theater distances, such 
platforms would have to have long-range and high-endurance as well as stealth. 
These systems would be expensive and thus relatively scarce.
100 However, if prog-
ress is made in the scouting battle, it may be possible to introduce less advanced 
ISR platforms for use in areas where the PLA’s ISR and air defense capabilities 
have been substantially degraded. 
While it may be possible to obtain a sense of the overall degradation of the 
PLA’s ISR network, determining the degradation of a particular network or sys -
tem or the residual inventories of particularly dangerous or effective weapons 
such as ASBMs or long-range SAMs would be more problematic. Persistent al -
lied ISR scouting would be needed to assess changes in the PLA’s A2/AD battle 
networks status. Deception operations could be employed to incite system activa-
tion (e.g., of the PLA’s integrated air defenses) to identify and destroy them, and 
to induce fires (e.g., against false airborne targets) to help exhaust IADS SAM 
99 For a useful glossary of specialized terms, see http://www.sew-lexicon.com/Terms_list_overall.
htm#DD.
100 Though they are very expensive, US investments in high-end IRS assets could compel or inducing 
the PLA to invest even greater resources to develop and field costly countermeasures.
Effective battle 
damage assessment 
is key to determining 
progress in the 
“scouting battle.”

64  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
inventories.101 Toward this end allied forces would employ platforms or devices 
to generate false targets to trigger PLA defensive systems. Such platforms pre -
sumably would be equipped with deceptive emitters or other means to generate 
signatures sufficient to trigger a desired response. Of course, as with all decoys, 
these US and allied “deception” systems must be sufficiently inexpensive to be 
lost to enemy action. 
Even if these tactics succeed in triggering the expenditure (and hence deple -
tion) of key PLA assets such as advanced SAMs, this would probably not entirely 
eliminate the threat posed by such systems; just as the PLA’s ISR systems cannot 
be completely suppressed, neither can allied forces expect to eliminate all PLA 
missile inventories. New production, particularly of long-range ballistic missiles 
(including ASBMs), as well as SAMs, would be of particular concern: long-range 
ballistic missiles pose a major threat to allied Western Pacific bases (whose posi -
tion is fixed and known) and high-value naval units, while SAMS put US ISR and 
strike systems at risk. In view of this, selected PLA missile production and stor -
age facilities should be struck early in the conflict.
e xecuting a m issile-Suppression Campaign
Suppressing PLA Land-Based Offensive Missiles
Countering or thinning the PLA offensive missile threat is a principal AirSea 
Battle line of operation. Success is critical in preventing China from achieving 
a quick “knock-out” blow. This requires an integrated mix of offensive and de -
fensive measures such as those discussed previously. AirSea Battle missile sup -
pression operations are designed to suppress or disrupt the Chinese missile 
bombardment campaign, attrite fixed and mobile missile launchers, and prevent 
their regeneration to the maximum feasible extent.
Given the PLA’s formidable missile forces and the large-scale missile produc -
tion now under way in China, allied forces would initially confront a large mis -
sile target set (see Figure 8). Air Sea Battle calls for Air Force and Navy stealthy 
long-range strike and support platforms, 102 supported by submarine-launched 
weapons and sensors, to suppress PLA airborne and ground-based components  
101 In essence, these would be updated versions of the “Wild Weasel” tactics developed by the Air 
Force during the 1960s to induce SAM sites to activate their radar and expend missiles.
102 Current Navy strike fighters lack the range to participate in such strikes as long as the PLA A2/AD 
threat keeps carriers out of strike range. Until carrier air wings include stealthy extended-range 
manned or unmanned aircraft that can carry out long-range strike missions to enable the carrier 
to operate outside of the A2/AD threat ring, Navy participation in these missions will likely re -
main limited to submarine-launched missiles and support for Air Force strike missions. The only 
Navy aircraft currently under development that could feasibly participate in long-range strike 
missions from carriers operating outside of the PLA A2/AD threat range is the N-UCAS, which 
could employ ordnance, ISR, and EW payloads for either strike or support roles.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 65
of coastal IADS with kinetic and non-kinetic attacks. Standoff and penetrating 
allied airborne electronic attack (AEA) platforms would degrade critical PLA IAD 
nodes and SAM systems to create multi-axis corridors 103 through which US ISR, 
AEA, and strike platforms would attack Chinese land-based missile launchers 
and their C2 networks. Legacy bombers with precision-guided standoff munitions 
would strike known fixed missile emplacements, while long-endurance manned 
and unmanned stealthy penetrators, supported by on-board and off-board target 
103 Attacking from multiple axes greatly complicates the defender’s problems for the simple reason 
that he must distribute his defenses over a wider area. In particular, the allies’ ability to penetrate 
into China from the northeast, where defenses tend to be less dense, would offer significant opera -
tional advantages as well as increasing demands on the PLA defenders; hence the importance of 
extending air superiority from Japan out over the East China Sea. 
f i g u r e  8 .  p l A  B A l l i S t i C  m i S S i l e  B r i g A d e S  
A n d  A i r  d e f e n S e S  (2 0 1 0)
Image: CSBA
Source: Sean O’Connor, “Dragon’s Fire: The PLA’s 2nd Artillery Corps,” IMINT & Analysis, entry April 8, 2009, accessed 
at http:/ /geimint.blogspot.com/2009/04/dragons-fire-plas-2nd-artillery-corps.html/ on 24 March, 2010; and  Sean 
O’Connor, “Worldwide SAM Site Overview,” IMINT & Analysis, entry March 20, 2010, accessed at http:/ /geimint.
blogspot.com/2008/06/worldwide-sam-site-overview.html  on 24 March, 2010.

66  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
cueing (perhaps including SOF), would locate and attack mobile missile launch -
ers. Penetrating (i.e., stealthy) platforms would deploy towed and expendable air-
launched decoys to suppress air defenses, creating multiple false targets to confuse  
PLA airborne and surface-based air defense systems, and inducing the PLA to 
expend surface-to-air missiles and vector interceptor aircraft without effect. 
The combination of US standoff and penetrating strike capabilities would cre -
ate multi-dimensional and multi-directional challenges for PLA offensive mis -
sile operations. Sustained attacks using only standoff weapons against known 
fixed missile sites and C2 infrastructure would degrade the PLA’s ability to con -
duct effective coordinated follow-on strikes against US and allied land bases and 
maritime targets. However, limiting US missile suppression operations to attacks 
from standoff distances would create a one-dimensional defensive challenge for 
the PLA. Furthermore, standoff weapons with long flight times are generally in -
effective against mobile missile launchers, which can transition from firing mode 
to road-march mode and move within minutes. Survivable long-range aircraft 
that penetrate and persist in defended airspace, on the other hand, have the abil-
ity to detect and strike PLA mobile launchers forced to move by standoff attacks, 
greatly complicating the PLA’s offensive missile operations.
The scope and intensity of US stand-off and penetrating strikes against targets 
in mainland China clearly has escalation implications. The decision to conduct 
these strikes would likely be taken at the highest political levels of the allied gov -
ernments. As previously noted, strikes against very high-leverage targets (e.g., 
PLA ASAT systems) would be essential, not the least for the “scouting battle.” 
Striking other PLA targets in China, however, might be dependent on Chinese ac-
tions. For example, if PLA bombardment of a key ally such as Japan went beyond 
attacking military forces and sought to force Japan out of the war through terror 
attacks against the populace, or if a major cyber offensive on the US national 
electric grid were determined to have originated in China, the odds of large-scale 
strikes against PLA missiles and their launchers would increase. 
Synergies between Air Force and Navy Capabilities  
for the Blinding and Missile Suppression Campaigns
These two lines of operation intertwine. If efforts to blind PLA long-range sen -
sors are successful, the threat from its long-range strike systems is correspond -
ingly diminished. As that threat diminishes, short-range Air Force and Navy ISR 
and strike assets can be brought to bear.
The synergy between Air Force and Navy capabilities is particularly notewor -
thy in the nexus between these two lines of operation. Air Force counter-space op-
erations help to restore naval freedom of maneuver by negating PLA space-based 
ocean ISR. To the extent they are successful, Air Force operations to defend the 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 67
US space architecture sustain the space-based functionality critical to effective 
Navy operations. Correspondingly, the Navy could support Air Force counter- 
space efforts with its sea-based anti-satellite capability, though such kinetic 
means generally would not be preferred due to the orbital debris they create. The 
Navy’s missile defense forces could help in defending Air Force operating bases 
from PLA missile attacks. Navy attacks against PLA IADS and ISR systems from 
submarines and (potentially) N-UCAS could help enable penetrating Air Force 
strikes against critical mainland targets. Depending on the target, Navy assets 
could conduct such strikes as well. 
Finally, the PLA’s inventory of missiles and mobile launchers is too numerous 
and generally too difficult to find to realize a high level of destruction. However, 
by forcing PLA missile forces to increase substantially the amount of time they 
spend on moving and hiding, it may significantly limit the PLA’s ability to launch 
missile strikes in optimum salvoes. To the extent allied missile defense forces 
confront a “drizzle” of incoming PLA missiles rather than a “downpour,” their 
effectiveness could improve dramatically, especially if the threat of a saturation 
ballistic missile attack were eliminated. Moreover, by winning the scouting battle 
and denying PLA missiles targeting information, the blinding campaign further 
limits their effectiveness. 
Seizing the i nitiative 
Assuming China starts the hostilities, it would have the strategic and operational 
initiative in choosing when, where and how war begins. Given this advantage as 
well as potentially some measure of operational and tactical surprise, US and  
allied forces could incur significant and perhaps severe losses.
Initial US and allied efforts would therefore focus on preventing the PLA from 
scoring a “knock-out blow” that would result in a quick victory. Priority would be 
given to defending and aiding Japan and other security partners, US forces would 
also move to rapidly blunt PLA efforts to win the scouting battle by both blinding 
PLA forces and successfully maintaining US C2, communications and ISR con -
nectivity. This would have to be accomplished either through successful defense 
of the US space architecture or by establishing adequate battle network alterna -
tives. Finally, US and allied forces would begin operations aimed at destroying or 
degrading key PLA A2/AD capabilities. 
Following the initial Chinese attacks, over succeeding weeks and months US 
and allied forces would focus on seizing the initiative in all warfare domains. The 
priority here would be on continuing the operations described above and on sup-
pressing PLA missile attacks against both naval and land targets, particularly in 
Japan. The missile suppression campaign would employ standoff and penetrat -
ing strikes, supported by submarine and carrier-based anti-IADS strikes and 
Initial US and allied 
efforts would focus 
on preventing the 
PLA from scoring 
a “knock-out blow” 
that would result in 
a quick victory.
Over succeeding 
weeks and months 
US and allied 
forces would seize 
the initiative in all 
warfare domains.

68  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
EW platforms.104 Emphasis would also be given to reinforcing Japanese air and 
missile defense forces by US assets to maintain air superiority over Japan and 
extend it over the East China Sea and then down the Ryukyus island chain. 
At sea, the ASW campaign would be critical to dismantling a principal por -
tion of the PLA’s ASCM threat. Reducing the PLA ASCM-armed warship threat 
also reduces the number of potential missile shooters, which in turn increases 
the freedom of maneuver of US and allied naval forces. Maritime patrol aircraft 
armed with ASW ordnance and able to patrol large maritime areas would sup -
port submarine and surface ship ASW operations. Anti-surface warfare opera -
tions against PLA combatants, particularly ASCM shooters, would be conducted 
principally by land-based maritime strike aircraft equipped with stand-off anti-
ship weapons.
105 The objective of the ASUW operations would be to turn the wa -
ters inside the First Island Chain into a metaphorical “No Man’s Sea”106 until such 
time as the ASW and ASUW campaigns had rendered the PLA’s A2/AD threat 
sufficiently attenuated to permit US and allied operations there.
107 
To sum up, following the defense against the initial PLA attacks, and the com-
mencement of the blinding and missile suppression operations, US and allied 
actions would emphasize:
>> Enhancing the air and missile defense of Japan, and extending air superiority 
over the East China Sea and down the Ryukyus island chain;
>> Conducting sustained standoff and penetrating strikes, using multiple attack 
axes, against PLA ballistic missile targets (including missile production and 
storage facilities) as well as strikes to re-attack new or repaired counter-space 
and long-range sensors sites;
>> Conducting ASUW operations  — led primarily by US and allied airborne 
forces — to deny PLA warships access to the East and South China Seas;
>> Continuing the ASW campaign inside the First Island Chain (principally 
with submarines complemented by airborne offensive mining missions using 
stealthy Air Force bombers), while maintaining ASW barrier operations; and
104 Again, this assumes that future carrier air wings will comprise stealthy long-range strike and sup -
port aircraft, such as the N-UCAS. 
105 Such aircraft would be the preferred means. Their employment would help to conserve SSN tor -
pedoes, which are key to keeping US and allied submarines on-station as long as possible before 
they have to return to reloading sites. 
106 This of course plays on the World War I term, “No Man’s Land,” which was the uninhabitable area 
separating the two sides’ trenches.
107 The ASUW and ASW sub-campaigns would have considerably different timelines. The ASUW 
effort could proceed relatively quickly, especially if aircraft were carrying most of the maritime 
strike burden. The ASW sub-campaign by contrast would be much slower. It would therefore be 
the pacing sub-campaign in terms of enabling US and allied operations closer to China’s littorals.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 69
>> Continuing the scouting battle through the attrition of PLA airborne ISR and 
communications relay assets.
Aside from its key role in winning the scouting battle, allied air superiority 
also makes a major contribution to the ASW campaign. As allied air superiority 
is steadily extended over greater areas, they become safe for fixed-wing air ASW 
assets to operate, thus adding significantly to the allies’ ASW capability along the 
Ryukyus barrier. The ASW campaign in turn would steadily reduce the number 
of ASCM-armed submarines threatening allied warships and commercial traf -
fic. As the ASW campaign achieved increasing success, allied submarines would 
become increasingly available to assist with other missions. 
The following sections discuss some of these operations in greater detail. 
Retaining Air Superiority over Japan  
and Extending It over Outlying Waters 
The principal immediate threat to bases and facilities in Japan would be posed by 
the PLA’s ballistic missile force. However, PLA strike aircraft armed with land-
attack cruise missiles and other stand-off ordnance also represent a significant 
threat, particularly to western Japan and the Ryukyus. Thus extended-range air 
defense of Japan would be a key AirSea Battle mission at the onset of a conflict. 
The bulk of Japanese and US fighters would operate from bases in eastern Japan, 
since bases further west would be more vulnerable to PLA attacks.
If the PLA commits significant numbers of strike aircraft to attacking targets 
in Japan, the opportunity may present itself for the allies to attrite PLA air order 
of battle. To the extent such PLA strike aircraft also had a maritime strike capa -
bility, their attrition over time would reduce the threat to allied naval platforms. 
Early reinforcement of JASDF fighters by US fighters would increase such attri -
tion, and reduce the need for US and Japanese surface-to-air missiles, thereby 
conserving them for use against PLA incoming missiles.
Assuming these allied operations were successful, Japanese and US air forces 
would extend air superiority out over the East China Sea, and down the Ryukyus 
island chain, where several Japanese airstrips, if improved, could support such 
operations. To sum up, this extension of allied air superiority operations would 
have several objectives, including:
>> Achieving local air superiority against PLA third- and fourth-generation 
fighters, including the Sukhoi Su-30MKK and indigenously-produced J-10;
>> Continuing the attrition of PLA air strike assets;
>> Protecting airborne ISR platforms to enable the establishing/maintaining of 
maritime domain awareness in support of sea-denial and ASW operations (see 
Figure 9 below); 

70  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
>> Enabling maritime strike operations against PLA surface units as part of 
allied sea-denial operations (see below); and
>> Helping to set the conditions for penetrating raids into or via Northeastern 
China, including recurrent probes of PLA IADS to induce SAM expenditures 
(e.g., by using low-cost unmanned decoys) and strikes against advanced SAM 
systems in support of penetrating strike missions.
Denying PLA Surface Warship Access  
to the East and South China Seas
Area denial of the maritime domain is a PLA priority. Consequently AirSea Battle 
finds US and allied forces seeking to deny the PLA surface forces, especially those 
equipped with ASCMs, the freedom to operate in open waters.
AirSea Battle employs several means to accomplish this. For reasons elaborat-
ed upon below, while submarines are generally the most lethal ship killers, their 
small numbers and payloads, as well as their allocation to other priority mis -
sions, limits their employment in anti-surface warfare operations, save against 
very high-value targets. Submarines could, however, provide contact and target -
ing data to other allied platforms, especially as friendly surface ships would no 
doubt find it too risky to close within range of PLA ships armed with ASCMs.
108 
Given these considerations, along with the large search areas required to cover 
the East and South China Seas, and the high number of contacts that would need 
to be evaluated, AirSea Battle relies heavily on airborne maritime strike plat -
forms armed with air-launched ordnance as the optimal means for destroying 
PLA surface combatants. Allied stand-off weapons such as ASCMs would be pre -
ferred against PLA warships armed with potent long-range air defense systems 
or operating under the cover of land-based IADS. However, many PLA ASCM-
armed missile platforms, such as small missile-firing craft like Houbei-class mis-
sile boats, while dangerous threats to surface ships, have little or no air defense 
capabilities. They would be easy prey for allied strike aircraft employing far less 
expensive non-stand-off ordnance. 
Until the point was reached where PLA commanders concluded their surface 
warships were no longer survivable underway against US and allied maritime 
strikes, and surviving vessels were kept in port,
109 there would be many PLA sur-
face targets to attack. While US carrier strike aircraft naturally have a maritime 
108 US warships currently are limited to HARPOON surface-to-surface missiles, subsonic ASCMs 
that have considerably shorter range than many advanced foreign ASCMs available on the market. 
See http://www.navy.mil/navydata/ fact_display.asp?cid=2200&tid= 200&ct=2. The US Navy 
had 250 nm range Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missiles (TASM) in the 1980s, but removed them from 
service (converting many to land-attack versions) after the end of the Cold War.
109 Making Chinese commanders believe that sending out their ships would result in their probable 
loss would no doubt be easier than actually killing them. The Royal Navy was able to do this suc -
cessfully against Argentina in the 1982 Falklands War.
AirSea Battle relies 
heavily on airborne 
maritime strike 
platforms armed 
with air-launched 
ordnance as the 
optimal means 
for destroying PLA 
surface combatants.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 71
strike role, with the potential exception of long-range air platforms like N-UCAS, 
they would likely lack the range to strike most PLA ships during the initial stages 
of the conflict when the PLA’s A2/AD network remained relatively intact. In the 
past, Air Force aircraft also have been assigned maritime strike missions, but 
training and funding to support this mission have generally been accorded low 
priority.110 Various Air Force platforms, including strike fighters that survive the 
PLA’s initial attacks on allied forward bases, UAVs, and bombers could be fit -
ted with the requisite systems to enable maritime strikes. Of these, the first two 
would carry smaller payloads and the priority for fighters in their interceptor role 
may be much higher than that accorded to the anti-ship strike mission, particu -
larly in the early stages of the conflict. Bombers, on the other hand, with their 
greater endurance and much larger payloads, could prove far more useful in the 
maritime strike role, assuming that they are properly equipped and their crews 
suitably trained for the mission. They could form AirSea Battle anti-surface 
“hunter-killer” groups, receiving targeting information from on-board systems 
and other platforms such as submarines, maritime surveillance aircraft, and ISR 
UAVs, and providing the maritime equivalent of the “on-call” fires they provide 
for ground forces. Assuming that friendly forces can protect them against PLA 
interceptor threats, anti-ship strikes could become an important mission for 
non-stealthy bombers that would not be survivable for other, more traditional 
missions in the face of robust enemy IADS.
Defeating the PLA Submarine Force and Maintaining  
Undersea Access within the First Island Chain
The AirSea Battle campaign to neutralize PLA submarines is key to regaining US 
and allied freedom of action (see Figure 9). 111 Chinese submarines armed with 
long-range ASCMs, and supported by off-board targeting are a key element of the 
PLA maritime A2/AD threat. 112 In addition to employing ASCMs to help keep US 
high-value surface warships beyond effective range of US allies in East Asia (and 
destroying them if possible), the PLA submarine force could conduct selective 
attacks against critical allied land targets to complement PLA ballistic missile 
strikes, assist with battle damage assessments if other PLA ISR assets are un -
available, and conduct attacks against US and allied SLOCs to force a substantial 
diversion of scarce ASW resources. On the other hand, US and allied submarine 
110 For example, during the Cold War, B-52s were able to carry HARPOON ASCMs, and occasionally 
participated in joint training exercises.
111 Lyle Goldstein and Bill Murray, “China’s Subs Lead the Way,” Proceedings , March 2003, Vol. 
129/3/1,201, which can be accessed at http://www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings/archive/
story.asp?STORY_ID=649.
112 The principal danger posed by the PLA submarine ASUW threat comes from remotely-targeted 
ASCMs rather than from torpedoes. While the latter are the most potent ship killers, they would 
have to be fired from positions close enough to their targets that escort ships’ ASW systems would 
likely have higher probabilities of detection and kill. 
The AirSea Battle 
campaign to 
neutralize PLA 
submarines is key 
to regaining US 
and allied freedom 
of action.

72  C enter for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments
forces (except SSGNs) would likely have ASW as their principal mission, with US 
submarines also capable of conducting concurrent strike and ISR missions. 
Further complicating the allies’ predicament, given the low acoustic signa-
tures of modern PLA submarines, it cannot be assumed that open ocean ASW 
operations would be very successful. The noisy littoral waters within the First 
Island Chain are even less encouraging for conducting prompt, successful allied 
ASW operations.
AirSea Battle’s first step in countering the undersea threat is limiting the num-
ber of PLA submarines that can deploy to the Western Philippine Sea where they 
can threaten US and Japanese naval operations and the SLOCs to and from Japan, 
as well as to the Republic of Korea and Taiwan. AirSea Battle exploits the allies’ 
geographic position and advantage in hydrography to establish anti-submarine 
barriers along the Ryukyus, and across the Luzon Strait through the Philippine 
Islands and southern exits from the South China Sea. The PLA submarines’ need 
F i g u r e  9.  P r i m a ry  a r e a s  oF u s  s u b m a r i n e  
a n d  a n t i - s u b m a r i n e  oP e
r at i o n s
Image: CSBA

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 73
to pass through such natural chokepoints could constitute a significant challenge 
for them, assuming US and Japanese ASW planners take the actions necessary 
to exploit their advantage. Japanese submarines and other Japanese ASW forc -
es, including air ASW platforms and undersea arrays, could prove particularly 
important in establishing and maintaining the “Ryukyus Barrier.” While PLA 
submarines might well deploy prior to the onset of a crisis, they have relatively 
limited times on station (measured in weeks), and are further constrained by 
their slow transit speeds, small payloads and, in many cases, lengthy transits to 
their patrol areas. Their relatively short on-station times require them to return 
frequently to their bases for rearming and refueling. They would be most vul -
nerable to attack during such transits as they crossed allied ASW barriers and 
entered and left their bases.
The AirSea Battle ASW campaign emphasizes ambushing PLA submarines 
during these periods of heightened vulnerability. Allied submarines, advanced 
“smart” mobile mines, and armed unmanned undersea vehicles (UUVs)
113 lead 
the effort in the ASW campaign. Offensive mining appears particularly attrac -
tive, given its comparatively low cost and the difficulty and time-consuming 
nature of countermine operations. However, these capabilities — armed UUVs 
and mines — will likely need to be deployed almost exclusively from submarines, 
as they represent the allies’ only highly survivable maritime asset during the 
conflict’s early stages. Given the theater’s enormous size and the submarines’ 
comparatively small payloads, establishing effective minefields near all PLA sub -
marine bases would require a prolonged effort if submarines alone were assigned 
the mission.114 
In light of this, AirSea Battle also employs Navy and Air Force aircraft in the 
ASW mission. Maritime patrol aircraft (MPA) remain important assets for open-
ocean ASW operations. 115 Air strikes by stealthy penetrating bombers against 
submarines in port are a possible option, though most PLA submarine bases af -
ford hardened protection (e.g., tunnels dug into hard rock formations). Stealthy 
bombers could also be used to lay mines, and could prove particularly effective in 
that role, given their large payloads. 
The AirSea Battle ASW campaign would likely last months. As the reduction 
and eventual elimination of the PLA submarine threat must be accorded a high 
113 The Navy is developing UUVs for various missions, and is exploring future concepts that include 
use of armed UUVs. See Edward Whitman, Unmanned Underwater Vehicles: Wave of the Future, 
Undersea Warfare, Vol. 4, No. 3, Summer 2002, accessed at http://www.navy.mil/navydata/cno/
n87/usw/issue_15/contents.html. 
114 As a rule of thumb, submarines can carry two mines for every torpedo.
115 While the probability of submarine detection is likely to remain low, MPA serve the important 
function of forcing diesel submarines to remain submerged to avoid radar or visual detection, 
thereby greatly reducing their speed and lengthening their transit times.

74  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
AirSea Battle priority, a large proportion of available US and allied submarines 
should be dedicated to the ASW campaign for a prolonged period. Perhaps some-
what paradoxically, the more submarines assigned to this campaign, the sooner 
they could be released for other missions. 
For AirSea Battle to succeed,, US and allied submarines must be able to con -
duct their missions inside the First Island Chain at acceptable levels of risk, to 
include recurrent pre-war undersea ISR to maintain awareness of any PLA un -
dersea sensor (and potentially weaponized) arrays in key areas where future op -
erations are planned. Rapid neutralization of these arrays early in the conflict is 
essential to the ASW campaign described above.
f ollow- o n o perations
The first-stage lines of operation would set the conditions for second-stage op -
erations in the event of a protracted war. Some of these follow-on operations 
might begin during the initial stage of operations, but would now assume much 
greater priority. 
Such follow-on operations would include: 
>> Continuing SLOC protection and convoy escort missions, including resupply 
of forward bases and operating elements, until the PLA ASW threat had been 
substantially attrited;
>> Securing “rear areas” by neutralizing any PLA units forward-deployed to such 
areas;
>> Establishing a “distant blockade” to interrupt Chinese seaborne commerce; 
and 
>> Cutting off or seizing Chinese offshore energy infrastructure.
Sustaining a Protracted Campaign
As US and allied forces work to seize the operational initiative, they would also be 
setting the conditions for waging a successful protracted campaign. The United 
States would steadily augment its forces in theater while restoring degraded bas -
es and capabilities. Given that the expenditure rates of both offensive precision-
guided and defensive munitions would most likely be very high, the US defense 
industrial base would undertake surge operations to replace expended ordnance.
Even though US and allied forces would be presumed to have seized the ini -
tiative from the PLA by this point, this would not necessarily mean the end of 
the conflict was approaching. Indeed, it would remain a difficult task to accu -
rately assess whether and what particular parts of the A2/AD threat continued 
to function. Given the lethality of certain systems, it could remain the case that 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 75
commanders still would not risk very-high-value units such as carriers within 
the range of the PLA’s most potent systems. Moreover, the PLA would continue 
to make every effort to restore degraded capabilities. Thus US and allied forces 
would need to continue the efforts undertaken in the initial phase of operations 
(e.g., suppressing PLA ballistic missiles, maintaining ASW operations; provid -
ing ballistic missile defense, etc.) even while ramping up Stage II protracted  
campaign operations.
The allies’ most effective operation could be a distant blockade of China. 
Whereas the United States has a major asymmetric advantage in that it would be 
able to maintain the vast bulk of its prewar overseas trade, a large proportion of 
Chinese trade would be essentially cut off. As shown both in World War I against 
Germany and in World War II against Japan, strangling an enemy’s foreign 
commerce can prove crucial, and perhaps even decisive, in winning the war.
Carrying Out Peripheral Operations to Secure “Rear Areas”
Over the past several years, China has helped develop port facilities in places 
like Gwadar (Pakistan), Chittagong (Bangladesh), and Sittwe (Burma) that could 
be used for military purposes. It recently deployed naval forces off Somalia in 
conjunction with anti-piracy operations for the first time, and PLA officials have 
floated trial balloons about acquiring access to forward bases
116. It continues to 
wage vigorous “dollar diplomacy” with various statelets in Oceania that could 
eventually translate into access to facilities for military purposes.
117 In short, 
China appears to be developing options for creating a network of overseas mili -
tary bases stretching from Africa to Oceania. Such presence would be consis -
tent with the actions of many other rising powers throughout history; however, it 
could have serious implications for the military balance and consequently for US 
security and the security of its allies. 
Preserving a stable military balance under these conditions would necessarily 
require the United States and its allies to maintain the capability to neutralize 
PLA bases outside the Western Pacific. This would involve removing the threat of 
diversionary PLA operations. 
Such peripheral operations could take some time to complete, given the large 
distances between theaters of operation. Still, the United States and its allies 
116 Dean Cheng, “The Chinese Navy’s Budding Overseas Presence,” WebMemo, Heritage Foundation, 
January 11, 2010, which may be accessed at: http://www.heritage.org/Research/Reports/2010/01/
The-Chinese-Navys-Budding-Overseas-Presence
117 “Dollar diplomacy” refers to the use of financial incentives such as foreign aid or low-interest 
loans to gain political influence with recipient nations. See, for example, Thomas Lun and Bruce 
Vaughn, “The Southwest Pacific: US Interests and China’s Growing Influence,” Congressional 
Research Service, July 6, 2007, and Bertil Lintner, “A New Battle for the Pacific,” http://www.
asiapacificms.com/articles/china_pacific/. 

76  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
would enjoy two important advantages. First, assuming the US fleet controls the 
seas, allied forces could take the lead in many of these peripheral operations, 
with US forces in support. For example, Australia is the most powerful state near 
Oceania, and has highly capable military forces that could conduct operations to 
neutralize any small PLA forces in the region. Second, US forces (e.g., amphibious 
units) that are highly vulnerable against the PLA A2/AD battle networks, could 
be employed to good effect in the campaign to secure the periphery. As isolated 
PLA forces are eliminated, the allied forces conducting these operations would be 
freed up for employment against (hopefully) a weakened PLA A2/AD capability. 
Implementing “Distant Blockade”  
to Interrupt Chinese Commerce
In the event of a protracted conflict, choking off Chinese seaborne commerce to 
the maximum extent possible would likely be preferred to conducting large-scale 
operations in China itself. While considerable attention has been paid to Chinese 
dependence on seaborne energy flows, it is generally considerably overstated. 118 
Instead, comprehensively blocking maritime shipping in and out of Chinese 
ports, i.e., halting trade, would have a much greater effect (see Figure 10). 
An AirSea Battle blockade would not resemble the anti-commerce warfare 
and blockade that the United States conducted against Japan during World 
War II. Whereas US submarines sought to destroy Japanese merchant shipping 
wherever it could be found, and operated close to Japan almost from the start of 
the Pacific War, in AirSea Battle US submarines would be assigned other, high -
er-priority missions as described above. Moreover, as other types of interdiction 
platforms (such as surface warships and non-stealthy aircraft) would be highly 
vulnerable operating within effective range of the PLA A2/AD systems, a “close 
blockade” is impractical. 
Instead the US forces could exploit the Western Pacific’s geography, which ef -
fectively channelizes Chinese merchant traffic. Since direct Chinese commerce 
with the United States and Japan would cease at the outbreak of conflict, there 
would be little if any trans-Pacific traffic left to intercept. Most interdiction ef -
forts would focus on ships trying to transit the South China Sea. Traffic bound for 
China would be intercepted as it tried to enter the southern portions of the South 
China Sea, i.e., beyond range of most PLA A2/AD systems, from the Malacca, 
Singapore, or major Indonesia straits.
Rather than the mass sinkings of merchant ships by German U-boats and their 
US counterparts during World War II, US and allied forces might conduct maritime 
118 See, for example, http://www.eia.doe.gov/cabs/China/Background.html. For a detailed discus -
sion of the possible impacts of an “energy blockade” of China, see Gabriel Collins and William 
Murray, “No Oil for the Lamps of China?” Naval War College Review, Vol. 61, No. 2 (Spring 2008), 
pp. 79–95.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 77
interception operations (MIO) against ships bound for China. Economically 
(and environmentally 119) it would be far more beneficial to seize (and perhaps 
confiscate) prize cargos than sink them. The option to use force against non- 
compliant ships would be retained. 
Interdiction operations would be resource-intensive. But since they gener -
ally would not involve major combat, allied aircraft and ships too vulnerable 
for employment against the PLA’s A2/AD battle network would be both suitable 
and available for such operations. These forces would patrol key chokepoints in 
Southeast Asia as the central element in a distant blockade.
However, many of the platforms most suited for this kind of operation, such as 
Littoral Combat Ships (LCS), patrol craft and small frigates, do not carry ordnance 
sufficiently heavy to stop larger ships determined not to halt and be boarded. Those 
119 Environmental factors would be secondary in the context of a major conflict, but the consequenc -
es of destroying certain cargoes (e.g., oil tankers) could be quite severe and worth avoiding when 
possible. 
f i g u r e  1 0.  S h i p p i n g  r o u t e S  t o  C h i n A
Image: CSBA

78  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
Navy ships that do would be likely to have higher priority taskings, and thus would 
not generally be available to support MIO operations. However, Air Force bombers 
with their large payloads and long endurance could provide “on-call” maritime 
strike. These bombers could be assigned to support MIO operations and conduct 
strikes on PLA vessels or cargo ships as needed.
Lastly, “distant blockade” operations could also require two additional opera -
tions: disrupting Chinese undersea telecommunications lines; and seizing or de -
stroying of Chinese undersea energy infrastructure and/or disrupting undersea 
energy flows to China.
Sustaining Operational Logistics
Given the threat posed by PLA forces and the current US forces called for in the 
Defense Department’s Program of Record, US forces will confront significant op-
erational logistics liabilities in the WPTO. These stem from the vulnerability of 
the relatively small number of US Western Pacific bases and those situated in the 
Ryukyus and Western Japan; the increased burden on the aerial refueling fleet 
if those bases become unusable; and the small size of the peacetime combat lo -
gistics force (CLF). Navy warships, especially submarines, carry small payloads 
relative to their potential taskings, and cannot rearm with missiles or torpedoes 
while underway. This limitation is exacerbated further by these ships’ inability to 
use vulnerable forward bases and facilities to rearm.
These vulnerabilities suggest the need to implement various offsetting mea-
sures. First, vital bases like Guam should employ active and passive defenses both 
to reduce damage to assets on the ground and to increase the number of PLA mis-
siles required to achieve the desired destructive effects in order to deplete the PLA 
inventory of longer-range missiles more quickly.
120 Rapid repair and remediation 
capabilities to restore minimal base functionality would be essential, as would the 
creation of a rapid base development capability
121 for use once PLA ISR systems 
were substantially neutralized. As noted above, denying the PLA BDA is central 
to winning the “scouting battle,” both to deplete PLA missile inventories further 
and to reduce the chances that new missile attacks will catch valuable assets on 
the ground. Using operational deception techniques to suggest facilities were back 
in operation and hosting forces even when they were not could also prove useful.
120 This would be less useful in cases of bases situated much closer to China, e.g., Kadena, since the 
PLA’s inventory of shorter-ranged missiles (plus air strike capabilities), being far larger, is not as 
vulnerable to allied exhaustion tactics. 
121 This capability has atrophied since World War II, when the US Navy’s Construction Battalions 
(CBs, or “Sea Bees”) constructed air strips at a record pace behind US forces advancing along 
the Western Pacific island chains. See William Bradford Huie, Can Do! The Story of the Seabees , 
(Naval Institute Press, 1997).

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 79
Second, given the possible temporary or protracted unavailability of major US 
Western Pacific island bases, the value of obtaining access to bases and facilities 
for logistical and maintenance purposes in areas such as eastern Japan, Australia, 
Singapore, and possibly other partner states (e.g., India, the Philippines, Vietnam) 
would increase commensurately. 
Third, SLOC defense between the United States and its forward-deployed 
forces could absorb considerable US and allied ASW forces as long as the PLA 
submarine threat remains significant. 122 Given that US forces must transport all 
or nearly all their needs into the WPTO, logistics throughput will remain criti -
cal to sustaining operations. In particular, allied ASW operations near the ap -
proaches to forward bases would remain particularly important to assure their 
resupply. As PLA submarines, particularly nuclear and long-range conventionally 
powered submarines, were attrited, resources dedicated to protecting friendly 
shipping could be reduced. Japanese SLOCs would be rerouted further north, 
well away from the reach of most PLA A2/AD systems. However, JMSDF units 
would still need to provide ASW protection for shipping approaching Japanese 
ports. Australian SLOCs would be a lesser concern. It would be significantly more 
difficult for PLA submarines to threaten these seriously on a sustained basis due 
to the great distances from their bases to these SLOCs.
123 
Fourth, the allies’ dependence on long SLOCs while the PLA submarine threat 
remained significant could be mitigated to some extent by stockpiling war reserve 
materials such as caches of munitions, maintenance spares, and POL in forward 
areas such as Australia, Hokkaido, Singapore, the Aleutians, and Hawaii. 
***
This chapter has described a candidate AirSea Battle campaign and its key com-
ponents and requirements. Executing such a campaign would require capabilities 
that, in some cases, differ considerably from those in the Defense Department’s 
Program of Record. Indeed, many of the operations and measures explored as -
sume various adjustments to the defense program, many of which would have to 
be initiated in the near-future. 
The next chapter discusses some candidate “piece-parts” of an AirSea Battle 
concept. They constitute a rough contemporary equivalent of the metaphorical 
“31 initiatives” that emerged from the AirLand Battle effort some thirty years ago. 
122 Hence the importance of the ASW campaign as it affects other operations; as PLA submarines are 
attrited, this threat would progressively diminish. 
123 Given that the United States is the principal guarantor of security in the region, it seems almost 
certain that PLA anti-SLOC efforts would be concentrated principally against US logistics flows. 



The Defense Department’s Program of Record forces and current concepts of op-
erations do not accord sufficient weight to the capabilities needed to successfully 
execute an AirSea Battle campaign like the one described in this report. This 
chapter offers some suggestions on how to close this gap between programmed 
capabilities and AirSea Battle operational requirements. 
For simplicity, this section is organized into the following broad categories: 
operational; organizational; and technological/materiel. A final section addresses 
issues that bear on an AirSea Battle concept but which fall outside of the purview 
of the Air Force and/or the Navy. 
o perational 
The following initiatives exploit or increase US operational advantages and oppor-
tunities and mitigate US vulnerabilities and risks at the operational level of war.
1. Initiatives on Mitigating the Missile Threat  
to Guam and Other Selected Bases: 
a. The Air Force should selectively harden facilities on Guam and some ad -
ditional sites in order to complicate PLA targeting challenges. Due to the 
considerable expense involved with hardening, a comprehensive effort is 
impractical. Moreover, hardening by itself would be insufficient to ensure 
continued base operations in the face of large PLA missile inventories. 
Thus hardening plans should be considered only within the context of an 
integrated effort, as described earlier in this report, for defending US and 
allied forward bases. 
b. The Air Force should refurbish smaller bases at locations such as Tinian, 
Saipan and Palau sufficiently to support bare-base air operations if 
c h APT e R  4 > C A ndid A te AirSe A  B A ttle “ p ie C e- pA rt S ”

82  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
Anderson AFB on Guam is not available. This would require stockpiling 
petrol, oil, and lubricants (POL) and munitions, and other items to enable 
bare-bones aircraft sortie generation. Running undersea fuel pipelines be-
tween Guam, Tinian and Saipan should be studied as a potential way of 
reducing the need to stockpile fuel on the satellite bases or resupply them 
using vulnerable tankers.  
c. The Air Force should increase its rapid runway repair capacity at Guam 
and its satellite bases. 
d. The Navy should harden its Guam port facilities (especially those used for 
fuel transfer from tankers) to the extent possible, recognizing that such 
assets are inherently fragile. Basic construction and repair materials suf -
ficient to support post-attack recovery efforts should be prepositioned on 
the island.
e. The Air Force and the Navy, in conjunction with Army ground-based mis -
sile defenders, should develop and routinely exercise joint plans for in -
tegrated ground-, air-, and sea-based missile defense of US bases in the 
WPTO. Similar plans should be developed and exercised with Japanese 
BMD forces to defend targets in Japan and create and maintain allied 
BMD interoperability.
124 
f. The Air Force and Navy should jointly assess potential tactical air-based 
BMD systems such as the Air-Launched Hit-to-Kill (ALHK) concept, di -
rected-energy defenses, and associated doctrine and tactics. With respect 
to the former, both manned and unmanned launch platforms should be 
explored. Navy versions should be capable of operating from carriers. If 
the joint assessment concludes the capability has promise, the Air Force 
and Navy should jointly develop and field it. 
2. Initiatives on Correcting the PLA-US Imbalance  
in Long-Range Strike for Time-Sensitive Targets: 
a. The Air Force and Navy should invest in a long-range strike capability 
against time-sensitive targets. US military forces in the WPTO confront a 
Chinese military that relies very heavily on short-, medium-, and interme-
diate-range ballistic and cruise missiles, all with very short flight times. 
Ballistic missiles are also both difficult and costly to defend against. Thus 
the imposition of similar defensive requirements on the PLA could im-
pose similar costs. Moreover, in this case the asymmetry in potential fixed 
124 Such combined US-Japanese BMD planning exists nominally. In reality, various alliance and 
Japanese domestic political considerations (e.g., interpretations of Article 9 of the Japanese con -
stitution) prevent genuine BMD interoperability. This poses a serious risk to successful defense 
even against a much weaker threat from North Korean ballistic missiles.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 83
targets would work to US advantage, in that while the PLA would have 
only a relatively small number of US targets to attack (e.g., forward bases), 
US forces could hold a much larger target set at risk.
b. The Navy should consider investing in conventionally-armed, relatively 
short-range125 sea-based IRBMs to further complicate PLA planning. 126 
Depending on missile technical characteristics, both submarines and 
surface ships (not necessarily combatants) could serve as potential firing 
platforms.127 Ballistic missile striking power should be distributed across a 
large number of platforms similar to the way Tomahawk land-attack cruise 
missiles distributed Navy strike power that had previously been concen -
trated in a small number of aircraft carriers. An ASBM variant should also 
be considered.
3. Initiatives on Finding and Attacking High-Value Mobile Assets:
a. The Air Force and Navy should develop and field long-range next-gen -
eration low-observable air platforms, both unmanned and manned/op -
tionally manned. The Navy variants should be capable of operating from 
carriers. 
b. The Air Force and Navy should jointly develop various payloads for these 
platforms, including precision-guided strike weapons, ISR sensors,  
advanced air-to-air missiles,  decoys of various kinds, electronic attack 
systems and, eventually, directed-energy weapons. 
4. Initiatives on Developing and Fielding  
Greater Penetrating and Stand-off Long-Range  
Precision-Strike Capabilities and Capacities:
a. The Air Force and Navy should jointly 128 develop a long-range precision-
strike family of systems that consists of ISR, airborne electronic attack, 
125 Such proposed IRBMs nominally would have a range of under 1,000 km, so that their flight pro -
files would be distinctly different from those of SLBMs and ICBMs, thereby reducing the chances 
that PLA defenders could mistake them for nuclear-armed missiles.
126 Note that the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty covers only ground-based systems. 
127 It may even become technically feasible to bring significant numbers of missiles into theater us -
ing towed modules, or even to place them on and fire them from the sea bottom. See, for example, 
http://www.navy.mil/ navydata/cno/n87/usw/issue_8/future_force.html. However, existing 
arms control treaties restrictions may limit this. See http://www.ntip.navy.mil/sea_bed_arms_
control_treaty.shtml.
128 This is not to say that the Navy should be deeply involved in every aspect of such a “family of sys -
tems,” e.g., with development of a long-range land-based bomber. However, it would be of critical 
importance both operationally and economically that systems such as ISR sensors, electronic at -
tack systems, and precision strike ordnance be compatible and interoperable from design through 
fielding, which would entail significant Navy participation in the relevant R&D.

84  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
and strike assets (see Figure 11 for ranges of current long-range systems).129 
Against potent A2/AD battle networks, synergistic employment of such 
systems would be a prerequisite for degrading an adversary’s IADS, ISR, 
and C2 networks. In particular, penetrating, persistent airborne electron -
ic attack platforms would increase the survivability of stand-off munitions 
and penetrating aircraft striking fixed and mobile targets in contested 
airspace. 
b. The Air Force should develop a survivable multi-mission, long-range per -
sistent strike platform as part of the above family of systems. The plat -
form, unmanned, manned, or optionally manned, should have on-board 
surveillance and self-defense capabilities to enable autonomous opera -
tions against fixed and mobile targets in degraded C2 environments. 
c. The Navy should expedite developing, experimenting with, and fielding a 
carrier-based UCAS system designed to operate either independently or in 
conjunction with manned platforms.
d. The Air Force and Navy should jointly develop future-generation stealthy 
long-range land-attack cruise missiles capable of carrying a wide vari -
ety of payloads to replace today’s Tomahawk (TLAM) and Air-Launched 
Cruise Missiles (ALCM).
130 
129 A CSBA study on the Long-Range Strike family of systems will be published later this year.
130 Historically, the cost of developing such weapons has been high. However, TLAMs and ALCMs 
are aging and becoming increasingly vulnerable to sophisticated missile defense, hence must be 
replaced at some point. 
f i g u r e  1 1 .  C u r r e n t  ( A n d  p r o S p e C t i v e )  u S  l o n g - r A n g e  
S t r i k e  S y S t e m S  ( C o m B A t  r A d i u S ,  u n r e f u e l e d)
Image: CSBA

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 85
e. The Air Force and Navy should alter the current ratio (roughly 20:1) of 
planned investments in short-range strike relative to long-range strike to 
favor long-range strike. 
5. Initiatives on Enhancing Maritime Strike Capacity:
a. The Air Force should equip many of its large long-range platforms and 
train their crews (if manned), in conjunction with the Navy, for mari -
time strike missions, including direct support of naval units conducting  
missions such as MIO and blockade enforcement.
b. The Air Force and Navy should develop the necessary joint C2 mecha -
nisms and tactics to enable Air Force platforms to target and engage hos -
tile surface targets in conjunction with Navy ISR and targeting systems, 
including maritime patrol aircraft.
c. The Air Force and Navy should jointly develop a long-range anti-ship mis-
sile that can be employed from manned and unmanned air platforms as 
well as from ships and submarines.
131 
d. The Air Force and Navy should routinely conduct joint maritime strike 
mission planning, training and exercises.
6. Initiatives on Regenerating Airborne  
Offensive Mining Capacity:
a. The Air Force should equip its stealthy large long-range /long-endurance 
platforms with an offensive mine-laying capability and train its crews (if 
manned), in conjunction with the Navy, for offensive mine laying missions 
within the PLA’s A2/AD umbrella.132
b. The Air Force and Navy should routinely conduct joint offensive mining 
planning, training and exercises.
131 The Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile (TASM) was withdrawn from service in the 1980s in part be -
cause the maritime targeting systems of the day were not good enough to exploit the missile’s 250 
nm range. Today’s mix of targeting systems and methods are far more capable, and will undoubt -
edly continue to improve in the future.
132 Offensive mining will generally only be effective in areas close to hostile territory, near the ap -
proaches to ports and naval bases. Thus stealthy mine-laying platforms capable of penetrating 
within A2/AD systems are preferred for conducting this mission. Submarines have offensive 
mine-laying capabilities, but as discussed in Chapter 2, have limited payload capacity, must trade 
off mine loads for torpedoes, have lengthy transit times, and, perhaps most important, are needed 
for higher priority missions. Long-range stealthy aircraft, and especially stealthy bombers, with 
their large payloads, would be attractive options for this mission. 

86  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
7 . Initiative on Enhancing Intelligence Preparation  
of the Undersea Battlespace: 
 The Navy, in conjunction with other government agencies with responsibility 
for oceanographic and hydrographic research, should put increased empha -
sis on sustained peacetime intelligence preparation of the undersea bat -
tlespace, to include recurrent mapping of undersea arrays as well as offshore 
energy and telecommunications infrastructure in areas of interest. 133 
8. Initiatives on Increasing Escorts:
a. The Navy should examine options for increasing the numbers and combat 
capability of lower-end warships suitable for SLOC protection and MIO 
missions.134 
b. The Navy should invest in sufficient Maritime Patrol Aircraft (MPA) to 
support robust SLOC protection and MIO operations as well as their pri -
mary ASW and surface surveillance missions in the WPTO.
135
9. Initiative on Enhancing Counter-Space Capabilities:
 The Air Force should lead a joint assessment of the technical and opera -
tional requirements for rapid counter-space operations against PLA space 
systems.
136
o rganizational
The following are candidate initiatives with organizational implications for both 
the Air Force and Navy. Not surprisingly, many of these are closely associated 
with command and control, communications, and ISR issues, both intra- and 
133 See Joint Publication 2-01.3, J oint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment , 
June 16, 2009 for background on the IPB process. It may be accessed at http://www.fas.org/irp/
doddir/dod/jp2-01-3.pdf. 
134 The 1970s-era Patrol Frigate (PF) program, which produced the Oliver Hazard Perry-class frig -
ates, was designed to provide a sizable class of low-cost, lower-end ships for convoy escort purpos -
es in the event of a NATO-Warsaw Pact war. The Navy currently intends to buy fifty-five Littoral 
Combat Ships (LCS), but LCS designs as currently configured appear to lack sufficiently robust 
ASW or air defense capability to perform escort or SLOC protection duties in the sort of combat 
environment assumed in ASB. The designs do, however, have an open architecture and appear 
to have the potential and capacity that can accommodate substantial upgrading of the combat 
capabilities.
135 Such aircraft could also be fitted to accommodate other equipment modules, e.g., communica -
tions relay systems enabling them to contribute to back-up maritime C2 architectures if required, 
in addition to their primary tasking.
136 Classification precludes a more specific discussion of this initiative. The key point here is that 
the United States must have the capability to deny, promptly and for however long necessary, the 
PLA’s ability to access its space assets.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 87
inter-Service. Importantly, some of these involve issues closely intertwined with 
deep Service culture norms, and thus could entail changes that could prove 
especially difficult to implement.
10. Initiatives on Dealing with Degradation of Space-Based C2, 
Communications and ISR Capabilities and Capacities:
a. The Air Force and Navy should rigorously train for and recurrently con -
duct exercises that simulate operations under conditions of lost or degrad-
ed space capabilities and capacities. Such “week without space” exercises, 
emulating the fleet-wide “Smallpipe” exercises of Cold War days, 137 while 
no doubt quite painful given today’s high dependence on space systems, 
are a prerequisite for demonstrating to the PLA and other potential ad -
versaries the ability of US military forces to cope with the loss or degrada -
tion of space assets. Such exercises should also test deploying of back-up 
capabilities to demonstrate C2 and ISR surge capacity. If sufficiently ro -
bust, such demonstrations could reduce PLA incentives to strike US space 
systems.
b. The Air Force and Navy should develop protocols, techniques and pro -
cedures for responding to denied or degraded communications environ -
ments. These should allow for graceful, tiered reduction of contemporary 
huge bandwidth consumption.
138 
c. The Air Force and Navy should assess the operational viability of future 
penetrating UAVs that rely on secure C2. Based on the joint assessment, 
they should develop and field technologies to enable unmanned or option-
ally manned aerial vehicles to continue to operate at extended-range in 
degraded C2 environments.
137 See p. 60, footnote 90. 
138 It would also be useful, though culturally very difficult, to systematically seek ways to reduce 
bandwidth demands where these are excessive or unnecessary. The US military’s luxury of es -
sentially having “bandwidth on demand” has tended to inculcate a mindset that does not prize 
efficient use of bandwidth, resulting in a certain mental laxness. For example, consider the high 
demand for full-motion video for non-operational purposes. As an analogy, during the Cold War 
era, Soviet mathematicians often did more elegant work than their western counterparts because 
the computer technology available to them was far less developed than in the West. Thus they were 
forced to be highly disciplined and efficient in their algorithms and programming, as opposed to 
Westerners who could solve many problems through “brute force” computation because it was 
far easier. The difficulty comes for the Air Force and Navy if the “excess capacity” is suddenly no 
longer available, as would be the case if the US satellite architecture were degraded or destroyed. 

88  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
11. Initiatives on Future Standardization and Interoperability of 
Data Links, Data Structures and C2 and ISR Infrastructure:
a. The Air Force and Navy should jointly assess the technical and operational 
requirements for future generation data links, data structures, and associ-
ated information infrastructure.
b. The Air Force and Navy should jointly develop and field fully compatible 
and interoperable ISR and PED (processing, exploitation, dissemination) 
architectures. 
12. Initiatives on Convergence of the Air Operations Center  
(AOC) and Maritime Operations Center (MOC) Constructs: 139  
a. The Air Force and Navy should jointly assess how AOCs and MOCs can 
achieve adequate connectivity in the near-term to maintain a common op-
erating picture in support of dual-Service operations.
b. The Air Force and Navy should jointly assess whether and how AOCs and 
MOCs in the future could be integrated, in whole or in part, to support 
dual-Service and multi-Service operations.
c. The Air Force and Navy should jointly assess whether and how AOC func -
tions could be carried out from Navy ships if required.
13. Initiative on Dual-Service Operations Specialization: 
 The Air Force and Navy should establish a dual-Service professional career 
specialization and train a cadre of officers focused on serving on staffs and 
eventually as commanders of joint aerospace-maritime task forces. These of-
ficers would serve multiple tours in both Services, acquire a thorough under-
standing of both Air Force and Navy forces and missions as well as integrated 
aerospace-maritime operations, and would normally be assigned to such op -
erational task forces, AOCs/MOCs and associated training assignments for 
most of their careers.
140
139 An AOC is a command center construct long used by the Air Force to manage theater air op -
erations. For more detailed information on AOCs, see, for example, http://www.fas.org/man/ 
dod-101/usaf/docs/aoc12af/part02.htm. The Navy has more recently adopted an analogous ap -
proach by establishing MOCs. See “Maritime Operations Center Offers State of the Art Capability 
for U.S. Fleet Forces” at http://www.navy.mil/search/display.asp? story_id =49154. 
140 This initiative would create a different category of officer specialization and career path that could 
be considered somewhat analogous, though at a lower level, to that of militaries that had a General 
Staff in addition to the Service-specific officer corps. General Staff officers (who were generally 
admitted through competitive professional examination) served alternately in General Staff as -
signments and in line assignments in their home Services. 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 89
t echnological/ m ateriel
The following are proposed initiatives concerning mainly technological or  
materiel matters. 
14. Initiatives on Electronic Warfare: 
a. The Air Force and Navy should significantly increase emphasis on and in -
vestment in cross-Service EW capability and capacity, including coordi -
nation on investments in low observables and long-range penetrating and 
stand-off EA-capable platforms (manned and/or unmanned).
b. The Air Force and Navy should develop and field in quantity obscurants,141 
decoys, and false target generators for both offensive and defensive mis -
sions, and make it clear that they are widely deployed and effective.
c. The Air Force and Navy should increase the emphasis on realistic elec -
tronic warfare training in major exercises. 142
15. Initiatives on High-Capacity Airborne C3 Relay Networks:
a. The Air Force should lead a joint Air Force-Navy assessment of the opera -
tional requirements, technical characteristics, and required components 
of wide-area airborne networks that could back up or replace lost func -
tionality or capacity in C3-degraded environments. 143 
b. Based on that assessment, the Air Force and Navy should jointly develop 
and field the components of such networks, and jointly develop the proto -
cols and tactics required to deploy them rapidly when required.
c. The Air Force and Navy should routinely conduct training exercises in -
volving deploying and operating these networks, to include short-notice 
drills as well as incorporating “week without space” drills into larger 
exercises. 
141 Obscurants, properly deployed for ship defense against missiles, are particularly highly effective 
across a large part of the electro-magnetic spectrum and are generally inexpensive as well. It 
may be that the low cost of obscurant initiatives has contributed to the lack of interest within the 
Services’ senior leadership.
142 Electronic warfare has traditionally been neglected in US military training, in part because it has 
been a somewhat esoteric and poorly understood professional specialty, much in the same way 
that mine warfare has been a neglected specialization in “mainstream” Navy. Consequently, EW 
is rarely rigorously practiced in large-scale exercises.
143 Both the Air Force and Navy have been working on such concepts for a considerable period. See, 
for example, http://www.mitre.org/news/events/xml4bin/pdf/stranc_airborne.pdf. Key compo -
nents could include systems like aerostats and UAVs. It will be important for both budgetary and 
operational reasons that such efforts are well-coordinated and result in fully interoperable capa -
bilities for both Services.

90  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
16. Initiative on Reducing Reliance on GPS: 
 The Air Force and Navy should jointly continue developing and fielding ca -
pabilities that provide complementary or back up functionality in the event 
of loss or severe GPS system degradation in precision navigation and timing, 
and guidance of precision guided weapons. 
17 . Initiatives on Directed-Energy Weapons (DEW) Systems: 
a. The Air Force and Navy should increase research and development in 
DEW systems for land- and sea-based point defense against missiles. 
b. If and when DEW systems become cost-effective, the Air Force and Navy 
should field them. 
18. Initiatives on Extended-Range  
Unmanned Undersea Vehicles (UUV): 
a. The Navy should continue to develop and field long-range/endurance UUVs 
for multiple missions germane to intelligence preparation of the undersea 
battlespace, including deploying leave-behind surveillance sensor arrays; 
near-land and harbor-monitoring missions; oceanographic research sup -
port; monitoring undersea infrastructure; and ASW tracking. 144 
b. The Navy should develop and field in significant numbers smart mobile 
mines capable of autonomous movement to programmed locations over 
extended distances. 145 Such mines should be deployable by submarines 
and stealthy Air Force bombers. 
19. Initiatives on Increasing Warship Ordnance Payloads:
a. The Navy should continue its efforts to develop and field the capability to 
rearm surface ship VLS cells at sea.
146 
144 See The U.S. Navy Unmanned Undersea Vehicle (UUV) Master Plan, November 9, 2004, accessed 
at www.navy.mil/navydata/technology/uuvmp.pdf and Bettina Chavane, “RAND Study Distills 
U.S. Navy UUV Missions,” Aviation Week & Space Technology , July 9, 2009. The Navy will also 
need to assess the right “mix” of manned and unmanned systems, as well as operational concepts 
to maximize their synergy.
145 Such mines are, in effect, UUVs.
146 The requirement to rearm surface ship VLS cells at sea is not new. Various Navy organiza -
tions such as the Office of Naval Research (ONR) and the Naval Surface Warfare Center at Port 
Hueneme continue to explore various means of doing so. See, for example, http://www.msc.navy.
mil/sealift/2006/February/visit.htm. However, the prospect of high missile expenditure rates for 
missions such as sea-based missile defense during major conflicts should provide additional im -
petus to efforts to field such a capability as soon as it becomes practicable. 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 91
b. The Navy should plan to replace the Ohio-class SSGNs upon the end of 
their expected service lives (late 2020s) with a follow-on SSGN class with 
similar or greater payload capacity.147
c. The Navy should require future flights of Virginia-class SSNs to incorpo -
rate Multi-Mission Payload Modules.
d. The Navy should continue to assess the technical requirements for, and op-
erational implications of, developing and fielding new kinds of submarine 
payload modules of various kinds to increase undersea strike capacity.
e. The Navy should require future submarine designs to incorporate an at-
sea rearming capability.
20. Initiatives on Increasing Global  
Precision-Guided Munitions Inventories
a. The Air Force and Navy should assess on a continuing basis projected mu-
nitions demands based on evolving future security environment trends 
and realistic PGM expenditure rates.
b. Based on such assessment(s), the Air Force and Navy should stockpile 
these munitions in sufficient quantities to execute an AirSea Battle cam-
paign and/or maintain adequate PGM surge production capacity for ac -
commodating unexpectedly high expenditure rates (see Other Issues 
below).
21. Initiative on Sustaining Adequate Aerial Refueling Capacity
 The Air Force should invest in sufficient air tanker force structure to meet 
the likely combined Air Force and Navy refueling demands during large-
scale sustained combat operations, taking into account the great WPTO dis -
tances and the likelihood that forward bases would be unavailable for use for 
extended periods.
148 
147 Design and procurement of follow-on SSGNs could be accomplished as part of, or in conjunction 
with, the SSBN(X) program, which, if enacted as expected, will replace current-generation bal -
listic missile submarines. 
148 As with Navy MPA, aerial tankers could also be fitted to accommodate other equipment modules. 
(e.g., communications relay systems) to enable them to contribute to back-up maritime C2 archi -
tectures if required.

92  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
o ther i ssues
Several other issues bear directly on an AirSea Battle concept, but are not solely 
within the purview of the Air Force or the Navy. Rather, they either involve the 
Department of Defense as a whole or require policy decisions from outside the 
Department.
Japanese support
Given the importance of Japan in US strategy in the WPTO, there are a number of 
measures Japan can take to support allied AirSea Battle operations. Conversely, 
there are actions the United States can take to help the Japanese buttress their 
capabilities.
Efforts should be undertaken with Japan to:
>> Harden selected bases, increase rapid runway repair capacities, and locate 
critical military assets and sites (e.g., key headquarters and operations sites) 
deep underground or within mountains (Japan’s topography is particularly 
suited for this);
>> Fully integrate its ground- and sea-based integrated air and missile defense 
systems and operations (including intelligence and early warning cooperation) 
with US forces stationed in and near Japan;
>> Increase Japan’s air and ballistic missile defenses; 
>> Expand its inventory of fourth-generation fighters and procure fifth-generation,  
air superiority fighters to protect its airspace and free up US fighters for 
offensive missions;
>> Expand its undersea warfare and ASW capabilities, including its submarine 
fleet and UUVs; and
>> Prepare plans in cooperation with the US Navy for establishing ASW barriers 
that take advantage of the geography of the Ryukyus island chain. 
The United States should:
>> Offer Japan the opportunity to procure US DEW systems if such systems prove 
operationally effective and cost-effective; 149 and
>> Offer Japan the opportunity to procure fifth-generation fighters.
149 There may be a potential security issue here. If DEW technology ultimately proves highly effec -
tive, US leaders may be reluctant to share it with allies, as was the case with congressional refusal 
to allow F-22 export sales. There is also the further question of how proliferation of the technology 
to potential adversaries would affect future US military operations. 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 93
Australian Support
Efforts should be undertaken with Australia to:
>> Partner with the United States and Japan in developing the next-generation 
anti-ship/anti-surface cruise missile;
>> Support its fielding a fifth-generation fighter force to support combined air 
superiority and ASW operations;
>> Join the US space surveillance system and build an S-Band radar to improve 
southern hemisphere SSA; and
>> Establish an offshore node for the US Joint Space Operations Center to create 
a Combined Space Operations Center, thereby improving operational integra -
tion and enhancing C2 survivability.
Cyber war and security of logistics networks
DoD, the Services, and possibly other US government entities should determine 
whether the unclassified networks that support US military operational logis -
tics can be reliably defended against cyber attacks. If they cannot, DoD should 
consider going to closed networks for operational logistics information and data 
flows. DoD interfaces with commercial suppliers may require specialized gate -
ways, perhaps analogous to the mechanisms that currently permit controlled 
interfaces between US and certain allied networks. Similarly, DoD should con -
sider introducing additional safeguards and protocols into information systems 
to verify identities and the reliability of transmitted information.
Defense Industrial Base and Surge  
Production of Precision-Guided Weapons
As previously noted, expenditure rates of precision-guided munitions during 
previous conflicts have been extraordinarily (and always unexpectedly) high. 
PGM expenditures in a Sino-US conflict of the type described in this paper would 
almost surely be similarly high. Given the size of the PRC and its military forces, 
the global inventories of such weapons, both offensive and defensive, on both 
sides would likely approach exhaustion at a relatively early stage of the conflict. 
This could produce a prolonged period of mutual limited activity while both sides 
regenerate their inventories of key assets and weapons. 
Thus the relative responsiveness of each side’s defense industrial base regard -
ing its most critical systems could be a key factor in determining which side would 
most rapidly regain the initiative, and ultimately prevail in a prolonged conflict. 
This is a factor arguing for striking selected sites (e.g., ballistic missile produc -
tion facilities) within China. However, to exploit success in preventing or delaying 

94  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
PLA efforts to restore its A2/AD system capacities, the US defense industrial base 
must be able to replenish US inventories of PGMs rapidly. Joint DoD-industry 
contingency plans should reflect this national security requirement. 150
150 The Defense Production Act (Public Law 81-774) was enacted in 1950, and remains in force as 
amended today. It was part of a broad civil defense and war mobilization effort in the context of 
the Cold War. It should be updated to reflect a requirement for surge capacity of precision guided 
weapons.

This paper has argued that implementing the AirSea Battle concept described 
would greatly enhance US and allied aerospace and maritime forces’ operational 
effectiveness in the WPTO. 
t he Core of AirSe A  B A ttle 
The most important question proponents of AirSea Battle must answer is wheth-
er the concept would help to restore and sustain a stable military balance in the 
Western Pacific. The AirSea Battle concept presented here argues that US and 
allied military forces can withstand initial large-scale Chinese conventional at -
tacks, mitigate their effects, reduce the effectiveness of China’s A2/AD system by 
rapidly blinding it, regain the strategic and operational initiative, and thereby set 
the stage for sustained follow-on operations. Success here will enhance the US 
military’s ability to preserve a vital national security interest and meet US treaty 
and legal obligations to allies and partners in the region. 
AirSea Battle is oriented on offsetting the central elements of the evolving 
Chinese A2/AD operational approach. To counter such an approach, AirSea 
Battle focuses on precluding China from achieving a quick victory in a war, or 
from believing it can coerce US allies and partners. 
What e ach Service p rovides the o ther 
The AirSea Battle concept finds each Service supporting the other in achieving 
essential missions. Some important instances of mutual support include:
c h APT e R  5 >  A p oint-of- d ep A rture Con C ept

96  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
>> Air Force counter-space operations to blind PLA space-based ocean surveil -
lance systems, thereby preventing the PLA from targeting high-value Navy 
surface units, including carriers, thereby enabling Navy operational freedom 
of maneuver in the maritime domain; Navy platforms could aid counter-space 
operations in support of the Air Force space control missions if required; 151
>> Navy AEGIS ships supplementing other missile-defense assets in defense of 
Air Force forward bases and Japan;
>> Air Force long-range penetrating strike operations to destroy PLA ground-
based long-range maritime surveillance systems and long-range ballistic 
missile launchers (both anti-ship and land-attack) to expand the Navy’s 
freedom of maneuver and reduce strikes on US and allied bases and facilities; 
Navy submarine-based ISR and strike support against PLA IADS systems to 
degrade them and thereby enable Air Force strikes;
>> Navy carrier-based fighters’ progressive rollback of PLA manned and un -
manned airborne ISR platforms and fighters to enable the forward operation 
of Air Force tankers and other support aircraft; and 
>> Air Force support of the ASW campaign through offensive mining by stealthy 
bombers and persistent non-stealthy bomber strike support of Navy ships 
conducting distant blockade operations.
h o W  u rgent i S  AirSe A  B A ttle 
i mplement A tion?
The preceding discussion suggests the United States and its allies in the WPTO 
should begin now to develop an AirSea Battle concept and the ability to execute 
it. The continuing increases in China’s “comprehensive national power,” espe -
cially its military component are of growing concern to regional governments. 
Adding to this unease is the concomitant perception by many that the United 
States is overly focused on irregular warfare and ongoing conflicts in the Central 
Command AOR at the cost of regional security interests in the Western Pacific. 
Regional actors and security partners such as Australia are already reacting to 
their perceptions of a growing regional imbalance by planning major military 
spending increases of their own.
152 Some of them also increasingly question 
future US commitment to the region. 
151 The February 2008 shoot-down of a crippled US military satellite by USS Lake Erie with an 
SM-3 missile illustrates the potential of AEGIS ships to be employed in this manner. Navy units 
could also use non-kinetic means (e.g., jamming, dazzling) to support Air Force counter-space 
operations.
152 See, for example, “Defending Australia in the Asia-Pacific Century: Force 2030,” Defence White 
Paper 2009 , accessed at www.defence.gov.au, and Kathrin Hille and Tim Johnston, “SE Asia 
Arms Purchases Fuel Fear of Clashes,” Financial Times (Asia) , March 15, 2010, p.3.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 97
Given this, two AirSea Battle matters appear particularly urgent. First, it 
would be useful for the Department of Defense to place continuing serious em-
phasis on developing the AirSea Battle concept in detail as a signal of US com-
mitment to security in the Western Pacific and to reassure regional partners in 
the near-term. This commitment should be recurrently demonstrated through 
frequent public statements by senior civilian and military leaders. 
Secondly, migration of the Air Force and Navy to fully compatible and interop-
erable, if not common, C2, ISR and PED architectures is at once the most critical 
and most complex challenge, and would have the longest lead time of any of the 
initiatives to implement from an overall systemic perspective. As such, the pacing 
of its implementation would be, in a sense, that of AirSea Battle as a whole. This 
suggests that implementing AirSea Battle will be an evolutionary phenomenon, 
playing out over the better part of a decade, and perhaps even longer.
153 However, 
given the momentum behind the PLA’s military developments, this only rein -
forces the need for urgency. If further incentive is needed, it can be found in the 
declining US and allied economic strength relative to China; this relative decline 
seems likely to persist at least over the near-term future. Moreover, the rapid 
growth projected for entitlement spending in the United States and Japan will 
almost certainly create downward pressure on both countries’ defense budgets. 
Simply put, neither country can afford a “rich” or “lazy” man’s approach to its 
defense program: both must pursue a “smart man’s” strategy.
Finally, it makes sense to field an AirSea Battle capability for reasons that are 
independent of the WPTO. The ability of the Air Force and Navy to execute highly 
integrated operations would be useful across a range of future scenarios, while 
the long-term cost efficiencies from doing so would appear highly desirable purely 
from a budgetary perspective. However, while such reasons might be sufficient 
to undertake the implementation of AirSea Battle, it is the growing military 
imbalance in the Western Pacific that makes it necessary to do so.
A f in A l n ote
This paper offers a point-of-departure AirSea Battle concept. While the au -
thors are confident that many of the ideas and initiatives presented will be in -
corporated into a final version of AirSea Battle, some may not withstand more 
detailed scrutiny, or require significant modification. All elements of an even -
tual AirSea Battle concept  — irrespective of their origin  — will require real-world  
experimentation and testing before being adopted. 
What is needed most at this point, however, is to begin a serious, persistent 
effort to address the growing military imbalance in an area of vital interest to 
153 See Tab B for a discussion of some of the challenges that implementation of AirSea Battle could 
face. 
Migration of the 
Air Force and Navy 
to fully compatible 
and interoperable, 
if not common, 
C2, ISR and PED 
architectures is 
the most critical 
and most complex 
challenge — the 
pacing of its 
implementation 
would be that of 
AirSea Battle as  
a whole.

98  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
the United States, the Western Pacific. It is in this spirit that we are providing an 
initial AirSea Battle concept. Our hope is to make a modest contribution to those 
in the Air Force and Navy who have taken on this critical challenge.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 99
glo SSA ry
3G ir S  Third-Generation Infrared System
A2/AD  Anti-access/area-denial
AAM  Air-to-air missile 
A e A  Airborne electronic attack
A i P  Air-independent propulsion
A l CM  Air-launched cruise missile
A l HK  Air-Launched Hit-to-Kill
AM r AAM Advanced medium-range air-to-air missile
A o C  Air Operations Center
ASA t  Anti-satellite [capabilities]
ASBM  Anti-ship ballistic missile
ASCM  Anti-ship cruise missile
AS u W  Anti-surface warfare
ASW  Anti-submarine warfare
A u V  Autonomous Undersea Vehicle
BAC n  Battlefield Airborne Communications Nodes 
BDA  Battle damage assessment
BMD  Ballistic missile defense
C2  Command and control
C4  Command, control, communications, and computers
C lf  Combat logistics force
CSG  Carrier strike group
D e W  Directed energy weapon
D ot M l P f Doctrine, organizational, training, materiel, leadership, 
personnel and facilities 
e A  Electronic attack
e M  Electromagnetic

100  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
e P  Electronic protection
e S  Electronic support
e W  Electronic warfare
fe BA  Forward edge of the battle area
fof A  Follow-on forces attack
G eo  Geosynchronous earth orbit
HA le  High-altitude, long-endurance
i ADS  Integrated air defense system
inf  Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
ir BM  Intermediate-range ballistic missile
i S r  Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
JDAM  Joint direct attack munition
JASSM  Joint air-to-surface standoff missile
JSD f  Japanese Self-Defense Force
JASD f  Japanese Air Self-Defense Force 
l ACM  Land-attack cruise missile
l CS  Littoral Combat Ship
leo  Low Earth Orbit
lo S  Line-of-sight
lr PS  Long-range precision strike
Ma r V  Maneuverable reentry vehicle
M io  Maritime interception operations 
MPA  Maritime patrol craft
M o C  Maritime Operations Center
M r BM  Medium-range ballistic missile
n CAD e  Network Centric Airborne Defense Element 
on A  Office of Net Assessment
or S  Operationally responsive space

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 101
o SD  Office of the Secretary of Defense
ot H  Over-the-horizon 
P e D  Processing, exploitation, and dissemination
PGM  Precision-guided munition
P l A  People’s Liberation Army
P l AA f  PLA Air Force
P l A n  PLA Navy
P ol  Petrol, oil and lubricants
P r C  People’s Republic of China
SAM  Surface-to-air missile
SB ir S  Space-Based Infrared System
S e AD  Suppression of enemy air defenses
S lo C  Sea lanes of communication
S r BM  Short-range ballistic missile
SSA  Space situational awareness
SSB n  Ballistic missile submarine
SSG n  Cruise missile submarine
SS n  Attack submarine
tel  Transporter Erector Launcher
tl AM  Tomahawk land-attack missile
t P f DD  Time-Phased Force and Deployment Data
u AV  Unmanned aerial vehicle
u CAS  Unmanned Combat Air System 
uu V  Unmanned undersea vehicle
V l S  Vertical launching system
WP to  Western Pacific Theater of Operations



Department of the Army Historical Summary: FY 1984
Appendix A
Department of the Army Department of the Air Force 
Headquarters, U.S. Army Headquarters, U.S. Air Force 
Washington, D.C. Washington, D.C.
22 May 1984
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
ON
U.S. ARMY- U.S. AIR FORCE
JOINT FORCE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
1. The Army and the Air Force affirm that to fulfill their roles in meeting the na -
tional security objectives of deterrence and defense, they must organize, train, 
and equip a compatible, complementary and affordable Total Force that will 
maximize our joint combat capability to execute airland combat operations. To 
that end, broad, across-the-board, war-fighting issues have been addressed. We 
believe the resulting agreements listed in the attachment will significantly en -
hance the country’s military posture and have a major positive impact on the way 
future combat operations are conducted.
T AB  A >  m emor A ndum of Agreement on u .S. 
Army- u .S. Air f or C e j oint d evelopment p ro C e SS

104  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
2. The Army and the Air Force view this MOA as the initial step in the estab -
lishment of along-term, dynamic process whose objective will continue to be the 
fielding of the most affordable and effective airland combat forces. Consequently, 
the joint agreements embodied in the attached initiatives will be updated and re -
viewed by the services annually to confirm their continued advisability, feasibil -
ity, and adequacy. We will expand this MOA (and attachments) to include future 
joint initiatives, as appropriate.
3. As an integral part of the joint effort to ensure the development of the optimum 
airland combat capability, the services will annually exchange a formal priority 
list of those sister service programs essential to the support of their conduct of 
successful airland combat operations, the purpose of which is to ensure the de -
velopment of complementary systems without duplication. The services will re -
solve joint or complementary system differences prior to program development. 
The services will ensure that those programs supporting joint airland combat 
operations will receive high priority in their respective development and acquisi -
tion processes. The MOA confirms our mutual dedication to ensuring that the 
provision of the best combat capability to the Unified and Specified Commanders 
remains the top priority of the Army and the Air Force.
JOHN A. WICKHAM, JR. CHARLES A. GABRIEL 
General, United States Army General, United States Air Force 
Chief of Staff Chief of Staff 
 
1 Atch 
Initiatives for Action
CSA/CSAF INITIATIVES FOR ACTION
1. Initiatives on Area Surface-to-Air Missiles/Air Defense Fighters:
a.  The Air Force will participate in the requirement and development pro -
cess for follow-on area surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems.
b.  The Air Force will lead a joint net sensitivity analysis to determine the 
optimum program mix of current area SAMs and air defense fighters.
c.  The Army will lead a joint effort to study the advisability and feasibility of 
transferring proponency for area SAMs from the Army to the Air Force.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 105
2. Initiatives on Point Air Defense:
a.  The Army and Air Force will jointly develop a plan to resolve air base point 
air defense (PAD) requirements.
(1)  The Air Force will provide to the Army an updated list of outstanding 
worldwide PAD requirements.
(2)  This joint plan will be reviewed annually.
b.  The Army and Air Force will develop a joint statement of need for fixture 
rear-area PAD systems.
c.  The Air Force will participate in the on-going Army effort to review air 
defense requirements and capability at Corps and Echelons above Corps.
3.  Initiatives to Counter Heliborne Assault Threat:
a.  The Army will lead a joint assessment of the technical characteristics and 
operational implications of the future heliborne assault threat.
b.  Based on the joint assessment the Army and Air Force will jointly develop 
and field the capabilities to detect and counter the threat.
4.  Initiatives on the Tactical Missile Threat:
a.  The Army and Air Force will complete the tactical missile threat assess -
ment, to include evaluation of the operational impact of anticipated threat 
technical capabilities.
b.  Using this threat assessment as the baseline, the Army and Air Force will 
establish a joint Anti-Tactical Missile Program.
5.  Initiatives on Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) Systems:
a.  The Army and Air Force will continue joint research in cooperative friend-
ly identification systems to identify cost-effective refinements for the Mark 
XV Question and Answer (Q,&A) identification program.
b.  The Army and Air Force will develop an IFF system (to include noncoop -
erative, positive hostile identification) that will enable the effective em-
ployment of beyond visual range weapons against hostile aircraft.
6.  Initiatives on Rear Area Operations Centers (RAOCs): 
a.  The Army will increase full-time manning of RAOCs as part of the on- 
going Army Reserve/Army National Guard program to expand manning 
by full-time support personnel.

106  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
b. The Army will establish the appropriate number of ARNG long tour 
(OCONUS) positions in each RAOC unit.
7.  Initiative on Host Nation Support Security Equipment. The Army and Air 
Force support equipage of FRG reserve security units with German equip -
ment and weapons; with US to FRG equipment ratios to be determined in 
conjunction with overseas commanders.
8.  Initiatives on Air Base Ground Defense: 
a.  The Army and Air Force will develop a joint Service Agreement for:
(1)  Army units to provide air base ground defense (ABGD) outside the 
base perimeter.
(2)  Operational control of Army units performing the ABGD mission by 
the appropriate air component commander.
b.  The Air Force will transfer Air Force Reserve Component manpower 
spaces to the Army, if the Air Force ABGD requirements exceed Army 
capabilities.
c.  The Army and Air Force will develop joint procedures for rear area secu -
rity reflecting these initiatives.
9.  Initiative for ABGD Flight Training. The Army and Air Force will execute a 
joint Service Agreement for the Army to provide initial and follow-on train -
ing for Air Force on-site security flights.
10.  Initiative for Rear Area Close Air Support. The Army and Air Force will de -
velop joint doctrine and procedures for the employment of Close Air Support 
(CAS) in the rear area.
11.  Initiative on the Mobile Weapon System. The Air Force will terminate devel -
opment of the Mobile Weapon System.
12.  Initiatives on Ground-based Electronic Combat against Enemy Air Attacks: 
a.  The Army and Air Force will reconcile their joint requirements and re -
structure the Air Defense Electronic Warfare System (ADEWS) programs 
accordingly.
b.  The Air Force will terminate the Comfy Challenge program.
c.  The Army will develop ADEWS to incorporate the required capabilities for 
both services.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 107
13.  Initiative on the Airborne Radar jamming System (ARJS). The Army will 
terminate the ARJS program. The Air Force will provide airborne jamming 
support.
14.  Initiative on the Precision Location Strike System (PLSS). The Army and Air 
Force will develop a joint concept and attendant hardware to broadcast PLSS 
target information to designated Army units in near-real-time.
15.  Initiatives on joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (J-SEAD)
a.  The Army’s analytical agencies will model J-SEAR to determine the over -
all contribution of an effective SEAD campaign and the impact of SEAD 
on ammunition expenditure rates. The Air Force will provide full time 
participation.
b.  Army Field Manuals will be updated to address transmittal of PLSS tar -
geting information direct to designated Army units.
16.  Initiatives on Combat Search and Rescue:
a.  The Air Force will remain proponent for Air Force Search and Rescue 
(SAR) with Special Operations Forces (SOF) providing a back-up capabil -
ity in special situations.
b.  The Air Force will:
(1)  Determine Air Force combat SAR objectives in relation to depths on 
the battlefield defined by capability.
(2)  Develop tactics, techniques, and procedures for conduct of SAR in Air 
Force zones.
c.  The Army and Air Force will develop tactics, techniques, and procedures 
for SOF to conduct SAR beyond Air Force zones.
17. Rotary Wing Lift Support for Special Operations Forces (SOF). The Air Force 
will transfer the responsibility for providing rotary wing lift support for SOF 
to the Army. A detailed implementation plan will be jointly developed.
18.  Initiatives on the joint Tactical Missile System QTACMS): 
a.  The Army and Air Force will develop a joint statement of need for the 
JTACMS. The restructured program will include the joint development of 
procedures to ensure that respective service components of JTACMS are 
fully complementary.

108  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
b.  The Army will refocus its current development efforts on a shorter range 
ground-launched system.
c.  The Air Force will develop an air-launched system.
19.  Initiative on Army and Air Force Munitions RDT&E. The Army and Air Force 
will develop procedures for a joint and recurring review of munitions tech-
nical base programs keyed to the budget/POM cycle,. This review will use 
the joint Logistics Commanders structure and include Army and Air Staff 
participation.
20.  Initiatives on Night Combat:
a.  The Army and Air Force will jointly determine the requirements for night 
operations.
b.  The Air Force will pursue a spectrum of night capabilities based on the 
joint requirements and resolve associated training issues.
c.  The Air Force will designate a single Air Staff point of contact for night 
systems and establish an Air Force liaison to the Army Night Vision and 
Electro-Optics Laboratory.
21.  Initiatives on Battlefield Air Interdiction: 
a.  The Army and Air Force will develop procedures that can be tailored to 
theater specific requirements, to synchronize Battlefield Air Interdiction 
(BAI) with maneuver.
b.  The Army and Air Force will field test these procedures.
c.  The Army will automate the Battlefield Coordination Element (BCE) and 
connect BCE/Corps/Land Component Commanders via near-real-time 
data links.
22.  Initiative on a joint Target Set. The Army and Air Force will conduct a joint 
target assessment for use in establishing a consensus on attack of enemy sur-
face targets and development of coordinated munitions acquisition plans.
23.  Initiatives on Theater Interdiction Systems: 
a.  In theater, the Air Component Commander is responsible for the execu -
tion of the interdiction campaign.
b.  The Air Force will lead a joint study to:
(1)  Establish procedures to jointly develop requirements for interdiction 
systems.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 109
(2)  Define future conventional interdiction requirements.
(3)  Determine optimum service proponencies for Intermediate Nuclear 
Force (INF) systems.
24.  Initiative on Close Air Support (CAS). The Army and Air Force reaffirm the 
Air Force mission of providing fixed-wing CAS to the Army.
25.  Initiatives on Air Liaison Officers and Forward Air Controllers: 
a.  The Army and the Air Force will provide enhanced training in maneuver 
unit operations for Air Liaison Officers (ALOs) and selected Forward Air 
Controllers (FACs).
b.  The Army and Air Force will conduct an in-depth review and evaluation 
of FAC operations and Tactical Air Control Party (TACP) structure to 
include:
(1)  Enhancing maneuver unit ground FAC capability with organic Army 
helicopter support.
(2)  Executing ground FAC functions while operating from organic maneu-
ver unit vehicles.
(3)  Performance of battalion FAC duties by non-rated officers in order 
to expand the full time Air Force representation at the maneuver 
battalion.
c. The review and evaluation will be conducted in the following phases:
(1)  Phase I: An internal review conducted by Tactical Air Command 
(TAC).
(2)  Phase II: A joint TAC and Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) 
review, to include development of a joint field test plan of the proposed 
FAC/TACP concepts.
(3)  Phase III. Joint field test.
26.  Initiatives on Manned Aircraft Systems:
a.  The Army and Air Force will establish specific service responsibilities for 
manned aircraft systems.
b.  The Army and Air Force will establish procedures for developing coordi -
nated joint positions on new aircraft starts prior to program initiation.
27.  Initiatives on Joint Surveillance and Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS)
a. The Army and Air Force will support the G18 as the single JSTARS 
platform.

110  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
b.  The Army and Air Force will develop a joint Memorandum of Agreement 
to:
(1)  Outline procedures to ensure dedicated support of ground commander 
requirements.
(2)  Ensure adequate platform procurement to provide required support.
28.  Initiatives on TR-1 Program. The Air Force and Army will restructure the 
current TR-1 program to enhance its wartime survivability and effectiveness, 
within the bounds of affordability.
29.  Initiatives for Manned Tactical Reconnaissance Systems: 
a.  The Army and Air Force will jointly develop requirements for common 
platforms to meet follow-on manned Special Electronic Mission Aircraft 
(SEMA) and Tactical Reconnaissance needs.
b.  When joint requirements can best be met by a single service platform 
(Army or Air Force), that service will assume single service mission and 
development proponency. In parallel with this, procedures will be jointly 
developed and adequate platforms procured by the responsible service, to 
ensure dedicated support of the other service’s requirements.
30.  Initiatives on Intratheater Airlift: 
a.  The Army and Air Force will establish a joint office to determine intra -
theater airlift requirements to support movement from Aerial Port of 
Debarkation/Sea Port of Debarkation to destination; resupply by airland/ 
airdrop; reposition/redeployment of forces, equipment, munitions, and 
war reserve; and medical/noncombatant evacuation.
b.  The Army and the Air Force will develop joint positions, as required, on 
intratheater airlift programs.
31.  Initiative on POM Priority List. The Army and Air Force will formalize cross-
service participation in the POM development process. This formalization 
will include the annual exchange of a formal priority list of those sister ser -
vice programs essential to the joint conduct of airland combat operations.

The candidate initiatives advanced in this paper are easy to state; realizing them 
is considerably harder. Even under ideal conditions, implementing an AirSea 
Battle concept like the one presented here would be difficult, especially in the 
current fiscal environment, the glacial pace of Defense acquisition, and long -
standing inter-Service (and, in this case, intra-Service) rivalries. Even under the 
best conditions, acquiring the necessary capabilities and conducting the train -
ing required to execute the concept and training could take the better part of a 
decade, or longer.
Some i mplement A tion Ch A llenge S 
Major issues that must be dealt with to implement an ASB concept successfully 
include:
>> The great complexity of implementing key enablers;
>> Substantial technology R&D and acquisition timelines for many component 
pieces; 
>> Growing downward pressures on defense resources;
>> Feasible migration paths from current to future forces and capabilities; and
>> Service buy-in, including acceptance of significant changes that impact Service 
cultures.
t he Complexity of i mplementing k ey e nablers
Part of the complexity involves maturing cutting-edge technologies needed for 
specific programs or capabilities, e.g., weapons, sensors, IT systems, or platforms 
T AB  B > i mplementing A n AirSe A  B A ttle Con C ept

112  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
of various kinds. However there is nothing new there: acquiring new capabilities, 
platforms or systems has always entailed solving technical and other problems. 
What really makes the implementation ASB especially thorny is that the concept 
is fundamentally based on creating a very high level of connectivity and interop -
erability among a wide range of physical systems, human operators, and orga -
nizations. Nevertheless, the effort to create a force capable of executing AirSea 
Battle must be made, unless the United States is willing to cede control of an area 
it has long considered to be of vital interest to its security, and to abandon its 
commitments to long-standing allies in the process.
There are two kinds of interoperability involved so that entities can operate 
seamlessly: technical interoperability of hardware and software; and procedural 
interoperability. Achieving both kinds will inevitably be toughest with respect to 
C2, communications, and ISR, simply because these drive the information and 
data flows that are intrinsically interwoven in virtually all physical systems and 
underpin all military operations.
Technical Interoperability
Battle networks supporting the command and control, communications and 
ISR connectivity essential for conducting US military operations are central to 
optimal execution of the ASB concept. Protecting and exploiting them and con -
currently destroying or degrading those of the enemy in the “scouting battle” or 
“blinding campaign” is the key sub-campaign that enables all the others. 
But quite apart from the postulated wartime competition between adversarial 
battle networks, development and sustainment of such networks in a compre -
hensive and coherent way across the Air Force and Navy, and ultimately the other 
two Services as well, represents an extraordinarily complex technical task in its 
own right.
154 
Over many years, the Air Force and Navy both have developed many Service-
specific networks with different technical specifications and standards for par -
ticular purposes. As a result, many intra-Service networks are incompatible. The 
cross-Service problem is worse, in part because historically the Services have 
developed their own customized networks for their own specific purposes, often 
within their own internal organizational stovepipes. Issues of security classifica -
tion further compound the challenge of establishing battle network connectivity 
between US and allied military forces.
154 The arguments in this section largely concern the Air Force and Navy, since these are the two 
Services whose integrated operations in the Western Pacific theater lie at the core of an AirSea 
Battle concept. However, they may also be applicable in many cases to the Army and the Marine 
Corps as well.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 113
The Services, as well as the Department of Defense writ large, are well aware 
of these challenges. 155 Each Service has been working for years to reduce the 
number and type of networks it uses. Various Office of the Secretary of Defense 
and Joint Staff organizations are striving to establish coherent technical stan -
dards to facilitate joint operations, albeit with mixed success to date. This will 
remain a fiendishly difficult problem for many reasons, including the need for di-
verse interested entities (i.e., designers, users, producers) to agree on various de-
tailed technical standards, the high sunk costs for past investments that Services 
would be loathe to discard prematurely, and the requirement that legacy systems  
remain available and employable until the transition to new ones is completed. 
Procedural Interoperability
Procedural interoperability is often at least as difficult to achieve as the tech-
nical kind. The Services historically have developed their procedures indepen -
dently for their own traditional missions and tasks. There are a limited number of 
common procedures for particular purposes, e.g., for coordinated Air Force and 
Navy strike, air defense, and aerial refueling missions, facilitated by use of com-
mon data links such as Link 16. On occasion, ad-hoc arrangements have enabled 
short-notice inter-Service operations, (e.g., Navy AEGIS ships cooperating with 
Army PAC-3 missile units during Operation Iraqi Freedom).
Separate Service procedures made sense when the Services tended to con -
duct most of their operations independently, since Services tended to develop 
their procedures to optimize the way they operated. These procedures also re -
flected and were influenced by each Service’s internal culture.
156 However, the 
AirSea Battle concept envisions significantly more frequent and closer interac -
tion, indeed integration, among Air Force and Navy assets for many missions 
and tasks. This integration would be most critical (and complex) with regard to 
the seamless flow of C2, communications and ISR information and data among 
both Services’ platforms. Ideally, the sensor(s) best situated to obtain informa -
tion or data (e.g., regarding a particular strike target or incoming threat) would 
provide it to the weapons system optimally placed to act, regardless of Service 
ownership. However, the way such systems are employed could be very Service  
tactics- and procedures-dependent. For example, whereas Navy air defenders (i.e., 
155 See, for example, http://www.chips.navy.mil/archives/03_fall/Web_pages/Web_Services.htm 
for a quick illustration of some sample interoperability issues just within the Navy. An illustrative 
Navy instruction, OPNAVINST 9410.5B, “Navy Interoperability Requirements, Certification and 
Testing of Navy Tactical C4ISR Systems Implementing Procedural Interface Standards,” dated 
February 28, 2008, serves to demonstrate the organizational difficulties involved in implementa -
tion of interoperability requirements within the Service.
156 A classic discussion of the role of Service cultures may be found in Carl Builder, The Masks of 
War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis , (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1989).

114  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
individual warships or fighter units) typically act “by negation,” Air Force (and 
Army) air and missile defense generally works under “positive control.” 157 Where 
such tactics and procedures differ significantly, they would impede procedural 
interoperability considerably. Moreover, such differences in tactics, procedures 
and command approach often reflect or influence the requirements and technical 
specifications each Service imposes on the design of the systems it acquires. 
Thus the AirSea Battle concept requires both Services to identify key mission 
areas and tasks in which their units would operate in an integrated fashion. Then 
dual-Service tactics and procedures — the operational “nuts and bolts” — would 
need to be established to enable the effective execution of these missions and 
tasks, and incorporated into dual-Service doctrine. Once established as doctrine, 
recurrent dual-Service training and routine exercising of integrated missions 
and operations must become the norm. 
Much of the above would go against the institutional grain of each Service, 
since the impact on Service culture and ethos could be considerable. Thus change 
of this kind could well take a long time to implement as older personnel depart 
and a new generation replaces them. 
Substantial r & d and Acquisition t imelines
Many individual capabilities (e.g., unmanned carrier strike; a new long-range 
bomber; unmanned underwater vehicles) cited in preceding chapters as impor -
tant elements in an AirSea Battle concept would require development, fielding, 
and integration of sophisticated technologies and systems that entail lengthy 
timelines to procure. To be sure, some of the very prolonged acquisition timelines 
the Department of Defense has labored under in recent decades, for example for 
producing new air platforms or new classes of warships, could perhaps be re -
duced through fundamental acquisition reforms. Other systems, however, due 
to their complexity, will still have lengthy development timelines. For example, 
in 2008 concept development began for the successors to the Ohio-class SSBNs. 
These boats are not expected to enter the fleet before the mid-2020s. Similarly, a 
new long-range bomber would probably require at least a decade of development 
prior to initial fielding.
Replacing manned platforms by unmanned or optionally manned platforms 
for increasingly sophisticated missions and tasks will also take considerable 
time, owing to technological challenges and Service-cultural resistance. An ex -
ample is found in the continuing development of the Navy Unmanned Combat 
157 The Navy typically operates using a “command by negation” policy that is Service-culturally deep -
ly informed by its tradition of independent command at sea. That policy authorizes (and expects) 
that commanders will take the initiative and act unless they are ordered not to. This contrasts 
with the Air Force policy of “positive control,” wherein action is affirmatively directed by the spec -
ified level of command.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 115
Air System (N-UCAS); both the Air Force (while N-UCAS was J-UCAS, a dual- 
Service program) and Navy initially lacked enthusiasm for this capability, with 
the latter skeptical as to the feasibility and desirability of operating both manned 
and unmanned aircraft from its carriers. Now, having assumed sole responsibil -
ity for the program, the Navy is moving forward briskly, with initial N-UCAS 
carrier demonstrations expected by FY2013.
158 Still, it will take years of opera -
tional testing and evaluation, developing proper operational procedures for car -
rier launch and recovery operations, and integrating the carrier’s manned and 
unmanned assets in flight operations before unmanned systems join the carrier 
air wing in substantial numbers. 
There are also unknown timelines for various systems. For example, claims 
that operationally significant directed-energy weapons (DEW) are “just around 
the corner” have been circulating for two decades. That being said, there have 
recently been dramatic improvements in DEW performance.
159 Simply stated, it 
is difficult to predict just when such systems will be operationalized and fielded 
in significant numbers, what their capabilities will ultimately be, and whether 
and where they will be cost-effective. However, given the huge potential boost 
in military effectiveness that technologies like directed-energy portend, they 
must be pursued and, if and when a breakthrough is made, exploited rapidly. 
Similarly, there is considerable interest in hypervelocity weapons, which if both 
operationally effective and cost-effective, could offer the US military a potent 
new strike option. 
In short, many of the potential constituent parts of an AirSea Battle concept 
would take many years to acquire, even if the decisions are made in the near-term 
to invest in them. In that sense, implementing an AirSea Battle concept would 
represent an evolutionary, not revolutionary, change, much as it took several de -
cades for the Navy to develop its fast carrier task forces and the Army Air Corps 
its strategic bombardment capabilities leading up to World War II. 
f easible m igration p ath
Another important aspect of implementing an AirSea Battle concept is that 
there must be a feasible “migration path” that facilitates the transition from to -
day’s forces along a financially viable path, all the while maintaining near-term  
mission and combat readiness.
Such a path needs to take into consideration that many of today’s Air Force 
and Navy assets will still be in service for decades if they are kept until they 
reach the end of their expected service lives. It is generally difficult to justify 
158 See http://www.defpro.com/news/details/13250/.
159 See Thomas Ehrhard, Andrew Krepinevich, and Barry Watts, “Near-Term Prospects for Battlefield 
Directed-Energy Weapons,” CSBA Backgrounder, January 2009.

116  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
to Congress and the public decommissioning various assets prematurely in the 
interest of acquiring new capabilities when the old ones seem “good enough.” 160 
Thus the Department of Defense and the two Services would need to have com-
pelling arguments to justify funding to enable the migration, particularly if it 
entailed significant new expenditures not offset by significant divestures of ex -
pensive “wasting assets.” 161 More sobering still is the prospect that in the cur -
rent dismal economic climate, even a compelling argument may be insufficient to 
loosen the nation’s purse strings. 
Planning for a feasible migration path could not be done individually by 
Service. Rather, as a minimum, it would require coordinated dual-Service plan -
ning.162 A crucial prerequisite for this would be Air Force and Navy agreement on 
the main elements comprising the substance of the AirSea Battle concept. This 
agreement would have to be given life through both Services’ planning and pro -
gramming. This would require an unprecedented degree of coordination. Given 
the timeframe involved, the FYDP planning horizon would be too limiting. Thus 
the Air Force and Navy would have to establish a mechanism for facilitating 
closely coordinated, ongoing longer-term planning for both Services.
163 
Service Buy- i n 
Perhaps the most essential prerequisite for successfully implementing an AirSea 
Battle concept is buy-in by the Air Force and Navy. For this to occur there must be 
clear institutional incentives for each. Both must be willing to alter long-standing 
160 This kind of argument in Britain in the 1920s was a major factor in preventing the Royal Navy 
from developing and acquiring modern aircraft carriers prior to World War II. As the first opera -
tors of carriers during World War I, the Royal Navy had several of them in the early 1920s, thus the 
British parliament refused to fund newer ones. As a result, the Royal Navy could not experiment 
with new capabilities and procedures, and thus remained largely limited to the “realm of the then-
possible.” See Jan van Tol, “Military Innovation and Carrier Aviation,” Joint Forces Quarterly, 
Summer 1997, pp. 77–87, and Joint Forces Quarterly, Fall/Winter 1997, pp.97–109.
161 See Krepinevich, “The Pentagon’s Wasting Assets.”
162 The other two Services would also need to be engaged at some point, particularly with regard 
to joint operations for which the Air Force and/or Navy provide support to ground operations. 
This would be particularly important, once again, in the C2 and ISR realm. Historically, however, 
joint all-Service planning and acquisition generally has been inefficient and tended to result in 
prolonged decision timelines and lowest common denominator solutions. Given the increasing 
specialization of the Services with regard to future missions implied in the 2010 QDR (i.e., the 
Army and Marine Corps will tend to focus on irregular warfare, while the Air Force and Navy 
will focus on high-end conflicts) and the inherent frictions involved in getting even two Services 
to cooperate on matters affecting their core institutional interests, pragmatically it would make 
sense that initial AirSea Battle development work be done on a dual-Service basis.
163 By way of loose historical analogy, after US military operations during the 1898 Spanish-American 
war were significantly impeded by lack of cooperation between the Army and Navy at either the 
planning or operational level, President Theodore Roosevelt established the Joint Army and Navy 
Board (in 1903), comprising representatives from the military heads and chief planners of both 
the Navy’s General Board and the Army’s General Staff to act as an “advisory committee” to plan 
joint operations and resolve problems of common rivalry between the two Services.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 117
cultural norms, including accepting non-traditional ways of conducting 
operations and changes to career paths for a subset of their officer corps. 
Institutional Incentives
Institutional incentives can take two forms: increased operational effectiveness 
and substantial cost efficiencies.
164 
Operational effectiveness enhancements would follow from each Service’s as -
sets or capabilities being able to support or reinforce the other’s operations di -
rectly as discussed in Chapter 3. Examples include sea-based missile defense of 
forward Air Force bases; submarine-launched anti-IADS strikes in support of 
Air Force penetration missions; Air Force penetrating attacks against key PLA 
targets that reduce the threat from long-range missile attacks against high-value 
warships; Navy carrier-based fighters protecting large Air Force stand-off assets 
such as tankers and ISR aircraft from PLA long-range fighter attack over large 
ocean expanses; maritime convoy operations to maintain the SLOCs needed 
to sustain Air Force logistics flows; Air Force conduct of offensive mining op -
erations in support of the ASW sub-campaign; and Air Force maritime strike  
support for lower-end Navy assets conducting MIO, to name but a few. 
Cost efficiencies would come from initiatives like dual-Service development 
and fielding of common systems such as EW jamming pods, long-range cruise 
missiles and other ordnance, and common C2, ISR and PED architectures. The 
principal efficiencies would derive from moving from today’s de facto acquisition 
model wherein each Service makes overlapping and sometimes redundant 
investments in systems optimized for its own purposes that later turn out to 
be non-interoperable with the other’s systems, to a model wherein a, if not 
the, leading key performance parameter (KPP) is compatibility with common 
interoperable architectures.
Significant Cultural Changes
Changing organizational culture significantly is typically very difficult. 165 This is 
particularly the case for military organizations with long histories marked by re -
peated success and a very strong Service ethos. An AirSea Battle concept neither 
164 It could be argued that “new missions” would be a third institutional incentive, in that new mis -
sions sometimes (but not always) carry the promise of new funding and new constituencies. 
However, this often presupposes that it is a “zero sum game,” as shown by past bitter inter-Service 
battles over roles and missions. This paper argues that an AirSea Battle concept would be a “posi -
tive sum game,” in which both the Air Force and Navy stand to gain considerably in terms of over -
all operational effectiveness and cost efficiencies.
165 For a good illustrative discussion on the role of Service culture impacting one specific mission, see 
Major Rhett Lawing, “American Armed Forces’ Service Culture Impact on Close Air Support,” Air 
and Space Power Journal, December 18, 2006, accessed at http://www.airpower.maxwell.af.mil/
airchronicles/cc/lawing.html.

118  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
could nor would deliberately seek to attempt such change. However, some of its 
elements as suggested in the preceding chapter would inevitably have impact on 
elements of each Service’s culture.
One element of Service culture traditionally has been pride in executing “its” 
roles and missions. Services have tended to fight perceived “intrusions” by other 
Services on their roles and missions for various reasons, including sustaining an 
advantage in the competition for resources and/or preserving pride of place in a 
desired role in the national military strategy. Services have also been motivated 
to protect institutional traditions (Service-directed vice Joint-directed opera -
tions) or sub-cultures (e.g., the horse cavalry). An AirSea Battle concept will al -
most surely result in some “intrusions” by one Service into what has traditionally 
been the other’s warfighting domain. This will likely occur, either for reasons of 
operational synergy or to reduce redundancies in Service capabilities that will no 
longer be affordable in the future, or both. A greater Air Force role in maritime 
strike would be a salient example. A greater Navy role in counter-space opera -
tions could be another. This will require a leap of faith by each Service that the 
other can — and will — provide it with critical supporting capabilities.
Another element of Service culture is the “command style” a Service uses for its 
operations. As noted earlier, whereas the Navy has traditionally exercised “com-
mand by negation,” the Air Force has generally relied on “positive control,” or 
more centrally directed operations. Both these styles evolved for specific reasons 
over long periods of time. They create a set of expectations on how individuals 
and units will act and operate that go to the heart of each Service’s culture. As an 
AirSea Battle concept entails a much higher level of operational integration than 
has historically been the case, the inherent differences in Air Force and Navy 
approaches will need to be addressed. For example, should the Air Force go to a 
“mission orders” approach at the wing or air-task force level rather than maintain 
its traditional centralized planning at the theater AOC level, particularly if opera-
tions in a major future war could well transpire in a seriously degraded commu -
nications environment?
166 Or should the Navy allow off-board weapons firing for 
certain kinds of missions (e.g., integrated air and missile defense)? How should 
the Services conduct combined operations for missions such as suppression of 
enemy air defenses when both have tended to have their own separate tactics and 
procedures for such missions? 
166 During the 1990–91 Desert Shield and Desert Storm operations, the differing ways the Air Force 
and Navy approached air operations planning, which reflected each Service’s institutional cul -
ture, put undue burdens on their joint operations. While many of those differences have since 
been resolved to one degree or another, it remains open to question whether today’s air operations 
planning construct would remain viable in the severely communications-degraded environment 
that may obtain in future major warfare. See, for example, http://aupress.maxwell.af.mil/ saas_
Theses/SAASS_Out/Fischer/fischer.pdf for a cogent argument for decentralized tactical planning 
through use of mission-type orders.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 119
The strong Service identification officers tend to have is another significant cul-
tural factor. Even with all the emphasis on “jointness” since the 1986 Goldwater-
Nichols Act, most officers think of themselves first and foremost as Air Force or 
Navy officers, not as “Joint officers.” And yet, an AirSea Battle doctrine could 
require creating a specialized corps of officers with deep knowledge of and ex -
perience with integrated AirSea operations. Given the postulated complexity of 
future AirSea operations, the likely required level of operational specialization 
could require both Air Force and Navy officers to spend the majority of their ca -
reers being trained and educated for inherently dual-Service operations.
167 
Another important cultural change would involve one of the most jealously 
guarded Service prerogatives, namely execution of US Code Title 10 impera -
tives to train and equip Service forces. Given the level of postulated future Air 
Force and Navy integrated operations and the combined investments required 
to enable them, it would be imperative for both Services to closely coordinate 
their planning, programming and budgeting for interoperable common systems, 
particularly in the area of C2, communications and ISR. Determining unfunded 
priorities would require similar coordination. This implies an unprecedentedly 
close relationship in an area that historically has been a major source of Service 
rivalry and friction.
i nve S tment S  A nd d ive S tment S
This paper suggests investments in new capabilities and capacities required to 
implement a coherent AirSea Battle concept. They include essential cross-Service 
capabilities, especially with regard to interoperability of C2, ISR and PED ar -
chitectures. Other cross-Service capabilities, such as common EW systems and 
various kinds of ordnance, while not essential should yield substantial increases 
in the overall effectiveness of AirSea Battle operations. Yet the migration to these 
would not come cheaply. 
This is a serious potential obstacle at a time when the United States confronts 
the prospect of a prolonged economic downturn, with a corresponding downward 
167 Today’s career tracks have superimposed multiple wickets that officers must pass through in order 
to remain competitive for promotion. These include such requirements as advanced education, 
qualification as Joint Service Officers, and duty at Service headquarters, in addition to qualifying 
and advancing within one’s primary warfare community. For the Navy, the underlying implicit as -
sumption may be characterized as, “every Ensign a potential Chief of Naval Operations.” This has 
tended to create generalists (or “jacks of all trades”) rather than experts at both the tactical and 
the operational levels of war. Historically, Navy officers who depart the standard career track and 
are repeatedly assigned instead to training commands and operational staffs, i.e., the very orga -
nizations that actually train units for and conduct combat operations, tend not to be promoted to 
the more senior ranks. A viable AirSea Battle concept should instead put a premium on creating 
(and professionally rewarding) a core of officers who specialize in the complex AirSea operations 
expected in future warfare in aerospace-maritime theaters. This is not the kind of skill that can be 
acquired during the occasional inter-Service exchange tour. 

120  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
pressure on defense spending. Absent a disruptive event that would dramatically 
increase the American people’s perceived threat to their security, implementing 
an AirSea Battle concept would entail significant reductions in spending for other 
programs and forces. Changes on this scale typically have created considerable 
bureaucratic and political turmoil, as champions of various programs strive to 
keep theirs on track at the expense of others.
A few broad metrics might apply in thinking about candidates for divestment 
or significantly reduced procurement. First, certain kinds of forces would be es -
sentially unusable due to their vulnerability during the early stages of a major 
conventional war against a high-end adversary, and would remain so for a pro -
longed period if the threats to them could not be mitigated. For example, land- 
and sea-based short-ranged tactical strike aircraft might be unemployable early 
in such a conflict. Yet, by far the largest Program of Record acquisition program 
in the coming years is precisely to buy those kinds of assets. As another example, 
aircraft carriers remain useful platforms — but perhaps not for prompt strike op-
erations as in the past. This raises the question of why carriers would need to 
be as sophisticated and costly as the current Ford-class ships will be, since they 
would not be required for non-high-end operations given their relatively high 
vulnerability against a first-class A2/AD threat.
168 
Second, Service-specific systems supporting key missions and tasks that both 
Services contribute to would appear the best candidates for preferred funding. 
These could include systems supporting interoperable C2, ISR, and PED archi -
tectures, common ordnance, EW systems, and meteorological and oceanograph-
ic systems just to name a few. 
Third, future air and maritime capabilities with the versatility to perform a 
wide range of missions, potentially by incorporating the capacity to accept mod -
ular mission packages, may be candidates for funding and development. The 
Navy’s LCS is an early example of such a modular concept. A future fleet of Air 
Force support aircraft based on a common platform could be designed to accept 
modular mission packages (e.g., for supporting missions such as EW, high-ca -
pacity communications relay, employment of various sensor suites) to give com-
manders maximal operational flexibility. 
Another area of potential divestment will come from the likely substantial 
drawdown of ground forces in Afghanistan and Iraq over the next decade, as the 
Defense Department shifts to a more indirect approach to addressing irregular 
threats. The savings from a reduction of one hundred thousand or more active-
duty soldiers and marines would result in considerable savings in personnel 
168 The intent here is not to revisit the old “small carrier versus large carrier” debate. Nimitz-class 
carriers will remain highly versatile and useful across a range of contingencies and, in a robust 
A2/AD environment could perform useful missions of the kind discussed in this paper. The much 
more expensive Ford-class would be “overkill” in lesser contingencies yet remain just as vulner -
able to high-end A2/AD threats as the older ships.

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 121
and operations and maintenance (O&M) costs, as well as lower equipment 
procurement requirements for reduced maneuver units. 169 
Although we provide some general guidance regarding forces and programs, 
presenting a detailed Program of Record forces lies beyond the scope of this pa -
per. History shows that the details are best determined after a vigorous series 
of wargames and field exercises, informed by serious analysis. Experience also 
shows that the sooner the Defense Department engages in such activities, the 
better informed its resource decisions will be. 
vA rying i mplement A tion t imeline S
The timelines required for implementation of these AirSea Battle initiatives 
would vary considerably, depending on the nature of the initiative. Some would 
necessarily entail nearly-irreducible timelines due to inherent challenges to be 
overcome, while others would depend on the level of investment, and thus be 
adjustable as a function of recurrent discrete political and/or budgetary choices. 
As noted earlier, many of the potential constituent elements of an AirSea 
Battle concept would take many years to acquire or implement, even if the de -
cisions were made in the near-term to invest in them. Certainly this applies to 
R&D and acquisition of particularly complex systems. Moreover, even as new sys-
tems and capabilities are acquired and evolve, it takes additional time to develop 
the operational concepts that enable them to be employed effectively as part of 
an overall force.
170 Other measures can be implemented on a more incremen -
tal basis (e.g., hardening of selected bases and facilities, increasing inventories 
of particular kinds of ordnance, or buying aircraft or ships at higher rates), as  
funding becomes available. 
The capabilities with the longest lead times  — and thus the ones that should 
be initiated the earliest  — are those that are particularly complex from an overall 
systemic perspective. One such set of capabilities are those involved in the Air 
Force and Navy migrating to fully compatible and interoperable, if not common, 
C2, ISR and PED architectures. The initial key challenge is identifying the ca -
pabilities needed and concurring on the priority they must be accorded. Various 
affected systems and components would have to be adapted to incorporate the 
169 This figure approximates the increase in ground forces after 2005 in response to temporary ad -
ditional demands for troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. Once major US troop deployments in those 
countries are over, the rationale for the elevated active component ground force levels will likely 
disappear. 
170 The contemporary case of the LCS illustrates this point well. With two LCSs newly commissioned, 
the Navy now must develop concepts of operation that demonstrate how these new kinds of ships 
can best be employed. Such development will come from experimenting with the actual ships to 
see what kinds of tasks and missions they are best suited for, and how they will operate with the 
rest of the fleet.

122  c enter for s trategic and Budgetary Assessments
new standards. This is particularly challenging (and potentially prolonged and 
expensive) due to the sheer number of items involved. Thus early Air Force 
and Navy agreement on efficient migration paths for these architectures is  
particularly important.
Secondly, developing the group of officers who specialize in dual-Service op -
erations will take many years. Indeed, their development would mirror the devel-
opment and implementation of the AirSea Battle in its ultimate form, a process 
that could take the better part of a decade, and perhaps longer when one con -
siders that some major systems may not enter the force in significant numbers 
until the mid-2020s. It also will likely take as long for both Services to divest 
themselves of the older generation of officers, some or many of whom could prove 
unable (or unwilling) to embrace the new way of operating. 
t he n eed for Ch A mpion S
Success in implementing something of the contemplated scope of an AirSea 
Battle concept like that discussed in the previous chapter would depend cru -
cially on maintaining the active support over time of diverse key constituencies. 
Within the Defense Department, these would include the senior leadership of the 
Air Force and Navy and of the Department’s senior civilian leadership. Almost 
as important, it would also require the support of key constituencies within the 
Pentagon military and civilian bureaucracies in order to overcome the internal 
opposition of various kinds that can steadily grind major initiatives to a halt. 
Then, within both the Air Force and Navy, any new concept would need senior 
proponents to help drive the actual implementation of the leading initiatives and 
components of the concept.
171 
Key external actors would also play a critical, perhaps determinative role. 
Given the lengthy timelines entailed in change of the scope and scale that an 
AirSea Battle concept envisions, support for it must extend across successive 
presidential administrations. Similarly, successive Congresses must continue 
to support and fund its implementation. For both the executive and legislative 
branches, such support must be independent of which political party occupies the 
White House or has the majority in each House of Congress.
Perhaps the ultimate prerequisite for winning and sustaining such support 
for an AirSea Battle operational concept (and eventually doctrine) among these 
diverse interested parties or stakeholders is the telling of a “compelling and 
171 For example, during the interwar years, development of naval aviation was aided crucially by 
senior leaders such as Admiral William Moffett, chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics from 1921 
to 1933. Similarly, the creation and implementation of air power doctrine was driven during 
the1930s by persistent forceful advocacy by men such as General Hap Arnold, later Chief of the 
Army Air Forces during World War II. 

AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure o perational Concept 123
enduring story.”172 In other words, the reasoning behind the AirSea Battle con -
cept must remain so compelling by virtue of the soundness of its underlying logic 
that the concept derives its enduring support not from a particular administra -
tion or Congress or a given set of military and civilian leaders serving in senior 
positions for a few years, but from a firmly grounded, widely shared belief that it 
offers an operationally effective as well as cost-efficient approach to dealing with 
a wide range of possible futures, primarily in the Western Pacific theater, but also 
in other theaters.
m etrics for Success
Given the demonstrable complexity of developing and implementing an  
AirSea Battle concept, how would proponents be able to tell whether they are 
achieving success? 
Early and vocal support by senior political and military leaders would be es -
sential to get AirSea Battle out of the realm of the theoretical. Among the earliest 
indicators of seriousness of purpose would be the willingness of senior Defense 
Department and Service leaders to speak publicly and recurrently to a wide 
range of audiences, including Service personnel at all levels, the Congress, the 
American public and the press, and industry. 
Significant and measurable progress in undertaking some of the most diffi -
cult and time-intensive dual-Service elements of AirSea Battle, particularly those 
central to creating interoperable C2, ISR and PED architectures, would be an 
important metric in terms of genuine Service commitment to AirSea Battle 
An important bureaucratic indicator would be demonstrated Air Force and 
Navy success in developing the mutual trust necessary for realistic and detailed 
coordination of their programming and budgeting in those areas pertaining di -
rectly to AirSea Battle. All the Services historically have jealously guarded their 
prerogatives in this regard and often fought bitterly over resources; thus success-
fully breaking this paradigm would be a key signal of seriousness of purpose.
Ultimately the most reliable indicator of success comes from “following the 
money.” If Air Force and Navy programs and budgets give priority to the neces -
sary supporting investments by both Services, and if successive administrations 
and Congresses keep funding the requirements to implement AirSea Battle, then 
the prospects for successful implementation would be correspondingly bright. 
172 This felicitous phrase was frequently used by the late Rear Admiral Wayne “Father of AEGIS” 
Meyer to remind the Navy that large, complex programs required steady support across succes -
sive administrations and Congresses due to the sustained costs and the prolonged development 
and acquisition process involved in such efforts. Meyer argued that success was only possible if 
the underlying rationale for a program was compelling, i.e., clearly met a genuine operational or 
strategic requirement that was persuasive to political members of either major party, and would 
endure over the long term.





Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments  
1667 K Street, n W, Suite 900
Washington, d C 20006 
Tel. 202-331-7990 •  f ax 202-331-8019
www. CSB a online.org