 
The American Enterprise Institute (AEI) is a nonpartisan, nonprofit, 501(c)(3) educational organization and does 
not take institutional positions on any issues. The views expressed in this testimony are those of the author. 
 
 
 
 
Statement before the Select Committee on the Chinese Communist Party 
 
 
The Challenges of Deterrence in the 
Taiwan Strait  
Recommendations for U.S. Policy 
 
 
Oriana Skylar Mastro1 
Center Fellow, Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies and 
Courtesy Assistant Professor of Political Science, Stanford University 
Non-Resident Senior Fellow, American Enterprise Institute 
 
 
 
April 26, 2023 
 
 
 
 

   
 
2 
Chairman Gallagher, Ranking Member Krishnamoorthi, and members of the Select Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to present my views on how to enhance near-term deterrence and 
our our own resilience against the PRC’s attempts to take Taiwan by force. The growth in 
Chinese military capabilities is well-documented, so I will not take time to summarize it in this 
testimony. Moreover, this committee has demonstrated an understanding that there is a 
possibility that China will attempt to take Taiwan by force. My article, “The Taiwan 
Temptation,” provides more concrete evidence to that fact if it is of interest.2 Instead, in this 
testimony, I want to focus on the challenges we face in countering (and thus deterring) China, 
including some fallacies; my recommendations for how to mitigate US defense challenges in 
deterring China from attempting a fait accompli; and my four rules for deterrence. 
U.S. Operational Challenges in Preventing a Chinese Fait Accompli 
China does not want to fight a protracted war against the United States at this stage of 
development. The only situation in which it will initiate a war over Taiwan is if the leadership 
believes it can move quickly and take the island before the United States has time to respond (I’ll 
address some caveats to this later on). 
 
The main vulnerabilities the United States experiences in its military power in Asia stem from 
the fact that it is not a resident power in Asia and thus is attempting to project power across vast 
distances.3 The emerging U.S. way of war exhibits several dependencies that China’s A2AD 
strategy targets. First and foremost, the United States relies on other countries for base access, 
while China can rely on home bases. This is problematic for several reasons. The number of 
bases the United States has access to in the first island chain has atrophied since the end of the 
Cold War, while China has infinite possibilities for basing options on its massive soil. In 
practice, the result is that the United States has one air base, Kadena Air Base in Okinawa, within 
combat range of Taiwan, while China has thirty-nine.4 Each air base can only support so many 
aircraft (Kadena can house about eighty aircraft, only fifty-four of which are fighters. And even 
here, the U.S. Air Force has also started to pull many of these aging aircraft out of the base, 
replacing them only with a temporary unit of more modern F-22s), which translates into China 
being able to generate far more sorties than the United States.5  
 
But the biggest issue is that the United States may not be able to get any aircraft into the sky; all 
U.S. forward bases in Korea and Japan, including Okinawa, are highly vulnerable to Chinese 
attack, most likely with ballistic missiles and ground- or air-launched land attack cruise missiles. 
China’s missile-launch capabilities in the region are staggering. A 2015 RAND report estimated 
that air force bases in Japan and South Korea, including Kadena, could see thousands of Chinese 
missiles launched at them. Even Andersen Air Force Base on Guam is within striking range of 
hundreds of Chinese missiles launched from bombers and fighters. Specifically, the J-20, 
deployed in 2017, greatly increased China’s ability to strike regional air bases, logistical 
facilities, and other ground-based infrastructure.6 Similarly, Chinese H-6 bombers have 
undergone several refits enabling them to strike targets as far as Guam.7  

   
 
3 
 
China has long been aware of the vulnerability of the U.S. bases in the Asia-Pacific region and 
Washington’s potential efforts to strengthen its bases.8 Media cite the 2008 RAND simulation, 
which shows that thirty-four Chinese missiles could damage 75 percent of the aircraft in Kadena, 
and call attention to Washington’s efforts to build up forces beyond the range of Chinese 
missiles.9 The People’s Daily Online and China News republished the Global Times report on a 
2014 National Interest article that argued Washington’s Asian military bases were the U.S. 
Army’s greatest weakness, due to China’s increasing missile capabilities.10 The articles 
specifically mentioned that the Yokosuka and Sasebo naval bases in Japan would become targets 
for Chinese missiles, leaving U.S. maritime strike forces in the region isolated. 
 
While the degree of damage depends on China’s strategy, the impact on the United States’ ability 
to operate in the region after an attack would be severely limited. U.S. bases could be closed for 
more than six weeks, with almost all aircraft damaged or destroyed.11 The range of China’s 
destructive capability is only increasing. Indeed, China’s cruise and ballistic missile programs, 
the heart of its long-range precision strike capability, are the most advanced and active in the 
world; China has deployed thousands of cruise missiles, 600 short-range ballistic missiles 
(SRBMs), and more than 500 medium-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs) capable of conducting 
precision strikes against land targets and naval vessels out to the first island chain.12 China’s 
MRBMs can extend PLA’s range to 1,000–2,000 kilometers, and new intermediate-range 
ballistic missiles (IRBMs), including the DF-26, of which China has approximately 250, extend 
operational ranges to 3,000 km. These are capable of precision attacks on Guam and U.S. carrier 
battle groups operating beyond the first island chain, in the Indian Ocean, or in the South China 
Sea.13  
 
According to the Pentagon’s annual reports to Congress, China’s ICBM count grew from 45 to 
300 missiles between 2010 and 2022; IRBMs grew from 20 to 250; MRBMs grew from 115 to 
500. Land-attack cruise missiles and SRBMs actually decreased during this time; however, this 
might be due to China’s replacing aging systems with newer, more sophisticated variants.14 
China’s missiles have improved dramatically in terms of quality as well as quantity. For instance, 
the DF-16, which only entered service in 2015, is nearly six times more accurate than the DF-
15.15  
 
In addition to its forward bases, the United States also projects power into the region from out-
of-area locations. A classic example is the aircraft carrier—five of which are assigned to the 
Indo-Pacific region, with two home-ported in San Diego, two home-ported in Washington State, 
and only one ported in the region, in Yokosuka, Japan. Aircraft carriers work to project power by 
geographically unlocking air superiority, allowing air forces to operate even without nearby 
airbases. The spillover effects of air superiority, or even competitiveness in the air, are many. For 
instance, during World War II, American aircraft carriers enabled success in critical naval 
battles, provided air support to make possible amphibious landings, and were able to protect 
shipping lanes despite the vastness of the Pacific Ocean and incidents being far away from 
American airbases. The 2022 film Top Gun: Maverick shows how the carrier can be used for 
deep-strike operations. In the movie, the pilots take off and return to a carrier off the coast of an 

   
 
4 
unnamed hostile country without any concern for the carrier’s safety. This makes sense, as most 
countries lack the ability to target a moving ship at sea from their shores, especially one as 
heavily defended as a carrier. 
 
But this is not the case with China. The PLA has terminally guided antiship ballistic missile 
systems, most notably the DF-21D, that reportedly can engage adversary surface ships up to 
1,000 nautical miles from the PRC coas, cued by increasingly sophisticated surveillance and 
attack networks, holding at risk Tokyo, Manila, Pusan, and targets throughout the South China 
Sea. With a combination of ballistic missiles, supersonic cruise missiles, rocket torpedoes, and 
rocket-propelled sea mines laid by submarines, China can destroy or render operationally 
ineffective all the aircraft carrier strike groups that the United States has in the Indo-Pacific 
region without levying comparable forces. U.S. commanders are now reluctant to send carriers 
into a conflict, making it difficult for the United States to establish air superiority.16 
 
Even if U.S. aircraft manage to get in the air despite the threat to aircraft carriers and regional 
bases, they are still threatened by a robust Chinese air defense system. Any air defense system 
encompasses two main functions: first, warning systems, including radar networks and other 
scanner, and second, air defense capabilities, including surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and 
fighter deployments. Chinese radar systems are strategically placed to overlap and are on the 
artificial islands it built in the South China Sea, extending early-warning range further into the 
Pacific.17 In terms of SAMs, China has continuously increased its deployments of long-range 
advanced missiles, deploying the HQ-9, the HQ-9B, and the Russian-built SA-10 and SA-20 
missiles. All Chinese SAM missiles currently in use can intercept aircraft and also cruise 
missiles. The overlapping defenses increase the chance of kill and make their system more 
robust.18 
 
Indeed, such capabilities will make it difficult for the United States to surmount Chinese air 
defenses with its usual set of tools (e.g., jamming, standoff, and stealth weapons) in the case of a 
Taiwan contingency. China’s Integrated Air Defense System (IADS) is sophisticated enough to 
prevent the United States’ fourth-generation, nonstealth aircraft from operating over and near the 
Chinese mainland. As former senior intelligence officer Lonnie Henley told Congress, by 
denying the United States the ability to conduct air operations over the Taiwan Strait, largely 
thanks to its IADS, China could maintain a blockade of the island and continue launching its 
planes to strike targets on Taiwan or U.S. Navy ships indefinitely.19 Although the United States 
would do better in conflicts surrounding more remote areas such as the Spratly Islands, Chinese 
capabilities such as advanced SAM systems and defensive combat air patrols could still stave off 
an easy defeat.20 In both scenarios, the U.S. would have to rely on fifth-generation stealth 
technology and standoff weapons to strike Chinese targets on the mainland, but China is also 
making progress with the HQ-19.21 Although it is unclear whether Chinese air defense could 
maintain a constant track on advanced U.S. stealth aircraft, the United States would be forced to 
operate at higher altitudes and disable or destroy antiaircraft capabilities with long-range missiles 
before being able to establish regional air superiority.22 
 

   
 
5 
Because the United States would largely be projecting power from outside the first island 
chain—from places like Guam, Hawaii, or even the continental United States—its military also 
relies on many “enablers,” or augmented capabilities that directly impact mission 
accomplishment. These are assets that main platforms or units need to engage in operations. 
These enablers also create vulnerabilities that China can exploit to hurt the U.S. ability to project 
power. For example, bombers and fighters need aerial refueling to engage in long-range 
operations, and thus they need tankers to carry and provide the fuel. But tankers are vulnerable to 
being shot down by Chinese surface-based defenses and fighters. Thus, China would compel the 
United States to refuel farther away from the conflict zone, reducing the amount of combat time 
fighters and bombers have (since they are flying farther and farther to get more fuel).23  
 
Chinese analysts quickly became aware of the U.S. dependence on space-based assets and 
services for commanding deployed troops, passing ISR data and enabling precision targeting and 
engagement.24 Conducting network attacks, blinding, dazzling, or even destroying satellites with 
a kinetic kill vehicle like an antisatellite could delay the deployment of U.S. military forces by 
disrupting communications and denying information vital for determining the location and the 
movement of forces.25 To paraphrase an authoritative Chinese military source, cyber operations 
can be used to disseminate false information, simulate various combat operations of the troops to 
mislead the enemy into wrong decisions, disrupt the enemy’s information obtainment, paralyze 
the enemy’s command-and-control systems, or access the enemy’s internet system and cause 
information destruction.26 Indeed, Chinese sources describe deterrence in outer space as “the first 
choice of future deterrence” since space is not limited by politics or geography and could 
“project the power of deterrence to every corner on the surface of the earth.”27 
 
Given these realities, Chinese experts have advised that the PLA should emphasize military-civil 
fusion and develop offensive and defensive cyber capabilities that target enemy vulnerabilities.28 
As a result of this top leadership focus, China evolved from “a position of relative backwardness 
in electronics in the 1990s” to “conducting large-scale cyber operations abroad, aiming to 
acquire intellectual property, achieve political influence, carry out state-on-state espionage and 
position capabilities for disruptive effect in case of future conflict.”29 China is now among the 
top five leading source countries for denial-of-service and web application–based global 
cyberattacks.30 
 
China has also proactively exploited the absence of established norms in space to put forth its 
own that would constrain the United States and cater to its strengths. For example, China’s 
Prevention of the Placement of Weapons in Outer Space and the Threat or Use of Force Against 
Outer Space Objects (PPWT) proposal would limit offensive weapons in space but does little to 
restrain antisatellite weaponry.31 The United States, which sees little to gain in an agreement that 
would limit its offensive capabilities while leaving China and Russia’s antisatellite missiles 
untouched, continues to oppose the PPWT.32 China has also pushed for incorporating concepts 
such as “cyber sovereignty” through the United Nations and its Digital Silk Road initiative. The 
term means that states are free to regulate their information technology industries in ways they 
see fit, justifying China’s stringent censorship of its internet.33 

   
 
6 
Recommendations 
The following recommendations are based on three main assessments about how to deter a war 
across the Taiwan Strait. First, cost imposition is less impactful than deterrence by denial.34 
Second, there is no indication that Xi Jinping needs to take Taiwan by 2027 to secure a new 
term. I see 2027 as a no earlier than date, not a deadline. Third, Chinese power is not in for a 
hard fall, making it now or never.35 In other words, China can be deterred. Below are some 
options for achieving this—none of which are easy, and all of which are far from guaranteed.  
 
More Access, Basing, and Overflight 
The U.S. military force’s posture needs to be completely overhauled. There is no way to 
adequately defend our bases from Chinese attack. Let me say that again: there is no way to 
ensure our bases are adequately defended. If China wants to render them inoperable, it can 
(operationally speaking). 
 
Given the difficulty of adequately defending its bases and assets against Chinese attack, the best 
strategy is dispersal, redundancy, and resilience. The best means of convincing China not to give 
that a try is to show them that even after absorbing Chinese attacks, the United States can still 
operate and achieve mission objectives. In other words, the focus is showing China that its 
attacks will not have the operational benefits it hopes for. This is what I consider resilience. One 
way of achieving this goal is redundancy—if we are fully reliant on any asset or location to 
succeed, it becomes too juicy of a target. In space, we need smaller, distributed and redundant 
space infrastructure. In terms of basing, we need to operate from more locations. Congress 
should call upon the Department of Defense to do a real global posture review—one in 
which we start with the threats and goals the U.S. military is hoping to achieve, and wiping 
the map clean, we evaluate where would be the ideal places to base what types of assets. 
Political feasibility is important, but an analysis of what is operationally ideal is important 
before this factor is considered. 
 
Negotiating access agreements and signaling to China that countries will support U.S. 
military operations in case of a contingency should be a top priority for the State 
Department. It is my sense that it is currently not, and there is insufficient coordination between 
DoD and State on this. Countries in the region are reluctant to get involved, but in practice they 
are choosing China when they choose neutrality, because that is all China needs to win. Access, 
basing, and overflight (ABO) will be most forthcoming if it is clear that China is the aggressor 
and Beijing is unable to take Taiwan quickly. U.S. leaders should avoid political maneuvering 
that does not improve the operational situation and must ensure the country can respond quickly 
and with minimal warning if China launches an attack on Taiwan.36 In other words, members 
of Congress needs to make fewer trips to Taiwan and more to other countries in the region 
to consolidate support for U.S. Taiwan policy. 
 
Two final points on basing. In a recent trip to Japan, where I met with high level officials, I was 
reassured that the Japanese would consider an attack on Kadena to be an attack on Japan. 

   
 
7 
However, two points are still concerning. First, before Japan would allow the United States to 
use its bases in a Taiwan contingency, there would be a domestic consultation process. It is not 
clear what this process is and how long this takes. While there are reasons not to discuss this 
issue in the public domain, U.S. officials need to make it a priority to clarify the process with 
Japanese counterparts and ensure the process of permission to use U.S. bases to defend 
Taiwan would take no more than 2-3 days.  
 
On the new bases in the Philippines, this is one of the most positive developments in deterrence 
to date. Only 500 kilometers from Kaohsiung, Taiwan and sitting on key sea lines of 
communication in the South China Sea, the bases are a step towards regional readiness in the 
event of a confrontation.37 However, how successful it is depends on what the United States puts 
at the bases. I suspect that they might be Army-run; this is important for logistics but not 
sufficient for the types of firepower we need to get in the theater quickly. Ideally, there would be 
more airbases as well as submarines positioned in the northern Philippines. Congress should 
ensure that they are consulted throughout the process to make sure the right posture is put at 
these new Philippines locations 
 
More Mass on Targets 
 
Having more locations from which to operate will mitigate the problem of Chinese attacks but 
will be insufficient to deny China the capability to take Taiwan. Doing so would require the 
United States to hit Chinese ships as they make the one hundred mile voyage to Taiwan’s shores.  
 
Even if by some miracle the United States’ power projection system survived an initial Chinese 
attack and the majority of its forces were within targeting range of the Taiwan Strait, the United 
States does not have the type and number of precision-guided munitions necessary to enfeeble 
enough Chinese ships to put the operation’s success at risk. A 2021 report, written before the 
Russia-Ukraine war, warned Congress that the services were buying low quantities of these 
weapons despite the high demand that any conflict would place on U.S. stockpiles.38 For 
instance, in its April 2022 procurement request, the U.S. Air Force requested fewer than two 
hundred long-range anti-ship missiles (LRASMs), while the navy requested fewer than 450.39 
When asked by reporters why the air force prioritized long-range standoff weapons designed to 
hit fixed, rather than surface, targets, an official replied that the service was not focused on 
hitting naval targets.40 The United States also fields the Harpoon anti-ship missile, the Maritime 
Strike Tomahawk, the Naval Strike Missile, and the ground-based High Mobility Artillery 
Rockets System (HIMARS, capable of firing antiship missiles). But here too, the United States is 
not buying enough. The lone exception might be the HIMARS, of which the U.S. Army hopes to 
procure five hundred by 2028, just barely in time for when the risk of invasion may begin to rise 
dramatically.41  
 
Consider the LRASM a useful example of the deficiency in U.S. procurement plans. Capable of 
being launched from air or ship and with a range of over three hundred kilometers, the LRASM 
represents one of the best options for striking Chinese naval and logistics vessels in a cross-strait 
invasion. PLA analyses estimate that China would need between 550 and 700 logistics ships to 

   
 
8 
transport men and materiel across the Taiwan Strait.42 Open-source reports suggest that China 
could pull from nearly two thousand civilian ships currently suited for mobilization.43 Under a 
best-case scenario—in which all of the US Air Force’s LRASMs and bomber fleets survive an 
initial Chinese missile strike, each LRASM evades China’s impressive antiair defenses, and each 
missile scores a killing blow against its target—the air force’s paltry 179 LRASMs would barely 
put a dent in this logistics fleet (not to mention its navy’s surface combatants). This is likewise 
for the navy, which would only bring another 450 missiles to the fight. Adjust these overly 
optimistic conditions by assuming that half of the LRASMs survive a first strike and that only 
half of those missiles find a home, and you are left with 157 missiles on target. As one report 
notes, with only 179 missiles, the air force could only fly nine B-52 sorties or seven B-1 sorties.44 
With each LRASM costing around $4 million, buying five times as many missiles over the next 
five years would cost the United States about $13 billion, representing just 1.5 percent of the 
amount Congress granted the military for 2023 alone.45  
 
The U.S. defense industry cannot support the type, amount, and pace of production needed. The 
United States also faces a backlog of nearly $19 billion in weapons meant for Taiwan, including 
hundreds of Stingers, Javelins, and Paladin guided artillery. The COVID-19 pandemic and 
related staffing shortages have led to much of this sclerosis.46 The crisis in Ukraine and tensions 
over the Taiwan Strait highlight the long-standing problem that the United States does not have 
the surge production needed. Part of the problem is that the Department of Defense (DoD) does 
not provide the demand to justify these companies keeping their production lines online or at 
least ready to be scaled quickly. For instance, because the Pentagon has not ordered Stingers 
since 2003, only a few foreign buyers kept Raytheon’s Stinger production lines operational.47  
 
Some experts view the U.S. Navy’s fleet of fifty-three fast-attack submarines, consisting of 
submarines in the Seawolf, Los Angeles, and Virginia classes, as a comparative advantage over 
China. PLA antisubmarine warfare capabilities are considered poor, while U.S. submarines are 
world class.48 But however poor China’s antisubmarine warfare capabilities are, American boats 
would be operating in a very tight environment in the Taiwan Strait and would have to face the 
combined might of China’s surface fleet, submarines, and airborne antisubmarine warfare assets. 
Procurement and maintenance problems exist here, too. According to the navy, less than one-
third of U.S. attack submarines have completed maintenance on time over the past decade, and 
navy officials have expressed concern over how stressed U.S. submarine shipyards have 
become.49 
 
The United States needs to develop frameworks for better coordination and cooperation 
between the defense industry and the government. Operation Warp Speed (OWS), the 
interagency initiative that led to the rapid development, approval, and distribution of COVID-19 
vaccines, could serve as an example. Defense procurement experts should study this program 
and determine how DoD might apply OWS’s successes to its research, development, and 
procurement efforts.50 Governments must often step in as providers of public goods when the 
market does not have the incentives necessary to motivate private companies to produce or 
provide a good or service. It might not make economic sense to train personnel and build 
production lines that are ultimately underutilized, but the need for a surge capacity in times of 

   
 
9 
war makes sense strategically. The U.S. government should explore options for a reserve 
force to produce defense equipment. 
 
Moreover, the civil-military partnership needs to be revitalized. In the 1960s, the DoD 
funded about half of the country’s entire research and development budget; today, that number is 
just 10 percent. While this may allow the Pentagon to piggyback off technology funded and 
developed by private corporations, it does lessen the military’s ability to guide the nation’s 
overall research and development effort.51  
 
Leveraging Partners 
Most U.S. efforts in foreign military sales, joint training, and exercises are designed to build 
partner capacity. The United States, the principal weapons supplier for Taiwan, has been busy 
helping Taipei adopt its “Overall Defense Concept” (ODC), or what some experts call the 
“Porcupine Strategy.” The ODC sees Taiwan relying on high numbers of low-cost weapons such 
as mines, missiles, and mobile artillery systems, rather than expensive, flashy platforms such as 
fighter jets and submarines.52  
 
Apart from Taiwan, the United States is helping countries across the region prepare for conflict 
with China. The AUKUS deal will provide Australia with nuclear fast-attack submarines, while 
Japan plans to buy Tomahawk missiles from the United States to bolster its long-range 
counterstrike capability.53 The Biden administration recently sold Indonesia $14 billion in F-15 
fighter jets, which would certainly help Indonesia contest Chinese air supremacy over the South 
China Sea. And the Pentagon has made clear that the Philippines’ human rights issues will not 
impede arms sales in the future, which should become more relevant considering the new 
president, Ferdinand Marcos Jr., is seen as much more hawkish on China than his predecessor.54 
 
Nowhere is building partnership capacity more important than in Taiwan’s building its own self-
defense. Over the past two administrations, the United States has sold Taiwan over $20 billion in 
arms. These include deals for cutting-edge F-16V fighter jets, radar arrays, Harpoon antiship 
missiles, and Patriot missile defense systems.55 The United States has also quietly deployed 
special operations units to Taiwan to train its troops.56  
 
But these actions alone do not present enough of a credible threat to Beijing. The mechanism 
through which this deters China is that Taiwan needs to show it can hold off long enough to 
allow the United States to come to its aid; then, other countries need to show the willingness to 
directly support U.S. military operations.  
 
In prioritizing U.S. allyship, Japan is positioned to play the most pivotal role. It boasts the third-
largest economy in the world and the second-largest population in Northeast Asia. And despite 
the limitations imposed by its constitution, the Japanese Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) is 
one of the best navies in Asia. It boasts over fifty surface combatants, including eight Aegis-
equipped guided missile destroyers and four helicopter carriers, two of which were converted 
into aircraft carriers capable of fielding advanced F-35B fighters.57 The MSDF also fields 

   
 
10 
twenty-one diesel-electric attack submarines and has commissioned two of a planned twenty-two 
Magami-class multi-role frigates.58 The MSDF’s five major bases at Yokosuka, Sasebo, Kure, 
Maizuru, and Ominato also provide MSDF and U.S. Navy ships with in-theater ports for repair 
and replenishment.59 The U.S. Navy’s only permanently forward-deployed aircraft carrier, the 
USS Ronald Reagan, is home-ported at Yokosuka. In short, Japan’s size, geography, and naval 
might could prove decisive in a U.S.-China conflict.  
 
But the role of allies and partners is not relegated only to military roles. Much ink has been 
spilled about how Beijing would not attack Taiwan if the result were complete diplomatic and 
economic isolation.60 However, the bottom line is that there are few indications that this would 
be the countries’ response, especially if China took Taiwan quickly with limited casualties.61 
The United States needs to work now to brainstorm potential sanctions packages that 
would be enough to set back Chinese economic growth by a significant margin. Much like 
we do joint contingency planning for war fighting, we need to coordinate in peacetime with 
U.S. allies on the steps, stages and nature of the economic sanctions we would levy together.  
U.S. and allied sanctions on Russia have brought that country’s GDP down by about 3.5 percent, 
so any sanctions package would need to far exceed that figure—and Washington must also 
convince countries to communicate their willingness to implement such measures if there is a 
Chinese use of force.62  
 
Taiwan’s Self-Defense 
 
We need to get it right on Taiwan’s self-defense. This is the most important thing that will 
convince Beijing it cannot achieve a fait accompli. Within this mission, it is essential that we 
keep China from establishing a significant beachhead on the island of Taiwan. We may think that 
they should be concerned about the costs of occupation—but they are not (see my Foreign 
Affairs response in “Strait of Emergency” for more evidence to this fact).63 Therefore, the most 
important thing to deter a war is to convince Beijing that Taiwan will be able to keep them at bay 
long enough for the United States to arrive in force. 
 
This is an exceptionally important point. We discuss Taiwan's ‘self-defense,’ but there is no 
situation in which Taiwan can defend itself. It is important for the domestic discourse in 
the United States for Americans to understand that there is no parallel with Ukraine. There 
is no option in which China invades Taiwan and then United States sits back it just sells Taiwan 
weapons to defend itself. First and foremost, there is no way to supply Taiwan once the war 
starts given that it's an island, the geography is just different than Ukraine. But they are up 
against a much more sophisticated foe. The only option to ensure that Taiwan does not fall if 
Beijing attacks is direct military intervention on behalf of the United States. Both Taiwan and 
United States need to understand this and plan accordingly. All command-and-control, training, 
equipment needs to take into account the fact that the United States and Taiwan will be fighting 
together. This means that Taiwan has to have a greater reliance on the United States. It is this 
reliance that will signal to Beijing that the United States is actually coming. 
 

   
 
11 
Let me address some fallacies in understanding about escalation and deterrence of the Taiwan 
Strait. Some people might be concerned that as United States enhances training, arms sales to 
Taiwan, this could start the war that we were hoping to avoid. In other words, U.S. policy is 
leading to a self-fulfilling prophecy. It is true that if Taiwan declares independence Beijing is 
going to war. Though less explicitly stated, I think that if United States tried to put nuclear 
weapons in Taiwan or establish an official military alliance with U.S. bases in Taiwan, this 
would also spark a war. But anything short of this, I don't think Beijing feels compelled to 
start a war before they feel like they're ready. If United States is engaging in more military 
operations in the vicinity of Taiwan and if Taiwan is improving in their training, this is not 
enough to convince Beijing that it is now or never. 
 
Even if the United States makes the changes that I lay out, these are only temporary solutions. As 
we get closer to Japan, China will get closer to Russia. As we build more munitions and put them 
in more places, China will build more munitions with the ranges to reach those places. All of the 
recommendations I lay out only buy us more time; there is no way to resolve the issue forever. In 
Beijing's mind, even if there are these improvements in U.S. position, I think it's more likely that 
they go back to the drawing board and decide how to defeat United States again before we are in 
another threat window. China will not risk a war before it is ready and before its leadership think 
victory is assured (as long as there is no declaration of independence or formal alliance). This 
means we have a lot more leeway to enhance Taiwan’s self-defense. That being said, we should 
do this as quietly as possible. Once Taiwan is ready, we can start signaling these new 
capabilities. But there's no reason to talk publicly about our hopes of improving Taiwan's defense 
if that defense has not been improved, at least from a deterrence perspective. 
 
General Principles for Implementing Recommendations: The Four Rules of Deterrence 
 
Congress is likely to get many more recommendations on enhancing deterrence across the 
Taiwan Strait besides the ones I have provided today. Executing my recommendations or 
assessing others should be done against the consideration of four basic rules of deterrence. The 
following rules may seem simple, but in my experience, many recommendations do not meet 
these basic standards.  
1) To deter by denial, whatever we do in peacetime has to have some positive 
operational impact. What this means is that not every military activity has deterrent 
value in the case of China over Taiwan. Sailing aircraft carriers around Taiwan does not 
have deterrent value if the Chinese know those carriers are getting as far away from the 
strait as possible if it looks like conflict is on the horizon. So the question is: does that 
capability impact China’s ability to take Taiwan? If the answer is no, you cannot use it in 
peacetime in a signaling capacity to enhance deterrence. This rule should be strictly used 
when assessing the future of U.S. posture in the Philippines.  
2) Whatever we do to deter the war has to happen before the war. Allies and partners 
will come around, the U.S. will jumpstart the defense industry—it’s a common refrain 
that problems will be solved once the war starts. Maybe. But then we have failed to deter 
the war. So if we want our actions to serve as a deterrent, we have to do it now. This is 

   
 
12 
why I argue for peacetime coordination of economic sanctions, clarification of the 
Japanese consultation process, and fixing our broken defense industry now, not after 
China attacks. 
3) In many cases, to impact deterrence, actions have to meet a certain threshold. In the 
operational environment, sometimes it’s all or nothing. In other words, while 
improvement is great, if we still do not get the total force, or Taiwan’s defense, to where 
it needs to be, it does not deter. If it takes the U.S. x number of days to mobilize what we 
need for a fight, that is how long Taiwan needs to hold out. If we need x number of 
munitions to sink enough Chinese ships such that they cannot continue with an 
amphibious assault, then anything less is not enough. Even if we improve, China will still 
think they can accomplish a fait accompli. 
4) How do we signal to China that taking Taiwan will be too costly or too difficult? 
Step one, make it true. Then talk to me about messaging.  
 
 
Conclusion 
The issue is not that China has surpassed the United States in military power; it has not. The 
issue is that, given current trends, China will meet or outmatch U.S. regional capabilities in the 
next five to ten years. China will soon have a modern military capable of conducting joint 
operations, such as those necessary to deny access to the South China Sea, retake islands, or 
force reunification with Taiwan. If, in the meantime, the U.S. military does not improve and 
strengthen its force posture in Asia, improve its resiliency, and increase its ability to deny China 
these objectives forcibly, then Chinese leaders may decide it is worth the risk to use force. This 
is how we end up in a war with China—not because we are overly provocative or push back too 
much, but because we do not do enough to maintain deterrence in the region and China gains the 
confidence to jettison a cautious approach.  
 
Military capabilities are not the best answer, but they are the easiest for the U.S. government to 
control. Upgrading political relationships can be even more challenging, especially given the 
latent threat of China lurking in the background. We need to ask Indo-Pacific countries what 
would be necessary to get their support and a closer military relationship—and be open-minded 
about what such relationships may require.  
 
To balance against the Soviet Union during the Cold War, we had the strategic mindset and 
political will to look beyond China’s political system, normalize relations, and move that 
relationship forward. We need that degree of strategic thinking and political will; adhering to the 
same policies but expecting different outcomes will not change current trends in East Asia. We 
need to think differently, whether in creating a reserve force for the defense industry, 
coordinating economic sanctions ahead of time, or managing capability gaps with strategic 
agility. For example, since the United States might receive an unambiguous warning of an 
invasion, we should communicate to China (and the world) that the amassing of a certain 
quantity of troops and ships will be taken as a sign of an impending assault. None of these 

   
 
13 
recommendations is easy, but deterring a war is always less painful than fighting one. For the 
sake of peace and security in Asia, experimentation is worth the risk.  
 
1 The author would like to thank Thomas Causey for his expert research assistance. 
2 Oriana Skylar Mastro, “The Taiwan Temptation:Why Beijing Might Resort to Force,” Foreign Affairs, 
June 3, 2021, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2021-06-03/china-taiwan-war-temptation. 
3 Parts of this testimony are adapted from Oriana Skylar Mastro, “The Military Challenge of the People’s 
Republic of China,” in M. Boskin, J.N. Rader and K. Sridhar. Defense Budgeting for a Safer World: The 
Experts Speak, Hoover Institution Press, forthcoming Fall 2023. 
4 Eric Heginbotham, Michael Nixon, Forrest E. Morgan, Jacob L. Heim, Jeff Hagen, Sheng Tao Li, 
Jeffrey Engstrom, et al., The US-China Military Scorecard: Forces, Geography, and the Evolving 
Balance of Power, 1996–2017 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015).  
5 “18th Wing,” United States Fifth Air Force, undated, accessed December 5, 2022, 
https://www.5af.pacaf.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/1483830/18th-wing; Stephen Losey, 
“F-22s Arrive at Kadena, as Aging F-15s Prepare to Depart,” DefenseNews, November 7, 2022.  
6 Timothy R. Heath, Kristen Gunness, and Cortez A. Cooper III, “The PLA and China's Rejuvenation: 
National Security and Military Strategies, Deterrence Concepts, and Combat Capabilities,” (Washington, 
DC: RAND Corporation, 2016), 38-39. Cited in China Power Team, “Does China’s J-20 Rival Other 
Stealth Fighters?” ChinaPower, February 23, 2018,  https://chinapower.csis.org/china-chengdu-j-20.  
7 US Department of Defense (DoD), Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic 
of China 2022: Annual Report to Congress, November 29, 2022, 81–82. 
8 “The Five Chinese Weapons that the US Army Is Most Afraid Of: DF-21D Is the First [美军最害怕的 5
款中国武器 DF-21D 导弹居首],” China Military Website [中国军网], May 8, 2014, 
http://www.81.cn/bqtd/2014-05/08/content_5895795.htm. 
9 “Hong Kong media hypothetical Sino-US conflict: Asia-Pacific bases will be the Achilles heel of the 
United States[港媒假想中美冲突：亚太基地将是美国致命弱点],” ChinaNews [中新网], March 4, 
2016, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/m/mil/2016/03-04/7783387.shtml.  .............................................  
10 “American Media: Chinese Missiles Make America’s Asia-Pacific Military Bases into the Fatal Fall of 
the US Army [美媒：中国导弹令美亚太军事基地太为美军致命伤],” People’s Daily Online [人民网], 
May 20, 2014, http://military.people.com.cn/n/2014/0520/c1011-25039554.html. 
11 In a RAND simulation of an attack on Kadena, 36 Chinese missiles closed the runways for four days, 
scaling up to 43 days of closure if 274 missiles were to be used. The study also noted that the DF-21C-
class missile could carry hundreds of submunitions, blanketing hundreds of square feet so that every 
aircraft parked in the area would have a high probability of being damaged. With just 108 missiles, China 
could shut down the airfield for a week and, with high probability of success, destroy every single fighter 
on the base. See Heginbotham et al., US-China Military Scorecard, 60.)  
12 US Department of Defense (DoD), Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2021: Annual Report to Congress , November 3, 2021, 167; Jin Yu, ed. The Science of 
Second Artillery Campaigns [第二炮兵战役学] (Beijing: People’s Liberation Army Press, 2004), 82–86.  
13 DoD, Military and Security Developments 2022, 167.  
14 US Department of Defense (DoD), Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2010: Annual Report to Congress, April 29, 2011, 66, 
http://www.andrewerickson.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/DoD_China-Report_2010.pdf; Military 
and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2022, 167.  
 

   
 
14 
 
15 David Webb, “Dong Feng-16 (CSS-11),” Missile Defense Advocacy Online, February 2017; “DF-15,” 
Missile Threat CSIS, August 5, 2021. 
16 In 2013 the PLA tested the DF-21D against a stationary, ground-based target about the size of a US 
aircraft carrier. In 2020, China fired the DF-21D and its intermediate-range counterpart, the DF-26, at a 
moving target in the South China Sea; however it remains unclear whether the test was successful. See 
DoD, Military and Security Developments 2022, 65. 
17 “A Constructive Year for Chinese Base Building,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, December 
14, 2017; DoD, Military and Security Developments 2022, vii.  
18 DoD, Military and Security Developments 2022, viii; Heginbotham et al., US-China Military 
Scorecard, 170.  
19 US-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Cross-Strait Deterrence, February 
18, 2021, (Testimony by Lonnie Henley, “PLA Operational Concepts and Centers of Gravity in a Taiwan 
Conflict”).  
20 Heginbotham et al., US-China Military Scorecard, 130–31. 
21 Heginbotham et al., US-China Military Scorecard, 130. 
22 Kris Osborn, “Could the US Military Gain Air Supremacy in a War with China,” The National Interest, 
November 8, 2021.  
23 Timothy A. Walton and Bryan Clark, “Resilient Aerial Refueling: Safeguarding the US Military’s 
Global Reach,” Hudson Institute, November 2021, 29. 
24 Wei Chengxi [魏晨曦], “Space War and Its Operational Environment [太空战及其作战环境],” 
Aerospace China [中国航天], no. 10 (2001): 40; Zhang Yuliang [张玉良] et al., eds., The Science of 
Campaigns [战役学] (Beijing: Guofang Daxue Chubanshe [国防大学出版社], 2006), 87. 
25 Interestingly, these acknowledgments often come in the form of translating and publishing Western 
analysts’ perspectives on Chinese capabilities, see Xin Lian [信莲], “American Media: PLA Space 
Capabilities Might Overtake the US Military [美媒: 解放军空天战力或“逆袭”美军],” China Daily [中
国日报网], April 23, 2014, http://world.chinadaily.com.cn/2014-04/23/content_17456442.htm; 
“American Media: The Contest in Space Is the Next “Great-Power Competition” [美媒: 太空之争，下一
场中美“大国竞赛”],” Xinhuanet [新华网], January 31, 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/mil/2021-
01/31/c_1211004592.htm. 
26 Yu, Second Artillery Campaigns, 341. 
27 Zhang Yan [张岩], Theory of Strategic Deterrence [战略威慑论] (Beijing: Social Sciences Literature 
Press [社会科学文献出版社], 2018), 97–98. 
28 Long Kun [龙坤] and Zhu Qichao [朱启超], “Algorithmic Warfare: Concept, Characteristics and 
Implications [算法战争” 的概念、特点与影响],” National Defense Science & Technology [国防科技] 
38, no. 6 (2017): 41. 
29 Brad D. Williams, “US ‘Retains Clear Superiority’ in Cyber; China Rising: IISS Study,” Breaking 
Defense, June 28, 2021; International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Cyber Capabilities and National 
Power: A Net Assessment,” June 28, 2021.  
30 Omer Yoacimik and Vivek Ganti, “DDoS Attack Trends for Q4 2021,” Cloudflare Blog, January 10, 
2022. In its 2021 annual report, cybersecurity firm CrowdStrike found that Chinese state-affiliated hacker 
 

   
 
15 
 
groups were responsible for 67 percent of intrusions in the year leading up to June 2021; see “Nowhere to 
Hide: 2021 Threat Hunting Report,” CrowdStrike, June 2021. As further evidence that its cyber strategy 
is about exploiting US vulnerabilities, China has not invested the same into its own cyber defenses, which 
remain weak, and its cyber-resilience policies for its critical national infrastructure are only in the initial 
stages; see Williams, “US ‘Retains Clear Superiority.’”  
31 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “China and Russia Jointly Submitted the 
Draft Treaty on PPWT to the Conference on Disarmament,” February 2, 2008; Bradley Bowman and 
Jared Thompson, “Russia and China Seek to Tie America’s Hands in Space,” Foreign Policy, March 31, 
2021.  
32 Todd Harrison, “International Perspectives on Space Weapons,” Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, Aerospace Security Project, May 2020; Almudena Azcárate Ortega, “Placement of Weapons in 
Outer Space: The Dichotomy Between Word and Deed,” Lawfare, January 28, 2021.  
33 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Remarks at the Opening Ceremony of 
the Second World Internet Conference,” (by Xi Jinping), December 16, 2015, 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/wjdt_665385/zyjh_665391/201512/t20151224_678467.html.  
34 Oriana Skylar Mastro, “Deterrence in the Indo-Pacific,” National Bureau of Asian Research, Asia 
Policy 17, no. 4 (October 2022), 8–18.  
35 For the evidence on Xi’s political motivation see: Mattathias Schwartz, “Why China Doesn’t Actually 
Want to Invade Taiwan,” Insider, November 12, 2022; and Derek Grossman, “Xi Jinping Is Not Looking 
to Go to War over Taiwan Anytime Soon,” NIKKEI Asia, November 16, 2022. For a counter to the 
peaking China argument, see Oriana Skylar Mastro and Derek Scissors, “China Hasn’t Reached the Peak 
of Its Power: Why Beijing Can Afford to Bide Its Time,” Foreign Affairs, August 22, 2022.  
36 Oriana Skylar Mastro, “Biden Says We’ve Got Taiwan’s Back, But Do We?” New York Times, May 27, 
2022.  
37 Brad Lendon, “US Gains Military Access to Philippine Bases Close to Taiwan and South China Sea,” 
CNN, April 4, 2023, https://www.cnn.com/2023/04/04/asia/us-philippines-military-base-access-intl-hnk-
ml/index.html. 
38 John Hoehn, “Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress,” Congressional 
Research Service, June 11, 2021.  
39 US Department of Defense, “Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates – Air 
Force, Missile Procurement,” (Department of the Air Force), April 2022, Volume 1 – 31 & 43, 
https://www.saffm.hq.af.mil/Portals/84/documents/FY23/PROCUREMENT_/FY23%20Air%20Force%2
0Missile%20Procurement.pdf?ver=QeRLpOSY7vcLmsKbr3C-Qw%3d%3d; US Department of Defense, 
“Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates – Navy, Weapons Procurement,” 
(Department of the Navy), April 2022, Volume 1 – 121 & 227, 
https://www.secnav.navy.mil/fmc/fmb/Documents/23pres/WPN_Book.pdf.  
40 John A. Tirpak, “As Air Force Ramps Up JASSM, Work Begins on Its Replacement,” Air and Space 
Forces Magazine, August 5, 2021 (also cited in Robert Haddick, “Defeat China’s Navy, Defeat China’s 
War Plan,” War on the Rocks, September 21, 2022).  
41 For HIMARS, see Joe Saballa, “US Army Seeking 500 New HIMARS by 2028,” Defense Post, 
September 14, 2022, https://www.thedefensepost.com/2022/09/14/us-army-himars-2028/.  
42 Li Peng [李鹏]，Sun Hao [孙浩]，and Liu Enyang [刘思阳] “Study on Joint Projection Command for 
Theater Command [战区联合投送指挥研究], Journal of Military Transportation University [军事交通
学院学报] 21, no. 5 (May 2019), 1-5, quoted in McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait 
Invasion,” 6.  
 

   
 
16 
 
43 “Hu Xiubin: ‘Four Insufficients’ Present in the Construction of China’s Maritime Strategic Projection 
Reserve Forces” [胡修斌: 我国海上战略投送后备力量建设存在 “四个不足”], China National Radio [
央广网], March 9, 2017, quoted in Conor M. Kennedy, “Getting There: Chinese Military and Civilian 
Sealift in a Cross-Strait Invasion,” in Crossing the Strait: China’s Military Prepares for War with 
Taiwan, ed. Joel Wuthnow, Derek Grossman, Phillip C. Saunders, Andrew Scobell, and Andrew N.D. 
Yang (Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, 2022), 223–52. 
44 Stacie Pettyjohn and Hannah Dennis, “Precision and Posture: Defense Spending Trends and the FY23 
Budget Request,” Center for a New American Security, November 2022, 10.  
45 US Defense Department, “Program Acquisition Cost by Weapon System (FY 2021),” Department of 
Defense Comptroller, May 2021, 5–11, https://assets1.cbsnewsstatic.com/i/cbslocal/wp-
content/uploads/sites/15909806/2021/08/fy2021_Weapons.pdf; Patricia Zengerle, “US Senate Passes 
Record $858 Billion Defense Act, Sending Bill to Biden,” Reuters, December 15, 2022.  
46 Doug Cameron, “Defense Companies Hurt by Staffing Shortages amid Growing Weapons Demand,” 
Wall Street Journal, July 30, 2022.  
47 Joe Gould and Bryant Harris, “As Raytheon Struggles to Replenish Stinger Missiles, Lawmaker Pushes 
Defense Production Act,” DefenseNews, April 26, 2022.  
48 Lyle Goldstein, “China Is Improving Its Anti-Submarine Warfare Capabilities,” National Interest, 
November 28, 2021.  
49 Sam LaGrone, “NAVSEA: Navy ‘Struggling’ to Get Attack Subs out of Repairs on Time as Demand 
Increases,” USNI News, September 21, 2022; Andrew Greene, “US Admiral Issues Blunt Warning on 
Building Australian Submarines in Overstretched Shipyards,” ABC Australia, September 1, 2022. 
50 David Adler, “Inside Operation Warp Speed: A New Model for Industrial Policy,” American Affairs 5, 
no. 2 (Summer 2021): 3–32.  
51 Paul Scharre and Ainikki Riikonen, “Defense Technology Strategy,” Center for a New American 
Security, November 17, 2020.  
52 Lee Hsi-min and Eric Lee, “Taiwan’s Overall Defense Concept, Explained,” The Diplomat, November 
3, 2020.  
53 “AUKUS Reshapes the Strategic Landscape of the Indo-Pacific,” The Economist, September 25, 2021; 
Michelle Ye Hee Lee and Ellen Nakashima, “Japan to Buy Tomahawk Missiles in Defense Buildup amid 
Fears of War,” Washington Post, December 12, 2022.  
54 Nick Aspinwall, “US to Sell Philippines Arms Despite No Human Rights Reforms,” Nikkei Asia, 
February 24, 2021.  
55 “US Arms Sales to Taiwan,” Forum on the Arms Trade, accessed December 21, 2022, 
https://www.forumarmstrade.org/ustaiwan.html.  
56 Gordon Lubold, “US Troops Have Been Deployed in Taiwan for at Least a Year,” Wall Street Journal, 
October 8, 2021.  
57 International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance: The Annual Assessment Of Global 
Military Capabilities and Defence Economics (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 
February 2020), 279–83, cited in Toshi Yoshihara, Dragon Against the Sun: Chinese Views of Japanese 
Seapower, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2020.  
58 Tim Fish, “Japan Countering China’s Naval Build-up with Modern Fleet,” USNI News, April 11, 2022; 
“Japan Adds Two Ships to Its Fleet of Aegis-equipped Destroyers,” Japan Times, November 21, 2022.  
59 International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance: The Annual Assessment Of Global 
Military Capabilities and Defence Economics (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 
February 2020), 277.  
 

   
 
17 
 
60 Jude Blanchette and Gerard DiPippo, “‘Reunification’ with Taiwan through Force Would Be a Pyrrhic 
Victory for China,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, November 2022.  
61 Oriana Skylar Mastro and Derek Scissors, “Beijing Is Used to Learning from Russian Failures,” 
Foreign Policy, April 18, 2022.  
62 Boris Grozovski, “Russia’s Economy at the End of 2022: Deeper Troubles,” Wilson Center, November 
23, 2022.  
63 Oriana Skylar Mastro, “Strait of Emergency? Debating Beijing’s Threat to Taiwan,” Foreign Affairs, 
September/October 2021: 225-229. 
 