  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
      Mark Stokes and Eric Lee 
 
 
    April 12, 2022 
  
 
 
Early Warning in the 
Taiwan Strait 


 
 
 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
 
About the Project 2049 Institute  
 
The Project 2049 Institute is a nonprofit research organization focused on promoting American values 
and security interests in the Indo-Pacific region. We specialize in open-source research using Chinese 
language sources to inform policy debate and advance public education. Our core mission is to create 
and disseminate knowledge that makes the region more peaceful and prosperous. 
 
The Project 2049 Institute is located in Arlington, Virginia, and was co -founded in 2008 by the 
Honorable Randall Schriver and Lt Col Mark Stokes (USAF, ret.). We are a 501(c)3 tax -exempt 
organization. Independent and non -partisan, our research is focused on bolstering human rights and 
national security. 
 
 
About the Authors 
 
Mark Stokes is Executive Director of the Project 2049 Institute. In addition to Taiwan issues, 
Mark’s research focus  includes Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Rocket Force and 
Strategic Support Force, defense industry, military and political leadership, and cross -Strait 
relations. Mark has served in a variety of military and private sector positions. A 20 year U.S. Air 
Force veteran, he served in intelligence, planning, and policy positions. From 1984 -1989, he was 
assigned to the Philippines and West Berlin. After graduate school and Chinese language training, 
Mark served as assistant air attaché at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing from 1992 to 1995. From 1995 
to May 1997, he was assigned as a strategic planner within the U.S. Air Force Plans and Operations 
Directorate. Between 1997 and 2004, he served as senior country director for China and Taiwan 
in the Office of the Secretary of Defense. After retiring from military service, he worked in the 
private sector on Taiwan for more than three years. Mark joined Project 2049 in 2008. He holds a 
BA from Texas A&M University and graduate degrees in international relations and Asian studies 
from Boston University and the Naval Postgraduate School. He has working proficiency in 
Mandarin Chinese. 
 
Eric Lee is Associate Director of Programs at the Project 2049 Institute. He manages the institute’s 
internship program, AsiaEye blog, outreach, and co-leads several core projects, including the U.S.-
Taiwan Defense Industrial Cooperation and Supply Chain Security Program. Previously, he 
managed all aspects of the institute’s senior visiting fellowship with the former Chief of the 
General Staff of Taiwan’s armed forces. Eric’s primary areas of research are cross-Strait security, 
U.S.-China, and U.S.-Taiwan issues. His writing has appeared in  NBC News, The Diplomat, The 
National Interest, and various Project 2049 publications. Eric holds a bachelor's degree from the 
University of California, Los Angeles. He is a Pacific Forum Young Leader and was previously 
an Alexander Hamilton Society Security and Strategy Seminar Fellow. Eric is fluent in Mandarin. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
The authors would like to recognize and thank Fu S. Mei, Ian Easton, Colby Ferland, Surya 
Narayanan, Lilly Lee, Steven Wang, Alice Cho, and Jenny Li. Their contributions, corrections, edits, 
and suggestions made this a better report. Any remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors.   
  
The Project 2049 Institute’s research is supported by private foundations, U.S. government agencies, 
like-minded governments, corporations, and individual donors. A complete list of our supporters can 
be found on our website at https://project2049.net/about/.  
 
Cover Image: Aerial view of military radar and asphalt road in Kenting National Park, Hengchun 
Town, Southern Taiwan at sunrise. (Source: “PNK Photo.”) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Introduction 
 
Air sovereignty is a nation’s exercise of absolute control and authority over the airspace above its 
territory. Political and military leaders demonstrate authority over territorial airspace through 
surveillance and control. Territorial airspace is the domain above a country’s land areas, internal 
waters, and territorial waters out to no more than 12 nautical miles. The U.S. Department of 
Defense defines air sovereignty as  “a nation’s inherent right to exercise absolute control and 
authority over the airspace above its territory.”1  
 
Taiwan, under its current Republic of China (ROC) constitution, exists as an independent 
sovereign state. From Beijing’s perspective, there i s one China, Taiwan is part of China, and the 
People’s Republic of China (PRC) is the sole legitimate government of China in the international 
community. PRC claims over Taiwan represent a border dispute in which one side claims the entire 
territory of the other. 
 
Early warning systems are critical at each point along the peace -war continuum. Early warning 
generally includes intelligence, space -based infrared sensors, and long -range radars. Various 
sources of intelligence, such as human resource intelligenc e, signals intelligence, and satellite 
imagery may provide strategic warning pending military action. U.S. Space Command provides 
warning through satellite-based infrared sensors that are able to detect heat signatures created by 
ballistic missiles upon launch. Alerts are shared with allies and partners, including Taiwan. 
 
Taiwan relies mostly on radar for early warning. 2 Ground-based and airborne radars and other 
sensors search the air, space, maritime, land, cyber, and electromagnetic domains for indications 
and warning s of potential threats, including a full -scale invasion. Radar intelligence can be 
produced through monitoring and cataloging air activity over time, which helps discern patterns 
and unusual activity. Radar is correlated with identification friend or foe (IFF) equipment and 
passive sensors to determine the nature of flight activity. It scans within a defined geographic area 
well beyond territorial airspace, known commonly as an air defense identification zone (ADIZ). 
Air surveillance radar works in tandem with civilian air tra ffic control to deconflict the use of 
airspace and enable vectoring of fighters to visually identify flight activity within an ADIZ.3 Upon 
detecting large-scale raids, long-range radars enable the dispersal of aircraft and cueing of ground- 
and sea-based air defenses. Early warning thus offers Taiwan’s national command authority an 
essential window of time to implement contingency plans for civil defense, mobilization, and 
counterstrikes.  
 
 
 
(Figure 1: At very long ranges the curvature of the Earth limits the so-called “radar horizon.” 
Source: “Ogier Electronics.”) 


 
 
2 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Ground-based early warning radars are typically characterized by large antennae  and low 
frequencies that can detect and track PLA flight activity hundreds of kilometers away. Line of 
sight limits a radar’s detection range. The higher the radar, the greater the range, placing a premium 
on mountaintop real estate. Taiwan is blessed with some of the highest elevations in the Indo -
Pacific region, giving its radars an advantage. In addition to conventional long range radar systems, 
Taiwan has invested in early w arning radar systems capable of detecting potentially catastrophic 
ballistic and land attack cruise missile strikes. 
 
A powerful ground-based early warning radar, similar in appearance to the U.S. Precision 
Acquisition Vehicle Entry Phased Array Warning Sy stem ( PAVE PAWS ) radar, detects PLA 
ballistic missile launches upon breaking the horizon thousands of kilometers away. The single 
ground-based radar is also capable of detecting airbreathing flight vehicles and maritime traffic 
transiting the Taiwan Strait. However, any ground-based system will have limitations on the ability 
to provide early warning against cruise missiles and other low flying, low observable flight 
vehicles. Powerful radars constructed on airborne early warning aircraft fill such critical gaps.4 
 
For Taiwan, early warning is a critical requirement at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels 
of warfare. The Taiwan Relations Act (TRA) states that the United States shall “maintain the 
capacity of the United States to resist any resort  to force or other forms of coercion that would 
jeopardize the security, or the social or economic system, of the people on Taiwan.”5 Furthermore, 
the U.S. shall make available “such defense articles and defense services in such quantity as may 
be necessary to enable Taiwan to maintain a sufficient self -defense capability.” However, since 
2007, U.S. defense policy toward s Taiwan appears to have adopted a n increasingly restrictive 
definition of self -defense. This shift most recently manifested itself in a new State Department 
security assistance policy toward Taiwan that enshrines an arbitrary distinction between 
“asymmetric defense” and “conventional” defe nse articles and services. While details remain 
unclear, the new policy allegedly includes a strong presumption of denial of requests for defense 
articles and services judged to be “conventional” in nature.6 
 
Early warning, and the air sovereignty mission  more broadly, is an example of a capability that 
defies the simple “asymmetric” versus conventional dichotomy. This brief examines the role of 
early warning in Taiwan’s national security and defense and within the context of the broader U.S.-
Taiwan relationship.  

 
 
3 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Air Sovereignty, PLA Use of Force, and the Conflict Continuum 
 
Chinese use of military force takes place along a continuum from peace to war. Coercive courses 
of action, known i n contemporary lexicon as “gray -zone” operations, are directed milita ry 
activities designed by the Central Military Commission (CMC) to advance the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP) Politburo’s political goals with minimal cost. The CMC Political Work Department 
likely plays a critical role in planning and executing coercive military campaigns.7 
 
Coercion succeeds when Taiwan’s political leadership concedes to Beijing’s demands under armed 
duress, despite retaining the power to resist.8 Coercive uses of force augment propaganda, military 
liaison, diplomatic, United Front Work, and economic instruments. Graduated escalation increases 
the risk of continued resistance, instilling in an enemy fear of future loss by slowly raising the risk 
of greater d amage. Coercion also requires the  ability to retain control over each step on the 
escalation ladder. A coercive campaign may seek to sow fear and uncertainty, or inflict pain and 
destruction, to generate popular support to compel Taiwan’s leadership to the negotiating table on 
unfavorable terms. 
 
At the low end of the spectrum, the CMC routinely calibrates shows of force for strategic effect. 
Shows of force are a form of subtle cross -Strait signaling, demonstrating potential consequences 
of a particular policy decision in Washington or Taipei. Military actions are amplified through 
PLA propaganda and liaison channels f or audiences around the world. Courses of action i n the 
middle part of the continuum include an air and/or maritime blockade, an island grab, and a 
strategic paralysis campaign.  
 
A maritime blockade would seek to isolat e Taiwan by attacking its sea lines of communication 
into and out of ports.  An air blockade could forcibly bring the Taipei Flight Information Region 
(FIR) under Shanghai or establish and enforce a no -fly zone over Taiwan. An air blockade also 
could suppor t a broader campaign to attain information dominance. Judicious application of 
firepower, combined with electromagnetic spectrum operations, cyber, operations security, and 
deception presumably would seek to paralyze Taiwan’s command and control system and  its 
ability to mount an organized resistance. Strategic-level targets likely would include early warning 
radar systems, national and operational -level command and control centers, communications 
nodes, critical infrastructure, and any deep interdiction assets. PLA writings suggest heavy reliance 
upon surprise an d pre -emption to shock leaders i n Taiwan, paralyze the ability to conduct 
operations, and to force a political solution soon after initiation of hostilities. 
 
At the upper end of the conflict continuum, Beijing could seek the destruction of the ROC central 
government, physical occupation, and imposition of will upon a vanquished population. Planning 
for annihilation takes political considerations off the table and assumes the ROC armed forces are 
the center of gravity. PLA mobilization for an invasion would be difficult to mask. However, 
China’s leaders may believe that ordering large -scale surprise missile strikes could decisively 
destabilize Taiwan, compelling it to acknowledge PRC sovereignty over the island before U.S. 
intervention. Theater-range hypersonic glide vehicles, land attack cruise missiles, and ballistic 
missiles pose the most significant threats to Taiwan’s strategic and operational -level command 
and control system.  

 
 
4 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
The Chinese Airspace Challenge 
 
Chinese Communist Party statecraft has adopted extraordinary means to control Taiwan’s 
interactions with the international community since establishing the PRC in 1949. Such measures 
include blocking Taiwan’s meaningful participation in United Nations-affiliated agencies, such as 
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). The United Nations calls upon members to 
refrain from “the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of 
any state.”9 The PRC has ensured that Taiwan is excluded from such criteria. 
 
The CCP has outlined seven triggers for employment of non -peaceful means to advance its 
political goals: 1) actions resulting in Taiwan’s permanent separation from China; 2) sustained 
refusal to engage in cross-Strait negotiations; 3) internal chaos in Taiwan; 4) a drastic deterioration 
of Taiwan’s armed forces and operational readiness; 5) permanent basing of U.S. or other foreign 
military forces on Taiwan; 6) Taiwan’s deployment of nuclear weapo ns; and 7) subverting CCP 
legitimacy through direct promotion of democracy or other measures.10  
 
Military courses of action available to the Politburo Standing Committee and CMC can generally 
be categorized as coercive or annihilative. Annihilation seeks the destruction of the ROC state and 
imposition of will on a vanquished population. Annihilative courses of action set aside the political 
context, including conditions and demands. Coercive courses of action are calibrated for political 
effect and intended to fall below the threshold to justify direct U.S. military intervention. Targets 
of a coercive campaign may include Taiwan’s public, the United States, or coalition partners. The 
CMC may seek an explicit policy change, shift in public opinion, or change  in the economy. A 
single air or missile strike, activation of a jammer targeting early warning radar, or crossing of the 
Taiwan Strait centerline may produce a strategic or political effect. The mechanism for how a 
military action will directly result in the desired political effect is unknown, but could entail 
punishment, denial, and strategic paralysis.11 Examples of coercive courses of action include low 
intensity shows of force or an air campaign to achieve strategic paralysis. The CMC prioritizes 
escalation dominance.12 
 
PLA displays of force could aim to deter or compel political leaders in Taipei and the international 
community to concede to Beijing’s political agenda. Limited uses of force could challenge 
Taiwan’s authority over its territorial airspace. Over the past few years, for instance, the PLA has 
crossed the Taiwan Strait’s centerline, conducted circumnavigational flights around Taiwan, and 
made deliberate incursions into Taiwan’s ADIZ. The centerline has been tacitly acknowledged as 
a border by both sides of the Taiwan Strait. While Taiwan’s ADIZ extends well over mainland 
China for alert purposes, the centerline marks the boundary of the Taipei and Shanghai FIRs. ROC 
Air Force (ROCAF) training areas are also to the east of the centerline. PLA military flights tha t 
cross the centerline can thus be interpreted as deliberately calibrated forms of coercion.  
 
PLA circumnavigational flights, referred to as “island encirclement patrols,” began in 2016. Long 
distance overwater training flights h ave transited the Bashi Ch annel, proceeded northeast of 
Taiwan, and returned to China through the Miyako Strait. PLA propaganda outlets noted the flights 
were intended to “maintain national sovereignty and territorial integrity.”13 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Beijing made veiled threats to declare an ADIZ covering the Taipei FIR as early as 2007. Five 
years later, the CMC established an ADIZ over the East China Sea. In 2018, China unilaterally 
announced and implemented a new air route (M503) running northbound along the western side 
of the centerline of the  Taiwan Strait. Also announced were three spurs from M503 to Xiamen, 
Fuzhou, and Dongshan that parallel military and civilian flights to Kinmen and Matsu.14 
 
The unilaterally announced routes deepened Taiwan’s suspicions of Chinese intent. As a matter of 
principle, Beijing has long viewed the Taiwan Strait as internal waters, along with the airspace 
above it. Furthermore, Beijing has used diplomatic coercion across international organizations to 
deny Taiwan’s meaningful participation in ICAO. ICAO is  responsible for global air navigation, 
including the conciliation of jurisdictional flight information regions. The Taipei FIR is one of the 
busiest in the world.15 
 
 
(Figure 2: Diagram of newly declared M503 flight by mainland China down western line of the 
Taiwan Strait. Source: “Civic Aeronautics Administration, ROC Ministry of Transportation and 
Communications.”) 
 
 
  


 
 
6 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
The PLA Kinetic Challenge 
 
The PLA Rocket Force (PLARF) presents the most significant kinetic challenge to Taiwan’s early 
warning and command and control system. 16 Under direct control of the CMC, the PLARF has 
traditionally been responsible for nuclear operations. P lanning for a conventionally capable 
ballistic and cruise missile capability since after conclusion of the U.S. -Soviet Inte rmediate 
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty in 1987.  The INF Treaty restricted U.S. and Soviet deployment of 
ballistic and land attack cruise missiles with ranges between 500 and 5,500 kilometers. Unbound 
by the treaty, the PLA’s first brigade equipped with a conventionally capable ballistic missile was 
established in 1993. The brigade launched dummy rounds into announced closure areas off the 
coast of Keelung and Kaohsiung during exercises in 1995 and 1996.17 
 
By 2007, the PLA’s corps-level missile command opposite Taiwan completed its planned structure 
of five conventional ballistic missile brigades under a corps -level missile command opposite 
Taiwan. Initial units were equipped with the 600 -kilometer range DF-15 or DF-11A short range 
ballistic missile (SRBM). A typical ballistic missile with a 300 -kilometer range has a flight time 
of approximately five minutes.18 Therefore, since 2007, any unhardened structure on Taiwan has 
been within seven minutes of destruction. 
 
Ballistic Missile Flight Data 
Missile Range (km) Highest Altitude (km) Angle of Reentry at 70km Total Flight Time in seconds (minutes) 
300 84.4 25 331 (5.51) 
600 164 39 443 (7.38) 
1,000 257 40 562 (9.37) 
1,500 391 42.1 677 (11.20) 
2,000 490 40 789 (13.15) 
3,000 700 38.6 989 (16.48) 
 
(Figure 3: Ballistic Missile Flight Data. Source: “Project 2049 Institute.”) 
 
Today, the PLARF’s conventional missile forces include a n 800-kilometer range vari ant of the 
DF-15; DF-11A SRBM; 700-kilometer range DF-16 SRBM; 1,500-kilometer range variant of the 
DF-21 medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM); the DF -17 MRBM equipped with a hypersonic 
glide vehicle; and the 3 ,000-kilometer range DF -26 intermediate-range ballistic missil e.19 The 
PLARF diversified its strike options through deployment of a first -generation ground launched 
cruise missile in 2005. Systems such as the 1 ,500-kilometer range DH -10 and 2,000-kilometer 
range DF-100 ground-launched cruise missile are deployed to at least two PLARF brigades.20 
 
In a crisis, the CMC could assign selected PLARF brigades to a Taiwan -focused joint task force. 
A combination of airbreathing flight vehicles, such as the DH-10, and ballistic missiles launched 
from multiple axes of attack would present significant challenges for any defender. Use of decoys, 
military deception, and penetration aids would further complicate defenses. 
 
A missile campaign would be followed by conventional PLA Air Force (PLAAF) strikes to ensure 
air defenses remain suppressed. If the PLA is successful in operating in the skies over Taiwan with 

 
 
7 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
impunity, conditions are created for a maritime blockade or an amphibious invasion. Together, the 
PLAAF and Navy Aviation are equipped with approximately 2,250 combat aircraft, making it the 
largest aviation force in the region and the third largest in the world. In 2020, the Party announced 
objectives to move towards “intelligentized” warfare that could offer Beijing an even broader 
range of military options by 2027. 
 
 
The PLA Non-Kinetic Challenge to Early Warning 
 
The PLA is increasing investment s into non-kinetic force options as well. The PLA understands 
that electromagnetic spectrum superiority is a prerequisite for dominance in air, sea, ground, space, 
and cyber domains. Therefore, it is investing significant resources into non -kinetic means of 
disrupting, deceiving, and destroying single points of failure in an adversary’s early warning and 
control systems. Priorities include artificial intelligence and microelectronics.21  
 
Electromagnetic spectrum operations would be central to a PLA coercive campaign directed 
against Taiwan. Electromagnetic attack assets would reduce Taiwan’s warning time through 
covering the takeoff, formation into strike packages, and transit. R adar countermeasures directed 
against early warning are intended to reduce time available to organize an effective response. PLA 
strategists note that employment of electromagnetic attacks can be a deterrent in and of itself.22 A 
notional PLA electromagnetic attack would employ stand-off jamming to saturate or deceive early 
warning systems by injecting noise through sidelobes to mask flight formations penetrating 
Taiwan’s ADIZ and territorial airspace. The Southwest Institute of Electronic Equipment (SWIEE) 
is the PLA’s most significant supplier of radar countermeasure systems.23 
 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Early warning provides Taiwan’s national -level decision makers with the information needed to 
make timely and accurate decisions throughout the conflict continuum. Air sovereignty is the 
exercise of control and authority over national territorial airspace. Air sovereignty missions – 
surveillance and control – demonstrate authority over territorial airspace. Ground-based and AEW 
radar systems search well beyond sovereign airspace to identify threats. Once detected and 
identified, necessary actions can be taken to respond. 
 
 
 
(Figure 4: Taiwan’s Concept of Air Sovereignty. Source: “Steven Wang / Song Wen-shih.”) 


 
 
8 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Early warning allows national-level command authorities to forecast, monitor, and assess national 
security threats, and determine appropriate countermeasures. Early warning also enables civil 
defense. Taiwan’s early warning system is tested through Wan’an air raid drills, which are carried 
out annually around Taiwan to exercise civil defense plans. Conducted since 1978, Wan’an drills 
increase operational readiness and civil awareness of possible threats.24 
 
Taiwan’s ADIZ is a declared geographic area extending beyond its territorial airspace. It is a 
designated airspace within which aircraft are required to comply with special identification 
procedures.25 Flight activity within the area is monitored and assessed for its potential threat to 
national security. Taiwan’s ADIZ was established in 1953 in the lead-up to the U.S.-ROC Mutual 
Defense Treaty.26 
 
An ADIZ supports the air sovereignty mission. Former Taiwan President Ma Ying -jeou 
emphasized that “ADIZs are establis hed to provide early warning and identification.” 27  In 
coordination with air traffic control authorities, ROCAF air surveillance operators track 
cooperative and non-cooperative aircraft within Taiwan’s ADIZ using radar and passive sensors. 
Cooperative aircraft, such as commercial flights, file a flight plan and use a transponder to identify 
themselves to civilian and military air traffic managers. An aircraft flying in an ADIZ may be 
identified as a possible threat, potentially leading to interception by ROCAF fighters.28 
 
The boundaries of Taiwan’s ADIZ extend west into China. In a practical sense, the western 
boundary is the centerline of the Taiwan Strait, also known as the “Davis Line.” Taiwan’s Ministry 
of National Defense (MND) and Ministry of Transpo rtation and Communications specify areas 
within the ADIZ where flight activity is restricted. 29 The MND is responsible for identifying, 
monitoring, intercepting, following, and engaging all aircraft in Taiwan’s ADIZ.30 
(Figure 5: Air Defense Identification Zones in East Asia. Source: “Congressional Research 
Service.”)  


 
 
9 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Taiwan’s Early Warning Infrastructure 
 
Early warning enables Taiwan’s national -level decision makers to make timely and accurate 
decisions. Sources of early warning include intelligence, space -based infrared sensors, and long -
range radars. Intelligence includes intercept of selected military and civilian communicat ions 
channels, commercial space-based imagery, and traditional human assets.31 Taiwan also is one of 
nine international partners of the U.S. Space Command for Shared Early Warning.32 
 
Taiwan’s highest value assets include six AEW platforms, a large ultra -high frequency (UHF) 
phased array early warning radar, and radars forward deployed on offshore islands. Both search a 
large swath of airspace for flight vehicles, including airborne targets and ballistic missiles. 
Secondary missions may include tracking shi ps at sea and electromagnetic support measures. 
AEW platforms overcome inherent limitations of ground -based radars due to elevation. Looking 
down over the Taiwan Strait at 10,000 meters, and over the mainland beyond, AEW searches vast 
volumes of airspace for potential threats flying “under the radar,” so to speak, such as land attack 
cruise missiles. AEW is an essential component of the air sovereignty mission. 
 
The ROCAF operates one of the most advanced air surveillance systems in the world. Barring the 
Himalayas, Taiwan has the highest elevations in the Indo-Pacific region: more than 156 mountain 
peaks surpass 3,000 meters (10,000 feet). Early warning radar installations are maintained on 
selected peaks. 
 
Taiwan’s air sovereignty infrastructure is rooted in the U.S. -ROC Mutual Defense Treaty. The 
United States developed and installed an initial early warning network in the 1950s. The system, 
designed to detect Soviet bomber raids against North America, hinged upon a network of radars 
across Alaska to t he Arctic regions of Canada and Iceland. Distant Early Warning Line (DEW 
Line) radar tracks were correlated via computers within the Semi-Automatic Ground Environment 
(SAGE) in the 1960s and 1970s. As the Soviets diversified nuclear delivery options, a paralle l 
ballistic missile early warning system (BMEWS) network was designed to detect Soviet and 
Chinese intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launches against North America.33  
 
The United States  worked closely with allies, including Taiwan. The U.S. Taiwan  Defense 
Command’s air component was established adjacent to the ROCAF Air Operations Center (AOC) 
in Taipei’s Gongguan area and connected via tunnel. 34 The AOC reported to the Combined 
Operations Center (COC) in Hengshan, an underground facility in Taipei’s northern suburbs. The 
AOC has traditionally relied heavily on a network of early warning radar stations cons tructed on 
the offshore islands - Pescadores (Penghu Islands) - along Taiwan’s coastline, and on mountains 
in the central part of the island. 
 
Radar reporting units passed tracks up the chain for manual plotting on boards. Sites on Matsu and 
Kinmen offered the deepest look over the mainland. Others were constructed at the southernmost 
tip of Taiwan (Eluanbi), the west coast of Miaoli (Waipu), the n ortheast coast (Sandiaojiao), the 
central east coast (Hualien), and Huoyanshan. Selected units were designated as control and 
reporting centers (CRCs) and granted authority to scramble and control fighter reactions to 
unidentified flight activity within Ta iwan’s ADIZ. CRCs were located on Penghu (Magong), at 

 
 
10 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
the northern tip of Taiwan (Shimen), and on Leshan, a 2,600-meter peak in central Taiwan. USAF 
weapons control officers were assigned to at least five of these early warning radar stations.35  
 
In the years prior to the 1979 derecognition of the ROC, the U.S. supported an overhaul of Taiwan's 
early warning and control network. The Sky Net ( Tianwang) system was conceptually based on 
the U.S. SAGE system.36 With the assistance of the U.S. Air Force, Taiwan acquired FPS-43 early 
warning radar systems and constructed new inst allations on Leshan and a 1,000 -meter tall 
mountain north of Taipei near Yangmingshan (Songshan). The ROCAF also rearranged CRC 
responsibilities. The Department of Defense Rome Air Development Center assisted in upgrading 
four existing FPS-88 radars to the FPS-110. Tianwang reportedly began operations in 1979.37  
 
With the initial deployment of conventional ballistic and land attack cruise missiles and 
introduction of advanced fighters, the ROCAF be gan planning in 1994 for a next -generation 
automated air defense system, known as the Chiangwang system. Chiangwang integrated tracks 
downlinked from six E-2T AEW aircraft equipped with a powerful UHF radar.  
 
The introduction of adva nced tactical data links further modernized Taiwan’ s air sovereignty 
system. Regional battle management centers under the AOC are responsible for northern, southern, 
and eastern sectors. In the event that the AOC is lost, Regional Operations Control Center s 
(ROCCs) are able to assume the AOC’s national air sovereignty mission should the latter fail. 38 
As follow -on to  Chiangwang, the Huanwang system leverages Link-16 and sophisticated 
computing to fuse tracking data from individual early warning radars into a single integrated air 
picture that is shared among participants in the network. 39 Participants include Hengshan, JOAC, 
ROCCs, selected fighters, long -range air defenses, and ROC Army and Navy platforms. 40 A 
common tactical picture also shares friendly position data.41 
 
 
(Figure 6: Taiwan Early Warning and Control System. Source: “Project 2049 Institute.”) 


 
 
11 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
  
A large, UHF long -range early warning radar, known today as the Surveillance Radar Program 
(SRP), i s a pillar of Taiwan’s air sovereignty system. In 1998, the MND, with the support of 
President Lee Teng -hui and Chief of the General Staff GEN Tang Fei, formally requested U.S. 
assistance in the design, development, and construction of a  new early warning radar system  
similar to the U.S. PAVE PAWS. During this period, the PLA began a massive buildup of its 
conventional ballistic and land attack missile infrastructure opposite Taiwan. At the time, U.S. 
media reporting suggested policy concerns over Chinese r eactions to the sale. Operational -level 
concerns focused on the radar’s survivability in the face of a missile attack. 42 Ultimately, the 
Clinton and Bush administrations supported the SRP to increase warning time and undercut the 
coercive utility of the PLA’s growing arsenal of increasingly accurate and lethal ballistic missiles 
deployed across the Taiwan Strait.43 
 
 
 
(Figure 7: Long-range UHF early warning radar in Leshan. Source: “Up Media.”) 
 
The SRP was constructed at an established site on Leshan a t an elevation of over 2,600 meters 
(8,000 feet). The system is designed to detect ballistic missile launches upon breaking the horizon 
out to at least 3,000 kilometers, or further upon receipt of an alert from the U.S. Shar ed Early 
Warning system. The system’s missile warning center is able to generate alerts. Unlike PAVE 
PAWS, the SRP is able to detect and track air breathing threats. Low radar cross section targets, 
such as cruise missiles, unmanned aerial systems, and heli copters, can be detected at 200 
kilometers. The radar has a latent space situational awareness and maritime surface tracking 
capability. The SRP is collocated with a missile warning center. 44 Taiwan ultimately opted for a 
single radar but has kept the door open for a possible second.45 
 
Ground- and sea-based radar systems are inherently limited in their ability to detect flight activity 
below the horizon. Airborne platforms equipped with high power early warning radars can detect 
airbreathing targets at all altitudes and out to extended ranges. Taiwan formally requested the 
acquisition of four E -2C Hawkeye early warning aircraft in 1992. The Clinton administration 


 
 
12 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
released a specially configured version designated as E -2T in 1993 with  initial deliveries taking 
place five years later. Taiwan acquired two E-2C Hawkeye 2000 aircraft (also known as E-2K) in 
2004 and brought the original four E -2Ts up to E -2K configuration by 2013. Within the Indo -
Pacific region, Japan and Singapore also are equipped with E-2s.46 
 
Taiwan’s E -2K AEW fleet is equipped with the APS -145 active electronically scanned array 
(AESA) radar, a passive detection system, and IFF. Link -16 terminals feed track data into the 
Huanwang system. The E -2K radar incorporates sid elobe suppression and other electronic 
counter-countermeasure capabilities. With a service ceiling of more than 10,000 meters, Taiwan’s 
AEW aircraft should be able to detect targets around Taiwan at ranges greater than 500 
kilometers.47 AEW radar data is shared within the ROCAF Air Combat Command and to selected 
Army and Navy participants through advanced tactical data links. It is unknown if Cooperative 
Engagement Capability has been released. After over 20 years of operation, however, the E -2K 
aircraft are reaching the end of their service life.48 
 
Taiwan’s conventional radar systems augment the SRP and E -2K for air sovereignty and early 
warning missions. Most belong to the FPS -117 family of three -dimensional long -range search 
radar. The USAF invested in, developed, and deployed the first generation of FPS -117s to the 
DEW Line in the 1980s to provide advance warning of Soviet bomber attacks. Fixed and mobile 
variants operate in the L -Band (1 to 2 -GHz) and employ sophisticated counter -jamming 
technology. The FPS -117 and its mobile variants (TPS -59, GE-592, and TPS -77) extended the 
range of Taiwan’ s early warning and control system. The system reportedly has a maximum 
detection range of more than 300 kilometers and altitude of 30 kilometers. Taiwa n fielded initial 
FPS-117 derivatives in the 1980s.49 
 
 
(Figure 8: Yilan Dong’aoling Radar Station. Source: “Makato Lin / Wikimedia Commons.”) 
 
 


 
 
13 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Taiwan began the process of acquiring seven fixed FPS-117 radar systems and an additional four 
mobile variants in 2002.50 With ballistic missile target tracking capability, the radar is reportedly 
able to determine accurate launch and impact prediction points, discriminate debris from the 
missile, and offer cueing quality data to air and missile defense fire unit s. It is reportedly one of 
the few currently fielded ground -based sensors that can detect and track long -range airbreathing 
targets and tactical ballistic missiles.51 The ROCAF is modernizing its fixed and mobile TPS-117 
family of radars.52 
 
Taiwan has acquired other radars to augment the FPS -117. In addition to installing two Hughes 
Air Defense Radar (HADR or HR-3000) systems in 1993, Taiwan also acquired four TPS-43 radar 
systems that were subsequently upgraded to the TPS -75, a mobile passive electronically scanned 
array system operating in the S-band (2.9 to 3.1-GHz). TPS-75s are reportedly deployed to Taitung, 
Hualian, and Pingdong radar stations. 53  The HADR, a three -dimensional phased array air 
surveillance radar operating in the S -band (2 to 4-GHz), is allegedly deployed to Songshan and 
Dagangshan radar stations.54 The TPS-59 was constructed on Leshan.55 
 
 
  

 
 
14 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Conclusion 
 
The CCP poses an existential threat to the Republic of China (Taiwan). Beijing challenges 
Taiwan’s authority over its territory and the airspace above it. A number of coercive measures are 
available to the CCP Politburo short of a full -scale amphibious inv asion. At the low end of the 
peace-war continuum, the PLA uses shows of force. The PRC has a long history of leveraging 
aerospace power as an instrument of coercive persuasion against Taiwan. The PLA could carry 
out a coercive campaign to attain strategic paralysis and implement a blockade of the skies above 
Taiwan. A strategic paralysis campaign envisions the physical destruction of Taiwan’s command 
and control system, strategic warning, and communications nodes through integrated air and 
missile strikes. In a worst-case scenario, the PLA could attempt an amphibious invasion.56 
 
Since 2007, U.S. policy has shifted its focus toward the high end of this peace -war continuum. 
Perspectives assume Chinese coercion will fail and that annihilation, defined as the eradication of 
the ROC and total political control over its people, is the only course of action that assures 
Beijing’s success. Assessments cast early warning radars, advanced fighters, submarines, long -
range air defenses, and main battle tanks as prestige-enhancing platforms with little operational or 
tactical value. Asymmetric defense, defined for Taiwan as smaller, dispersed, cost -effective, and 
highly mobile  weapon systems , is intended to prevent a fait accompli  and hold out for U.S. 
intervention. With an emphasis on a decisive battle in the littoral, counterstrikes against selected 
targets on the mainland are deemed offensive, provocative, and unlikely to be effective.57 
 
Early warning, whether derived from intelligence, satellites, or radars, is critical in responding to 
all Chinese courses of action. In February 2022, Taiwan’s President Tsai Ing -wen called on the 
armed forces to “ramp up efforts to provide early warning and surveillance of military 
developments in the Taiwan Strait and surrounding areas.” 58 At the strategic level, early warning 
enables a national command authority to create a window of time to organize an effective response 
to existential threats. Early warni ng also complements operational and t actical level asymmetric 
approaches outlined in the Overall Defense Concept (ODC).59 In the absence of a Mutual Defense 
Treaty with the United States, Taiwan’s armed forces invest in capabilities to counter all possible 
PLA courses of action along the peace-war continuum. 
 
Taiwan and the United States share a long history of cooperation on air surveillance and control. 
Taiwan’s use of U.S.-supplied systems also provides the potential for interoperability with the U.S. 
military, and potentially other militar y forces in the region. The large UHF long -range early 
warning radar and E-2K airborne early warning aircraft have been strategic pillars of Taiwan’s air 
sovereignty system for over 25 years. Other fixed and mobile early warning radar systems augment 
the SRP and AEW. Early warning systems, as well as associated networks and communications, 
are critical for Taiwan’s national security and defense. Should Taiwan request additional or new 
early warning systems, the Biden administration should support it.60 U.S. and Taiwan interlocutors 
should also consider a common operational picture that includes the sharing of radar surveillance 
among the U.S. and coalition partners in the Indo-Pacific region. For more effective and efficient 
investments in Taiwan’s national security, the United States  and Taiwan would do well to begin 
establishing roles and missions for critical scenarios across the spectrum of coercion and 
annihilation.  

 
 
15 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Endnotes 
 
1 See “DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,” U.S. Department of Defense, updated 
November 2021, at https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/dictionary.pdf; and 
“Continental Air Defense: A Dedicated Force Is No Longer Needed,” U.S. General Accounting 
Office, May 1994, at https://www.gao.gov/assets/nsiad-94-76.pdf. The North American 
Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) describes air sovereignty as “providing surveillance 
and control of the territorial airspace.”  
 
2 Britain deployed the world’s first early warning radar network (CHAIN HOME), prior to the 
Second World War. CHAIN HOME, along with the Dowding ground controlled intercept, 
contributed toward the defeat of Nazi Germany’s Luftwaffe. Royal Air Force fighters did not 
have to invest significant time searching large volumes of airspace for targets, but were guided to 
within visual range by air controllers on the ground. 
 
3 An ADIZ serves as a buffer between territorial and international airspace. Airspace control 
authorities may direct fighters on alert to intercept, identify, and escort aircraft within an ADIZ. 
Selected early warning radar stations are often assigned tactical control. 
 
4 A radar’s capability depends on several factors. These include elevation of the radar and 
altitude of target, portion of the frequency spectrum within which it operates, power and size of 
the antenna (power aperture). A radar also is judged by its ability to filter returns caused by 
clutter, such as the sea, ground, birds, rain, and other conditions. Electromagnetic (EM) attack 
would seek to deliberately reduce the effectiveness of a radar system. EM attack could include 
noise jamming, generation of false targets, chaff, decoys, and anti-radiation missiles. Fire control 
radars, organic to air defense units equipped with surface to air missile (SAM) systems, such as 
the U.S. PATRIOT, Taiwan’s TIANKUNG, or Chinese SA-10/20, generally operate at higher 
frequencies with reduced range yet better target discrimination. 
 
5 “Taiwan Relations Act (Public Law 96-8, 22 U.S.C. 3301 et seq.),” U.S. Congress, January 1, 
1979, available online at https://www.ait.org.tw/our-relationship/policy-history/key-u-s-foreign-
policy-documents-region/taiwan-relations-act/.  
 
6 Russell Hsiao, “Biden Administration Unveils New Security Assistance Policy towards 
Taiwan,” Global Taiwan Brief, March 23, 2022, at https://globaltaiwan.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/03/Vol-7-Issue-6-1.pdf. For an excellent discussion of the asymmetric and 
conventional distinction, see Fu S. Mei, “Building Defense Capabilities Towards Integrated 
Deterrence (構建符合「整體性嚇阻」戰略的國防戰力),” United Daily News, November 10, 
2021, at https://opinion.udn.com/opinion/story/121595/5880516. 
 
7 Mark Stokes and Russell Hsiao, “The People’s Liberation Army General Political Department: 
Political Warfare with Chinese Characteristics,” Project 2049 Institute, October 14, 2013, at 
https://project2049.net/2013/10/14/the-peoples-liberation-army-general-political-department-
political-warfare-with-chinese-characteristics/.  

 
 
16 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
8 Randall Schriver and Mark Stokes, “Evolving Capabilities of the People’s Liberation Army: 
Consequences of Coercive Aerospace Power for U.S. Conventional Deterrence,” Project 2049 
Institute, August 20, 2008, at https://project2049.net/2008/08/20/evolving-capabilities-of-the-
peoples-liberation-army-consequences-of-coercive-aerospace-power-for-u-s-conventional-
deterrence/.  
 
9 The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a specialized agency of the United 
Nations, defines air sovereignty as the “exclusive competence of a State to exercise its 
legislative, administrative and judicial powers within its national airspace.” The ROC was a 
founding member of ICAO at the Chicago Convention of 1944, when it was established that 
“every State has complete and exclusive sovereignty over the airspace above its territory.” See 
“Convention on International Civil Aviation,” International Civil Aviation Organization, 
December 7, 1944, at https://www.icao.int/publications/documents/7300_orig.pdf; and “Airspace 
Sovereignty (Presented by the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO)),” 
International Civil Aviation Organization, April 3, 2013, at 
https://www.icao.int/Meetings/atconf6/Documents/WorkingPapers/ATConf.6.WP.080.1.en.pdf. 
Also see Russell Hsiao, “Cross-Strait Aviation and Beijing’s Hybrid Warfare,” Taiwan Insight, 
February 21, 2018, at https://taiwaninsight.org/2018/02/21/the-politics-of-cross-strait-aviation-
and-beijings-hybrid-warfare/; and “A Primer on M503 and Civil Aviation in Asia,” CSIS, March 
14, 2018, at https://amti.csis.org/primer-m503-civil-aviation-asia/.  
 
10 Article 8 of the 2005 Anti-Secession Law states that “in the event that the ‘Taiwan 
independence’ secessionist forces should act under any name or by any means to cause the fact 
of Taiwan’s secession from China, or that major incidents entailing Taiwan’s secession from 
China should occur, or that possibilities for a peaceful reunification should be completely 
exhausted, the state shall employ non-peaceful means and other necessary measures to protect 
China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. See “Anti-Secession Law (反分裂国家法),” PRC 
National People’s Congress, March 14, 2005, available online at 
http://en.people.cn/200503/14/eng20050314_176746.html. Also see Mark Burles and Abram N. 
Shulsky, Patterns in China’s Use of Force: Evidence from History and Doctrinal Writings 
(Santa Monica, CA: 1999). 
 
11 A punishment strategy targets the general population and the economy, thus putting pressure 
on democratically elected leadership to adjust policy. Denial strategies would seek to undermine 
or paralyze Taiwan’s capacity for organized military resistance in the hope that the political 
leadership would concede to Beijing’s demands to avoid further loss or futile expenditure of 
resources. 
 
12 For background on effective control (有效控制), see Alison A. Kaufman and Daniel M. 
Hartnett, “Managing Conflict: Examining Recent PLA Writings on Escalation Control,” Center 
for Naval Analysis, February 2016, at https://www.cna.org/cna_files/pdf/DRM-2015-U-009963-
Final3.pdf. 
 
13 See Mercedes Trent, “Over the Line: The Implications of China’s ADIZ Intrusions in 
Northeast Asia,” Federation of American Scientists, August 17, 2020, at 
https://uploads.fas.org/2020/08/ADIZ-Report.pdf; and Mark Cozad and Nathan Beauchamp-

 
 
17 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
Mustafaga, “People’s Liberation Army Air Force Operations over Water: Maintaining Relevance 
in China's Changing Security Environment,” RAND Corporation, 2017 at 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2057.html. For reference to “circumnavigate the 
island” (绕岛巡航), see “Various PLA Air Force fighters continuously ‘circumnavigate the 
island’ to test actual combat capability (中国空军多型战机连续“绕岛巡航”检验实战能力),” 
Xinhua, April 19, 2018, at http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2018-04/19/c_1122710694.htm. 
 
14 Mark Stokes, “China’s Air Defense Identification System: The Role of PLA Air Surveillance,” 
Project 2049 Institute, May 9, 2014, at https://project2049.net/2014/05/09/chinas-air-defense-
identification-system-the-role-of-pla-air-surveillance/; and Russell Hsiao, “Cross-Strait Aviation 
and Beijing’s Hybrid Warfare,” Taiwan Insight, February 21, 2018, at 
https://taiwaninsight.org/2018/02/21/the-politics-of-cross-strait-aviation-and-beijings-hybrid-
warfare/.  
 
15 Michael Mazza and Gary Schmitt, “Righting a Wrong: Taiwan, the United Nations, and 
United States Policy,” Project 2049 Institute, October 25, 2021, at 
https://project2049.net/2021/10/25/righting-a-wrong-taiwan-the-united-nations-and-united-
states-policy/.  
 
16 For a detailed examination of Taiwan’s tactical air defenses, see Michael J. Lostumbo, David 
R. Frelinger, James Williams, and Barry Wilson, “Air Defense Options for Taiwan: An 
Assessment of Relative Costs and Operational Benefits,” RAND Corporation, 2016, at 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1051.html. 
 
17 Patrick E. Tyler, “China Wargames Viewed as Tactic to Press Taiwan,” New York Times, 
August 19, 1995, at https://www.nytimes.com/1995/08/19/world/china-war-games-viewed-as-
tactic-to-press-taiwan.html.  
 
18 Ian Easton, “Able Archers: Taiwan Defense Strategy in an Age of Precision Strike,” Project 
2049 Institute, September 22, 2014, at https://project2049.net/2014/09/22/able-archers-taiwan-
defense-strategy-in-an-age-of-precision-strike/.  
 
19 “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China,” U.S. 
Department of Defense, November 3, 2021, at 
https://media.defense.gov/2021/Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-1/0/2021-CMPR-FINAL.PDF.  
 
20 For details of the PLA’s cruise missile development, see Dennis M. Gormley, Andrew S. 
Erickson, and Jingdong Yuan, A Low-Visibility Force Multiplier Assessing China’s Cruise 
Missile Ambitions (Washington, DC: NDU Press, 2014), available online at 
https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/Books/force-multiplier.pdf. Also see “Military 
and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China,” U.S. Department of 
Defense, November 3, 2021, at https://media.defense.gov/2021/Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-
1/0/2021-CMPR-FINAL.PDF; and Ian Easton, “The Assassin Under the Radar,” Project 2049 
Institute, October 1, 2009, at https://project2049.net/2009/10/01/the-assassin-under-the-radar-
chinas-dh-10-cruise-missile-program/.  
 

 
 
18 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
21 Marcus Clay, “To Rule the Invisible Battlefield: The Electromagnetic Spectrum and Chinese 
Military Power,” War on the Rocks, January 22, 2021, at https://warontherocks.com/2021/01/to-
rule-the-invisible-battlefield-the-electromagnetic-spectrum-and-chinese-military-power/.  
 
22 “Science of Military Strategy (战略学),” National Defense University, 2020.  
 
23 SWIEE is headquartered in Chengdu and is also known as the China Electronics Technology 
Group Corporation (CETC) 29th Research Institute. SWIEE reportedly supplies the PLA with 
60% of its electronic reconnaissance and jamming equipment. The institute also designs and 
manufactures assemblies and components, such as ultra-wideband antennas. The 29th Research 
Institute publishes the journal, Electronic Information Warfare Technology (电子信息对抗技
术), in which PLA engineers have examined means of jamming older E-2 early warning aircraft 
using artificial intelligence-supported technologies. See Wang Zhenxing, Li Xiaoyan, and Cui 
Xinfeng, “Inversion and Simulation of E-2C Airborne Early Warning Radar Antenna (E-2C 预警
机雷达天线方向图反演和仿真),” Electronic Information Countermeasures Technology, 2018. 
The authors are from the PLA’s primary EMSO training complex in Luoyang. Also see Chih-
Cheng Lo, “The Vulnerability of an Airborne Early Warning (AEW) System Against Stand-Off 
Noise Jamming (SOJ),” U.S. Naval Postgraduate School, September 1996, at 
https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA318176.pdf. 
 
24 The requirement for air raid drills is outlined in the “Civil Defense Act (民防法),” Laws & 
Regulations Database of the Republic of China (Taiwan), amended January 20, 2021, at 
https://law.moj.gov.tw/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?pcode=D0080118. For reference to the Airspace 
Threat Alert System (空中威脅告警系統), see “MND Explains ‘Airspace Threat Alert System’ 
Test Press Release (國防部說明『空中威脅告警系統』訊息測試新聞稿),” ROC Ministry of 
National Defense, March 28, 2018, at 
https://www.mnd.gov.tw/Publish.aspx?p=75197&title=%E5%9C%8B%E9%98%B2%E6%B6%
88%E6%81%AF&SelectStyle=%E6%96%B0%E8%81%9E%E7%A8%BF; and “Wan’an 
Exercise (萬安演習),” ROC Ministry of National Defense, All-out Defense Mobilization Agency, 
updated March 1, 2022, at https://aodm.mnd.gov.tw/front/front.aspx?menu=076&mCate=076.  
 
25 “Air Defense Identification Zones,” U.S. Naval War College, Stockton Center for 
International Law, 2021, at https://digital-
commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2939&context=ils.  
 
26 “President's Interview with Asia Weekly (總統接受亞洲週刊專訪),” Office of the President 
of the Republic of China (Taiwan), December 25, 2013, at 
https://www.president.gov.tw/NEWS/18286.  
 
27 “President Ma attends academic conference on contemporary international and transnational 
law (總統出席「現代國際法與超國界法」學術研討會暨「中華民國國際法學會」102 年年
會),” Office of the President of the Republic of China (Taiwan), December 14, 2013, at 
https://www.president.gov.tw/NEWS/18253.  
 

 
 
19 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
28 Among various sources outlining Taiwan air defense system, see David A. Shlapak, David T. 
Orletsky, and Barry A. Wilson, Dire Strait? Military Aspects of China-Taiwan Confrontation 
and Options for U.S. Policy (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2000), available online at 
https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/2007/MR1217.pdf; and David 
A. Shlapak, David T. Orletsky, Toy I. Reid, Murray Scot Tanner, and Barry Wilson, A Question 
of Balance: Political Context and Military Aspects of the China-Taiwan Dispute (Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND, 2009), available online at 
https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monographs/2009/RAND_MG888.pdf. 
 
29 “Civil Aviation Act (民用航空法),” Laws & Regulations Database of The Republic of China 
(Taiwan), May 30, 1953, at 
https://law.moj.gov.tw/LawClass/LawSearchContent.aspx?pcode=K0090001&kw=%e5%88%b6
%e7%a9%ba.  
 
30 Song Wen-hsi, “Exploring Airspace Sovereignty within Air Defense Identification Zones from 
a Legal Perspective (法源觀點探討防空識別區之空域主權),” ROC Air Force Bimonthly, 
December 1, 2020, at https://www.mnd.gov.tw/NewUpload/202012/2-
%E6%B3%95%E6%BA%90%E8%A7%80%E9%BB%9E%E6%8E%A2%E8%A8%8E%E9%9
8%B2%E7%A9%BA%E8%AD%98%E5%88%A5%E5%8D%80%E4%B9%8B%E7%A9%BA
%E5%9F%9F%E4%B8%BB%E6%AC%8A_232353.pdf.  
 
31 An estimated 500,000 to 1.5 million Taiwanese are physically on mainland China at any given 
time. 
 
32 For reference to Taiwan and Shared Early Warning, see John W. Raymond, “Testimony before 
the House Armed Services Committee: Fiscal Year 2021 Priorities and Posture of the United 
States Space Command,” U.S. Congress, February 27, 2020, at 
https://www.congress.gov/116/meeting/house/110583/witnesses/HHRG-116-AS29-Wstate-
RaymondJ-20200227.pdf. Other partners include NATO, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi 
Arabia, Republic of Korea, and the United Arab Emirates. Also see Wendell Minnick, “US 
intelligence is in bed with Taiwan space agency,” Shephard Media, September 24, 2018, at 
https://www.shephardmedia.com/news/digital-battlespace/us-intelligence-bed-taiwan-space-
agency/. 
 
33 For a history of SAGE and associated radar systems, see David F. Winkler, Searching the 
Skies: The Legacy of the United States Cold War Defense Radar Program (Langley, VA: Air 
Combat Command, 1997), available online at https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA331231. 
Also see “SAGE: Semi-Automatic Ground Environment Air Defense System,” MIT Lincoln 
Laboratory, at https://www.ll.mit.edu/about/history/sage-semi-automatic-ground-environment-
air-defense-system. 
 
34 For background on the 327th Air Division, see “Taipei Air Station” at 
http://taipeiairstation.blogspot.com/. Also see Jacob Van Staaveren, Air Operations in the 
Taiwan Crisis of 1958, U.S. Air Force Historical Division Liaison Office, November 1962. For 
background on the role of a USAF air division, see Mike Pietrucha and Jeremy Renken, 

 
 
20 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
“Bringing the Air Division Back to the Future,” War on the Rocks, April 22, 2019 at 
https://warontherocks.com/2019/04/bringing-the-air-division-back-to-the-future/. 
 
35 See “Taipei Air Station” at http://taipeiairstation.blogspot.com/. 
 
36 Control Reporting Points (CRPs) were located in Kinmen, Dongyin, Hualien, Waipu, 
Dagangshan, and Dahanshan. The three RPs were now located in Sandiaojiao, Shimen, and 
Eluanbi. For background on the Automated Air Defense System Preparation Office (自動化防空
系統籌建處), see Liao Ying-yen, “From Dongyin Radar Station, Reviewing the Evolution of 
ROCAF Battle Management Radar Under the U.S.-Taiwan Mutual Defense Treaty (Part 2) (從
東引雷達站回顧美台協防期間，空軍戰管雷達演變史),” Taiwan Public Television Service, 
February 16, 2022, at https://news.pts.org.tw/article/567771.  
 
37 The program names were COMMANDO EDGE and PEACE EDGE. Among various sources, 
see “Administrative Practices: Nicknames,” U.S. Department of the Air Force, January 1, 1975, 
at 
https://books.google.com/books?id=hWfVAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA10&lpg=PA10&dq#v=onepage
&q&f=false.  
 
38 For background on Chiangwang (強網系統) and Regional Operations Control Centers 
(ROCC; 區域作戰管制中心), see Wendell Minnick, “Taiwan Targets $30 Million for Radar 
Upgrades,” Janes Defense Weekly, November 6, 2000. Also see Luo Tianbin, “Linking 
Combatant Commands, One point of breakage inspires concern (戰管連動 一處被破全體堪
虞),” Liberty Times, March 1, 2012, at https://news.ltn.com.tw/news/focus/paper/564762. The 
AOC is alternatively known as the Air Force Combat Command (空軍作戰指揮部, 空軍作戰部 
or 空作部). Specifically, the underground facility is located at Chanchushan (Toad Mountain; 蟾
蜍山) in the Gongguan (公館) residential area (福興營區). 
 
39 Wang Jiong-hua, “Air Force Builds the Huanwang System to Monitor PLA Fighters (空軍建
置寰網系統監控中共戰機 去年竟 19 次故障),” Apple Daily, April 14, 2019, at 
https://tw.appledaily.com/politics/20190414/KIGJTXXIOA4BTRO6TSY5ENICEI/; Luo 
Tianbin, “Taiwan Strait Military: Linking sea-air missile radars to strengthen air defense, the 
military's 'Huangchan project' will be completed in 2024 (台海軍情: 聯結海空飛彈雷達強化防
空 軍方「寰展計畫」2024 年完成),” Liberty Times, May 1, 2021, at 
https://news.ltn.com.tw/news/politics/breakingnews/3517481; and Chu Ming, “Improve Air 
Force Air Defense Missile Effectiveness, ‘Huanwang’ Battle Management Network Incorporates 
Israeli Technology (提升空軍防空飛彈攔截效能「寰網」聯戰採以色列系統作為主要核心
技術),” Up Media, December 9, 2021, at 
https://www.upmedia.mg/news_info.php?Type=1&SerialNo=132001.  
 
40 For a history of Taiwan’s air defense and early warning projects covered under Anyu (安宇), 
see “Taiwan's military implemented a plan to replace its air defense radar, the entire program 
was completed in 2006 (台军方实行换装防空雷达计划 全案 2006 年完成),” Sohu, August 11, 
2003, at http://news.sohu.com/37/79/news212017937.shtml. For more on Taiwan’s C2 and early 

 
 
21 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
warning systems, see “The Balance of Air Power in the Taiwan Strait,” US-Taiwan Business 
Council, May 2010, at https://www.us-taiwan.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/2010_may11_balance_of_air_power_taiwan_strait.pdf.  
 
41 The Joint Tactical Information Distribution System (JTIDS) operates on a secure wireless data 
link network operating in the UHF or L-band portion of the frequency spectrum - specifically 
between 962 and 1213-MHz. Within this 250-MHz bandwidth range, the JTIDS reportedly hops 
77,000 times a second over 51 specific frequencies. Although JTIDS can still be jammed, the 
cost and power required for a jammer to cover the entire 250-MHz bandwidth would be 
significant. JTIDS also utilizes encryption for an extra level of security. See Hsiao Jie-yun, 
“Military plans to invest more than NT$10 billion to revitalize the Bosheng case (軍方擬投逾百
億元，為中風的博勝案復健),” Storm Media, January 8, 2021, at 
https://new7.storm.mg/article/3364237. Also see Ed Ross, “Taiwan’s Ballistic-Missile 
Deterrence and Defense Capabilities,” China Brief, February 10, 2011, at 
https://jamestown.org/program/taiwans-ballistic-missile-deterrence-and-defense-capabilities/. 
 
42 Philip Shenon, “U.S. Plans to Sell Radar to Taiwan to Monitor China,” New York Times, April 
30, 1999, at https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/library/world/asia/043099taiwan-
missiles.html?Re.  
 
43 Among various sources, see “Raytheon's Surveillance Radar Program for Taiwan Completes 
System Design Review,” Business Insider, May 10, 2006, at 
https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/raytheons-surveillance-radar-program-for-
taiwan-completes-system-design-review-807865; and Inside the Pentagon, Vol. 20, No. 14 
(April 1, 2004), p. 1. 
 
44 John Liang, Inside Missile Defense, Vol. 11, No. 14 (July 6, 2005), p. 2. For reference to the 
Reconnaissance and Early Warning Center (空軍偵蒐預警中心), see You Kai-shiang, “INDSR: 
Leshan Radar Station covers the South China Sea for early warning to the United States (國防
院：樂山雷達站範圍涵蓋南海 供美早期預警),” Central News Agency, November 29, 2020, at 
https://www.cna.com.tw/news/firstnews/202011290163.aspx. 
 
45 “Increase Survivability of ‘Long-Range Early Warning Radar’ in Leshan, Hsinchu, protection 
by layered anti-aircraft missiles (提高新竹樂山「長程預警雷達」存活率 防空飛彈層層防
護),” ETToday, October 1, 2020, at https://www.ettoday.net/news/20131001/277087.htm.  
 
46 The E-2C foreign military sales (FMS) program was estimated to be U.S. $700 million. 
Shirley Kan, “Taiwan: Major U.S. Arms Sales Since 1990,” Congressional Report Service, 
October 31, 2001, at https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA472822.pdf. For general background on 
the E-2C, see Daniel M. Sunday, Timothy P. Barrett, Michael G. Dennis, Constantine M. 
Frangos, Mark O. Schlegel, and Thomas D. Whitaker, “E-2C Hawkeye Combat System 
Display,” Johns Hopkins University APL Technical Digest, Volume 23, Numbers 2 and 3 (2002), 
at https://www.jhuapl.edu/content/techdigest/pdf/V23-N2-3/23-02-Sunday.pdf. Also see “U.S. 
Arms Sales to Taiwan (美國對台軍售大事記),” Voice of America, October 7, 2013, at 
https://www.voacantonese.com/a/timeline-us-arms-sales-to-taiwan/1764389.html; and 

 
 
22 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
“Transmittal No. 99–30,” U.S. Department of Defense, August 12, 1999, at 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1999-08-12/pdf/99-20786.pdf; and “E2K All 
Upgraded, Combat and Rescue Power Increased (E2K 全數升級 戰力救援增),” Taiwan News, 
March 9, 2013, at https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/ch/news/2168492. 
 
47 For retrofit work, see “Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United 
States – E-2T Retrofit Upgrade,” Defense Security Cooperation Agency, October 3, 2008, at 
https://web.archive.org/web/20110721171925/http:/www.dsca.osd.mil/PressReleases/36-
b/2008/Taiwan_08-47.pdf; “AN/APS-145 Advanced Airborne Surveillance Radar,” Lockheed 
Martin, at https://digilander.libero.it/humboldt/pdf/ANAPS-145.pdf; and “Lockheed Martin 
APS-145 radar to go aboard new Customs aircraft,” Military Aerospace Technology, November 
1, 1999, at https://www.militaryaerospace.com/home/article/16705866/lockheed-martin-aps145-
radar-to-go-aboard-new-customs-aircraft.  
 
48 The E-2s also include the ARC-158 UHF datalink and ARQ-34 Dual HF Communications Set. 
See “Taiwan Receives Upgraded E-2K Early Warning Aircraft From US,” Airforce Technology, 
March 10, 2013, at https://www.airforce-technology.com/news/newstaiwan-e-2k-early-warning-
aircraft-us/.  
 
49 The system is reportedly able to counter anti-radiation missiles and counter jamming attempts 
by randomly hopping among 18 channels in the 1.215 to 1.4-GHz band and using pencil beams 
for targets with low radar cross sections. “FPS-117,” Missile Defense Advocacy Alliance, May 1, 
2018, at https://missiledefenseadvocacy.org/defense-systems/an-fps-117/. 
 
50 “Taiwan To Receive Early-Warning Radars From US: Jane’s,” Space Daily, June 13, 2002, at 
https://www.spacedaily.com/news/bmdo-02o.html; and Chu Ming, “Combatant Command radar 
cannot detect drones and cruise missiles, 3D radar on offshore wind turbines become crucial (戰
管雷達無法偵測無人機與巡弋飛彈 離岸發電風機預警的 3D 雷達成利器),” Up Media, 
November 6, 2019, at https://www.upmedia.mg/news_info.php?Type=1&SerialNo=74835.  
 
51 “AN/TPS-59 Long-range Air Surveillance Radars,” Lockheed Martin, at 
https://www.lockheedmartin.com/content/dam/lockheed-martin/rms/documents/ground-based-
air-surveillance-radars/TPS-59%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf; and “AN/TPS-59,” Missile Defense 
Advocacy Alliance, May 22, 2018, at https://missiledefenseadvocacy.org/defense-systems/an-tps-
59/.   
 
52 Hung Che-cheng, “Responding to PLA J-20, ROCAF Upgrading FPS-117 Capabilities (因應
殲 20 威脅 空軍全面提升 FPS-117 雷達性能),” United Daily News, September 1, 2021, at 
https://city.udn.com/60321/7124407#ixzz7MC62tAkg. Taiwan also operates a number of ship-
based air search and SAM acquisition radars, such as the ADAR-1 (Chang Bai). The Chang Bai 
radar system is reported to be based on Lockheed Martin’s ADAR-HP (Air Defense Array 
Radar-High Power) design and operates in the 2 to 4-GHz range (S-band). Developed for the 
TIANKUNG SAM system, the system reportedly has a 120-degree field of view and maximum 
range of 450 kilometers. Among various sources, see “Medium Range Air Defense Radar,” 
Taiwan Defense Review, June 19, 2006. At least seven systems are said to be currently in service. 
The system performance specifications remain classified, but its reported effective detection 

 
 
23 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
range against 1m² targets is around 400 kilometers. Reportedly, it is resistant to electronic 
countermeasures and can detect fixed and rotary-wing aircraft, cruise missiles and UAVs. See 
“3D Rotating Phased Array Radar System,” National Chun-shan Institute of Science and 
Technology, at 
https://www.ncsist.org.tw/eng/csistdup/products/product.aspx?product_id=278&catalog=41.  
 
53 “AN/TPS-75 Radar System,” Federation of American Scientists, at https://man.fas.org/dod-
101/sys/ac/equip/an-tps-75.htm; “Military Exercise ‘destroy radar’! J-10 test-fired YJ-91 anti-
radiation missile (軍演「摧毀雷達」！ 殲-10 試射鷹擊-91 反輻射導彈),” ETToday, 
November 18, 2016, at https://www.ettoday.net/news/20161118/813607.htm; and “Transmittal 
No. 00-22,” U.S. Department of Defense, March 16, 2000, at 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2000-03-16/pdf/00-6433.pdf.  
 
54 See “Electronic Warfare Handbook 2008,” Shephard, 2008, at 
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.174.4209&rep=rep1&type=pdf. The 
Songshan radar station, where the HR-3000 system was deployed, reportedly suffered a serious 
explosion in 1998 that killed nine people. 
 
55 The TPS-59 is a mobile variant of the FPS-117 developed for the U.S. Marine Corps. Four 
TPS-77 (GE-592) air surveillance radars were acquired in 1984 and a fifth in 1992. Data was 
acquired from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) trade register database. 
 
56 Ian Easton, “China’s Top Five War Plans,” Project 2049 Institute, January 6, 2019, at 
https://project2049.net/2019/01/06/chinas-top-five-war-plans/.  
 
57 Among various sources, see For background on Taiwan’s counter-strike capability, see Denny 
Roy, “Taiwan Perilously Ponders Its Strategic Missile Force,” China Brief (Vol 6, Issue 20), 
May 9, 2007, at https://jamestown.org/program/taiwan-perilously-ponders-its-strategic-missile-
force/; William Murray, “Revisiting Taiwan’s Defense Strategy,” Naval War College Review, 
61, No. 3 (Summer 2008): 12−38; Jim Thomas, John Stillion, and Iskander Rehman, Hard ROC 
2.0: Taiwan and Deterrence through Protraction (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and 
Budgetary Assessments, 2014), at https://csbaonline.org/research/publications/hard-roc-2-0-
taiwan-and-deterrence-through-protraction/publication/1; Michael J. Lostumbo, David R. 
Frelinger, James Williams, and Barry Wilson, Air Defense Options for Taiwan: An Assessment of 
Relative Costs and Operational Benefits (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2016); 
Michael A. Hunzeker and Alexander Lanoszka, A Question of Time: Enhancing Taiwan’s 
Conventional Deterrence Posture (Fairfax, VA: November 2018), at https://csps.gmu.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/A-Question-of-Time.pdf; Drew Thompson, Hope On The Horizon: 
Taiwan’s Radical New Defense Concept, at https://warontherocks.com/2018/10/hope-on-the-
horizon-taiwans-radical-new-defense-concept/; Tanner Greer, “Taiwan’s Defense Strategy 
Doesn’t Make Military Sense But It Does Make Political Sense,” Foreign Affairs, September 17, 
2019, at https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/taiwan/2019-09-17/taiwans-defense-strategy-
doesnt-make-military-sense; and James Timbie, Adm. James O. Ellis Jr., “A Large Number of 
Small Things: A Porcupine Strategy for Taiwan,” Texas National Security Review, December 
2021, at https://tnsr.org/2021/12/a-large-number-of-small-things-a-porcupine-strategy-for-
taiwan/. 

 
 
24 
 
Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait 
 
 
58 “President Tsai Responds to Ukraine Developments (聽取「烏克蘭情勢因應小組」簡報 
總統四項指示：呼籲和平理性、確保國家安全、確保民心安定、維持經濟穩定),” Office of 
the President of the Republic of China (Taiwan), February 23, 2022, at 
https://www.president.gov.tw/News/26560.  
 
59 Lee Hsi-min and Eric Lee, “Taiwan’s Overall Defense Concept, Explained,” The Diplomat, 
November 3, 2020, at https://thediplomat.com/2020/11/taiwans-overall-defense-concept-
explained/; “2021 Quadrennial Defense Review (2021 年日年期國防總檢討),” ROC Ministry of 
National Defense, 2021, at 
https://www.mnd.gov.tw/NewUpload/%e6%ad%b7%e5%b9%b4%e5%9c%8b%e9%98%b2%e5
%a0%b1%e5%91%8a%e7%b8%bd%e6%aa%a2%e8%a8%8e(QDR)/%e6%ad%b7%e5%b9%b4
%e5%9c%8b%e9%98%b2%e5%a0%b1%e5%91%8a%e7%b8%bd%e6%aa%a2%e8%a8%8e(Q
DR).files/%e6%ad%b7%e5%b9%b4%e5%9c%8b%e9%98%b2%e5%a0%b1%e5%91%8a%e7
%b8%bd%e6%aa%a2%e8%a8%8e(QDR)-
110/110%20QDR(%e4%b8%ad%e6%96%87%e6%ad%a3%e5%bc%8f%e7%89%88).pdf; and 
“ROC National Defense Report 2021 (中華民國 110 年國防報告書),” ROC Ministry of 
National Defense, 2021, at 
https://www.mnd.gov.tw/NewUpload/%E6%AD%B7%E5%B9%B4%E5%9C%8B%E9%98%B
2%E5%A0%B1%E5%91%8A%E6%9B%B8%E7%B6%B2%E9%A0%81%E5%B0%88%E5%
8D%80/%E6%AD%B7%E5%B9%B4%E5%9C%8B%E9%98%B2%E5%A0%B1%E5%91%8
A%E6%9B%B8%E5%B0%88%E5%8D%80.files/%E5%9C%8B%E9%98%B2%E5%A0%B1
%E5%91%8A%E6%9B%B8-
110/%E5%9C%8B%E9%98%B2%E5%A0%B1%E5%91%8A%E6%9B%B8-110-
%E4%B8%AD%E6%96%87.pdf.  
 
60 Hung Che-cheng, “Taiwan Constructs High-Altitude Air Defense Network with the U.S. 
Military (我將與美軍建構高高空防禦網),” United Daily News, March 15, 2021, at 
https://udn.com/news/story/10930/5317999.  