 
 
  
 
Meeting the Anti-Access and 
Area-Denial Challenge 
 
Andrew Krepinevich, Barry Watts & Robert Work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1730 Rhode Island Avenue, NW, Suite 912 
Washington, DC 20036 
 



 
 
Meeting the Anti-Access and 
 Area-Denial Challenge 
 
by 
Andrew Krepinevich 
Barry Watts 
Robert Work 
 
 
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments 
2003 



 
 
ABOUT THE CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND BUDGETARY ASSESSMENTS 
The Center for Strategic and Budgetary A ssessments is an independent public policy 
research institute established to promote innovative thinking about defense planning and 
investment strategies for the 21st century. CSBA ’s analytic-based research makes clear the 
inextricable link between defens e strategies and budgets in fo stering a more effective and 
efficient defense, and the need to transform the US military in light of the emerging military 
revolution. 
CSBA is directed by Dr. Andrew F. Krep inevich and funded by foundation, corporate and 
individual grants and contributions, and government contracts. 
 
1730 Rhode Island Ave., NW 
Suite 912 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 331-7990 
http://www.csbaonline.org 

 
 
CONTENTS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... I 
I. NEW CHALLENGES TO POWER PROJECTION.................................................................. 1 
II. PROSPECTIVE US AIR FORCE FAILURE POINTS........................................................... 11 
III. THE DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY AND ASSURED ACCESS: A CRITICAL RISK ASSESSMENT .2 9 
IV. THE ARMY AND THE OBJECTIVE FORCE ..................................................................... 69 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................... 93 

 
 i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
During the Cold War, the United States defense posture called for substantial forces to be located 
overseas as part of a military strategy that emphasized deterrence and forward defense. Large 
combat formations were based in Europe and Asia. Additional fo rces—both land-based and 
maritime—were rotated periodically back to the rear area in the United States. This posture was 
both effective and possible for a variety of reason s. The United States had a clear understanding 
of the principal threats to its security, high conf idence as to where major acts of aggression were 
likely to occur, and a belief that forward bases were reasonably secure, even in the event of 
enemy attack. 
These conditions either no longer exist or, where they do, are s ubject to trends that appear most 
unfavorable to their long-term survival. Today the US military Services are struggling to adapt to 
an expeditionary era. This expeditionary era has emerged from two defining developments. First, 
due to the collapse of the Soviet empire in  1989 and of the Soviet Union, itself, in 1991, 
increasingly US combat forces have been brought  home from the overseas garrisons, bases, and 
ports they once occupied on the periphery of Am erica’s Cold War adversary. Second, there is 
ample reason to anticipate that future adversar ies, having seen Iraq routed twice by US-led 
coalition forces after they were allowed to deploy unmolested into Southwest Asia, will seek 
asymmetric ways of opposing the movement of US military forces into their region. 
While US power-projection oper ations are becoming more di fficult owing to political, 
geographic, and resource constraints, there is a growing challenge in the military dimension of 
power-projection operations as well. This is particul arly true with respect to the traditional form 
of US power-projectio n operations, which involves deploy ing and sustaining air and ground 
forces at or through major ports and airfields. For maritime forces, power projection now implies 
moving into the littoral to influence operations inland on a far greater scale than was the case 
only a few decades ago. It also means controlling the littoral in order to sustain US and allied 
ground and air forces ashore. 
Prospective adversaries are developing and fielding, or have ready access to, military capabilities 
that will place US forces operating from large, fi xed forward bases, and in the littoral regions, at 
increasing risk. Consequently, the Pentagon face s new challenges to the operations of air and 
land forces from overseas bases, as well as how best  to structure its maritime forces to operate in 
the littoral. 
Even more disconcerting is the growing prolif eration of national and commercial satellite 
services and missile technology. In creased access to these satellite services will allow even 
regional rogue states both to pretarget key fixed facilities and to monitor US deployments into 
forward bases. Unless one makes heroic assump tions regarding advances in missile defense 
effectiveness—which this assessment does not—these  facilities can be held  at risk through the 
employment of even moderate numbers of ballistic and cruise missiles. This is particularly true if 
an adversary has and threatens to use missiles with  chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, or 
enhanced explosives warheads.  

 
 ii
Starting in the mid-1990s, senior US military le aders began voicing strong concern over the US 
military’s ability to deal with such a contingencies. General Ronald Fogleman, then Air Force 
chief of staff, observed in 1996 that 
Saturation ballistic missile attacks against littoral forces, ports, airfields, 
storage facilities, and staging areas could make it extremely costly to 
project US forces into a disputed theater, much less carry out operations 
to defeat a well-armed aggressor. Si mply the threat of such enemy 
missile attacks might deter US and coalition partners from responding to 
aggression in the first instance. 
As Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld noted, “[ P]otential adversaries . . . see that our ability 
to project force into the distant corners of the world where they live depends, in some cases, on 
vulnerable foreign bases.” Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz, in expanding on 
Secretary Rumsfeld’s observation, stated that 
US forces depend on vulnerable foreign bases to operate—creating 
incentives for adversaries to develo p “access denial” capabilities to keep 
us out of their neighborhoods. We must, therefore, reduce our 
dependence on predictable and vulnerabl e base structure, by exploiting a 
number of technologies that include  longer-range aircraft, unmanned 
aerial vehicles, and stealthy platforms, as well as reducing the amount of 
logistical support needed by our ground forces. 
If anti-access (A2) strategies aim to prevent US forces entry into a theater of operations, then 
area-denial (AD) operations aim to prevent their freedom of action in th e more narrow confines 
of the area under an enemy’s direct control. AD operations thus include actions by an adversary 
in the air, on land, and on and under the sea to contest and prevent US joint operations within 
their defended battlespace. 
Aerial AD operations include coor dinated operations by an enemy’s air forces and integrated air 
defense forces to maintain a degree of air parity  or superiority over thei r territory and forces. 
Land AD operations might include short- to me dium-range artillery, rocket, or missiles strikes 
against US maneuver forces at either their litto ral penetration points or at air-landing points, 
before they can disperse and when they ar e most vulnerable; wide-area mine fields; 
contamination of large areas by chemical, biolog ical, or radiological agents; and counter-special 
operations tactics. Long-range maritime AD threats include antiship cruise or even ballistic 
missiles, and submarines. Closer to shore, sophi sticated mines, coastal submarines, and small 
attack craft could be employed against US forces. 
Again, the implications for US power-projection operations are both clear, and disquieting. As 
the then-chief of naval operations, Admiral Jay Johnson, observed: 
I anticipate that the next century will see those foes striving to target 
concentrations of troops and materiel ashore and attack our forces at sea 
and in the air. This is more than a sea-denial threat or a Navy problem. It 
is an area-denial threat whose defeat or negation will become the single 
most crucial element in projecting and sustaining US military power 
where it is needed. 

 
 iii
How have the Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and Army responded to this emerging challenge? 
Perhaps the most striking feature of their individual responses to  the A2/AD challenge so far is 
the absence of a truly joint approach. Instead, each Service appears to be pursuing its own 
solution, for its own institutional purposes, within the boundaries of its tr aditional warfighting 
roles and domain. The Air Force’s Global Strike Task Force (GSTF) concept focuses on turning 
the short-range F-22 into an F/A-22 able not only to have a devastating first-look, first-shot 
advantage over enemy fighters, but also to kick  in the door to denied airspace by taking out 
advanced surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) as well as critical mobile targets such as enemy mobile-
missile launchers. 
However, unless the GSTF can succeed in s uppressing or destroying such systems very 
quickly—probably within a day or two at the most—the closure of the Army’s first few 
Objective Force brigades on the desired timelines is likely to be delayed. Similarly, whether the 
sea base is assured or not, V-22 insertion of a Marine combat battalion into enemy battlespace 
still actively defended by SA-20 class SAMs would also have to wait for the suppression of these 
AD systems by the GSTF. At the same time, except for Tomahawk land attack cruise missiles 
(TLAMs), the Navy will have no realistic means of attacking these defenses with manned 
aircraft until the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter enters service. Indeed, because the SA-10D is believed 
to have a credible capability against non-stealthy cruise missile s such as the TLAM, the Navy 
appears to have no capability to attack any cri tical inland targets in the face of S-300/S-400 class 
SAMs. Thus, in an A2/AD environment, the ability of the entire joint force to project power 
promptly ashore may hinge at the outset on the viability of the GSTF to eliminate various A2 and 
AD systems in a matter of hours to a day or two. And, given the operational risks inherent in the 
GSTF, doing so appears to be a non-trivial chal lenge—especially in the absence of long-range, 
penetrating, staring surveillance. 
Operationally, the Army’s admirable goals of bei ng able to have a brigade combat team on the 
ground anywhere in the world within 96 hours, and an entire division with 120 hours, are 
laudable lines to draw in the sand for an expeditionary era. However, even if the operational risks 
in the GSTF are set aside, these brigades still appear to require more strategic and in-theater 
airlift than either the Air Fo rce or Navy are ever likely to  field. Beyond simply getting the 
combat units on the ground within the desired timelines, there is the additional burden of 
logistical sustainment for light, dispersed groun d forces operating deep in enemy territory. As 
Chapter IV notes, the Army is exploring advan ced airlift and sealift options. At best, though, 
they lie far in the future, and the fiscal pressures on the Army created by the Future Combat 
System (FCS) alone suggest that, in the end, other Services will  have to bear much of the 
development and procurement burden of such syst ems if they are to be fielded before 2015. 
Consequentially, there appears to  be a major disconnect between the deployment goals of the 
Army’s Objective Force and the lift capacity of the rest of the joint force. 
Turning to the Department of the Navy, the overri ding risk to its current approach to the A2/AD 
challenge is, surely, fiscal. As suggested in Ch apter III, the new class of littoral combat ships 
(LCSs) will probably cost $2-3 billion per year  over a period of 15 year s just to construct. 
Manning and operating this new class of ships will create additional costs. Even if one assumes 
that the Defense Department’s 051 topline gr ows to $483.6 billion in  discretionary budget 
authority by FY 2009, as the Department presently  projects, paying for this new class of ships 

 
 iv
will probably require the transfer of some total obligation authority (TOA) from the Air Force’s 
or Army’s topline to the Navy Department. If, on the other hand, the 051 topline begins leveling 
off, as history would suggest, before FY 2009, an even larger reallocation of Service budget 
shares will be needed to pay for the LCS class of  ships and the associated growth of the fleet to 
375 ships. Thus, even before one contemplates the non-trivial operational risks of trying to 
operate these vessels close to the shore within the reach of enemy AD capabilities, the fiscal 
assumption that the DoN can count on an increasi ng share of TOA at the expense of its sister 
Services over the next 15-20 years seems to require a major leap of faith about maritime 
preeminence in the expeditionary era. Unless this leap of faith is borne out, the more likely 
outcome is that the LCS class will not be fielded in the numbers presently envisioned. 
The disconnects between individual Service so lutions to the A2/AD challenge, then, are 
substantial. Furthermore, these disconnect s suggest an obvious recommendation. A joint 
approach to the prospective A2 and AD capabilities of future US adversaries is crucial if the 
various path, operational, technological, and fiscal risks are to be mitigated or hedged against to 
any serious degree. 
Granted, one could argue or assume that A2/AD thre at, as depicted in this  report, is overblown 
and will not emerge within this decade—or the next. Doing so, of cour se, would be tantamount 
to judging the risk of encountering serious A2  or AD capabilities before 2020 as unlikely or 
remote. In other words, foreseeable opponents c oncerned about United States projecting power 
into their regions of the world w ill not really be seri ous for a long while to come. At the end of 
the day, however, this viewpoint appears to be a huge gamble and one that neither prudence nor 
history could recommend with much confidence. 
 

 
 1
I. NEW CHALLENGES TO POWER PROJECTION 
INTRODUCTION 
During the Cold War, the United States defense posture called for substantial forces to be located 
overseas as part of a military strategy that emphasized deterrence and forward defense. Large 
combat formations were based in Europe and Asia. Additional fo rces—both land-based and 
maritime—were rotated periodically back to the “r ear area” in the United States. This posture 
was both effective and possible for a variety of reasons. The United States had a clear 
understanding of the principal threats to its secu rity, high confidence as to where major acts of 
aggression were likely to occur, and a belief that  forward bases were reasonably secure, even in 
the event of enemy attack. 
As the following discussion will make clear, thes e conditions either no longer exist or, where 
they do, are subject to trends that appear most unfavorable to the continued viability of Cold War 
approaches to the forward basing of US power-projection forces. 
WHAT HAS CHANGED 
Despite all the uncertainties the US military must c onfront in preparing for the future, two trends 
seem apparent. First, given the United States’ current military dominance, the incentive is high 
for would-be adversaries to present the American  military with very different challenges than 
those which US forces confronted during the Gulf  War, or even during more recent operations, 
such as Operation Allied Force in the Balkan s and Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. 
Second, the diffusion of military technologies a nd the rapid progression of military-related 
technologies may increasingly offer such adversar ies the means to achieve this goal. These two 
trends will play out within the context of three new realities.  
Operational Realities  
The Cold War was characterized by large numbers of US ground, air, and maritime forces based 
and deployed around the periphery of the Soviet empire. Since its peaceful conclusion, and as the 
imminent threat to our allies overseas diminishe d, the number of US forces based overseas has 
declined, and the bulk of US combat power was repositioned in the continental United States. As 
a consequence, the 1990s saw the Services grapple,  with varying degrees of difficulty, with the 
challenge of adapting their “garrison” forces to a new “expeditionary” age. The challenge was 
particularly acute for the Army and Air For ce, which had long maintained large forward 
garrisons in Europe and northeast Asia, equipped to fight intense battles in relatively small 
geographic theaters of operations. 
With the arrival of the new century, and faced w ith the new task of fighting a global war on 
terrorism, US military planners once again might  prefer a forward-based posture that would 
allow them to preempt terrorist activity or to respond rapidly to their at tacks. Notwithstanding 
the force-protection issues such a posture would incur, the United States lacks the resources and 
the political support abroad to establish a comprehens ive network of forwar d bases so as to 

 
 2
position forces forward to address every plausible threat. Put another way, even if there were no 
political obstacles to the unrestr icted use of overseas bases, the United States cannot afford to 
maintain a major presence in every corner of the globe. Hence the United States must be 
prepared to project its forces into distant theaters over inter-continental distances. 
Political Realities 
Again, the collapse of the Soviet Union led to a substantial reduction in the number of US 
overseas bases. At the same time, with its at tention freed from a dominant focus on air-land 
operations in Europe, the United States increas ed both the pace and scope of its worldwide 
military operations. These changes occurred even as its allies took an increasingly regional focus 
on security issues, with a co rresponding reduction in their w illingness to commit to military 
operations other than those involving local security or those that  receive broad sanction from the 
international community. Consequently, the Unit ed States, which has broadened and expanded 
its global responsibilities and operations, has found it necessary to cobble together ad hoc 
coalitions, or “coalitions of the willing,” to meet threats to its own or international security. 
As a result, unlike during the Cold War, US de fense officials can no longer assume that allies 
will automatically provide base access whenever it is needed. Indeed, gaining base access for 
overseas expeditionary operations is now a central concern of US military planners. However, by 
their very nature, “coalitions of the willing” im ply that political access to forward bases cannot 
be taken for granted, nor can it be assumed that such bases, even if provided, will be sufficient 
for the task at hand. For example, during Oper ation Desert Fox in 1998, both Saudi Arabia and 
Turkey refused to allow US air strikes on Iraq to originate from bases on their soil. Similarly, in 
1999, Greece, America’s long-term North Atlantic Tr eaty Organization (NATO) ally, refused to 
permit US forces to operate from its bases du ring Operation Allied Force. In 2001, the United 
States found unfettered forward base access difficult to come by in the war against al Qaeda 
terrorist forces and the Taliban regime in Afghanistan.  
More recently, the United States lit erally spent months trying to secure access to overseas bases 
in order to execute military operations against Iraq. The protracted negotiations undermined the 
US military’s stated goal of being able to bring overwhelming power to bear promptly against an 
enemy. Moreover, the negotiations were only part ially successful, as even  long-time allies such 
as Turkey refused Washington’s request to pe rmit the deployment of American ground forces 
through its territory. In short, US requests for forward base access now typically encounter 
political resistance, either in the form of refu sal to allow access to bases, or the granting of 
access with severe restrictions on their use, especially in the case of strike operations. 
Geographic Realities 
Nor can the US military be confident that adequa te basing facilities will be available even if 
political access is unproblematic. During the Cold  War, the United States developed modern 
base facilities to optimize the military’s ability to execute the strategy of containment of the 
Soviet Union. Correspondingly, the US military developed forces that became dependent on 
these well-developed facilities in Western Europe and Northeast Asia. But the Cold War is over, 
and the US military has confronted the harsh rea lity that basing facilities in many other parts of 

 
 3
the world—in places such as Somalia, Albania,  and Afghanistan—are au stere to the extreme 
compared to their Cold War–era counterparts. I ndeed, the Army’s current transformation efforts 
seem driven, to a significant degree, by its inab ility to deploy forces rapidly to the Albania-
Kosovo border during the 1999 Balkan conflict.1 
Making matters worse, potential fl ash points, such as the Asian subcontinent, Spratly Islands, 
and Taiwan Straits, lie in regions that posse ss relatively modest local basing facilities to 
accommodate either the US military’s predominatel y short-range tactical fighter forces or its 
medium/heavy ground forces. Areas of instabili ty, such as the Persian Gulf, Indonesian 
archipelago, and Taiwan Straits are characterized by maritime choke  points or relatively narrow 
bodies of water that could make maritime operations difficult. 
At the same time, there is increas ed uncertainty with respect to wh ich state, collection of states, 
or non-state actors will pose the next major threat to US interests. Since 1989 the US military has 
conducted operations in Panama, Iraq, Somalia, Ha iti, Bosnia, Sudan, Albania, and Afghanistan. 
While hot spots remain in places like the Pers ian Gulf and the Korean Peninsula, given 
America’s increasingly muscular approach to fore ign affairs, it is more  and more difficult to 
predict with high confidence where its forces will be  deployed next, or if there will be adequate 
base structures once they get there. 
THE MILITARY CHALLENGE: ANTI-ACCESS/AREA-DENIAL 
(A2/AD) 
While US power-projection oper ations are becoming more di fficult owing to political, 
geographic, and resource constraints, there is a growing challenge in the military dimension of 
power-projection operations. This is particularly tr ue with respect to the traditional form of US 
power-projection operations, which involves deploying and sustaining air and ground forces at or 
through major ports and airfields. For maritime forces, power projection now implies moving 
into the littoral to influence operations inland on  a far greater scale than was the case only a few 
decades ago. It also means controlling the littoral in order to sustain US and allied ground and air 
forces ashore. 
Prospective adversaries are developing and fielding, or have ready access to, military capabilities 
that will place US forces operating from large, fi xed forward bases, and in the littoral regions, at 
increasing risk. Consequently, the Pentagon face s new challenges to the operations of air and 
land forces from overseas bases, as well as how best  to structure its maritime forces to operate in 
the littoral. 
                                                 
1 The principal metric employed by the Army to define its Objective Force brigades concerns their ability to deploy 
to a forward base within four days. The primary challe nge encountered by the Servic e’s Task Force Hawk during 
Operation Allied Force was its inability to deploy quickly. 

 
 4
Anti-Access (A2) 
Even more disconcerting is the growing prolif eration of national and commercial satellite 
services and missile technology. In creased access to these satellite services will allow even 
regional rogue states both to pretarget key fixed facilities and to monitor US deployments into 
forward bases.
2 Unless one makes heroic assumptions regarding advances in missile defense 
effectiveness—which this assessment does not—these  facilities can be held  at risk through the 
employment of even moderate numbers of ballistic and cruise missiles. This is particularly true if 
an adversary has and threatens to use missiles with  chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, or 
enhanced explosive (CBRNE) warheads.  
Starting in the mid-1990s, senior US military le aders began voicing strong concern over the US 
military’s ability to deal with such a contingencies. General Ronald Fogleman, then Air Force 
chief of staff, observed in 1996 that 
Saturation ballistic missile attacks against littoral forces, ports, airfields, 
storage facilities, and staging areas could make it extremely costly to 
project US forces into a disputed theater, much less carry out operations 
to defeat a well-armed aggressor. Si mply the threat of such enemy 
missile attacks might deter US and coalition partners from responding to 
aggression in the first instance.
3 
Admiral Jay Johnson, then chief of naval operations , expressed very similar concerns when he 
declared 
Over the past ten years, it has become  evident that proliferating weapon 
and information technologies will enable  our foes to attack the ports and 
airfields needed for the forward deployment of our land-based forces. 4 
Perhaps most revealing, however, are the comments  of a retired Indian brigadier general, who 
observed that future access to forward bases 
is, by far the trickiest part of the American operational problem. This is 
the proverbial “Achilles heel.” India needs to study the vulnerabilities 
and create covert bodies to devel op plans and execute operations to 
degrade these facilities in the run up to and after commencement of 
hostilities. Scope exists for low cost options to significantly reduce the 
combat potential of forces operating from these facilities.5 
The National Defense Panel (NDP), formed by Congress in 1997 to review long-term US 
strategy, concluded that the threat to forward base access was real, and would almost certainly 
                                                 
2 The ability of the world’s militaries to tap into the co mmercial satellite architecture for targeting purposes is 
reflected in the Chinese military’s use of US commercial satellite imagery to identify targets in Taiwan for missile 
attack. Bill Gertz, “China Buys US Satellite Data To Target Taiwan,” Washington Times, February 7, 2002, p. 1. 
3 Bill Gertz, “The Air Force and Missile Defense,” Air Force Magazine, February 1996, p. 72. 
4 Admiral Jay Johnson, “Anytime, Anywhere: A Navy for the 21st Century,” Proceedings, November 1997, p. 49. 
5 Brigadier V. K. Nair, War in the Gulf: Lessons for the Third World (New Delhi, India: Lancer International, 1992), 
p. 230. 

 
 5
grow over time.6 The NDP therefore concluded that the Un ited States “must radically alter” the 
way in which its military projects power.7 
Area-Denial (AD) 
If A2 strategies aim to prevent US forces entr y into a theater of operations, then AD operations 
aim to prevent their freedom of action in the mo re narrow confines of the area under an enemy’s 
direct control. AD operations thus include actions by an adversary in the air, on land, and on and 
under the sea to contest and prevent US joint operations within their defended battlespace. 
Aerial AD operations include coor dinated operations by an enemy’s air forces and integrated air 
defenses to maintain a degree of air parity or superiority over their territory and forces. Land AD 
operations might include short- to medium-range ar tillery, rocket, or missi les strikes against US 
maneuver forces at either their littoral penetratio n points or at air-landing points, before they can 
disperse and when they are most vulnerable; wide -area mine fields; contamination of wide areas 
by chemical, biological, or radi ological agents; and counter–sp ecial operations tactics. Long-
range, maritime, AD threats include long-range, antiship cruise, or even ballistic, missiles, and 
long-range submarines. Closer to shore, sophis ticated mines, coastal submarines, and small 
attack craft could be employed against US forces.8  
Again, the implications for US power-projection operations are both clear, and disquieting. As 
Admiral Johnson observed: 
I anticipate that the next century will see those foes striving to target 
concentrations of troops and materiel ashore and attack our forces at sea 
and in the air. This is more than a sea-denial threat or a Navy problem. It 
is an area-denial threat whose defeat or negation will become the single 
most crucial element in projecting and sustaining US military power 
where it is needed.
9 
MEETING THE A2/AD CHALLENGE 
Would-be adversaries thus have st rong incentives to adopt this indi rect approach to defeating, or 
deterring, US power-projection operations. The effort, as noted above, seems well under way. 
According to a recent Defense Science Board (DSB) study, a regional power’s development of 
this kind of A2/AD capability by 2010 is quite plau sible, even given relatively severe resource 
constraints.10 A commander-in-chief of US forces in Ko rea declared that the problem of forward 
                                                 
6 National Defense Panel, Transforming Defense (Washington, DC: US GPO, December 1997), pp. 12-13.  
7 National Defense Panel, Transforming Defense, p. 33. 
8 For a discussion of the maritime AD threat, see VADM Arthur K. Cebrowski and Captain Wayne P. Hughes, US 
Navy (Ret.), “Rebalancing the Fleet,” Proceedings, November 1999; and Captain Wayne P. Hughes, US Navy 
(Ret.), Fleet Tactics and Coastal Combat (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2000), pp. 145–68. 
9 Johnson, “Anytime, Anywhere: A Navy for the 21st Century,” p. 49. 
10 DSB, Final Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Globalization and Security  (Washington, DC: 
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, December 1999), p. vi. 

 
 6
base access is not a problem for the US military  of 2010, but one has existed in embryonic form 
in Korea for much of the 1990s, and which will only worsen over time.11 
These concerns have not been lost on the curr ent Defense Department leadership. As Secretary 
of Defense Rumsfeld noted, “[P]oten tial adversaries . . . se e that our ability to project force into 
the distant corners of the world where they li ve depends, in some cas es, on vulnerable foreign 
bases.”12 Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfow itz, in expanding on Secretary Rumsfeld’s 
observation, stated that 
US forces depend on vulnerable foreign bases to operate—creating 
incentives for adversaries to develo p “access denial” capabilities to keep 
us out of their neighborhoods. We must, therefore, reduce our 
dependence on predictable and vulnerabl e base structure, by exploiting a 
number of technologies that include  longer-range aircraft, unmanned 
aerial vehicles [UAVs], and stealthy platforms, as well as reducing the 
amount of logistical support needed by our ground forces.13 
Defeating the A2/AD threat promises to be a very challenging proposition. States developing 
A2/AD forces could do so in such as way as to  make entry into a theater of operations more 
problematic, to deny US forces adequate freedom of action once they get there, and to degrade 
the effectiveness of US counter-A2/AD operations. To this end, enemies might emphasize: 
• political access denial (e.g., entering into allia nces with, or threatening to attack, neighbors 
for the express purpose of denying US access); 
• geographic access denial (e.g., deploying forces fa r inland to stress US forces’ range and 
targeting capabilities);  
• hardening of fixed targets (e.g., WMD production and storage facilities; command centers; 
leadership facilities); 
• sanctuaries (e.g., positioning military forces in noncombatant neighborhoods, or near cultural 
landmarks; employing localized global positioning system (GPS) jammers); 
                                                 
11 Senior US officials have been concerned about the risk to US forward bases on the Korean Peninsula as far back 
as the 1994 crisis. At that time, Secretary of Defense William Perry recalled his concerns that 
. . . . North Korea might use some of its large stock of chemical weapons to 
disrupt the airfields and ports upon which our reinforcement depended. The 
airfields were critical to our reliance on  air superiority to stop the invading 
force; the ports were critical to our ability to bring in more ground forces to 
throw back the invading force. 
Ashton B. Carter and William J. Perry, Preventive Defense (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1999), p. 
130. 
12 Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, Speech, The Na tional Defense University, Wa shington, DC, January 31, 
2002. 
13 Paul D. Wolfowitz, Testimony, House Budget Committee, Washington, DC, February 12, 2002. 

 
 7
• mobility and dispersion (e.g., mobile launchers fo r ballistic and cruise missiles; advanced air 
defense systems including SA-10, -12, and -20 surface-to-air missiles (SAMs)); 
• stealth (e.g., diesel submarines; low-observable cruise missiles; advanced antiship mines);  
• deception (e.g., coastal combatants masquerading as commercial vessels; terrorists posing as 
noncombatants); 
• information operation attacks against US netw orks, especially those that support the time 
phased flow of American forces into a theater; and 
• unconventional warfare attacks ag ainst transshipment points, and air and sea points of 
embarkation and debarkation. 
To the extent they must operate outside of th e enemy’s A2/AD envelope, US forces will find 
their reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition (RSTA) timelines stretched, making 
destruction of critical enemy mobile A2/AD targets an even more difficult proposition. Indeed, a 
critical sub-competition of the A2/AD challenge involves enemy efforts to stretch US RSTA and 
engagement timelines versus US military attempts to compress its engagement cycle timelines. 
Of course, such timelines can be compresse d, and the opportunities for defeating the A2/AD 
threat enhanced, by US forces operating within the enemy’s A2/AD reach. This will likely 
require forces that can effect a distributed insert ion (i.e., deploy without r ecourse to large, fixed 
nodes, such as major ports and air bases), and which can both operate and sustain themselves in a 
highly distributed, highly networked posture. In a ddition to, or in lieu of, forces capable of 
distributed insertion, forces th at minimize their risk of detection through various forms of 
stealth—to include signature reduction and cove r, concealment and deception—and which are 
highly mobile, may be particularly valuable. Fi nally, forces designed to operate within an 
enemy’s A2/AD network would benefit greatly from  effective terminal defenses against enemy 
missiles. 
THE MATTER OF RISK  
The US military has been charged by the secret ary of defense to develop forces capable of 
addressing the A2/AD challenge. For their part, each  of the Services has developed a concept of 
operations for accomplishing this mission. The Air Force has developed the Global Strike Task 
Force concept. The Navy and Marine Corps ha ve advanced the concep t of “Assured Access.” 
The Army has centered its efforts around its operati onal concept for the Objective Force, with an 
interim force comprised of Stryker Brigades and so -called “legacy forces.” There is, as yet, no 
joint war-fighting concept of operations for addressing the A2/AD threat, although both the Joint 
Staff and Joint Forces Command (JFCOM) have undertaken efforts to this end. 
There is, of course, an element of risk invo lved in developing new means and methods for 
dealing with the A2/AD threat. Large-scale i nnovation—or “transforma tion”—is never easily 
accomplished. Transformations are characterized by “winners” and “losers,” and perceived 
losers will oppose change that threatens their own narrow equ ities. Moreover, transformation 

 
 8
itself is often fraught with uncertainty. While the A2/AD challenge offers a compelling reason 
for why the Services must “radically alte r” the way in which they project power,  14 there are any 
number of ways “to skin the cat.” There is no gu arantee that the path le ss traveled might not be 
more effective than the path knowingly taken. As a result, ther e are bound to be risks—some 
explicit, some implied—in each Service’s planned responses to the A2/AD challenge 
This paper attempts to illuminate the risks asso ciated with each of the military Department’s 
transformation plans, specifically as they re late to the A2/AD challenge. These risks are 
categorized into four broad categories. They are summarized next. 
Path Risk 
Service responses to the A2/AD challenge may pr oceed down a number of plausible paths. For 
example, after World War I some tank enthusia sts argued that the tank “could replace the 
infantry on foot, and th e cavalry on horseback.” 15 Such single-arms solutions, however, have 
seldom proven very robust or resilient when conf ronted with the stresses and frictions of actual 
combat. The stunningly successful Blitzkrieg campaign that the Germans unleashed on the 
Western allies in May 1940 was a combined-arms approach that employed Panzer divisions in 
conjunction with infantry, artillery, and air s upport. Inherently, this combined-arms solution, 
though exploiting the tank, was a mu lti-path solution to both the German strategic problem of 
two-front wars and the operational problem, enc ountered in World War I trench warfare, of 
restoring mobility to the battlefield.  
Depending upon the resources available and the level of uncertainty that ex ists, the US Services 
might proceed down one path, or multiple paths simu ltaneously, in their effo rts to deal with the 
A2/AD challenge. The more each Service focuses on a single path solution, the more it will be 
able to concentrate its resources, and the better prepared it will be to execute a particular war-
fighting concept to meet the threat. However, if  a Service’s particular concept of operations 
proves to be flawed or beyond DoD resources, th e emphasis on a single-path solution for dealing 
with the A2/AD challenge will leave it with no  significant alternatives  to fall back on. The 
Services must take this sort of path risk into account.  
Operational Risk 
Each of the Services, as part of  its transformation strategy, is de veloping forces, doctrines, and 
operational concepts to deal w ith prospective A2/AD challenges. There may be risk, however, 
that the preferred Service solutions will fare poorly when used in actual combat against 
intelligent, resourceful, motivat ed opponents. A ready example can be found in the pre-World 
War II notion, developed at the Air Corps Tactical  School by strategic bombing enthusiasts, that 
well-flown formations of heavily armed bomb ers could penetrate to, and accurately bomb, 
defended targets deep in the enemy’s heartland without either fighter escort or suffering 
                                                
 
14 National Defense Panel, Transforming Defense, p. 33. 
15 Charles Messenger, The Blitzkrieg Story (NY: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1976), p. 37. 

 
 9
unacceptable attrition.16 Attractive as this doctrine may have been to pre-war bomber proponents, 
its various assumptions, each reasonable in isolati on, gave rise to a collective risk that led to 
operational failure against the German Air For ce in the fall of 1943. The crucial test came in 
October when the American 8th Air Force undert ook a series of missions against targets in 
Germany beyond the range of its escort fighters . The culmination of this brash attempt to 
establish that heavily-armed bombers could fl y deep into enemy territory with only the 
protection of their own defensive fire-power came, of course, on October 14, 1943, when the US 
8th Air Force lost 60 B-17s and their 594 crewmen over enemy territory out of the 291 B-17s 
dispatched to the three ball-bearing plants at Schweinfurt.17 The loss rate of the B-17s dispatched 
on this mission, which came to be known as Black Thursday, was nearly 21 percent. In addition, 
145 of the B-17s that returned to England on Bl ack Thursday had sustained varying degrees of 
battle damage, including some that were dama ged beyond repair. The returning bombers also 
carried back 5 dead and 40 wounded. As the 8th Air Force’s own report on its wartime tactical 
development stated after the war in Europe ha d ended in victory, the Germans had “developed 
methods of concentration, new armament and improved tactics which made deep daylight 
bombing penetrations beyond escort too costly to be continued.”18  
Clearly this example is an extreme case. The co llective operational risks in the 8th Air Force’s 
concept of operations through mid- October 1943 led to outright tactical defeat. The 8th Air 
Force did not fully resume large-scale, deep-penetration raids against targets in the German 
heartland until the following January, and by then enough P-51s were available to provide fighter 
escort all the way to the targets and back. Yet,  as extreme as this example may be, it aptly 
illustrates the potentially disastrous consequences of doctrines and concepts that harbor 
significant operational risk. 
Technological Risk 
The Services also confront techno logical risk in the sense that they cannot state with absolute 
confidence that the new capabilities they hope to field for dealing with the A2/AD challenge will 
actually pan out. Nor can they state with certainty  what level of proficiency they can achieve 
with emerging capabilities, or when these profic iency levels will be achieved. For example, the 
US military has long sought to develop effective defenses against ballistic missile attack. Yet, 
despite the expenditure of substantial resources—some $75 billion since President Reagan’s 
                                                 
16 In the plan (A-WPD/1) prepared by the air staff’s Air War Plans Division in the summer of 1941 in response to 
President Roosevelt’s request for an estimate of the munitions requirements to defeat potential American 
adversaries, pursuit (or fighter) aviation was mentioned. However, the 3,400 fighters the air planners envisioned as 
necessary to defeat Germany by strategic bombardment of the German war economy were intended simply to 
protect the air bases from which the bomber force would operate (Air War Plans Division, “Graphic Presentation 
and a Brief: A-WPD/1, Munitions Requirements of the Army Air Forces To Defeat Our Potential Enemies,” August 
1941, p. 2). Kenneth L. Walker, who was one of the A-WPD/1 planners, had been a strident advocate at the Air 
Corps Tactical School of th e view that “A well planned and well cond ucted bombardment a ttack, once launched, 
cannot be stopped”. Haywood S. Hansell, Jr., The Air Plan That Defeated Hitler  (Atlanta, GA: Higgins-
McArthur/Longino & Porter, 1972), p. 15. 
17 Roger A. Freeman with Alan Crouchman and Vic Maslen, Mighty Eighth War Diary (New York: Jane’s, 1981), p. 
126. 
18 W. E. Kepner, Major General, Eighth Air Force Tactical Development, August 1942-May 1945 (England: 8th Air 
Force and the Army Air Forces Evaluation Board, July 9, 1945), p. 116.  

 
 10
“Star Wars” speech—the Pentagon has yet to perf ect such a capability. Or take the case of 
Britain’s Royal Navy early in the 20th century. Th e Admiralty made a stra tegic decision to fight 
fleet engagements at extended ranges. This appr oach presumed the technology existed to enable 
such long-range strikes agains t ships moving at relatively hi gh speeds along perhaps irregular 
paths. Unfortunately, the technology had not yet been perfected to enable highly effective 
gunnery at the ranges anticipated, and would not be until after World War I. 
With respect to the A2/AD challenge, the US military hopes to realize considerable technological 
gains in its ability to find, track, and engage cr itical mobile targets; defend against missile 
attacks; defeat critical  deep underground targets; and so fo rth. But the Services do not know 
when (or even if) they will achieve the required le vel of effectiveness in these key capabilities to 
enable them to operate as called for in their war-fighting concepts. Cons equently, the Services 
may have to find ways to hedge against technical uncertainty, particularly with respect to their 
war-fighting concepts and modernization strategies.  
Resource Risk 
There is a risk that the Servic es will not have sufficient resources to realize their preferred 
solutions to the A2/AD challenge in the time fr ame anticipated. To a considerable extent these 
risks are a function of the Se rvices’ budgets. There is con cern whether these budgets are 
adequate to execute the Service programs and main tain the force structure at the levels called for 
in the Bush Administration’s defense posture. The risk here is that key Service transformation 
initiatives will be starved or crowded out by lower-than-required defense budget estimates, by 
more immediate demands for military capabilities (e.g., the war on terrorism, homeland defense), 
or by more traditional modernization initiatives. Alternatively, desired new capabilities may just 
be too costly to pursue, however promising their potential operational contribution (e.g., the 
space-based radar). At a deeper level, the Services  may also discover that they lack either the 
human or industrial resources to bring about the kind of changes that are required. 
ORGANIZATION 
The discussion now turns to an assessment of each  military department’s approach to addressing 
the A2/AD threat as part of Service transforma tion efforts. Chapter 2 assesses the Air Force’s 
concept of Global Strike Task Force. Chapte r 3 examines the Navy Department’s Assured 
Access concept. Chapter 4 explores the Army’s  transformation efforts relative to the A2/AD 
challenge, with emphasis on its operational concep t for its Objective Force. Chapter 5 offers 
some concluding observations. 

 
 11
II. PROSPECTIVE US AIR FORCE FAILURE POINTS 
By Barry Watts 
POINT OF DEPARTURE 
The Global Strike Task Force (GST F) is the logical point of depa rture for identifying potential 
show-stoppers—areas of significant operational, path, technological, or fiscal risk—in the ability 
of the US Air Force (USAF) to fulfill its mo st likely and most demanding wartime mission in 
future conflicts. While this concept is only one of seven in the USAF’s developing family of 
capabilities-based concepts of operation (CONOPS), it is the one that most directly addresses 
emerging A2 and area-denial challenges to the projection of American military power overseas.1 
To address these interrelated challenges, Air Fo rce leaders argue that the GSTF will, among 
other things, provide robust solutions to the fu ll range of time- and mission-critical targets, 
including the opponent’s advanced SAMs, mob ile missile launchers, weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD), and various emerging targets that may be onl y briefly vulnerable during the 
course of an operation. The GSTF concept is not  only central to current USAF transformation 
efforts, but its prospective operational failur e points are tightly c oupled with the path, 
technological, and fiscal risks built into the Air Force’s current force-stru cture plans, programs, 
doctrine, and operational thinking about future war. 
THE GLOBAL STRIKE TASK FORCE 
General John Jumper, whose tenure as Air Force chief of staff began in  September 2001, started 
publicly advocating the Global Strike Task Force in  his prior assignment as head of Air Combat 
Command (ACC).2 Jumper’s account of the GSTF at th e Air Force Association symposium in 
mid-February 2001 portrayed the concept as the “next step” in Air Force transformation, the 
previous step having been the conversion of  the Cold War USAF, which had emphasized 
forward basing overseas, into a home-based, expe ditionary force during General Michael Ryan’s 
tenure as chief of staff.  
The GSTF concept sought to d eal not only with pot ential A2/AD challenges but, also, to 
incorporate lessons the USAF had gleaned fr om its operational experiences during the 1990s. 3 
                                                 
1 The other six task-force concepts under development ar e homeland security, global mobility, global response, air-
and-space expeditionary forces, nuclear response, an d air-and-space C2ISR (command , control, intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance). 
2 The forerunner to the GSTF concept was first briefed to four-star leaders of the USAF at the fall 2000 Corona 
conference by retired General Richard Hawley, who ha d previously been the ACC commander. Hawley’s 
presentation used the term ‘Global Reconnaissance Strike’ (GRS) to refer to a joint approach to no-notice power 
projection in an anti-access environment. GRS had three ma in operational goals: to establish air dominance and a 
clear ISR (intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance) picture; to halt enemy aggression; and to permit safe 
deployment of follow-on joint forces  by degrading enemy anti-access and air-d efense capabilities. GRS operations 
focused on the “B-2/F-22” team. 
3 The anti-access challenge, once again, focuses on the availability and viab ility of in-theater bases and ports. It 
involves the complex mix of political, geographic, and milita ry factors that could prevent or delay US forces from 

 
 12
One of those lessons was the real ization that prospective US a dversaries, having witnessed the 
rapid defeat of Iraqi forces in Kuwait and southern Iraq after the United States and its coalition 
allies were allowed five months to build up their forces in the re gion, would be strongly 
motivated in the future to find ways to deny similarly unopposed and leisurely regional access. 
Another lesson, driven home during NATO’s 78-day campaign aimed at persuading Slobodan 
Milosevic to abandon ethnic clea nsing in Kosovo, was that a c ontinuous presence over the 
battlefield is needed to find, validate, and rel ease weapons on time-critical and rapidly emerging 
targets within less than ten minutes (as opposed to hours or days).4 
In light of these emerging challenges and perc eived lessons, USAF leaders have advanced the 
GSTF as their Service’s “contribution to the nation’s kick-down-the-door force” when 
confronted by no-notice contingencies in wh ich the enemy possesses A2 and area-denial 
capabilities.5 By leveraging current and near-future USAF capabilities, the GSTF will employ 
joint power-projection capabilities—including stealth, standoff, precision, space, and information 
systems—to establish air dominance by rapidly gaining access to denied battlespace, engaging 
adversary A2 systems and high-value targets,  and subsequently main taining access for all 
required joint or coalition follow-on forces.6 Prior to conflict, the GSTF will deploy directly from 
the continental United States to forward- based “home stations” and begin developing 
comprehensive awareness of enemy targets,  capabilities, and likely courses of action. 7 At the 
start of a conflict, the GSTF will then kick down the door into denied battlespace by rapidly 
degrading, and thereafter defeating, the advers ary’s C4ISR (command, control, communications, 
computers, intelligence, surv eillance, and reconnaissance) , A2 weapons, CBRNE delivery 
systems, and threats to friendly ground or naval forces. 
                                                                                                                                                             
deploying into an overseas theater, as well as the enemy’s ability to attack US forces at or flowing through in-theater 
bases and ports. By contrast, in current Pentagon us age AD threats involve systems and capabilities—such as 
advanced SAMs, mines, or diesel subm arines—that could be used to deny Am erican forces access to, or limit their 
freedom of action within, the battlespace of an overseas theater.  
4 David A. Fulghum, “USAF Plan Rapid, All-Stealth Task Force,” Aviation Week & Space Technology , February 
26, 2001, available online at http://www.aviationnow.com/content/ncof/ncfn08.htm. 
5 General John P. Jumper, “Global Strike Task Force: A Transforming Concept, Forged by Experience,” Aerospace 
Power Journal, Spring 2002, p. 29. 
6 Headquarters USAF/XPXT, Transformation Division, The USAF Transformation Flight Plan: FY03-07, undated, 
p. 14; also, Posture Statement of the Honorable James G.  Roche and General John P. Jumper Before the 108th 
Congress, House Armed Services Committee (HAS C), February 27, 2003, available online at 
http://www.house.gov/hasc/openingstatementsandpressreleases/108congress/03-02-27airforce.html. p. 15. 
7 The current USAF transformation plan actually goes so  far as to assert that, by leveraging information 
technologies, it will be not only be possible to develop “a complete, accurate, clear, coherent, persistent, real-time” 
picture of the battlespace, but “predictiv e battlespace awareness” (PBA) as well ( The USAF Transformation Flight 
Plan: FY03-07, pp. x-xi). How literally these goals should be taken is hard to say. Even USAF officials usually 
concede that technology will never completely overcome the Clausewitzian “fog of war” (Ibid., p. 18). Perhaps, 
therefore, all USAF officials mean when  discussing PBA is that they hope to exploit information technology to 
improve, as much as possible, the picture of the ba ttlespace on which commanders and operators will base their 
wartime decisions. On the other hand, one can find USAF statements that go further, asserting for instance that PBA 
“provides decision-makers the ability to predict what actions  the enemy is most likely to make” (“New Strike Force 
to Debut in Air Force Experiment,” Air Force Press Release, July 19, 2002). 

 
 13
The F-22 Raptor, which was rede signated the F/A-22 in Septem ber 2002, plays an especially 
pivotal role in the GSTF CONOPS.8 Over the last decade or so, the main challenge for the USAF 
in gaining rapid access to, and control of, enemy airspace has not stemmed from enemy air-to-air 
fighters. Since 1979 Israeli and American F-15 pilo ts, plus one Saudi F-15 pilot who scored two 
kills during the 1991 Persian Gulf War, have  downed some 96 enemy fighters—including 
French-built F-1s as well as Russian-bui lt MiG-29s and MiG-25s—without a single loss. 9 While 
this box score almost certainly owes much more to the superior training and situational 
awareness of the F-15 pilots involved than it does to the technological superiority of the F-15 per 
se, the plane’s combat record in US, Israeli,  and Saudi hands has been one of crushing 
dominance over Syrian, Iraqi, and Serbian fighters.
10 Presumably the F/A-22’s low observability 
and capacity to cruise at speeds over Mach 1.5 without engaging afterburners (“supercruise”) 
reflect the USAF’s willingness to pay a premium price—almost certainly over $210 million each 
(including both development and production)—to sustain an overwhelming technological margin 
of advantage in air-to-air combat.11 
What, then, is likely to be the more pressing air-dominance challenge the USAF will to face in 
the foreseeable future? While it would be foolhardy to dismiss the potential threat posed by 
advanced fighters such as the Russian Su-37 Super Flanker, the more worrisome challenge lies in 
so-called double-digit SAMs such as the Russian S-300PMU-2 Favorit (the export version of the 
SAM NATO codenamed the SA-10) and S-400 Triumph (codenamed the SA-20). 12 To give a 
sense of the area-denial potential of these sy stems, the S-300PMU-2 (or SA-10D) is credited 
                                                 
8 A. J. Bosker, “F-22 Redesignation Reflects Combat Role,” September 17, 2002, available online at 
http://www.af.mil/news/Sep2002/91702361.shtml. 
9 Gulf War Air Power Survey (GWAPS), Vol. V, A Statistical Compendium and Chronology , Pt. 1, A Statistical 
Compendium (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1993), Table 206, pp. 653-54; Lon O. Nordeen, 
Air Warfare in the Missile Age  (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institutions Press, 2002 2nd ed.), pp. 161-63, 251 
and 256; and Shlomo Aloni, “The Fighting Baz,” Air Forces Monthly, October 1999, p. 40. The USAF and Boeing 
currently put the F-15’s box score to date at 101-to-0, but this score includes at least five kills against helicopters 
and fixed-wing support aircraft.  
10 An important element in the superior situational awarenes s of American and Israeli F-15 pilots has been the uses 
of airborne surveillance aircraft such as the E-3 Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) and the E-2C. 
11 The estimate of $210 million each (acq uisition unit cost) assumes that the Air Force produces 331 F/A-22s for a 
total program cost of $70.4 billion. The program cost of $70.4 billion is based on increasing the program total of 
$69.7 billion (current dollars) in the November 1, 2002, Selected Acquisition Report by $690 million for the 
RDT&E (Research, Development, Testing and Evaluation)  overrun that the Air For ce acknowledged in December 
2002 and dividing by 331 (see Department of Defense, OUSD(AT&L) AR&A/AM, “Selected Acquisition Report 
(SAR) Summary Tables,” November 1, 2002; and, “Rap tor Program on Track Despite Challenges,” December 3, 
2002), available online at http://www.af.mil/news/Dec2002/12030249.shtml. 
12 Jumper, in response to questions from Duncan Hunter during a February 2003 hearing, testified that the Flanker is 
the “equal” of the F-15 and F-16; House Armed Services Committee, Hearing on the Ai r Force FY 2004 Budget, 
February 27, 2003, p. 58 (using the electronic LexisNexis ™ file in Word™). This assessment, however, ignores 
American advantages in pilot skill and proficiency, as we ll as surveillance and command-and-control, which have 
consistently combined since 1991 to gi ve American fighter forces an enormous  edge in situatio nal awareness. To 
give some idea of how crucial an edge in situational awar eness is in air-to-air combat, reconstructions of the 112 
decisive engagements that occurred in  Southeast Asia from 18 December 1971 to  12 January 1973 revealed that 81 
percent of all 112 aircrews downed—American and North Vietnamese—either were unawa re of the attack (67 of 
112 decisive engagements), or else did not become aware in time to take effective defensive action (24 of 112); 
Project Red Baron III: Air-to-A ir Encounters in Southeast Asia , Vol. 1, Executive Summary (Nellis AFB, NV: US 
Air Force Tactical Fighter Weapons Center, June 1974), p. 24. 

 
 14
with a maximum range of some 109 nautical miles (nm) (200 kilometers) using the 48N6E2 
missile, and the Russians have advertised that, with a new missile, the S-400 will have a reach 
approaching 400 kilometers. 13 It has also been reported that  these SAMs will have capabilities 
against stealthy aircraft such as the F-117. 14 Granted, the S-300 and S-400 are expensive 
systems. A single S-400 battalion,  including eight launchers and 32 ready-to-fire missiles, is 
estimated to cost over $160 million, and the SA- 10B, which entered Soviet service in the 1980s, 
is thought to run $60 million a system.15 These prices go far to explain why even the older S-300 
has not proliferated outside of Russia as ra pidly as Western air forces have feared. 16 Still, the 
Russians are eager to sell such systems abroad, and even stealthy platfo rms may have difficulty 
operating in the immediate vicinity  of such systems—especially if they are deployed in numbers 
and networked. Consequently, as General Jump er observed in September 2002, the F/A-22’s 
“most significant contributions over the next 30 year s will be [in] its att ack role, particularly 
against the most lethal next two generations of [enemy] surface-to-air missiles.”17  
Air Force leaders have gone on to emphasize th at, because the F-117 a nd B-2 cannot protect 
themselves from enemy fighters or visually guided SAMs, they have heretofore operated 
exclusively at night. The F/A- 22, in their view, overcomes this limitation. Not only can the 
Raptor take out advanced SAMs but, by protecti ng the F-117 and B-2 against enemy fighters, it 
opens the door to 24-hour, se ven-days-a-week (24/7) operatio ns by all the USAF’s stealthy 
aircraft from the outset. 18 And, once air dominance of enemy ai rspace is established, the GSTF 
enables precision-strike operations by non-stealthy aircraft, whether sea- or land-based.19  
In this context, Air Force officials have also underscored the transforma tional potential of the 
F/A-22’s advanced sensor suite to provide jo int forces with precise location and other 
information on emerging and time-critical targets. Th ey have argued that Raptor’s ability to be 
its own ISR platform, in conjunction with its supe rcruise speed, will enable the F/A-22 to locate 
such targets and, then, close to weapon-release parameters for guided weapons in less time than 
                                                 
13 John A. Tirpak, “The Double-Digit SAMs,” Air Force Magazine , June 2001, p. 49, available online at 
http://www.afa.org/magazine/June2001/0601sams.html. The SA-20 can fire older SA-10 missiles such as the 
9M96E2. The new missile that is advertised to give the SA-20 a range out to 400 kilometers may be derived from 
SA-12 missiles. 
14 Russian aerospace officials have admitted that they  are testing new SAM missiles and other air-defense 
components against the remains of the F-117A shot down by Serbian air defenses in 1999 (see “S-300PMU (NATO 
SA-10C Grumble)” at http://www.softwar.net/rfed.html). 
15 Tirpak, “The Double-Digit SAMs” p. 49. A standard US Patriot battalion contains eight launchers, which is the 
same number usually associated with SA-10 and SA-20 battalions. 
16 Currently the SA-10 is deployed in most of the former  Soviet republics, China, Bulgaria, India and Cyprus. 
Tirpak, “The Double-Digit SAMs” p. 49. 
17 Bosker, “F-22 Redesignation Reflects Combat Role,” September 17, 2002. 
18 “The F-22 (Raptor) will bring stealth into the daylight for the first time” (General John Jumper, quoted in A. J. 
Bosker, “Transformation Allows AF To Leverage Technology”), available online at  
https://public.afca.scott.af.mil/public/02may/02may.htm). 
19 USAF leaders are adamant that le gacy systems, meaning the F-15, “can not ensure air dominance in future 
engagements” (Posture Statement of th e Honorable James G. Roche and Genera l John P. Jumper Before the 108th 
Congress, p. 20). 

 
 15
any other platform.20 Additionally, the Small Diameter Bomb (SDB) will permit a single Raptor 
to cover 2-3 times as many ground targets on a single sortie as it can with 1,000-pound Joint 
Direct Attack Munitions (JDAMs) while retaini ng a mix of short- and medium-range air-to-air 
missiles.21  
Indeed, it was to capture this now-planned evolution of the F-22 from a predominately air-to-air 
fighter into a premier surveillance and precision-strike system that prompted Secretary of the Air 
Force James Roche and General John Jumper to redesignate the Raptor the F/A-22 in September 
2002. The only caveat bearing mention is that this evolution is based on migrating Joint Strike 
Fighter (JSF) avionics into the F/A-22, which is not scheduled to begin until fiscal year (FY) 
2005. As a result, at least the fi rst 65 production F-22s will be built without these air-to-ground 
upgrades. 
FORWARD BASES: DISTANCE TRADEOFFS AND 
VULNERABILITIES 
The first issue to examine vis-à-vis the various ri sks in the GSTF is how close to enemy targets 
USAF combat systems generally have to be based to sustain intense operations, meaning 
operations in which theater-based fighter, fighter-bom ber, and attack aircraft can sustain at least 
one sortie per day per aircraft. 22 For purposes of this discussion, short-range systems are those 
with an unrefueled combat radius of 1,000 nm or less, where combat radius refers to the distance 
combat systems must fly from their bases or launc h points to reach their ta rgets or patrol areas. 
By contrast, long-range systems such as the B- 52H are associated with an unrefueled combat 
radius of at least 3,000 nm. Usi ng these definitions, fighters and fighter-bombers such as the F-
15C, F-16C, F-15E, F/A-18C, and F/A-18E are sh ort-range strike platforms. Only heavy 
bombers such as the B-52 and B-2 qualify as truly long-range systems. 
Given the air-refueling resources of  the US Air Force, however, the unrefueled combat radius of 
a given platform no longer answers the question of how close to targets or patrol areas various 
strike and fighter aircraft need to be based. In the case of heavy bombers, the answer is that, if 
need be, they can operate over truly global distan ces but only at reduced sortie rates, which do 
not qualify as intense. During NATO’s 1999 cam paign against Yugoslavia (Operation Allied 
Force), B-2As flew some 45 effective combat sor ties against Serbian targets in the Balkans from 
their home station at Whiteman Air Force Base (AFB), Missouri, a one-way distance (or mission 
radius) of some 5,470 nm (10,000 kilomete rs) using the actual routing flown. 23 The typical 
                                                 
20 HASC, Hearing on the Air Force Fiscal Year 2004 Budget, pp. 17-19.  
21 The SDB, which is presently in development, will be a 200-250 pound guided munition. A possible munitions 
load for the F-22 is 4 SDBs in its one center weapon bay, 3 AIM-120 Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missiles 
(AMRAAMs) in the other, and two AIM-9s in its side bays. 
22 This definition of intense combat operations is borrowed from John Stillion and David T. Orletsky, Airbase 
Vulnerability to Conventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-M issile Attacks: Technology, Scenarios, and U.S. Air 
Force Responses (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1999), MR-1028-AF, p. 54. 
23 During Operation Allied Force, the 509th Bomb Wing launched 49 B-2 sorties of which 45 were “effective” in the 
sense of expending munitions against Serbian targets (Colonel Tony Imondi, 509th Bomb Wing briefing on B-2 
operations during Allied Force, August 31, 1999, White man AFB, MO). Two sorties were canceled by higher 

 
 16
mission duration exceeded 30 hours—something 509th Bomb Wing crews had prepared for prior 
to the conflict—and invol ved four air refuelings. 24 During the opening phase of American 
operations against al Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan (Operation Enduring Freedom), B-2s 
flew 44-hour missions from White man, recovering at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean. 25 The 
operational constraint imposed by 30-44 hour mission lengths is, of course, that the number of 
sorties a given bomber can generate per day is unlikely to exceed 0.2-0.4. From a sortie 
generation standpoint, therefore, basing bombers closer to their target areas th an even their 
unrefueled combat radii is genera lly desirable so long as the closer-in bases are not subject to 
enemy attack.  
During the 1991 Persian Gulf War (Operation De sert Storm), for example, B-52Gs flew 
bombing missions from Fairford in the United  Kingdom, Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean, 
Moron in Spain, and Jeddah in Saudi Arabia. Usi ng realistic routing, the Fairford, Diego Garcia, 
and Moron B-52s operated over one-way dist ances of 2,900-3,390 nm from Baghdad, whereas 
the 16 at Jeddah were less than 800 nm from Baghdad and even cl oser to the Kuwait Theater of 
Operations. Thus, the 16 Jeddah B-52s averaged 1.2-1.3 sorties per day and generated 46 percent 
of the total B-52 sorties, while the 40-50 B-52s at the other three bases generated less than 0.5 
sorties per day and only 54 percent of the total sorties.26  
Short-range fighters, fighter-bombers, and attack  aircraft—collectively “Tacair”—face the same 
tradeoffs between sortie rates and the distances they are based from the theater of operations. 
Assuming unlimited air refueling, the main radius -of-action constraint on single-seat aircraft 
such as the F-15C and the F/A- 22 is the amount of time the p ilot can remain strapped to an 
ejection seat and still be able to perform piloting and combat tasks effectively.  
During the Vietnam War, 3-4 hour missions from Thailand bases such as Ubon and Korat against 
targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong region of North Vietnam became routine. On such missions, F-
105s and F-4s usually refueled twice from KC -135s. On occasion, mission duration approaching 
nine hours were reported. 27 In April 1986, F-111Fs based at Lakenheath, England, flew a 14-
hour mission against targets in Libya, some 2,200 nm distant given the actual routing.28 In Desert 
                                                                                                                                                             
headquarters short of the combat area, one did not drop because the ta rgets “fell out” when the B-2 was en route to 
the theater, and one sortie was aborted early due to a cabin pressurization problem (Ibid.). 
24 Rebecca Grant, The B-2 Goes To War (Arlington, VA: IRIS Press, 2001), pp. 27 and 57-71. 
25 Christopher J. Bowie, Robert P.  Haffa, Jr., and Robert E. Mullins, Future War: What Trends in America’s Post-
Cold War Military Conflicts Tell Us about Early 21st Century Warfare  (Arlington, VA: Northrop Grumman 
Analysis Center, January 2003), p. 42. 
26 GWAPS, Vol. V, Pt. 1, A Statistical Compendium, Tables 108 and 192, pp. 346 and 556-597; Captain Michael D. 
Madzuma and 1st Lieutenant Michael A. Bu oniconti, “Men of the Stratofortress,” From the Line in the Sand: 
Accounts of USAF Company Grade Officers in Support of Desert Shield/Desert Storm , ed. Captain Michael P. 
Vriesenga (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, March 1994), p. 8. 
27 Colonel Robert E. Venkus, Raid on Qaddafi (New York: St. Martin’s Paperbacks, 1993), p. 42. Venkus logged an 
8.9-hour mission in the F-105 during the Vietnam conflict. 
28 Venkus, Raid on Qaddafi, pp. 47 and 110. Among other routing problems, France refused permission for the F-
111Fs and their accompanying tankers to  utilize French airspace. The F-111F crews were offered sleeping pills and 
amphetamines (“go” pills) to prepare for and fly this long-duration mission (Ibid., p. 23). 

 
 17
Storm, efforts to prevent Iraqi fighters from escaping to Iran by maintaining barrier patrols 
between Iraqi air bases and the Iranian border led to recurring mission durations of eight hours or 
more, with multiple refuelings for the F-15C pilots involved. 29 In the spring of 2001, during the 
run-up to the second Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), USAF officials argued that the F-22 
could sustain mission durations of up to 10 hour s over combat radii up to 2,500 nm—with, of 
course, heavy tanker support (one KC-135 per F-22 at 2,500 nm).30  
RAND analysts John Stillion and David Orletsky had examined this issue a couple years earlier 
and concluded that “current USAF combat  aircraft probably could not sustain intense combat 
operations . . . over a distance of more than 2,000 nmi [nautical miles]; such missions simply 
take too long.” 31 Christopher Bowie reached a slightly more conservative conclusion in 2002. 
Recognizing that land-based Tacair would need to  provide air cover and strike targets several 
hundred  nm beyond the adversary’s borders, he argued that USAF Tacair would have to be 
based within 1,000-1,500 nm of enemy territory. 32 Assuming the F/A-22’s maximum unrefueled 
combat radius is “in excess of 600” nm, and becau se little (if any) of  the 1,200 nm an F/A-22 
would fly on an unrefueled, maximum-range comb at mission would be at supercruise speeds 
(above Mach 1.5), the Raptor’s performance charact eristics offer no obvi ous reason for altering 
these conclusions as to how close to enemy airs pace short-range Tacair needs to be based to 
sustain intense combat operations.33 
In the best of all worlds, therefore, the USAF would prefer to locate F/A-22 units deploying to an 
overseas theater as part of a GSTF within 500-1,000 nm of the enemy targets and airspace. 
However, in extremis, operations could be initiated from bases as distant as 1,500-2,000 nm from 
the borders of enemy airspace, although doing so  would maximize refueling requirements and 
impose the stresses of extremely long mission dura tions on the pilots. L ong-range systems such 
as the B-2 could operate from greater distances —including as far away as home bases in the 
United States—but basing within 1,500-3,000 nm woul d increase sortie rates and minimize 
tanker requirements. In the end, such choices will  be determined by the political and geographic 
availability of forward bases in conjunction with  their vulnerability to enemy attacks, including 
by ballistic and cruise missiles.  
                                                 
29 The use of sleeping pills and amphetamines became widespread among USAF F-15C pilots during the Gulf War. 
30 USAF QDR Office, “Extended-Range F-22 Operations,” PowerPoint slides, April 2001. The thrust of these slides 
was to argue that the USAF faced no shortage of airfields for its land-based, short-range fighters in the West Pacific. 
Assuming an operating radius of 2,500 nm for the F-22, and excluding China and North Korea, the first of these two 
slides insisted that the USAF would potentially have available over 650 “unsinkable” airfields. At this point in time, 
the USAF’s institutional attitude toward the anti-access challenge seemed to be one  of denial, despite the fact that 
General Ron Fogleman had called attention to it back in 1996, while Air Force chief of staff. 
31 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to Conventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks, p. 54. 
32 Christopher J. Bowie, The Anti-Access Threat and Theater Air Bases  (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and 
Budgetary Assessments, 2002), p. 14. 
33 HASC, Hearing on the Air Force Fiscal  Year 2004 Budget, p. 62. Lockhe ed-Martin slides from April 2002 
comparing the F-22 to a notional “bomber” variant, the FB-22, indicate that with 100 nm of supercruise above Mach 
1.5 (50 nm inbound and 50 nm outbound), the combat radius of the F-22 is only 475 nm. The same charts cite a 630 
nm combat radius for the F-22 on a subsonic mission. 

 
 18
Stillion and Orletsky examined the vulnerabilities of air bases to enemy cruise and ballistic 
missiles in 1999. Their analysis was predicated on three premis es. First, GPS has “tremendous 
potential” for not only reducing cruise-missile en route navigation errors, but for overcoming 
such errors simply and cheaply, thereby making it  likely that cruise missiles with “pinpoint” 
accuracy will become widely available at relatively affordable prices ($300,000 or less per round 
if mass produced). 34 Second, modern ballistic missiles such as the Chinese M-9 (CSS-6 or DF-
11)—and its longer-range, two-stage variant, the M-18—incorporate det achable warheads with 
steering jets, thus enabling circular error proba bles (CEPs) of 150-200 meters or less (depending 
on the accuracy of the GPS signal utilized) regardless of range. 35 Third, if such weapons are 
combined with submunitions optimized for area c overage against soft targets such as aircraft 
parked in the open, tent cities at  forward bases or air-defense ra dars, they can be quite lethal. 36 
Based on these assumptions, Stillion and Orletsky calculated that, 
for about $1 billion, an adversary could attack four missile-defense 
radars [for example, US Patriot radars ] once, four tent cities [as large as 
1-square kilometer] once, and all [aircraft] parking ramps [at four 
forward bases] between 6 and 12 times each. These attacks have the 
potential to be so destructive to equipment and disruptive to sortie-
generation operations that, unless steps are taken to diminish the 
effectiveness of these systems, they could force the USAF to abandon 
bases within reach of enemy missiles.
37 
In the case of unsheltered aircraft at the four forward air bases, assuming parking patterns similar 
to those used by US F-15Es at Shaikh Isa, Ba hrain, during the 1991 Gulf  War, and assuming a 
20-foot lethal radius for 1-pound submunitions against soft targets, Stillion and Orletsky 
estimated that an opponent could achieve a 0.9 probability of kill against all aircraft parked in the 
open on the four bases “with 30 GPS-guided M-9 and 30 M-18 ball istic missiles, and 38 small 
GPS-guided cruise missiles, at an  estimated cost of $101 million.” 38 Their implication is clear. 
Continued heavy dependence on being able to operate short-range platforms from overseas bases 
even at distances of as much as 1,500-2,000 nm fr om enemy territory may not be viable in the 
                                                 
34 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to Conventional Crui se-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks, pp. 10-
11 and 25. To complicate the problem for the USAF, Stillion and Orletsky postulated ve ry slow cruises whose low 
speeds would cause them to be rejected by computer-controlled, low-down radars (Ibid., p. 16). 
35 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to C onventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks , pp. 9-
10, 13, and 79. CEP is the radius of a circle within which 50 percent of the missiles are expected to hit. A range of 
600 nm is sufficient to reach Kadena AFB, Okinawa, from the Chinese mainland. The M-9, like the modified Scuds 
used by Iraq in 1988 and 1991, can be fired from mobile launchers, making them very difficult to destroy before 
they have fired at least one missile. 
36 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to Conventional Crui se-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks, pp. 22-
27. They assume a lethal radius of 15-25 feet for a 1-po und submunition against aircraft in the open, Patriot radars, 
or elements of a USAF tent city at a bare forward air base (Ibid., pp. 24 and 80). 
37 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to C onventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks , p. 27. 
Stillion and Orletsky’s basic solution to the vulnerability of forward-based Tacair was to rely, instead, “on a fleet of 
long-range aircraft operating from permanent bases” beyo nd the reach of affordable ad versary ballistic and cruise 
missiles with modern submunitions, (Ibid., p. 60). 
38 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to Conventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks , p. xiv. 
For a picture of the ramp at Shaikh Isa in early 1991, see p. 6. 

 
 19
long term against smart, determined adversar ies—even ones with modest military defense 
budgets and resources compared to those of the United States. 
Three final points should round out discussion of the vulnerabilities inherent in overseas basing. 
First, ballistic and cruises missiles armed with  specialized submunitions are by no means the 
only conceivable way of exploiti ng US dependence on forward ba ses and ports to  project US 
military power overseas. In reflecting on opportunities  that the Iraqis failed to exploit in 1991, it 
is puzzling that Saddam Hussein’s regime was “ unable to organize or hire special operations 
forces or terrorists to attack USAF aircraft” on their forward bases around the Persian Gulf, as 
the North Vietnamese had done to American bases in South Vietnam over two decades earlier.39  
Second, the potentially devastating cruise and ballistic missile th reat to forward-based USAF 
Tacair described by Stillion and Orletsky was predicated strictly  on the use of non-nuclear or 
conventional munitions. However, ballistic miss iles such as the Chinese M-9 and M-18 could 
also carry nuclear, chemical, or biological warh eads. The M-9 (DF-15), for instance, has been 
credited with being able to deliver a range of munitions, including a 90-kiloton nuclear or a 500-
kilogram conventional warhead. 40 The implications of WMD bei ng used against Air Force in-
theater air bases argue that the potential vulne rabilities of basing within range of enemy A2 
systems are greater than even Stillion and Orletsky’s sobering analysis indicates. 
Third, as Bowie pointed out in 2002, the vulnera bilities of forward bases and ports are much 
more than an Air Force issue. Insofar as “A rmy, Navy, and Marine forces are dependent upon 
forward ports, airfields, and ba ses in the theater to conduct combat operations,” continued 
reliance on large, fixed facilities within the theater of operations has “broader strategic 
implications for the US military as a whole. 41 Thus, “over the long run, the combined 
uncertainties raised by political factors, logist ics, and emerging military threats mean that the 
combat power of the land-based fighter force ma y be significantly constrained in supporting US 
power-projection operations in an A2 environment.” 42 USAF difficulties coping with A2/AD 
challenges could undermine the operations of its  sister Services during joint expeditionary 
operations overseas. 
                                                 
39 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to Conventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks, p. 6. 
40 See, for example, the Center for Defence and Interna tional Security Studies, “The Chinese Missile Threat: A 
Photo Essay for Special Reports,” available online at http://www.cdiss.org/China_Essay.htm.  
41 Bowie, The Anti-Access Threat and Theater Air Bases, p. i. 
42 Bowie, The Anti-Access Threat and Theater Air Bases , p. i. “To project power, US reliance on forward bases 
requires success in four areas: an adequate base infrastructure, responsive logistical support, political approval from 
host nations, and effective counters to enemy threats. If  one of these factors is missing, US power-projection 
capabilities will be compromised. The problem facing the United States is that even a high probability of success in 
each factor results in an overall low pr obability of success. For example, if  the United States had a 90 percent 
chance of succeeding in each ar ea, only a 65 percent overa ll probability of success results  (90 percent X 90 percent 
X 90 percent X 90 percent = 65 percent). In short, these co mbined uncertainties suggest that over the long term, the 
land-based fighter forces could be significantly constrained in supporting US power-projection operations.” (Ibid., p. 
65). The probability Bowie cites is actually 0.6561, which r ounds to 0.66. If one of the four probabilities is only 0.5 
while the other three remain 0.9, then the overall proba bility of successful power pr ojection against an anti-access 
threat falls to 0.3645—slightly better than one chance in  three. Moreover, these notional calculations omit the AD 
challenges posed by, for example, double-digit SAMs. 

 
 20
PATH RISKS IN THE GSTF CONCEPT 
On the one hand, the Global Strike Task Force is a sensible response to prospective A2/AD 
challenges to the expeditionary power-projection capabilities of the US Air Force in particular, 
and to the American military in general. The GSTF CONOPS ta kes current USAF capabilities 
(for example, the B-2A, JDAM, and advanced surveillance assets such as Global Hawk) and 
future capabilities (notably the F/A-22 and the SD B) and integrates them into an operational 
concept that endeavors to defeat foreseeable A2 /AD capabilities. In this sense, the GSTF is a 
prudent reaction to the likely em ergence of asymmetric respons es to the wide margins of 
advantage currently enjoyed by the US military in  most areas of high-intensity, conventional 
operations. 
On the other hand, the GSTF concept is critically dependent on the presumption that, for at least 
the next three decades, the Air Force will be able to deploy short-range fighters into theater bases 
located, at most, 1,500-2,000 nm from enemy airspace , if not closer. The USAF’s path remains 
that of betting that forward bases, which are almost certain to fall increasingly within the reach 
of enemy ballistic missiles, cruise missiles and ot her A2 capabilities, can nonetheless be utilized 
by its expeditionary air units. The alternative path of developing long-range strike systems that 
could provide some capability to “kick down the door” from bases beyond the reach of most 
enemy A2 systems is not being pursued. 
The stated intention of USAF leaders to depend  predominately on short-range platforms to cope 
with A2/AD threats for some three decades is bo rne out by the following observations. First, in 
March 1999 the Air Force, in response to congre ssional language directing the preparation of “a 
comprehensive plan for the future of the long-ra nge bomber force,” produced a white paper that 
deferred initial operational capability (IO C) for a follow-on to the B-2 until 2037. 43 In the 
meantime, the vast majority of USAF invest ment in combat platforms—procurement plus 
RDT&E—is programmed to go to short-range platforms, mainly to the F/A-22 and the F-35 JSF.  
Second, since the appearance of the 1999 white pape r, senior Air Force leaders have shown no 
inclination to change their minds about the wisd om of delaying substantia l investment in long-
range strike systems until the 2030s . Indeed, their position seems, if anything, to have hardened. 
Whereas the 1999 bomber roadmap suggested that, in the future, the residual bomber force of B-
52s, B-1s, and B-2 would “play a greater role in achieving time-cr itical effects for the JFACC 
[Joint Force Air Component Co mmander],” Air Force Secretar y Roche and Chief of Staff 
General Jumper have argued since that the F/A-22 is the only airc raft with real potential to deal 
with relocatable or moving targets deep in enemy territory.44  
Third, the pivotal assumption underlying their judgment that only the F/A-22 can deal with deep, 
moving targets seems to be that the legacy bomber fleet, during the kick-down-the-door phase of 
                                                 
43 Department of the Air Force, U.S. Air Force White Paper on Long Range Bombers  (Washington, DC: March 1, 
1999), pp. 1 and 21-22. 
44 U.S. Air Force White Paper on Long Range Bombers , p. 19; HASC, Hearing on the Air Force Fiscal Year 2004 
Budget, pp. 17-18. 

 
 21
operations against an A2/AD threat, is only suitable for striking “fixed target sets.”45 On this line 
of reasoning, time-critical, emergent, moving, a nd relocatable targets become the exclusive 
purview of Tacair platforms such as the superc ruising F/A-22—despite the fact that the B-2 had 
success in 1999 over Serbia against relocatable targets such as SAMs, and despite the lesson that 
General Jumper drew in 2001 from this same conflict regarding th e need for pers istence in the 
target area to deal with emerging targets. I ndeed, it was General Jump er who, during Allied 
Force in 1999, instigated B-2 “fle x targeting,” an innovation that  led to successful B-2 attacks 
against at least a couple Serbian SA-3 sites when all other available strike systems proved unable 
to cope with the Serb tactic of regularly moving SAMs small distances to preclude precise 
targeting.46  
Finally, while Air Force opposition to buying additio nal B-2s has been evident for at least a 
decade, less well known is the growing resistance of  Air Force leaders to long-range solutions of 
any sort. Recently senior Air Force officials have gone so far as to argue that, because both long-
range and short-range strike aircraft will generally require some air refueling, it is irrelevant to 
talk at all about long-range vers us short-range systems at all. 47 This argument, however, 
highlights yet another single-path  dependency in the Air Force’s present trajectory. Insofar as 
USAF dependence on short-range systems such  as the F/A-22 grows in coming years, 
dependence on an aging tanker fleet will also increas e. In fact, air refueling sorties grew to 25 
percent of the total sorties flown during the first year of Enduring Freedom, as compared with 20 
percent during Allied Force in 1999 and only 12 percent during Desert Storm in 1991. 48 Yet, the 
last of the KC-135s, which constitute 90 percent of the Air Force’s inventory of just over 600 air-
refueling aircraft, was delivered in 1965, and th e only current USAF pro posal for addressing the 
aging of its tanker fleet is a c ontroversial plan to retire 68 KC-135Es a nd lease 100 modified 
Boeing 767s for a period of ten years with an option to buy. 49 Thus, the GSTF’s heavy 
dependence on short-range platfo rms has not prompted the Air Force to earmark the funding 
needed to recapitalize the tanker fleet on which this CONOPS will increasingly depend. 
One could argue, of course, that Air Force leaders are right in betting so heavily on the F/A-22’s 
potential to cope with the A2/AD challenges likely  to appear over the next  three decades. After 
all, the opening months Operation Enduring Fr eedom showed that with enough air-refueling 
                                                 
45 HASC, Hearing on the Air Force Fiscal Year 2004 Budget, p. 50. 
46 Grant, The B-2 Goes To War, pp. 81-82. 
47 HASC, Hearing on the Air Force Fiscal Year 2004 Budget, p. 50. 
48 Bowie, Haffa, and Mullins, Future War, p. 42. 
49 USAF Fact Sheet, “KC-135 Stratotanker,” July 2001, available online at  
http://www.af.mil/news/factsheets/KC_135_Stratotanker.html; HASC, Hearing on the Air Force Fiscal Year 2004 
Budget, p. 10; and, Boeing, “The U.S. Air Force 767 Tanker Program,” March 17, 2003, slides 5 and 6. The USAF’s 
fleet of some 540 KC-135 Stratotankers was produced during the late 1950s and early 1960s. The Stratotanker was 
based on the Boeing model 367-80, which was also the basis for the Boeing 707. The current fleet contains 411 R 
models, which have been modified with new CFM-56 engines, and 134 Es, which were re-engined with TF-33-PW-
102 engines. The other 10 percent of the USAF’s tanker inventory consists of 59 KC-10s. These planes, which were 
modifications of the DC-10, entered USAF service in 1981. Estimates of the cost of the 767-lease agreements have 
varied widely. In May 2002, the Congressional Budget Offi ce estimated that the cost of  lease-purchase agreement 
(with changes in current law) would be $37 billion; by November 2002 Boeing was offering $21 billion for a 10-
year lease followed by purchase at the end of ten years. 

 
 22
support, short-range combat aircraft could operate  over long distances and their aircrews could 
cope with long-duration missions (albeit agains t an opponent with almo st non-existent A2/AD 
capabilities). Nonetheless, the extreme path dependency underlying th e GSTF concept seems 
impossible to deny. The fact is that Air Force le aders show no inclinatio n whatsoever to hedge 
against this critical dependency by investi ng seriously, between now and the 2030s, in long-
range systems that could offer the benefits of pe rsistence, large and varied payloads, and, most 
importantly, greater ability to operate from  bases beyond the reach of an opponent’s A2/AD 
systems. 
OPERATIONAL RISKS 
The vulnerabilities and uncertainti es inherent in basing short-ra nge systems—particularly the 
F/A-22—within reach of adversary AD capabilities have already been covered. The only point 
bearing reiteration is the obvious  one concerning the potential war-stopping ramifications of 
attacks on USAF forward bases su fficiently destructive or disruptive to force abandonment of 
bases within reach of enemy missiles and othe r AD capabilities. In such an event, the 
deployment of ground forces scheduled for early arri val in theater would ha ve to be delayed, or, 
if they had already begun arri ving, would be vulnerable to heavy losses should the opponent 
attack US airlift assets, in-theater ports, troop concentrations, or logistics bottlenecks. Indeed, US 
ground forces might be denied th eater access or subjected  to attack even if the forward bases 
were retained should Tacair sortie generation be greatly reduced. Again, the degree of success 
the GSTF achieves in A2/AD contingencies will di rectly affect the success of joint-force power 
projection.  
Turning to other operational risks in the GSTF c oncept, a key claim is that the F/A-22, once its 
potential for ground-attack has been developed, w ill be able to take out double-digit SAMs early 
in an AD contingency. As General Jumper noted in early 2000: 
If Mr. Milosevic had had an SA-10 or an SA-12—and he well could 
have—or the latest generation of fighter—which he could well have—
[Lieutenant General] Mike [Short, the JFACC for Operation Allied 
Force] would have faced a profoundl y more difficult situation than he 
did, and we would have been havi ng a debate over why we didn’t have 
the F-22 five years ago instead of several years from now. The F-22 will 
bring us not only the air superiority that we traditionally think of in the 
air-to-air role, but that total air superiority of a first-in capability that 
takes out the airplanes and those most potent surface-to-air defenses that 
would otherwise limit our access to targets. That is why we need the F-
22.
50 
Without question, Jumper’s positi on was—and staunchly remains—that only the F/A-22 can 
ensure the early air dominance against both enemy fighters and SAMs that is  a sine qua non for 
the joint force in AD scenarios. 
                                                 
50 General John P. Jumper, Air Force Association Air Wa rfare Symposium Proceedings , February 24-25, 2000, 
available online at http://www.aef.org/symposia/jump200.htm . The SA-12 is part of the S-300 family of Russian 
SAMs. The SA-12, however, has a faster missile and is optimized against incoming tactical ballistic missiles 
(Tirpak, “The Double-Digit SAMs,” p. 48). 

 
 23
One way to assess this conten tion is to consider the followi ng question: How much does air 
dominance in this inclusive se nse hinge on the F/A-22 itself as  opposed to its weapons and 
timely, precise targeting information? In the case of  air-to-air threats, two points appear relevant. 
First, while much is made of the vulnerability of US bombers to enemy fighters, there is no good 
reason why the B-2 (or any other long-range strike platform) cannot  be equipped with air-to-air 
armament such as the AIM-120 AMRAAM. If the B-2 remains in the inventory until the late 
2030s, its avionics—particularly its radar—will be  upgraded at least once. When that upgrade 
occurs, the new radar will surely be an electronically scanned arra y, and, as in the case of the 
existing JSF radar, it would be simply a matter of software to provide air-to-air modes along with 
air-to-ground capab ilities. Second, regarding fighter-ver sus-fighter compar isons, the F/A-22’s 
low observability will give it a first-look, first-shot advantage over aircraft such as the Su-37 that 
the F-15C will never be able to match. One coul d suggest that this technology-based edge will 
not be all that decisive in the real world given the training, proficiency, surveillance, and 
command-and-control advantages of US pilots. N onetheless, from the pe rspective of being an 
effective competitor over the long haul, th e F/A-22 will undoubtedly discourage prospective 
opponents from even attempting to compete head-t o-head with American forces in traditional 
air-to-air combat. 
Of course, the very likelihood of this outcome w ill inevitably encourage serious adversaries to 
invest in asymmetric responses, starting with advanced air defenses such as the SA-10 or SA-20. 
Because these systems employ very powerful radars , they will probably prove difficult to take 
out even for platforms with the low observability  of F/A-22—particularly in the absence of any 
electronic-warfare support. Low observability does not confer invisibility in any portion of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. In the case of radar, if a so-called stealthy platform gets close enough, 
burn-through will occur, which was most likely how an F-117 was downed by a Serbian SA-3 on 
the night of March 27, 1999, about 35 nm north of Belgrade.51 Consequently, another operational 
risk embedded in the GSTF concept is whether the F/A-22 can safely get close enough to double-
digit SAMs to release air-to-surface weapons, which in the F/A-22’s case means SDBs. 
The Air Force’s answer to this problem is to put  wings on the SDB. Given that the much heavier 
AGM-154 Joint Stand Off Weapon (JSOW) can glide to targets up to 40 nm away when released 
from high altitude, SDBs released from an F/ A-22 at supercruise speeds can probably reach 
targets as distant as 50 nm or more. 52 This much stand-off would greatly enhance the 
survivability of the F/A-22 dur ing attacks against double-dig it SAMs. On the other hand, it 
would also mean that the precise locations of critical SAM elements such as the engagement 
radars would be needed at even greater distance s than 50-60 nm. Hence, off-board surveillance 
                                                 
51 General Richard Hawley, who had been the ACC commander when the F-117 was lost, made the revealing 
observation that “Before that airplane took off from Aviano [Air Base in Italy], there was better than a 50-50 chance 
it would be shot down” (“U.S. Confirms Yugoslavs Downed Stealth Fighter,” The Washington Post, November 25, 
1999, p. A18). The loss occurred on the fourth night of Op eration Allied Force and the Serbs were quick to televise 
scenes of the wreckage, including the tail number of the F-117 (see “NATO Plane Downed,” Online NewsHour, 
Public Broadcasting System, March 28,1999, availabl e online at http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/europe/jan-
june99/f117a_3-27.html). 
52 Boeing’s SDB candidate uses the MBDA DiamondBack wing and is reported to have “a range greater than 40 
nautical miles” “Boeing Successful on First Flight of a Small Diameter Bomb,” Boeing press release, February 25, 
2003, available online at http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q1/nr_030225n.html. 

 
 24
for initial target location and the lethality of the SDB appear to be more crucial to kicking open 
the door into denied airspace than the F/A- 22 platform per se. What, for example, would 
preclude such targeting information and SDBs from being utilized by other low-observable 
platforms to attack SA-10 or SA-20 sites—assuming the F/A-22s could suppress enemy fighters? 
The presumed lethality of the SDB suggests another ope rational risk in the GSTF concept. The 
lethal radius of a unitary high-explosive warhead is proportional to the cube root of the weight of 
its explosive material. 53 The Mark-84 warhead used in 2,000-pound JDAMs, as well as many 
2,000-pound laser-guided bombs (LGBs), contai ns 945 pounds of H-6 or Tritonal. By 
comparison, the weight of high explosives in  the SDB is expected to be some 50 pounds. 54 
Simple arithmetic argues, therefore, the lethal radi us of an SDB against a given target is nearly 
2.7 times smaller than that of a JDAM or LGB using the Mark-84 warhead. LGBs, which are the 
most accurate US guided bombs, have CEPs of around 3 meters, which is also the CEP objective 
for the initial version of the SDB. Evidently, th en, until a terminal seeker can be developed for 
the SDB, the weapon may not have the accuracy n eeded to achieve high probabilities of target 
destruction with a single round.  
Of course, the Air Force’s hope is that improveme nts in high explosives will enable the SDB to 
be as powerful as a 1,000-pound JDAM, which is the largest air-to-ground munition that can be 
carried inside the F/A-22’s weapons bays.
55 Accomplishing this would require roughly a tenfold 
increase in the explosive power of the SDB’ s warhead relative to Tritonal, whereas a 20-30 
percent increase is probably the most that is within technological reach. Among other reasons, 
the explosive material in military munitions ha s to be stable enough to withstand physical 
shocks, temperature extremes, rapid temperatur e cycles, and other harsh treatment unavoidable 
in military practice even in peacetime. A 30 percen t increase in the explosive power of material 
in the SDB’s warhead would, therefore, be a c onsiderable step forward. However, even 30 
percent falls well short of offse tting a 3-meter CEP compared to the explosive power and lethal 
radius of a 1,000-pound LGB. 
Aircrews could compensate for the 3-meter CEP by releasing multiple SDBs against a single aim 
point, but doing so would undermine perhaps the main objective of the SDB development, to 
provide “increased kills per sortie on current and future aircraft platforms.” 56 Another alternative 
would be to drive the CEP for the basic weapon  down close to 1 meter. However, a CEP this 
small may be difficult to achieve without a te rminal seeker. Further, because the seeker 
envisioned for the second phase of the SDB pr ogram aspires to provide automatic-target-
recognition (ATR) capabilities suitable for mobile and relocatable targets, it is unlikely to be 
cheap. Achieving cheap 1-meter CEPs may be pressing the state of technology, and without such 
                                                 
53 Stillion and Orletsky, Airbase Vulnerability to Conventional Cruise-Missile and Ballistic-Missile Attacks, p. 11. 
54 See, for example, Global Security, “Small Diameter  Bomb / Small Smart Bomb,” available online at 
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/systems/munitions/sdb.htm. 
55 John A. Tirpak, “The F-22 On the Line,” Air Force Magazine, September 2002, p. 40.  
56 RDT&E Budget Item Justification Sheet (R-2 Exhibit), 0604329F Small Diameter Bomb, February 2002, p. 1. 

 
 25
accuracy the F/A-22/SDB combination could be ha rd pressed to eliminate advanced SAMs as 
quickly and thoroughly as hoped. 
A related operational risk is th at double-digit SAMs such as th e SA-20 are designed for rapid 
relocation. In 1999 the Serbs, drawing on Iraqi experiences in 1991, had considerable success 
using periodic relocation of their SAMs over  short distance to deny precision-targeting 
information to NATO aircraft. In a full-blown AD contingency involving advanced SAMs, one 
would expect that the use of such tactics could result in F/A-22 pilots suddenly finding 
themselves inside the burn-through distances of i ndividual sites that had moved while they were 
en route to their target areas. W ithout precise, real-time surveill ance of all existing SAM sites, 
which may well be difficult to achieve, pop-up SA -10s or SA-20s could lead to unexpected 
attrition, even of F/A-22s. 
This prospect raises the broader issue of achieving persistent, wide-area surveillance—especially 
against deep targets beyond the ra nge of the E-8C Joint Surveillan ce and Target Attack System 
(JSTARS). Because JSTARS is hosted on a Boei ng 707 airframe, it cannot risk operating inside 
hostile or denied airspace. Using a standard racetr ack pattern located some 90 kilometers inside 
friendly airspace, JSTARS can track moving targets to maximum depth of less than 100 nm 
inside enemy territory.57 There is no reason, however, why mobile launchers for ballistic missiles 
designed for AD against US power-projection capa bilities cannot be located deeper in enemy 
territory. Further, combat expe rience in Iraq as we ll as analytic simula tions since 1991 have 
argued that near-continuous survei llance over large areas is essent ial to have much chance of 
targeting mobile-missile launchers after they ha ve fired a missile, much less of destroying them 
before they have fired at leas t once. While USAF plans to mi grate JSF air-to-ground avionics 
into the F/A-22 would permit detection and tracking of  such targets within the aircraft’s field of 
view when operating in enemy airspace, the Ra ptor does not offer much capability for around-
the-clock surveillance of large areas. For the con tinuous surveillance needed to locate and track 
mobile SAMs, mobile missile launchers, and othe r relocatable or time-urgent targets, a long-
dwell platform along the lines of Global Hawk is required. A flight or two of F/A-22s blowing 
through enemy airspace above Mach 1.5 hardly seem well suited to providing the staring 
coverage needed for these classes of targets. No r, in fact, are supercruising F/A-22s likely to 
provide the persistence in the target area that long-range platforms can provide by loitering in or 
near areas in which time-critical and m oving targets are expected to emerge. 58 Finally, because 
Global Hawk is being bought in relatively small numbers and is not low-observable, one cannot 
help but wonder whether the Air Force is buying the ki nds or quantities of  penetrating, deep-
look, persistent sensors that will almost certainly  be needed to make the GSTF concept work 
against smart, resourceful, capable opponents. In deed, this deep-surveillance shortfall verges on 
being a true show-stopper for the GSTF concept as a whole. 
                                                 
57 Congressional Budget Office, “Options for Enhancing the Department of Defense’s Unmanned Vehicle 
Programs,” September 1998, Chapter III, p. 16. 
58 The view implicit in Air Force arguments for the F/A-22 and the GSTF that the high supercruise speeds of the 
Raptor is the only way to deal with time-critical, relocatable, moving, or emergent targets illustrates another way in 
which the USAF has selected a single-path solution to a di fficult problem. Surely a long-range platform able to 
provide long loiter times in or near likely target areas offers an alternative.  

 
 26
Taken together, these observations suggest that th e aggregate or collective operational risk in the 
GSTF is substantial. As sensible and prudent as  the GSTF may be as an Air Force response to 
A2/AD challenges, the concept involves non-triv ial operational risks. The vulnerability of 
forward bases, the difficulties of eliminating a dvanced SAMs quickly, and the shortfalls in the 
staring surveillance needed to detect and track  emerging, time-critical, relocatable, and moving 
targets are the most obvious areas. While such a comparison cannot be precise, it does not seem 
unreasonable to suggest that the collective operational risk in the GSTF is at least as great as that 
which confronted the 8th Air Force’s concept of daylight, strategic bombing in mid-1943. 
TECHNOLOGICAL AND FISCAL RISKS 
The technological risks in the GSTF concept are, to a large extent, those of the F/A-22 program, 
and the Raptor’s technological ri sks are tightly coupled with fi scal risks facing the F/A-22 
program in particular and the Department of  Defense’s (DoD’s) topline in general. The 
preceding discussion of operational risk implicit ly assumed that JSF-class air-to-ground 
capabilities can be readily migrated to the F/A-2 2. The present Air Force plan is to begin doing 
so with Spiral 2 modernization enhancement, st arting with substituting the JSF antenna array for 
the current F/A-22 array. This newer, active electronically scanned antenna array will be 
substantially cheaper, but in itself it will not  provide anything approaching JSF air-to-ground 
capabilities. Migrating the bulk of those capabilit ies to the F/A-22 will demand the much greater 
signal-processing and computationa l power provided, in the F-35’ s case, by its open avionics 
architecture, which is currently based on Motorola G4 microprocessors running at 1 gigahertz or 
higher.59 Thus, the migration of JSF-like, air-to-g round capabilities to th e F/A-22 is almost 
certain to increase overall program costs. Among other things, this migration will require large 
amounts of new software. 
The additional cost of this added program content could perhaps be absorbed—at least in part—
within the F/A-22 program if the program was on schedule and under cost. Unfortunately, the 
F/A-22’s current IOC is may well slip a year, pr ogram costs have grown some $6-7 billion since 
mid-2001, and the production portion of th e program probably exceeds the existing 
congressional cost cap ($37.6 billion according to DoD) by at least that much.60 
                                                 
59 By comparison with the microproces sors in the JSF Common Integrated Processors (CIPs), the production 
representative test vehicle (PRTV) versions of the F- 22 built for initial flight testing utilized Intel i960MX 
microprocessors—roughly comparable to the Intel 386—running at speeds around 25 megahertz. The hope of the 
JSF’s open architecture is that when G5 chips become ava ilable, it will be possible to insert new cards with those 
microprocessors into the CIP slots and have the aircraft’s software run without modification. While the validity of 
this hope has yet to be demonstrated, the aim of making the JSF’s computer hardware able to cope with successive 
generations of improved microprocessors is clearly a step  forward compared to the relatively closed computer 
architectures in the B-2 and F/A-22.  
60 The FY 1998 defense authorization act imposed a cost cap of $36.4 billion on F-22 production. Subsequent 
decisions to fund the first two PTRVs and long-lead for next six using production money increased this cap to $37.6 
billion, and, in Decembe r 1999, Pentagon officials put the “adjusted” cost caps for the F-22 as $18.9 billion for 
engineering and manufacturing development and $39.759 billion for production (“F-22 Program on Track,” Air 
Force News Service, December 22, 1999 ). Just before the Augu st 14, 2001, Defense Acquisition Board (DAB) on 
low-rate initial production for the F-22, the Air Force conceded that it needed an additional $5.4 billion in 
production money, although the Cost Analysis Improvement Group (CAIG) believed that production was $9 billion 
short. The August 2001 DAB added $5.4 billion to pr oduction, $600 million to RDT&E, and mediated the 

 
 27
If Congress does not relent on the existing produc tion cost cap, the Raptor buy could fall to as 
few as 200 aircraft, well short of the 381 Air For ce officials believe they need to equip each of 
the USAF’s ten Air and Space Expeditionary For ces (AEFs) with one 24-aircraft squadron of 
F/A-22s (while providing enough additional Raptor s for training, attrition reserves, ongoing 
operational testing, and so forth). 61 Even if Congress ultimately accedes to $43-44 billion for 
production, this higher cap will probably buy only  275-300 Raptors, and achieving full Spiral 5 
capabilities now appears to re quire funding over and above $43-44 billion. If so, then the Air 
Force may be unable to bring all F/A-22s to the Spiral 5 level. Deciding what portion of the F/A-
22 fleet to leave with only basic air-to-air cap abilities would be a difficult choice given how 
much the GSTF depends on the ground-attack capabilities of the plane. The resulting risk may be 
more fiscal than technological, but the bottom line  seems to be that the planned migration of 
something approaching JSF ground-attack capabilities to the F/A-22 faces substantial risk. 
The underlying technological risk lies in the ch allenge of getting so much software to work 
reliably. By all reports, the air-to-air software in  the PRTV F-22s currently being flown in flight 
test has had recurring stability problems. Adding all the additiona l code needed to migrate JSF 
ground-attack functionality to the F/A-22 suggests that some of the Raptor’s technology may not 
yet be entirely in hand. 
The broader fiscal risk that co uld affect the F/A-22 and the GSTF stems from the sustained real 
growth now envisioned through FY 2009 in the Do D’s topline. If the military (051) topline 
grows, as the Department now projects, to $483.6 billion in discretionary budget authority by FY 
2009, then the 051 topline will have grown in real terms for eleven consecutive years.62 Since the 
Vietnam War, there has been no hi storical precedent for sustaine d real growth spanning eleven 
years in a row. Five or six years constitutes th e maximum duration of steady topline real growth 
in the historical record. Given th e current state of the US econom y, the nation-wide shortfalls in 
many state and local budgets, the likely costs of the second Gulf War (Operation Iraqi Freedom), 
and the ongoing effort against global terrorism , it is not unreasonable to think that the 051 
topline might level off as early as FY 2005 or  2006, rather than conti nuing to grow at the 
projected rate through 2009. In that event, there would be additional fiscal  pressure on all large 
service programs, including with the F/A-22 and the Army’s Future Combat System (FCS).  
                                                                                                                                                             
remaining difference between the USAF and the CAIG cost positions on production by reducing the quantity to 295 
(with the proviso that up to 331 could be procured if costs could be reduced). Under Secretary of Defense E.C. 
“Pete” Aldridge, Jr. then asked Congress  to raise the production cap, Congress has not done so, and the Air Force 
has been left arguing that cost-reduction initiatives would enable the program to produce 295-331 F-22s within the 
congressional limit on procurement (E. C. Aldridge, Jr., letter to John H. Tierney, October 3, 2001). It now appears 
increasingly doubtful that the USAF will be able to do  so (General Accounting Office, “Tactical Aircraft: DoD 
Needs to Better Inform Congress about Implications of Continuing F/A-22 Cost Growth,” February 2003, GAO-03-
280). In fact, since the August 2001 DAB, the program has experienced at least one further cost overrun of $690 
million to as much as $1 billion in RDT&E and the decision to begin migrating JSF-like air-to-ground capabilities to 
the plane starting with Lot (spiral) 5 ap pears to eliminate much hope of redu cing production costs, “Air Force Jet 
Overruns May Reach $1 Billion,” The Washington Post, December 7, 2002, p. A6. 
61 Tirpak, “The F-22 On the Line,” p. 39. The Air Force believes that each AEF should have 2.5 Raptor squadrons 
numbering a total of 60 aircraft. This would require a total buy of over 950 F/A-22s, (Ibid., p. 40). 
62 DoD, “Fiscal 2003 Department of Defense Budget Rel ease,” No. 044-03, February 03 , 2003, available online at 
http://www.defenselink.mil/news/Feb2003/b02032003_bt044-03.html. 

 
 28
The one other technological risk of significance st ems from the GSTF’s clear need for staring or 
persistent surveillance of targets deep inside  enemy territory. The Pentagon has begun investing 
RDT&E funds into spaced-based radar (SBR) as  a long-term solution. However, radar physics, 
orbital mechanics, and the continuing high costs of putting a pound of payload in low-earth orbit 
suggest that an affordable SBR constellation able to provide 24/7 targeting-quality data 
throughout areas as large as the entire Korean peninsula is unlikely to come on line before 2020. 
In the meantime, the only altern ative appears to be  air-breathing, long-dur ation, survivable 
platforms operating at high altitudes. Global Hawk  satisfies the first two requirements, but lacks 
the low observability to be survivable in the pr esence of advanced SAMs. Dark Star, a stealthy 
competitor to Global Hawk, was cancelled. Hence, there appears to be a need to offset the 
technical risk of SBR by investing in a su ccessor to the Dark Star UAV for persistent, 
penetrating surveillance.  
ASSESSMENT 
The GSTF appears to face some serious fiscal and technological risks on top of the concept’s 
path and operational risks. The most worris ome risks confronting this USAF CONOPS, though, 
appear to be operational. Moreover, the collective operational risk is, in turn, tied to the path risk 
inherent in the Air Force’s in sistence on depending so heavil y on short-range systems between 
now and the late 2030s. If the aggreg ate operational risk in this prefer red path is at least as great 
as that faced by the 8th Air Force in mid-1943, th en some hedging in the direction of greater 
investment in long-range systems would seem to be prudent at the very least. Against opponents 
with A2/AD capabilities, betting mainly on short -range systems to find, fix, track, and attack the 
deepest and most difficult target classes seems ta ntamount to embracing the riskiest of all paths 
available. Unfortunately, the fiscal and related technological risks facing the F/A-22 and, after 
that, the JSF, make even modest rebala ncing in favor of long-range systems both 
bureaucratically and programmatically difficult for the US Air Force. 
In the final analysis, USAF and DoD leaders coul d judge the total risk tolerable on the grounds 
that American forces are unlikely to be confro nted by an opponent as determined and militarily 
capable as was Nazi Germany in World War II. J udging by Iraqi prowess in two Gulf Wars, this 
bet may be a safe one in the short term. If hist ory is any guide, however, it is much riskier over 
the long term, and there can be  no doubt that the wager the Air Force is making is a long-term 
bet. Taking the long view, therefore, prudence would counsel some rebalancing of Air Force 
modernization investments more in favor of long-range platforms—for strike as well as 
persistent surveillance of deep targets. 

 
 29
III. THE DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY AND 
ASSURED ACCESS: A CRITICAL RISK 
ASSESSMENT 
By Robert Work 
ASSURED ACCESS 
The Department of the Navy (DoN)—comprised of  the two sea Services, the US Navy and the 
US Marine Corps—has a straightforward, declaratory approach to theater access: 
We assure access . Assuring sea-based access worldwide for military 
operations, diplomatic interaction, and humanitarian relief efforts. Our 
nation counts on us to do this.1 
Assured access is a re latively new DoN promise. In 1999, th e DoN emphasized four strategic 
concepts for naval forces: forward presence; deterrence; sea and area control; and power 
projection. The 2000 Program Guide to the US  Navy lists forward presence, knowledge 
superiority, and dominating the ba ttlespace as the key tenets of maritime operations in the 
Information Age. The promise of assured acce ss was first made during the 2001 QDR. During 
that review, the Navy outlined the four returns on  investment in a strong Navy: command of the 
seas; US sovereign power overseas; assured access; and enabling the transformation of the joint 
force. The claim of assured access is now a staple of Navy and Marine Corps publications, and it 
has been elevated to the first of three pillars in the DoN’s new strategic vision, Naval Power 21.2 
The confidence this claim implies derives from the unique maneuver space the Navy and Marine 
Corps operate on and exploit: the broad oceans of the world, which cover over 70 percent of the 
earth’s surface. By international law and conven tion, naval vessels and airc raft can operate over, 
on, and under the sea as cl ose as 12 miles off any coast in the world at any time, with no need to 
seek permission from any international body or national government. 3 As a result, Vice Admiral 
Art Cebrowski, Director of the Office of For ce Transformation, refers to the oceans as the 
“global commons.” By assembling, moving, and concentrating naval forces on the global 
commons, the United States can literally establish a sovereign sea base—and thereby assure joint 
                                                 
1 Gordon England, Admiral Vernon Clark, General James L. Jones, Naval Power 21 (Washington, DC: Department 
of the Navy, October 2002), p. 1.  
2 See Richard J. Danzig, Admiral J.L. Johnson, General C.C. Krulak, Department of the Navy 1999 Posture 
Statement: America’s 21st Century Force (Washington, DC: Department of the Navy, 1999), pp. 6-8; Admiral J.L. 
Johnson, Vision…Presence…Power: A Program Guide to the U.S. Navy, 2000 edition (Washington, DC: 
Department of the Navy, 2000), pp. 6-9; A 21st Century Navy (Washington, DC: Department of the Navy, 2001), a 
small pamphlet published by the Navy’s 2001 QDR Support Team; and Edmund P. Giambastiani, Jr., “An 
Investment Portfolio…For the Navy After Next,” Sea Power, April 2001, pp. 9-19. 
3 In December 1982, the US accepted the provisions of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, which established 12 
miles as the limits of the territorial sea, and which gave  naval and merchant vessels the right of “innocent passage 
through those seas. For an overview of the convention, see www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements. 

 
 30
force access—in virtually any thea ter of operation. A naval officer perhaps best summarized the 
DoN’s approach to access when he wrote: 
With the right Navy, we do not require permanent overseas presence, 
host-country infrastructure, or other country’s permission to assert our 
national desires. Naval force will take us anywhere in the world to touch 
someone, whether with diplomatic initiatives or high explosives.4 
Of course, geographic limitations also apply to sea bases. In some cases, access to an ocean 
operating area is physically prevented by ice or very shallow water. In other instances, access is 
complicated, but not denied, by narrow chokepoints such as the Strait of Hormuz, and restricted 
waters, like the Persian Gulf. In both cases, lack of  sea room limits the potential size of the sea 
base, and hinders the free maneuver of its constituent parts.
5 However, all of the “critical 
regions” identified in Defense Planning Guidan ce—Europe; Southwest Asia and the Persian 
Gulf; the Indian Ocean and Central Asia; the Ea st Asia Littoral; and Northeast Asia—have long, 
accessible coastlines. Indeed, as Navy and Marines planners like to point out, 80 percent of the 
world’s population and capitals are located within 200  nm of a coastline.
6  
In addition to its political and geographic attractions, sea basing has two key military advantages. 
First, a sea base is mobile; not only can the ship s that constitute the base sail from theater to 
theater, but once in an operating area, they re main constantly on the move—either over-the-
horizon or close to shore—depending on the thre at. This attribute has important tactical 
implications. In an era of precision guided munitions, in which accuracy is independent of range, 
target location error is one of the biggest opera tional determinants of a successful engagement. 
Moving targets are inherently hard er to hit than stationary targ ets, and both the difficulty and 
expense of developing over-the- horizon targeting capabilities ag ainst ships trying to evade 
detection and engagement are non-t rivial challenges. Second, the base generally carries its own 
defenses with it wherever it goes. Local air defe nses are provided by tactic al aircraft operating 
off the decks of its large aircraft carriers an d “big deck” amphibious ships; organic missile 
defenses are netted and dense to protect the base from missile and air attack; and aircraft, surface 
combatants, and submarines screen the base from submarine and surface ship threats.7  
Access During the Cold War 
During the Cold War, the Navy capitalized on these two military advantages by forming free-
ranging, independent strike bases consisting of groups of one or two carriers surrounded by six to 
12 surface escorts, and one or two attack submarines in direct support.8 Given the potential threat 
                                                 
4 Captain John Byron, US Navy (Ret.), “A New Navy for a New World,” Proceedings, March 2003, p.86. 
5 Note, however, that for Operation Iraqi Freedom, the Navy operated three aircraft carrier battle groups inside the 
Persian Gulf. See Robert Wall, “Waging War,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, March 17, 2003. 
6 Edward Lundquist, “The Future Family of US Naval Ships,” Marine Corps Gazette, March 2003, p. 28. 
7 See for example Richard Kugler, “Naval Overseas Presence,” in Globalization and Maritime Power, ed. Sam J. 
Tangredi (Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, 2002), pp. 302-03. 
8 A Carrier Battle Group, or CVBG, is built around a single carrier, nominally defended by six combatants and one 
or two submarines; a Carrier Battle Force, or CVBF, has two or more carriers, each contributing their close escort of 
six combatants and submarines. 

 
 31
posed by long-range Soviet naval aviation, submar ine, and surface units, these strike bases were 
rarely, if ever, stationary. They planned rapid penetrations of S oviet naval defenses to “unmask 
their batteries” of aircraft (and later, land attack  cruise missiles), launch  a strike from extended 
range, and then either retire or reposition for fu rther strikes. The ready availability of allied 
forward bases meant that the Cold War carrier- centric “strike Navy” wo rried less about seizing 
bases from which to operate, repair battle dama ge, or refit, and more about ensuring reliable 
underway replenishment from their special purpose combat logistics forces (CLFs).  
The Marines also benefited from  the extensive worldwide availability of bases in the Cold 
War—so much so that they gradually came to emphasize rapid land-based assembly of large 
Marine units rather than major amphibious assaults or operations from the sea. It is true that the 
Navy strove to maintain enough purpose-built amphibious ships to embark 2.5 Marine 
Expeditionary Brigades (MEBs) , or “brigade equivalents.” 9 However, with the Marines’ 
enthusiastic support, they organized and operate d them in such a way as to keep several 
reinforced battalion crisis response units forward deployed in peacetime, which were themselves 
best suited for independent, limited missions. Th is brigade equivalent of forward sea-based 
Marines was backed by an additional brigade that could fall in on equipment hidden and 
protected in deep caves in Norwa y, and three more that could fly to  an airfield ashore to marry 
up with equipment delivered by special purpose ma ritime pre-positioning ships to a nearby port. 
In other words, by the end of the Cold War, the ratio of land-based to sea-based Marine brigade 
equivalents in crisis response ope rations was 4:1. As a result, the art of mounting even a single 
cohesive brigade-sized amphibious  operation (as opposed to the as sembly of three independent 
sea-based battalions) was an increasingly lost one. 
Assured Access in the New Expeditionary Era 
The end of the Cold War ushered in a new expeditionary era that forced both the Navy and 
Marines to confront new operational realities.  With the collapse of the Soviet Navy and no 
plausible naval opponent on the near- to mid-term  horizon, the Navy had to recast its attention 
toward joint power-projection ope rations and support of joint land and air forces ashore. And 
with the ready availability of land bases, ports, and airfields no longer certain, the Marines had to 
rethink their reliance on land bases for the rapid projection of most of their forces.
10  
In the process of confronting these new operati onal realities, the DoN recognized an important 
bureaucratic opportunity. Because it was the only  Department with its own navy, tactical air 
                                                 
9 Amphibious lift is measured in several ways, such as total personnel spaces, square footage dedicated to cargo, 
square footage dedicated to vehicl e storage, helicopter spots, etc. The active amphibious fleet exceeds all 
measurements for 2.5 MEB equivalents except in “vehicle square.” This shortfall will be alleviated with the 
introduction of the new LPD-17; in the interim, a reserve Amphibious Lift Enhancement Program covers the 
shortfall. Major General D.T. Krupp, Naval Amphibious Warfare Plan (Washington, DC: Department of the Navy, 
undated), pp. 32-33. 
10 In 1992, the DoN published From the Sea, its first articulation of the rationale for the post Cold War Navy-Marine 
Corps Team. This was followed two years later by Forward…From the Sea. Together, they outlined the vision for a 
more concerted Departmental shift towa rd supporting joint power-projection operations in the world’s littoral seas. 
See both of these vision statements in the Official Posture Statement sec tion of the Defense Strategy Review at 
www.comw.org. 

 
 32
force, and ground maneuver element, it could argue that its ability to assemble sovereign forward 
sea bases11—capable of providing assured access and of projecting both fire and maneuver—was 
ideally suited to a new strategic era in which theater access was no longer guaranteed.  
As enemy access to weapons of mass destruction grows, and the 
availability of overseas bases declines, it is compelling both militarily 
and politically  to reduce the vulnerability of US forces through the 
expanded use of secure, mobile, networked sea basing (emphasis 
added).12 
Unstated, but strongly implied, was that this ci rcumstance might warrant a reapportionment of 
DoD resources in favor of the sea Services. 
Sea basing is also a catalyst fo r coalition building, because it is 
politically and logistically easier for nations to contribute to a sea-based 
effort than to commit land forces (emphasis added).13 
This bureaucratic opportunity gradually helped to convince both Navy and Marine Corps officers 
that they needed to change their acquired Cold War habits. For assured sea-based access and sea-
based fire and maneuver to translate into a mean ingful wartime advantage, the Navy had to once 
again think of Marines as part of  the battle fleet’s main battery, and about reallocating assets to 
support them. For their part, the Marines had to re discover the art of conducting large, sea-based 
operations not reliant on land-ba sed ports and airfields, ther eby increasing their operational 
reliance on the Navy. Together, then, both the Navy and the Marine Corps had to re-energize an 
operational partnership with one an other than had lapsed since th e end of the Korean War. In 
large measure, the 1990s can be seen as a peri od of operational reappraisal and debate among 
and within the two sea Services  on the extent and ramificati ons of this renewed operational 
partnership.  
While the growing ties between Navy and Marine planners has been a positive development 
within the DoN, both of the sea Services are now starting to confront the operational challenge of 
promising assured access in the green-water littoral regions of the world. The term “littoral 
region” includes both a seaward and landward dimension in na val operations. The seaward 
dimension is generally defined “as the ar ea shoreward from the continental shelf.” 14 While the 
definition of the landward extension is less clear,  so as not to cede any advantage to the Air 
Force and Army in the immediate post-Cold War roles and missions debates the DoN chose an 
expansive one: “…those areas adjacent to the oceans and the seas that are within direct control of 
and vulnerable to the striking power of sea-based forces.” 15 In joint power-projection operations 
                                                 
11 The emphasis on sovereignty with respect to sea bases was also a development during the 2001 QDR. See A 21st 
Century Navy, Giambastiani, Jr., “An Investment Portfolio…For the Navy After Next.”  
12 Admiral Vern Clark, US Navy, “Sea Powe r 21: Projecting Decisive Joint Capabilities,” Proceedings, October 
2002, pp. 36-37.  
13 Vice Admiral Charles W. Moore, Jr., US Navy, and Lieu tenant General Edward Hanlon, Jr., US Marine Corps, 
“Sea Basing: Operational Independence for a New Century,” Proceedings, January 2003, p. 83. 
14 Vice Admiral Hank Giffin, US Navy (Ret.), and Rear Admiral John Tozzi, US Coast Guard (Ret.), “‘C’ in LCS 
Stands for Combat,” Proceedings, January 2003, p. 89. 
15 Forward From the Sea (Washington, DC: Department of the Navy, 19 September 1994), preface.  

 
 33
along an enemy coast, naval planners rightly em phasize the latter definition, since the aim of 
their forces is to threaten as much of the en emy’s homeland as possible with fire and maneuver. 
But therein lies the challenge, because offsetting the sea base’s advantages of mobility and 
organic multi-dimensional defenses is the relati vely limited operational reach of its strike and 
maneuver forces. 
With the retirement of A-6 attack aircraft a nd the abortive development of the A-12, the Navy 
and Marines began to rely on re latively short-range F/A-18 Hornet  and AV-8 Harrier  fighter-
bombers for naval aviation strike. Indeed, to try to make up fo r its lack of operational reach, 
naval aviation converted the F-14 Tomcat, a compar atively long-ranged fighter-interceptor, into 
a fighter-bomber.16 In any event, although aerial refueling can extend the reach of its aircraft, 
carrier strike wings are currently optimized to conduct strikes between 200-500 nm from the 
carrier deck. 17 Tactical air strikes can be augmented by Tomahawk land attack cruise missile 
attacks, currently to ranges of approximately  1,000 nm. However, for every mile a carrier or 
missile shooter operates offshore, the amount of land threatened by its ai r wings or missiles is 
reduced. As a result, to optimize the inland reach of  its strike assets, naval planners prefer for 
carriers and surface combatants to  operate no more than 50-100 nm from an enemy coastline, 
adjusted as necessary to deal with tactical threats.  
Sea-based maneuver reach is even more limited th an strike reach. Because aircraft carriers or 
amphibious ships cannot operate large tactical lift aircraft such as the C-130 from their decks, 
sea-based maneuver operations rely upon rotary wing aircraft (e.g., helicopters and, in the future, 
tiltrotors) to support the ship-to-shore movement. However, rotary wing aircraft have both less 
comparative lift capability and range than larg e, fixed-wing airlifters. For example, Army 
planning factors call for the insertion of future Objective Force brigades by C-130 aircraft to 
landing zones 500 miles from an intermediate staging base. In contrast, Marine planners envision 
the air insertion of a combat battalion 200 miles from a sea base, using a mixture of tiltrotor 
MV-22s and helicopters. 18 However, due to the lift constraints of these aircraft, the majority of 
heavier combat units and equipment will continue to be delivered to the beach by surface craft, 
and will then drive inland to link up with lighter , air-delivered forces. As a practical matter, 
therefore, the operational exploitation of sea-base d maneuver forces requires that the sea base be 
                                                 
16 See for example “Swing-role Tom cats Crucial to First Days of ‘Enduring Freedom’ Air Campaign,” Jane’s 
International Defense Review, November 2001, p. 2. 
17 The un-refueled combat radius of a naval strike fighter is  subject to many variables. In certain profiles, the F/A-
18C, the current workhorse of carrier air wings, is 500 nm—see Vice Admiral Charles W. Moore, Jr., US Navy, and 
Lieutenant General Edward Hanlon, Jr., US Marine Corps, “Sea Basing: Operational Independence for a New 
Century,” p. 81. However, when highlighting the air wing’s maximum daily sortie rates and aimpoints attacked, it 
assumes ranges to targets on the order of 200 miles. See Lieutenant Commander Ed Langford, CVW Strike 
Sortie/Aimpoint Improvement, unclassified point paper (Washington, DC: DoN (N8QDR), January 18, 2001).  
18 Of course, the use of tiltrotors and helicopters for tro op and equipment insertions allows a sea-based maneuver 
force far more flexibility in selecting landing sites, since aircraft capable of vertical landing require only flat landing 
zones instead of airfields, whether improved or not, like the C-130. 

 
 34
very close to shore. Indeed, Marine maneuver and supporting naval gunfire planning factors call 
for the forward edge of the sea base to be located no more than 25 miles from the shoreline.19  
Even if a potential adversary decides not to contest sea-based operations this close to a coastline, 
limited operational reach can still complicate or limit the contributions of sea-based forces. For 
example, during recent operations in Afghanist an—a land-locked country with no navy and 
located a minimum of 400 nm from the sea (K abul was over 900 nm)—hi gh sortie rates by 
carrier strike aircraft were difficult to sust ain, even when supported by land-based Air Force 
tankers, and the Marines had to stage most of their maneuver forces and equipment through 
bases in Pakistan. 20 Operational reach would also be an issue for combat ope rations against an 
exceptionally large country with a coastline (e.g., China); even if the country does not contest the 
establishment of a sea base close to its shore, the expanse of the country may mean targets are 
simply out of reach of US wea pons, aircraft, and forces. For the remainder of this discussion, 
however, the focus will be on efforts by US sea- based forces to assure access and to maximize 
their operational reach by operating close to a c ontested shoreline and concerted efforts by an 
enemy to prevent or deny this from happening.  
MARITIME AD 
Given its declaratory promise of assured ac cess from sea bases established on the global 
commons, the DoN’s position is that the Navy and Marines no longer require forward bases 
ashore. In this sense, the DoN does not face an A2 challenge; instead, its main problem is to 
ensure that enemy forces cannot deny its use of the littoral battlespace through concerted 
maritime AD operations. 
To understand the Navy and Marine approach to the maritime AD challenge, one must 
appreciate the nature of the threats that confront them in wartime and, perhaps counter-
intuitively, their preferred peacetime deployment pattern. Demonstrated or available maritime 
AD systems include over-the-horizon targeting sy stems; long-range strike aircraft; antiship 
cruise missiles (ASCMs) and possibly ballistic missiles; submarines and missile-firing surface 
combatants; swarming fast attack craft; mines; a nd coastal defense artill ery. Finally, integrated 
air defenses seek to prevent naval strike aircraft , aerial delivery platforms, and land attack cruise 
                                                 
19 The forward edge of the sea base would see purpose-b uilt amphibious assault ships and naval gunfire platforms 
such as the DD(X) land attack destroyer. The Marines’ new Advanced Amphibious Assault Vehicle is designed to 
commence its run-in to shore from approximately 25 miles over-the-horizon, and the range requirements for future 
naval gunfire systems assume that the firing ship is lo cated 25 miles offshore. Unarmed and built-to-commercial- 
standard maritime pre-positioning, ships might operate as fa r from shore as 100-200 miles, depending on the threat. 
See George V. Galdosi, “Expeditionary and Amphibious Warfare,” in Globalization and Maritime Power, p. 419. 
For a concise overview of Marine Corps future plans, see Marty Kauchak, “The Marine Corps in 2025: Evolving 
Doctrine and New Weapons Platforms Will Position Corps to Meet Diverse, Future Threats,” Armed Forces Journal 
International, April 2002. 
20 In Afghanistan, with the help of US Air Force tankers, three carrier air wings were able to maintain a continuous 
combat air patrol over US forces ove r 700 miles away from their carrier decks. See statement of Vice Admiral 
Kevin P. Green, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Pl ans, Policies, and Operations, before the Subcommittee on 
Military Readiness and Management Support of the Senate  Armed Services Committee on April 9, 2003, found in 
the Today’s Navy section at www.navy.mil. 

 
 35
missiles from penetrating their airspace. Pote ntial adversaries might emphasize none of these 
systems, some of them, or all of them; pruden tly, the Navy and Marine Corps plan to face and 
overcome them all. 
When considering the challenge of maritime AD operations, it is therefore helpful to adopt the 
Israeli Navy’s threat-based definition of the littor al, which is “[t]he area of the sea adjacent to an 
enemy coast, protected by dete ction and weapon systems based on land, ships, and aircraft 
within the area.” From the Israeli perspective, this definition focuses on what an opponent can do 
to the naval force, not how or deep the naval force exploits and extends its operational reach. 
Note that in this construct “littoral” is not de fined as a generalized geographic location (i.e., 
“shoreward from the continental shelf”), but as an  “increase in threat level as you near the shore 
and become more affected by elements operating under its wing.” Intuitively, this definition is 
far more aligned with potential counter-maritime denial operations  since, as the Israelis point 
out, the nearer a force operates to shore, the be tter and more reliable an enemy’s targeting, the 
more diverse the threats, and the higher the risk to friendly naval forces.21 
This is where the DoN’s peacetime deployment pattern looms large. Since the end of World War 
II, both of the sea Services have emphasized rotational fleet operations that maintain combat 
credible forward presence. That is, the Navy-Mari ne Corps team strives to  keep balanced battle 
fleets forward deployed to show the flag and to  quickly respond to brewing or emerging crises. 
An important additional mission for these forwar d deployed forces is to assert the Navy’s 
continued right to operate on the global common s within 12 miles from  any accessible coast on 
the planet. These freedom-of-navigation exercises are continually conducted. Indeed, some naval 
officers insist that, as a matter of policy, US nava l task groups will always operate in restricted 
bodies of water and close to shore—even, indeed  especially, near potential adversaries—to 
demonstrate the Navy will not be deterred from using any of the world’s accessible water 
space.22 The practical result of both its peacetime deployment patterns and its religious insistence 
of the right of passage on the open seas means that, as a matter of course, the Navy-Marine 
Corps team routinely operates in the heart of poten tial maritime AD networ ks and within easy 
range of their component weapon systems. 
This operational reality has a profound impact on the way the sea Serv ices approach the 
combined A2/AD problem. In power-projection ope rations into distant theaters, the Air Force 
and the Army think first of fighting for and es tablishing theater base access (counter-A2) and 
then penetrating and defeating AD threats to gain operational freedom of action (counter-AD). In 
sharp contrast, the Navy/Marine Corps team th inks first about mainta ining and sustaining 
operations within range of even short-range maritime denial systems so as to assure continual 
access for sea-based forces (simultaneous A2/AD) . As one Navy officer puts it, “This potential 
                                                 
21 Captain Opher Doron, Israeli Navy (Ret.) , “The Israelis Know  Littoral Warfare,” Proceedings, March 2003, pp. 
66-69. 
22 See for example “A Global St rategy Demands a Global Naval Presence,” a section in the Department of the 
Navy’s 1999 Posture Statement: America’s 21st Century Force, which describes the importance of freedom of 
navigation exercises.  

 
 36
condition is unique to the sea Services because of the vast areas of responsibility and broad 
diversity of assigned missions.”23 
This unique DoN approach to the A2/AD cha llenge has had two far-reaching consequences. 
Operationally, it has convinced both Navy and Marine  Corps planners to organize and train their 
forces to operate from “enhanced network sea ba ses” that will “assure access” and provide “the 
nation’s 21st century asymmetric military advantage.” 24 Tactically, it means the Navy worries 
incessantly about surpri se first salvos—preemptiv e enemy strikes against friendly naval vessels 
and sea bases from enemy maritime AD systems th at operate alongside them in the cluttered 
littoral environment: 
…the short operating distances (close to the coast) means that US naval 
forces themselves could be subject to greater detection and repeated 
attacks from land-based missiles and aircraft. 
This is a particular danger for unalerted surface platforms performing a 
forward presence mission. To be an effective deterrent, forward-
deployed forces must maintain access to the theater and provide essential 
services to the joint and combined force commanders. These functions 
require the ability to rapidly assert maritime battlespace dominance in the 
open ocean approaches to the theater and the littoral regions of the 
theater. But they also ex pose a forward-deployed force to a “battle for 
the first salvo” in a no-warning engagement. (emphasis in the original)
25 
This understandable obsession over mitigating the effects of a surprise first salvo translates into a 
requirement to build “combat ready forces that ar e prepared to ‘climb into the ring’ to achieve 
and sustain access before and during crisis” (emphasis added).26  
THE DON TRANSFORMATION PLAN: EXPLOITING ASSURED 
ACCESS 
The operational and tactical consequences of the DoN approach to the A2/AD challenge are 
readily evident in recently published Navy and Marine Corps transformation plans. Although 
primarily a Navy-developed vision, Sea Power 21 is unquestionably the primary conceptual 
driver behind the Department’s transformation roadmap.27 In it, the naval Services identify three 
key concepts that will drive their transformation efforts: 
                                                 
23 Giffin and Tozzi, “‘C’ in LCS Stands for Combat,” p. 89. 
24 Moore, Jr. and Hanlon, Jr., US Marine Corps, “Sea Basing: Operational Independence for a New Century,” p. 85. 
25 Norman Friedman, James S. O’Braskey, and Sam J.  Tangredi, “Globalization and Surface Warfare,” in 
Globalization and Maritime Power, pp. 378-379. 
26 Sea Power 21, p. 36. Although understandable, the obsession over a surprise naval attack—a “Pearl Harbor in the 
littorals”—is not necessarily logical based on empirical evid ence or recent operational history. Bolt-from-the-blue 
attacks are rare, and naval bolt-from-the-blue attacks are rarer still. See H.H. Gaffney, Warning time for US Forces’ 
Responses to Situations (Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analysis, June 2002), pp. 11-16. 
27 Sea Power 21 is the Navy’s strategic vision, developed in coordination with the Marine Corps. Marine Corps 
Strategy 21 and the capstone concept of Expeditionary Maneuver Warfare outline the Marine Corps strategic vision, 

 
 37
• Sea Basing  “projects the sovereignty of the United States globally while providing Joint 
Force Commanders with vital command and control,  fire support, and logi stics from the sea, 
thereby minimizing vulnerable assets ashore.” 28 Sea basing is the means for assuring access 
globally. 
• Sea Shield “develops naval capabilities related to homeland defense, sea control, assured 
access, and projecting defense overland.” Sea sh ield thus includes both those capabilities 
needed to fight for and maintain access and those that provide protection for the homeland 
and joint forces.  
• Sea Strike  is “a broadened concept for naval power  projection that leverages enhanced 
C4ISR, precision, stealth, and endurance to increase operational tempo, reach, and 
effectiveness.” 
These three fundamental concepts are enabled by a fourth, called FORCENet, “the operational 
construct and architectural fram ework for naval warfare in the information age, integrating 
warriors, sensors, command and control, platfo rms, and weapons into a networked, distributed 
combat force.”29 
Deconstructing the transformation plans that devolve from these concepts, five general 
objectives and goals emerge for DoN transformation efforts. The implied priority of these goals 
helps to illuminate the DoN’s concerns over both A2 and AD threats.  
Expand the Navy 
The first and overriding goal of th e DoN’s transformation plan is to  expand the size of the fleet. 
In 1890, Alfred Thayer Mahan argued  that the proper role of the Navy was to build a battle fleet 
and to wield it as a decisive instrument of national power. Since then, the Navy has judged its 
health primarily by the number of ships in its “Total Ship Battle Force” (TSBF). 30 As a result, a 
defense analyst once dubbed the Navy the “ hypochondriac” of the Services because it 
continually measured itself agains t perceived threats, and more often than not found the size of 
its fleet wanting. 31 For most naval officers a bigger fleet is, by definition, better than a smaller 
fleet, and “transformation” plans are thus ofte n judged first and foremost by their success in 
building one. 
                                                                                                                                                             
developed in conjunction in the Navy. See Naval Power 21, pp. 4-5. However, even a cursory reading of the DoN’s 
overall transformation plan makes clear the driving impetus of Sea Power 21. Gordon England, Admiral Vern Clark, 
General James L. Jones, Naval Transformation Roadmap: Power and Access…From the Sea (Washington, DC: 
Department of the Navy, 2002). 
28 Naval Power 21, pp. 5-6.  
29 Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 36.  
30 For a more thorough discussion of TSBF counting procedures, see Colonel Robert O. Work, US Marine Corps 
(Ret.), The Challenge of Maritime Transformation: Is Bigger Better? (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and 
Budgetary Assessments, 2002), pp. 4-7. 
31 C a r l  H .  B ui l d e r ,  The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis (Baltimore & London: 
Johns Hopkins U. Press, 1989), p. 21.  

 
 38
In the early 1980s, at the height of the Cold Wa r, the Navy developed a Maritime Strategy that 
provided the logic and justification behi nd a 600-ship Navy, and it enjoyed unprecedented 
political support in driving toward that goal. In the process, 600 ships became the gold standard 
of measurement for future fleets. Not surpri singly, then, since 1997 the Navy has chafed under 
the force structure guidelines outli ned in the Clinton Administratio n’s QDR. That review called 
for a fleet of “only” 298-310 ships. Immediately af ter the review, supporters of a larger fleet 
began attacking the 300-ship Navy and lobbying for a larger fleet, implying that the smaller fleet 
placed the nation at great risk. 32 By 2000, when pressed by the C ongress to outline the 30-year 
shipbuilding plan to support the QDR fleet, th e DoN included an unasked for section that 
outlined a reduced risk fleet of 360 ships, in cluding 15 carriers, 68 attack submarines, 134 
surface combatants, and 44 amphibious ships.33 Moreover, some Navy officers made it clear that 
even this enlarged fleet provide d only the minimum level of risk  reduction; one active senior 
officer proclaimed, on the record, that the Navy needed “at least” 450 ships.34 
Despite the Navy’s best efforts, the idea of a major fleet expansion was supported by no one 
except serving and retired na val officers and the US shi pbuilding industry. The Clinton 
Administration never wavered from its view that  a 300-ship Navy was sufficient for the nation’s 
national security needs. Moreove r, the incoming Bush Administ ration refused to buy into the 
idea of a major fleet expansion e ither. In a September 2001 letter to the Secretary of the Navy, 
the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics outlined three options 
for the fleet of 2025: a 260-ship fleet, a 316-ship fleet, and a 340-ship fleet. And even the largest 
of the three fleets, while only 20 ships short of th e Navy’s 360-ship reduced risk fleet, was much 
different in kind. For example, it had only 12 carriers instead of the Navy’s desired 15.35 
Then came the Bush Administration’s own QDR followed soon thereafter by new Defense 
Planning Guidance. Since the end of the Cold War, US national military strategy had called for 
armed forces capable of waging nearly simultaneous or overlapping major theater wars in two 
distant theaters. The Navy and the Marine Corps me t this requirement in part, by keeping two or 
three CVBGs and two or three Amphibious Read iness Groups (ARGs) with embarked special 
operations-capable Marine Expeditionary Un its (MEU(SOC)s), ARG/MEU(SOC)s, forward 
deployed. The post-9/11 defense planning guidan ce introduced a new 1-4-2-1 planning construct 
that tasked the Services to defend the homeland, de ter adversaries in four critical regions, defeat 
                                                 
32 See for example, Hunter Ke eter, “30-year Ship Plan Re flects Stress on Current Fleet,” Defense Daily, March 20, 
2000; Christopher Lehman, “For US Navy, Bi gger Not Just Better, It is a Necessity,” Defense News, January 24, 
2000; State Representative Griffen Dalianis, New Hampshire, “Drastic Erosion of US Naval Fleet Has Gone Almost 
Unnoticed,” Manchester Union Leader, February 11, 2000; J.F. Kelly, “A Mighty Fleet in Decline,” San Diego 
Union Tribune, September 19, 2000, and remarks by CNO Admiral Jay L. Johnson cited by Ronald O’Rourke, 
Congressional Research Service, at the Forum on American Sea Power in the 21st Century, June 24, 1999. 
33 Report on Naval Vessel Force Structure Requirements (Washington, DC: DoN, Office of the Secretary, February 
29, 2000). 
34 Remarks of Vice Admiral Daniel Murphy, US Navy, then-Commander of the Navy’s Sixth Fleet, as cited by 
Hunter Keeter, in “Murphy:  Street Fighter Unsound,” Defense Daily, October 15, 1999, p. 5. For a more recent 
articulation on the need for more ships, see Sc ott C. Truver, “Sea Change for the US Navy,” Jane’s International 
Defense Review, April 2003, p. 25. 
35 Norman Polmar, “Transformation, Terrorism, and the QDR,” Proceedings, November 2001, p. 102. 

 
 39
enemy attacks with minimal reinforcements in two of the four, and win decisively (i.e., conduct a 
regime change) in one of the two.36 
Whether intended or not, this new 1-4-2-1 constr uct helped to provide the rationale for a new 
Global Concept of Operations and a much larger  375-ship Navy to implement it. Navy officers 
appear increasingly confident that, in Sea Power 21 and the Global CONOPS, they now have the 
argument to support and foster the “transforma tion” from a smaller fleet to a larger one. 37 
Interestingly, however, there is  no explicit tie be tween the larger Glob al CONOPS fleet and 
assertions of growing A2/AD threats. 
Restructure the Navy and Marine Corps for Sustained Operations on 
and from the Sea 
The next priority of DoN transformation plans is the development of enhanced, networked sea 
basing, which “serves as the foundation from which offensive and defensive fires are projected—
making Sea Strike and Sea Shield realities.”38 One Marine general put it this way: 
If we get this concept right, it might well be one of the most 
transformational things the Department of Defense, and our naval forces, 
will ever do. We will, most importantly, offer our nation a truly quantum 
leap over what we have today.39 
Such a statement might be mistaken for simply  an overly-optimistic Marine interpretation of 
fleet priorities, but it evidently represents the view of the highe st Navy leadership as well. The 
current Chief of Naval Operations (CNO), Admiral Vern Clark, recently wrote that: 
Beyond its operational impact, the Sea Basing concept provides a 
valuable tool for prioritizing naval programs . This means transforming 
shore-based capabilities to sea-based systems whenever practical, and 
improving the reach, persistence, and sustainability of systems that are 
already afloat” (emphasis added).
40 
Physically, the Navy and Marines describe the sea base as bei ng made up of nuclear-powered 
aircraft carriers, multi-mission surface combatan ts, amphibious warfare ships, submarines, 
combat logistics force (CLF) ships, and maritime prepositioning force (MPF) ships. 41 The latter 
is significant. In the past, the MPF ships that de livered Marine equipment to ports to enable the 
                                                 
36 Vice Admiral Mike Mullen, US Navy, “Global Concept of Operations,” Proceedings, April 2003, p. 66.  
37 Two analysts recently wrote “…the 21 st–century Navy that evolves from Sea Power 21  may become the new 
global military model for the United States.” See Robbin Laird and Sco tt C. Truver, “Sea-Based Forces and 
Transformation,” Sea Power, December 2002, pp. 37-40.  
38 Clark, Sea Power 21,  p. 36. For the definitive articulation of sea basing, see Moore, Jr. and Hanlon, Jr., US 
Marine Corps, “Sea Basing: Operational Independence for a New Century.”  
39 Lieutenant General E.H. Hanlon, US Marine Corps, as cited by Colonels Art Corbett and Vince Goulding, US 
Marine Corps (Ret.), in “Sea Basing: What’s New?” Proceedings, November 2002, p. 34. 
40 Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 37. 
41 Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 37. 

 
 40
land-based assembly of their forces were not counted in the official TSBF count—they were 
instead counted in a separate sealift category.  The planned 375-ship fleet includes six new 
Maritime Prepositioning Force (Future) ships 42 that “do not have to enter port to offload.” 43 
Their inclusion in the TSBF and in new Mari time Prepositioning Groups, which also include 
CLF ships and high-speed logistical support vessels and craft, means that Navy planners now see 
these new ships as operational fleet assets. 44 Interestingly, however, while the CLF ships and 
new prepositioning ships count toward the 375-ship  fleet goal, new high speed support vessels 
(HSVs) do not.45 
In any event, the enhanced networked sea base defines the DoN’s sustained access fleet that aims 
to achieve three important DoN transformational sub-goals: 
• to “eliminate the requirement for ports and ai rfields within the Joint Operating Area (JOA) 
that traditionally ar e the key ingredients of recepti on, staging, onward movement, and 
integration, but in the future will be vulnerable to being exploited by adaptive enemies;”46  
• to accelerate expeditionary deployment and employment timelines by pre-positioning heavy 
equipment forward in theaters, and by conducting at sea arrival and assembly of Marine 
forces, selective offload of units and equipment, as well as their post-operation reconstitution 
at sea;47 and  
• to increase joint force security and operational agility.48 
In other words, the DoN implicitly asserts that th e A2 threat is more pressing for land bases than 
sea bases. 
Reorganize the Fleet to Provide Increased Global Strike Coverage 
The next stated priority in DoN transformation plans is embodied in Sea Strike, emerging Marine 
Corps concepts about deep maneuver from a se a base and the Global CONOPS. The goal of Sea 
Strike is to amplify effects- based striking power by increasing the number of independent naval 
strike groups forward deployed at any given time and by givi ng these groups the ability to 
employ fires, maneuver, and special operation s forces in high tem po, 24/7 operations with 
greatly extended reach. As the CNO put it: 
                                                 
42 Briefing slide in “Sea Power 21: Projecting Decisive Jo int Capabilities,” a PowerPoint briefing provided by the 
Navy Staff. 
43Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 37. 
44 Truver, “Sea Change for US Navy,” p. 27. 
45 For a discussion on HSVs, see Admiral Robert J. Natter, US Navy, “Meeting the Need for Speed,” Proceedings, 
June 2002, pp. 65-67. 
46 Corbett and Goulding, “Sea Basing: What’s New?” p. 34. 
47 Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 37; Corbett and Goulding, “Sea Basing: What’s New?” p. 34-36. 
48Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 36. 

 
 41
Sea Strike is what we are all about. It is first and most importantly about 
being on the offense. It is the u ltimate reason we remain forward 
deployed: to impose the will of our nation on our enemies when all else 
has failed.49 
The Navy of today has 19 independent stri ke groups, including 12 CVBGs—consisting 
nominally of one nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, six large multi-mission surface combatants 
(each capable of firing Tomahawk land attack cr uise missiles), and two attack submarines—and 
seven Surface Action Groups (SAGs), consisti ng nominally of three multi-mission surface 
combatants with heavy batteries of Tomahawk missiles. In addition, the fleet employs 12 ARGs, 
consisting of a big deck amphibious ship capable of carrying a large mixe d air wing of rotary 
wing and vertical/short take-off fi ghters, and two additional amphibious ships. Together, these 
three amphibious ships can carry a MEU(SOC). Th e Navy and Marines operate a fleet rotational 
pattern so that two to three CVBGs and two to  three ARG/MEU(SOC)s are forward deployed at 
any given moment. Importantly, in the past the CVBGs and ARG/MEU(SOC)s traditionally 
operated independently, except when concentrating during time of crisis. ARG/MEU(SOC)s thus 
routinely sailed unescorted.
50 
As outlined in Sea Power 21’s new Global CONOPS, the Navy intends to increase the number of 
available strike groups primarily through a more efficient allocation of fleet capabilities, made 
possible by the diminution of global naval threats.  Faced with the prospect of global operations 
against the capable Soviet Navy, Cold War naval pl anners called for each car rier to be escorted 
by six multi-mission surface combatants, (four with the AEGIS combat system) and two 
submarines in “direct support. 51 With the disappearance of th e Soviet Navy, and with no open-
ocean threats to carriers eviden t on the horizon, naval planners c oncluded that they could reduce 
the number of carrier escorts to three combatants  (all with AEGIS) and one submarine without 
appreciably raising the risk to the carriers. By assigning the “extra” three surface combatants and 
submarine to operate with the heretofore unesc orted ARG/MEU, the Navy created two new task 
groups for the price of one: a “strike-heavy” Carrier Strike Group (CSG), consisting of one 
carrier, three multi-mission combatants, and an attack submarine; and a “maneuver-heavy” 
Expeditionary Strike Group (ESG), consisting of  three amphibious ships carrying a MEU(SOC), 
three combatants, and an attack submarine. 52 Since the multi-mission combatants and submarine 
assigned to the new ESG can carry land attack mi ssiles and, in the case of the combatants, long-
range naval guns, both of the new task groups will be strike capable. 53 Without changing its 
                                                 
49 Vice Admiral Cutler Dawson, US Navy, and Vice Admira l John Nathman, US Navy, “Sea Strike: Projecting 
Persistent, Responsive, and Precise Power,” Proceedings, December 2002, p. 55. 
50Clark, Sea Power 21, pp. 38-39; Mullen, “Global Concept of Operations,” p. 66; Truver, “Sea Change for the 
Navy,” pp. 26-27. 
51 Norman Polmar, Ships and Aircraft of the US Fleet, 14th edition (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987), 
pp. 46, 110. 
52 Captain Kendall King and Commander Tom Holmes, US Navy (Ret.), “Expeditionary Strike Group!” 
Proceedings, March 2003, pp. 90-93.  
53 The distinction between “strike-heavy” and “maneuve r heavy” task groups mirrors the difference between 
armored and mechanized combat teams.  Armored combat teams have two tank units and one mechanized infantry 
unit while mechanized combat teams have two mechani zed and one armored unit; both are capable of fire and 
maneuver. 

 
 42
preferred fleet peacetime rotational deployment pattern, the Sea Power 21 Navy will thus be able 
to keep four to six independent strike groups  with organic air capabilities forward deployed, 
increasing immediately available theater strike coverage by 100 percent,  with no increase in size 
to the sustained access fleet.54 
In addition, the Sea Power 21  Navy seeks to increase the number  of SAGs from seven to nine. 
Although these SAGs would retain some residual strike capability and w ould continue to be 
counted as a strike group, over tim e they would be focused primarily on the anti-tactical ballistic 
missile threat (to be discussed below). Today th e SAGs are generally us ed to cover gaps in 
Persian Gulf carrier strike coverage, meaning only one is normally forw ard deployed at any 
given time. In the future, the Navy evidently w ould aim to keep two independent SAGs forward 
to augment CSG and ESG strike coverage. Finall y, the Navy will introduce four covert/special 
operations strike groups, each built around a modifi ed Trident guided missile submarine (SSGN) 
capable of carrying up to 154 Tomahawk land attack missiles and 102 special operations 
personnel. Supported by dual crews, two of the f our-boat SSGN force will be able to be forward 
deployed at any given time. In other words, fo r the modest increase of approximately 10 
vessels—six combatants (two SAGs) and four SSGNs— the sustained access fleet would gain 
three additional forward deployed strike groups.55  
In total, the Sea Power 21 sustained access fleet will nearly doubl e the pool of strike groups (37 
as compared to 19), and increase the number of forward deployed and readily available strike 
groups from 3-4 to 8-10. 56 In addition to expanding global stri ke coverage by dispersing strike 
assets among more critical regions at a time,  Sea Strike also seeks to expand the Navy’s 
operational reach and speed of strike respons e. New long-range, unma nned ISR assets will 
enable the groups to find and pr osecute targets independently; 57 weapons with increasingly 
longer range such as the 800-mile range JSF and the 1,350-mile range Tactical Tomahawk will 
expand inland reach; and new means of non-kineti c attack (e.g., information operations) will 
extend the range of effects further still. 58 Moreover, the strike power of the fleet will be fully 
integrated into a larger Joint Fires Network that  aims to compress the target engagement cycle 
from hours to minutes, thus improving performa nce against time-sensitive or time-critical 
targets.59  
                                                 
54 See Mullen, “Global Concept of Operations,” p. 67; Truver, “Sea Change for the Navy,” pp. 26-27. As this 
document is being published, there are indications that the Navy is contemplating a change to its rotational 
deployment pattern, emphasizing fleet operations designed to facilitate the surge of six CSGs and ESGs to a crisis 
point. Vice Admiral Kevin P. Green spoke to such a change in his April 9, 2003 testimony before the Subcommittee 
on Military Readiness and Management Support of the Sena te Armed Services Committee. It is not yet clear how 
this will affect the number of forward deployed naval strike groups. 
55 Ibid., p. 67. 
56 Mullen, “Global Concept of Operations,” p. 67. 
57 Robert Wall, “Navy Sets Course for Endurance UAV,” Aviation Week &Space Technology, December 23, 2002. 
“NG: UCAV-N Design Could Fulfill USAF Requirements,” Aerospace Daily, April 17, 2003. 
58 See Dawson and Nathman, “Sea Strike: Projecting Persis tent, Responsive, and Precise Power,” pp. 54-58, and 
Moore, Jr., and Hanlon, Jr., “Sea Basing: Operational Independence for a New Century,” pp. 81 and 83-84. 
59 Sandra I. Erwin, “Navy. Air Force Team Up in ‘Joint Fires Network’,” National Defense, March 2003, pp. 22-23. 

 
 43
For their part, the Marines plan  to conduct inland combined arms  maneuvers from the sea base 
directly against operational (campa ign-level) targets to ranges of approximately 200 miles, and 
raids to distances far beyond. As outlined in thei r concepts of Operational Maneuver From the 
Sea (OMFTS) and Ship-to-Objec tive Maneuver (STOM), and as em bodied in such systems as 
the V-22 tiltrotor aircraft, Adva nced Amphibious Assault Vehicle,  and the Landi ng Craft, Air 
Cushion (LCAC), the Marines seek to extend their operational reach in the same matter as Navy 
strike planners, by conducting high tempo, 24/7 maneuver operations  deep in an enemy’s rear, 
logistically supported from the sea base. The Marines also seek to fu lly sea-base their tactical air 
forces, both through integrating mo re squadrons into carrier air wings, and by adding additional 
sea-based aviation platforms to the sustained access fleet.60 
In summary, the Global CONOPS is better seen as  articulating a global, naval-strike network 
based on assumed (assured) access rather than a reaction to growing naval A2 threats. 
Embrace an Expanded Theater Air and Missile Defense Mission 
The “most dramatic advancement” 61 promised by Sea Shield is fully netted, long-range theater 
air and missile defense, which “for the first tim e [has] the potential to extend naval defensive 
firepower beyond the task force.”62 
Naval planners hope that updated versions of  the AEGIS combat system, the new Volume 
Search Radar (VSR) and Multi-function Radar (M FR), the E-2C Hawkeye Radar Modernization 
Program (RMP), and the new Active Electronically  Scanned Array (AESA) radar for the F/A-18 
E/F and, later, JSF—all netted by means of the new cooperative engagement capability (CEC) 
and Link-16—will allow the formulation of a single integrated air picture (SIAP), itself enhanced 
by data collected by interoperable joint sensors, when available. Moreover, planners expect these 
new netted systems will form an integrated cohesive fire control network now called the Navy 
Integrated Fire Control-Counter-A ir (NIFC-CA). If the hopes of the planners are met, the SIAP 
will greatly extend a naval task group’s sensor reach, both at sea and over land. When combined 
with high fidelity NIFC-CA tracking and engagement data, and new defensive weapons such as 
updated models of the AMRAAM and extended ra nge SAMs, future naval task groups thus 
might be able to conduct multiple engagements against attacking air and cruise missile, 
beginning at long range, to minimize the number of leakers that the task force terminal defenses 
must deal with.
63 
In this regard, the Navy rece ntly introduced a new SAM progr am called the Extended Range 
Active Missile (ERAM). ERAM is to combine the active seeker from the AMRAAM with a 
                                                 
60 Moore, Jr., and Hanlon, Jr., “Sea Basing: Operational Independence for a New Century,” p. 81; Corbett and 
Goulding, “Sea Basing: What’s New?” p. 35; and Galdosi, “Expeditionary and Amphibious Warfare,” in 
Globalization and Maritime Power. 
61Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 36. 
62 Vice Admiral Mike Bucchi, US Navy, and Vice Admiral Mike Mullen, US Navy, “Sea Shield: Projecting Global 
Defensive Assurance,” Proceedings, November 2002, p. 56. 
63 Bucchi and Mullen, “Sea Shield: Projecting Global Defensive Assurance,” pp. 57-58. 

 
 44
long-range version of the ubiquito us Standard SAM, to allow interceptions of air and missile 
threats at ranges to 200 nm. 64 Being able to conduct such extended-range air and missile 
intercepts would serve two important purposes. First, it would improve the sustained access 
fleet’s ability to defend itsel f from over-the-horizon air and AS CM attacks as it approached a 
hostile shore. More importantly, however, as the sea base established its presence in its preferred 
operating area in the open waters 25 miles from the coastline and seaward, extended-range air 
and missile intercepts would allow the base to protect itself—as well as joint land bases and 
littoral penetration points—from air and missile  attacks launched from deep in the enemy’s 
territory.
65  
Sea Shield also includes new naval defenses ag ainst ballistic missiles. The Navy is pursuing a 
“family of boost phase, mid-course, and terminal defense as part of an overall joint force ballistic 
missile defense system.” These new sea-based, an ti-ballistic missile capabilities would not only 
protect the sustained access force from future ballis tic missile attack, but allied forces and joint 
bases in a JOA and possibly the US homeland as well. As was said, the Navy plans to increase 
the number of deployable SAGs from seven to ni ne, and to gradually fo cus these SAGs and the 
multi-mission combatants in them on the ballistic missile defense mission.66 
Together, extended theater air and cruise and ballistic missile defe nses are expected to “protect 
the deployment of US forces into forward theaters” and “enhance crisis control, protect allies and 
joint forces ashore, and set th e stage for combat victory.” 67 The fact that DoN officials cite the 
projection of defensive power from the sea base  as “the most drama tic” contribution of Sea 
Shield indicates that the DoN’s concern over emerging AD threats is relatively low.  
Create a New Special Purpose Counter-Maritime AD Force  
The final goal of the DoN transf ormation plans is to create a special purpose counter-AD force 
“…capable of defeating the conve ntional and asymmetric access-deni al threat in the littoral.” 68 
The means to do this will be new expeditionary sensor grids, including subsea arrays such as the 
advanced deployable system (ADS), which will be used to locate and track enemy AD threats 
during periods of rising tension, and a large clas s of new focused-mission combatants called the 
Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) designed to prosecute the threats.
69 
                                                 
64 From an article by Andrew Koch, “US Navy Proceeds with Defense Missile Initiative, ” in an unknown 2003 
edition of Jane’s Defense Weekly. 
65 Ibid., pp. 57-58. 
66 Ibid., p. 58. See also Norman Polmar and Stephen Kelle r, “A Credible and Cost-Effective Contribution: Theater 
Ballistic Missile Defense ‘…From the Sea,’” Sea Power, September 2000, pp. 32- 35. For potential Navy 
contributions to national missile defense, see John G. Morgan, Jr., “A Triangle of Persuasion,” Sea Power, April 
2001. 
67Clark, Sea Power 21, p. 36. 
68 Littoral Combat Ship Flight 0: Preliminary De sign Interim Requirements Document (PD-IRD), Serial Number 
N763F-S03-026, February 10, 2003, p. 2. 
69 Bucchi and Mullen, “Sea Shie ld: Projecting Global Defensive Assurance, ” p. 36; and Friedman, O’Braskey, and 
Tangredi, “Globalization and Surface Warfare,” in Globalization and Maritime Power,  p. 378. See also 

 
 45
The LCS is part of the Navy’s new family of ne xt-generation combatants and a key program in 
its counter-AD strategy and plans. The ship is designed to confront three long-standing maritime 
AD threats—submarines operating close to the coast, small fast attack craft armed with missiles, 
and mines. In the words of one senior Navy official, “[w]e want to serve that niche market with a 
specific class of ships to respond to those threats.”70 Importantly, however, the LCS will only be 
able to confront one threat at a time. That is, ev ery LCS will be able to re-configure itself in port 
or perhaps at the sea base to  carry one of three special-pur pose mission modules designed to 
combat one of the three threats.  As a result, for counter-AD opera tions against a highly capable 
opponent, the LCS is specifically designed to work as  part of a larger networked force—in close 
proximity to larger multi-mission combatants, and as part of LCS “divisions” made up of 3-5 
ships with complementary mission modules.
71 
While the LCS will be smaller than the 9,000 to 10,000-ton multi-mission destroyers along side 
of which it will operate, it likely will be a bigger vessel than many expect. Indeed, naval planners 
are less concerned with the ship’s final displacement—the typical metric used to compare size of 
ships—than with its navigational draft, speed, crew size, and capability. As befits a ship designed 
to operate close to shore, the requirements document for the LCS specifies the desired and 
maximum draft to be 10 and 20 feet, respect ively (as compared to a modern multi-mission 
destroyer that has a draft of 31 feet). The sh ip is required to achieve high speeds—between 40 
and 50 knots (as compared to 30 knot speeds of larger combatants). Maximum crew 
accommodations, including core crew members and mission module detachments, are not to 
exceed 75 personnel (as compared to crews of 350-400 on existing guided missile destroyers and 
cruisers). Capability-wise, each LCS must be able to embark and hanger one medium MH-60R/S 
helicopter, and its mission modules are to em phasize unmanned systems, including UAVs for 
surveillance, unmanned surface vehicles for anti- boat defense and surveillance, and unmanned 
mine countermeasure systems. They will carry no land attack missiles or guns, thereby adding no 
combat punch ashore.72  
In a networked battle fleet, the LCS will comple ment the multi-mission su rface combatants that 
make up the sustained access or sea-based force in three ways: 
• First, they will be designed to  operate in the dead zone of adversary AD networks that 
extends from the shoreline to a distance of some 25-50 miles to sea—a sea space 
characterized by shallow water. “Speed, shallo w draft and maneuverability will allow the 
                                                                                                                                                             
“Expeditionary Pervasive Sensing,” in the concepts s ection on the Naval Warfare Development Command website; 
www.nwdc.navy.mil. 
70 “Focused Mission Ship Studies to Help Chart Course for Future Navy,” story number NNS021206-14 on Navy 
Newsstand, at www.news.navy.mil., released December 6, 2002. 
71 Littoral Combat Ship Flight 0: Preliminary Design Interim Requirements Document (PD-IRD),  and Littoral 
Combat Ship Concept of Operations, PowerPoint briefing prepared by Navy Staff, 2003. 
72 Littoral Combat Ship Flight 0: Preliminary Desi gn Interim Requirements Document (PD-IRD), p. 4. Although 
often compared to guided missile destroyers, the LCS should more properly be seen as a replacement for the guided 
missile frigate (FFG) force. The current FFG, the Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigate, has a navigational draft of 25 
feet, a speed of up to 36 knots, and a crew of approximately 215. It carries  two MH-60 class helicopters. Norman 
Polmar, Ships and Aircraft of the US Fleet, 16th edition (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1997), pp. 139-41.  

 
 46
agile LCS freedom of action to operate near the shore, where larger, deeper draft ships would 
be constrained severely.”73 
• Second, the ships will shoulder the burden of in-shore counter-AD tasks and screen the 
sustained access fleet from maritime threats, thereby allowing the larger multi-mission 
combatants to concentrate on Sea Strike and Sea Shield tasks: “As a focused mission ship, 
the LCS will enable unimpeded accomplishment of other missions such as ballistic missile 
defense or precision strike by multi-mission surface combatants.”
74 
• Third, their small size, small crew, and mode st mission capabilities will allow the Navy to 
establish a low-risk na val presence in high-risk areas.  While one noted naval analyst 
conceded that a LCS would be vulnerable in th e coastal zone, he asked: “Would you rather 
have a destroyer or cruiser in there with 300-plus crew members and a billion-dollar price 
tag?”75  
Given the DoN’s preferred deployment pattern of continuous operations within range of potential 
adversary maritime AD systems, this third factor is especially important. In essence, the LCS is a 
small crewed combatant designed to conduct immediate suppression of enemy littoral defenses , 
while operating inside the very teeth of an enemy’s maritime AD network, at ranges certain to 
increase the likelihood of their detection and engagement, and unde r circumstances that cede to 
the enemy the advantage of firing first. Since the chances are poor that a small combatant like the 
LCS would survive any type of di rect hit, “crew survivability” is one of its priority design 
objectives, and its mission life will depend in pa rt on “speed, agility, signature management, and 
a core self-defense weapon suite.”
76 However, “the LCS—more than any other Navy surface 
combatant—will require dominant battlespace awaren ess (DBA)” to survive; in other words, 
“full knowledge” of the location of enemy threats, so that they can be avoided.77  
Although the LCS is a focused-mission ship, its  initial requirements document and CONOPS 
makes clear that the Navy will employ it as a multi-mission platform. Although first designed to 
confront the maritime AD threat, the LCS will also accompany CSGs and ESGs to provide 
“vanguard scouting, pouncing support” or execute ot her direct-support task force tasks; operate 
independently in low threat ar eas to support special operations, supply forces, provide medical 
assistance and evacuate civilians; or conduct di vision-size maritime intercept operations or 
intelligence collection during periods of heightened tension.78 
                                                 
73 Rear Admiral Don Loren, US Navy, “Littoral Co mbat Ships Will Help US Forces Gain Access,” National 
Defense, December 2002, p. 21. 
74 Littoral Combat Ship Flight 0: Preliminary Design Interim Requirements Document (PD-IRD), p. 3. 
75 Otto Kreisher, “New Small Navy Ships Debated,” San Diego Union-Tribune, February 12, 2003. 
76 Littoral Combat Ship Flight 0: Preliminary Design Interim Requirements Document (PD-IRD), pp. 9-10. 
77 Giffin and Tozzi, “‘C’ in LCS Stands for Combat,” p. 89.  
78 Littoral Combat Ship Concept of Operations, PowerPoint briefing prepared by Navy Staff, 2003. 

 
 47
These additional missions help make clear that the driving force behind the proposed ship is less 
a concern over the maritime AD threat per se , and more to support the DoN’s first 
transformation objective: to increase the size of the fleet. As naval analyst Norman Friedman put 
it: 
…before the 4-2-1 there had been barely enough [surface combatants] 
for the existing carrier battle groups. There was, however, a new surface 
combatant program at an embryonic stage: LCS. The new strategy 
converted LCS from a proposal for perhaps a squadron of ships into a 
desperate requirement for about 50-60 new surface combatants. It also 
completely changed the nature of the LCS, because for some purposes it 
would have very little in common with the earlier LCS formulation.
79 
Given a choice, it seems apparent that the Na vy would prefer additional multi-mission ships. 
Congressman Gene Taylor (D-MS), whose distri ct includes the Northrop-Grumman shipyard in 
Pascagoula, probably accurately portrayed the Navy’s view when he said, “In an ideal world, I’d 
like a bunch of destroyers. But this isn’t an ideal  world.” Taylor, who agrees with naval planners 
that the 300-ship Navy is too small for its worldwid e responsibilities, thinks the smaller and less 
expensive LCS is the only way to expand th e fleet from its current size to 375 ships. 80 This 
sentiment is echoed by Ron O’Rourke, naval anal yst for the Congressional Research Service, 
who said “I think it’s fair to say…the LCS repr esents the most important program to move the 
Navy from 310 to 375 ships.”81 
To drive the Navy toward its TSBF goal of 3 75 ships, the LCS class will be a large one, 
numbering between 30-60 ships; the act ual class planning number for the Sea Power 21 Navy is 
for 56 vessels. This would make the LCS the larg est class of ships in the fleet and fully 15 
percent of the TSBF. This makes the cost of the ships an important design factor. As a result, the 
maximum allowable costs for the core hull and mission packages are $220 and $180 million, 
respectively. The intent is to be able to purchase three of the ships for the same cost as a single 
multi-mission, guided missile destroyer. 82 Of course, low cost is also attractive given the high 
risk mission of the vessel. 
Recently, a new argument in support of the LCS has emerged: that this small combatant program 
will “save” the US shipbuilding industry: 
There is more at stake for the Navy th an just the specific characteristics 
of the LCS. Unless the Navy can get its shipbuilding act together fast, it 
will lose control of shipbuilding to outside agencies. 
                                                 
79 Norman Friedman, “New Roles for Littoral Combat Ships,” Proceedings, January 2003, p. 5. 
80 Pat Towell, CQ Staff, “Design for Agile Combat Ships Reflects New Face of Sea War,” Congressional Quarterly 
Weekly, March 1, 2003. 
81 Kreisher, “New Small Navy Ships Debated.” 
82 Freidman, “New Roles for Littoral Combat Ships,” an d Towell, “Design for Agile Combat Ships Reflects New 
Face of Sea War.” Planning number for the 375-ship Navy was provided to th e author by N81, the staff section on 
the CNO’s staff responsible for the Global CONOPS. 

 
 48
The problem starts with the Navy’s ri gid approach to shipbuilding. The 
recent debacles of the Arsenal Ship and DD-21 programs highlighted the 
Navy’s inability to bring in a new start in surface combatants…The 
result is a shipbuilding account that is  unstable, unrealistic, and, from an 
industry standpoint, frustratingly unpredictable. All of this has been to 
the detriment of the nation’s highly skilled shipbuilding industrial base. 
Simply  stated, the law of evolution applies: use it or lose it. Unless the 
Navy builds more combatants, those who build them will go out of 
business.
83 
Note that this argument thus both supports and reinforces the first goal of DoN transformation 
plans—to build more combatants to get a larger fleet.  
PATH RISK 
What is not to like about the DoN’s new tran sformation path? Together, the transformation 
vision and its associated concepts  and detailed plans outline orga nizational, technological, and 
operational innovations. And the associat ed Global CONOPS and the 375-ship Sea Power 21 
Navy make the most compelling and comprehensiv e story since the Mari time Strategy and its 
600-ship Navy. However, the explicit and implic it goals outlined in the DoN’s transformation 
plans make clear that the DoN worries less ab out A2 and AD threats—it clearly sees these 
threats as more pressing for land-based groun d and air forces—and mo re about crafting far-
reaching plans that exploit assured access from  the global commons. DoN transformation plans 
might thus be seen as a bid to assert Departmental preeminence in this new joint expeditionary 
era.84  
By so doing, DoN transformation plans are revealed as a politically unconstrained solution. First, 
the DoN seeks to maintain the same general su stained access fleet called for in the 1997 QDR. 
Look at it this way:  one year before Sea Power 21  was unveiled, the sustained access fleet 
included four command ships, 12 carriers, 55 att ack submarines, 84 guided missile cruisers and 
destroyers, 32 land attack destroyers, and 36 amphi bious ships, and 29 CLF ships for a total of 
248 ships, all types. The “transformed” sustai ned access fleet includes 12 carriers, 55 attack 
submarines, four SSGNs, 88 guided missile cruisers and destroyers, 24 land attack destroyers, 37 
amphibious ships, six new maritime pre-pos itioning ships designed to support sea-based 
operations (including command elemen ts), and 42 CLF ships for a to tal of 268 ships, all types. 
Moreover, as will be discussed in the section on technological and fiscal risk, all of the next-
generation sustained access force ships are more capable—and expensive—than the ones they 
                                                 
83 Vice Admiral Henry C. Mustin, US Navy (Ret.), and Vice  Admiral Douglas J. Katz, US Navy (Ret.), “All Ahead 
Flank for LCS,” Proceedings, February 2003, p. 31. 
84 Indeed the subtitle of Sea Power 21 is “Projecting Decisive Joint Capabilities” (emphasis added). This pointed 
emphasis on joint contributions represents a real sea change for Navy, traditionally the most independent of the 
services. 

 
 49
will replace. Just achie ving and maintaining the “improved” 268-ship sustained access force 
would be a significant challenge.85  
On top of the improved sustained access fleet, a nd unchanged mine countermeasures and fleet 
support forces, the DoN plan adds the new counter-maritime AD force of 56 LCSs, employing 
an unknown number of special  purpose mission modules. 86 This new transformation element is 
thus “above the line” in relati on to previous budget plans. Mo reover, LCS comb at capabilities 
are strictly additive to the sustained acces s fleet’s improving combat capabilities, not a 
replacement in kind. For example, the new la nd attack, multi-mission destroyer, DD(X), will 
itself carry new radars and an integrated undersea combat system specifically designed for 
littoral operations. Presumably the follow-on CG(X ), built on the same hull, will carry similar 
systems. Although the Navy is loath to use the word “expendable” in an operational sense, its 
ship-building plans make clear that the loss of th e LCS force would not, in and of itself, threaten 
the viability of the fleet’s capability to project power.
 87  
When combining all the desired new platforms, the DoN’s chosen transformation path requires a 
17-25 percent fleet expansion, depending on th e base fleet number used for comparison. 88 
Proportionately, this represents an  expansion equivalent to the ma jor fleet build up in the 1980s 
in the face of a global naval challenge by the S oviet Navy—in a world devoid of any traditional 
naval opponents, and with only embryonic mar itime AD networks. Of the three military 
Departments, only the DoN is arguing for such a large increase in its fighting strength. Given the 
amount of time it takes to develop and build ship s, and even though the planned increase to 375 
ships is largely driven by “relatively” inexpensive $400 million combatants and CLF ships, such 
an ambitious fleet expansion will only be po ssible with stable support over many succeeding 
administrations. This appears unlikely, since it is by no means apparent that DoN leaders have 
won support from even this one; Bush Administrati on officials have yet to explicitly endorse the 
idea of a major fleet expansion. 89 And as will be discussed shortly, even if this and future 
administrations generally endorse th e idea of a larger fleet, it is  by no means apparent that they 
will be able to afford the fleet proposed in the current DoN transformation plans. 
The political (and fiscal) support for the plan th erefore appears anything but solid, threatening 
the entire chosen path. What is the DoN’s hedging strategy if its bid for a larger fleet fails? What 
component will be the first to go if support from the secretary of defense and the White House is 
less than forthcoming? How will the DoN adju st the Global CONOPS to account for a 325-ship 
                                                 
85 Comparisons between the fleet outlined in the Navy’s 30- year shipbuilding plan outlined in the previously cited 
Report on Naval Vessel Force Structure Requirements and the 375-ship fleet outlined in the Navy Staff’s Sea Power 
21 PowerPoint slide briefing. 
86 The Navy has not yet made clear how many or what ty pe of mission modules will be procured to support the 
Navy. Presumably there will be more than 56, but less than 168 (three for every LCS). 
87 See remarks attributed to Vice Admiral Timothy LaFleur in Kreisher, “New Small Navy Ships Debated.” 
88 The Secretary of the Navy uses the upper end of the range—25 percent. See Naval Power 21, p. 3. 
89 Ronald O’Rourke, Navy DD(X) Future Surface Combatant Program: Background and Issues for Congress 
(Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, updated January 27th, 2003), p. CRS-2. 

 
 50
Navy? Because the plan is so closely tied to a fleet expansion, and make s no clear prioritization 
of fleet combat capabilities, the answers to these questions are unclear.  
One reason why this is so is that the primary m easures of merit that naval officers use to judge 
the capability of the fleet are the number of ships in the TSBF and the level of combat credible 
forward presence that it can sustain. With regard  to the former, traditional fleet counting criteria 
means that a combat support ship with useful combat capabilities would not contribute to an 
expansion in fleet size; as wa s noted, HSVs do not count toward  the Navy’s 375-ship goal, even 
though they are clearly capable of supporting both helicopter and unmanned vehicle operations.90 
Nuclear-powered carriers and submarines are extr aordinarily expensive (costs of over $6 billion 
and $2 billion, respectively). Modern multi-mission combatants now cost over $1 billion dollars; 
indeed, modern amphibious ships, li ke the LPD-17, approach those costs. 91 Therefore, barring a 
change to fleet counting conventions or a new way to judge the capability of the fleet beyond 
simply counting ship hulls, the only way to pursu e a 375-ship Navy is to build large numbers of 
relatively inexpensive, small crewed combatants. 
It is not yet clear that a 375-ship Navy with 56 small crewed LCSs is the transformation path best 
taken. As will be discussed in the next section, the exact character of the future naval 
competition or emerging maritime AD threats is not yet clear. At the same time, the current 305-
ship Navy is the best fleet ever put to sea by this, or any other navy. Indeed, Navy officers 
acknowledge that the capabilities of the current 300-ship fleet are far superior to those of the 
600-ship Navy that sailed little over a decade ago.
92 Such sentiments suggest two things. First, 
that simply counting fleet hulls is no longer the best means to determine the health or combat 
power of the battle fleet. And s econd, that newer, different, and more applicable fleet combat 
metrics need to be developed that better illuminate the Navy’s proper transformation pathway.  
For example, imagine one new metric called “und ersea battlespace characterization,” defined as 
the time required to search and characterize the u nderwater battlespace in littoral waters (defined 
by a certain volume of water). It seems likely that unmanned underwater systems would do well 
against this metric—and probabl y better than manned combatants. 93 If this presumption was 
validated, then a debate could occur over th e best way to employ the unmanned systems: 
Autonomously, from long range? Directed, from elements of th e sustained access fleet? Or 
operated from small, manned combatants at shor t range? This simple example helps demonstrate 
why the lack of such expanded metrics makes it difficult to determine if the DoN’s chosen 
                                                 
90 See for example Admiral Robert J. Natter,  US Navy, “Meeting the Need for Speed,” Proceedings, June 2002, pp. 
65-67. 
91 Ms. Gaye Evans, “FY 2004 President’s Budget Overview,” PowerPoint briefing by the Director, Investment and 
Development Division, Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller), 
March 7, 2003. 
92 For example, see Vice Admiral Dennis McGinn, in test imony before the House Armed Services Committee, from 
transcript prepared by the Department of the Navy, Office of Legislative Affairs, February, 2001. 
93 See for example Mark Hewish and Joris Jannssen Lok, “Silent Sentinels Patrol the Depths,” Jane’s International 
Defense Review, April 2003, pp. 49-54. 

 
 51
pathway is the best alternative because, in many ways, the primary measure of merit now used to 
judge it—the TSBF count—is increasingly irrelevant.94  
This point is driven home when considering th e second long-standing metric for determining 
fleet combat capability: the leve l of combat credible global pr esence the TSBF can sustain. By 
simply reorganizing fleet assets into new naval task groupings like the CSG and ESG, increasing 
missile defense SAGs from seven to nine, and adding just four covert SSGN special 
operations/strike forces, the total number of available strike groups is doubled, and the number of 
forward task groups tripled, with only a ten-ship increase to the size of the sustained access fleet. 
This is an innovative and cost-eff ective solution to meeting the basic requirements of the new 1-
4-2-1 Defense Planning Guidance. Each of four critical regions can be covered by the strike 
platforms found in either a CSG,  ESG, SAG, or SSGN; using ju st forward deployed assets, the 
Navy-Marine Corps team would be able to bring to bear the gold standard of naval expeditionary 
power projection, a full Expeditionary Strike Fo rce (the combination of a CSG and an ESG)—
reinforced by a missile defense SAG and a covert SSGN strike group—in two of the four 
theaters.95 And to win decisively in one of the theater s, these powerful combat credible forward 
presence forces could be quickly reinforced from fleet surge assets. 
Moreover, it seems likely that these new task gr oupings and capabilities will lead to even more 
dramatic improvements to naval combat contribu tions in joint power-projection operations, and 
that they will spur even further operational refinements. For example, although sea-based 
maneuver is included in the definition of Sea Strike, the Global CONOPS expands only naval air 
and missile coverage. The transfer of a new LPD-17 from the ESG to the CSG, along with a 
specially configured company-size Marine maneuver unit, would provide expanded fire and 
maneuver coverage around the globe. Perhaps the Marines will be prompted to organize a special 
purpose raiding/fleet strike company, organized for deployment and employment from an SSGN, 
and trained to provide target location and termin al precision guidance for fleet tactical air and 
missile strikes. Or, perhaps the Navy and Marine Corps would explore different ways of surging 
and concentrating CSGs and ESGs. The point he re is that as Navy and Marine officers 
experiment with these new organizations in oper ational settings, they will identify additional 
improvements and enhancements. And, importantly, th ey will be divorced from increases to the 
TSBF count. 
Interestingly, the DoN refuses to explicitly emph asize either its efficient restructuring of fleet 
striking power, or its potential to spark further transformational change. Instead, it chooses to use 
the doubling of strike groups as a means to justify the fleet’s expansion to 375 ships: 
To meet our defense goals to deter forward in critical areas, and 
decisively defeat threats to our nation, we see the need to reorganize the 
fleet to provide a large number of strike groups. We believe we could 
                                                 
94 For a more complete discussion of po ssible future fleet metrics, see Work, The Challenge of Maritime 
Transformation: Is Bigger Better?” pp. 35-37. 
95 Truver, “Sea Change for the Navy,” p. 27. 

 
 52
double the number of strike groups today with a 25% increase in the size 
of the fleet.96 
However, as has been discussed, the increase in the number of st rike groups is obtained through 
a nearly neutral restructuring of the sustained access fleet, while the bulk of the fleet 
expansion—driven by the LCS force—adds nothi ng to fleet striking power. This incongruous 
argument simply provides more evidence that th e overriding goal of ex panding the TSBF count 
is distorting the entire DoN transformation pathway.  
OPERATIONAL RISK 
In expanding the fleet with the ships now envisioned, the Navy and Marine Corps transformation 
plan is based on four key judgments about futu re enemy threats and fr iendly capabilities. The 
following section outlines these key judgments, and the operational risks associated with them. 
Threats to land bases—including political impediments, ballistic  and cruise missile attacks, 
and unconventional warfare threats —are increasing at a much fast er rate than threats to sea 
bases. As discussed, the key long-range threat to the sustained access fleet is over-the-horizon 
targeting systems directing long- range air and ASCM and ballistic  missile strikes. Open-ocean 
submarine attacks pose a real, but lesser threat, especially in the near term. Threats to the 
components of the sea base when operating clos e to shore include air, ASCM, and ballistic 
missiles attacks, as well as diesel submarines and mines. Swarming attack boats represent a final 
but less pressing threat. Naval pl anners appear confident that th e envisioned capabilities for the 
sustained access fleet and counter-maritime AD forces will sufficiently overmatch emerging 
enemy maritime AD systems, allowing the assured continuous operation of future sea bases. This 
confidence is based on a key judgment: that ballistic and cruise missile attacks against land bases 
will continue to mature more rapidly than missile, and other, threats to sea bases.97 
This judgment warrants further debate. It is ind eed difficult to locate, track, and engage ships 
operating over the horizon. It is also true that risks to a sea base decrease as range from the shore 
increases. However, those on both sides of the sea base vulnerability argument probably spend 
too much time debating whether or not a se a base might be succe ssfully engaged at extended 
range with ballistic and cruise missiles. It is largely a moot argument. As has been discussed, for 
a sea base to make an operational contribution beyond land attack missile strikes, it must operate 
close to the coastline. Therefore, in the future , most adversaries will have no real incentive to 
mount extended-range, over-the-hori zon attacks, since be ing able to locate a large, sea-based 
force operating within 25-150 miles from the coas t would appear to be  a relatively certain 
proposition—and more easily attainable technol ogically, financially, and operationally. If this 
judgment is correct, the survivabil ity of the sea base will likely  hinge first on the outcome of 
accurately directed enemy barrage missile attacks against its organic missile defenses. This is 
                                                
 
96 Naval Power 21, p. 3. 
97 See for example Adam B. Siegel, “Scuds Against Al Jubayl?” Proceedings, December 2002, pp. 34-36. 

 
 53
true for both surprise attacks against forward deployed vessels, as well as those deliberately 
closing on the theater.98 
The Navy’s approach to ASCM defense duri ng combat operations depends on “killing the 
archers”—destroying ASCM missile launchers  from long-range—and on networked organic 
defenses including long-range SAMs, horizon-ra nge Enhanced Sea Sparrow Missiles (ESSMs), 
and terminal defenses including decoys and missile and gun system s (e.g., the Nulka decoy 
system, the Rolling Airframe Missile , and the Close-in Weapon System).  The Navy is quite 
confident in the ability of these systems to  defeat the emerging cruise missile threat. 99 There are 
those who believe the Navy’s confidence is misplaced, however. For example, a 2000 
Government Accounting Office report conclude d that the Navy was both underestimating the 
potential threat, and over optimistic on its projected defensive capabilities.
100 
Whether or not task group cruise missile defe nses are as good as the Navy believes they are 
hopefully will never be tested. If  they are, however, and even  if the defenses prove highly 
effective, an Achilles he el of a sea base may be exposed: namely, that for conventional attacks, 
the sea base is much more sus ceptible to catastrophic damage from individual missile leakers 
than a land base. Although the ships that make up the sea base are dispersed, each node 
represents a very highly concentrated and vulnerable target. A si ngle SS-N-22 ASCM would 
likely disable, or sink outright, anyt hing smaller than an aircraft carrier, 101 whereas the damage 
to a land base caused by one or two 2000-pound high explosive warheads delivered by missiles 
is likely to be much less, especially if the defending force has taken even the modest precautions 
of dispersing and hardening its combat assets. 
A stark example of the vulnerability of sea bases to missile leakers occurred during the Falklands 
War. On May 25, 1982, two Argentinean Super Etendards attacked the British sea base operating 
off the Falkland Islands. In the subsequent engagement, British warships were able to 
successfully decoy the missiles away from themse lves, but in the process one of the missiles 
veered and hit a large container ship . It quickly went to the bottom, taking ten Wessex and four 
Chinook helicopters—not to mention the tentage for the entire landing force—with her. The loss 
of the helicopters “was a crippling blow to British strategic plans for the campaign.”102 
                                                 
98 Lieutenant Commander Douglas E. Eurom, US Naval Reserve, and Lieutenant Mark Hughes, US Navy, “Don’t 
Forget the Anti-ship Missile,” Proceedings, July 2002, pp. 56-59. 
99 See for example Rear Admiral Phil Balisle and Capt ain Tom Bush, US Navy, “CEC Provides Theater Air 
Dominance,” Proceedings, May 2002, pp. 60-62; George K. Hamilton, “Defense in Depth: Protecting Naval 
Forces,” Surface Warfare, March/April 1999, pp. 2-15; and M.S. Frick, “RAM and Phalanx: System of Systems 
Testing,” Sea Power, September 2000, pp. 46-48. 
100 See Comprehensive Strategy Needed to Im prove Ship Cruise Missile Defense (Washington, DC: Congressional 
Budget Office, July 11, 2000). 
101 Ibid., p. 57. 
102 Max Hastings and Simon Jenkins, The Battle for the Falklands  (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1983), 
pp. 227-228. 

 
 54
This type of disaster can be mitigated by spr ead loading equipment among elements of the sea 
base, but the fact remains that equipment on a stricken ship cannot  be salvaged quickly, if ever. 
Therefore, the advantages of operating at sea are offset, to a great degree, by the increased risk 
that missile (or, as will soon be discussed, torpedo) leakers pos e to the sea base. Said another 
way, when faced with conventional ASCM attacks, task force defenses must be nearly perfect to 
minimize the potential for catastrophic damage to key components of the sea base. This will be 
an especially challenging task given the ranges at which the sea base is  expected to operate 
offshore, and the short reaction time sea base defenses may have to react.  
Moreover, a case can be made that a sea base may actually be more susceptible to CBRNE  
attacks than a land base, especially nuclear attacks. During the Cold War, there was some 
thought that the probability of nuclear weapons be ing used at sea was higher than on land, for 
three reasons. First, because nuclear explosi ons at sea would be less damaging than on land, 
nuclear war at sea could be li mited. Second, nuclear weapons pr ovided an attractive tactical 
option for attacking certain targets, such as d eep-diving nuclear submarines or US aircraft 
carriers. And third, physical cont rols over nuclear weapons at s ea could be less than those on 
land. Indeed, in 1979, the Atlantic  Council Working Group on Securing the Seas stated that “[i]t 
can be argued that the restricted use of nuclear weapons at sea carries neither the degree of moral 
stigma nor the threat of further escalation that applies to their use against land targets.”103 
All of the Cold War reasons that argued for a potentially lower nuclear threshold for sea warfare 
remain in effect. Since US forces now plan to concentrate sea bases close to shore, a nuclear 
explosion in the general vicinity of the sea base might be an attractive tactical attack option for 
any adversary seeking to deny US naval forces freedom of action in a littoral. Moreover, it has 
the added advantage of possibly being conducte d covertly, underwater, providing the adversary 
with “plausible deniability” of such an attac k. For this reason, and when considering the added 
potential threats of torpedo attacks (nuclear or conventional), mines (nuclear or conventional), or 
future underwater threats (to be discussed shortl y), it is by no means axiomatic that threats to 
future sea bases will be significantly less than those to land bases. 
The vulnerabilities to land bases and the advan tages to sea basing outweigh the operational 
and logistical penalties of designing the entir e naval maneuver force for sea-based operations. 
The vulnerability of the sea base aside, a maneuver force designed to  conduct most of its 
operations from a sea base—including its assemb ly, employment, and reconstitution of forces—
requires the maritime maneuver commander to accept some real operational and logistical 
penalties. For example, it is not yet clear that  at sea arrival and assembly of forces will 
appreciably compress the deployment and empl oyment timeline, a key goal of sea basing. 
Assembly of a 15,000-Marine sea-based brigad e on newly designed maritime pre-positioning 
ships using just V-22s and helicop ters would take quite some ti me. HSVs might cut the at sea 
assembly time, depending on whether or not they could be quickly staged at an intermediate 
transfer point, and whether or  not ship-to-ship transfer of  personnel could be accomplished 
promptly and safely in mid-ocean from their d ecks. An alternative would be to fly Marines 
directly to an intermediate port and to embark them onboard ships there. The preparation of their 
                                                 
103 William M. Arkin, The Nuclear Arms Race at Sea (Neptune Papers No. 1, October 1987), p. 25. 

 
 55
equipment could then be accomplished onboard on the way to a joint operating area, but the 
offloading of the ships operating 25-100 miles at s ea would likely be much slower than a rapid 
disgorgement of forces across a pier or near a beach.104  
Marine planners tend either not to accept or a dvertise the operational and logistical penalties 
associated with sea-based operational maneuver. Instead, they argue that enhanced-network sea 
basing is more of an operationa l concept for providing assured access, exploiting the sea as both 
a sanctuary and operational maneuver space, generating a higher operational tempo, and 
maintaining the initiative.105 However, the fact remains that for the foreseeable future, maneuver 
of units above battalion size directly against a deep operational target is generally not being 
contemplated. As has been previously discussed,  Marine planning metrics now seek to deploy a 
single Marine infantry battalion 20 0 miles from the sea base; larger  units could be inserted at 
shorter ranges. In any case, Marine heavy equipment will generally be delivered to the beach via 
high-speed surface craft and then be driven inla nd. Of course, Marines will strive to land this 
surface component where the enemy is not and have it push quickly inland, rather than assaulting 
a defended shoreline. However, for the foreseeable future, STOM will have both an air-delivered 
and a prominent ship-to-shore-to-objective ma neuver component, both of which will consume 
supplies as they move ever deeper into enemy territory or operate far from their sea base. 
OMFTS and STOM are thus proper ly seen, above all, as requi ring revolutionary logistical 
improvements. OMFTS and STOM will be transf ormational when Marines and their organic 
heavy equipment and means of tactical mobility can be lifted deep inland at the same time , and 
when fast-moving Marine units can be sustained logistically from the sea base at extended 
tactical ranges. This would seem to argue fo r a maneuver force transformation strategy that 
emphasizes a higher proportion of heavy lift rotary-wing and tiltrotor ai rcraft than in the past.
106 
However, the priority for Marine vertical lift plans is the high speed V-22, which is optimized for 
insertion of troops, and not equipment. Indeed, its cargo box is so narrow (68 inches on the floor) 
that it can carry only light strike vehicles, if them . This means that the majority of their loads in 
support of air maneuvers are likely  to be carried beneath the airc raft on slings, slowing them 
down appreciably, and, given their high relative costs (nearly $70 million a plane), making them 
a less attractive addition to the force structure. 107 Meanwhile, the service life extension program 
for the Marines’ heavy lift CH-53E helicopter is a much lower priority in Marine aviation 
modernization plans. Until there is more operational data from which to make more informed 
                                                 
104 Major John M. Curatola, US Marine Corps, and Lieutenant Commander Robert Bovey, Jr., “The Future Maritime 
Pre-positioning Force,” Proceedings, November 2001, pp. 87-89; Also Christopher J. Castelli, “DoD Panel Mulls 
Seabasing Ideas, Including Mobile Offshore Base,” Inside the Navy, November 18, 2002, p.1. 
105 Corbett and Goulding, “Sea Basing: What’s New?” p. 37. 
106 For a good synopsis of Marine heavy-lift support, see Major David J. Dowling, “The Future of Heavy Lift in 
Support of Expeditionary Maneuver Warfare,” Marine Corps Gazette, May 2002, pp. 76- 82. For a discussion on the 
contribution that heavy-lift tiltrotors would make to STOM , see Major General Richard L. Phillips and Lieutenant 
Colonel Mark J. Gibson, US Marine Corps (R et.), “The Missing Piece of the OMFTS Puzzle,” Proceedings, 
November 2000, pp. 70-72.  
107 This price, which includes the recurring flyaway costs plus nonrecurring expenses, ancillary equipment, training 
support equipment, contractor support and initial spares, lik ely understates the cost, as they were costs before the 
major restructuring of the V-22 that occurred in 2000 after two crashes of early production aircraft. V22 Resource 
Book (Washington, DC: Headquarters, US Marine Corps), p. 93.  

 
 56
judgments, then, the assertions that sea-based for ces will be able to gene rate greater operational 
tempo, or be able to maintain the initiative better than land-base d forces, are based on facts not 
yet in evidence. 
It also bears noting that the logic behind Sea Power 21 contains an apparent  contradiction. One 
of the key promises of Sea Shield is that ex tended naval theater air and missile defense will 
provide “global defensive assurance” by projecting “a defensive umbrella over coalition partners 
and joint forces ashore.” 108 Two obvious questions jump out: if  these capabilities enable and 
protect joint forced entry, why wouldn’t they en able continued land-based assembly of Marine 
forces or rapid ship-to-shore-to-objective mane uver? Restated, given defensive assurance, why 
accept the operational and logistical  penalties associated with designing the entire maneuver 
force for sea-based operations?  
Having already locked in to a future path de manding sea-based maneuver forces, Marines are 
attempting to preempt this line of thinking: 
Even when secure ports and airfields are available, the greatly enhanced 
operational tempo Sea-Based forces will be able to achieve through ship-
to-objective maneuver will make Sea Basing the preferred means of 
engagement.
109 
Given the potential costs to convert the entire future MPF and the Marine Corps for sea-based 
operations and recent operational history—incl uding Marine operations in Operation Iraqi 
Freedom—this is a surprising conclusion. In the firs t place, there will be many instances in the 
future where land-based access is available. Indeed, one analyst at the Center for Naval Analysis, 
after looking at US m ilitary operations since 1989, concl uded the United States has been 
remarkably successful in getting access to land bases. 110 Moreover, the uncertainties over 
whether threats to the sea base will  mature more or less rapidly than those to land bases, and the 
operational and fiscal penalties associated with  true STOM operations, are both high. It would 
pay dividends to sort out these uncertainties a nd penalties before committing to a complete force 
transition to sea basing. 
Perhaps a better hedging strategy would be to modernize just one maritime pre-positioning ship 
squadron (the one located on Dieg o Garcia) to enable one Mari ne brigade to conduct at sea 
assembly of forces, selective offload, STOM, a nd reconstitution of forces. The Marines could 
then experiment with this STOM brigade in op erational settings. Such a path would fly in the 
face of Marine preferences for standard force deployment packages. But if threats to the sea base 
materialize quicker than expected, or if naval air and missile defenses prove as effective as 
claimed in Sea Shield, optimizing the other maritime pre-positioning squadrons for improved 
ship-to-shore-to-objective maneuver may prove to be just as operationally attractive as STOM, at 
                                                 
108 Bucchi and Mullen, “Sea Shield: Projecting Global Defensive Assurance,” pp. 56-59. 
109 Corbett and Goulding, “Sea Basing: What’s New?” p. 35. 
110 Hank Gaffney, “The American Way of War as it Emerge d in Combat Experience After the Cold War,” Briefing 
paper, Center for Naval Analysis, undated. 

 
 57
a much lower price. Moreover,  a period of experimentation would allow a more measured 
examination of the apparent steep logistical bur den associated with concepts like OMFTS and 
STOM, and whether or not accepting them is operationally warranted. 
Surface penetrations into the dead zone from the leading edge of the sea base to the shoreline, 
and the sea base itself, must be screened from three key threats:  diesel subs lurking close to 
shore, mines, and swarming boats.  Although none of these three threats are new, naval and 
civilian leaders have concluded that their previous efforts to deal with them have been 
ineffective.111 This judgment has led the Navy to conclude that the best way to counter them is 
with a special-purpose counter maritime AD force based on crewed combatants. Moreover, given 
their desire not to change peacetime operational pa tterns, and to mitigate the dangers of surprise 
first salvos, these vessels must be  low cost, and their loss cannot th reaten the viability of the sea 
base. 
All of these judgments and conclusions are al so open to debate. Indeed, the Navy may be 
preparing to fight the last maritime AD network, and with the wrong tools. As Norman Friedman 
has noted after a careful review of global naval arms transfers and purchases, coherent maritime 
AD networks comprised of submarines, mi nes, and boats—and even ASCMs—are not 
materializing.112 This suggests one of three things: pot ential adversaries ha ve decided not to 
develop maritime AD networks; they are attracted  to the maritime AD capabilities that currently 
occupy US naval planners, but have elected not to pursue them in the near term for other political 
or military reasons; or they are pursuing new capabilities to outflank DoN transformation plans.  
This last circumstance would s eem not only plausibl e, but highly probable . For any adversary 
contemplating a long-term competition with the US battle fleet, building a maritime AD network 
that US naval expeditionary for ces are being specifically designed to defeat would not appear to 
be an attractive transformation path. From an  adversary’s perspective, crewed submarine 
operations are an extremely expensive pathway, and the prospect of taking on the US attack 
submarine fleet is not an attractive one. The Un ited States is expending an enormous amount of 
resources and effort, however belatedly, to sweep stationary mines and to effect rapid but 
relatively narrow penetrations of static minefields. For an adversary to embark now on a major 
procurement program to buy these types of weapons would appear to be huge gamble. And 
except for surprise attacks, no serious naval opponent is going to emphasize swarming boats 
(except perhaps in special cases like the Persia n Gulf, where sea room fo r US naval forces is 
limited). As was conclusively demonstrated at the Battle of Bubiyan Channel, a naval 
engagement during the first Gulf War, fast attack craft attackin g a prepared naval force that 
enjoys air superiority is not a survivable tactic.113  
                                                 
111 Mustin and Katz, “All Ahead Flank for LCS,” p. 31. 
112 Norman Friedman, “Globalization of Antiaccess Strategies?” Globalization and Maritime Power, pp. 487-501.  
113 Navies in the Nuclear Ag e: Warships Since 1945, ed. Robert Gardiner (Edison, NJ: Chartwell Books, 1993), pp. 
105-106. 

 
 58
An alternative approach might be to pursue new underwater attack systems combining the 
technology of torpedoes, mobile mines, and new autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs). 
Pursuing new types of stealth y uncrewed attack submarines , or long-range autonomous 
torpedoes, or mobile mines that constantly sh ift their position or patrol an engagement area 
would appear to be a far more at tractive competitive strategy for maritime AD, in that it would 
side-step most, if not all, of US counter-AD plans. Moreover, such a strategy would allow 
attacks beyond the littoral dead zone to threat en the very viability of the sea base. AUV 
technology available today could easily allow an  adversary to conduct wake-homing attacks on 
surface vessels at ranges out to 250 miles. 114 In the future, even longer-range attacks will be 
possible, perhaps extending to ocean basin range s. In addition, unlike in the past when the 
military sector dominated the development of  underwater systems, today’s revolution in 
remotely operated underwater vehicles and A UVs is being driven by the commercial and 
scientific communities. Since most of the research and de velopment (R&D) for long-range 
AUVs is being borne by them, the costs for w eaponizing AUVs are likely to be reasonable, 
meaning that AUV-based weapons might be bui lt in numbers, and quickly, opening the 
possibility of springing either an operational or tactical surprise. Moreover, once built, 
weaponized AUVs would require little infrastructure overhead, and they could operate largely 
autonomously after the start of a war.115 
Even if future adversaries do not attempt to outflank DoN transformation plans and decide to 
construct the maritime AD networks that US nava l planners expect, it is not yet clear that 
building crewed combatants with crews of up to 75 officers and sailors is th e best way to tackle 
the “dead zone” threats of submarines, mines, and swarming boats. For the near to mid-term, 
helicopters would appear to be the dominant  weapon system in the dead zone. From a 
submariner’s perspective, “no [anti-submarine warfare] platform is more feared than the 
helicopter.”116 The Navy’s mine countermeasures plan relies on a variety of systems to be 
employed by the MH-60S medium helicopter.117 Additionally, missile and gun-firing helicopters 
are the scourge of small boats. 118 In the mid- to long term, unmanned systems may vie for 
primacy as the dominant warfighting platforms in shallow littoral waters. Indeed, the threat of 
mines and small boats can already be mitigated, to a large degree, by networked unmanned 
systems, and “track and trail” of enemy submar ines in littoral waters by unmanned underwater 
vehicles is expected to be demonstrated by FY 2007.  119 It is therefore unsurprising that the LCS 
                                                 
114 STN Atlas Elektronik is developing a 2,000-kilogr am AUV, called DeepC, that can carry a 200-kilogram 
payload, dive to 4,000 meters, has a 60-hour endurance period, and a range of 250 miles at 6 knots. See Hewish and 
Janssen Lok, “Silent Sentinels Patrol the Depths,” p.51. 
115 For a more thorough discussion on the potential for these types of threats, see Maritime Futures: The Undersea 
Environment (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2003). 
116 Rear Admiral W.J. Holland, US Navy (Ret.), “Battling Battery Boats,” Proceedings, June 1997, p. 32.  
117 See US Naval Mine Warfare Plan (Washington, DC: Department of the Navy, undated), and Admiral Robert J. 
Natter, US Navy, “Access is Not Assured,” Proceedings, January 2003, pp. 39-41. 
118 Navies in the Nuclear Age: Warships Since 1945, ed. Robert Gardiner., pp. 105-106. 
119 See for example “Fut ure Undersea Battlespace: Unmanned, Undersea,” Jane’s Defense Weekly, June 12, 2002; 
Richard Scott, “New Roles Studied for RMS Unmanned Vehicle,” Jane’s Defense Weekly, July 24, 2002, pp. 76-77; 
Norman Friedman, “Mine Clearance Progresses,” Proceedings, March 2003, pp. 6-7; Robert L. Wernli, “Low-cost 
UUVs for Military Applications,” Sea Technology, December 2002. 

 
 59
will rely on both helicopters and unmanned systems to accomplish its missions. What is not 
clear, however, is why a small, focused-mission combatant is required to employ them. 
Helicopters and unmanned surface and air systems, employed by large multi-mission combatants 
or sea base support ships operating within the prot ected confines of the sea base, and augmented 
by submarines and unmanned underwater vehicles , would appear to be a viable, lower risk 
option than those outlined in DoN plans. Such an option might forego a littoral combat ship, and 
instead pursue a vessel along the lines of the littoral support craft (LSC) studied by the Office of 
Naval Research since 1997, or HSVs like the HSV-X1, a high-speed wa ve-piercing catamaran 
leased by the Navy in 2001. Like  the LCS, the LSC and HSV ar e both designed to operate at 
high speeds, but they both trade stealth for larg er deck areas and more storage volume. Both 
would be able to employ helicopter detachments and unmanned vehicle detachments, or both, in 
a maritime AD environment—and in larger number s than could be carried by an LCS. These 
detachments would operate from roll-on, roll-off container vans. In lower threat environments, or 
once maritime AD threats had been rolled back, they could then perform important logistics 
functions in support of the sea base, serving as high speed ship-to-shore delivery craft, thereby 
helping to offset or mitigate some of the aforementioned penalties for sea-based maneuver 
operations.120  
Even if LCS is conceived as a true small combatant, it is not yet clear that a focused-mission 
approach (larger numbers of single-mission ships) is the right answer for the deployment patterns 
preferred by the Navy. Given the fact that the LCS may be the target of a wide variety of surprise 
attacks, a more attractive approach might be th e multi-mission approach preferred by the Israelis 
(fewer numbers of multi-purpose ships). 121 Indeed, given the wide  array of missions now 
contemplated for the LCS, perhaps an multi-missi on corvette or frigate would be the better 
answer. It would appear that op erational experimentation would be the best means by which to 
determine the merits of these different design ap proaches. Perhaps one op tion might be to build 
two experimental LCS divisions,  one designed to operate in th e Persian Gulf, and one designed 
to operate in the East Asian Littoral—both areas of restricted waters that complicate operations 
for larger combatants and elements of a sea base. 122 Perhaps the division in the Persian Gulf 
could be comprised of small multi-purpose combat ants, while the division in the East Asia 
Littoral could be comprised of small focused-mission combatants. Both squadrons would 
experiment, in an operational setting, primarily in support of CSGs and ESGs. At the same time, 
                                                 
120 See Natter, “Meeting the Need for Speed,”  pp. 65-67; Rear Admiral George R. Worthington, US Navy (Ret.), 
“We Have the Craft for Littoral Warfare,” Proceedings, October 2002, p. 128.; Rear Admiral George R. 
Worthington, US Navy (Ret.), “Littora l Warfare Needs a Specific Ship,” Proceedings, January 2003, pp. 90-91; 
David Foxwell and Richard Scott, “X-Craft  Catamaran Will Test New Technologies,” Jane’s Defense Weekly, 12 
March 2003; and the concept for High Speed Vessels in the concepts section of the Naval Warfare Development 
Command website at www.nwdc.navy.mil.  
121 Doron, “The Israelis Know Littoral Warfare;” see also Freidman, O’Braskey, and Tangredi in “Surface Warfare,” 
in Globalization and Maritime Power, pp. 382-384. 
122 The Persian Gulf is accessible only through the narrow straights of Hormuz, has restricted maneuver room, and is 
characterized by relatively shallow water (74 percent of the Gulf is less than 30 fathoms (55 meters) deep. Hewish 
and Janssen Lok, “Silent Sentinels Patrol the Depths,” p. 54. In fact, one naval analyst believes that the original 
impulse for the LCS originated from US naval operations in these waters. See H.H. Gaffney, Globalization and the 
US Navy: An Annotated Briefing (Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analysis, July 2002), p. 49. 

 
 60
the Navy would monitor the development of act ual, as opposed to projected, maritime AD 
threats. Final decisions on the size and character of the smallest member of the Navy’s future 
family of ships would be made based on these experiments and observations.123 
Under any circumstances, however, the DoN’s insi de-out approach to the A2/AD threat—that is, 
continuously operating crewed combatants inside  the heart of potential maritime AD networks, 
even in times of heightened tension—shoul d be re-examined and debated. Although naval 
planners now assert that maritime AD networks  built around coastal submarines, mines, and 
swarming boats are increasingly dangerous and pose higher risks to US naval forces, they refuse 
to change their operational approach to fight ing for access and organi zing the fleet for an 
outside-in roll back of maritime AD networks. 124 Instead, the DoN continues to pursue its 
traditional peacetime deployment pattern, and has concluded that the best way to handle 
increasingly dangerous A2/AD thr eats is to create a new manned combatant designed to operate 
in the areas of highest risk so as to assure continued access. 
This type of thinking is eerily reminiscent of pre-World War II Army Air Corps thinking that 
“the bomber will always get through.” It rests on shaky operational assumptions such as the LCS 
will always have the dominant battlespace awaren ess to avoid threats, or that its signature 
reduction will make it virtually invisible, or that  its speed and maneuverabi lity will allow it to 
generate misses. However, a st rong counter-argument can be made  that at the ranges from the 
shore that these ships will operate, their location and targeting in a future sensor rich 
environment is virtually assured, and the likelihood that they will be engaged is very high. 
Proponents of the LCS would counter that their sm aller crew and lower costs make these risks 
acceptable. However, this assertion rests on a ke y, unproven assertion: that  the loss of several 
small $400 million crewed combatants with 75-pers on crews in surprise first salvos would be 
more politically and operationally palatable than the loss of a $1 billion crewed combatant with a 
350-person crew. On the surface, this assumption a ppears attractive, especially on the basis of a 
cost-benefit analysis. However, what of the inherent political risks? It is by no means certain that 
a political or even an operational war leader w ould consider the employment of three smaller, 
less well-protected ships, each with crews of 75 officers and sailors, to be less risky than 
employing a larger, better-protected ship with a crew of 350. After all, a larger ship is more 
difficult to sink than a smaller vessel;125 the hits sustained by the Stark (two Exocet missiles), the 
Samuel B. Roberts, Princeton, and Tripoli (mine explosions), and the USS Cole (waterline 
suicide boat explosion) would all likely have destroyed or sunk a LCS outright. Moreover, what 
                                                 
123 US Navy experimentation will be conducted under the new Sea Trial construct, Sea Power 21’s fleet-led concept 
development and experimentation process. See Clark, Sea Power 21. 
124 An outside-in approach to maritime AD networks has many advantages. Covert mining clearing using unmanned 
systems from standoff ranges would be far less risky than  surface clearing operations within enemy sensing and 
engagement ranges. As for battling diesel boats in the littoral, shallow water is not a haven naturally sought by 
submariners. Diesel boats have tactical vulnerabilities that become crippling when patiently exploited by penetrating 
anti-submarine warfare forces; see Holland, “Battling Battery  Boats.” Of note, the LCS portrays an outside-in 
approach to an attack through the Straits of Hormuz.  
125 See Friedman, O’Braskey, and Tangredi, “Surface Warfare,” Globalization and Maritime Power, p. 383. 

 
 61
would a terrorist or potential adversary prefer: putting one multi-mission combatant out of action 
temporarily, or sinking three $400 million combat ants outright? The psychological impact of 
being able to claim the first si nking of a US combat ant in battle since the Korean War would 
likely be significant on both enemy and US popul ations. Moreover, any subsequent order to 
withdraw LCSs from a littoral joint operating ar ea to assess their opera tions and tactics would 
likely be viewed as serious reversal for the US Navy and the Joint Force. 
Even if one ignores these politic al and operational risks, furthe r problems remain. For example, 
advocates of the LCS emphasize that their comb at systems will rely to a great degree on 
unmanned systems. But much of the fleet valu e of pursuing unmanned naval systems will be 
obviated by creating new crewed combatants to employ them. Moreover, introducing a large 
class of new crewed combatants to employ unma nned systems, rather than exploiting unmanned 
systems to reduce the number of crewed combatan ts, or to improve the pe rformance of a similar 
number of combatants, is fraught with its own risk. If the LCS turns out to be either an 
ineffective or non-survivable combat platform, much of the potential combat contribution of 
unmanned naval systems will be lost to the sustained access fleet. 
In sum, the LCS component of the DoN tran sformation plan appears to be its weakest 
operational link, and one that needs to be more fully considered before embarking on a 56-ship 
class production run. 
There is no viable threat to the sea lines of communication to the sea base.  That is, there will 
be no need for open ocean escorts or convoys in the future. 
This judgment is already having important impact s on fleet design and operations. For example, 
all of the Navy’s CLF ships—those ships that provide the lifeline for forward deployed naval 
task forces and that would guarantee the sea base’s operational independence from forward bases 
ashore—are being transferred to the Milita ry Sealift Command. Thei r weapons are being 
removed and their crews are to be made up primar ily of civilian mariners. As this is happening, 
the Navy’s relatively large (35-ship ) residual guided missile frigate force is losing its local area 
air defense armament. Indeed, one  new proposal calls for the frig ates’ conversion into LCS test 
beds by converting one of their two helicopter hangers into an  unmanned vehicle storage and 
handling facility.126 These latter two developments will rob these frigates of much of their open-
ocean escort capability—a capability no longer cons idered necessary since all CLF ships are to 
operate alone and unescorted from forward fleet bases. The same would go for the maritime pre-
positioning ships, as well as the surge sealift ships bringing joint forces to theater.  
Both these changes can be readily defended based on observable trends in foreign naval 
developments. However, they present an attractive opportunity for an enemy that views maritime 
AD through a strategic rather than tactical lens . Sinking civilian crewed pre-positioning ships in 
their unprotected anchorages, or attacking CLF ships on the high seas with armed merchantmen 
                                                 
126 Norman Polmar, “Getting the LCS to Sea, Quickly,” Proceedings, April 2003, pp. 106-107. 

 
 62
or container vessels (a modern  variation of the “Q-ship”), 127 or stalking both with long-range 
ocean interdiction versions of AUVs would be ju st as effective in denying US naval access as 
taking on and sinking h eavily armed combatants operating close to shore. In fact, these 
operational approaches might be eas ier to achieve, especially if an adversary planned them as 
part of a surprise, coordinated global first salvo.  
The point here is that while the risks associated  to sea base lines of communication may appear 
to be low now, the Navy should retain the flex ibility to respond to and overcome unexpected 
challenges against them. Should an adversary pursu e this tack, the only wa y to respond with the 
Sea Power 21 Navy as now envisioned would be to dive rt multi-mission combatants away from 
the sea base, thereby robbing the base of both st riking and defensive power. All the more reason 
to question the pursuit of a large class of special purpose, focused-mission LCSs with 20-30 year 
expected service lives suitable only for operations in the littoral. And all the more reason to enter 
a period of operational experiment ation and to determine if future threats to naval operations 
emerge in expected or unexpected ways. 
TECHNOLOGICAL AND FISCAL RISK 
The new DoN transformation plan is packed with technological promise. In the near to mid-term 
the Department plans to introduce new hull forms; a new electric propulsion system for its large 
multi-mission combatants; high bandwidth sensor a nd fire control systems that allow the sharing 
of data among many different network nodes; ne w deployable sensors; new long-range radars 
conformally mounted in ship hulls; new integrat ed undersea warfare suites; new long-range land 
attack and air defense missiles; new ballistic miss ile defenses; new aircraft such as the JSF, E/A-
18G Growler, V-22 tiltrotor, and multi-mission, maritime aircraft; unmanned systems designed 
to operate in the air, on the sea, and under the sea; new long-range naval guns; new precision 
weapons of all types; a new high-speed amphibious assault vehicle; and other high-speed support 
vessels and landing craft.128 All of these advances appear to be technologically feasible, although 
ballistic missile defense will continue to be espe cially challenging. Indeed, technological risk, to 
the extent that it is present, appears more associ ated with integrating all of the new technologies 
together rather than in developing them. As is evident by the past problems with introducing the 
AEGIS combat system and the CEC, integration is not a trivial challenge. However, given time 
and operational experience, the integration challenges appear to be manageable.
129 
                                                 
127 A “Q-ship” was man-of-war disguised as an unarmed merc hantman, used to lure enemy submarines or merchant 
raiders close aboard where they could be destroyed by gun fire. Originally a class of ships built in England during 
World War I, and given the classification “Q” by the British Navy. John Quick, Dictionary of Weapons and Military 
Terms (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1973), p. 361.  
128 See the Naval Transformation Roadmap for a complete recount of the Do N’s planned technology insertion 
program. See also the statements of the Honorable John J. Young, Jr., Assi stant Secretary of the Navy (Research, 
Development, and Acquisition) and Vice Admiral John Nathman, US Navy, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations 
(Warfare Requirements and Programs) before the Subcommittee on Projection Forces concerning Navy 
Transformation and Future Naval Capabilities of the Hous e Armed Services Committee on April 3, 2003, found in 
the Today’s Navy section at www.navy.mil.  
129 Polmar, “Transformation, Terrorism, and the QDR,” p. 103. 

 
 63
In the farther term, the Navy is pursuing more es oteric and perhaps more revolutionary systems 
such as electromagnetic rail guns and directed-energy weapons. 130 The technological risks 
associated with these weapons are higher, but the stakes are lower. The near- to mid-term 
weapons appear more than capable of holding their own against known  near- to mid-term 
operational challenges. Moreover, US armed fo rces are far outspending all other potential 
adversaries in R&D, thereby providing a big hedge against an  opponent beating them to any 
technological knockout punch. Should any of these weapons prove technologically feasible, they 
will simply widen the technological edge that the Navy and Marine Corps now enjoy. 
The real risk associated with the technological plan is that, like the fl eet expansion plan, it 
pursues an unconstrained vision of  future naval capabilities. T ogether, both plans require large 
steady state increases in ship and aircraft proc urement, sea-basing costs, weapons procurements, 
and operations and support costs, sustained over many years. The Navy is trying to mitigate the 
risks as best it can by canceling programs and by aggressively seeking “business efficiencies,” in 
a process known as Sea Enterprise.131 DoD is also trying to help; it diverted an additional $1.3 
billion to help the Navy cover its FY 2004 bills , and an additional $6.6 billion to cover costs 
within the five year defense plan. 132 Despite these promising developments, the fiscal risk to the 
overall DoN transformation plan is perhaps the most daunting, and th e most likely to result in its 
eventual abandonment or modification. 
Throughout the 1990s and up through 2001, the number of aircraft carriers in the active fleet was 
a continual target for those who argued for a mo re aggressive transformation of US combat 
forces. Some argued that carriers were increasingl y vulnerable; others argued that they took too 
great a share of available resources. 133 These arguments have been  largely muted since the 
Afghanistan campaign, where access problems initially prevented the introduction of short-
range, land-based fighters into theater, and carrier air accounted for nearly 75 percent of all strike 
sorties. These naval strike sorties, flown over extended ranges, dropped approximately 25 
percent of the total tonnage, approximately 90 percent of which was delivered via precision 
guidance.
134 This performance was followed up by the a ssembly of five aircraft carriers for 
Operation Iraqi Freedom, and where two carrier s in the eastern Mediterranean helped to 
overcome the tactical shortcomings caused by Tu rkey’s refusal to allow land-based tactical 
                                                 
130 See for example Lieutenant Commander David Allan Adams, US Navy, “Naval Rail Guns are Revolutionary,” 
Proceedings, February 2003, pp. 34-37, and Christopher J. Cast elli, “Navy Envisions Surface Combatants with 
Powerful Laser Guns,” Inside the Navy, December 9, 2002, p. 1; and Andrew Koch, “US Navy Sees the Light,” 
Jane’s Defense Weekly, December 18, 2002. 
131 Sea Enterprise is a new process for identifying cost-cutting solu tions to help the Navy recapitalize the fleet. See 
Clark, Sea Power 21 , and Admiral Clark’s 2003 Fleet Guidance at www.chinfo.navy.mil/navpalib/cno/clark-
guidance2003. See Hunter Keeter, “Mullen: Navy To Back  Further Program Cuts, More  Business Efficiencies,” 
Defense Daily, January 17, 2003, p. 1. 
132 Christopher J. Castelli and Amy Butler, “At Last Minute, OSD Gives Navy $1.3 billion To Cover Bills in FY-
04,” Inside the Navy, January 13, 2003, p. 1. 
133 See for example Dave Moniz. “Bi ggest US Ships called Vulnerable,” USA Today , May 21, 2001, and Loren 
Thompson, “What It Takes to Kill an Aircraft Carrier,” Defense Week, June 11, 2001. 
134 Eric Schmitt, “Improved US Accuracy Claimed in Afghan Air War,” New York Times, April 9, 2002, and 
William Arkin, “Weapons Total for Afghanistan includes Large Amounts of Cannon Fire,” Defense Daily, March 5, 
2002. 

 
 64
aircraft to be launched from its soil.135 The Navy appears to have thus successfully made the case 
for a 12-carrier force structure,  136  and to have won approval for the first major redesign of its 
aircraft carriers since the 1960s.137  
The US carrier fleet offers unequaled capabilities , but it does incur high costs. Assuming an 
expected service life of 50 years,  a new carrier has to be built every 4 or 5 years. Between 1990 
and 2002, aircraft carrier annual average construc tion costs, including refueling overhauls, was 
$1.4 billion a year. That will jump to $2.0 billion plus between 2003 and 2020. 138 The planned 
cost for the next replacement carrier—the  new CVN-21 design—will be $12.35 billion through 
FY 2009 including R&D. 139 Costs for subsequent carriers are expected to range between $6-7 
billion—and these costs do not include the costs of their organic air wings. Even if the 
shipbuilding cost targets are achieved, in consta nt FY 2004 dollars they will be 23-35 percent 
higher than for carriers delivered during the 1980s.140  
Spending on amphibious ships and support ships between now and 2020 is expected to average 
$1 billion a year, which is well within historical averages. Surface combatant spending is another 
story. Between 1990 and 2002, the surface combatant force cost an average of $3.6 billion a year 
in constant FY 2003 dollars to sustain a force structure of 116 ships. The expansion of the 
combatant fleet to 168 vessels (including the LC S) would cost over $5 billion a year between 
now and 2010, and average at least $6.2 billion per year from 2010-2020—nearly a 100 percent 
increase in funding. By itself, the planned level of spending for surface combatant construction is 
three quarters of the averag e construction costs for the entire fleet between 1990 and 2002. 141 
Moreover, the new weapon systems that go aboard  the new combatants themselves carry high 
costs. For example, depending on the number of ships converted for the anti-ballistic missile 
defense mission and the numbers of special-pur pose missiles bought, costs for putting these new 
capabilities to sea could be as high at $17 billion.142 
Planned increases in attack submarine procurement are even more dramatic. As the submarine 
fleet contracted from its Cold War high of nearly  100 boats to the current level of approximately 
55 boats, average fleet constr uction costs averaged $1.3 b illion between 1990 and 2002. To 
                                                 
135 David Brown, “Battle Groups Prepare to Do More With Less Hardware,” Navy Times, February 24, 2003, p. 18. 
136 The case for the carrier was aided immeasurably by the favorable endorsement given these vessels by the 
Defense Science Board. See  Defense Science Task Force on the Future of the Aircraft Carrier (Washington, DC: 
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, October 
2002). Public commentary on the carrier is also far more supportive. See for example Victor Davis Hanson, “Our 
Islands in the Storm: Carriers as the new phalanxes,” National Review Online, December 13, 2002. 
137 See David Lerman, “Pentagon OK s 2007 Start for CVN Carrier,” Newport News Daily Press, December 20, 
2002, and Jason Sherman, “US Navy Nears Decision,” Defense News, March 24, 2003, p. 16. 
138 Transforming the Navy’s Surface Combatant Force (Washington, DC: Congression al Budget Office, March 
2003), p. 21. 
139 Ms. Gaye Evans, “FY 2004 President’s Budget Overview.” 
140 Transforming the Navy’s Surface Combatant Force, p. 21. 
141 Ibid., pp. 17-21. 
142 Tony Capaccio, “US Defense Spending Heading to Reagan-Era Levels,” Bloomberg.com, January 8, 2003. 

 
 65
sustain a 55-boat fleet, averag e construction costs be tween 2003 and 2010 are expected to jump 
to a minimum of $4.2 billion a year, and jump again to $6.2 billion a year between 2011 and 
2020.143 Moreover, these planned costs are likely optimistic. Procurement costs on the new 
Virginia-class attack submarines have  not yet been contained. Re cently, higher-than-expected 
costs in material, labor, health care, pensions an d infrastructure contributed to industry bids for 
the next block of five boats to be 20 percent higher than expected. Maintaining the attack 
submarine force at 55 boats thus appears to pose a significant long-term challenge.144 
Taken together, the increased shipbuilding costs associated with DoN transformation plans are 
quite striking. The average annual ship constructi on costs necessary to drive the fleet expansion 
between 2003 and 2010 would be nearly 60 per cent higher than the av erage between 1990 and 
2002. To help put these numbers in perspective,  between 1980 and 1989, during the build up to 
the 600-ship Navy, the DoN built an average of 20 ships per year, at an average cost of $14 
billion. Between 2010 and 2020, the decade that woul d see the most dramatic increase in fleet 
units, the DoN would need to bu ild over 14 ships per year, at an average cost of nearly $17 
billion.
145 
Enhanced sea-basing costs are not yet clear, pr imarily because many of the new platforms 
associated with the base, such as future ma ritime pre-positioning ships, have not yet been 
designed. Also, a large percentage of the costs will likely be paid for by National Defense Sealift 
Funds. However, the costs promise to be subs tantial. Given the new operational capabilities 
required by future maritime pre-positioning ships (such as enhanced command and control 
capabilities), they are sure to be much more expensive than past ships. New big deck amphibious 
ships designed to support JSFs an d V-22s will be far more expens ive than previous ships. Costs 
for new HSVs, replacements for aging landing craf t, and service life extensions of air cushion 
landing craft will also likely be higher.
146 
The outlook for Navy and Marine aviation costs is somewhat brighter due to the $19 billion cost 
savings associated with the recently announced Navy and Marine Corps Tactical Aviation 
Integration plan. 147 But these savings merely made a woefully out-of-balance plan more 
manageable. Over the course of the next decade the Navy and Marine Corps will complete the 
F/A-18 E/F buy and introduce the new E/A-18G electro nic attack aircraft, more advanced E-2C 
early warning aircraft, the JSF, the V-22, near ly 500 MH-60 S/R helicopters, more KC-130J 
airlifters, upgraded UH-1 and AH-1 helicopters, a new maritime multi-mission aircraft to replace 
                                                
 
143 Ibid., pp. 17-21. 
144 Jason Sherman, “US Navy Sub Costs Mount,” Defense News, March 10, 2003, p. 1. For the prospects of 
maintaining the submarine fleet at 55 boats, see remarks made by Ronald O’Rourke, Congressional Research 
Service, at the Forum on American Sea Power in the 21st Century, June 24, 1999. 
145 Long-Term Implications of Current Defense Plans (Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office, January 
2003), pp. 59-61, and Transforming the Navy’s Surface Combatant Force, pp. 17-21. 
146 For an overview of systems required to support OMFTS and STOM, see Mark Hewish, “Solving the Amphibious 
Puzzle,” Jane’s International Defense Review, November 2001, pp. 52-57. 
147 Ms. Gaye Evans, “FY 2004 President’s Budget Overview.”  See also “US Scales Back JSF, Super Hornet Buys,” 
National Defense, March 2003, p. 21. 

 
 66
its aging P-3 fleet, and unmanned aerial and un manned combat aerial vehicles. The final 
aggregate cost for these programs is not know n. However, the Congressional Budget Office 
(CBO) estimates that annual spending on Do N fighter-attack aircra ft will jump from 
approximately $3.5 billion in FY 2003 to over $8 billion in FY 2009, then fall to a steady state of 
approximately $6 billion a year from 2010 th rough 2020. Spending on Mari ne helicopters will 
see similar dramatic increases, from approximately $1 billion in FY 2003 to $2.5 billion a year 
from FY 2007 through 2012.148  
Weapons procurement costs appear also to be fo rmidable. The aggregate missile capacity for the 
surface combatant fleet at the end of FY 2001 was approximately 7,100 (13-inch and larger 
diameter) surface-to-air, anti-ship, anti-submar ine, and land attack mi ssiles. The aggregate 
magazine capacity for the planned sustaine d access fleet will be  over 12,000 missiles—a 70 
percent increase in potential combat power. Comp arable numbers for the submarine fleet are 
approximately 1,800 21-inch diameter weapons in 2001, and 2,500 21-inch diameter weapons in 
2011—a 40 percent increase. The weapon procuremen t costs required to fill the substantially 
enlarged fleet magazine, even if individual weapon costs drop, will certainly be much higher.149 
Naval planners often point out th at they expect higher constructio n costs to be offset by lower 
operations and support (O&S) costs, due primarily to smaller crew sizes on the next generation 
of combatants. Given the aggressive technolo gy insertion program associated with the new 
vessels, however, that expectation may not prove va lid. For example, the current fleet is largely 
standardized. For example, all surface combatan ts are powered by the same basic gas turbine 
propulsion plant, and all guided mi ssile cruisers and destroyers have the same anti-air and anti-
submarine combat systems. The next two decad es will see new propulsion systems, new radars, 
new combat systems, new weapons, and new LCS mission modules. Training costs will 
invariably rise during the transition, as will s upport costs due to the multitude of new systems. 
Moreover, the fleet expansion wi ll require more, not less sailo rs—at least for the next two 
decades. Compared to the pre-transformation plans of 84 AEGIS combatants and 32 DD-21s, the 
post-transformation fleet of 88 AEGIS combatants, 24 DD(X) dest royers, and 56 LCSs will 
likely require at least 3,000 more sailors. Significa nt O&S savings will thus not be realized until 
the AEGIS combatants with crews over 350 start to  retire, and are replaced by combatants with 
smaller crews, in 2025.150 
As can be seen, then, the DoN’s aggressive te chnology insertion plan, when coupled with the 
types of ships that they are building and their associated costs, will require sustained budgets that 
even under the best circumstances (all costs contained, ship construction timelines met, 
technology integration 100 percent successful) will be far larger than history suggests can be 
                                                 
148 Long-Term Implications of Current Defense Plans, pp. 64-65. 
149 The Navy’s SAMs, anti-submarine rockets, Harpoon anti-sh ip missiles were all originally 13 inches in diameter 
to fit inside the pre-vertical launch system rotary magazines. Submarine weapons are designed to be fired through 
21-inch diameter torpedo tubes. Aggregate weapons capacities in Work, The Challenge of Maritime 
Transformation: Is Bigger Better?, and calculations of vertical launch cruise cells, deck launchers, and torpedo room 
spaces for the projected 2011 fleet. 
150 CBO projects rising aggregate O&S costs at higher rates th an expected by DoN. See Long-Term Implications of 
Current Defense Plans, pp. 15-22. 

 
 67
supported. The DoN’s transformation plan is thus  incredibly fiscally risky—and one unlikely to 
be consummated. 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT 
DoN transformation plans largely discount future  access threats and outline a new naval striking 
network in order to ju stify a large fleet expansion. Thes e plans are based on several key 
assumptions, conclusions and programs that warran t further discussion and debate. In particular, 
the DoN’s approach toward countering maritime AD networks—operating small crewed 
combatants in the area of maximum danger—raises  as many questions as it answers. It thus 
appears that the overall plan has path, operationa l, and technological and fiscal risks that are 
formidable, if not insurmountable. 
The plan has many attractions. The technological inse rtion plan promises a future fleet far more 
capable than the one that rule s the seas today. Sea Strike (i ncluding OMFTS and STOM), Sea 
Shield, and Sea Basing are exciting concepts, even if they have yet to be fully developed. The 
new Global CONOPS has innovative and cost-effective new naval task groupings that promise to 
spark further change and improvements to fleet operations. However, given the crushing 
dominance that the Navy and Marine Corps now enjoy over potential naval adversaries, as well 
as the embryonic state of developing maritime AD and other naval th reats, a period of 
experimentation and observation woul d appear to be an appropriate strategy to help mitigate the 
risks associated with the current plan.  



 
 69
IV. THE ARMY AND THE OBJECTIVE FORCE 
By Andrew Krepinevich 
POINT OF DEPARTURE 
The Army’s transformation effort is the logical point of departure in assessing how the Service 
intends to accomplish its missions in an A2/AD warfighting environment. The Army presents a 
clear and sobering picture of the challenges it c onfronts in future powe r-projection operations 
against an enemy possessing A2/AD capabilities.  For the Army, the A2/AD threat comprises 
“theater ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, long-range rockets and artillery, weapons of mass 
destruction and other unconventional means, and information operations.” 1 It is believed the 
enemy will employ these capabilities in an attempt to either deny deploying Army units access to 
major forward aerial and sea ports of debarkation (APODs and SPODs, respectively). 
Moreover, in its wargames, the Army has found repeatedly that the longer an enemy can delay 
effective US response, the gr eater his chances for success. 2 Since an “enemy could seek to 
accomplish its initial objectives quickly by an a ggressive, territorial move with conventional 
forces against a neighbor, leaving sufficient time to prepare for and deny external intervention,” 
the Army believes its forces must be capable of deploying rapidly, along much shorter time lines 
than at present.3 The Army’s leadership also recognizes  that the deployed ground force must not 
only be capable of addressing th e A2/AD threat, but must also be capable of carrying out its 
mission upon arrival in the threatened theater.  
Rapidly deploying expeditionary ground forces in an A2/AD threat environment is not viewed as 
an end in itself; the forces th at arrive must be capable of conducting the full range of combat 
operations. The Army believes that such combat  may involve engagements in open terrain, but 
that the enemy will more likely “disperse and operate from areas of physical and moral sanctuary 
often located in complex, urban terrain, shielded by civilians and culturally significant 
structures” to reduce his exposure to US preci sion fires, while also creating discrimination 
problems for US targeting.4 
                                                 
1 US Army White Paper, Concepts for the Objective Force (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, undated), p. 
2, available online at http://www.army.mil/features/WhitePaper/default.htm. Hereafter cited as US Army, Objective 
Force. 
2 US Army White Paper, Concepts for the Objective Force  (Washington, DC: US Army, November 2001), p. 1. 
Hereafter cited as White Paper, Objective Force. 
3 US Army, Objective Force, p. 2. 
4 As the Army’s Objective Force concept paper states, “Operations will occur day and night, in open, close, 
complex, or urban terrain throughout the battlespace.” Ibid., p. 6. 

 
 70
ARMY TRANSFORMATION AND THE A2/AD CHALLENGE 
A Lighter Army 
The Army has established very ambitious deployme nt time lines for its forces. The design of its 
future forces is driven by its goal to deploy a brigade combat team  anywhere in the world in 96 
hours after liftoff, a division on the ground in 120 hours, and five divisions in theater in 30 
days.”5 Unless they are predeployed in advance of a conflict, the Army’s current heavy, 
mechanized divisions are far too heavy to meet  these deployment timelines under any plausible 
contingency. The Service also believes that its  light divisions lack th e combat capability to 
conduct the full range of ground force missions.6 
Consequently, the Army’s transformation plan s eeks to create an Objective Force that “will 
possess the lethality, speed and st aying power associated with heavy forces and the agility, 
deployability, versatility, and close combat capability of today’s light forces.” 7 At present, 
however, the Objective Force is more concept th an reality. To bridge the gap between today’s 
heavy (or legacy) forces and the Objective Force, the Army is beginning to field Stryker Brigade 
Combat Teams (SBCTs). 8 However, while these brigades are roughly as deployable as the 
Objective Force units are projected to be, they are nowhere near as le thal as today’s heavy 
formations. Thus the Army’s transformation plan is counting heavily on its Objective Force 
units, which it intends to begin fielding by the end of this decade. 
Deploying the Force 
The Army’s White Paper outlining its concept for it s Objective Force states that “[i]n order to 
overcome an aggressor’s A2 capabilities, entry into  areas of operations must be enabled without 
reliance on conventional Aerial Ports of Debark ation (APODS) and Sea Ports of Debarkation 
(SPODS) where denial efforts will be focused.”
9 This approach is necessary because of the 
anticipated threat of large-sc ale enemy missile attacks agains t major transportation hubs, or 
nodes. 
Army Objective Forces will deploy from multiple ports of embarkation, at home or abroad, to 
multiple points within the theater of operations and fight upon arrival, bypassing chokepoints and 
                                                 
5 Ibid., p. 9. 
6 Ibid., p. 11. The Army has ten active divisions. The 1st Infantry (Mechanized), 3rd Infantry (Mechanized), 4th 
Infantry (Mechanized), 1st Cavalry and 1st Armored divisions are considered “heavy” divisions, owing to their 
preponderance of heavy armored vehicles, such as the 70-ton Abrams main battle tank. Light formations include the 
82nd Airborne Division, the 25th Infantry and 10th Mountain divisions. The 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) 
is the Service’s only helicopter-intensive division, and is not considered light. The 2nd Infantry Division is regarded 
as a medium-weight division. The Service also has several independent brigades and regiments. 
7 Ibid., p. 11. 
8 The Army has converted two units to Stryker configuratio n. It also plans to convert the 172nd Infantry Brigade 
(Forts Richardson and Wainwright, Alaska); the 2nd ACR (Fort Polk, Louisiana); the 2nd Brigade, 25th Infantry 
Division (Schofield Barracks, HI); and the 56th Brigade of the 28th Division (Mechanized) of the Pennsylvania 
Army National Guard. (The two brigades now being converted are the 3rd Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division 
(Medium), and the 1st Brigade, 25th Infantry Division (Light)). 
9 US Army, Objective Force, p. 10. 

 
 71
A2 threats as necessary. In order to deploy in this way, the Army will rely on a strategic mobility 
triad comprising sealift, airlift, and prepositione d stocks. This triad “is critical to protecting and 
sustaining US forces in distant anti-access and aerial (sic) denial environments.”10  
Strategic Lift and Prepositioned Equipment 
With respect to lift, the Army envisions an ex pansion beyond the US military’s current sealift 
assets, which include eight Fast Sealift Ship s (FSS), 11 Large Medium Speed Roll-on Roll-off 
(ROROs, or LMSRs) vessels, and 31 LMSRs in th e surge fleet. Similar expectations exist with 
respect to the future airlift fleet, which will comprise 126 ag ing C-5 Galaxy cargo aircraft 
(including 38 C-5A models) and programmed 180 C-17 Globe Master IIIs. Once in theater, the 
Army intends to use intermediate staging bases (ISBs) that are C-5/C-17 and LMSR capable, to 
transload military forces to a range of sealift and airlift assets for deployment into the threatened 
area.11  
Recognizing that “[j]oint dependence on mobility platforms such as LMSRs, C-17s and C-5s for 
this sustainment flow will not decrease dramatically in the near future . . . . ” the Army advocates 
“accelerated exploration of ne w lift capabilities . . . .” 12 In addition to the limited supply of lift 
relative to the demand imposed by the Services, the need for new kinds of lift capabilities is also 
driven by the Army’s requirement to deploy with greater speed against an A2/AD threat. Indeed, 
the Army’s 2002 Transformation Wargame led the Serv ice to conclude that “[f]uturistic air and 
sealift concepts proved essential to strategic an d theater force projection and in countering A2 
efforts.”13 
Realizing the importance of lift to its future warfighting concept, the Army is exploring a range 
of possible airlift and sealif t solutions. Among them are the Advanced Technology Transport 
(ATT),14 the Shallow Draft High Speed Ship (SDHSS), 15 and Theater Support Vessel (TSV). 16 
                                                 
10 Shinseki and White, Army Roadmap , p. B-4; The Army’s Objective Force  document states that “Deployment 
transformation counters our adversaries’ strategies of anti-access and AD. The successful transformation of air and 
sealift platforms, prepositioning, deployment organizations, training, processes, and infrastructure has enabled the 
Objective Force to meet our deployment objectives.” DA, Objective Force Final Draft, p. 32 The conclusions of the 
Army’s major transformation wargames “consistently bear out the critical importance of strategic and intra-theater 
lift enablers for deployment, operational maneuver, and sustainment of the joint Objective Force.” Department of 
the Army (DA), Army Transformation Wargame 2001: April 22-27, 2001, (Carlisle Barracks, PA: undated), pp. 13-
14. (Hereafter cited as DA, Army Wargame 2001.) 
11 Shinseki and White, Army Roadmap, p. B-4; and Ron Laurenzo, “Congress: Air Force Must Fully Fund C-17,” 
Defense Week, October 21, 2002, p. 7. 
12 Shinseki and White, Army Roadmap, p. B-7. 
13 Department of the Army, Army Transformation Wargame 2002 (Fort Monroe, VA: Army Training and Doctrine 
Command, 2002), p. 18. Hereafter cited as DA, Army Wargame 2002. 
14 The ATT is envisioned as super short takeoff and landing (SSTOL) airlifter capable of deploying two Future 
Combat Systems. Ibid., p. 14. 
15 Three SDHSSs would be capable of delivering a SBCT with its initial basic load of supplies. 
16 Michael Fabey, “Army’s New Craft is All About Speed,” Newport News Daily Press , September 6, 2002. The 
Army is actually testing the TSV HSV-X1, Joint Venture. This  catamaran is capable of speeds in excess of 40 knots 
and can be adapted to haul freight, equipment, or combat  forces. The ship, which is Australian built, is made of 

 
 72
These systems are viewed by the Army as providi ng it with the means “to avoid traditional entry 
points and deliver . . . combat power along multip le routes to the operational and tactical 
fronts.”17  
Turning to the third element of the Army’s strategic mobility triad, prepositioned equipment, the 
Army envisions that it “will selectively tran sform our prepositioned stocks . . . [with] an 
increased proportion of sustainment stocks and e quipment relative to combat equipment.” This 
approach seems to indicate that such stocks will be used primarily to sustain deployed ground 
forces, rather than be configured in unit sets.18 
Deploying the Force 
Once they are deployed to ISBs, Army units still  face the challenge of deploying into an A2/AD 
threat environment. Army Objective Force and St ryker units are envisioned  as transferring their 
equipment from strategic lift assets  (e.g., C-17s, FSSs) to intratheater  lift assets such as C-130 
and ATT cargo aircraft, and TSVs. Other more adva nced forms of lift noted above may also be 
employed, if they are available. These forms of  lift could allow Army units to bypass major port 
and air base “chokepoints.”19 
There is some evidence that the Army envisions Stryker brigades as part of the first-wave assault 
into an A2/AD environment. The Army Transformation Roadmap notes that  
. . . [SBCTs] will provide JFCs [Joint Force Commanders] with a robust, 
lethal, early entry, land force capability to expand control of key areas 
and receive follow-on forces. For example, an SBCT employing Joint 
Airfield Construction (JRAC) (sic) Program capabilities provides a 
unique capability to upgrade the existing airfields rapidly, or to construct 
contingency airfields in austere or degraded environments.
20 
The Army appears to realize that even operating out of small or remote airfields in an A2/AD 
environment may prove difficult in the face of en emy missile forces. Consequently, it continues 
to pursue a number of air and missile defense systems to defend these bases from attack. 21 The 
                                                                                                                                                             
lightweight aluminum. The Army hopes th e Navy, its sister Service in the Jo int Venture experiments, will begin 
building military versions of the vessel within four years, at a cost of $85-100 million per ship.  
17 Even more exotic means of providing lift are being expl ored—at least in the Army’s war games. Among them are 
a large ground-effect aircraft (Pelican), an Ultra-Larg e Airlift (ULA) aircraft, and a Precision Extended Glide 
Airdrop System (PEGASYS) that would provide logistical  support from high-altitude and standoff ranges. which 
“could improve strategic responsiveness significantly.” Shinseki and White, Army Roadmap, p. B-4. 
18 Equipment configured in unit sets essentially represents a complete set of equipment for a maneuver formation 
(e.g., a brigade). Configured in this manner, prepositione d equipment can speed the deployment process since in 
theory all that is required is for the personnel to move from their base of origin to their prepositioned equipment. Of 
course, procuring an extra set of equipment for a maneuver formation is an expensive proposition. This may have 
factored in to the Army’s apparent decision to emphasize sustainment stocks (e.g., munitions, spare parts). 
19 Shinseki and White, Army Roadmap, p. B-4 
20 Ibid., p. B-7. 
21 Ibid., p. B-2. 

 
 73
Army’s Patriot system has had limited success in a ballistic missile defense role, although 
improvements continue to be made on the syst em. Further down the road the Army envisions 
deploying its Theater High Altitude Air Defe nse (THAAD) system along with its Medium 
Extended Air Defense System (MEADS). Long-te rm initiatives are focused on the Mobile 
Tactical High Energy Laser (MTHEL) and the Joint Land Attack Cruise Missile Defense 
Elevated Netted Sensor System (JLENS), which offer the potential for new and revolutionary 
methods of detecting and defeating theater air and missile threats.22 
Intratheater sealift is also intended to avoid traditional entry points such as major ports. As in the 
case of arriving at and operating from a distribut ed cluster of smaller air bases, the use of 
multiple entry points along the coastline is also intended to complicate the enemy’s targeting 
problem. 
Combat Operations: The Objective Force 
The Army’s transformation goal is not merely to de ploy forces in an A2/AD environment, but to 
prevail decisively across the entire conflict spectrum. The Service therefore has established three 
main transformation requirements as they pertai n to the A2/AD problem: forces that can deploy 
rapidly; deploy at acceptable cost in an A2/AD threat environment; and accomplish their 
warfighting mission once they have deployed. In an effort to address the first two challenges, the 
Army is lightening up the force. At the same time, the Service intends for its Objective Force 
units to be as lethal and survivable as today’ s far heavier legacy force. The SBCTs, possessing 
neither of these characteristics, are clearly a transition force, and the Army accordingly describes 
the SBCTs as an Interim Force. Hence the focus here will be primarily on the Objective Force. 
The Objective Force is very much a product of the Information Age, and its vision of “see first, 
know first, act first and finish decisively” speaks to a true revol ution in land warfare. Simply 
stated, Objective Force formations will not seek  to close with and destroy the enemy as the 
decisive part of battle, but rather conduct the d ecisive phase of the engagement at extended 
range. As the Army’s White Paper on the Objective Force notes: 
Operations will be characterized by developing situations out of contact; 
maneuvering to positions of advantage; engaging enemy forces beyond 
the range of their weapons; destroying them with precision fires; and, as 
required, by tactical assault at times and places of our choosing. 
Commanders will accomplish this by maneuvering dispersed tactical 
formations of Future Combat Systems units linked by web-centric C4ISR 
capabilities for common situational dominance.
23  
The Objective Force will also shift from traditional linear to nonlinear operations: 
In contrast to the phased, attrition- based, linear operations of the past, 
this approach is focused on disrupting the integrity of the enemy’s battle 
plan by exposing the entire enemy forc e to air/ground attack, rather than 
                                                 
22 Ibid. 
23 US Army, Objective Force, p. 6. 

 
 74
rolling his forces up sequentially. Non-c ontiguous operations will have a 
dramatic impact on the architecture of the battlefield and in the 
relationship between combat, combat support and combat service support 
formations. Superior situational understanding, based on advanced 
C4ISR capabilities embedded at all le vels, enables ground commanders 
to operate non-linearly . . . . 24 
As the Stryker Interim Armored Vehicle is centra l to the SBCTs, so too is the Future Combat 
System at the heart of the Objective Force. The FCS is intended to combine the capabilities of 
current howitzers, main battle tanks, and infantry fighting vehicles—exceeding their lethality and 
survivability while coming in at a weight not to exceed 20 tons, or slightly  above that of the 19-
ton Stryker.25 More than a platform, however, the FCS is envisioned to comprise a networked, 
combined-arms team of manned and unmanned ground systems and UAVs. Once the FCS 
proves itself, it will be adopted by the Legacy and Interim Forces, which will eventually merge 
into the Objective Force. 
The FCS’s development is driven by three prin cipal performance metrics. Like the SBCT’s 
Stryker, it must be transportabl e in a C-130-type aircraft. Unlik e the Stryker, however, the FCS 
must also be as survivable and as lethal as  the Army’s 70-ton M1A2 Abrams main battle tank.
26 
This has led to a fundamental shift in Army th inking with respect to th e conduct of operations. 
Mandating a 70 percent reduction in  weight from the Abrams tank and a 50 percent reduction in 
internal volume (to under 20 tons  and between 300-400 cubic feet respectively) to accommodate 
C-130 cargo capacity limitations runs  directly counter to the histor ical trends of ever-increasing 
size, weight, and volume in ground combat vehicles. 
Projecting such a radical weight loss forces the Army to abandon its long-held belief that 
survivability is based primarily on armor thickness,  and move toward a ne twork-centric view of 
combat. As Col. Ellis Golson, Director of Comb at Development at the Army’s Aviation Center 
in Fort Rucker, Alabama, stated: “[a] lighter  force in the future, without a 70-ton tank will 
depend on information to survive.” 27 In fact, the Army does not expect the FCS to survive a 
direct hit from an anti-tank miss ile. Rather, the goal is to prot ect the vehicles against 14.5 mm 
rounds.28  
This view is consistent with the Army’s concept of “see firs t, know first and act first;” that is, 
waging the decisive battle at extended ranges. At  extended ranges, Objective Force units will, it 
is presumed, have the advantage in battlespac e awareness (i.e., scou ting), ranged fires, and 
precision munitions. FCS formations will rely prim arily on these advantages to achieve first-hit 
                                                 
24 Ibid., p. 13. 
25 David Jablonsky, “Army Transformation: A Tale of Two Doctrines,” in Conrad C. Crane, Transforming Defense 
(Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, December 2001), p. 50. 
26 Briefing, Dr. A. Michael Andrews,  “Army S&T and the Obj ective Force...Accelerati ng the Transformation,” 
(Washington, DC: AUSA Future Combat System Symposium Briefing, June 27, 2000) p. 7. 
27 Ann Roosevelt, “Army Ponders Its Future In Aviation,” Defense Week, January 14, 2002, p. 6. 
28 Sandra I. Erwin, “Army’s Future Combat  System Shakes Up Procurement Culture,” National Defense, January 1, 
2003, p. 24. 

 
 75
kills for survival, instead of on their armor. 29 Key force elements that will enable Objective 
Force units to achieve an advantage in battle  space awareness include, at a minimum, “combat 
identification systems; organic sensors that are robotic, multi- spectral, and disposable; UAVs; 
embedded C4ISR; Special Operations Forces (SOF); Long Range Surveillance Detachments 
(LRSD); and air and ground reconnaissance operations.”30 
The Army sees the Objective Force’s mobility as  another key enabler of its Future Combat 
System’s ability to survive. A force that can  move rapidly and that  operates on a nonlinear 
battlefield in which there are no front lines can  make an enemy’s scouting job difficult. The 
Army envisions Objective Force’s mobility being facilitated by several intra-theater airlift 
systems, to include the joint transport rotorcra ft (JTR) vertical airlifter, and the ATT SSTOL 
airlifter.
31 
The Objective Force is to comprise Units of Employment (UEs) and Units of Action (UAs). 
“The UEs . . . are the basis of [a] combined arms air-ground task force.” They are the rough 
equivalents of today’s Ar my corps and divisions. 32 According to the Objective Force final 
concept draft 
The UA is the decisive element within the OF [Objective Force] . . . . It 
is not a fixed organization and has the capability to command and control 
up to three FCS combined arms battalions, one Aviation Detachment one 
Artillery Battalion, and one Forwar d Support Battalion, as well as, 
employ enablers from higher headquarters.33 
An FCS basic unit is envisioned to comprise  some 2,245 soldiers, 369 ground vehicles and 66 
unpiloted aircraft. 34 Although not included in this description, the Army’s believes its 
“Comanche [helicopter] will be a revolutionary cornerstone of the Objective Force and this 
networked C4ISR systems architecture.”35 
                                                 
29 “Tactical engagement will be characterized by developmen t of the situation out of contact and the integration of 
standoff fires, skillful maneuver and close combat assault to achieve tactical decision simultaneously at multiple 
locations across the JOA. Objective force tactical commands  will direct the continuous integration of powerful sub-
elements, moving along multiple, non-contiguous axes to  objective areas, while engaging the adversary with 
organic, overmatching, and precise fires.” US Army, Objective Force, pp., 7, 14. 
30 Ibid., p. 7. 
31 DA, Army Wargame 2002, p. 15. 
32 DA, Objective Force Final Draft, p. 5. 
33 Ibid., p. 6. 
34 Erwin, “Army’s Future Combat System Shakes Up Procurement Culture,” National Defense, p. 24. 
35 General Eric Shinseki, Speech, Dwight D. Eisenhowe r Luncheon, Association of  the United States Army, 
Washington, DC, October 22, 2002. 

 
 76
OPERATIONAL RISK 
Rapid Deployment 
Strategic Lift 
Assuming the Army can configure its SBCTs and Ob jective Force units for rapid deployment, it 
also confronts issues with respect to both their ab ility to be deployed by st rategic lift assets, and 
the quantity of these assets that would likely be made av ailable to support Army force 
deployments. Moreover, as the Objective Force operational concept states, “For the Army, the 
first consideration argues for maximum early reli ance on strategic mobility assets capable of 
delivering forces at unimproved points of entry over the shore or at austere inland aerial ports of 
debarkation.”36 This adds the A2/AD element to the mix; because it means that the Army 
requires strategic lift that can avoid being targeted by enemy A2/AD forces—that can avoid large 
ports and major air bases. The conclusions of  the Army’s major transformation wargames 
“consistently bear out the critical importance of  strategic and intra-theater lift enablers for 
deployment, operational maneuver, and sustainment of the joint Objective Force.”37 
Unfortunately, the Army concludes that vessels “capable of delivering forces over the shore are 
in short supply and travel slowly. Strategic airlif ters travel quickly but have limited ability to use 
unimproved fields, and the larger their size and weight, the fewer sorties any such unimproved 
arrival site will tolerate.” 38 As one senior Army official succi nctly put it, “[T]here’s not enough 
lift, period . . . [and we] don’t think that’s  going to change much in the future.” 39 Army 
logisticians were even more blunt in their asse ssment: “Despite significant improvements in US 
strategic mobility capabilities since Desert Storm, the Army Vision of moving one Brigade in 96 
hours, one Division in 120 hours, and five Divisions in 30 days to a theater of operations remains 
out of reach.”40 Similarly, a recent study sponsored by the Air Force concluded that a “force with 
more than 1,000 vehicles [i.e., an SBCT] cannot be deployed by air from CONUS to the far  
reaches of the globe in four days.” 41 GAO also reached the same conclusion, stating “[i]t is 
questionable whether the Army will be able to deploy its first brigades anywhere in the world in 
                                                 
36 US Army Training and Doctrine Command, The United States Army Objec tive Force: Operational and 
Organizational Concept (TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-0) (Fort Monroe , VA: TRADOC, December 18, 2001), p. 42. 
Hereafter cited as TRADOC, Objective Force, p. 42. 
37 DA, Army Wargame 2001, p. 4.  
38 TRADOC, Objective Force, p. 42. 
39 “C-130 Will Provide Airlift For FCS: No Role For Future Transport Rotorcraft,” Aerospace Daily, March 12, 
2002. 
40 US Army Logistics Integration Agency, Industry’s Role In Logistics Transformation: Final Report , January 16, 
2002, p. 8. Hereafter cited as USA LIA, Logistics Transformation. 
41 Alan Vick, David Orletsky, Bruce Pirnie and Seth Jones, The Stryker Brigade Combat Team  (Santa Monica, CA: 
The Rand Corporation, 2002), p. xvi. The study did note that, with some mobility enhancements, it is possible to 
achieve deployment timelines on the order of one to two weeks. While impressive, this is far short of the Army’s 
deployment metrics that call for three brigades (or a full division) to be deployed within five days. Moreover, the 
study finds that “Prepositioning of eq uipment or overseas basing of forces  is the single most effective way to 
increase the responsiveness of US Army forces for operations in key regions.” Yet as noted above, prepositioning 
entire unit sets of equipment is likely to prove too costly, and perhaps too risky as well. Here the risk pertains to 
equipment prepositioned ashore, which may be vulnerable to  attacks by anti-access forces. If such equipment were 

 
 77
96 hours.” GAO further noted that “[w]hile this  is now only a goal for the IBCTs, it is a 
requirement for units entering the force after 2008.”42 
In the process of exploring options, an Army st udy determined that the closure of a SBCT to 
Kosovo, at the Pristina airfield from Fort Le wis, Washington, using n earby McChord Air Force 
Base, would take 12.7 days usin g current airlift capab ilities. If the Pristina airfield were 
improved to be capable of handling all-weat her, round-the-clock operations, and if the 
throughput capacity of en route air bases was doubled, and if maximum use were made of 
commercial aircraft, the best deployment time th at could be achieved was 7.5 days, almost twice 
the Army’s target deployment time length of four days (96 hours).43 
According to a study by Boeing, which manuf actures the C-17 cargo aircraft, deploying an 
SBCT within 96 hours would require between 103 to  168 C-17s dedicated solely to this mission, 
assuming the aircraft were to fly at great er than normal mission completion success rates. 44 
Assuming the Boeing figures are correct, 45 it would be impossible ev en for the entire planned 
inventory of 180 C-17s to deploy  the remaining two SBCTs in the following day (i.e., to meet 
the goal of three SBCTs deployed in 120 hours). Nor does this anal ysis take into  account the 
A2/AD threat to major forward operating air bases.  Nor does it address the fact that the nation’s 
strategic lift assets may be assigned to othe r high-priority missions. All this has led Army 
officials to conclude that “with all the comp eting demands for these aircraft, the Air Force 
currently does not possess sufficient numbers of them to meet the 96-hour goal for the 
[S]BCTs.”46 
The C-130 
The Army concept for the Objective Force calls for the deployment of forces to ISBs, where they 
would transload their equipment and be insert ed into a threatened theater of operations 
employing intra-theater lift assets, with emph asis on the Air Force’s C-130 cargo aircraft. 
However, assuming that ISB access is not an issue, there is the matter of transloading 
SBCT/Objective Force equipment from “strategic” (i.e., C-17 and C-5 aircraft) to C-130 aircraft, 
a process that will only further delay the deployment of these forces. 
                                                                                                                                                             
positioned afloat, the Army would likely want it on ships capable of avoiding traditional SPODs, adding still further 
to the cost of prepositioning. 
42 General Accounting Office, Military Transformation: Army Actions Needed to Enhance Formation of Future 
Interim Brigade Combat Teams  (Washington, DC: General Accounting Office, May 2002), p. 3. The term IBCT 
refers to Interim Brigade Combat Teams. The IBCTs were renamed Stryker Brigade Combat Teams when the 
brigades’ light armored vehicles were christened with the name Stryker, to honor two Army enlisted Medal of 
Honor winners. (Hereafter cited as GAO, Military Transformation). 
43 Ibid. 
44 Briefing, Leonard Tavernetti, “Deploying a Brigade Combat Team,” The Boeing Company, undated, p. 3.  
45 Army transportation planners have determined that it would take 201 C-17s and 51 C-5s to transport all of the 
SBCT’s equipment to a distant theater. 
46 GAO, Military Transformation, p. 23 

 
 78
Moreover, the 2,800 mile range of the C-130 imp lies an ingress and egress route from the 
intermediate staging base of approximatel y 1,400 miles each. But it seems quite possible—
indeed likely—that during the time frame in which the Army will field the Objective Force even 
a rogue state enemy could deploy ballistic missile systems with ranges that exceed 1,400 miles.47 
Thus projecting power thorough ISBs may well pr ove untenable for purely military reasons, in 
addition to the problems associat ed with getting political access for such bases in the first 
instance. 
Given its ability to land at fairly  austere airfields, the C-130 has been adopted by the Army as its 
best bet for deploying forces rapidly in an A2/AD environment. However, there are other 
problems with which to contend, in addition to the ISB issue. Simply put, despite its attempts to 
prioritize force design around the C-130, the Army may not yet have come to grips with the 
severe limitations such an approach has imposed on both the SBCTs and the Objective Force. 
This leads to a discussion of th e C-130 itself. This venerable ai r lifter has been in the US 
military’s inventory since 1956, although it has unde rgone a number of modifications over the 
years. In choosing the C-130, the Army selected a sy stem that is likely to be in service for many 
years to come, given the apparent absence of a program designed to produce a follow-on aircraft. 
However, “The number of C-130s that the Air Force can dedicate to Army missions probably 
will not increase.”48 
The C-130 has a maximum range of 2,800 nm, carrying no payload. The C-130’s maximum 
payload is 45,000 pounds, or 22.5 tons; but this reduces its range dramatically, to 240 nm. These 
figures, however, do not take into account a range of operational conditions or aircraft structural 
limitations. For example, once the cargo exceeds  36,500 pounds, the aircraft  must land with 
additional fuel so that the airplane remains wi thin its center-of-gravity limits, further reducing 
aircraft range. If one accepts the Army’s require ment for the Stryker, the C-130 can fly this 19-
ton payload up to 1,000 nm onto a 5,000-foot improve d runway on a standard day at sea level 
with no correction for weather (e.g., wind, rain), r unway slope, etc. If conditions are less than 
ideal, then the cargo-carrying capacity is reduced. 49 As of May 2002, the Stryker interim 
armored vehicle (IAV) infantry carrier variant weighed 39,750 pounds, while the Stryker mobile 
gun system weighed 45,000 pounds (although designed to weigh 41,300 pounds). 50 It is 
important to note that unless the C-130s can be refueled upon landing—a prospect that seems 
problematic given that they are deploying forces  into an austere (and perhaps hostile) forward 
base area—the aircraft’s range would be roughly cut in half, as it would need fuel to recover to 
its base of origin. 
                                                 
47 North Korea already has in production a ballistic missile, the Taepo Dong 2 missile, with a range of 3,600 miles. 
48 Joseph F. Cassidy, C-130 Transportability of Army Vehicles  (Newport News, VA: Military Traffic Management 
Command, Transportation Engineering Agency, March 15, 2001), p. 6. 
49 Ibid., p. 3. 
50 Frank Tiboni, “New IAV Armor Boosts Protection for Soldiers,” Defense News, April 8-14, 2002, p. 7. The Army 
has put the Stryker’s mobile gun system on a weig ht reduction program desi gned to accommodate C-130 
requirements. 

 
 79
Landings on shorter runways are possible, bu t they also reduce cargo capacity, again for 
structural reasons. For example, in conducting an  assault landing on a runway at least 3,000 feet 
long would reduce the aircraft payload to 36,500 pounds, or below the weight of either the 
Stryker IAV or the anticipated weig ht of the FCS. If range is sa crificed to increase the C-130’s 
cargo capacity, then intermediate fuel stops are necessary. But this assumes the availability of 
secure airfields in an A2/AD environment and also lengthens deployment times.51  
The situation does not l ook any better for the FCS, whose re quirements allow the system to 
weigh up to 40,000 pounds, or 2,000 pounds more than the Stryker. The heaviest current Army 
C-130 certified armored vehicle is the M9 Armored Combat Earthmover (ACE) which, at 35,500 
pounds, is certified for C- 130 transport at 38,000 pounds. 52 Recently, however, the Air Mobility 
Command has granted a permanent waiver to depl oy the Infantry Combat Vehicle variant of the 
Stryker on C-130 aircraft, with a maximum of four crew members. (The vehicle normally carries 
nine troops, not including the driver.)53  
Given these factors, the Military Traffic Management Command has concluded that: 
• If one considers maximum transportation flexibility to be of paramount importance, the 
maximum C-130 air transport weight of future vehicles should be in the 29,000-32,000 
pound range. These weights ideally would incl ude the crew, ¾-tank of fuel, and full 
ammunition, armor, and equipment. 
• If the vehicle’s mission allows the aircraft to be refueled at the payl oad’s destination, then 
the maximum C-130 assault landing air tran sport weight could be as high as 36,500 
pounds.” [Emphasis in the original]
54 
The above discussion leads ineluctably to the c onclusion reached in the Army’s recent large-
scale transformation wargame: “Advanced sealift and airlift capability investments are required 
now. These include: shallow-draft high-speed ship (vital future capability), advanced theater 
transport, and joint transport rotorcraft.” 55 To accomplish this, according to the Army’s logistics 
community, the Army needs to invest in technology that will enable it to move rapidly through 
ports of embarkati on and debarkation. 56 Toward this end, the Army has found that a number of 
                                                 
51 Cassidy, C-130 Transportability, pp 3-6. Even assuming tanker aircraft were made available to support C-130 
operations, with the exception of some special mission aircraft, the C-130 does not have an aerial refueling 
capability. The C-130J was designed with the internal piping required to support aerial refueling, but there are no 
current plans to field such a capability, and the Army is apparently not strongly advocating this be done.  
52 Cassidy, C-130 Transportability, p. 7. 
53 Andrea Shalal-Esa, “Arm Sees No Ch allenge to Stryker Combat Vehicle,” Reuters.com, August 27, 2002; and 
Megan Scully, “Permanent Waiver Allows Strykers to Be Deployed by C-130s,” Inside the Army, p. 7. 
54 Cassidy, C-130 Transportability, p. 13. 
55 DA, Army Wargame 2001, p. 12. 
56 US Army Logistics Integration Agency, Industry’s Role In Logistics Transformation: Final Report , January 16, 
2002, p. 8. Hereafter cited as USA LIA, Logistics Transformation. 

 
 80
strategic lift technologies show promise. They include the light er-than-air ULA, and high-speed 
sealift. 
Advanced Airlift 
The Army is intrigued with the idea of ULAs. Thes e airships are very large, and also have very 
large cargo capacities. 57 According to the Army, they are “no more vulnerabl e that any other 
high value transportation asset” to anti-aircraft fires, and their failure modes are more benign 
than aircraft, as they tend to settle to ground ra ther than crash.58 They are capable of landing on 
water or on large flat areas ashore . However, there are other issues relating to vulnerability, such 
as the ULA’s radar signature, that need to be explored before the Army can be sanguine about its 
ability to operate in an A2/AD environment. 
ULAs might help solve some of the Army’s demand for large lift volumes. However, ULAs 
move at slower speeds than ai rlifters, although they do move more quickly than ocean-going 
ships. Hence their ability to support the rapid de ployment of Army forces would appear to be 
quite limited. 
In any event, a substantial investment would be required to support full development of the 
ULA, and the cost of infrastructure is re latively high. Manufacture and maintenance would 
require the construction of very large hangars. While there appear s to be a commercial market 
for such craft, it is not clear it will mature along the timelines required to sustain the Army’s 
vision of force transformation. At present the Ar my appears content to monitor the commercial 
sector’s progress on ULAs rather than commit to  the kind of funding necessary to accelerate 
their development. 
The Army’s 2001 and 2002 transformation wargames c oncluded that, intratheater lift assets for 
combat units and for sustainment are “esse ntial enablers” for the Objective Force. 59 The Army’s 
Future Transport Rotorcraft (FTR) program was intended to provide the Objective Force with 
much-needed intra-theater lift cap ability to supplement its re liance on the C-130 cargo aircraft. 
Until 2002, the system was scheduled for prog ram definition and risk reduction during FYs 
2008-2011, followed by engineering and manufact uring development (EMD) from 2012-2017, 
and then production.60 
In the spring of 2002, the Army announced it w ould not fund the development of a heavy-lift 
FTR to address FCS requirements. Instead, the Serv ice chose to rely on C-130 cargo aircraft for 
the mission. However, the FTR initiative has now b een resurrected in the form of the Advance 
                                                 
57 For example, the Advanced Technologies Group’s SkyCat 1000 could carry over 700 short tons of cargo, vice 61 
short tons for a C-5 cargo aircraft, the largest in the US air fleet. 
58 USA LIA, Logistics Transformation, p. 10. 
59 DA, Army Wargame 2001, p. 14; and DA, Army Wargame 2002, p. 14-15, 18. 
60 “C-130 Will Provide Airlift for FCS; No Role for Future Transport Rotorcraft,” Aerospace Daily , March 12, 
2002. 

 
 81
Maneuver Transport (AMT). If fielded, the aircraft would provide vertical airlift for the heaviest 
FCS vehicles over a distance of roughly 1,000 miles.61 
Advanced Sealift 
There are two broad areas of development with respect to high-speed sealift, which is a Navy 
mission. One area is focused on developing an ocean -going vessel that carries similar tonnage to 
today’s LMSR vessels, but which is capable of speeds between 40 and 90 knots. However, the 
High Speed Sealift Steering Group, chaired by the US Transportation Command (TRANSCOM), 
estimates the technology required to produce such a craft is “at least 10 years away” and would 
cost well over a billion dollars to develop.62 
A potentially more promising approach cente rs on commercial off-th e-shelf technology and 
involves the TSV. Both the Mari ne Corps and the Navy have already experimented with such a 
high-speed vessel—a leased, commercially de signed Australian catamaran, which has been 
christened the WestPac Express. The WestPac Express displaces 10,054 tons and is 331-feet 
long. Its cargo capacity is the equivalent of rou ghly nine C-17 aircraft. It can carry 417 tons of 
equipment and 970 passengers. It can also travel  at speeds approaching 50 mph for 48 hours (or 
some 2,400 miles) before refueling.  
The Navy also has been conducting experiments w ith a high-speed catama ran it calls the Joint 
Venture. The twin-hulled ship, also made in Australia, was originally designed as a car ferry. 
Admiral Robert Natter, Commande r-in-Chief, Atlantic Fleet, appears excited over the ship’s 
potential, declaring “I think th ere are all kinds of applicati ons for this kind of high-speed, 
relatively small craft . . . .”63 
Army studies exploring the pot ential of using Australian-d esigned commercial high-speed 
catamarans (HSCs) as TSVs are encouraging. The studies conclude that it would take 12.71 days 
to move an SBCT from Langley AFB in Virginia  to an APOD at Tirana-Rinas, Albania using C-
17 aircraft. However, if the brigade were airlif ted to an APOD at Sigonella, Sicily and then 
transshipped by 12 TSVs to a SPOD at Durres , Albania, the SBCT deployment could be 
accomplished in 10.1 days.64 This represents a significant improvement over current deployment 
timelines. 
Again, however, the fact remains that such vessel s would still not enable the Army to meet its 
deployment metrics. Moreover, as long as these ve ssels have to operate out of major ports, they 
would be vulnerable to A2 capabilities. There also is the matter of the enemy’s littoral AD 
forces. Until such time as US forces achieved s ea control over the littoral, cargo ships would 
                                                 
61 Jefferson Morris, “Army Funding for New Heavy-Lift Helo Will Remain Scarce, Official Says,” Aerospace Daily, 
January 9, 2003. 
62 USA LIA, Logistics Transformation, p. 10. 
63 Nathan Hodge, “Admiral: Fast Cata maran Shows Mine-Warfare Potential,” Defense Week Daily Updates , 
http://www.king-discussion.com. 
64 USA LIA, Logistics Transformation, p. 10. 

 
 82
operate in such waters at great peril. The Servic e estimates that it would take 12 TSVs to deploy 
a single SBCT.65 
In the final analysis, it remains unclear how large airlifters and high-speed sealift would fare in 
an A2/AD environment, given that  they are not anticipated to be stealthy, but are intended to 
deploy early in a conflict. Nor is it clear how either ULAs or fast sealift will resolve the 
challenge of rapid SBCT or Objective Force depl oyment. As Army studies show that even with 
these assets, it remains difficult to deploy one brig ade in four days, it will  be even more difficult 
to meet the goal of deploying thr ee brigades in five days, or fi fteen (i.e., five divisions) in 30 
days. Recall also that these formations are projec ted to arrive with only three days of supplies. 
Hence the demand for lift to support these forces’ sustainment is likely to be substantial. 
In summary, it is easy to sympathize with the dilemma of fielding a mo re expeditionary Army 
that can deploy rapidly in an A2/AD threat envi ronment, but which can also maintain the most 
desirable characteristics of the heavy, forwar d-deployed mechanized Army forces that 
characterized the Cold War era. Unfortunately, it may well be that the Army’s current approach 
provides the worst of both worlds. For despite the sacrifices being made with respect to other 
design parameters (e.g., lethality, survivability , sustainability) at the altar of the Army’s 
deployment metrics, the current and projected airlift force seems unlikely to accommodate Army 
deployment goals. 
Logistics 
General Eric Shinseki, the Army’s chief of staff, has stated blun tly that “[w]ithout a 
transformation in logistics, there will be no  transformation in the Army.” And without 
transformation, the Army will come under increasing risk from enemies possessing A2/AD 
capabilities. As the Army works to reduce the we ight of its combat sy stems and maneuver force 
elements in order to enhance deployability a nd reduce reliance on large, fixed forward APODs 
and SPODs, it is also working to reduce sustainment requirement s to achieve the same end. As 
its Objective Force White Paper declares, “[t]he Army will aggressively reduce its logistics 
footprint and replenishment demand.”
66 To accomplish this, the Army has concluded that “[t]he 
Objective Force operational concept requires new sustainment capabilities, maximizing 
distribution-based logistics and enhancing strategic responsiveness.”67 This will be critical, as the 
Army believes its Objective For ce units will operate at a signi ficantly higher tempo, or pace, 
than current formations. This will accentuate the need for “innovative sustainment concepts and 
capabilities, based on sharp re ductions in sustainment demand, significant improvements in 
reliability, split-based operations, and refined procedures for accelerating throughput, battlefield 
distribution, and mission staging.”68  
                                                 
65 DA, Army Wargame 2002, p. 14. 
66 US Army, Objective Force, p. 15. 
67 DA, Army Wargame 2002, p. 24 
68 US Army, Objective Force, p. 13. 

 
 83
Although Objective Force units are expected to have a high operating tem po, they will initially 
deploy with only three days of supplies before th ey must be replenished from external sources. 69 
This has led to concerns over resupply e fforts, particularly since the Army’s 2002 
Transformation Wargame concluded that hea vy demands the Objective Force places on 
employing precision munitions early in major comb at operations can “quickly deplete stockage 
to dangerously low levels.”70 
One way to assess the risk associated with the logi stical dimension of the Army’s efforts to meet 
the A2/AD challenge through transformation is to examine the Service’s SBCTs, which are 
rough surrogates for the Objective Force in term s of their deployment and sustainment metrics. 
With respect to sustainment, the SBCTs, like th e Objective Force units, are designed to carry 
limited supplies and after 72 hours to “reach” for needed logi stical support. Under the Army’s 
transformation concept of “reach” logistics, depl oyed Stryker Brigades are expected to receive 
logistics support through an in tegrated distribution system by a linked communications network 
that will include a foreign country’s commercial systems. However, to date the Army has not yet 
determined how this approach will enable SBCT replenishment.71 
The Army is also engaged in an effort to decrea se the ratio of combat ar ms soldiers to support 
troops to 6:1 from the current ratio  of 2.5:1 in the Stryker brigades. 72 The results, thus far, have 
not been encouraging. As a GAO study noted, “Fort Lewis has had to assume an increased 
maintenance workload because the IBCT [i.e.,  SBCT] was designed with fewer maintenance 
personnel in order to deploy quickly.” 73 To facilitate their rapid deployment, the SBCTs have 
been designed with an austere support battalion that contains  fewer mechanics to support and 
maintain its vehicles. However, even though the number of mechanics ha s been reduced by two 
thirds, the number of vehicles to support remains the same.74  
While the Objective Force is designed to dr aw upon emerging, advanced technologies to avoid 
the problems being experienced by the SBCTs, there does appear to be significant risk associated 
with the Army’s approach to deploying and sust aining forces in an A2/AD environment. The 
message here seems to be that there is no free  lunch. Efforts to light en SBCT and Objective 
Force units to facilitate rapid deployment tend to push a significant part of the logistics problem, 
whether it is munitions support fo r Objective Force units or maintenance support for the SBCTs, 
into the sustainment phase of the operation. 
                                                
 
69 The period prior to replenishment may be extended if  the operating tempo is reduced. The Army Objective Force 
White Paper states: “Units will organically sustain themse lves for three days of high tempo operations without 
replenishment from external sources in continuous combat in mid-to-high intensity conflict or be self-sustainable for 
up to seven days in low-end conflict and peacetime military engagement.” Ibid., p. 15. 
70 DA, Wargame 2002, p. 23. 
71 GAO, Military Transformation, pp. 3, 28. 
72 Army Leadership Gives Green Light to Logistics Transformation Plan,” Inside the Army, September 9, 2002, p. 1. 
73 GAO, Military Transformation, pp. 3. 
74 Ibid., p. 27. 

 
 84
The Army’s logistics challenge is also likely to be exacerbated by its warf ighting concept. In a 
non-linear warfare environment against an A2/AD th reat, there are serious risks with respect to 
the Army’s ability to sustain its SBCT and Objective Force maneuver formations. Army logistics 
elements must not only find a way to support the rapid deployment of the Objective Force, but to 
sustain them as well, as they conduct high ly distributed operatio ns on a fluid, nonlinear 
battlefield; i.e., in an environment where there are no rear areas offering sanctuary for lift and 
sustainment operations. 
In such a battlefield environment, it may be necessa ry to devote substantial combat resources in 
support of resupply convoy operations, diverting significant combat and logistics resources away 
from the main effort of the ground campaign. Th e situation may be further exacerbated by the 
Army’s efforts to establish a distributed supply network as opposed to a few iron mountains of 
supplies which could be highly vul nerable to enemy missile attac k. While a distributed supply 
network would assist in addressing the A2/AD ch allenge, it would require additional combat 
forces to provide security. The Army appears to  have a solution for the convoy problem, in the 
form of advanced airlift capabilities. However, it is not clear that the Service has the resources to 
field a fleet of intratheat er vertical airlifters on the scale necessary to  support a sizeable ground 
force in the area of operations. In short, the Service appears to have assumed substantial risk with 
respect to how it will accomplish the various aspects of this mission. 
PATH RISK 
The Homogenous Objective Force 
As noted above, in resp onding to the need for tr ansformation, the Army is pursuing what might 
be termed a three-track approach. The first track involves sustaining and modernizing a 
significant portion of the legacy force. This legacy force is dominated by heavy, mechanized 
forces that proved their worth in deterring aggr ession while forward depl oyed in Europe, and in 
routing the Iraqi Republican Guard. The second and third tracks are dire cted at fielding an 
Expeditionary Army. The second track’s ce nterpiece involves fielding an Interim Force 
comprising SBCTs—rapidly deployable medium-w eight units possessing more punch than light 
formations, such as the Army’s light infantry divisions and airborne di vision—but not nearly as 
heavy and logistics intensive as the Service’s armored and mechanized infantry divisions. 
The Stryker brigades are intended to serve as a br idge to the Objective Force, the third track of 
Army force development. The Objective Force w ill comprise units that possess the ability to 
deploy and sustain as rapidly as the Stryker brigades, as well as their mobility, but which also 
have the lethality and survivability character istic of today’s heavy formations. Once the 
Objective Force has been fielded, the Army’s legacy formations will be restructured along 
Objective Force lines. After this phase of th e Army’s transformation is completed, the SBCTs 
will be reorganized into Objective Forces.  
There are several path risks associ ated with the Army’s approach to transformation. First of all, 
the Army seems to assume its sister Services are pursuing transformation paths that will support 
its concept for dealing with the A2/AD threat. It  is far from clear, however, that the Army has 
fully considered the impact the A2/AD threat will have on its operations, or the limitations such 

 
 85
an environment will place on its sister Services. For example, given the Army’s relatively low 
level of investment in vertical li ft, and in air and missile defenses , it appears to assume the early 
destruction of the enemy’s ballistic and cruise missile forces, which would permit a more 
traditional buildup and sustainment of forces through major transportation nodes. But the US 
military’s ability to target and destroy these critical, mobile forces over extended ranges is much 
more a hope than it is a reality. As noted in  Chapter II of this report, the Air Force’s 
modernization program does not offer high confid ence that an enemy’s mobile ballistic and 
cruise missile forces can be defeated promp tly. In Millennium Challenge 2002 (MC02), a large-
scale joint field exercise designed to address the problem of dealing with an A2/AD threat in a 
small-scale contingency, the Air Force did not address the problem . If forced to operate for a 
protracted period in an A2/AD environment, ea rly deploying Army units could find themselves 
at a severe disadvantage for other than logistical reasons. In such  an environment, it is unlikely 
that the Air Force will want to deploy its aircraft to forward base s. This could substantially limit 
the close air support that US ground forces ha ve come to expect, further reducing their 
effectiveness.75 
Moreover, during the exercise, when the Navy move d the fleet into the littoral to open a sea line 
of communications in order to facilitate th e resupply of deployed ground forces, it suffered 
serious losses to its combatants and was forced  to withdraw. Consequently, even if the Army 
possessed the TSV, this aluminum-hulled craft ma y find itself operating at extreme risk in its 
efforts to deploy or resupply the Objective Force ashore. In short, the Army does not seem to 
have developed a hedge agains t the possibility that it may have to operate in an A2/AD 
environment for a protracted period. 
Beyond the Open Battle—Urban Warfare 
Army forces must not only depl oy rapidly and sustain themselv es in an A2/AD environment; 
they must also be able to accomplish their mission. The Objective Force is optimized for 
conventional theater warfare in general, and maneuver warfare in  relatively open terrain in 
particular. A case can be made that this is ap propriate. However, the Army’s contention that a 
single basic force element can be task organized to dominate across the full spectrum of conflict 
would appear to court significant risk. The ur ban conflict environment is likely to demand a 
significantly different force mix than one that  is optimized for extended-range, nonlinear ground 
warfare in open terrain. Enemy fo rces would likely seek cover in urban terrain in order to avoid 
having to operate in the open, where they would find themselves at a severe disadvantage against 
US air power and Army forces optimized fo r open battle. As the Army White Paper on the 
                                                 
75 Sean Naylor, “Stryker Impresses in Its First Real Test,” Army Times, August 19, 2002, p. 10. The MC02 exercise 
is revealing in terms of the risks it identified with respect to Army deployments and the reliance of ground forces on 
air power. In MC 02, a Stryker company with 14 vehicles participated with 800 troops of the 82nd Airborne 
Division against an opposing force (OPFOR) comprising the Army’s 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment at the 
Army’s National Training Center (NTC). The OPFOR wa s scaled down from the usual T-72 tanks that units 
typically encounter at the NTC. Moreover, the Stryker unit was not allowed to cross its line of departure before air 
strikes had destroyed all enemy tanks. Officers on the scene noted that the Opposing Force was not permitted to 
attack the Blue Force (including the Stryker unit) without  permission from the controllers. Similarly, although the 
Red Force had forces in position to attack the Stryker unit as it landed, it was not allowed to do so. The first 
comment is substantiated by LTG (Ret.) Paul van Riper, the Red Force Commander in MC02. See Michael Gilbert, 
“General: Stryker Unit’s Performance Not an Issue,” Tacoma News Tribune, August 22, 2002. 

 
 86
Objective Force notes, “[t]he environment is growing more and more urban—avoiding built-up 
areas is simply not possible. Future adversaries will exploit urban and complex terrain for 
sanctuary. Objective Force units must be extensively trained, properly equipped, and 
psychologically prepared for urban warfare.” 76 Moreover, US urban operations seem 
increasingly likely in the near and far future  for another reason. Ma ny demographic experts 
predict that by 2025, over 85 percent of the world’ s population will reside in cities. Thus not 
only will adversaries have more incentive to fight in urban environments, there will also be more 
urban terrain than ever before in which to seek sanctuary.77 
This complicates matters for the Objective Force. It is far from clear that units organized, trained 
and equipped for optimal performance in non-comp lex terrain will be optimized as well for 
operations in urban terrain. Ur ban operations are not only extr emely personnel intensive, but 
forces attempting to evict enemy forces from urban terrain historically suffer much higher 
casualty rates than forces operating in open terrain. 78 For these reasons, the Army—despite its 
concept of operations—may not want to put Objec tive Force units into an urban meat grinder. 
Indeed, in its major transformation war games, while Red (i.e., enemy) commanders typically 
concentrate their forces in cities, the Blue (i.e ., US/allied) commanders have generally relied on 
allied ground forces to conduct urban eviction operations.79 
Having said this, it is clear that the Army is ma king an attempt to structure and train its SBCTs 
with an eye toward the urban mission in mind. For example, roughly half of SBCT collective 
training explicitly deals with urban operati ons. The base unit of employment for both the 
SBCT—and the Objective Force—is a combined  arms mechanized/motorized infantry unit—
historically, the type of unit well-positioned for urban terrain, and “heavy” with the numbers of 
infantry soldiers necessary for the house-to-hou se fighting so prevalent in urban operations. 80 
Furthermore, the Objective Force system-of-syst ems envisions the integr ation of robotic ground 
and aerial vehicles (e.g., UAVs) which will provi de both sensor and s hooter capabilities to 
reduce the risk to personnel in the high-threat t actical situations so prevalent in urban terrain. 81 
                                                 
76 US Army, Objective Force, p. 14. 
77 General Accounting Office, Military Capabilities: Focused Attention Needed to Prepare US Forces for Combat in 
Urban Areas (Washington, DC: February 2000), p. 6. Furthermore, 95 percent of the population growth over the 
next 10 years or so will occur in de veloping countries, with almost all of the increase taking place in urban areas. 
See Central Intelligence Agency, Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue About the Future with Non-governmental 
Experts, (Washington, DC: NIC 2000-02, December 2000, GPO #041-015-00211-2). 
78 Army and Marine Corps Estimates that urban operations require up to nine times the number of personnel than 
open terrain operations of a similar scope. GAO, Military Capabilities, p. 7. 
79 One war game set in the Persian Gulf region found Germ an ground forces tasked with the urban eviction mission, 
while another game set in the Caucasus region saw the Turkish Army performing the mission. 
80 Huba Wass de Czege and Jacob Biever, “Maximizing th e Army’s Competitive Edge: Close Combat Soldiers,” 
Army Magazine, July 2001, pp. 9-12. “The Army must remember that its unique contribution to the fight is the 
assurance of decisive campaign results by closing with the enemy and assuming control of populations and territory 
. . . . The enemy will avoid open terrain, and will move to  complex terrain and an urban environment—therefore, 
larger numbers of squads and vehicle crews will be nece ssary. We must maximize their numbers while reducing the 
amount of overhead as well.” 
81 LTG Paul Kern, “Army Transformation,” Briefing, Washington, DC, Association of the US Army (AUSA) 
Conference, October 17, 2000, pp. 29, 37. 

 
 87
These efforts, if successful, may lead to the proliferation of robotic vehicles, to include the use of 
very small, or micro, aerial vehicles (MAVs) so that almost every unit, down perhaps even to the 
squad or individual level, would have its own eyes-and-ears.82 
As currently configured, the 24-man tactical human intelligence (HUM INT) platoons in the 
SBCT’s military intelligence company not only roughly doubles the HUMINT capability of each 
brigade, but also puts control of these intelligence assets within the brigade itself. While this is 
hardly a panacea (one doubts, for example, that such units could achieve quick results), it does 
represent a step in the right di rection. Recognizing the importance that snipers have played in 
urban combat, Stryker Brigades boast a sniper in every infantry squad, a sniper team in every 
company, and a sniper squad in every battalion. 
In terms of equipping the individual soldier, the Army’s Objective Warrior program aims to 
boost the abilities of Army perso nnel operating in the urban environment. With its focus on 
increased situational awareness (although not necessarily in urban environments), lethality, and 
survivability, the Objective Wa rrior program—assuming its pr oducts can be provided in a 
rugged and lightweight form—will enhance individual effectiveness in urban environments. 
Unfortunately, the program has been delayed due  to a combination of technical and fiscal 
problems.
83 
In summary, however, it appears that serious questions remain concerning the structure of the 
SBCTs and the Objective Force for urban warfar e. Both are built around the notion of operating 
under a new operating paradigm: to see first; understa nd first; act first; and finish decisively. 
There is a sequential aspect to this approach. To fi nish decisively, one must act first. To act first, 
one must understand first. Finally, to understand fi rst, one must see first. However, in urban 
operations it seems highly likely that the local inhabitants or occupying enemy forces will have a 
much better picture than Army forces arriving after the fact. Thus the Army will find itself 
operating from the start in a situation at odds w ith its new operating doctrine. Furthermore, the 
battlefield sensors used by Army forces will li kely be degraded in ur ban terrain. Until (and 
unless) R&D and acquisition efforts produce vi able MAVs, wall-penetrating radars, and 
advanced room-clearing munitions, Army units may find themselves operating at a distinct 
disadvantage relative to their conduct of operations in open terrain. 
Finally, despite its assertion that the SBCTs an d Objective Force will be sufficient to achieve 
dominance in land warfare across the spectrum of conflict, the Army’s concept of operation 
seems to acknowledge the unique requirements of urban operations. Specifically, it states that 
“wherever possible, urban clearing should be treated as an independent operational task, assigned 
to forces designated, prepared, and resourced specifically for the clearing mission under separate 
                                                 
82 DA, Objective Force Final Draft, p. 20. 
83 Erin Q. Winograd, “Army Scraps Plan to Fi eld Objective Force Warrior With FCS Block I,” Inside the Army , 
January 27, 2003, p. 1. The Army scrapped its plans to fi eld the advanced soldier system known as Objective Force 
Warrior with the first block of the Future Combat System in 2008, and is now pursuing a less ambitious variant. 
Early variants of the capability, known as Land Warrior Initial Capability and Land Warrior Stryker Interoperability, 
will be deployed with Army Ranger units in FY 2004 an d Stryker brigades, respectively. In 2008 the Army now 
intends to field the “Land Warrior SI+”. 

 
 88
command and control.” 84 This seems to call for units specially oriented, trained, and equipped 
for urban operations. From the above discussion, it also seems clear that the Army should at least 
experiment with such units. This also suggests that the Army may want to maintain its heavy 
counterattack legacy corps beyond the establishmen t of the Objective Force. These units might 
be especially valuable if they can be predeployed, either as part of a peacetime rotation of forces, 
or during a crisis prior to the initiation of hostilities. Altern atively, the Army may want to 
explore major variations in force design apart fr om the Objective Force so as not to progress 
down too narrow a path. 
Indeed, recent history suggests that armies engaged in tr ansformation explore a significant 
number of alternative force st ructures. In the late 1930s, fo r example, the German Army 
experimented with various mechanized, motori zed, airborne and air-la nding ground formations. 
Moreover, within these general categories, th ey also made major modifications to unit 
organizations.85 Given the Army’s vision of future warfare, a hedging strategy designed to 
mitigate operational risk is not only warranted, it is a necessity. Such a strategy could support 
exploring several different type s of Objective Force field formations, in addition to the full-
spectrum base formation contemplated by the Arm y. This might include brigades optimized for 
the extended reconnaissance/deep-strike mission , the urban eviction and control mission, large-
scale consequence management operations, and WMD control operations. 
Technical Risk 
As in any transformation, the Army is incurring  technology risk. The Service must surmount 
formidable technological challenges on a ra nge of capabilities key to its transformation 
strategy—from novel forms of strate gic lift, to system weight and support reductions, to new 
forms of munitions, to the integration of a wide arra y of information systems. 86 Moreover, to 
create a system-of-systems level of integration re quires that a range of systems, intelligence, 
surveillance and communications components be in tegrated. This poses tw o challenges. First, 
there is the challenge of creating such a system s architecture, which is essential to the Army 
vision of rapidly deployable forces that rely on  an advantage in information (i.e., situational 
awareness) and mobility rather than heavy armo r for their protection. Second, there is the matter 
of fielding such a capability—even in rudimentar y form—in five years. Indeed, the Objective 
Force concept, as originally envisioned by th e Army Science Board in the mid-1990s, had an 
anticipated fielding date of 2015. However, the Army seeks to field the Objective Force 
beginning in 2008, even though the FCS’s roving network of manned and unmanned ground and 
aerial combat vehicles, all to be linked into a battle network, is by far the most complex 
technological challenge ever attempted by the Army.
87 
                                                 
84 TRADOC, Objective Force, p. 24. 
85 See Andrew F. Krepinevich, The German Army’s Transformation to Blitzkrieg, (Unpublished paper), p. 32. 
86 Dan Caterinicchia, “Army Racing the Clock For Objective Force,” Federal Computer Week, November 4, 2002. 
87 Frank Tiboni, “Future Combat Systems Program Has Its Doubters,” ArmyTimes.com, October 22, 2002. 

 
 89
Challenges abound. For example, signature management techniques are needed to make the FCS 
less visible to enemy sensors, an important f actor in reducing the system’s vulnerability. 
However, they are too expensive to be incorpor ated into FCS Block I. Battery performance is 
another challenge, with the technology lagging the ambitious FCS fielding schedule.88 The Army 
also hopes to incorporate hybrid-electric propul sion in the FCS. A hyb rid-propulsion engine’s 
components allow for a more flexible (and hence, more efficient) use of the vehicle’s volume, 
thereby making a major contribution to maximizi ng the internal volume available for various 
payloads. Thus the FCS infantry carrier with a nine-man squad is anticipated to have 25-35 
percent greater internal volume than a Stryker vehicle. This will enable the FCS to carry the fuel, 
ammunition, spare parts, food, and water necessar y for the Objective Force UE to deploy with 
the requisite three to seven days of supplies. Yet it is not clear that this can be achieved on the 
timelines established. If the savi ngs in volume are not realized, th is could further exacerbate the 
logistics challenges discussed above.89 
Not surprisingly, perhaps, the Army Science Bo ard concluded that, of  the 32 technologies 
required to support the fielding of the Objective Force, 16 of them will not be ready by the time 
the initial units of the force are being fielded. 90 A strong case can be made that the Army may 
experience a significant lag in its fielding of the Objective Force. This has profound implications 
for the Army if one accepts General Shinseki’s  statement that the Army risks becoming 
irrelevant if it cannot begin the transition to the Objective Force as scheduled. 
FISCAL AND HUMAN RESOURCE RISK 
The Budget 
The Army might be able to reduce the technical ri sk associated with the Objective Force if it 
could devote more resources to addressing the pr oblem. Despite its efforts to increase funding 
for the Objective Force, however, the Army still finds itself coming up short. In fact, despite 
canceling and restructuring 48 progr ams, the Army’s six-year spe nding plan contains mismatch 
of some $35 billion when compared to the Service’s program. 91 M a n y  o f  t h e  A r m y ’ s  k e y  
Objective Force programs are inadequately funde d and in danger of not being able to meet 
critical development and fielding time lines. A few highlights indicate the risk this poses to the 
Army’s goal of creating a force that can deploy rapidly and opera te effectively in an A2/AD 
environment: 
                                                 
88 Sandra I. Erwin, “Army’s Future Combat System Shakes Up Procurement Culture,” National Defense, January 1, 
2003, p. 24. 
89 Mark Hewish, “Technology Transformation for Armored Warfare,” Jane’s International Defense Review , April 
200303, p. 38. 
90 Briefing, Office of Program Analysis and Evaluation, Army Transformation, July 26, 2001. 
91 Inside the Army , “Despite Increased Spending, Army Faces $35 Billion Gap in 2004-09 POM,” September 2, 
2002. The Army’s fiscal risk extends beyond its own budg et. For example, the Army st ates that its “96/120/5-30 
deployment timelines were only made possible when they  were accepted and stated as Joint requirements. In 
essence, sister Services [must] program their resources to support Joint deployability and the future Joint Force 
Commander (JFC).” DA, Objective Force Final Draft , p. 32. Yet it is far from clear that the Navy or Air Force 
intends to buy the kind or amount of lift required by the Objective Force’s deployment timelines. 

 
 90
• The FCS organic air defense system (ORAD)  is designed to provide organic defense 
against rotary-wing aircraft, unguided rockets, artillery, UAVs, and mortars, as mandated 
by the FCS operational requirements. Absent ORAD, FCS units would have little ability 
to defend against such threats. Yet the program is severely under funded.92  
• At the same time, the PAC-3 missile defens e system, which could be critical to the 
Army’s ability to operate forces from multiple, austere forward bases, is arguably short of 
missiles, which cost roughly $2 million apiece. The Army hopes to buy over 1,000 PAC-
3 missiles through FY 2009.
93  
• The Army does not possess its own means for air transporting its FCS assets within an 
operational theater. Despite discussing buildin g an FTR, the Army seemed to lose 
enthusiasm for the project once the Marine Corps pulled out of the enterprise. It is 
estimated that the Army would have to spend over $1 billion in the current defense plan 
(FY 2004-2009) to create an option to field an FTR-like aircraft sometime in the next 
decade.94 According to the Army, an Objectiv e Force brigade-size formation would 
require 544 JTRs and 82 ATTs to be airlifted.95  
• Unmanned systems figure prominently in th e Army’s Objective Force. However, the 
Service’s Cooperative Enhanced Performan ce for Unmanned Systems (CEPUS) is not 
being funded. The program is intended to develop cooperative c ontrol behaviors for 
unmanned systems. Without them the Objective Force’s unmanned systems will not 
achieve their performance requirements in  areas such as land navigation, mapping, 
communications relay and target identification.
96  
• The Army hopes to see 17 Joint Venture–like FSS in service. Procurement costs alone are 
anticipated at between $1.5-2 billion. Even if the ships are procured, they will not provide 
sufficient lift to move even two Stryker brigades.97  
• The Army chief of staff, General Shinseki, maintains that the Comanche helicopter is “a 
revolutionary cornerstone of the Objective Force . . . .”98 The Army’s plan requires a fleet 
of 819 Comanches; however, only 650 aircraft are programmed for production.99  
                                                 
92 Erin Q. Winograd, “Dozens of Key Army Transformational Efforts Inadequately Funded,” Inside the Army , 
December 16, 2002, n.p. 
93 Erin Q. Winograd, “With Iraq in Mind , DoD to Boost PAC-3 Missile Purchases,” Inside the Army, November 25, 
2002, n.p. 
94 Wingorad, “Key Army Transformation Efforts,” n.p. 
95 DA, Army Wargame 2002 , p. 16. The JTR has been resurrected as  the AMT. An FCS goal, according to the 
Army’s TRADOC operational requirements document, is to be able to vertically lift a significant maneuver element. 
96 Wingorad, “Key Army Transformation Efforts,” n.p. 
97 Richard Sisk, “Army Battles the Ax,” New York Daily News, October 21, 2002, p. 26. 
98 Vernon Loeb, “Top Army General Backs US Capability,” The Washington Post, February 17, 2003, p. A24. 

 
 91
• The FCS crew is to control both ground robots and aerial drones. Its ground vehicles will 
carry a small (less than 30- pounds) robot for urban reconna issance, a robotic mule 
weighing 1-2 tons and carrying up to  1,200 pounds of cargo, a 5.3-ton armored 
reconnaissance vehicle to support maneuver for ces and a 2.5-ton assault vehicle that will 
accompany dismounted infantry. Once again, the technological challenges are impressive 
in this area, and the Army has not received the kind of f unding support that it had hoped 
for in order to maintain its deployment timelines.100 
There does not appear to be much in the way of  fat in the Army budget to redirect to its 
transformation efforts, following the Service’s re ductions and/or adjustme nts to generate over 
$20 billion in additional funding for transformation.101 Barring a significant increase in its budget 
estimates, it seems the Army will incur significant fi scal risk in its efforts to field a transformed 
ground force. 
Personnel and Training 
Not surprisingly, military transformations typically lead to substantial shifts in the skill sets 
required of soldiers. The Army’s shift toward mo re expeditionary forces that can be deployed 
rapidly and operate as part of a highly distributed, networked force on a nonlinear battlefield will 
require a highly trained force. This force must  be capable of operating along highly compressed 
timelines, both with respect to deployment and to meet the Army’s “see first, understand first, act 
first and finish decisively” vision. Consequentl y, the Army’s training paradigm “will change 
from ‘Alert-Train-Deploy’ to ‘Train-Alert-Deploy.’”
102 That is, Army units will need to train 
more intensively than in the past. Rather than gearing up their tr aining efforts upon being alerted 
for deployment, units must be highly trained, so that upon being alerted, they are ready to deploy 
rapidly. 
Yet the Army has already encountered problems w ith soldiers maintaini ng proficiency in the 
new digital battle field technologies being introduced into the force, particularly with respect to 
the SBCTs. 103 Army officials were c oncerned that normal pers onnel rotation policies would 
adversely affect the SBCT’s readiness and ability to achieve certification on time. To address the 
problem, the Army established a formal stabilization policy for the SBCTs in May 2001.104 
Realizing that this action only addressed the symptoms of the problem, the Army, much to its 
credit, is considering replacing its individua l-replacement system with a unit-manning system. 105 
                                                                                                                                                             
99 John R. Guardiano, “Manning and Unmanning Army Aviation,” Rotor& Wing, December 2002, p. 8. 
100 Sandra I. Erwin, “Future Combat System,” p. 24. 
101 Department of the Army, Deputy Chief of Staff, G-8, Army Modernization Plan 2003  (Washington, DC: 
February 2003), p. 2. 
102 DA. Objective Force Final Draft, p. 6. 
103 GAO, Military Transformation, p. 3. 
104 Ibid., p. 25. 
105 Sean D. Naylor, “Secretary Pushes for Large-Scale Personnel Reform,” Army Times, September 16, 2002, p. 14. 

 
 92
The intent is to reduce the turbulence that happen s when a unit must rotate soldiers in and out 
one at a time. In the words of Army Secretary Thomas White, the personnel system “for the last 
60 years has been focused on an individual rotation basis, which is the antithesis of unit cohesion 
and expertise.” 106 The proposed approach could see units  home basing at installations in the 
United States and deploying overseas for six-m onth or one-year unaccompanied tours. More 
importantly, it offers the promise that soldiers will be stabilized in their units, enabling them to 
achieve the high levels of training proficienc y demanded by the Army’s new deployment and 
warfighting concepts. 
MEETING THE A2/AD CHALLENGE: AN OVERLY RISKY 
PROPOSITION? 
The discussion above leads ineluctably to the c onclusion that the Army’s transformation effort, 
while laudable, is a highly risky proposition. I ndeed, the Service’s focus on fielding Objective 
Force units that are capable of deploying rapidl y and operating effectively across the entire 
spectrum of conflict including the A2/AD threat, is  a highly risky proposition, is problematic for 
several reasons. 
What is to be done? This issue is beyond the scope of this paper, whose focus is diagnostic rather 
than prescriptive. A good starting point, however, would involve an assessment of how the Army 
vision and its associated Objective Force operati onal concept might be m odified to reduce risk, 
while still enabling the Army to  meet the A2/AD threat that helped define the need for 
transformation in the first place. In areas where risk cannot be reduced to more acceptable levels, 
the Army might explore opportunities to develop strong hedges against risk failure. 
Finally, despite the formidable problems confronting the Army, there is some cause for cautious 
optimism. The Army leadership clearly sees th e need for addressing the A2/AD challenge. The 
Army has initiated the transformation process before the A2/AD threat has grown to such 
proportions as to jeopardize the Service’s abili ty to perform its land warfare missions at 
acceptable costs. The Army still has time to make  adjustments to its transformation strategy, so 
as to enhance the prospects for success and mitigate the consequences of setbacks. How much 
time, however, will be up to America’s adversaries. 
                                                 
106 Ibid. 

 
 93
V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The preceding chapters paint an overall picture of the US military services struggling to adapt to 
an expeditionary era. This expeditionary era has emerged from two defining developments. First, 
due to the collapse of the Soviet empire in 1989  and of the Soviet Union, itself, in 1991, more 
and more US combat forces have been brought home from the overseas garrisons, bases, and 
ports they once occupied on the periphery of Am erica’s Cold War adversary. Second, there is 
ample reason to anticipate that future adversar ies, having seen Iraq routed twice by US-led 
coalition forces after they were allowed to deploy unmolested into Southwest Asia, will seek 
asymmetric ways of opposing the movement of US military forces into their region. 
A2 and AD capabilities are, therefore, a natu ral and logical response to American military 
preeminence and demonstrated power-projection cap abilities. Iraq’s Baathist regime may have 
learned little in this regard from the 1991 Persian Gulf War, but  evidence is ac cumulating that 
other nations are more adept competitors. For in stance, the ongoing People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) deployments of advanced CSS-6 and CSS- 7 short-range ballistic missiles (SRBMs), SA-
10 SAMs, over-the-horizon targeting systems, and re lated capabilities opposite Taiwan may be a 
leading indicator of the kinds of A2/AD capabilities America’s expeditionary forces will 
eventually confront should anothe r Taiwan Straits crisis arise.  Moreover, US power-projection 
capabilities are themselves contributing the probl em. It is likely, for example, that the GPS 
coordinates of most potential fixed targets on Taiwan are already precisely known to PRC 
SRBM units, and GPS has also made accurate, l ong-range cruise missiles an option countries 
with limited defense resources relative to the Unite d States will find increasingly affordable in 
the future. 
But the Pentagon’s concerns are not limited to China. A recent commander-in-chief of US forces 
in Korea declared that the problem of forward base access is not a problem for the US military of 
2010, but one that exists in embryonic form in Korea today, and which will only worsen over 
time. Indeed, Secretary of Defense William Perry  voiced concerns over this problem during the 
1994 crisis on the peninsula. A cursory examina tion of the situation on the Korean peninsula 
reveals the reasons for concern. 
In the near term, air operations from the two US air bases in South Korea are unlikely to be 
severely disrupted by North Korean missile attack s as long as North Kor ea refrains from using 
nuclear or chemical warheads, and does not improve the accuracy and lethality of its 
conventional missiles. North Korea’s current in ventory of Scud-C (Hwa song 5/6) and Scud D/E 
(No-Dong 1 and 2) ballistic missiles, despite ra nges of over 300 and 900 miles respectively, lack 
sufficient accuracy to target an air base effectively. North Korea has yet to develop warheads for 
delivering submunitions, either bomblets or runway penetration submunitions, a capability useful 
for disrupting operations spread over large areas. 
However, this relatively favorable situation seem s unlikely to endure. North Korea is increasing 
its inventory of No-dong 1 and 2 ballistic missiles. South Kor ea and a significant portion of 
Japan are within range of the No-dong 1. Most of  Japan, including the US air bases of Misawa 
and Yokota, are within range of the No-dong 2. A ll of Japan, including the US Kadena air base 

 
 94
in Okinawa, is within range of the Taepodong 1 medium-range ballistic missile currently in 
production. While these missiles are relatively inaccurate, over time improvements in their 
accuracy appear not only possible,  but highly likely. As this co mes to pass, forces relying on 
large, fixed bases will find themselves paying an ever greater (and perhaps prohibitive) price for 
continuing to operate out of these facilities. 
There is also the matter of Iran.  The importance of maintaining free maritime passage through 
the Strait of Hormuz cannot be understated. Yet the strait is perhaps the most likely maritime 
chokepoint to be threatened by an AD capab ility. Iran, with military-technical support from 
China, North Korea, and Russia, seems intent  on developing and fielding a range of A2/AD 
capabilities, to include ballistic and cruise missiles (possibly equipped with WMD warheads), 
mobile ASCMs (both shore based and sea based), submarines, small high-speed coastal 
combatants, and advanced anti-ship mines. Wh ile the situation appears manageable for US 
maritime forces over the near term, the prospect that Iran will continue to develop more 
formidable AD capabilities cannot be ruled out. If  anything, such a development would appear 
likely. Moreover, Iran’s AD capabili ties could be enhanced by its fielding of A2 forces, which 
could also be used to hold at  risk the oil and natural gas pr oduction facilities (to include over 
land pipelines) of other Gulf states. As noted ea rlier in this report, a recent US military major 
joint field exercise, Millennium Challenge 2002, revealed what even a small country’s AD forces 
could do to limit US maritime forces’ ability to control key narrow waters. 
How have the Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and Army responded to this emerging challenge? 
Perhaps the most striking feature of their individual responses to  the A2/AD challenge so far is 
the absence of a truly joint approach. Instead, each Service appears to be pursuing its own 
solution, for its own institutional purposes, within the boundaries of its tr aditional warfighting 
roles and domain. The Air Force’s GSTF concept focuses on turning the short-range F-22 into an 
F/A-22 able not only to have a devastating first-look, first-shot advantage over enemy fighters, 
but also to kick in the door to denied airspa ce by taking out advanced SAMs as well as critical 
mobile targets such as enemy mobile-missile launchers. However, unless the GSTF can succeed 
in suppressing or destroying such systems very quickly—probably within a day or two at the 
most—the closure of the Army’s first few Objective Force brigades on the desired timelines is 
likely to be delayed. Similarly, whether the sea base is assured or not, V-22 insertion of a Marine 
combat battalion into enemy battlespace still actively defended by SA-20 class SAMs would also 
have to wait for the suppression  of these AD systems by the GSTF. At the same time, except for 
TLAMs, the Navy will have no realistic means of attacking these defenses with manned aircraft 
until the JSF enters service. Indeed, because the SA-10D is believed to have a credible capability 
against non-stealthy cruise missiles such as the TLAM, the Navy appears to have no capability to 
attack any critical inland targets in the f ace of S-300/S-400 class SAMs. Thus, in an A2/AD 
environment, the ability of the entire joint for ce to project power promptly ashore may hinge at 
the outset on the viability of the GSTF to elim inate various A2 and AD systems in a matter of 
hours to a day or two. And, given the operational risks inherent in the GSTF, doing so appears to 
be a non-trivial challenge—especially in the absence of long-range, penetrating, staring 
surveillance. 
Operationally, the Army’s admirable goals of be ing able have a brigade combat team on the 
ground anywhere in the world within 96 hours, and an entire division with 120 hours, are 

 
 95
laudable lines to draw in the sand for an expeditionary era. However, even if the operational risks 
in the GSTF are set aside, these brigades still appear to require more strategic and in-theater 
airlift than either the Air Fo rce or Navy are ever likely to  field. Beyond simply getting the 
combat units on the ground within the desired timelines, there is the additional burden of 
logistical sustainment for light, dispersed groun d forces operating deep in enemy territory. As 
Chapter IV noted, the Army is exploring advan ced airlift and sealift options. At best, though, 
they lie far in the future, and the fiscal pressu res on the Army created by the FCS alone suggest 
that, in the end, other Services will have to bear much of the development and procurement 
burden of such systems if they are to be fielded before 2015. Consequentially, there appears to be 
a major disconnect between the deployment goals of the Army’s Objective Force and the lift 
capacity of the rest of the joint force. 
Turning to the DoN, the overriding risk to its current approach to the A2/AD challenge is, surely, 
fiscal. As suggested in Chapter III, the new cl ass of littoral combat ships will probably cost $2-3 
billion per year over a period of 15 years just to construct. Manning and operating this new class 
of ships will create additional costs. Even if  one assumes that the Defense Department’s 051 
topline grows to $483.6 billion in discretionary budget authority by FY 2009, as the Department 
presently projects, paying for this new class of ships will probably require the transfer of some 
total obligation authority (TOA) from the Air Force’s or Army’s topline to the Navy Department. 
If, on the other hand, the 051 toplin e begins leveling off, as hist ory would suggest, before FY 
2009, an even larger reallocation of Service budge t shares will be needed to pay for the LCS 
class of ships and the associated growth of th e fleet to 375 ships. Thus, even before one 
contemplates the non-trivial operational risks of trying to operate these vessels close to the shore 
within the reach of enemy AD capabilities, the fiscal assumpti on that the DoN can count on an 
increasing share of TOA at the ex pense of its sister Services ove r the next 15-20 years seems to 
require a major leap of faith about maritime pr eeminence in the expeditionary era. Unless this 
leap of faith is borne out, the more likely outcome  is that the LCS class will not be fielded in the 
numbers presently envisioned. 
The disconnects between individual Service so lutions to the A2/AD challenge, then, are 
substantial. Furthermore, these disconnect s suggest an obvious recommendation. A joint 
approach to the prospective A2 and AD capabilities of future US adversaries is crucial if the 
various path, operational, technological, and fiscal risks are to be mitigated or hedged against to 
any serious degree. 
Granted, one could argue or assume that the A2 /AD threat, as depicted in this report, is 
overblown and will not emerge within this deca de—or the next. Doing so, of course, would be 
tantamount to judging the risk of encounterin g serious A2 or AD capabilities before 2020 as 
unlikely or remote. In other words, foreseeable  opponents concerned about US power-projection 
capabilities into their regions will  not really be serious for a l ong while to come. At the end of 
the day, however, this viewpoint appears to be a huge gamble and one that neither prudence nor 
history could recommend with much confidence. 