 1 
 
The Adaptability of the FARC and ELN and the Prediction of their Future Actions 
 
 
By 
Drew Lasater  
INTL 699 
D001 Win 
 
Advisor  
 
Dr. Jonathan S. Lockwood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2 
Introduction 
  
 Colombia  is  Latin  America’s  oldest  democracy  yet  the nation has faced continual 
violence and a guerrilla war that has made the nation weak and fragmented. This violent 
foundation of the Colombian state made it open to a new wave of political ideologies in 
the 20th century. The movement of Marxism-Leninism spread across Latin America, 
especially among the intellectuals, peasants, and priests in Colombia. The purpose of this 
research is to provide an analysis of the two main guerrilla factions in the country – the 
FARC and the ELN – and predict the future of these groups. Studying the history of these 
organizations and their adaptability within the Colombian context provides insight into 
the emergence of guerrilla warfare and the problems for the state.  
 Colombia has been in social and political turmoil since independence. Like most 
Latin American countries, Colombia developed a political system based on an oligarchy 
between the political and landed elite with the working poor and peasantry at the bottom.  
As Colombia began interacting with international markets and businesses it produced 
economic growth and prosperity for the elite while leaving the impoverished and 
marginalized populace open to the spread of revolutionary political ideologies.    
 The FARC and ELN emerged as the masses at the bottom of the social strata were 
alienated by the ruling elite and their political system. While Colombia is a popularly 
elected democracy there was little participation or reward for those outside of the two 
party Liberals and Conservatives.  With the spread of revolutionary ideals across Latin 
America due to the success of the Cuban revolution, the FARC and ELN found within 
Colombia the political and social context necessary to employ revolutionary strategies 
that continue today.  

 3 
 Looking at these two revolutionary groups, their emergences, capacities for 
change and durability provide insights on revolutionary groups and their survival.  The 
FARC and ELN have faced incredible odds due to the rejection of the local people, lack 
of external support, or weak organizations in general.  But these two organizations have 
been able to strengthen, adapt and expand even as public support has waned.  They have 
survived with little or no external support and they have learned to become self-sufficient 
over time. Not only are these groups a model for the study of modern revolutionary 
movements but of prevention of revolutionaries and counterinsurgency tactics as well. 
Very few revolutionary movements in history have been able to achieve the level of 
success and adaptability of these two organizations over nearly half a century.  
 In the process of studying these groups the political environment of Colombia and 
the 20th century are also of great importance. The movement of Marxism throughout the 
world created hope for a utopian ideal which spoke to the disenfranchised and sparked 
the belief that the revolution was possible. The workers of the world only needed a 
cohesive leadership structure. In Colombia, the revolution was based on land 
redistribution and an equitable sharing of wealth. These ideals, coupled with the lack of 
social change in Colombia, have led to a long standing revolutionary climate. 
 Beginning in Chapter One, the study looks at the emergence of Marxism as a 
political ideology in the late 1800s. By 1917, Lenin interpreted Marxism to create what 
would be the first socialist country, Russia, after the Bolshevik Revolution. The chapter 
then moves on to Stalinism and the spread of socialist ideology all over the world. After 
an overview of Stalin and Mao, the chapter takes up the Soviet and Mao influence in 

 4 
Latin America and the Cuban revolution. This moves the work through the influence of 
the Cuban revolution and the emergence of revolutionary ideology in Colombia. 
 Chapter Two focuses on the FARC and the origins of the revolutionary group. 
Using liberalism as the theoretical approach and through rational choice modeling the 
work will test hypotheses using a matrix diagram. The purpose of the chapter is to show 
the adaptability of the FARC as an explanation for their survival and ability to compete 
with the Colombian government. This also explains the ideology that formed the FARC 
and how that ideology has changed with the evolution of the revolutionary group. This 
research and framework will be the basis for the next chapter on the ELN as well. 
 Chapter Three discusses the ELN and its origins as a revolutionary movement. 
This chapter also uses liberalism as its theoretical approach with the testing of hypotheses 
completed through rational choice modeling and a matrix diagram. The purpose of this 
chapter is to show the origins and ideology of the ELN and how that ideology changed as 
the  political  and  social  dynamic  changed  in  Colombia.  The  ELN’s  adaptability  for  
survival and its ability to stay a strong revolutionary group is also discussed. This leads 
into the final chapter on predicting the future of these groups. 
 Chapter Four is a LAMP (Lockwood Analytical Method for Prediction) study 
conducted on both the FARC and ELN using the actions of the government as a 
backdrop.  Beginning with the political history of the government, the chapter explains 
how the government acts in Colombia and its motivations.  By utilizing the liberalism 
theoretical approach that acknowledges the importance of non-state actors, the LAMP 
study focuses on the FARC and ELN actions and predicts the future actions and 
behaviors of these groups vis-à-vis actions by the state of Colombia. The study will 

 5 
outline the scenarios possible and provide a prediction of how the FARC and ELN will 
act based on past behaviors. 
 This thesis sets out to present a chronological and historical analysis of the FARC 
and ELN and their effectiveness as revolutionary organizations. Through this process, the 
political and ideological events during the life spans of these groups will be considered 
and used to predict their possible futures. One cannot discuss two revolutionary actions in 
Colombia without considering the FARC and ELN. By studying the emergence and 
adaptability of both guerrilla groups, insights are to be gained in understanding  the role 
of the revolutionaries in the Latin American social and political climate. It is the intent of 
this research to add to the literature on Colombia revolutionaries and through the use of 
new methods, offer new insights to the conflict in Colombia.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
Chapter 1 
Marxist Roots of the FARC and ELN 
Introduction: 
In post World War II Latin America, Marxist-inspired insurgency groups formed 
in response to the unequal distribution of land ownership and wealth, and ongoing state-
sponsored violence. This chapter forms the background necessary to trace the Marxist 
influence from the 1800s through Lenin, Stalin, and Mao, as applicable to Latin America, 
particularly  in  Colombia’s  FARC  and  ELN.  Karl  Marx  planted  the  seeds  of  revolution  in  
his creation of a comprehensive social and political philosophy that would become 
known as classical Marxism. While the creation of what became Marxism was the result 
of many philosophers, Marx was the dominating philosophy fromwhich the political form 
of communism from Lenin, Stalin, and Mao was created. Marxism was never applied 
during  his  lifetime,  but  Marx’s  writings  became  the  root  system  for  the  practical  
applications of communism by nations and revolutionaries throughout the world. These 
communist/socialist  ideologies  were  similar  in  that  they  stemmed  from  Marx’s  ideas  of  
class struggle and class equity. With Marxism providing the philosophical side of the 
Communist  movement,  Lenin  and  Stalin  interpreted  Marx’s  ideology  through  the  
application of his principles and ideals in Russia. While the actual result of the Soviet 
experience was far from what Marx had hoped for or predicted the Russian Revolution 
became the springboard for the expansion of communist and socialist ideologies around 
the globe, where they were employed especially in the Third World. Once communism 
reached China and Latin America, revolutionary movements began that are still active 
today.  

 7 
Marxism: 
 Marx’s  social  and  political  philosophy  was  a  grand  narrative,  a  critique  of  modern  
capitalism in European industrial society. One looking at Karl Marx and his work must 
understand  that  “Marx  was  not  an  academic  writer  but  a  humanist  in  the  Renaissance  
sense of the term: his mind was concerned with the totality of human affairs, and his 
vision of social liberation embraced as an interdependent whole, all of the major 
problems  with  which  humanity  is  faced.”1 This explains how the writings of Marx were 
more romantic and less practical, where his works tended to follow general ideas rather 
than practical means for attaining social and political goals. Upon his position of editor at 
Rheinische Zeitung Marx focused on political abuses and socio-economic inequality.2 He 
decried  the  monopolization  of  wealth  and  property,  declaring  the  poor  “the  elemental  
class  of  human  society.”3 The  works  of  Marx  follow  “three  fields  of  speculation  – basic 
philosophic anthropology, socialist doctrine, and economic analysis – and point to three 
corresponding sources in German dialectics, French socialist thought, and British 
political  economy.”4 Marx  was  introduced  to  Hegelianism  which  “was  the  interpretation  
of history as a progressive rationalization of the world in accordance with the ineluctable 
laws of the spirit; the chief purpose of philosophical thought was to observe this 
evolution,  in  which  empirical  reality  was  seen  gradually  to  conform  to  universal  reason.”5 
On  Hegel’s  “idea”  of  the  state,  Marx  turned  this  into  the  “reality”  of  the  “crass  pursuit  of  
self-interest and slavish service to aristocratic and bourgeois interests”  by  the  Prussian  
                                                 
1 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism: The Founders The Golden Age  
 The Breakdown. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 8. 
2 Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion to Major Social Theorists. Malden: Blackwell 
Publishers. 107. 
3 Ibid.  
4 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 9. 
5 Ibid 80.  

 8 
bureaucracy officials.6 Marx took from Hegel the notion of history unfolding, but rather 
than  by  “laws  of  the  spirit”  the  unfolding  was  a  function  of  historically  material  
processes.  Marx’s  criticism  of  religion  is  evident  in  his Critique  of  Hegel’s  Philosophy  of  
Right on man and religion as they pertain to politics: 
Man is the world of man, the state, and society. This state, this society produce 
religion’s  inverted  attitude  to  the  world,  because  they  are  an  inverted  world  
themselves.  Religion  is  …  the  imaginary  realization  of  human  being,  because  
human being possesses no true reality. Thus the struggle against religion is 
indirectly  the  struggle  against  that  world  whose  spiritual  aroma  is  religion  …  
Religion is the opium of the people. The real happiness of the people requires the 
abolition of religion, which is their illusory happiness. In demanding that they 
give up illusions about their condition, we demand that they give up a condition 
that  requires  illusion  …  Once  the  holy  form of human self-alienation has been 
unmasked, the first task of philosophy, in the service of history, is to unmask self-
alienation in its unholy forms. The criticism of heaven is thus transformed into 
criticism of earth, the criticism of religion into the criticism of law, and the 
criticism of theology into the criticism of politics.7 
Marx looked at the state of Germany for example and discussed its liberation, 
“[w]e  must  make  the  actual  oppression  even  more  oppressive  by  making  people  
conscious of it, and  the  insult  even  more  insulting  by  publicizing  it  …  We  must  force  
these petrified relationships to dance by playing their own tune to them. To give people 
                                                 
6 Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion 107.  
7 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 106. 

 9 
courage,  we  must  teach  them  to  be  alarmed  by  themselves.”8 For Marx, it was necessary 
for the oppressed classes to be relieved of their religion as an opiate, which kept them 
from  acting  on  their  collective  alienation.  Marx  explains  how  the  “social  revolution  can  
only be carried out by a class whose particular interests coincide with that of all society, 
and  whose  claims  represent  universal  needs.”9 With that, Marx portrays the liberation of 
the proletariat and its abolition as a separate class resulting in the subsequent destruction 
of class distinctions by abolishing private property.10 Marx first discussed socialism but 
not  as  a  substitution  of  one  political  life  by  another  but  as  the  “abolition  of  politics  
altogether.”11 Marx  looked  at  socialism  as  the  “full  emancipation  of  the  individual  by  the  
destruction of the web of mystification which turned community life into a world of 
estrangement  presided  over  by  an  alienated  bureaucracy.”12 According to Marx 
capitalism separates the individual from their means of production, concentrates 
production and its means in the hands of capitalists, and achieves cooperative activity 
through coercion.13 This unrestrained pursuit of self-interest generates tension between 
the individual activity and cooperation.14 These ideas make the assumption that there can 
be a perfect union between collective and individual interests and that a society where all 
sources of conflict, aggression, and evil have been removed was thinkable and 
historically eminent.15 Marx  held  that  the  bourgeois  “freedom  dissolves  feudal  ties  and  
extends formal rights, but neither sustains community nor provides adequate 
                                                 
8 Ibid.  
9 Ibid 107.  
10 Ibid.  
11 Ibid.  
12 Ibid 108. 
13 Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion 115. 
14 Ibid.  
15 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 108. 

 10 
opportunities  for  those  below  the  middle  class.”16 Marx  intended  a  ‘practical  philosophy’  
over  the  ‘contemplative’  attitudes  of  his  predecessors  and  peers  “The  philosophers  have  
only interpreted the world in various ways; the point, however, is to  change  it”17  
 Marx believed that the primary source of social conflict lies within the division of 
labor and the resulting class antagonisms.18 Since this division of labor is the primary 
cause of social inequality and private property, the chief goal of communism is to abolish 
the division of labor and allow men to take part in all types of work and thus achieve all-
around development.19 Leveling social divisions by abolishing property ownership and 
class distinctions promotes the conditions for revolution.  “First,  the  state  of  servitude  
must become intolerable and the masses must be deprived of possessions totally opposed 
to  the  existing  order.”20 “Second,  technical  development  must  have  reached  an  advanced  
stage: communism in a premature state would only be  generalized  poverty.”21 
Communism must also occur on the global stage where each county is economically 
interdependent on each other, which is brought about by simultaneous revolution in the 
most dominant and advanced countries.22 While  “previous  revolutions have altered the 
division  of  labor  and  distribution  of  social  activity,”  communism  as  a  revolution  will  
abolish labor and class divisions in the human race.23 Thus  it  will  “bring  about  a  universal  
transformation  in  the  terms  of  production  and  exchange.”24 Marx’s  materialist  analyses  
stress class struggles over the forms of property and his focus was on the social 
                                                 
16 Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion 108. 
17 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 118. 
18 Ibid 130.  
19 Ibid 131. 
20 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 131. 
21 Ibid.  
22 Ibid. 
23 Ibid 132. 
24 Ibid. 

 11 
relationships  associated  with  material  factors  rather  than  material  conditions  “per se.”25 
Materialism, according to Marx, points to productive forces  as  the  “ultimate  causal  
agent”  of  major  change  but  class  struggle  is  the  immediate  “motor.”26 Marxist ideas of 
historical materialism give rise to class antagonism; against which Marx encourages the 
proletariat to resist but Marx also realized that as production yields surpluses capable of 
freeing  a  significant  portion  of  the  populace  from  labor  a  fundamental  “class  split”  arises  
into  the  “ruling  classes”  and  “direct  producers.”27 This  “split”  is  the  foundation  for  “class  
struggle”  which  creates  new  class structures and reshapes social life.28 The problem is 
that complex splits between fragments in single classes and cross-class alliances through 
legal  “orders”  and  status  groups  causes  “internecine”  conflict.29 For  that  reason  Marx’s  
portrayal of extremely fragmented class relations through ethnic, racial, gender, religious, 
and other socio-cultural divisions hinder class struggles.30 While it was not until years 
after Marx that Latin America adopted his revolutionary ideology, there are distinct class 
fragmentations in the region that epitomize the problems Marx saw in class struggles.  
   In 1847-48, Marx and Engels31 were asked to join a League of Communist 
bodies from many European nations.32 On the advice of Marx and Engels the name was 
changed to The Communist League and  coined  the  motto  ‘Proletarians  of  all  countries,  
unite!’33 It  was  at  this  time  that  the  league  created  the  ‘Principles  of  Communism.’34 
                                                 
25 Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion 119. 
26 Ibid. 
27 Ibid 117.  
28 Ibid.  
29 Ibid.  
30 Ibid. 
31 Frederick Engels was part of the young –Hegelian  movement  of  the  1840’s  and  after  critically  addressing  
the political economy, became a communist. Marx followed this path and Engels became a lifelong 
collaborator  to  Marx  and  contributed  substantially  to  Marx’s  thought  (Ritzer  109).   
32 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 186.  
33 Ibid 187. 

 12 
These  principles  “dealt  with  capitalist  exploitation  and  the  inevitability  of  crises  and  
described the future society based on community of goods, political democracy, equal 
wages,  and  planned  industrial  production”  and  also  explained  the  necessity  of  
simultaneous revolution in civilized countries.35 In 1848, the first Manifesto of the 
Communist Party was published  where  relationships  “between  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  
proletariat, between the communists and the proletariat, and between communism and 
existing  socialist  doctrines”  are  dealt  with.36 The Communist Manifesto makes the call for 
global communism in a proletarian  “conquest  of  political  power”  through  the  abolition  of  
private property and social classes.37 The Manifesto also anticipated critiques of 
communism with these rebuttals38 [in italics, added]: 
1. The abolition of private property will lead to general idleness and the collapse 
of production. But private property does not exist today for the masses, yet 
society exists and maintains itself.  
2. Communism is the denial of individuality. Yes-of such individuals as are 
enabled by the system to use their own property as an instrument for the 
enslavement of others.  
3. Communism destroys the family. It destroys the bourgeois family, based on 
property-ownership on the one hand and on prostitution and hypocrisy on the 
other. Big business has destroyed the family life of the proletariat.  
4. Communism is against nationality. But the working man has no fatherland, so 
how can he be deprived of one? In any case the world market is effacing 
                                                                                                                                                 
34 Ibid.  
35 Ibid.  
36 Ibid.  
37 Ibid 188. 
38 Ibid 189. 

 13 
national differences, and the victory of the proletariat will intensify this 
process. When the exploitation of man by man is abolished we shall also see 
an end of exploitation, oppression, and enmity among nations. National 
oppression is the outcome of social oppression.  
5. Communism seeks to destroy the eternal truths and sublime ideas of religion, 
ethics, and philosophy. But all the ideas bequeathed by history are absolute 
only in so far as exploitation and oppression have persisted despite all 
changes in political systems. The spiritual output of mankind is as changeable 
as the conditions of human existence; ideas are permanent in so far as 
particular relations have hitherto been permanent. Communism overthrows 
‘eternal’  ideas  by  destroying  the  class  system  which,  by  existing  from  time  
immemorial, gave them the appearance of eternity.39  
Marxism focused on the domain of social philosophy and while Marxism was being used 
as an ideology for a political movement, the philosophy required interpretation and 
specification which caused tensions and contradictions within Marxism previously 
unnoticed.40 Even  more  difficult  was  the  application  of  Marx’s  prophecies  concerning  the  
nature of communism.41 Since  Marx  explained  that  “socialism  deposes  objective  
economic laws and enables men to control the conditions of their lives, it is easy to infer 
that a socialist  society  can  do  anything  it  likes”  and  thus  Marx’s  dream  of  unity  could  
“take  the  form  of  a  despotic  party  oligarchy.”42 Marx  asserted  that  the  “first  phase  of  
communist  society  would  carry  the  defects  of  capitalism’s  limited  economic  and  cultural  
                                                 
39 Ibid.  
40 Ibid 341.  
41 Ibid 342.  
42 Ibid.  

 14 
development.”43 He  contended  that  the  “first  step  in  the  revolution  …  is  to  raise  the  
proletariat  to  the  position  of  ruling  class  to  win  the  battle  for  democracy.”44 However, 
Marx  realized  that  in  this  first  phase  the  “state  can  be  nothing  but  the revolutionary 
dictatorship of the proletariat”  and  that  the  political  wing  of  the  proletariat  would  
“expropriate  the  bourgeoisie  and  centralize  primary  means  of  production  and  
infrastructure.”45 On  another  occasion  Marx  used  the  term  ‘dictatorship  of  the  proletariat’  
and never  explained  what  it  meant  but  he  “had  in  mind  the  class  content  of  the  power  
system and not, as Lenin did, the liquidation of democratic institutions.46 The implication 
of  the  first  phase  was  a  total  centralization  of  power  which  would  employ  “despotic”  
force to implement its modernization plan.47 According to Marx, the communist state 
authorities  had  to  monopolize  power  and  ignore  calls  for  “freedom  for  the  communities”  
or  “self  government”  in  order  to  create  productive  and  socio-cultural infrastructure for a 
break with bourgeois society.48 “The  Leninist-Stalinist version of Marxism was no more 
than a version, i.e. one attempt to put into practice the ideas that Marx expressed in a 
philosophical form without any clear principles of political interpretation.”49 
Leninism: 
 By  the  1890’s  Marxism  came  into  public  debate  in  Russia  but  was  used  mainly  to  
denounce capitalism and its effects, and to support Russia choosing a path of its own.50 It 
was  through  the  October  Revolution  that  Lenin’s  presence  and  activity  in forming the 
Bolshevik  Party  was  an  indispensable  condition  of  the  revolution’s  outbreak  and  
                                                 
43 Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion 130.  
44 Ibid.  
45 Ibid 130-131. 
46 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 343.  
47 Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion 131. 
48 Ibid. 
49 Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism 343. 
50 Ibid 640.  

 15 
success.51 Leninism  has  been  disputed  as  a  variant  of  Marxism;;  some  see  Leninism  as  “a  
‘revisionist’  ideology  in  relation  to  the  Marxist  tradition,”  and  others  see  it  as  a  “faithful  
application  of  the  general  principles  of  Marxism  to  a  new  political  situation.”52 Lenin 
looked  only  at  the  singular  aim  of  the  revolution  “and  the  meaning  of  all  human  affairs,  
ideas, institutions, and values resided exclusively in their bearing  on  the  class  struggle.”53 
While Marx and Engels supported these ideas, their focus was much broader than the 
Lenin  focus:  “Is  this  good  or  bad  for  the  revolution?”54  
There are three specific points that call into question the fidelity of Lenin to the 
Marxist tradition.55 First,  Lenin  “advocated  an  alliance  between  the  proletariat  and  the  
peasantry  as  the  basic  strategies  for  the  ‘bourgeois  revolution,’  while  his  opponents  
contended that an alliance with the bourgeoisie would be more in accordance with the 
doctrine  in  this  case.”56 “Secondly,  Lenin  was  the  first  to  see  the  national  question  as  a  
powerful reservoir of energy that social democrats could and should use to further their 
cause,  instead  of  merely  an  awkward  hindrance.”57 Third, Lenin created his own 
organizational rules and his own version of the party attitude towards resistance by the 
workers.58 As critical as his opponents were about these policies they were necessary to 
the success of the Bolshevik revolution.59  
Lenin’s  ideas  of  the  party  were considered despotic and are considered by some 
historians  as  the  beginning  of  the  entire  “hierarchical,  totalitarian  structure  in  which  the  
                                                 
51 Ibid 641.  
52 Ibid 661.  
53 Ibid 662.  
54 Ibid 663.  
55 Ibid.  
56 Ibid.  
57 Ibid.  
58 Ibid.  
59 Ibid 664. 

 16 
socialist  system  was  subsequently  embodied.”60 Lenin was accused of elitism; he desired 
to substitute a revolutionary organization for the working class and that the power should 
reside with the intelligentsia rather than proletariat.61 It  was  understood  that  socialism’s  
theoretical foundations had to be laid by intellectuals and it was also accepted that the 
workers’  party differed from the working class since nothing in the writings of Marx 
showed the two as one and the same.62 To Lenin, the working class movement in the true 
sense of the term was a movement of the right ideology, not a movement of workers.63 
While it was important for Lenin to have as many workers in the party as possible, he 
looked at the party as an entity where the distinction of intellectuals and workers 
disappeared if provided with the correct theoretical consciousness.64 The  “consciousness  
of the proletariat”  would  be  embodied  despite  what  the  general  proletariat  thought  of  the  
party.65 Hence,  it  was  the  premise  of  Lenin  that  “requires  us  to  believe  that  the  interests  
and aims of the social class, the proletariat, can and indeed must be determined without 
that  class  having  any  say  in  the  matter.”66 This hegemonic idea developed into an 
authoritative  party  role,  which  was  a  “despotism”  based  on  the  idea  that  the  “party  always  
knows  better  the  interests,  needs,  and  even  desires”  of  the  community  than  do  the 
“backward  people”  themselves.67  “In  this  way  Lenin  laid  the  foundation  of  what  was  to  
become the Communist Party-a party distinguished by ideological unity, efficiency, a 
hierarchic and centralized structure, and the conviction that it represents the interest of 
                                                 
60 Ibid 667.  
61 Ibid.  
62 Ibid. 
63 Ibid 668.  
64 Ibid. 
65 Ibid.  
66 Ibid 669.  
67 Ibid.  

 17 
the  proletariat  whatever  the  proletariat  itself  may  think.”68 This party deems its own 
interests  to  be  that  of  the  working  class  and  of  “universal  progress”  due  to  its  “scientific  
knowledge”  that  entitles  it  to  ignore  the  “actual  wishes  and  aspirations of the people it 
appointed  itself  to  represent.”69  
 Lenin was the first and only important social democrat in Europe to invoke the 
idea that the proletariat would militarily overthrow the government to turn the war from 
imperialist to civil.70 Lenin believed that the Russian Revolution would spark an 
international  or  at  least  a  European  revolution  based  on  the  “rising  tide  of  revolution  and  
the  outbreaks  in  Bavaria,  Hungary,  and  Estonia,  but  also  on  Lenin’s  conviction  that  the  
European war could only be stopped  by  overthrowing  capitalism.”71 When it became 
clear  that  the  greater  European  proletariat  would  not  follow  Lenin  or  “would  fail  trying”  
and that the end of the war could be brought about by alternative means there was the 
question of what the party was to do with their new found power.72 Thus began the 
dispute  with  Stalin  and  Trotsky  over  socialism  in  one  state  and  “whether  the  building  of  
socialism in Russia should be subordinated to the cause of the world revolution or vice 
versa.”73 It is evident however,  that  after  Russia’s  Revolution  Lenin’s  attention  was  
dedicated to policy as the head of state and not the leader of a world-wide revolution.74 
While the Russian Revolution was a communist revolution in the sense that it transferred 
                                                 
68 Ibid 673.  
69 Ibid.  
70 Ibid 732. 
71 Ibid 737-738. 
72 Ibid 738. 
73 Ibid. 
74 Ibid 739.  

 18 
power to the Communist Party, it did not follow the Marxist predictions for the downfall 
of capitalist society.75 
Stalinism:  
 This brings the final phase of communism in Russia to the forefront since the era 
of Stalin was significant in the international scene with both the expansion of Soviet 
influence and the onset of the Cold War. The rule of Stalin was horrific but largely 
accidental in its application.76 For many communists, the emergence of Stalinism 
occurred as a result of the circumstances of the era, such as the cultural and industrial 
backwardness in Russia, the failure of an anticipated European revolution, external 
threats to Russia, and the political exhaustion of the Soviet state after the revolution, 
rather than the despotism of Stalin himself.77 Many observers see the Soviet system under 
Stalin as the continuation of Marxism and Leninism, which can be best described by an 
“all-powerful authority competent to declare at any given moment what Marxism was 
and  what  it  was  not.”78 Marxism meant nothing more or less than what Stalin currently 
pronounced and unlike Lenin, the regime of Stalin was unique in that it became an 
international phenomenon.79 Stalin used pieces of work from Marx, Engels, and Lenin to 
support his ideology, which seemed to change frequently. Upon Stalin’s  rise  to  power  it  
became clear that the Russians needed to set forth a socialist transformation in their own 
country first before they could inspire revolutions around the world.80 This was very 
similar to the circumstances Lenin found after the revolution when he realized his efforts 
                                                 
75 Ibid 741.  
76 Ibid 789.  
77 Ibid.  
78 Ibid 791. 
79 Ibid 792. 
80 Ibid 806.  

 19 
had to be directed to head the state. Essentially, Marxism under Stalin differed from 
Leninism by adding the two main tenants: 1) socialism could be built in one country 
alone  and  2)  “that  the  class  struggle  must  become  fiercer as the building of socialism 
progressed.”81 These tenants were unique in that Stalin was the first to realize the 
importance of Soviet support for communism around the world rather than waiting for 
world  support  of  communism.  Stalin’s  ideology  made  exportation of Marxist-inspired 
revolutionary ideas possible.  
 Stalinism subsequently began spreading throughout the international communist 
movement and revolutionary groups began forming in Europe.82 These international ties 
were fueled in the Second Communist International when Lenin stated that colonial and 
backward countries needed communists to enter into alliances with national revolutionary 
movements, yet remain separate and keep the bourgeoisie from controlling the 
revolutionary movement.83 This would support a Soviet republic from the outset and 
under the Soviet leadership, these backward countries would not have to go through a 
capitalist phase.84 A document called the Twenty-One Conditions was also created to 
make joining communist parties adhere to the forms of Leninist organization of the 
movement.85 These conditions stated that communist parties must subordinate their 
propaganda activities to the decisions of the Communist International (Comintern), the 
Communist Press was under party control, and the  ‘sections’  must  combat  reformists  by  
removing  reformists  and  centralists  from  workers’  parties.86 Within  their  country’s  armed  
                                                 
81 Ibid 867. 
82 Ibid 871-872. 
83 Ibid 872. 
84 Ibid.  
85 Ibid 873.  
86 Ibid.  

 20 
forces,  the  ‘sections’  must  carry  out  systematic  propaganda.87 “They  must  combat  
pacifism, support colonial liberation movements,  be  active  in  workers’  organizations  and  
especially  trade  unions,  and  make  efforts  to  win  peasant  support.”88 In Parliament 
communist agents must make the revolutionary propaganda their primary concern and 
“parties  must  be  centralized  to  the  maximum,  observe iron discipline, and periodically 
purge their ranks of petty-bourgeois  elements.”89 All parties had to unquestioningly 
support Soviet republics, their programs had to be endorsed by a congress of the 
Comintern or its Executive Committee, and such decisions were binding on all sections.90 
Finally, all parties must call themselves communist and those in countries where they can 
operate  openly  must  also  maintain  clandestine  organizations  for  actions  at  the  ‘decisive  
moment.’91 This document underpinned international support for the movement of 
communism from Soviet Russia to Europe and beyond.  
Third World:  
 By the end of the Second World War, Marxism-Leninism became the ideology of 
the  Soviet  state  which  meant  little  more  than  Stalin’s  version  of  the  two  with the 
characteristic  feature  of  “the  interests  of  the  governing  stratum  of  a  totalitarian  state”  and  
“its  combination  of  extreme  rigidity  and  extreme  flexibility.”92 After  Stalin,  the  ‘New  
Left’  could  be  characterized  by  European  and  North  American  student organizations that 
believed  that  the  concept  of  a  society  ready  for  revolution  is  a  “bourgeois  deceit  and  that  
any  properly  organized  group  can  make  a  revolution”  and  bring  social  change  to  any  
                                                 
87 Ibid. 
88 Ibid.  
89 Ibid.  
90 Ibid.  
91 Ibid.  
92 Ibid 881.  

 21 
country.93 For  the  ‘New  Left’  the  ideology  reverted  to  classical Marxism and renewed 
attacks on the imperialism of the West, the arms race, and colonialism.94 “The  revolution  
must  be  worldwide,  total,  absolute,  unlimited,  and  all  embracing.”95 For the New Left, 
the working class could not be relied on since they had been co-opted by the bourgeoisie 
under  what  Marx  would  call  “false  consciousness.”    Finally,  the  patterns  for  total  
revolution were to be found in the Third World where the heroes of the New Left were 
Asian and Latin American revolutionaries.96 Due to imperialism, colonialism, poverty, 
and oppression the Third World Marxian ideology resonated with the social and political 
struggles of the area.  
 Shortly after World War II, Maoism began influencing the communists of Latin 
America and in many respects transported ideologies. Traditional communist parties 
borrowed  Maoist  ideology  due  to  the  movement  of  Chinese  “franchises”  into  Latin  
America and the idea of a prolonged revolution.97 Another reason for the movement of 
Maoism into the region was as a result of the appeal to those of the Far Left that were 
disillusioned by the pro-Soviet  Communist  Parties  such  as  “Castroism.”98 The guerrilla 
warfare  of  the  Chinese  Maoists  became  the  guidebook  for  Ernest  “Che”  Guevara  and  
Fidel Castro in Cuba. Even though the revolution in Cuba did not begin as a communist 
revolution, by 1961 Cuba was firmly a socialist country.99 It would be the Castro shift to 
Soviet socialist ideology that would eventually force Guevara to leave Cuba and spread 
his own revolutionary ideology.  
                                                 
93 Ibid 1178.  
94 Ibid.  
95 Ibid 1179.  
96 Ibid.  
97 Alexander, Robert J. 1999. International Maoism in the Developing World. Westport: Praeger. 41. 
98 Ibid.  
99 Ibid 42.  

 22 
The 1960’s  brought  acute  global  problems  into  view  that  needed  to  be  solved  on  a  
widespread basis: over-population, environmental pollution, and the poverty, 
backwardness, and economic failures of the Third World.100 These structural deformities 
gave rise to guerilla movements throughout Latin America.  But the many failures of 
Latin American movements paralleled the failures of Lenin in his experience with the 
Bolshevik Revolution. Guerrilla movements that failed in Latin America were attributed 
not  to  the  “objective  and  subjective”  conditions  that  were  central  to  early  Marxists  but  a  
failure  of  organization  and  an  inability  to  “act  intelligently  and  cohesively  in  mobilizing  
the  population”  for  the  struggle.101 This thinking directly parallels the problems Lenin 
faced in the Russian Revolution and as a result Latin American guerrilla activity is 
simply  a  “latter-day,  rurally  oriented  union  of  Leninist  theory  and  praxis.”102 The 
emphasis on intelligent organization proposed by Lenin fueled the debate between the 
followers of Che Guevara and Mao.103 Che developed his revolutionary ideology from 
the Mao example of prolonged revolution but he would later diverge into his own 
revolutionary ideology. Despite differences, both schools of thought believed that the 
“masses  are  there, waiting  to  be  mobilized”  and  revolutionaries  simply  have  to  “push  the  
right  buttons”  to  create  a  revolution.104 Upon the rise of the New Left in the Third World, 
two new major Communist forces would come in the form of Maoism in China and its 
influence on Guevara and Castro in revolutionary Cuba. 
                                                 
100 Ibid 1180. 
101 Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P. 1991. Exploring Revolution: Essays on Latin American Insurgency and 
Revolutionary Theory. Armonk: M.E. Sharpe, Inc. 5. 
102 Ibid.  
103 Ibid.  
104 Ibid 6.  

 23 
At  the  beginning  of  Castro’s  rise  to  power,  support  for  the  region  was  coming  
from both the Chinese and the Soviets.105 Since  Castro’s  emergence  was  based  on  the  use  
of guerrilla warfare, Maoist support seemed evident.106 However, shortly after the Cuban 
missile crisis Castro had developed a deep dependency on the political, military, 
diplomatic, and economic aid from the Soviet Union due to the conflict with the United 
States.107 By 1966, Castro publicly split from the Chinese over their refusal to aid Cuba 
and through 1968, Castro began rallying revolutionary parties in the Third World 
organizing a rough equivalent to the Comintern.108 It would be the reliance of Castro on 
the Soviets and his shift in ideology that drove Che to create his own revolutionary 
ideology.  
In Latin America the Cuban Revolution set the model for revolutionary groups in 
the Third World.109 Guevara had synthesized the lessons of the Cuban Revolution into 
three  principles:  “1)  popular  forces  can  win  a  war against the army; 2) it is not necessary 
to wait until all the conditions for revolution exist; the insurrection can create them; 3) in 
underdeveloped  America  the  countryside  is  the  basic  area  for  armed  fighting.”110 
Throughout his works Guevara explained how the necessary elements for revolution 
existed across Latin America including poverty, oppression, and class conflict.111 
Bypassing the possibilities for peaceful insurrection, Guevara declared that the subjective 
conditions to the belief in revolution and the will to revolt could be created by the 
                                                 
105 Ibid.  
106 Ibid.  
107 Ibid.  
108 Ibid 43.  
109 Wright, Thomas C. 2000. Latin America in the Era of the Cuban Revolution. Praeger 
Security International. Internet. Available from: 
http://psi.praeger.com.ezproxy.apus.edu/doc.aspx?d=/books/questia/b78112/b78112 -sect24.xml 1. 
110 Ibid.  
111 Ibid 2.  

 24 
“insurrectional  foco.”112 As Guevara set his guerrilla ideals into motion, many 
revolutionary groups throughout Latin America began taking up arms. Colombia was not 
exempt from the spread of revolutionary uprisings. 
Colombia: 
 In  “The  Possibility  of  Nonviolent  Revolution”  an  1872  essay  by  Marx,  he  asserted  
that the proletariat can attain goals by peaceful means but for most countries this is not 
the  case  and  the  “lever  of  our  revolution  must  be  force.”113 This is more applicable to 
Colombia than any other country today. In 1917 the Bolshevik Revolution engineered by 
Lenin was watched closely in Colombia.114 By 1924 a Marxist study group which called 
itself  a  “Communist  Party”  was  formed  with  the  help  of  Vicente  Staviskya, a Russian 
immigrant, and were related to the Liberal Party, which by 1926 became the 
Revolutionary Socialist Party (PSR) of the Third Communist International.115 After 
divided by ideology, the PSR became the Communist Party of Colombia (PCC), a pro-
Soviet  party  with  the  intention  of  improving  workers’  rights  and  organizing  “peasant  
leagues”  in  rural  areas  and  “popular  fronts”  in  urban  areas.116 PCC members watched the 
Castro takeover of Cuba and the division that was caused by the USSR-China split over 
Maoism.117 This disrupted the unity of the PCC and it divided into various factions 
following different ideologies of the time.118 As  a  result  of  the  “Sino-Soviet  crisis”  two  
                                                 
112 Ibid.  
113 Brittain, James J. 2005. The FARC-EP in Colombia A Revolutionary Exception in an Age of 
Imperialist Expansion. Monthly Review. (September). Internet. Available from: 
http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.apus.edu/ehost/pdf?vid=4&hid=108&sid=de2d9d2d -80a6-4b2b-bb78-
0e26c4201452%40sessionmgr103. 21. 
114 Osterling, George P. 1989. Democracy in Colombia: Clientelist Politics and Guerrilla Warfare. New 
Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.185. 
115 Ibid.  
116 Ibid.  
117 Ibid 186.  
118 Ibid.  

 25 
leading divisions emerged from the PCC: the pro-Moscow or mainstream PCC and the 
pro-Peking Marxist-Leninist Communist Party (PCML).119 It was the radical, militant 
members  of  the  PCML  that  split  into  the  Marxist  “Southern  Block”  in  the  late  1940’s  
which became the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) less than 
fifteen years later.120  
During the time of the Cuban Revolution, Colombia was in an era known as La 
Violencia. This era is important because of the changes in Colombia during and after the 
period due to the loss of over 200,000 lives in 15 to 20 years.121 This era can be broken 
into four periods. The first period was the 1948 assassination of Jorge Eliecer Gaitan, 
leader of the Liberal Party, and the subsequent galvanizing moment of political 
tension.122 The second period was marked by the quick spread of guerrilla warfare 
throughout the country as revolutionary groups armed themselves against partisan 
attack.123 To make matters worse the conservative controlled government used the 
national police and the Army for partisan ends that further mobilized the liberal 
peasantry.124 It was at this point General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla overthrew the government 
and installed a military dictatorship to regain control of the country.125 In the third period 
of La Violencia, this dictatorship started to see a downward trend as progress stalled, 
corruption increased, pockets of violence were met with repression, and guerrilla warfare 
                                                 
119 Ibid 187.  
120 Ibid.  
121 Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P. 1992. Guerrillas and Revolution in Latin America: A 
Comparative Study of Insurgencies and Regimes Since 1956. New Jersey: Princeton  University Press. 17. 
122 Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia The Past as a Prologue? A History of U.S. 
Counterinsurgency Policy in Colombia 1958-66. Strategic Studies Institute. 3. 
123 Ibid.  
124 Ibid.  
125 Ibid.  

 26 
began to spread again.126 The fourth period of La Violencia saw the first split National 
Front government (a two-party 4-year alternating power system) which, with the help of 
the United States, instituted the best counterguerrilla operations in the Western 
Hemisphere.127 This marked the end of La Violencia but with the Cold War in full swing 
the Marxist/Stalinist/Soviet inspired FARC and Castro/Che Guevara-inspired ELN 
represented a new era in Colombian revolutionaries. 
 The new era of Colombia and its revolutionary groups went into full swing in the 
1960’s  during  a  time  when  communism  was  fully  operable  in  Russia  and  China.  During  
this time the first nuclei of the FARC formed which followed a Soviet-communist 
ideology.128 The ELN, which followed a Che Guevara type of communist ideology, built 
their support among the marginalized campesinos due to the failure of agrarian reforms 
and the political exclusion imposed by the bi-party system of the National Front.129 
Shortly after the Cuban Revolution, the Movimiento Obero-Estudiantil-Campensino 
(MOEC)  was  formed  using  Fidelista  teachings  by  setting  up  a  guerrilla  “foco” in 
Vichada, Colombia.130 There is no doubt that the MOEC was the ideological and 
organizational base for the ELN.131 A number of Latin American radicals made the trip to 
Cuba  which  became  a  revolutionary  “Mecca”  where  revolutionaries  were  spiritually  
prepared and militarily trained for the struggle.132 This was especially effective when 
groups of revolutionaries such as the ELN went to train together and return to follow 
                                                 
126 Ibid.  
127 Ibid 4. 
128 Palacios, Marco. 2002. Understanding Colombia: History and Background. Aspen Institute. Internet. 
Available from: http://www.ciaonet.org.ezproxy.apus.edu/wps/pam04/index.html. 19. 
129 Ibid.  
130 Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P. 1992. Guerrillas and Revolution 40.  
131 Ibid.  
132 Ibid 31.  

 27 
“The  Cuban  Road.”133 Like many revolutionary groups of the era, the FARC and ELN 
had similar goals even though their means differed greatly. 
Aside from some middle class leaders and a priest who joined the ELN, both the 
FARC and ELN have remained isolated from the urban social currents of Colombia and 
have been apart from the political leadership.134 Due  to  the  lack  of  “stable  and  systematic  
alliances with the urban sectors  of  the  trade  unions  or  university  fronts”  the  guerrillas  
have been politically weak on the national scale.135 On the local scale the guerrillas have 
been able to form networks of supporters and sympathizers.136 For the FARC, their 
agrarian tradition and ties to the Communist Party are a testament to their pro-
Soviet/Stalinist  ideals  but  their  rural  origins  puts  them  closer  to  “secular caciquismo”  and  
clientelism.137  The  FARC  has  survived  the  years  due  to  the  Leninist  “Democratic  
Centralism”  inherited  from  the Communist Party that keeps the unity of command even 
though the combatants are scattered over a fragmented geography.138 The ELN has 
adopted a more federation approach.139 For the FARC the focus is on a clear chain of 
command that requires cohesion where the ELN leaders in their respective fronts have 
more autonomy. It is the organization, culture, and behavior of these two organizations 
that make them so unique.   
Having traced the Marxist inspired trajectories of the Colombian FARC and ELN 
from classical Marxism through the model Latin American Marxist revolutionaries, Che 
Guevara and Fidel Castro, the focus now turns to an analysis of the development of the 
                                                 
133 Ibid.  
134 Palacios, Marco. 2002. Understanding Colombia 19.  
135 Ibid.  
136 Ibid.  
137 Ibid.  
138 Ibid.  
139 Ibid.  

 28 
FARC (Chapter Two) and the ELN (Chapter Three). Marxism is at the core of both 
organizations but their differing ideologies and revolutionary styles created very different 
outcomes for these organizations. After the Cold War and the fall of Marxist communist 
ideologies around the world in the late twentieth century, both of these groups were faced 
with the question of viability. The problems of adaptation in the post-Cold War era 
produced very different outcomes for the FARC and ELN as they exist today.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 29 
 
References 
Alexander, Robert J. 1999. International Maoism in the Developing World. Westport:  
 Praeger.  
 
Brittain, James J. 2005. The FARC-EP in Colombia A Revolutionary Exception in an  
Age of Imperialist Expansion. Monthly Review. (September). Internet. Available 
from: 
http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.apus.edu/ehost/pdf?vid=4&hid=108&sid=de2d
9d2d-80a6-4b2b-bb78-0e26c4201452%40sessionmgr103. 
 
Kolakowski, Leszek. 2005. Main Currents of Marxism: The Founders The Golden Age  
 The Breakdown. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  
 
Osterling, George P. 1989. Democracy in Colombia: Clientelist Politics and Guerrilla 
 Warfare. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. 
 
Palacios, Marco. 2002. Understanding Colombia: History and Background. Aspen 
Institute. Internet. Available from: 
http://www.ciaonet.org.ezproxy.apus.edu/wps/pam04/index.html. 
 
Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia The Past as a Prologue? A History 
of U.S. Counterinsurgency Policy in Colombia 1958-66. Strategic Studies 
Institute. 
 
Ritzer, George. Ed. 2000. The Blackwell Companion to Major Social Theorists. Malden:  
 Blackwell Publishers.  
 
Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P. 1991. Exploring Revolution: Essays on Latin American 
 Insurgency and Revolutionary Theory. Armonk: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.  
 
Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P. 1992. Guerrillas and Revolution in Latin America: A 
Comparative Study of Insurgencies and Regimes Since 1956. New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press. 
 
Wright, Thomas C. 2000. Latin America in the Era of the Cuban Revolution. Praeger 
Security International. Internet. Available from: 
http://psi.praeger.com.ezproxy.apus.edu/doc.aspx?d=/books/questia/b78112/b781
12-sect24.xml 
 
 
 
 

 30 
Chapter 2 
The  FARC’s  Adaptability 
 
Introduction: 
The history of Colombia has been fraught with violent conflict and an unstable 
political system. The peasants in the country have been impoverished, marginalized, and 
oppressed by the military and the government to the point that they have banded together 
to defend themselves against their enemies. The galvanizing point for revolution was 
reached during the period of La Violencia, when in 1947 Manuel Marulanda Velez began 
the nucleus of liberal guerrilla units that would become the FARC (Fuerzas Armadas 
Revolucionarias de Colombia).140 This occurred as communism was fully operable world 
wide as the Chinese revolution emerged and the Soviet Union was a global 
superpower.141 The Cuban Revolution served as a great inspiration to the FARC because 
the war was based on land reform and re-distribution of wealth.142 It was at this point the 
FARC was founded in 1966 within the peasantry to create a parallel state that could 
provide basic services to the rural areas where the Colombian government has been 
failing. The FARC was founded upon pro-Soviet communist principles and slowly 
expanded into new territories as their ranks swelled with those that had lost faith in the 
Colombian state. Areas of quasi independence were soon under the influence of the 
Colombian  Communist  Party  and  bases  of  “peasant  republics”  were  created.143 As the 
                                                 
140 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries in Latin America. Boulder: Lynne 
Reinner Publishers. 96. 
141 Ibid 97.  
142 Ibid 98.  
143 Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P. 1991. Exploring Revolution: Essays on Latin American Insurgency and 
Revolutionary Theory. Armonk: M. E. Sharpe. 135.  

 31 
organization grew it was forced to change in many ways to survive at a time when the 
government and military were determined to eradicate the group and its followers. These 
changes within the FARC and its structure allowed it to grow in size and strength that 
would be able to create a power struggle with the government for the rural areas and the 
people residing in them.  
 As the FARC gained strength in numbers while increasing control of land and 
resources, their ability to branch out into illicit commerce and trade created a state within 
a state. The FARC has succeeded where many failed in the sense of survival because of 
this ability to adapt and change. Due to flexibility in their structure, political, and 
economic ties the organization has been able to thrive over the years where hundreds of 
other guerrilla groups have dwindled away. But along with adaptation the group has also 
changed its goals. After gaining strength in numbers and land their ability to wage war 
against the national government has increased and they have been able to create 
partnerships with other criminal and political entities that have expanded the reach of the 
organization.144 As a result of their flexibility the group has become increasingly 
independent despite some support derived from the communist nations during the Cold 
War. The FARC has separated its cause from the international Communist movement and 
forced the world to treat it as an independent entity.145 Also, since the Cold War illicit 
crop production has become an increasing part of the funding and capabilities of the 
regional guerrilla groups thus furthering their independence.  
 Together with the U.S. government, the Colombian government has fostered an 
extensive effort to contain and eradicate the FARC insurgency, of which Plan Colombia 
                                                 
144 Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies in the Post-Cold War: The Case of the Revolutionary Armed 
Forces of Colombia. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism 01 (April): 137. 
145 Ibid 130-131. 

 32 
is the latest incarnation. The U.S. involvement fighting the FARC has foreign policy 
implications for the region which makes the study of the organization an imperative. By 
looking into the history of the organization and its structure, the adaptive strategies can 
be analyzed. By understanding these fundamentals of the organization there is a better 
understanding of the FARC and how to use that knowledge against the organization for 
the purpose of negotiations and possible eradication. For the purpose of this chapter the 
focus will be on the organizational structure of the FARC and how it has changed since 
the Cold War. More specifically the chapter will look at how the organization has 
adapted its structure to survive and thrive in Colombia. 
Literature Review:  
 The following works represent an important portion of the literature on the FARC 
and their evolution in Colombia over the years. The literature demonstrates the history of 
the FARC and their growth as a guerrilla group. The literature will show the changes in 
the operations of the FARC over the years and their ability to adapt and survive where 
other groups have been dissolved.  
 In Colombia: A Brutal History Geoff Simons gives a thorough history of the 
violence from the historical roots to modern times in Colombia as a result of government 
and non-governmental actors. Simons positions the emergence of the FARC in the 
struggle for the state to become stable and secure after La Violencia from 1948 to 
1965.146 The guerrilla group expanded and gained in stature during the early years,147 
while it played a role in subversion as the government was preoccupied with cartels and 
                                                 
146 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History. London: SAQI. 35-43. 
147 Ibid 46-52.  

 33 
the war on drugs.148 At this point the FARC and their actions were described in the 
context of the beginning of the Ernesto Samper administration and how the group used 
kidnapping and military action to influence political actions.149 The work moves to 1996-
97 where the government was dealing with the onset of a full guerrilla war and the ties 
between the illicit drug trade and the guerrillas.150 Throughout these years in Colombia 
the  U.S.  had  tremendous  influence  in  the  military  and  political  aspects  of  Colombia’s  
wars and the author shows how even with the help of the U.S. the multi-front battle was 
becoming too much for the Colombian government to handle.151 The next portion of the 
Colombian timeline is represented by the Pastrana administration (1998-2001) and the 
beginnings of the long attempts to negotiate peace with the FARC.152 This period really 
marked a turning point where the guerrilla groups demanded recognition as political 
entities within the country and the government was forced to negotiate. These peace talks 
with the Pastrana administration and the U.S. involvement brought on by the terrorist 
attacks of September 11, 2001 are detailed, as are the subsequent changes in U.S.-
Colombia relations.153 While this work gives some great insight to the history of the 
conflict in Colombia it is a broad look at all of the conflicting groups and focuses on the 
Colombian and U.S. governments.  
 The following three works establish the effect of the Cold War and its end to the 
revolutionaries in Colombia. In Insurgent Strategies in the Post-Cold War: The Case of 
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia Roman D. Ortiz discusses the adaptation of 
                                                 
148 Ibid 75-89. 
149 Ibid 91-113.  
150 Ibid 114.  
151 Ibid 169-181. 
152 Ibid 182.  
153 Ibid 282.  

 34 
the guerrillas in Colombia to begin a new style of armed conflict.154 The work begins 
with a look at the insurgent groups as the developed during the Cold War.155 The 
ineffectiveness of the groups during these years and their strong ideological foundations 
necessitated the evolution of the FARC movement with their political ideology into a 
position as an alternate public manager.156 Ortiz looks at the growth and expansion of the 
FARC and discusses their split from the Communist party thus giving the organization a 
unique identity.157 At this point the FARC changed their model of military action and 
their increased capabilities as they were able to increase their arsenal to sizes unseen in 
guerrilla groups and increase the income of the organization to hundreds of millions of 
dollars.158 Finally Ortiz covers the current problems the large organization is now facing 
and their emerging vulnerabilities.159 This work provides an in depth look at the changes 
in the ideology of the group and their emergence as a military force in Colombia. 
 In the article Why the  end  of  the  Cold  War  doesn’t  matter:  the  U.S.  war  of  terror  
in Colombia Doug Stokes discusses U.S. involvement in the region and the Cold War 
style of intervention that came to Colombia as a result.160 Stokes establishes the links 
between the guerrillas and the illicit drug trade after the Cold War and how these 
organizations support the illicit activities.161 The author concludes with a look at how the 
new U.S. war on terror has produced a dual purpose battle in Colombia where fighting 
                                                 
154 Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies 127.  
155 Ibid 128.  
156 Ibid 129-131.  
157 Ibid 134.  
158 Ibid 136-138.  
159 Ibid 140.  
160 Stokes,  Doug.  2003.  Why  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  doesn’t  matter:  The US war of terror in Colombia. 
Review of International Studies 29: 569-571. 
161 Ibid 578.  

 35 
the illicit drug trade has become a tactic in counterinsurgency.162 While the work focuses 
on U.S.-Colombian relations it also explains the past and current methods to combat both 
fronts of the guerrilla war and the drug war at the same time. 
 A Shift in the Paradigm of Violence: Non-Governmental Terrorism in Latin 
America since the Cold War by Andreas Feldmann demonstrates how terrorism is 
currently used by guerrilla groups to exert their force on governments.163 The work 
focuses on terrorism alone and thus the acts are subject to the  authors’  interpretation  of  
terrorism. While the study looks at Latin America as a whole the author points out that 
the FARC repeatedly uses terrorist actions in their overall strategy to their advantage.164 
Feldmann outlines the use of bombings and massacres by the FARC as a method of 
control and fear of the populace in Colombia.165 The use of this work is to explain the 
evolution of the groups from military actions to terrorist actions since the Cold War.   
 The next four works focus on the increasing criminality of the armed rebel groups 
in Colombia and their ability to combat the government and military. In The 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the Illicit Drug Trade by Ricardo 
Vargas, the author attempts to explain how the cartels have become anti-guerrilla yet 
since the farmers of coca plants are in guerrilla areas they have been assumed to be one 
and the same.166 The dynamic between the farmers, the guerrillas, the cartels, and the 
military are as a result of these intertwining operations.167 In The role of the state in the 
                                                 
162 Ibid 581.  
163 Feldmann, Andreas. 2005. A Shift in the Paradigm of Violence: Non-Governmental Terrorism in Latin 
America since the end of the Cold War. Revista de Ciencia Politica 25: 11. 
164 Ibid 28. 
165 Ibid 29-30.  
166 Vargas, Ricardo. 1999. The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the  Illicit Drug 
Trade. Transnational Insitute (June). Internet. Available from 
http://www.tni.org/detail_page.phtml?page=archives_vargas_farc; Accessed 14 November 2008. 4. 
167 Ibid 5-7.  

 36 
international illicit drug trade: the case of Colombia and external intervention, Julius 
Walker explains the roles the guerrilla forces play in this dynamic and their actions in the 
country.168 It is imperative to understand how these organizations are operating in this 
new climate to compare their more ideological beginnings. That brings up the next work 
Criminal Rebels? A Discussion of War and Criminality from the Colombian Experience 
by Francisco Gutierrez Sanin discusses the beginnings of the guerrilla organizations in 
Colombia and how they turned to criminal activities for profit.169 The author breaks down 
the beginning activities of the FARC and how the new enterprises of drugs, kidnapping, 
and extortion have turned the organization into a thriving money-maker.170 The author 
concludes the study by applying ten tenants of being a member of the guerrilla 
organizations and how these apply to the debate of whether these groups are rebels or 
criminals.171 Finally, Colombian Army Adaptation to FARC Insurgency by Thomas 
Marks  describes  the  beginning  of  the  FARC  as  a  military  force,  it’s  dynamic  as  a  rebel  
group, and how it was able to combat the military as it expanded in operational capability 
and scope.172 At this point the military and police response to combating the FARC is 
discussed but more importantly the adaptation of the FARC in their action to thwart 
military and police attempts to recapture guerrilla zones.173 While the military or police 
portions of the work are not needed for this study, his work provides invaluable 
information on how the FARC had developed financially, operationally, and militarily.  
                                                 
168 Walker, Julius. 2002. The role of the state in the international illicit drugs trade: the case of Colombia 
and external intervention. Global Politics Network Internet. Available from http://www.globalpolitics.net; 
accessed 14 November 2008. 10. 
169 Sanin, Francisco Gutierrez. 2003. Criminal Rebels? A discussion of war and crim inality From the 
Colombian experience. Crisis States Programme. (April): London. 7-10. 
170 Ibid 10.  
171 Ibid 11.  
172 Marks, Thomas. 2002. Colombian Army Adaptation to FARC Insurgency. Strategic Studies Institute 
(January). 1-9. 
173 Ibid 9-21. 

 37 
 In Non-State Actors in Colombia: Threats to the State and the Hemisphere Max 
G. Manwaring describes the war in Colombia being fought on three fronts. Manwaring 
breaks down and discusses each of the three groups and focuses on how the FARC has 
taken control of rural land and populations, along with the linking factors within these 
groups that make them so difficult to combat.174 This research is useful looking at the 
goals and objectives of the FARC and how their growth is possible with the factors 
competing against the organization.  
 In the final work A Subnational Study of Insurgency: FARC Violence in the 
1990’s Jennifer S. Holmes, Sheila Amin Gutierrez de Pineres, and Kevin M. Curtin use 
the scientific method to test theories of insurgencies.175 Using a Poisson model the 
authors look to examine traditional factors purported to explain insurgencies and then 
“extend  the  analysis  to  reveal the role of coordination and contagion using spatial 
econometric  techniques.”176 The study begins with the origins and growth of the FARC 
and all of the contributing factors to the insurgency.177 Through a subnational level 
analysis the increase in violence with the advent of the drug trade is discussed while 
looking at the underlying factors that continue to support the explanation of violence 
within the country.178 The study concludes with the preliminary spatial analysis that tests 
the hypotheses against the fixed factors of the insurgency thus determining the 
insignificant effects of the drug trade against the violent actions of the FARC.179 The 
scientific methods used in this study test the factors contributing to the FARC violence 
                                                 
174 Manwaring, Max G. 2002. Non-State Actors in Colombia: Threats to the State and to the Hemisphere. 
Small Wars & Insurgencies 01 (August): 71-73. 
175 Holmes, Jennifer S., Sheila Amin Gutierrez de Pineres, and Kevin M. Curtin. 2007. A Subnational 
Study of Insurgency: FARC Violence  in  the  1990’s.  Studies in Conflict & Terrorism. (March): 1. 
176 Ibid.  
177 Ibid 2-12.  
178 Ibid 12.  
179 Ibid 17.  

 38 
and through this it is easier to understand the guerrilla group and their actions. The 
literature collected all has points interlinking with the questions to be evaluated in this 
study but are lacking in answering the specific research question. 
 Looking at the individual studies above there is a useful amount of information 
concerning the changes within the FARC as an organization and the variables 
surrounding those changes. The links that are missing are the bureaucratic structure and 
organizational culture of the FARC and how these two features have changed, as well as 
the major factors that produced these changes. Many of the studies above look at the end 
of the Cold War and its effects on the FARC and the beginnings of the drug trade and its 
effects. But missing is how these factors as well as changes in the populace, government, 
and militaries have all culminated to affect the FARC and their structure and culture 
collectively. While all of these works attempt to single out factors affecting all of the 
competing groups in Colombia, this chapter is going to focus on how these factors 
affected one group, the FARC.  
Methodology: 
To explain the factors involved and their effect on the FARC the chapter will use 
liberalism as the theoretical approach. The FARC is a non-state actor and has proven to 
have both military and economic strengths that make it a formidable opponent to the 
state. It is also important to understand that the actions of the state directly affect the 
FARC as an organization and its culture. Taking that into account the focus on the state, 
the populace, the military, and the other organizations competing for power all play into 
the liberal cobweb approach to social science theory. This will be a more effective 
approach for explaining the independent variables such as the international drug trade, 

 39 
the actions of the state and the end of the Cold War affect the organization where in the 
above literature the focus looks at the FARC as an independent variable and how it 
affects the state. Since the changes within the FARC as an organization is the focus of the 
study all of the surrounding factors of the government, military, populace, and competing 
organizations will all be treated as independent variables. 
Through rational choice models this chapter proposes competing hypotheses 
which will individually be major contributing variables to the organizational and 
structural changes to the FARC. Hypothesis 1: The changes to the organizational culture 
and bureaucratic structure of the FARC are a direct result of the end of the Cold War. 
Since the Cold War ended it is possible that the FARC has changed its identity and 
structure to turn the organization into a successful offensive operation that is completely 
self-sufficient. This is important to this study since many other cases of insurgencies 
immediately failed after the end of the Cold War. Hypothesis 2: The FARC adapts itself 
to the policies of the government. It is an interesting dynamic where the government can 
change its mind on military action or inaction and whether or not to participate in peace 
talks. As a result the years of FARC actions appear to have a direct correlation with the 
government and military actions in regard to the FARC. Hypothesis 3: The FARC 
changed its organizational culture and behavior to take advantage of the drug trade. The 
advent of the drug trade in Colombia and its affect on the FARC has been widely 
debated. This study will look at this variable and discuss what effect it has had on the 
organization if any.  
Through the analysis of these hypotheses using liberalism as the theoretical 
approach the goal will be to understand the importance of the independent variables on 

 40 
the FARC. By treating the FARC as the dependent variable this chapter will look at the 
Cold War, the State, and the drug trade. The goal is to show what affect these variables 
have on the FARC individually and then show the links between the independent 
variables. This analysis will show the most definitive variables contributing to the 
organizations structural and cultural changes over time and how effective these changes 
were in the survival of the organization.  
 As a result of the readings it is realistic to say that the organizational behavior, 
structure and culture of the FARC changed over time. The variables will be considered to 
determine the time and severity of the changes. For some of the organizational 
adaptations outlined in the hypotheses the change was gradual and took place over 
periods of time where in other cases the changes were dramatic and fast. Pursuant to the 
literature, part of this research will be conducted to determine why some instances or 
variables caused immediate change where as the impact of other variables caused a more 
gradual change over time. Since the focus of the research is based on one organization the 
changes will be measured by the independent variables and how their increase or 
decrease of influence on the FARC caused or did not cause change to the organization.  
 The importance of this research lies in the organizational changes created by 
internal and external factors to the FARC. For the sake of eradication of the group or to 
provide for an advantage in negotiations, understanding the effects these variables have 
on the group may prove insightful. It is likely that through understanding how 
independent variables affect the organization these independent variables could be 
manipulated to direct or control the organizational changes of the FARC in the future.  

 41 
 To help the discussion of the variables in the study some secondary sources will 
be used that focus on the data side of the hypothesis testing. Three of the secondary 
sources used for the study focus on statistical, geographical, and operational data. In 
System of Violence, the work covers the gender and demographic composition of the 
FARC, the state making capabilities of the organization, and the economic and military 
assets of the organization.180 This data provides changes in these elements of the 
organization from the mid-60’s  to  the  late-90’s.181 A more recent version of the statistical 
and geographic data set comes from Conflict, Decentralization, and Local Governance in 
Colombia, 1974-2004 by Fabio Sanchez. This covers the geographic and operational 
capabilities of the FARC over the thirty year window and how that has changed over 
time.182 Finally Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and Insurgency and Its 
Implications for Regional Stability by Angel Rabasa and Peter Chalk also covers the 
economic and geographic expansion of the FARC and looks at the involvement of the 
illicit drug trade and arms trade with the organization.183 These secondary sources 
represent the statistical compilations of the activity of Colombian guerrilla groups and the 
geographic expansion of FARC operations over the years. Since these sources encompass 
all guerrilla activity they will only be used for their limited portions that focus on the 
FARC alone and any data that is compared to past and present FARC operational 
abilities. 
                                                 
180 Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence The Political Economy of War and Peace In Colombia. 
Albany: State University of New York. 60-81. 
181 Ibid 60.  
182 Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization and Local Governance in 
Colombia, 1974-2004. CEDE. (May): 7-9. 
183 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and Insurgency and 
its Implications for Regional Stability. Santa Monica: RAND. 23-51. 
 

 42 
 For the analysis portion of this research, the data and competing hypotheses will 
be constructed  into  a  matrix  diagram  to  analyze  the  “diagnosticity”  of  the  data  and  its  
effect on the hypotheses. The study will be completed with an analysis of the sensitivity 
of the data to each hypothesis. The analysis will consist of an explanation of each 
hypothesis and all of the factors that are consistent and inconsistent with each hypothesis. 
Through a systematic approach each of the factors will be described in detail and the 
effect of each factor will be explained. The end of each section will include a summation 
of whether the hypothesis is consistent with the data or if the data produced inconclusive 
results. The section will finish with a matrix diagram focusing on the major themes of 
evidence as compared to each hypothesis. The data will be coded as consistent (C), 
inconsistent (I), and not applicable (N/A). The diagram will be discussed as the evidence 
is weighed for diagnosticity, which will lead to the conclusions. Aside from limitations, 
the biases involved in the study arise in looking at the competing hypotheses where the 
subject (FARC) is discussed based on the presumed actions the organization will take in 
each hypothetical scenario. While this is counteracted by the data and actions known and 
documented about the group there is still some question of certainty when estimating how 
the organization reacted to specific variables. For the purpose of this research it will be 
assumed that the organizational actions are true to the studies used in the analysis.  
The limitations result from missing first hand information from the guerrillas and 
the civilians involved or directly affected by the guerrillas. Most of the works used in this 
particular research were conducted by military sources, government and non-
governmental organizations. While some of the works incorporate data collected from 
former guerrillas and civilians in the region, this data is very limited. There are new 

 43 
works  coming  out  of  the  region  from  “inside”  sources  however, they have yet to be 
translated and are beyond the limitations of this paper. 
First Hypothesis and Analysis: 
 The changes to the organizational culture and bureaucratic structure of the 
FARC are a direct result of the end of the Cold War. Since the 1959 Cuban Revolution 
until a 1992 truce in El Salvador the armed groups of Latin America were founded on a 
revolutionary doctrine based on Marxist-Leninist ideology and a military strategy 
combining guerrilla and terrorist activities.184 The Cuban revolution inspired these rebel 
groups that revolution was possible but one difference for the FARC is their long and 
endogenous process of accumulating peasants for armed resistance.185 Since its 
beginnings as a self-defense peasantry organization the FARC reached a point of 
radicalization and became close to the pro-Soviet Communist Party.186 Within these 
communist ideologies there was little room for the armed groups to adapt to a changing 
environment, and militarily they relied on the support of Communist states for logistical 
needs.187 As a result of the alienation of the public the Marxist-Leninist group formed a 
military  organization  to  achieve  “armed  colonization”  and  took  an  approach  to  dominate  
“human  terrain”  much  like  the  strategy  of  the  Viet  Cong.188 The FARC broke from these 
limitations and with considerably flexible politics, military sophistication, and increasing 
logistic autonomy the organization increased its chances for survival.189 After adopting a 
less rigid political ideology, the FARC heightened its complaint that the government is 
                                                 
184 Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies 128.  
185 Sanin, Francisco Gutierrez. 2003. Criminal Rebels? 5. 
186 Ibid.  
187 Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies 130.  
188 Manwaring, Max G. 2002. Non-State Actors in Colombia 71.  
189 Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies 130. 

 44 
incompetent in dealing with social inequality, crime, and deficient public services and 
presenting  the  organization  as  a  “good  alternative.”190 As a result, the FARC expanded its 
administrative capacity and its ability to provide services such as health care, education, 
and public order.191 While this type of parallel state creation is common for guerrilla 
groups  the  FARC  achieved  a  balance  by  “sidelining  any  dogma  that  promises  the  
achievement of some utopia, and giving way to a purely pragmatic strategy for gaining 
power.”192 Through this change the insurgents have overcome the arising crisis from the 
collapse of the Soviet Bloc and have created an ideology that is simply more efficient 
thus increasing the political appeal of their message.193 Since the foundations of the 
FARC were created during the period of La Violencia (1948-1965) and its organization 
focused  on  armed  insurrection,  the  organization  was  “defined  by  a  pragmatic  ideological  
evolution  and  complex  relationships  with  the  Communist  Party.”194 While the FARC did 
follow Marxist rhetoric in its analytical texts its publicly stated political aims sought 
support from the rural community at the cost of distancing themselves from communist 
orthodoxy.195 The awkward relationship with the communist parties of Colombia led to 
the rise of a communist leader of the FARC, Jacobo Arenas, and as a result, communist 
leaders stated that the leadership of the FARC followed the party line in public 
statements.196 By this time however, the leadership of the FARC was not in line with the 
communist orthodoxy, the Colombian communist party preferred not to link itself to the 
                                                 
190 Ibid.  
191 Ibid 131.  
192 Ibid.  
193 Ibid.  
194 Ibid 132.  
195 Ibid.  
196 Ibid.  

 45 
FARC because it did not have complete control, and the proximity to the FARC could 
affect the communists in the legal political arena.197  
In  the  mid  80’s  the  FARC  joined  the  electoral  alliance  Union  Patriotica (UP) and 
appeared to be bolstering their relationship with the Communist party but their continued 
military actions created a division so the organizations kept their distance and looked at 
the situation as two independent groups that shared some political ideology.198 By this 
time the FARC considered itself an armed guerrilla organization  that  “opens  its  doors  to  
all political, philosophical, religious, and ideological tendencies, and which brings 
together people with the common ideal of liberating this  country.”199 The final division of 
the FARC with the Communist party occurred with the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 
and the death of Jacobo Arenas in 1990.200 As a result of these occurrences, the FARC no 
longer had the leadership of an ideologue with a vision close to communist orthodoxy 
and with the loss of control of the FARC by the Communist party.201 The organization 
was able to offer a light ideological payload and an advance toward a highly pragmatic 
program.202 The collapse of the Soviet Union also discredited the guerrillas’ ideology and 
as a result the dialogue with the leftist intellectuals in urban centers was severed limiting 
their mobility within cities.203  
After the end of the Cold War officials expected guerrillas to face a diminished 
capacity however, the degree of financial autonomy reached when looking at external 
support and the effect of anti-drug policies on the peasantry offered unexpected bases of 
                                                 
197 Ibid 133.  
198 Ibid 134.  
199 Ibid.  
200 Ibid 135.  
201 Ibid.  
202 Ibid.  
203 Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence 65.  

 46 
support and political legitimacy to the guerrillas.204 For studies looking at violence in the 
form of terrorism, the end of the Cold War as a positive effect in diminishing terrorism 
proved overly simplistic.205 While in many countries there appeared to be a decline on 
non-governmental terrorism between 1968 and 1992; in Colombia the trend proved 
unequivocal where between 1993 and 1999 the country accounted for more than fifty 
percent of the total incidents in the region.206  
As a result of the peasant and self-defense foundations of the FARC it appears 
that the organization was very different from the common communist revolutionaries in 
Latin America. With no evidence to conclude that the bureaucratic structure changed 
outside of the militaristic foundations of the organization the data suggests the end of the 
Cold War had no effect. Aside from the change in leadership to Jacobo Arenas to a more 
ideologically open leadership there is no evidence to suggest that at any time the structure 
of the organization changed. While some of the data collected points to the end of the 
Cold War as a turning point in the organizational culture as a political ideological group 
the majority of the data suggests that the FARC split from these lines before the end of 
the Cold War. Since its foundations were based on land reform and the peasantry, the 
data suggests that the FARC alignment with the Communist ideology was a beneficial 
alignment and as soon as that benefit no longer existed, there was no need to keep the 
FARC attached to a rigid ideology. Since the FARC preferred armed movement to 
political movements the data suggests that the military drive of the organization alienated 
the group from the other ideological organizations and thus was forced to develop its own 
                                                 
204 Begerquist, Charles., Ricardo Penaranda, and Gonzaol Sanchez G. 2001. Violence in Colombia 1990-
2000 Waging War and Negotiating Peace. Wilmington: Scholarly Resources Inc. 31-32. 
205 Feldmann, Andreas. 2005. A Shift in the Paradigm of Violence 13.  
206 Ibid 15.  

 47 
ideology and organizational culture. The data does suggest that with end of the Cold War 
the FARC made the final split from exclusive communist ideology by accepting members 
of all ideologies, religions, and social classes in public statements, but the roots of this 
had existed in the group since its beginning. All of the data seems to bring inconsistency 
to the hypothesis and the information looked at suggests that the organizational culture 
change of the FARC was not a result of the end of the Cold War.  
Second Hypothesis and Analysis: 
 The FARC adapts itself to the policies of the government. Since its beginnings the 
FARC developed as a defensive organization that was militarily weak and had no 
offensive capabilities.207 By  the  mid  60’s  President  Guillermo  Leon  Valencia  transferred  
judicial  and  other  powers  to  the  military  and  “suspect”  civilians  were  tried  in secret 
hearing, with their legal and political rights suspended.208 In  spite  of  this  by  the  1970’s  
the FARC was expanding and was adjudicating legal disputes, overseeing public works 
and carrying out police functions.209 By  the  mid  1980’s  the  “long  lasting  social and 
political exclusion, an uneven distribution of wealth, corruption, and a culture of 
impunity”  all  played  roles  in  the  expansion  of  the  guerrilla groups.210 Colombia has been 
notoriously weak and has low defense spending with only 3.1% of GDP spent on the 
military in 1998.211 Homicides, used as an indicator of weak governmental control, are 
associated with high levels of FARC violence and higher levels of state repression are 
associated to higher levels of insurgent violence.212  
                                                 
207 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 43.  
208 Ibid.  
209 Ibid 44.  
210 Feldmann, Andreas. 2005. A Shift in the Paradigm of Violence 24.  
211 Holmes, Pineres, Curtin. 2007. A Subnational Study of Insurgency 7. 
212 Ibid 16.  

 48 
When President Cesar Gaviria declared a state of emergency in 1992 the 
government cracked down by banning ransom payments or protection payments and 
seized land and bank accounts associated with guerrilla money laundering.213 Within 
three days, three of the top commanders of the Colombian armed forces resigned leading 
to speculation that the new crack down generated only further dissent and turmoil.214 
With the onset of presidential and congressional elections in 1994 the FARC stepped up 
their kidnapping and terrorist acts to affect the elections and while Rafael Pardo the 
Colombian defense minister tried to downplay the actions, around 70 percent of the 
electorate would not vote.215 This is important due to the higher electoral participation 
and mayoral support having a negative effect on FARC armed activity.216 The higher 
electoral participation and government support indicate the legitimacy of local 
government and to an extent hamper the illegal activities of armed groups.217 
Over the next few years corruption in the political system began receiving 
attention as a survey by Semana magazine indicated that corruption cost Colombia 
$40,000 a day in public funds.218 By 1996 Colombia was in pieces. As the guerrilla war 
raged on, President Samper was absolved by congress on corruption charges and the 
military and guerrillas were fighting a tit for tat battle.219 By late 1996 the FARC and 
other guerrilla groups tried to take control of major cities and towns by burning trucks, 
creating physical obstructions and creating roadblocks, which affected food prices that 
rose by 10 percent, with the impacts reaching the Caribbean coast and northern 
                                                 
213 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 75-76.  
214 Ibid 76.  
215 Ibid 90-91.  
216 Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization and Local Governance in 
Colombia, 1974-2004. CEDE. (May): 22. 
217 Ibid.  
218 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 96. 
219 Ibid 110-113.  

 49 
provinces.220 Samper tried to bring the FARC to negotiations and ended up publicly 
stating that the government was willing to concede to demilitarized zones to begin 
talks.221 With  that  the  FARC  “acknowledged  the  offer  as  ‘a  substantial’  first  step”  but  
many other conditions would also have to be met.222  
In  the  late  1990’s  the  FARC  demanded  a  demilitarized  zone  and  while  this  was  
conceded by President Andres Pastrana it has done little to curb FARC actions as now the 
organization has earned recognition for its sovereign power and affirmation of the FARC 
as a parallel state.223 By 1998 as the FARC descended on its newly acquired demilitarized 
zone five mayors were fired for embezzlement, helping to end corruption.224 A local 
priest  declared  the  last  five  months  as  a  “paradise  of  peace.”225 The  FARC  was  “showing  
the  government  we  can  run  our  own  state.”226 Since that time FARC and government 
actions against one another have increased while the attempts at peaceful resolution have 
dissolved.227 By the end of 1999 President Pastrana and the U.S. were under criticism for 
allowing priorities to get sidelined while continuing the war effectively even though the 
government was preparing for peace negotiations.228  Upon the kidnapping of Senator 
Jorge Gechem Turbay, President Pastrana halted all peace talks with the FARC and 
began  “Operation  Death,”  a  full  scale  military  war  on  the  FARC.229 With no breaks in the 
carnage and increased U.S. support, President Alvaro Uribe was elected and after 9/11 
                                                 
220 Ibid 115.  
221 Ibid 130.  
222 Ibid.  
223 Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies 136.  
224 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 201. 
225 Ibid. 
226 Ibid.  
227 Ibid 248.  
228 Ibid.  
229 Ibid 305.  

 50 
Colombia’s  “George  W.  Bush”  was  warned  with  a  prophecy  of  “Blood,  blood,  and  more  
blood;;”  “maybe  even  some  gringo  blood.”230  
The data all seems to support the hypothesis. The overall actions of the 
government in terms of repression and violence in turn seem to provoke more actions 
from the FARC. Yet according to some examples in the data there were instances where 
the government was attempting peace negotiations or was committing to peace 
negotiations while the FARC was not. The difficulty here is the limited information. 
While on one hand the government claims it has stopped all military actions there is no 
guarantee as in the case of the FARC. The majority of the data coincides with the idea 
that as the government has increased its actions the FARC in turn increases theirs. The 
other problem with looking at this data specifically is trying to ignore the paramilitary 
and cartel effects on the situation. What might be considered an act of violence toward 
the government may in fact not be as a result of government action but their failure to 
fight the paramilitaries and it is possibilities like this that make the cause-effect data 
unclear. In some cases it seems clear that actions by the government dictate the frequency 
or severity of FARC actions however, the other variables of narcos and paramilitaries 
make the overall picture less than definitive. 
Final Hypothesis and Analysis:   
 The FARC changed its organizational culture and behavior to take advantage of 
the drug trade. Over the last few decades the FARC has evolved from a small peasant 
organization to an organization of unprecedented military strength as a result of the illicit 
drug trade.231 There is little evidence to support the idea that the FARC is directly 
                                                 
230 Ibid 314-315. 
231 Vargas, Ricardo. 1999. The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia 1. 

 51 
involved in coca growing or refining but since their areas of control reside in main coca 
cultivation areas the FARC does tax the various stages of production and export.232 The 
FARC did not become a major actor through mobilization of an alienated base; they 
became major actors through the power that came from the cultivation of drugs by a 
marginalized population.233 While illicit crop cultivation and protection was originally 
forbidden by the FARC, the movement of paramilitaries into the area to support the now 
dominant economic activity forced the FARC to protect and support coca cultivation in 
order to keep their social base from working with their political enemies.234  
In  the  early  80’s  the  FARC  reached  an  impasse  where  no  matter  how  much  the  
ideological message changed there was no increased support for the organization and 
though the negative aspects of involvement in the drug trade were known the payoff was 
too great.235 The FARC went from ten fronts to twenty-six during the first three years of 
the  1980’s in large part as a result of their now stable and lucrative sources of financing 
through the illicit drug tax system.236 This involvement between the FARC and the drug 
cartels has also helped in a unique framework where the FARC is not only acquiring 
income but also the connections to the international black market for arms since it is 
closely related to the drug market.237 This connection has created instances of drugs for 
guns swaps and has bolstered the FARC logistical framework through building arms 
supply sources in neighboring countries.238 The FARC established a stable economic base 
for the colonos (colonizing migrants) and small peasants by regulating market prices, 
                                                 
232 Walker, Julius. 2002. The role of the state 11.  
233 Marks, Thomas. 2002. Colombian Army Adaptation 3.  
234 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 26. 
235 Walker, Julius. 2002. The role of the state 7. 
236 Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict 7-8. 
237 Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies 138.  
238 Ibid.  

 52 
providing financial and technical assistance, and protection.239 This forces the 
narcotraffickers  to  pay  the  peasants  and  wage  laborers  “raspachines”  the  market  price  of  
coca leaves and labor.240 The  FARC  “made  it  possible  for  the  sustenance  economy  to  
incorporate  into  the  international  markets  with  minimum  “structural  adjustment.””241 As 
a result of this policy of protection and regulation between peasants, narcotraffickers, and 
merchant intermediaries the FARC has faced the changing dynamics of the armed 
conflict among guerrillas, the state, and organized crime.242  
The FARC was able to use the illicit drug platform to increase its state-making 
capabilities as well and through a tax of 7 to 10 percent per kilo of coca paste the group 
had  an  estimated  income  of  $60  to  $100  million  a  year  by  the  early  1990’s.243 This 
additional income not only assisted in the expansion of the FARC militarily but also in its 
ability to provide expansions in commerce, providing means of transportation, 
adjudicating and arbitrating social and personal conflicts, constructing landing strips, 
providing health and education services, and essential public services.244 As of 2000, of 
the 61 FARC fronts, 32 are linked to the drug trade through income or protection.245 
Some analysts believe that it would be prudent to assume a substantial part of their 
income is in a reserve for combat escalation, but even without that, the development of 
these incomes have “broadened  the  range  of  strategic  options  available  to  the  
guerrillas.”246 Analysts look to the strategic objective of the FARC to consolidate its coca 
growing regions to build up their military capabilities and to push into other regions 
                                                 
239 Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence 70.  
240 Ibid.  
241 Ibid 71.  
242 Ibid 72.  
243 Ibid 75.  
244 Ibid 78.  
245 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 32.  
246 Ibid 33.  

 53 
where its establishment of seven new fronts near Bogotá provides a new source of 
income from the cultivation of poppy fields on the eastern side of the Andes.247 As early 
as  the  mid  1990’s  the  FARC  could  take on the military in a pitched battle and prevail.248 
It is important to note that in 1999 the FARC cooperated in a $6 million dollar UN 
project to convert coca plantations to legal alternatives.249 While it is true that fronts of 
the FARC are involved in taxation of the illicit drug trade the organization has minimal 
connections to the cultivation, refinement, and transshipment to the U.S.250  
According to the data, the conclusion can be drawn that the organizational 
behavior and culture were changed with the involvement of the FARC in illicit crop 
production. With increased funding the operational military functions were better 
supplied and more expansive giving the FARC access to areas they were unable to 
infiltrate before. The FARC was also able to present more of a challenge to the military 
like never before thus changing their behavior as an organization. Along with the 
increased military capacity the data shows that with the income from the drug trade the 
FARC adapted to run their own state more effectively and provide more services to their 
base. Perhaps the greatest organizational change emerged within the culture of the FARC 
where, originally working with drugs was not considered a supportive action to the 
groups’  political  goals, yet the organization was forced to adapt to the threat of losing 
their marginalized masses to competing groups. The data provided indicates that the 
                                                 
247 Ibid 40.  
248 Green, John W. 2005. Guerrillas, Soldiers, Paramilitaries, Assassins, Narcos, and Gringos:The Unhappy 
Prospects for Peace and Democracy in Colombia. Latin American 
Research Review. (June): 40. 145. 
249 Stokes,  Doug.  2003.  Why  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  doesn’t  matter 579.  
250 Ibid.  

 54 
organizational changes to the FARC are linked to their entrance into the protection and 
taxation of illicit crops.  
Matrix Diagram and Analysis: 
Evidence  Hypothesis 1 Hypothesis 2 Hypothesis 3 
Corruption in the 
government  
N/A I N/A 
Broad government 
suppression 
N/A C N/A 
People supporting 
the government 
N/A I N/A 
Weak government N/A C N/A 
Loss of international 
support 
I N/A N/A 
Breaking from 
Communist 
ideologies 
C N/A N/A 
Losing support from 
the public base 
I N/A N/A 
Changing leadership I N/A N/A 
Increased income I N/A C 
Increased ability to 
build and support a 
parallel state 
I N/A C 
Increased size and 
capabilities of 
military 
I N/A C 
Movement into 
international 
criminal activity 
I N/A C 
 
 With the completion of the matrix diagram the evidence for each hypothesis is 
demonstrated. This supplements the above discussion of each hypothesis and the data 
collected. For the sake of brevity the major points of evidence are broken into four major 
themes and the conclusions drawn on their consistency or inconsistency when compared 
to the hypothesis. The first hypothesis citing the end of the Cold War as the main factor 
in the FARC change of structure and culture was proved inconsistent. While the end of 

 55 
the Cold War did help push the change in ideology in different directions none of the 
evidence complied in the rest of the data supported the hypothesis. The second hypothesis 
looking at government actions as the main factor in FARC change results were similar. 
While there was some correlation between a weak government and broad suppression to 
the behavioral changes of the FARC, there was a lack of examples to permanently link 
the data to the hypothesis. For the other factors there was inconsistent data on whether the 
corruption of the government or public support would change FARC behaviors. The final 
hypothesis looks at the involvement of the FARC in illicit drug trade. This change in the 
organizational culture and behavior of the group was conclusively supported by all of the 
categories looked at in this research. According to the data, with increased income the 
group was able to change its military tactics due to greater numbers and better, more 
abundant equipment. The data also supported that FARC was able to provide better 
services on a greater scale in their function as a parallel state. Their change in 
organizational culture was also supported by the data since the founding of the FARC’s  
interest in the illicit drug trade was as a result of the changing economic situation with 
their marginalized base. That coupled with the FARC desire to ensure the loyalty of their 
base in competition with their political enemies was all supported by the data.  
Conclusion: 
 The  survival  of  the  FARC  in  Colombia  has  depended  on  the  organization’s  ability  
to adapt to its surroundings through cultural, behavioral, and structural changes. In this 
research the attempt was made to compile data for three possible contributing factors of 
the end of the Cold War, the state, and the onset of the illicit drug trade. While there are 
inconclusive results for the actions of the end of the Cold War and the state, the research 

 56 
supports the attempt to explain the organizational changes of the FARC resulting from 
the illicit drug trade. This chapter analyzed the FARC as the dependent variable with the 
end of the Cold War, the state, the illicit drug trade as independent variables. For each of 
the factors, there would be a benefit to looking at each of the independent variables as 
major themes for the purpose of a more in-depth study. There is also the rise of U.S. 
involvement and paramilitaries which could also be looked at as variables in the attempt 
to explain the FARC organizational changes. 
 Form here the next chapter will focus on the ELN as the organizations ability to 
adapt is analyzed. The ELN will be analyzed using the same techniques and theoretical 
guidelines to support the comparison of the two groups in following chapters. This leads 
to the LAMP analysis (Chapter 4) to predict the future behaviors of the FARC and ELN. 
In addition to the LAMP study chapter 4 will update the current situation of the FARC 
thanks to the publication of a new document. This will demonstrate the continual 
adaptability of the FARC in more recent situations.  The next chapter will illuminate both 
the similarities and differences in the adaptation of the ELN with the intent on exploring 
these factors in the LAMP study (Chapter 4).  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 57 
Appendix 1: Evolution of FARC Actions 
1985 
1990
  
 

 58 
2000 
 
(Sanchez and Palau 2006, 8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 59 
References 
Begerquist, Charles., Ricardo Penaranda, and Gonzaol Sanchez G. 2001. Violence in 
Colombia 1990-2000 Waging War and Negotiating Peace. Wilmington: Scholarly 
Resources Inc.  
 
Feldmann, Andreas. 2005. A Shift in the Paradigm of Violence: Non-Governmental 
 Terrorism in Latin America since the end of the Cold War. Revista de Ciencia 
 Politica 25: 03-36. 
 
Green, John W. 2005. Guerrillas, Soldiers, Paramilitaries, Assassins, Narcos, and 
Gringos: 
 The Unhappy Prospects for Peace and Democracy in Colombia. Latin American 
 Research Review. (June): 40, 137-149. 
 
Holmes, Jennifer S., Sheila Amin Gutierrez de Pineres, and Kevin M. Curtin. 2007. A  
 Subnational Study  of  Insurgency:  FARC  Violence  in  the  1990’s.  Studies in 
 Conflict & Terrorism. (March): 249-265.  
 
Manwaring, Max G. 2002. Non-State Actors in Colombia: Threats to the State and to the  
 Hemisphere. Small Wars & Insurgencies 01 (August): 68-80. 
 
Marks, Thomas. 2002. Colombian Army Adaptation to FARC Insurgency. Strategic  
 Studies Institute (January). 
 
Ortiz, Ramon D. 2002. Insurgent Strategies in the Post-Cold War: The Case of the  
 Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism 
 01 (April): 127-143. 
 
Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and 
 Insurgency and its Implications for Regional Stability. Santa Monica: RAND. 
 
Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence The Political Economy of War and Peace 
 In Colombia. Albany: State University of New York. 
  
Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries in Latin America. Boulder: Lynne 
 Reinner Publishers.  
 
Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization and Local  
 Governance in Colombia, 1974-2004. CEDE. (May): 20. 
 
Sanin, Francisco Gutierrez. 2003. Criminal Rebels? A discussion of war and criminality  
 From the Colombian experience. Crisis States Programme. (April): London. 
 
Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History. London: SAQI. 

 60 
Stokes,  Doug.  2003.  Why  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  doesn’t  matter:  The  US  war  of  terror 
 in Colombia. Review of International Studies 29: 569-585. 
 
Vargas, Ricardo. 1999. The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the 
 Illicit Drug Trade. Transnational Insitute (June). Internet. Available from 
 http://www.tni.org/detail_page.phtml?page=archives_vargas_farc; Accessed  
 14 November 2008. 
 
Walker, Julius. 2002. The role of the state in the international illicit drugs trade: the case 
 Of Colombia and external intervention. Global Politics Network Internet. 
 Available from http://www.globalpolitics.net; accessed 14 November 2008.  
 
Wickham-Crowley, Timothy P. 1991. Exploring Revolution: Essays on Latin American  
Insurgency and Revolutionary Theory. Armonk: M. E. Sharpe.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 61 
Chapter 3 
The  ELN’s  Adaptability 
Introduction: 
 From independence until the present day Colombia has been characterized by 
constant warfare and a fragmented political climate due to unequal land distribution, 
poverty, and oppression. Many revolutionary arms of rural and urban Latin America have 
used the Cuban revolution and the ideology of Che Guevara and Castro as their example 
to follow; the ELN (Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional) was one of these organizations. The 
ELN has remained as a small but persistent guerrilla group  in  Colombia  since  the  1960’s.  
Based on the Cuban revolution  a  workers’,  students’  and  peasants’  movement  
Movimiento Obrero Estudiantil Campesino (MOEC) was started in 1961 in rural 
Colombia.251 By 1964 the MOEC had divided into factions and one group in particular, 
led by Fabio Vasquez, went to Havana for training and returned to Colombia to establish 
the ELN.252 Due to their Havana ties, the  ELN  tried  adhere  to  the  “foquista  ideology  as  
propounded  in  the  works  of  Che  Guevara.”253 Along  with  the  ‘Che’  ideology  the  group  
took  on  a  Robin  Hood  persona  by  “stealing  from  the  rich  to  give  to  the  poor”  and  
followed a Christian moral ideology.254 One  of  the  ELN’s  most  influential  members,  
priest Camilo Torres, committed the group to implement a moral component in its 
revolutionary actions.255 This style of conflicting ideology has caused quandary between 
the  teachings  of  “Clausewitz  and  Guevara,  on  one  hand,  and  the  Christian  view  of  murder  
                                                 
251 Pearce, Jenny. 1990. Colombia: Inside the Labyrinth. New York: Monthly Review Press 165.  
252 Ibid.  
253 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries in Latin America. Boulder: Lynne Reinner 
Publishers 102.  
254 Ibid 103.  
255 Ibid.  

 62 
as  the  ultimate  sin,  on  the  other.”256 Through their mix of Christianity and political 
realism the ELN focused on gaining support from the campesinos with their argument 
that the state is an enemy to the people.257 The ELN mixture of moral and intellectual 
ideology  gained  support  from  the  “middle-class students and professionals alienated by 
the  exclusionary  politics  of  the  National  Front”  since even moderate leftist behavior was 
not tolerated.258 This unique set of ideologies created an identity for the ELN and its 
members but also caused many internal problems within the organization. The ELN has 
been considered a marginal player in the Colombian conflict; however, it has been the 
organizations ability to adapt and change its culture, ideology, and behavior that has 
made the ELN a persistent guerrilla organization.  
 The ELN as a guerrilla organization has had to adapt to the changing social and 
political climate but their refusal to change in other areas has been the reason the 
organization has limited membership and success. The ELN was faced with a difficult 
start  as  the  organization’s  leaders  were killed or exiled on more than one occasion 
causing  their  near  demise  at  the  hands  of  the  Colombian  Army  in  the  1970’s.  Re-
emergence after these hardships required major changes in the leadership, ideology, and 
actions  of  the  revolutionary  group.  This  also  included  changes  in  the  ELN’s  financial  
expansion into new criminal enterprises. Thus changes were imperative not only for the 
survival  of  the  remaining  members,  but  they  also  increased  the  organization’s  strengths  
and  effectiveness  in  the  1980’s  to the present. Among these changes, the ELN was forced 
to expand their economic opportunities and their modes of operation in order to survive. 
While in some cases the organization benefited from increased income and expanded 
                                                 
256 Ibid.  
257 Ibid.  
258 Ibid.  

 63 
territorial control, they were forced to stray from their core ideology, making their appeal 
to the people less desirable. As one of the longest running revolutionary organizations, 
the ELN has proven their ability to adapt and increase their effectiveness even after its 
assistance from Cuba had dwindled after the end of the Cold War. It has only been in the 
last decade that the ELN has proven itself a strong adversary for the Colombian 
government.  
As the ELN has strengthened it has become a more effective federation of fighters 
to improve their bargaining position with the government. With other organizations 
having taken precedence at the negotiation tables, the ELN has a renewed sense of 
purpose and some new forms of income to help their negotiating positions.  In spite of the 
difficulties within the organization the ELN has been able to adapt its behavior, structure, 
and ideology to make it one of the only surviving revolutionary groups in Colombia. 
Since their re-emergence as a strong fighting force, the Colombian government cannot 
afford to ignore the ELN any longer. It is important to understand how this force was able 
to return from almost complete annihilation to an effective guerrilla organization. By 
analyzing these changes and capabilities this analysis will shed light on government 
mistakes in stopping the organization and give insight to future negotiations. Due to the 
implications for U.S. and Colombian relations, studying the ELN is imperative if there is 
ever to be peace in the region.   
Literature Review: 
 The main research for this document pertains to the revolutionary groups in Latin 
America and Colombia specifically. The literature provides information on the creation 
of the ELN and their long history. The works will demonstrate the mistakes the ELN 

 64 
made in their early years as well as their ability to adapt and return as an effective force a 
decade later. This research also provides insight on the structure, organization, and 
behavior of the ELN and how these have changed over time. Each author adds 
information on the origins, ideology, economic changes, and actions of the ELN.  
 In Vanguard Revolutionaries in Latin America James F Rochlin discusses the 
revolutionary groups of Peru, Colombia, and Mexico. Rochlin begins with the four most 
powerful guerrilla movements, one of which is the ELN.259 The work gives a brief history 
of Colombia from independence to the era of La Violencia when the ELN began.260 
Rochlin then focuses on the ELN and their origins as a unique mix of Christianity and 
political realism.261 The work gives a timeline for the organization and their actions from 
their  creation  in  the  1960’s  and  their  decimation  in  the  1970’s  to  their  re-emergence in 
the  1980’s.262 Rochlin points out the regions of operation for the ELN and the strategy 
behind their choices for areas of operation and recruitment.263 This work is thorough in 
the  explanations  of  the  ELN’s  birth  and  movement  into  their  modern  version.     
 In the following two works, the focus is on the history of Colombia and its wars. 
In Colombia: A Brutal History by Geoff Simons, the author focuses on the social and 
political history of Colombia from the pre-colonial era to post-9/11. The work touches 
briefly on the formation of the ELN but the focus is on the actions of the ELN and their 
interaction with the government.264 Simons explains the terrorist actions, kidnappings, 
and negotiations with the Colombian government over the course of multiple 
                                                 
259 Ibid 1. 
260 Ibid 87-102.  
261 Ibid 102-103. 
262 Ibid 103-104.  
263 Ibid 104-106. 
264 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History. London: SAQI 90, 144-145. 

 65 
administrations.265 While this work provides little in the way of a thorough study on the 
ELN it does provide a timeline throughout the life of the organization accounting for their 
actions during these periods. In The Colombian Civil War, Bert Ruiz focuses on both the 
actions of the ELN and their combatants. The ELN portion of the book begins with the 
U.S. and Colombian government working toward peace agreements.266 The work 
explains the force the ELN has at its disposal and the mentality of the leadership at the 
time.267 Ruiz covers a series of talks between the Pastrana administration and the ELN 
and explains the ideological makeup of the ELN and its leaders.268 The work goes back in 
time to the era of the Cuban Revolution and the beginnings of what would become the 
ELN.269 Camilo Torres is discussed in-depth since this Catholic priest was considered 
one  of  the  “best  and  brightest  minds  in  Colombia”  and  went  on  to  join  the  ELN.270 Ruiz 
then looks at the ties between the ELN and Cuba and explains the founding Marxist 
ideology of the organization.271 The end of the work returns to the failure of the talks 
between the ELN and Pastrana administration where Pablo Beltran, an ELN leader, 
proclaimed  “our  fight  will  grow,  and  we  will  not  disarm.”272 This work gives a better 
view into the leadership of the ELN and how its organization operates.  
 The following two briefs focus exclusively on the ELN. In Colombia: Moving 
Forward with the ELN? This International Crisis Group paper focuses on the modern 
ELN and their capabilities. This brief begins with the military capabilities of the 
                                                 
265 Ibid 156-267. 
266 Ruiz, Bert. 2001. The Colombian Civil War. Jefferson: McFarland & Company Inc. Publishers. 86. 
267 Ibid 87.  
268 Ibid 89-91.  
269 Ibid 109-112.  
270 Ibid 112-116.  
271 Ibid 119-129.  
272 Ibid 245-248.  

 66 
organization and their interaction with other armed groups.273 The political and social 
bases are discussed as the ELN has a very diverse membership.274 Economics and 
finances are the last topic of the section focusing on the ELN, which gives a look at their 
evolution of money-making  activities  since  the  1980’s.275 The next section of the brief 
considers the recent talks with the government and their interaction with organizations in 
Cuba and Mexico.276 This section also looks at the negotiations between the ELN and the 
Uribe administration, as well as the involvement of the international community.277 The 
brief ends with the participation of peace organizations in the negotiating process and 
these highlight the difficulties facing the government and populace in ending ELN 
hostilities.278 The brief offers some insight to the governmental and non-governmental 
roles in negotiations, but the focus is too narrow in time and scope.  
In Colombia: Prospects for Peace with the ELN the International Crisis Group 
offers a much broad and in-depth study of the ELN and their actions. The report begins 
with an overview of the successes and failures of negotiations with the ELN and 
“evaluates  the  prospects  for  the  constructive  advancement  and  conclusion  of  peace  
negotiations.”279 The history of the ELN is discussed in detail as the report moves from 
the founding of the organization through the decline of the 1970’s.280 The report then 
briefly looks at the re-emergence  of  the  organization  in  the  1980’s  and  the  changes  within  
                                                 
273 International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward with the ELN? Latin America Briefing 
No16. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/latin_america/b16_colombia_eln.pdf 2-6. 
274 Ibid 6-7.  
275 Ibid 7-8.  
276 Ibid 8-12.  
277 Ibid 12.  
278 Ibid 13-17.  
279 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace with the ELN. ICG Latin America 
Report No2. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/report_archive/A400790_04102002.pdf  1-4. 
280 Ibid 5-6.  

 67 
the organization and in negotiations with the government.281 The next section of the 
report is a detailed timeline of the interactions of the ELN and the government during the 
Pastrana administration.282 The details of the Pastrana administration transitions the paper 
into the Uribe administration and how negotiations can commence based on the lessons 
learned from the past.283 The report finishes with a detailed set of negotiating actions the 
government  needs  to  follow  in  order  to  get  the  ELN  into  peace  talks  because  “without  
peace, the fight against drugs will never be won and the fight against poverty will never 
succeed.”284 This paper is thorough in its discussion of negotiations between the ELN and 
the government but barely discusses the changes in behavior and ideology that have made 
the ELN of today so durable.  
 Moving into the economics side of the ELN conflict the next three works consider 
the actions of the ELN and their economic strategies. In Systems of Violence: The 
Political Economy of War and Peace in Colombia, Nazih Richani offers a quantitative 
study on the ELN. After a brief history of the ELN, Richani studies the class and gender 
composition of the organization.285 The author then focuses on the extortion portion of 
the ELN income and their capabilities as fighters within areas of geographic control.286 
Even though the work is limited to economic, geographic, and statistical data the work is 
very thorough in these details of the ELN. In Criminal Rebels? A Discussion of War and 
Criminality from the Colombian Experience, Francisco Gutierrez Sanin focuses on 
quantitative data on the FARC and ELN actions in Colombia. Sanin tests the research of 
                                                 
281 Ibid 7-8.  
282 Ibid 11-20. 
283 Ibid 20-23.  
284 Ibid 23-26.  
285 Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence The Political Economy of War and Peace In Colombia. 
Albany: State University of New York. 81-85. 
286 Ibid 85-91.  

 68 
economic causes of civil war as stated by Paul Collier.287 Sanin  tests  Collier’s  “criminal  
rebels”  thesis  against  his  own  data  of  the  ELN  and  analyzes  organizational  behavior.288 
The  author  explains  his  points  of  critique  when  comparing  the  ELN  to  Collier’s  ideas  and 
gives a thorough accounting of the ELN actions and their income from those actions.289 
After  analyzing  the  data,  Sanin  refutes  the  assumptions  made  by  Collier  in  his  “criminal  
rebels”  thesis  and  states  his  conclusions  for  the  opportunities  and  motivations of the 
organization.290 The author does a good job of using data to explain the actions of the 
ELN but the document treats the ELN like a secondary player since the FARC has more 
data to its credit for the purpose of this study. The final work, Parasites and Predators: 
Guerrillas and the Insurrection Economy of Colombia by Alfredo Rangel Suarez looks at 
“Colombia’s  guerrilla groups  (and)  places  them  among  the  most  outstanding  examples  …  
of successfully self-financed  insurgent  groups.”291 Suarez begins with an overview of the 
insurgent groups in Colombia and gives a general picture of their behavior.292 The work 
describes the guerrilla economy  as  it  exists  by  “how  it  relates  to  the  territory  and  the  
people  it  controls,  as  well  as  by  the  state’s  governing  capability.”293 Suarez breaks this 
into income, extortion, kidnapping, drug trade, and cattle theft and gives incomes and 
percentages the ELN derives from these activities.294 The expenses and investments of 
                                                 
287 Sanin, Francisco Gutierrez. 2003. Criminal Rebels? A Discussion of War and Criminality from the 
Colombian experience. Crisis States Programme. (April): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisstates.com/download/wp/WP27FG.pdf 1. 
288 Ibid 2-5.  
289 Ibid 6-13.  
290 Ibid 14-22.  
291Suarez, Alfredo Rangel. 2000. Parasites and Predators: Guerrillas and the Insurrection Economy of 
Colombia. Journal of International Affairs. (Spring): 53 no.2 577-578. 
292 Ibid 580-581.  
293 Ibid 582-585.  
294 Ibid 585-595. 

 69 
the guerrillas are also discussed before Suarez completes the work with a look at the 
overall microeconomic effect of the guerrilla economies in Colombia.295   
 Two papers focus on the Colombian conflict orientation. In Colombia-Thinking 
Clearly about the Conflict, Philip McLean studies the type of conflict in Colombia 
between all of the major players.296 The author breaks down the individual groups and 
considers  the  ELN  as  the  only  group  that  could  fall  under  the  title  of  “a  classic  guerrilla 
war.”297 McLean looks at the actions of the guerrillas and compares them to their stated 
purpose and summarizes peace talks between the guerrillas and the government.298 In 
Conflict, Decentralization, and Local Governance in Colombia, 1974-2004, Fabio 
Sanchez and Maria del mar Palau the work discuss the contributing factors to the 
geographical expansion of the armed factions in Colombia.299 After a brief overview of 
the Colombian conflict the work focuses on each of the individual groups including the 
ELN.300 The look at the ELN provides factors that have contributed to the organizations 
survival and geographic expansion.301 Sanchez and Palau show the factors that 
government decentralization reforms play in the expansion of the armed groups in 
Colombia through testing the variables in econometric models and a contiguous 
matrix.302 This means that  the  work  can  “analyze  the  contagious  effects  of  illegal  armed  
activity  in  one  municipality  or  another  …  (and)  the  influence  of  independent  variables  …  
                                                 
295 Ibid 596-601.  
296 McLean, Phillip. 2002. Colombia-Thinking Clearly about the Conflict. Center for Strategic and 
International Studies. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.csis.org/index.php?option=com_csis_pubs&task=view&id=729  1. 
297 Ibid 3.  
298 Ibid 7-10.  
299 Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization and Local Governance in 
Colombia, 1974-2004. CEDE. (May): Internt. Available from: 
http://ideas.repec.org/p/col/000089/002180.html 1. 
300 Ibid 9.  
301 Ibid 10-11.  
302 Ibid 12-18.  

 70 
on  local  dependant  variables.”303 The study breaks the data into time periods and groups 
which gives data sets for illegal actions and graphs representing the change in probability 
of actions for each group.304 Finally, the work provides similar data sets and graphs for 
the effect of the conflict on the local governments.305 This work is very specific to the 
actions of the organizations in relation to the independent variables tested and their affect 
on their geographical region. This work is well planned but is limited to decentralization 
factors and political implications. 
 The final work, War and Drugs in Colombia by the International Crisis Group 
rounds out the literature as it focuses on the drug trade in Colombia. Since the ELN had a 
rigid ideology the organization resisted the drug trade for a long time.306 However, this 
organizational/ideological change has been particularly interesting with the ELN.307 Even 
though their role is marginal in the drug trade the ELN is still an important actor in the 
region’s  drug  trade.308 The work discusses the unexpected partnership and expected 
conflict that has risen between the ELN and the FARC and the changes that have given 
the ELN strength in drug producing regions.309 The paper concludes with the current 
attempts to curtail the drug trade in Colombia and the future options available to the 
country to control and possibly end the drug war.310 
 This literature helps in understanding how the ELN has changed and adapted over 
the years to be the second-largest and important revolutionary group in Colombia. None 
                                                 
303 Ibid 18-20.  
304 Ibid 21-26.  
305 Ibid 26-32.  
306 International Crisis Group. 2005. War and Drugs in Colombia. Latin America Report 
No11. (January): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/latin_america/11_war_and_drugs_in_colombia.pdf  17-18.  
307 Ibid 18.  
308 Ibid. 
309 Ibid 19-20.  
310 Ibid 21-34.  

 71 
of the authors give a clear overview of the ELN exclusively and many cover all of the 
illegal armed groups in Colombia. While many works look at single factors of change the 
purpose of this chapter is to apply the individual factors to the ELN.  
Methodology: 
 To explain the multiple factors involved and their effect on the ELN this research 
will use liberalism as the theoretical approach. The ELN is a non-state actor that has 
proven to have both military and economic strengths that make it a formidable opponent 
to the state. It is also important to understand that the actions of the state directly affect 
the ELN as an organization and its culture. This study takes into account the focus on the 
state, the populace, the military, and the other organizations competing for power all play 
into the liberal cobweb approach to social science theory. This will be a more effective 
approach for explaining how the independent variables such as the international drug 
trade,  the  actions  of  the  state,  and  the  near  annihilation  in  the  1970’s  affect  the  
organization. In the above literature, the focus is on the ELN as in independent variable 
and how it affects the state. Through the liberalist approach the ELN will be the focus of 
the study as the dependent variable and the state will be considered one of the 
independent variables. Since the changes within the ELN as an organization is the focus 
of the study all of the surrounding factors of the government, military, populace, and 
competing organizations will all be treated as independent variables. 
Through rational choice models the study will propose competing hypotheses 
which will individually be major contributing variables to the organizational and 
structural changes to the ELN. Hypothesis 1: The changes to the organizational culture 
and structure of the ELN are a direct result of their near annihilation  in  the  1970’s.  The 

 72 
ELN was ideologically strong during their creation but their military, organization, and 
leadership were weak, which combined with attacks from the government and competing 
organizations led to the near demise of the ELN. A Catholic-Marxist mix of ideologies 
could be the main deterrent for popular support, due to the contradiction as murder being 
an unforgivable sin in Catholicism, in the rural communities the ELN controls. It stands 
to reason that the ELN has purposely changed their ideology and behavior to garner 
support within the regions they control. It is possible that this single era of rebuilding 
between  the  1970’s  and  1980’s  is  responsible  for  the  strong  leadership,  military,  and  
structure that the ELN seems to have today. Hypothesis 2: Through organizational 
changes the ELN was more successful at procuring funding and expanding influence. It is 
understood that the conflicting ideology between Marxism and Catholicism has dictated 
some of the actions of the ELN. In order to survive the ELN has de-emphasized their 
ideology to support greater financial gains and geographic expansion. Hypothesis 3: The 
ELN is reactive to the government and populace and changes the frequency, severity, and 
type of attacks accordingly. The second largest guerrilla group in Colombia is not happy 
with the government treating the ELN as second-place or unimportant. The behavior of 
the government and populace toward the ELN could directly change the behavior and 
actions of the organization.  If the governments’  presence  is  strong  or  weak  in  an  area  it  
could explain the severity, frequency, and type of actions carried out by the ELN.  
 Through the analysis of these hypotheses using liberalism as the theoretical 
approach the goal will be to understand the importance of the variables on the ELN. By 
treating the ELN as the dependent variable the study will look at the near destruction of 
the ELN and their ideology, their economic capabilities, populace and the state. The goal 

 73 
is to show what affect these variables have on the ELN individually and then show the 
links between the independent variables. This analysis will show the most definitive 
variables contributing to the organization’s structural, cultural, and behavioral changes 
over time and how effective these changes were in the survival of the organization. As a 
result of the readings it is realistic to say that the organizational behavior, structure and 
culture of the ELN changed over time. The variables will be looked at to determine the 
time and severity of the changes. Some of the organizational changes outlined in the 
hypotheses were gradual and took place over periods of time where in other cases the 
changes were dramatic and fast. In looking at the literature part of the research will be 
conducted to determine why some instances or variables caused immediate change where 
as the impact of other variables caused a more gradual change over time. Since the focus 
of this chapter is based on one organization the changes will be measured by the 
independent variables in the research and how their increase or decrease of influence on 
the ELN caused or did not cause change to the organization. 
 The significance of this study lies in the organizational changes created by 
internal and external factors to the ELN. Whether the goal is to eradicate the group or to 
provide for an advantage in negotiations, understanding the effects these variables have 
on the ELN is important. By understanding how independent variables affect the 
organization, these independent variables could be manipulated to direct or control the 
organizational changes of the ELN in the future. This study will also show just how 
strong the organization is and where its greatest weaknesses lie. 
 There will be two secondary sources to support the data side of the hypothesis 
testing. These studies focus on statistical, geographical, and operational data. In 

 74 
Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and Insurgency and its Implications for 
Regional Stability by Angel Rabasa and Peter Chalk gives a detailed account of the ELN, 
its geographic expansion, and involvement in the drug trade.311 The work also covers the 
political, economic, and social complications in Colombia as they are affected by 
organizations like the ELN.312 Focusing on illicit activities is Guns, Drugs, and 
Development in Colombia by Jennifer S. Holmes, Sheila Amin Gutierrez de Pineres and 
Kevin M. Curtin. The main portions of the book to be used are the sections of guerrilla 
violence hypothesis testing and resulting data.313 The section on illicit crops and their 
effect on the Colombian economy will also be used.314   
  For the analysis portion of the study, the data and competing hypotheses are 
constructed  into  a  matrix  diagram  to  analyze  the  “diagnosticity”  of  the  data  and  its  effect  
on the hypotheses. The study will be completed with an analysis of the sensitivity of the 
data to each hypothesis. The analysis will consist of an explanation of each hypothesis 
and all of the factors that are consistent and inconsistent with each hypothesis. Through a 
systematic approach each of the factors will be described in detail and the effect of each 
factor will be explained. The end of each section will include a summation of whether the 
hypothesis is consistent with the data or if the data produced inconclusive results. The 
section will finish with a matrix diagram focusing on the major themes of evidence as 
compared to each hypothesis. The data will be coded as consistent (C), inconsistent (I), 
and not applicable (N/A). The diagram will be discussed as the evidence is weighed for 
                                                 
311 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and Insurgency and 
its Implications for Regional Stability. Santa Monica: RAND. 23-52.  
312 Ibid 61-84. 
313 Holmes, Jennifer S., Shiela Amin Gutierrez de Pineres, and Kevin M. Curtin. 2008. Guns, Drugs, and 
Development in Colombia. Austin: University of Texas Press. 73-101. 
314 Ibid 103-160.  

 75 
diagnosticity, which will lead to the conclusions. Aside from limitations, the biases 
involved in the study, arise in looking at the competing hypotheses where the subject 
(ELN) is discussed based on the presumed actions the organization will take in each 
hypothetical scenario. While this is counteracted by the data and actions known and 
documented about the group there is still some question of certainty when estimating how 
the organization reacted to specific variables. For the purpose of the study it will be 
assumed that the organizational actions are true to the studies used in the analysis.  
The limitations of the study result from missing first hand information from the 
guerrillas and the civilians involved or directly affected by the guerrillas. Most of the 
works used in this particular study were conducted by military sources, government and 
non-governmental organizations. While some of the works incorporate data collected 
from former guerrillas and civilians in the region this data is very limited. There is also a 
lack of information due to the relative size of the organization compared to other illegal 
groups  in  the  region.  There  are  new  works  coming  out  of  the  region  from  “inside”  
sources however they have yet to be translated and are beyond the limitations of this 
paper. 
First Hypothesis and Analysis: 
 The changes to the organizational culture and structure of the ELN are a direct 
result of their  near  annihilation  in  the  1970’s. In 1962 a group of sixteen Colombian 
students visited Cuba on scholarship at the time of the Cuban Missile crisis.315 There 
would be around sixty students to travel to Cuba by the end of 1962.316 The students 
asked  for  military  training  to  transplant  the  Che  Guevara  “foquista”  to  Colombia  to  target  
                                                 
315 Holmes, Jennifer S. 2008.Guns, Drugs, and Development 50.   
316 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 5. 

 76 
“militant  petroleum  workers  and  peasant  land  colonizers.”317 The Santander area was 
chosen for the ELN camp because the region had experienced a communist uprising in 
1929 and the formation of a liberal guerrilla force during La Violencia, the area had a 
history of armed opposition.318 The area was also known for the Industrial University and 
the Port of Barrancabermeja on the Magdalena River; the former provided left-wing 
student agitators and the latter provided radicalized trade unionists.319 These target groups 
were successful operating among angry petroleum workers and peasants.320 As a result of 
these ties, the leaders of the ELN trace back to the 1929 uprising and unions of 
Barrancabermeja.321 In spite of initial success the ELN soon began a string of problems 
that lasted  through  the  1970’s.322 Considerable infighting began in the group.323 This 
infighting resulted from the diversity of the members with no strong leadership and 
purges under the accusation of treason. 
 The  ELN  ideology  supported  nationalism  and  “popular  democracy”  with  aversion  
to foreign investment.324 As  declared  by  the  ELN  the  aim  is  to  “take  power  and  establish  
a democratic and popular movement capable of liberating Colombia from the 
international monopolies and the crillo oligarchy.”325 The ELN proposed equality,  “full  
democratic  liberties  to  the  popular  sectors,”  giving  women  their  legitimate  rights,  and  
“assuring  respect  for  human  dignity  and  the  free  development  of  all  Colombians.”326 By 
focusing on the energy sector of Colombia the ELN has distinguished itself from the 
                                                 
317 Holmes, Jennifer S. 2008.Guns, Drugs, and Development 50. 
318 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 5. 
319 Ibid.  
320 Holmes, Jennifer S. 2008.Guns, Drugs, and Development 50. 
321 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 5. 
322 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 103.  
323 Ibid.  
324 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 6. 
325 Ibid.  
326 Ibid.  

 77 
other organizations in the region.327 During the tension period between Moscow and 
Cuba over revolutionary ideology, the ELN became favored by Havana and adopted the 
Castroite revolutionary ideology.328 While this ideology worked for the ELN at the time 
they were on a path to great difficulty.  
 After their first actions in Simacota the ELN gained attention from clergymen, 
most notably Camilo Torres.329 Torres tried to organize his own movement called the 
United Front and failed.330 His decision to join the ELN forever changed the organization 
and Colombia by uniting this Marxist ideology with Christian morality.331 Torrez was 
able  to  bring  new  membership  to  the  ELN  with  his  call  of  “popular  unity.”332 Even after 
the death of Torrez his charisma and commitment turned him into a martyr for the 
organization.333 By  the  1970’s  the  first  generation  of  ELN  leaders  died  in  combat,  were  
exiled, or executed by their own men for treason.334 Information provided by deserters of 
the  organization  “enabled  the  army  to  kill  and  capture  most  of  the  ELN  leadership”  
during this time.335 The ELN had a habit of purging their ranks and making the 
organization naturally weak as a result.336 This purging weakened the organization to the 
point that the remaining leaders focused on military action and the application of the 
foquismo doctrine.337 However, this focus would only last for a few years before more 
problems  rose  for  the  ELN’s  survival.  By  the  1970’s  the  ELN  was  further  weakened  by  
                                                 
327 Ibid.  
328 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 30.  
329 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 6. 
330 Ibid.  
331 Ibid.  
332 Harper,  Liz.  2002.  Colombia’s  Civil  War:  National  Liberation  Army  (ELN).  Online News Hour. 
Internet. Available from: http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/latin_america/colombia/players_eln 2. 
333 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 6. 
334 Ibid.  
335 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 34. 
336 Sanin, Francisco Gutierrez. 2003. Criminal Rebels? 6. 
337 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 6. 

 78 
continued desertion and infighting that caused an abandonment of the foquista 
philosophy and retraction from political work to focus all of their attention on the 
militaristic side of the ELN.338 In 1977-78 the ELN suffered more losses at the hands of 
the military and through desertion to the point the ELN was no more that thirty people.339 
This near-demise  ignited  a  serious  rethinking  of  the  ELN’s  goals  and  strategy  that  
marked an era of reorientation and soul-searching for the organization.340 This marked 
the end of the old ELN and its ideology and made way for the rebirth of the organization 
in culture and structure.   
 By  the  1980’s  the  ELN  began  its  resurgence  due  to  three  main  factors:  1)  “The  
ELN  was  able  to  strengthen  its  links  with  existing  social  movements  and  trade  unions;;”341 
2)  “alongside  its  increasingly decentralized individual guerrilla fronts a more complex 
organizational structure was put into place, composed of the National Congress, the High 
Command,  the  National  Directorate,  and  the  National  General  Staff;;”342 3)  “the  
development of the oilfields in areas where the ELN enjoyed relative strength, provided 
unexpected financial windfalls through extortion of domestic and international oil 
companies.”343 The first national conference held by the ELN dictated the division and 
expansion of its two fronts.344 Their strategy included a multi-class recruitment directive 
that would bring unity to the Catholics, students, and middle-class professionals.345 The 
addition of Manuel Perez included key military strategies and ideologies to the ELN.346 
                                                 
338 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 104. 
339 Ibid.  
340 Ibid.  
341 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 7. 
342 Ibid. 
343 Ibid. 
344 Ibid. 
345 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 104. 
346 Ruiz, Bert. 2001. The Colombian Civil War 116.  

 79 
Perez brought the various factions of the ELN together and developed new forms of 
income for the ELN through extortion of oil companies as their primary source.347 The 
ELN works through a federation of units and in some cases pays their men as 
professional revolutionaries.348 These changes in their structure were but a portion of the 
organizational change coming to the ELN.  
 During this time of structural change the ideology and goals of the ELN went 
through gradual changes as well. In practice, the ELN “original  aim  of  “national  
liberation”  was  replaced  by  an  “emphasis  on  the  control  and  exercise  of  power  at  the  
regional level  … which has been denominated by some as a kind of armed local co-
government.””349 These developments have earned the ELN the reputation of being the 
most politically developed guerrilla movement in Colombia.350  The ELN moved to 
maximize its power through its Christian-Marxist ideology and refrained from politics 
stating  that  it  would  “ultimately  mean  the  corruption  and  ideological  sellout  of  the  
group.”351 In its second international conference in 1989 the ELN still supported the 
movement  toward  a  socialist  Colombia  which  has  not  changed  since  the  70’s.352 The 
ELN  leader  Nicholas  Rodriguez  Bautista  (“Gabino”)  called  the  “socialist  system  …  an  
extremely  young  project”  and  proclaimed  the  ELN  to  become  a  successful  “pioneer”  of  
the revolution.353 Another point that has not changed in the life of the ELN is their 
continued support from Havana even though it has become minimal recently.354 
However, it has been the ability of the ELN to remain financially independent from 
                                                 
347 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 31.  
348 Sanin, Francisco Gutierrez. 2003. Criminal Rebels? 6. 
349 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 7. 
350 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 122.  
351 Ibid.  
352 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace 7. 
353 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 122. 
354 McLean, Phillip. 2002. Colombia-Thinking Clearly 3.  

 80 
external sources that has left them unhurt by the end of the Cold War.355 These 
ideological consistencies and changes were the backbone of the renewed ELN. 
 These facts definitively support the hypothesis that the ELN changed its culture 
and structure in response to their near-demise. The organization could not have survived 
without changing their ideology, structure, and behavior. The end of the old leadership 
and the changing environment for the ELN forced the group to restructure and broaden 
their appeal. In many ways the data that supports this hypothesis appears to be the only 
reason the organization survived. Without the drastic changes the ELN would have died 
out  in  the  late  1970’s.  As  much  as  these  factors  support the hypothesis it is important to 
note other factors that created change within the ELN. 
 In  the  1990’s  changes  to  the  international  community  forced  the  ELN  to  alter  its  
culture  and  structure  for  survival  again.  “The  capitalist  restructuring  demanded by 
neoliberalism  through  global  institutions  such  as  the  World  Bank  and  the  IMF”  became  
points of threat to the ideology of the ELN.356 For Perez the onset of this global reality 
would bring human rights violations, and a concentration of wealth that would further 
embed economic misery in the region.357 The  ELN  rose  as  “moral  and  ethical  combatants  
poised  against  the  threat  of  creeping  neoliberalism”  and  pledged  their  fight  against  this  
emerging  economic  order  imposed  on  the  world  via  the  “North  American  “monocultural 
parameter.””358 This brought the ELN view of economic redistribution back to the 
forefront since they see the revolutionary actions in Colombia a result of economic 
                                                 
355 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 122. 
356 Ibid 123.  
357 Ibid.  
358 Ibid.  

 81 
“misery  and  exploitation.”359 The  1990’s  also  brought  a  change  in  the  ELN  view  on  
foreign investment stating that they simply want a better deal for Colombia from 
transnational corporations (TNCs).360 This improved deal has to include a larger profit 
share  and  the  “human,  material,  scientific,  and  technological  infrastructure”  support  
Colombia needs to end its dependence.361 These changes to their organization are a direct 
result of the changing in global economics and politics. While these points do not support 
the hypothesis they do outline other shifts in environment that have forced the 
organization to change and adapt. 
 Second Hypothesis and Analysis: 
Through organizational changes the ELN was more successful at procuring 
funding and expanding influence. An insurgencies support base is directly related to the 
support of the regions and people they control.362 During  their  rise  in  the  1960’s  the  ELN  
survived from contributions from the peasants, theft of local payrolls and bank raids.363 
The major income breakdown for the ELN is 60 percent extortion, 28 percent from 
kidnapping, 6 percent from the drug trade, and 4 percent from cattle theft.364 Since the 
1970’s  confrontations  between  the  ELN  and  the  Colombian  army  produced  such  
disastrous results that the ELN has avoided military confrontations and has pursued an 
“economic  strategy.”365 The  ELN  “developed an organizational structure capable of 
collecting and investing the enormous economic resources that would allow the 
                                                 
359 Ibid.  
360 Ibid.  
361 Ibid.  
362 Suarez, Alfredo Rangel. 2000. Parasites and Predators 582.  
363 Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization 10.  
364 Suarez, Alfredo Rangel. 2000. Parasites and Predators 585.  
365 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 45.  

 82 
movement  to  recover  and  expand.”366 A major reason for the growth of the ELN arose in 
the  1980’s  with  the  building  of  the  Cano-Limon-Covenas oil pipeline, which became a 
nationalist issue and source of funding for the ELN.367 Oil production in Arauca has 
earned the ELN an exceptional source of rent from petroleum companies.368 The 
northeast front covers an area that the center of the country needs for transit and 
communication via railroads and roads and the corporations pay the ELN for protection 
of mining and transit.369 Along with the Barrancabermeja region, the ELN moved into the 
Carmen and San Vicente coal regions, northern Antioquia, and southern Cauca which has 
strategic highways and agricultural production.370 This  expansion  of  the  80’s  also  
included the Norte de Santander region and Uraba, a banana-producing area.371 The ELN 
controls a number of corporations and invests both domestically and in foreign 
markets.372 This  Gabino  extortion  expansion  plan  of  in  the  1980’s  was  the  linchpin  to  the  
growth and sustainability of the ELN. This expansion of extortion, upon the emergence 
of both international and national companies in the region for natural resources, has given 
the ELN a unique form of income. During the early years of the organization it fought the 
movement of foreign companies into the region but with the income the ELN has derived 
from those sources it is now their largest form of income. The processes of globalization 
and foreign direct investment now add more chances for income than any other avenue 
outside of kidnapping.  
                                                 
366 Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization 10. 
367 McLean, Phillip. 2002. Colombia-Thinking Clearly 3. 
368 Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence 86.  
369 Ibid.  
370 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 104.  
371 Ibid.  
372 Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence 86. 

 83 
The ELN has greatly expanded its income through the use of kidnapping. In 
Colombia the ELN is responsible for more than twice the number of kidnappings than 
other armed groups.373 This technological advances in kidnapping developed by the ELN 
has caused the socioeconomic status of the victims to drop and it has been transformed a 
near-perfect, automated operation that is highly profitable.374 The ELN has specialists 
who select the victim, study their financial situation for the purpose of ransom amount 
and ability to pay, study their security, study their routines, plan the capture and captivity, 
and negotiate the ransom.375 This operation has become technologically advanced due to 
increasing financial stability for the ELN.376 Through the use of computer technology the 
processes has been greatly streamlined and while this is not the newest form of income 
for the ELN it has definitely  expanded  since  the  1980’s.  The  final  change  for  the  
economy of the ELN came in the form of the drug trade.  
  For a time the ELN refused to participate in the drug trade since the Catholic and 
Christian members and leaders objected to the trade on moral grounds.377 With the death 
of Perez in 1998, his successor, Gabino has allowed more participation in the drug 
trade.378 While ELN participation in the drug trade is less than other armed organizations 
their fronts can be seen in almost every opium/poppy region.379 In looking at the 
relationship between the ELN and drug producing areas is complex.380 The ELN is active 
in almost ten regions, five of which are coca producing areas.381 In some areas the ELN 
                                                 
373 Suarez, Alfredo Rangel. 2000. Parasites and Predators 592.  
374 Ibid.  
375 Ibid.  
376 Ibid.  
377 Harper,  Liz.  2002.  Colombia’s  Civil  War 2.  
378 Ibid 3.  
379 International Crisis Group. 2005. War and Drugs in Colombia 18. 
380 Ibid.  
381 Ibid.  

 84 
would not tax the farmers for illicit crop production but would allow chosen drug dealers 
into the area to buy.382 In other areas such as the Magdalena River, Bolivar, and Serrania 
de San Lucas, the ELN taxed the cultivation of coca.383 Some areas, which the ELN was 
contesting with the FARC, led to an order to peasants to eliminate crops being promoted 
by the FARC.384 This increased pressure of paramilitary presence in areas shared with the 
FARC has hindered the ability of the ELN to gain substantial amounts of drug revenue.385 
There is more recent evidence that shows the ELN income from drug trafficking has 
increased and in some regions the organization is involved in the whole chain of 
production.386  
The evidence supports the hypothesis that changes in the procurement of funds for 
the organization have enabled their survival. Economic diversity and expansion has been 
a major adjustment to the ELN and its ability to survive. While the major component of 
ELN finances come from extortion and increased kidnappings, it is not possible to 
discount their involvement in the drug trade.  The  decision  in  the  1980’s  by  Gabino  to  
extort natural resource companies and their transit was and is the most significant 
economic change the ELN has made to the organization. While the drug trade income is 
still relatively small it has been an important addition to the ELN since it allows them to 
control regions that would otherwise be taken over by the FARC or paramilitaries. 
Final Hypothesis and Analysis: 
 The ELN is reactive to the government and populace and changes the frequency, 
severity, and type of attacks accordingly. The military capabilities of the ELN have 
                                                 
382 Ibid.  
383 Ibid.  
384 Ibid.  
385 Ibid.  
386 Ibid.  

 85 
waned due to many factors.387 Some analysts see the reduction as a conscious movement 
into a political strategy while others contend that the increased mobility of government 
forces factor in.388 There  is  the  expected  correlation  between  “state  presence  and  political  
development, both judicial efficiency and electoral participation have a negative effect on 
ELN  activity.”389 As stated this is expected since the stronger and better the government 
presence is the less the ELN attacks. With the death of Manuel Perez Martinez the ELN 
leader  Nicholas  Rodriguez  declared:  “On  Father  Perez’s  grave,  the  ELN  swears  it  will  
never  abandon  the  oppressed  and  exploited.  It  will  never  give  up  the  revolution.”390 Five 
days before the death of Perez the ELN agreed to peace talks with the government but 
withdrew  calling  the  government  “opportunistic”  due  to  up-coming elections.391 By July 
1998 the government met the ELN for peace talks in Germany and Pastrana offered a 
withdrawal of troops and to create a prisoner exchange program.392 The ELN agreed to 
free congressmen and mayors and called for a unilateral halt of hostilities while 
negotiating  “a  national  convention  to  introduce  wide-ranging political reforms, (and) the 
creation  of  a  constituent  assembly.”393 Subsequent talks with the government included 
Francisco Galan and Felipe Torres, two ELN leaders, who were temporarily released 
from jail to join in the talks, and coupled with upcoming negotiations between the 
government  and  FARC,  incentive  to  “agree  a  favorable  accommodation  with  the  
government.”394  
                                                 
387 International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward 2.  
388 Ibid.  
389 Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization 22.  
390 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 178.  
391 Ibid.  
392 Ibid 188-189.  
393 Ibid 189. 
394 Ibid.  

 86 
The ELN was annoyed with the governments hard-line toward their negotiations 
while giving concessions to the FARC.395 As a result of this insult, the ELN intended to 
begin  a  “bold new guerrilla campaign  designed  to  enhance  the  bargaining  power”  of  the  
organization.396 This new campaign was designed to prove the ELN was a worthy 
military force by hijacking an Avianca plane and taking 41 passengers as hostages.397 
Pastrana immediately called  the  action  a  “blatant  terrorist  act”  and  refused  any  political  
demands of the ELN; essentially the plan backfired.398 By 1999 the political tide shifted 
out  of  Pastrana’s  favor  as  “14  of  the  country’s  30  generals  and  200  officers  all  opposed  to  
the government’s  moves  to  negotiate  peace  with  the  rebel  groups.”399 Within four days 
the ELN kidnapped a mass of 100 people at a Cali church.400 Negative public outcry and 
an immediate military response prompted the ELN to release 30 hostages in return for 48 
hours of no troop movements from the government.401 Upon public outcry the ELN 
begged for forgiveness from the Catholic community while secretly were soliciting 
ransoms for the wealthy church-goers,  but  made  it  clear  they  “had  to  finance  a  war.”402 
The ELN ended the debacle by giving 33 hostages over to an international commission in 
mid-June 1999.403  
By April of 2000 the government was finally willing to cede a zone to the ELN; 
however, negative public sentiment and a paralyzing wave of roadblocks throughout the 
                                                 
395 Ruiz, Bert. 2001. The Colombian Civil War 87. 
396 Ibid.  
397 Ibid 88.  
398 Ibid 89.  
399 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 202. 
400 Ibid.  
401 Ibid.  
402 Ruiz, Bert. 2001. The Colombian Civil War 91.  
403 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 202. 

 87 
country caused the government to rescind the offer.404 This retraction caused the ELN to 
unleash  a  wave  of  “sensational  sabotage  and  kidnappings.”405 In December of 2000 the 
ELN released 45 captive officers as a show of goodwill for both Christmas and for 
prospective peace talks.406 These  actions  all  follow  the  ELN  “broad  strategy  of  attracting  
the attention of the government and the global media through non-murderous 
extravaganzas.”407 This characteristic of avoiding carnage has been effective at getting 
the attention of the state and increases their willingness to engage the ELN in peace 
talks.408 This  example  also  presented  itself  when  the  Pastrana  administration’s  
management and sale of the ISAGEN a state power generator, ISA a power grid 
company, Carbocol the regions coal producer, as mandated by the IMF was protested by 
the ELN.409 The  ELN  wanted  to  gain  Pastrana’s  attention  and  blew  up  22  electricity  
producing sites.410 ELN  leader  Gabino  stated  the  “the  popular  revolution  has  the  
responsibility of protesting how the government is managing policy-making”  and  that  the  
“Pastrana  clan  has  always  benefited  with  privatizations,  as  well  as  Colombia’s  oligarchy.  
We  want  that  to  stop.”411 However, in 2001 the ELN was losing its negotiation for a 
cease-fire zone and in a fit of frustration unleashed attacks that summer in which civilians 
were slaughtered.412 This ended the ELN talks for their own zone.  
                                                 
404 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 127.  
405 Ibid.  
406 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 267.  
407 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 126.  
408 Ibid.  
409 Ruiz, Bert. 2001. The Colombian Civil War 245.  
410 Ibid.  
411 Ibid 246.  
412 Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries 128.  

 88 
 By 2001 the effectiveness of the paramilitaries caused the ELN bargaining 
position to become increasingly weaker.413 Even with their diminished position the ELN 
scheduled peace talks in 2002 and observers did not foresee an agreeable outcome nor did 
they believe the ELN would honor a holiday truce.414 With only 22 active fronts in 2006 
the ELN has decreased its military actions from 195 a year to 19.415 Army offensives 
resulting in demobilizations and captures have hindered the ability of the ELN. The ELN 
has survived in many regions due to their mobility but the importance of their presence 
has been reduced.416 While the ELN and the Uribe administration have tried peace talks 
both in Mexico and Cuba there seems to be no end in sight.417 The ELN has noted three 
issues  in  particular  that  have  led  to  the  failure  of  negotiations:  1)  “the  government’s  
persistent denial that an internal conflict existed;;”  2)  “its  bias  in  favor  of  the  
paramilitaries;;”  and  3)  “it’s  reluctance  to  resolve  the  humanitarian  crisis.”418 The 
ceasefire bottleneck remains the principal problem as the ELN sees their mobility as their 
only defense against the other armed groups.419 This also causes issues of concentrating 
fighters which would not only expose the ELN strengths and weaknesses to the 
government (thus losing negotiating power) and it would  be  “military  suicide”  if  
negotiations ended.420  
 The data supports the assertion that the  government’s  actions  directly  affect  the  
frequency and severity of ELN actions. Where the data deviate are when looking at the 
actions themselves. The ELN has always supported minimal or no innocent deaths as a 
                                                 
413 Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History 286. 
414 Ibid 295.  
415 International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward 2. 
416 Ibid.  
417 Ibid 10.  
418 Ibid.  
419 Ibid 12.  
420 Ibid.  

 89 
result of their actions. While this is not true in all cases, the few outliers containing 
civilian deaths are the exception, not the rule of the ELN. The data are not supportive of 
the ELN rhetoric of minimal fatalities because this has not always been the case, but 
compared to the other armed groups of the country, the ELN is the least murderous of the 
bunch. In concluding the data the hypothesis is not supported that the ELN changes the 
type of military based on the government actions. Their actions follow the same lines 
regardless of the specific motivations, although there are exceptions. But in many cases 
of ELN and government negotiations the ELN has used their small number of innocent 
killings as a point of leverage against the government and each time this is violated the 
ELN loses negotiating power. The ELN does not change its actions or severity based on 
public sentiment. While the leadership has asked the public for forgiveness in certain 
cases it has not changed or deterred ELN operations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 90 
 
Matrix Diagram and Analysis: 
Evidence  Hypothesis 1 Hypothesis 2 Hypothesis 3 
Change in ideology C C I 
Change in 
leadership 
C C N/A 
Diversity in 
membership 
C N/A N/A 
Rise of new 
international 
political and 
economic policies 
C C N/A 
Economic 
expansion 
N/A C N/A 
Involvement in drug 
trade 
N/A C N/A 
Acceptance of 
foreign investment 
N/A C C 
Technological 
advancements 
N/A C N/A 
Government actions 
dictate frequency 
and severity of 
attacks 
N/A N/A C 
Government actions 
dictate type of 
attacks 
N/A N/A I 
Popular sentiment 
dictates frequency 
and severity of 
attacks 
N/A N/A I 
Popular sentiment 
dictates type of 
attacks 
N/A N/A I 
 
The matrix diagrams the evidence for each hypothesis, supplementing the 
discussion of hypotheses and the data collected. The major points of evidence are broken 
into four major themes of change, new international orders, government, and public and 
the conclusions drawn on their consistency or inconsistency when compared to the 

 91 
hypothesis. These themes emerge in the hypothesis analysis portion of the work. In the 
first hypothesis the change in ideology overlapped multiple areas. Their change in 
ideology ensured their survival and opened new forms of economic gain throughout the 
life of the organization. It never changed its tactics in attacking the government or 
negotiating peace. The change in leadership of the organization played a large role in 
changing the organizations structure and changes to the geographic utilization of their 
areas on control for economic gain. Diversity in membership seemed to be the cause of 
many changes within the organization as it expanded and created a hybrid force that was 
truly unique to revolutionary movements in many ways. The rise of neoliberal capitalism 
and the IMF was originally an area the ELN refused to allow in their sector but as its 
inevitability became apparent the ELN used it to their economic advantage and changed 
their culture to fit the new economic order. In the second hypothesis the economic 
expansion  of  the  ELN  in  the  1980’s  is  supported  as  one  of  the  most  important  points of 
organizational change. The involvement in the drug trade is a direct result of the 
economic factor in that some areas of control require the ELN to participate to fight other 
armed groups and a change in later ideology also supported this economic venture. 
Acceptance to foreign investment opened new opportunities for the ELN financially 
through extortion but it also changed the interaction between the ELN and the 
government. The data shows that during time of privatization and foreign sale of 
resources are the times the ELN was most active in terrorist attacks in these areas. 
Technological advancements made the ELN proficient kidnappers in Colombia. The data 
shows these advancements made the kidnapping processes systematic and much more 
profitable. While in the third hypothesis, the data did support the assertion that 

 92 
government actions dictated the severity and frequency of attacks perpetrated by the 
ELN, the data also showed that their actions followed the same minimal casualty or no 
casualty type of action. Based on that, the data did not support the hypothesis looking at 
the change in type of actions. In both cases of public sentiment the data shows that while 
apologetic on occasion the ELN does not change its frequency, severity, or types of 
attacks.  
Conclusion: 
 The ELN has depended on their ability to change their organizational culture, 
structure, and behavior for survival. This chapter highlights the major factors contributing 
to these changes through the near demise, expansion of funding and influence in a new 
economic order, and through the actions of the government and populace. The data 
supported the hypothesis of annihilation, funding, and influence. This showed that the 
near-decimation of the ELN changed their ideology, structure, and leadership. The data 
also demonstrated that the expansion of funding opportunities and influence played 
integral roles in the survival and changes in the organizational behavior and structure. 
When considering the final hypothesis the data supports the change in frequency and 
severity of ELN attacks based on the actions of the government but the types of actions 
were not changed, and the popular view changed nothing.   
 Having studied the FARC and ELN changes, the next chapter is a LAMP 
(Lockwood Analytical Method of Prediction) analysis of the FARC and ELN. The next 
chapter pulls together the individual studies of the FARC and ELN for the purpose of 
predicting their futures in Colombia.  
 

 93 
Appendix 1: Evolution of ELN Actions 
1985 
1990
  
 

 94 
2000 
 
(Sanchez and Palau 2006, 11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 95 
References 
Harper,  Liz.  2002.  Colombia’s  Civil  War:  National  Liberation  Army  (ELN).  Online  
News Hour. Internet. Available from: 
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/latin_america/colombia/players_eln 
 
Holmes, Jennifer S., Shiela Amin Gutierrez de Pineres, and Kevin M. Curtin. 2008.  
 Guns, Drugs, and Development in Colombia. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
 
International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace with the ELN. ICG 
Latin America Report No2. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/report_archive/A400790_04102002
.pdf 
 
International Crisis Group. 2005. War and Drugs in Colombia. Latin America Report 
No11. (January): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/latin_america/11_war_and_drugs_i
n_colombia.pdf 
 
International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward with the ELN? Latin 
America Briefing No16. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/latin_america/b16_colombia_eln.p
df 
 
McLean, Phillip. 2002. Colombia-Thinking Clearly about the Conflict. Center for  
Strategic and International Studies. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.csis.org/index.php?option=com_csis_pubs&task=view&id=729 
 
Pearce, Jenny. 1990. Colombia: Inside the Labyrinth. New York: Monthly Review Press. 
   
Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and 
 Insurgency and its Implications for Regional Stability. Santa Monica: RAND. 
 
Richani, Nazih. 2002. Systems of Violence The Political Economy of War and Peace 
 In Colombia. Albany: State University of New York. 
 
Rochlin, James F. 2003. Vanguard Revolutionaries in Latin America. Boulder: Lynne 
 Reinner Publishers.  
 
Ruiz, Bert. 2001. The Colombian Civil War. Jefferson: McFarland & Company Inc.  
 Publishers.  
 
Sanchez, Fabio and Maria del Mar Palau. 2006. Conflict, Decentralization and Local  
Governance in Colombia, 1974-2004. CEDE. (May): Internt. Available from: 
http://ideas.repec.org/p/col/000089/002180.html 
 

 96 
Sanin, Francisco Gutierrez. 2003. Criminal Rebels? A Discussion of War and Criminality  
from the Colombian experience. Crisis States Programme. (April): Internet. 
Available from: http://www.crisisstates.com/download/wp/WP27FG.pdf 
 
Simons, Geoff. 2004. Colombia: A Brutal History. London: SAQI. 
Suarez, Alfredo Rangel. 2000. Parasites and Predators: Guerrillas and the Insurrection  
 Economy of Colombia. Journal of International Affairs. (Spring): 53 no.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 97 
Chapter 4 
The Future of the FARC and ELN 
 
 
Introduction: 
For a nation with abundant natural resources and large area, Colombia is the 
second oldest democracy in Latin America, yet remains one of the most unstable 
democracies, with a long legacy of violence. The violence has stemmed from political 
divisions which fall along economic structural inequalities, giving rise to such guerrilla 
groups as the FARC and ELN, which offer redress of social ills. Although the 
international community has tried to help the government of Colombia, its socio-
economic problems are considered of their own making and thus must be handled by the 
Colombian government via military, police, or diplomacy. These problems have become 
international issues as globalization has made Colombia a major trading partner of the 
U.S. and other countries, and has also opened up for foreign direct investment. 
Unfortunately, this international assistance will all be brought to an end if the government 
cannot regain and maintain control of the insurgent forces within the country.  
 This chapter will begin with a brief history of Colombia and its democratically 
elected government for context. Next, the chapter discusses each actor and their roots and 
ideologies, how these groups interact with each other, and with the Colombian 
government. Research earlier in this thesis focused on the ELN and FARC individually. 
With the addition of the government the study will show the likely futures of these actors. 
This  will  be  followed  by  the  “pairwise  comparison”  and  an  explanation  of  the  findings.421 
                                                 
421 Lockwood  Johnathan  S.  and  Kathleen  O’Brien  Lockwood. 1994. The Lockwood 
Analytical Method for Prediction (LAMP). MBS: American Military University 28-29. 

 98 
The research will then explain focal events and indicators that will present themselves in 
the event the futures predicted become reality.    
Predictive Issue:  
Within the range of adaptations probable, what are the most likely predictions for 
future FARC and ELN behavior? 
 
Actors: 
 
The purpose of this chapter is to fill some of the gaps in the prediction theories 
surrounding the future of Colombia in its battle against insurgencies. This question 
involves an evaluation of the three major actors in the battle between the insurgencies and 
the state. This study focuses on the FARC and ELN with the state as a constant and all of 
the choices and interactions therein. These two actors and their options are considered 
under  the  scenarios  of  Colombian  state  involvement.  Colombia’s  state  options  include  
taking a neutral  stance,  a  containment  stance,  or  a  “victory”  stance  in  its  battle  with  the  
FARC and ELN.   
Colombia  
 When looking at the history of the Colombian state it is important to focus on the 
political divisions within the country. As noted in previous chapters the FARC and ELN 
are militant, radical wings of political arms.  Since independence  in  the  1830’s  from  Gran  
Colombia422 the Liberal and Conservative parties that would determine or influence every 
aspect of politics, nation building, and Colombian society.423 With their roots in the Wars 
of Independence the two parties were comprised of land owners and merchants who had a 
                                                 
422 CIA. 2009. World Factbook Colombia. Central Intelligence Agency. (April). Internet: 
Available from: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/co.html 1. 
423 Tuft, Eva Irene. 1997. Democracy and Violence: The Colombian Paradox. Chr.Michelsen Institute 
Report Series. Internet. Available from: 
http://bora.cmi.no/dspace/bitstream/10202/307/1/R%201997.%201.%20Eva%20I.%20Tuft -
07092007_1.pdf 29. 

 99 
“considerable  degree  of  autonomy”  and  could  mobilize  their  supporters  for  elections  and  
civil conflicts.424 This  bipartisan  system  led  to  the  elites  using  it  as  a  framework  “to  
channel,  promote,  and  protect  their  interests.”425 Elite interests became indistinguishable 
from party ideology and this coupled with the hereditary nature of the political factions 
led to a polarized Colombia where party affiliation became the main social cleavage in 
the country.426 This violence occurred as a result of competition for state power and 
distribution of resources.427 In the early Colombian republic one of the most important 
and  often  only  sources  of  wealth  was  the  “ability  to  award  contracts,  control  political  and  
public service appointments, and  make  policy  decisions  related  to  the  economy.”428 This 
was  because  the  “state  budget  was  the  only  industry  in  a  country  without  industries”  and  
this lack of a private sector meant that the government had the only opportunities for 
advancement.429 
 The political  parties  were  “subcultures”  and  operated  on  “attack  and  revenge”  
systems since the membership was passed on from generation to generation.430 However, 
the minority party was never excluded from participation in the government and a system 
of elite pacts was  used  as  a  “mechanism  for  accommodation,  power  sharing,  mediation,  
and  resolving  conflict.”431 Elite pacts were ways of sharing power and making sure that 
no  significant  political  faction  was  left  out  so  that  a  “political  truce”  or  gradual  exchange  
of power between parties could happen without instigating violence.432 This was the basis 
                                                 
424 Ibid.  
425 Ibid 30.  
426 Ibid.  
427 Ibid 31. 
428 Ibid.  
429 Ibid.  
430 Ibid 32.  
431 Ibid 33-34. 
432 Ibid 33. 

 100 
for the clientelismo, or clientelist, form of government that came to define Colombian 
politics.  
 In previous chapters clientelist politics are discussed regarding the FARC and 
ELN, but in this chapter the explanation leads to the modern state of Colombian politics. 
Clientelismo is  a  reward  system  “in  the  form  of  patronage,  in  exchange  for  support.”433 
This reward could mean government contracts, licensees, positions in local or regional 
government, or even as giving a title of public land to private interest.434 This clientelism 
occurred between the Liberals and Conservatives (state representatives) and elite groups 
and between the elites of the parties and their supporters.435 For peasants this form of 
patronage  could  mean  “relief  from  military  conscription  for  a  son  to  effective  police  
protection  from  belligerent  neighbors  to  a  favorable  resolution  of  legal  disputes.”436 For 
landowners  this  could  mean  “access  to  government  jobs,  advanced education for 
children, a favorable decision on the location of a road or any of a hundred other political 
or  legal  favors.”437 This system unified parties from the top elites through the bottom of 
society  and  “replaced  the  state  as  a  source  of  identity.”438 Clientelism was critical in the 
polarization of the country and the polarization of the two parties.439 Now that the 
foundations of Colombian political polarization are clear it is important to recap the era 
of La Violencia. 
 The next major event in the history of Colombia was an era known as La 
Violencia. This era is important due to the changes in Colombia during and after the 
                                                 
433 Ibid 34.  
434 Ibid.  
435 Ibid 35.  
436 Ibid.  
437 Ibid.  
438 Ibid 36.  
439 Ibid.  

 101 
period between 1940 and 1960. Two distinct levels of conflict started in this era and at 
first look, this was the same type conflict as in the past between the Liberal and 
Conservative parties.440 During  this  period  the  “old  bipartisan  hegemony”  conflicted  with  
the  new  political  ideologies  that  fell  “outside  of  the  traditional  political  order.”441 The 
origins of these new political groups formed as a result of the political and social changes 
that spread throughout Latin America in the 20th century that were discussed in the first 
chapter.  These  groups  were  categorized  as  “silent  revolutions”  and  while  their  political  
and social divisions were previously discussed it is helpful to recall the changes 
facilitates by this period. First were the influx of foreign investment, economic growth 
due to exports, industrial and manufacturing growth, and the role of the state becoming a 
supporting rather than driving force.442 Rapid growth in the population included massive 
migration from agricultural lands to industrial urban centers.443 The expansion and 
growth  of  this  era  created  almost  no  downward  distribution  of  wealth  and  the  “majority  
of Colombians experienced either a stagnation or relative decline in their standard of 
living.”444 This created a period where government income increased some four hundred 
percent yet the social expenditures in the country were stagnant.445 These conditions 
coupled with the general increase in education of the public and relative loss of influence 
of  the  Catholic  Church,  set  the  stage  for  “silent  revolutions.”446 The formation of new 
political  groups  added  new  powers  and  opportunities  and  new  “loads  to  the  political  
                                                 
440 Ibid 38.  
441 Ibid.  
442 Ibid 40.  
443 Ibid.  
444 Ibid.  
445 Ibid. 
446 Ibid 41. 

 102 
system.”447 The expansion of these groups allowed them to channel and satisfy the 
demands of their constituents thus beating out the traditional parties and eroding the 
clientelist system.448 This led to immediate attempts by both the Conservatives and 
Liberals to integrate these new parties into their bipartisan system, for example, the 
Liberals integrating the labor unions and interest groups from the urbanization of the 
work force.449 These issues of political and social divisions led to the rise of a new 
political leader that would change the face of Colombian politics.  
 Jorge  Eliecer  Gaitan  was  the  face  of  the  “reformist  wing  of  the  Liberal  party”  by  
focusing  his  efforts  on  uniting  the  politically  marginalized  people  against  the  “oligarchy,  
the real country against the political country, ceaselessly attacking the corruption and 
bankruptcy  of  the  old  system.”450 Gaitan mobilized the populace by Gaitanismo where 
the traditional Liberal-Conservative divisions were invited to realign themselves to 
transform the traditional  system  into  “a  new  class  oriented  axis  of  political  
confrontation.”451 To  the  oligarchy,  “Gaitanismo equaled a revolution which threatened 
the  foundation  of  their  interests”  and  so  these  traditional  parties  tried  to  continue  their  
previous path of integrating the new political forces into their pre-existing vertical party 
divisions.452 It was this attempt to change the face of Colombian politics that appealed to 
so many and brought the full weight of the hardliner Conservatives to bear on Gaitan. It 
would mark the beginning of La Violencia.  
                                                 
447 Ibid.  
448 Ibid.  
449 Ibid.  
450 Ibid 44.  
451 Ibid.  
452 Ibid.  

 103 
La Violencia can be broken into four periods. The first was the galvanizing 
moment of political tension, the assassination of Gaitan on April 9, 1948.453 This led to 
the Bogotazo which was a spontaneous riot that began the “multifaceted  insurrection”  
reflecting  “the  demands  of  the  new  challengers.”454 The traditional party leaders acted 
quickly to stop the violence but as Conservative violence increased the Liberals withdrew 
from the political alignments and the killing escalated.455  
The second period of La Violencia was marked by the quick spread of guerrilla 
warfare throughout the country as guerrilla groups armed themselves against partisan 
attack.456 To make matters worse the Conservative controlled government used the 
National Police and the Army for partisan ends that further mobilized the Liberal 
peasantry.457 This  use  of  police  and  military  in  “scorched-earth”  tactics  and  terror  would  
mark itself in the minds of Colombian society.458 In 1952 the guerrillas met with the 
Liberal leadership and gave them the ultimatum of either leading the revolt or the 
guerrillas would.459 The Liberal response was a public parting from the guerrilla 
organizations and the people they represented.460This growing independence of the 
guerrilla groups and the  inability  of  the  Liberal  elite  to  control  them  led  to  “an  
irreversible  social  and  political  crisis.”461 The final break between the Liberals and the 
guerrillas came with the increasing radicalism of the guerrillas and their announcement 
that the Llanos region of Colombia was to be an autonomous area under a popular 
                                                 
453 Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia The Past as a Prologue? A History 
of U.S. Counterinsurgency Policy in Colombia 1958-66. Strategic Studies Institute. 3. 
454 Tuft, Eva Irene. 1997. Democracy and Violence 45. 
455 Ibid 46.  
456 Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia 3. 
457 Ibid.  
458 Tuft, Eva Irene. 1997. Democracy and Violence 47. 
459 Ibid 48.  
460 Ibid.  
461 Ibid 49.  

 104 
democracy.462 Land  reform  would  be  “land  for  the  people  who  work  it”  which  directly  
affected the Liberal land owners.463 It was at this point General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla 
overthrew the government in a military coup at the behest of the political parties.464 The 
Conservative  and  Liberal  moderates  “essentially  thrust”  Pinillas  into  power  while  the  two  
parties  “worked  out  a  new  governing  pact.”465 The General preferred a civilian solution to 
the problem and preferred the past military stance of not getting politically involved since 
he  believed  that  “we  the  military  do  not  have  sufficient  capacity  to  govern  the  
country.”466  
In the third period of La Violencia progress stalled, corruption increased, pockets 
of violence were met with repression, and guerrilla warfare began to spread again.467 
Rojas Pinilla alienated the business men through his economic policies and in incidents 
where students were fired upon and crowded churches were tear-gassed he alienated the 
Catholic Church.468 The Rojas Pinilla blend of populism with corporatism alienated the 
military  and  “threatened  the  institutional  unity,”  and  finally  he  was  unable  to  demobilize  
the guerrillas or bring alliances together with new movements like the trade unions.469  
The fourth period of La Violencia saw the creation National Front government (a 
two-party 4-year alternating power system).470 Due to the threats to the traditional parties 
the Liberals and Conservatives created the National Front to combat the rise of new 
political challengers and the attempt by Rojas Pinilla to unite the people in a Gaitanista 
                                                 
462 Ibid.  
463 Ibid.  
464 Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia 3. 
465 Tuft, Eva Irene. 1997. Democracy and Violence 49. 
466 Ibid 50. 
467 Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia 3. 
468 Tuft, Eva Irene. 1997. Democracy and Violence 51. 
469 Ibid.  
470 Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia 4. 

 105 
fashion.471 Through a series of constitutional amendments the Liberals and Conservatives 
reached agreements to ensure neither party was excluded or repressed by the other.472 
This legitimized inter-elite arrangements and along with a 4-year alternating presidency, 
each party was given half of the legislative seats regardless of their number of votes.473 
All cabinet positions, Supreme Court appointments, public service appointments, 
governorships,  and  mayoralties  “were  made  on  the  basis  of  parity  between  the  two  
parties,”  and  “ordinary  legislation  required  a  two-thirds  majority  vote  to  be  ratified.”474 
The National Front also marked the first time the military became involved in political 
negotiations; the removal of Pinillas in 1957 began the transition of the military 
government back into civilian control.475 The military was given three concessions upon 
its return to civilian control.476 First, the excesses and/or failings were placed at the feet 
of Pinillas exclusively.477 Second  the  “professionalization”  of  the  military  in  their  
national security role was redefined.478 They were given modern equipment, professional 
training abroad, a large budget increase and complete autonomy over these resources.479 
Third, the military was given the role of advisor to public order and security decision-
making.480 The final portion of the National Front system dealt with the emergence of 
new political participants and restrictions.481 These four restrictions were 1) none of the 
new political entities were involved in the National Front system; 2) all parties other than 
                                                 
471 Tuft, Eva Irene. 1997. Democracy and Violence 53.  
472 Ibid.  
473 Ibid 54. 
474 Ibid.  
475 Ibid.  
476 Ibid 55.  
477 Ibid.  
478 Ibid.  
479 Ibid.  
480 Ibid.  
481 Ibid 56.  

 106 
Liberals and Conservatives were excluded from the electoral process; 3) there were no 
provisions for the expansion of political participation in the National Front agreement; 4) 
the agreement was purely political and addressed no social or historical issues.482 This 
power sharing program was the source of diminishing party loyalty, which eroded the 
political relationship of the state and the people even further.483  
The National Front was effective as a power sharing and control mechanism for 
the Liberal and Conservative parties but the system further repressed new political 
entities in Colombia and strengthened the resolve of the guerrillas. The Colombian crisis 
is a result of political violence that goes almost completely uncontrolled by the state.484 
There are four main elements in the Colombian crisis.485 First, forty years after the 
National Front the Liberals and Conservatives still run the political scene.486 The system 
is closed to any other potential participants, membership of the traditional parties has 
become extremely narrow, where the system is fragmented beyond the control of any 
actor, the democratic institutions have neither been a channel for concerns of the public 
nor a mechanism for broad debate, and these institutions cannot mediate or resolve 
conflict.487 Second, the expanding poverty gap, despite economic growth, has increased 
social protest and given rise to new organizations that  “are  creating  politics  without  the  
government or the guerrillas.”488 Third, all social conflict resolution has been militarized 
due to the dependence of the elite on military support to stop new political opposition.489 
The military has gained influence in  “defining  the  ideological  rationale  and  implementing  
                                                 
482 Ibid.  
483 Ibid.  
484 Ibid 58.  
485 Ibid 59.  
486 Ibid.  
487 Ibid.  
488 Ibid.  
489 Ibid.  

 107 
policy related to public order, social conflict, and the ongoing war with the various 
guerrilla groups.”490 Fourth, the justice system is breaking down since the system has 
been politicized through state repression, agents responsible for human rights violations 
have absolute impunity, and the system cannot effectively deal with escalating crime.491 
These problems have permeated the political climate in Colombia to the point where 
most of the social conflict can be traced to these core issues.  
Colombia has become a tangled web of groups that have evolved into part of the 
culture where each fight for individual ideals rather than the common good.492 The desire 
for power and easy wealth has tainted the vision of these groups and their self-serving 
behavior  has  produced  the  “Loop  Effect”  that  the  country  is  currently  entangled  in.493 The 
social condition of Colombia has been as a result of uneven wealth distribution, the 
inability to meet human needs, lack of free speech, weak ethics, poor leadership, 
mishandling of the country and resources, and electorate indifference.494 The political 
forces in Colombia obtain their profits and power from the chaotic state of the country.495 
This produced new ideological leaders in Colombia that followed the tradition of Gaitan. 
Gaitan was followed by Luis Carlos Galan Sarimento the founder of the New Liberalism 
political party, supported the extradition of criminals to the U.S., and was killed for his 
efforts in 1989.496 Guillermo Cano Isaza was a defender of free speech and human rights 
and his protest of violence, rights violations, authoritarianism, and corruption led to his 
                                                 
490 Ibid.  
491 Ibid.  
492 Zambrano, Jair Cortazar and Lynn L. Adams. 2008. Colombia: Indications of a Never-Ending Conflict 
in Relation to the Adams Revolutionary Model. Utah Valley University. Internet: Available from: 
http://law.creighton.edu/wernerInstitute/complexityconference/speaker_materials/Table%20Topic%20Pape
r%20Presentations/Colombia%20-%20Lynn%20Adams%20&%20Jair%20Cortazar.pdf 13. 
493 Ibid.  
494 Ibid.  
495 Ibid 14.  
496 Ibid 12.  

 108 
assassination in 1986.497 Jamie Garzon was a journalist, comedian, and political satirist 
but his human rights activism led to his assassination in 1999.498 Throughout  the  90’s  
over 250,000 Colombians were killed in social conflict.499 In 2006 the National 
University  of  Colombia’s  faculty  was  threatened  due  to  their  scholarly  approaches  to  the  
Colombian social and political situation and their research of certain topics.500 Ideologues 
and their families are often kidnapped or assassinated; Senator Ingrid Betancourt is an 
example of this.501  She demanded a change in all aspects of the system including society, 
rebels, politics, and government and was kidnapped by the FARC in response to her 
efforts to change the old ways.502 The efforts of Uribe Velez who is the president elect 
from 2006 to 2010 started the improvement of Colombia.503 It will be the actions and 
improvements of the Uribe administration that will support the scenario portion of the 
work.  
While violence in Colombia has been historic, it has not been until recently that 
the conflict spillover into neighboring nations has created a new set of problems for the 
Colombian government. These extenuating circumstances beyond the state of Colombia 
warrant far more discussion than can be included here.  However, this chapter focuses on 
the Colombian state and their effect on FARC and ELN actions. The short-term and long-
term goals of each group are considered next, followed by the goals of the government, 
which are discussed in relation to the scenarios that will come later in the study.   
 
                                                 
497 Ibid. 
498 Ibid 13.  
499 Ibid 12.  
500 Ibid.  
501 Ibid.  
502 Ibid.  
503 Ibid 14.  

 109 
The FARC 
To date there have been numerous political guerrilla groups in Colombia but the 
most commonly known which still present a threat to the Colombian government is the 
FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia). This group adopted a revolutionary 
doctrine based on Marxist-Leninist ideology and a military strategy following other 
guerrilla and terrorist activities.504 The ideological discourse these groups pursued in the 
decision  making  process  “diminished  their  intellectual  flexibility  in  developing  strategies  
and  their  ability  to  adapt  to  the  political  and  social  environment.”505 This deeply 
imbedded  doctrine  forced  the  group  to  “adopt  political  and  military  behavior  that  on  
many occasions was not suited to the real conditions in which the struggle was to take 
place.”506 The evolution of the FARC began with the shift from the Marxist-Leninist 
orthodoxy  to  a  less  rigid  “Bolivarian”  ideological  path.507  
This new ideological vision combines nationalist with left-wing ideas and 
sidelines ultimate ideological goals for the establishment of a socialist model.508 This has 
evolved into competition with the state through heightened critique of government 
incompetence when dealing with social inequality, crime, and deficient public services.509  
The FARC has presented themselves as a credible alternative for “good  government.”510 
The  FARC  has  gone  from  “criticizing the legitimacy of the origin of the state to 
questioning  its  functional  legitimacy.”511 The group has since pushed to gain a share of 
                                                 
504 Ortiz,  Roman  D.  2002.  “Insurgent  Strategies  in  the  Post-Cold War: The Case of the Revolutionary 
Armed  Forces  of  Colombia”  Studies in Conflict and Terrorism. vol. 25 128. 
505 Ibid.  
506 Ibid.  
507 Ibid 130.  
508 Ibid.  
509 Ibid.  
510 Ibid.  
511 Ibid.  

 110 
power within the state at the municipal level so as to be visible in an administrative 
capacity.512 The guerrillas have also increased their ability to provide public services such 
as health, education, and public order.513 New governmental forms of the FARC were 
derived from a narrow set of ideologies that clashed with the culture of the population 
and as a result diminished the  group’s  operational  flexibility  as  well  as  their  lobby  for  
support from local social coalitions. What makes this group unique is their pragmatic 
strategy for gaining power.514 This difference has been crucial to the survival of the 
FARC where their support within the rural areas remains strong from those who have 
been neglected by the government. 
In 2008 the FARC was dealt two difficult blows to its leadership. Founder Pedro 
Marin died in May and the earlier death of second-in-command Raul Reyes in a bombing 
raid in Ecuador in March, after which the new leader Alfonso Cano (Guillermo Saenz) 
rose to power.515 The Colombian military continued its strategy of military neutralization 
through  “deepening  internal  fissures  and  splintering  the  organization”  leaving the FARC 
no choice but to surrender, be captured, or die.516 But the government failed to remember 
that the organization is still a durable political-military force with an ideology that 
contains remnants of Marxism-Leninism.517 The government estimates that there are 
around 7,000 to 10,000 troops left and while the numbers vary due to the replenishment 
capabilities of the FARC, the government has been particularly effective in using FARC 
                                                 
512 Ibid 131. 
513 Ibid.  
514 Ibid.  
515 International  Crisis  Group.  2009.  Ending  Colombia’s  FARC  Conflict:  Dealing  the  Right  Card.  Latin 
America Report No 30. (March): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/home/index.cfm?id=6016 1.  
This work is the most current publication on the FARC and was published while this paper was in process.  
516 Ibid.  
517 Ibid 1-2. 

 111 
defectors to hunt-down and infiltrate remaining FARC units.518 This increase in fighting 
has decimated the FARC ranks at 10,806 killed and 26,648 captured all between 2003 
and 2009 to make matters worse individual demobilization has also been a problem 
where 11,615 fighters left the FARC.519 
The FARC has continued its assertion that their struggle is legitimate but there is 
a lack of education among its recruits.520 The fighters are simply told the state elites are 
responsible for their hardships which leave the majority of fighters unaware of the 
political and military structures and objectives of the FARC.521 This lack of political 
savvy and waning morale coupled with unrelenting military pressure has created a 
“culture  of  distrust”  leading  the  FARC  to  desperate  child  recruitment  to  replenish  its  
forces.522 These problems have added further strain to the rural fronts where the FARC 
has retreated to the high ground border regions of Venezuela, Panama, Ecuador, and 
Brazil.523 These  units  have  merged  with  stronger  “inter-fronts”  and  have  reduced  their  
unit size to avoid air attacks and increase their ability to use hit-and-run methods of 
attack  with  “triads”  (three-man cells).524 This has hindered the ability of the FARC to 
launch offensives but that has not reduced their capacity to take over new territory in 
these deeper rural areas.525  
On the urban fronts the FARC still could gain strength against the government 
since the security policy of the government is supported in these areas and an increase in 
                                                 
518 Ibid 7. 
519 Ibid. 
520 Ibid 9. 
521 Ibid. 
522 Ibid.  
523 Ibid 10.  
524 Ibid.  
525 Ibid.  

 112 
attacks would discredit this policy.526 A new goal of the FARC is to gain attention 
through assassinations, sabotage, and recruitment of students.527 Several attacks have 
already taken place in the cities of Bogotá, Cali, Buenaventura and Neiva.528 The FARC 
has shown resolve in these areas.529 While kidnapping and extortion remain important 
sources of income the FARC has changed its methods by keeping kidnapped victims in 
various places and by demanding smaller ransoms.530 Illicit activities remain at the top of 
the list for income and the FARC has responded to the government offensive by 
strengthening its units in coca producing areas.531  
The  FARC’s  goals  for  the  short  term  include  the  property  acquisition  in  drug  
cultivating regions and domination of communication across Colombia.  In 1999, the 
Colombian government conceded a piece of land the size of Switzerland to become a 
demilitarized zone after which military and police withdrew from the area.532 Over three 
years the FARC used this area near the heart of the country to increase their effective 
presence in the areas around the zone thus expanding the territory they controlled and 
ensuring southern lines of communication.533 They were able to use the area to hide and 
manage their inventory of hostages, accelerate their terrorist training, and manufacture 
bombs and mines.534 The FARC is trying to consolidate its control of coca-growing 
regions in the south and east thus allowing them to expand their operations and gain 
                                                 
526 Ibid 11. 
527 Ibid.  
528 Ibid 12. 
529 Ibid.  
530 Ibid.  
531 Ibid.  
532 Demarest, Geoffrey, 2003. Mapping Colombia: The Correlation Between Land Data and Strategy. 
Strategic Studies Institute. 16. 
533 Ibid.  
534 Ibid.  

 113 
military capabilities.535 Subsequently, new goals include extending their theatre of 
operations  to  envelope  the  entire  country  and  the  FARC’s  goal  is  to be accomplished 
through the control of corridors to the costal, border, and mountain regions of 
Colombia.536 The FARC and ELN in separate actions both plan to isolate Bogotá and 
other major cities by cutting communications between the cities and the rest of the 
country.537 Finally through networking in the urban areas the FARC plan a large-scale 
attack that will result in a general uprising.538 However, these goals have taken a back 
seat to the more important goals of leadership replacement and survival since 2008. 
A pressing issue is the effect of the military on the ability of the FARC to 
continue to support their base. FARC support has been reduced to almost nothing in rural 
communities and their support nationally and internationally has been greatly 
diminished.539 The ability of the FARC to mobilize populations against the government 
has diminished since they have been unable to protect those involved from reprisals of 
security forces and new armed organizations.540 The rural communities have also taken 
advantage of the weakened state of the FARC to combat the extortion and recruitment 
tactics of the group.541 This all hinges on the upcoming 2010 elections in Colombia when 
the new leader Cano hopes that the FARC will be able to re-structure the political side of 
the FARC.542 The FARC is infiltrating the left-wing and government opposition through 
                                                 
535 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and Insurgency and 
its Implications for Regional Stability. Santa Monica: RAND. 39. 
536 Ibid 40. 
537 Ibid.  
538 Ibid. 
539 International  Crisis  Group.  2009.  Ending  Colombia’s  FARC  Conflict 15. 
540 Ibid.  
541 Ibid 17. 
542 Ibid.  

 114 
universities and protests which are strengthening links with urban militias.543 This has led 
to a return to their Bolivarian interpretation and continuing their anti-imperialist ideals 
with a focus on uniting Latin America.544 Since the 2002 shock of being placed on the 
European and Canadian terrorist lists, the FARC has shifted some of its focus to 
regaining international support and while this has been met with limited success the 
FARC has increased its prisoners-for-hostages swaps with the government.545 This, 
coupled with the FARC request to increase the involvement of the international 
community has not only improved their international image but has proven their ability to 
act with political cohesion.546  
The ELN  
The Marxist based ELN by comparison however, has never strayed from their 
rigid communist ideology. A smaller group, numbering around 3,500, the ELN believes 
in removing the current government and replacing it with a socialist system.547 Heavily 
inspired by the Cuban Revolution, the group evolved from urban radicals (MOEC 
Movement for Workers, Students, and Peasants), who were inspired by Castro and Che 
Guevara in their call for the removal of all Latin American governments.548 At this time, 
another group, the United Front for Revolutionary Action (FUAR) solicited Castro for 
financial support and the FUAR would eventually become part of the ELN.549 Soon 
peasants and farmers supported the group for protection from the right-wing 
paramilitaries and even radical Roman Catholic priests joined the movement due to its 
                                                 
543 Ibid.  
544 Ibid.  
545 Ibid 18-19. 
546 Ibid 19.  
547 Harper,  Liz.  2002.  Colombia’s  Civil  War:  National  Liberation  Army  (ELN).  Online News Hour. 
Internet. Available from: http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/latin_america/colombia/players_eln 1. 
548 Ibid.  
549 Ibid 2. 

 115 
call  for  “popular  unity”  against  a  government  that  neglects  its  poor.550 The ELN has also 
shown that for the right reasons it will ally itself with other guerrilla groups like the 
FARC,  as  they  did  in  the  1990’s  for  the  “Simon  Bolivar  Guerrilla Coordination.”551 For 
most of their existence the ELN has followed a strict separation from the drug trade, 
freedom of religion, and a separation from Maoist communist ideology.552 Foundational 
differences aside, the ELN and FARC have disparate goals for the short term, yet have 
similar long-term goals.  
 The  ELN  avoids  direct  military  confrontation  and  uses  an  “economic  strategy”  
consisting of attacks on the power grid and communications, including  “armed  
propaganda,”  kidnappings,  and  airplane  hijackings.553 This strategy has been as a result 
of the smaller size of the ELN and their lack of military strength. Currently, the FARC 
and ELN both have a similar long-term goal, which includes but is not limited to 
complete destruction of the state as it exists, while the ELN still has the short-term goal 
of negotiating its own demilitarized zone.554 Although the breakdown of talks for this 
demilitarized zone ended with the Pastrana administration the ELN is an effective force 
involved in kidnappings, hijackings, extortion, and the drug trade.555 Under the Uribe 
administration the ELN shifted strategies by presenting their political demands to 
parliament,  giving  the  government  hope  to  see  the  rebels  “reconcile their revolutionary 
demands  with  Uribe’s  mandate  to  strengthen  the  state,  enhance  citizen  security  and  
                                                 
550 Ibid. 
551 Ibid. 
552 Ibid 3.  
553 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 45. 
554 Ibid 46. 
555 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace with the ELN. ICG Latin America 
Report No2. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/report_archive/A400790_04102002.pdf  20. 

 116 
combat  poverty.”556 It  is  important  to  note  that  the  ELN  has  the  unique  “capacity  for  
reflection  and  political  assessment”  that  is  more  developed  than the other armed 
groups.557 This has impressed a more pragmatic approach for ELN leadership and the 
general shift in thought is that there is more to be gained from negotiations than armed 
conflict.558  
 The Uribe administration’s rounds of peace negotiations showed a similar fate to 
those of the Pastrana administration. One of the focus points of the ELN negotiations has 
been the humanitarian crisis and while the government refused to focus on this issue they 
demanded that the ELN cease all hostilities and criminal acts to participate in 
negotiations.559 With the advent of the Cuban rounds in 2007 the ELN and government 
could not even agree on whether to discuss the ceasefire or agenda first.560 Upon the 
agreement for the government to release ELN prisoners, the ELN was prepared to release 
all hostages and stop kidnapping.561 However, when talks resumed in June the 
government  demanded  the  ELN  identify  its  combatants  and  move  them  to  a  “special  
zone.”562 The government then accused the ELN of changing its requests every time the 
negotiations seemed to be nearing an end.563 The main points of argument for the ELN 
are legitimate in that they fear the government will use the identification and 
concentration of their troops to wipe the organization out. On the other hand, the 
                                                 
556 Ibid 21.  
557 Ibid 23.  
558 Ibid.  
559 International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward with the ELN? Latin 
America Briefing No16. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/latin_america/b16_colombia_eln.pdf 10. 
560 Ibid 11.  
561 Ibid.  
562 Ibid.  
563 Ibid.  

 117 
government feels that the ELN will continue their illegal acts if the government cannot 
identify and locate ELN combatants.  
 There is a level of uncertainty when looking at the preferred outcome and goals of 
the ELN under the current negotiations. As an armed group the goals of the ELN are 
relatively unchanged from the goals the group set out to achieve in its founding. With the 
new negotiations it is unclear as to whether the ELN has the desire to become a legitimate 
political party or build on its base and represent its goals through legal channels.564 The 
most  challenging  aspect  of  this  transition  is  the  ELN’s  desire  to  retain  its  structure.565 
Two points of difficulty seem to be that those close to ELN leadership are of the opinion 
that the group does not desire to create a political party, and the FARC seems to be 
thwarting efforts of the ELN and the government to reach peace agreements.566 The ELN 
and FARC goals and recent actions against the backdrop of the political climate in 
Colombia and the actions of the government are the subjects of the following 
methodology and analyses.   
Methodology 
 To explain the factors involved and their effect on the FARC and ELN future 
actions, this research uses liberalism as the theoretical approach which allows for the 
actions of non-state actors. The FARC and ELN are non-state actors and in this work 
have proven to have both military and economic strengths that make them formidable 
opponents to the state. It is also important to understand that the actions of the state 
directly affect the FARC and ELN future actions and adaptations. The focus on the state 
competing for power and control of the country plays into the liberal cobweb approach to 
                                                 
564 Ibid 16. 
565 Ibid.  
566 Ibid.  

 118 
social science theory. This is an effective approach for explaining how the independent 
variables such as the actions of the state affect the organizations where in the literature 
review the focus looks at the FARC and ELN as independent variables and how they 
affect the state. Through the liberalist approach the FARC and ELN is the focus of the 
study as the dependent variables and the state will be considered the independent 
variable. Since the future actions and changes within the FARC and ELN are focus of this 
study, the government and its actions will be treated as the independent variable within 
each scenario.  
 This study will be using the Lockwood Analytical Method for Prediction as its 
methodology. The LAMP technique is the sum of the possible interactions between the 
FARC, ELN, and the state.567 This technique looks at the probability of an alternate 
future in relation to all possible futures.568 Using this method will improve the 
organization of available information based on the perceptions of the actors and make 
predictions on which alternate future is likely at a point in time.569 The LAMP method is 
broken  into  twelve  steps  :  1)  “Determine  the  issue  for  which  you  are  trying  to  predict  the  
most  likely  future;;”  2)  “Specify  the  national  “actors”  involved;;”  3)  “Perform  an  in-depth 
study of how each national actor perceives the issue in question;;”  4)  “Specify  all  possible  
courses  of  action  for  each  actor;;”  5)  “Determine  the  major  scenarios  within  which  you  
will compare the alternate futures;;”  6)  “Calculate  the  total  number  of  permutations  of  
possible  “alternate futures”  for  each  scenario;;”  7)  “Perform  a  “pairwise  comparison”  of  
all alternate futures to  determine  their  relative  probability;;”  8)  “Rank  the  alternate futures 
for each scenario from highest relative probability to the lowest based on the number of 
                                                 
567 Lockwood Johnathan S. The Lockwood Analytical Method for Prediction (LAMP) 25. 
568 Ibid 26.  
569 Ibid 27.  

 119 
votes  received:”  9)  “Assuming  that each future occurs, analyze each alternate future in 
terms  of  its  consequences  for  the  issue  in  question;;”  10)  “State  the  potential  of  a  given  
alternate future to  “transpose”  into  another  alternate future;;”  11)  “Determine  the  “focal  
events”  that  must  occur in our present in order to bring about a given alternate future;;”  
12)  “Develop  indicators  for  the  focal  events.”570 Since only the past is fixed and since the 
analyst cannot know how the future focal events of the study will change, the LAMP 
method is a qualitative method of study where the outcomes can always be revoted and 
all of the possibilities are analyzed, not just probable ones.571  
Courses of Action 
 These are the four courses of action that are available to the FARC and ELN 
based on past and current behaviors.  
 Continue Fighting: (CONT) The option remains for each of the actors to continue 
the violence both against each other and against the state. This means the FARC can 
continue fighting the government and/or other illegal armed groups (ELN). The ELN can 
continue fighting against the government or illegal armed groups (FARC).  
Negotiate Peace: (NEGO) Each of the armed groups has the chance to negotiate 
peace with the government or with each other. 
Withdrawal: (WITH) It is possible for each of the actors to disarm and/or 
withdraw from the fighting altogether.  
Form Alliances: (ALLI) The FARC and ELN have worked together in the past 
and if faced with destruction, they may join forces.  
                                                 
570 Ibid 27-28. 
571 Ibid 91-93. 

 120 
 Both the FARC and ELN have shown their desire to continue fighting against the 
government. Even with the recent offensives of the government the FARC and ELN have 
moved toward more remote areas and strengthened their forces in areas from where they 
derive income, such as drug producing areas. Another similarity is the international 
legitimacy desired by both organizations. Since the FARC and ELN were placed on 
international terrorist lists there has been a movement in both groups to return to their 
political ideological roots and expand their recruitment to bring in students and 
ideologues. Neither the FARC nor the ELN have shown any desire to become legitimate 
political parties and while it could happen there are no indications that these groups will 
change their positions.  
 The government continues to look to negotiations to end the violence of the 
FARC and ELN. In both cases their histories of adaptation and survival have shown that 
they are not going away by themselves and government eradication is unlikely. The only 
way the Colombian government will end the violence is through negotiations. The FARC 
has shown their desire for international legitimacy and control of territory as important 
goals in negotiations. For the ELN their goals are more political seeking an international 
platform for their political movement and by bringing their issues with the government to 
international attention. The ELN has been trying to get the government to take them 
seriously since the Colombian government has ignored them in discussions with the 
FARC. For the FARC their actions seem to be interfering with government negotiations 
with the ELN and the state has accused the FARC of tampering with ELN/government 
negotiations. In the current situation it appears the government or the FARC or ELN can 
initiate negotiations. Under the scenario of government withdrawal, the FARC and ELN 

 121 
can negotiate with each other. In the face of fighting until a winner emerges, the two 
organizations have the option of negotiating a truce among themselves.  
 The only way the FARC or ELN would withdraw from the conflict is if it was the 
only option left to them. Due to the recent loss of support facing the FARC and ELN this 
has not changed their position. The FARC and ELN have only attained limited support 
from the general populations and since much of the support is forced it is easy to see why 
the organizations have not been swayed by public opinion. Much like the discussion of 
the Marxist-Leninist ideology before, the FARC and ELN feel they are the best option for 
the people and their best hope for prosperity even if the people themselves do not agree. 
The public appears to be siding with the government and with the government’s recent 
advances the FARC and ELN have lost most of their ability to provide for their base, 
which has directly affected their support from local communities. However, the groups 
are still intent on fighting for the cause even if the general public is no longer interested.   
 As this support dwindles, it is possible for the FARC and ELN to join forces to 
increase their effectiveness against the government. In the past these alliances have been 
very short lived and have only occurred between one or two fronts of both the FARC and 
ELN. Differences in ideology and economic activities were the major points of 
disagreement. In addition to these differences, with the current fighting between the 
organizations for control over common drug producing areas, the relations between them 
have soured. But the FARC and ELN have also shown no limitations to their adaptability 
in the face of annihilation. Because of this resolve if either force is facing destruction in a 
region there is a good chance the two will join forces for the sake of survival.  
 

 122 
Scenarios 
1. The Colombian government adopts a stance of neutrality in Colombia. They 
withdraw from the conflict. 
2. Colombia follows a containment strategy in Colombia. They commit enough forces 
to contain the conflict to Colombia and restrict the spread of violence within the 
country and out. 
3.  Colombia  employs  a  “victory”  strategy  in  Colombia.  They  commit  significant 
military forces and funding in an all out offensive against the FARC and ELN to 
achieve a permanent end to the conflict.  
 The government has gained public support with the Uribe administration. The 
hard-line against the FARC and ELN has shown success in fighting the groups and when 
coupled with the economic improvements in Colombia in the last few years the 
government has a better standing with the people. It is this support that will keep the 
government from withdrawing from the conflict. The advances made against the FARC 
and ELN have been significant and the government does not want to lose the favor of its 
people. This moves to the issue of containment since 2008 saw serious international 
problems as the FARC and ELN have shown their ability to move across borders into 
neighboring countries. The Colombian government cannot continue a program that 
follows guerrillas into neighboring countries without that country’s support since this will 
cause an international incident. The government has to look at containing the violence to 
Colombia. While the role of the international community is beyond the scope of this 
work, the assumption is that the Colombian government could take on this containment 
strategy by itself. If the Colombian government continues its current strategy it would 

 123 
follow a complete victory method of dealing with the FARC and ELN. The government 
has seen few limitations in recent years in their attempts to eradicate the FARC and ELN 
forcefully. While the methods have worked the reality is that total eradication has been 
and will be impossible without negotiations and the support of the international 
community.  
 In moving on to the scenarios this research will  use  a  “pairwise  comparison”  to  
determine the most likely alternate futures for each scenario. Since the discussion of the 
adaptations of the FARC and ELN were analyzed in chapters two and three the focus will 
now be on the prediction of the futures of these groups, with the top five outcomes of 
each scenario discussed.  
Alternate Futures Calculations: 
    y 
X  = Z       X= courses of action (4) y= national actors (2)   Z= 16 alternate futures 
 
Scenario 1: 120 votes 
Scenario 2: 120 votes 
Scenario 3: 120 votes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 124 
Table 1: 
Possible Future # FARC ELN Remarks 
1 CONT CONT This is the FARC and ELN desired 
position 
2 CONT NEGO Recently this is a common occurrence 
3 CONT WITH  
4 CONT ALLI  
5 NEGO CONT  
6 NEGO NEGO This has been a common scenario 
historically 
7 NEGO WITH  
8 NEGO ALLI  
9 WITH CONT  
10 WITH NEGO  
11 WITH WITH  
12 WITH ALLI  
13 ALLI CONT  
14 ALLI NEGO  
15 ALLI WITH  
16 ALLI ALLI This has happened and failed in the past 
 
CONT: Each group continues fighting. 
NEGO: Each group negotiates with the government or each other. 
WITH: Each group withdraws. 
ALLI: ELN and FARC try to form alliance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 125 
Table 2: 
Scenario 1: The Colombian government withdraws from fighting.  
Possible Future # FARC ELN Votes 
1 CONT CONT 15 
2 CONT NEGO 14 
4 CONT ALLI 13 
3 CONT WITH 12 
6 NEGO NEGO 10 
5 NEGO CONT 9 
13 ALLI CONT 9 
8 NEGO ALLI 8 
14 ALLI NEGO 8 
7 NEGO WITH 6 
16 ALLI ALLI 6 
9 WITH CONT 4 
15 ALLI WITH 3 
10 WITH NEGO 2 
12 WITH ALLI 1 
11 WITH WITH 0 
Total: 120 
 
Alternate Futures: 
SCENARIO 1: Colombian government withdraws. 
Future # 1 The FARC and ELN continue fighting. (15 votes) 
This is the most likely outcome in this scenario due to the fact that government 
withdrawal will remove all restraint from the guerrillas. History has proven that when the 
government is on the offensive, the guerrillas have larger losses inflicted on them than 
they can inflict on the government.572 There are also the points discussed in previous 
chapters where the FARC and ELN are focused on the fight with or without the support 
of the masses and for these groups they have continually expressed their refusal to 
become legitimate political parties and disarm. Under President  Pastrana’s  administration  
                                                 
572 Restrepo, Jorge, Michael Spagat and Juan F. Vargas. 2003. The Dynamics of the  
Colombian Civil Conflict: A New Data Set. Center for Economic Policy Research No 4108. (November). 
Internet: Available from: www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP4108.asp 19. 

 126 
the government essentially withdrew from the zona de despeje, an area conceded to the 
FARC during peace talks, in return for their promise to disarm.573 The FARC used this 
area to traffic arms, money, supplies, troops, and drugs to their other fronts.574 They also 
launched attacks against the government from this region and held prisoners and hostages 
there.575 Since this is the outcome of government withdrawal on a small scale there is no 
evidence to suggest this will not happen on a large scale. It is because of this track record 
the first four of five top alternate futures indicate the FARC will follow the same lines. 
For the ELN their attempts to retain a ZOE (zone of encounter) during peace talks proved 
less successful than the FARC since the government was soured by the FARC 
exploitation of the agreement.576 Based on history it is hard to see how the ELN will react 
upon government withdrawal but their historical tenacity and desire to continue fighting 
makes the case for this alternate future.  
Future # 2 The ELN will try and negotiate with the powers left in the conflict. (14 
votes)  
While negotiating with the government will no longer be necessary in this scenario the 
ELN will have to work out deals with the FARC over contested regions. Since the FARC 
is a larger and stronger military force, the ELN will try to negotiate its survival and 
control of their portions of the country. In the last few years the ELN has shown their 
resistance to the expansion of the FARC into their territory in areas like Arauca and 
Norte de Santander where the two groups have engaged in armed conflict.577 Based on 
occurrences like these it would be the ELN to start negotiations with their competitors 
                                                 
573 Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth 43.  
574 Ibid.  
575 Ibid.  
576 International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace with the ELN 16. 
577 Ibid.  

 127 
since they are the smaller force. Without pressure from other sources the FARC could 
focus its efforts on taking ELN territory and in doing so, the ELN would not be able to 
sustain a prolonged conflict leading them to negotiate. 
Future # 4 The ELN would align itself with the FARC. (13 votes)  
While this is unlikely due to the core differences in ideology the two groups are fighting 
for the same general goals. With the government no longer in the picture the ELN may 
look to align itself with the FARC rather than risk fighting and losing the battle. The ELN 
has shown in the past their willingness to join other revolutionary movements including 
the FARC. For a time, the two partnered up with other smaller revolutionary groups in 
the late  1980’s  creating  the  National  Guerrilla Coordinating Instance (CNG).578 Later the 
ELN formed the Simon Bolivar Guerrilla Coordinating Group but the ideological 
differences were too great and the organization fell apart.579 The FARC and ELN do have 
similarities in their interests and goals but historically seem to only tolerate each other.580 
The FARC recognizes the ELN as a revolutionary force but the relationship is complex 
since in some areas the ELN inhabit some higher regions with the FARC and even work 
together in regions where the ELN has the weaker position.581 It has only been the 
movement of the FARC into the Venezuelan border regions that has caused armed 
conflict between the groups.582  The withdrawal of the government could relieve some of 
the tension that is between these groups since they would no longer fight over peace 
negotiations in which one group is participating while the other is not. Since there have 
                                                 
578 Ibid 7. 
579 Ibid.  
580 International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward with the ELN?  4. 
581 Ibid 5.  
582 Ibid.  

 128 
been instances of ELN frustration during government and FARC talks and FARC 
frustration during ELN and government talks this point of friction would be removed.  
Future # 3 The ELN would withdraw from the conflict based on the withdrawal of 
the government. (12 votes) 
This is a relatively remote option, since the ELN has proven to be very resilient. The 
ELN has shown its desire to establish a socialist government both in its ideology and in 
its attempts to join revolutionary groups together. This alternate future would suggest that 
the ELN would see the FARC as the leading force and with the government gone, realize 
that its ability to compete for control is nonexistent. Based on the strength and size of the 
FARC over the ELN they would have no choice but to be annihilated by the FARC or 
disarm and withdraw. 
Future # 6 The FARC and ELN would negotiate for control of the country. (10 
votes) 
This is a remote possibility due to the power vacuum left with the withdrawal of the 
government. Neither organization is prepared to, or capable of, taking over the country. 
There is a possibility that the two organizations would come to an agreement eventually 
but their focus would be expanding as fast as possible to gain the upper hand, power and 
control. Both would expand rapidly and since their concentrations of military strength are 
in different regions there would be bursts of armed conflict throughout important 
economic regions. Since the ideologies of the FARC and ELN differ so much there 
would never be a consensus but probably a division of land and control. This is all 
assuming that the two organizations will not decide to declare all out war in a winner-

 129 
take-all conflict. This moves into the second scenario where the government focuses on 
containment. 
Focal Events: 
SCENARIO 1: Colombian government withdraws. 
Future # 1 The FARC and ELN continue fighting. (15 votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Colombian government loss of popular support from the populace 
FOCAL EVENT- Government would lose territory to the FARC and ELN on a large 
scale 
FOCAL EVENT- Government loss of personnel to great to continue fighting 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN begin major offensives in urban areas and 
government strongholds 
 
Future # 2 The ELN will try and negotiate with the powers left in the conflict. (14 
votes)  
FOCAL EVENT- Colombian government loss of popular support from the populace 
FOCAL EVENT- Government would lose territory to the FARC and ELN on a large 
scale 
FOCAL EVENT- Government loss of personnel to great to continue fighting 
FOCAL EVENT- ELN forces lose the battle for the support of the populace to the FARC 
 
Future # 4 The ELN would align itself with the FARC. (13 votes)  
FOCAL EVENT- Colombian government loss of popular support from the populace 
FOCAL EVENT- Government would lose territory to the FARC and ELN on a large 
scale 
FOCAL EVENT- Government loss of personnel to great to continue fighting 
FOCAL EVENT- ELN forces are too weak to fight the FARC 
 
Future # 3 The ELN would withdraw from the conflict based on the withdrawal of 
the government. (12 votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Colombian government loss of popular support from the populace 
FOCAL EVENT- Government would lose territory to the FARC and ELN on a large 
scale 
FOCAL EVENT- Government loss of personnel to great to continue fighting 
FOCAL EVENT- Left to the FARC and ELN the ELN forces are too weak and fail to 
gain public support 
 
Future # 6 The FARC and ELN would negotiate for control of the country. (10 
votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Colombian government loss of popular support from the populace 
FOCAL EVENT- Government would lose territory to the FARC and ELN on a large 
scale 
FOCAL EVENT- Government loss of personnel to great to continue fighting 

 130 
FOCAL EVENT- FARC and ELN gain sufficient support and strength and divide the 
country rather than continue fighting  
 
Indicators: 
 
FOCAL EVENT- Colombian government loss of popular support from the populace 
KEY INDICATOR- Refusal to enter into elections, protesting, and rioting 
by the public at large 
KEY INDICATOR- The humanitarian status of government actions would 
worsen since in the past as people are killed by the government their 
support moves to the revolutionaries 
KEY INDICATOR- Overall repression of the populace by the government 
socially and politically 
KEY INDICATOR- Increase  in  jailed  or  “disappeared”  opponents  of  the  
government 
KEY INDICATOR- Number of refugees and displaced people increases 
greatly 
FOCAL EVENT- Government would lose territory to the FARC and ELN on a large 
scale 
KEY INDICATOR- Government negotiations lead to large demilitarized 
zones for the FARC and ELN 
KEY INDICATOR- Military and police forces are forced out of regions 
when faced with large columns of FARC and ELN combatants 
KEY INDICATOR- Government supply and communication lines are cut 
by the FARC and ELN isolating government forces and cities  
FOCAL EVENT- Government loss of personnel to great to continue fighting 
KEY INDICATOR- Assassinations of government officials increase 
sharply 
KEY INDICATOR- Government forces suffer major defeats on fronts 
controlled by the FARC and ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN begin major offensives in urban areas and 
government strongholds 
KEY INDICATOR- College campuses begin forming radical political 
groups that carry out terrorist actions 
KEY INDICATOR- FARC and ELN fronts begin isolating cities from 
government communications, supplies, and control 
KEY INDICATOR- Workers strikes and protests against the government 
by unions and students increase in frequency and violence 
KEY INDICATORS- The government is no longer able to protect the 
citizens and declare martial law 
FOCAL EVENT- ELN forces loses the battle for the support of the populace to the 
FARC 
KEY INDICATOR- Public support favors the FARC and their fronts 
through taxes and recruitment 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN continues to push a socialist/communist 
ideology on the areas it controls, pushing the peasantry away 

 131 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN is unable to provide public works and 
support to local populations  
FOCAL EVENT- ELN forces are too weak to fight the FARC 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN will withdraw from areas where control is 
contested with the FARC 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN will not be able to recruit new combatants 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC is able to take over vast drug producing 
areas and increase their size and strength faster than the ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- FARC and ELN gain sufficient support and strength and divide the 
country rather than continue fighting  
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC and ELN will have successes in gaining 
public support after the government withdraws 
KEY INDICATOR- Both groups will move to take over major income 
producing areas increasing their ability to support their ranks financially 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC and ELN will begin working together in 
contested areas or divide the fronts among each other  
KEY INDICATOR- Hostilities between the groups will cease 
 
Transposition: 
SCENARIO 1: Colombian government withdraws. 
 When looking at future # 1 of both the FARC and ELN continuing to fight this 
future could easily transpose into future # 2, 3, 4, and 6. It seems impossible for future # 
1 to not take place to some degree. It would be this initial fighting that would determine 
transposition into other futures if the groups expand militarily and economically at 
similar rates then the conflict could be sustained by both sides. If the FARC grew larger 
and stronger than the ELN, which has been the case historically, then the ELN would be 
faced with negotiation or withdrawal which would transpose future # 1 into future # 2, 3, 
or 4. It would be the FARC and ELN adherence to political and ideological goals on top 
of  FARC’s  larger  and  stronger  force  that  would  mean  the  military  end  to  the  ELN.  If  the  
ELN is pushed into a corner, it could be flexible on goals and ideology, as in the past, to 
survive by aligning themselves with the FARC. Finally the transposition from future #1 
could lead to future # 6 since the buildup of forces and territory could lead to negotiations 

 132 
by both groups who see each other as legitimate and no longer needing to continue the 
conflict with a government out of the picture.  
Table 3: 
Scenario 2: The Colombian government imposes a containment strategy. 
Possible Future # FARC ELN Votes 
1 CONT CONT 14 
16  ALLI ALLI 14 
2 CONT NEGO 13 
4 CONT ALLI 11 
5 NEGO CONT 11 
6 NEGO NEGO 10 
13 ALLI CONT 10 
8 NEGO ALLI 8 
14 ALLI NEGO 8 
7 NEGO WITH 6 
3 CONT WITH 5 
9 WITH CONT 4 
15 ALLI WITH 3 
10 WITH NEGO 2 
12 WITH ALLI 1 
11 WITH WITH 0 
Total: 120 
 
Alternate Futures: 
Scenario 2: The Colombian government imposes a containment strategy. 
Future # 1 The FARC and ELN continue fighting the government. (14 votes)  
With the government following a containment strategy the FARC and ELN would not be 
deterred from fighting. As the FARC and ELN see their abilities to retreat, resupply, and 
train across the Colombian border in the remote areas of neighboring countries, the 
hostilities will increase. The FARC and ELN will fight to take over all of the area and 
supplies of opposing groups including the government to continue their fight. The FARC 
and ELN are dependent on their use of the borders and international corridors for many 

 133 
reasons. Drugs and guns routinely cross the border of Colombia and neighboring 
countries as a result of the ineffective Colombian border patrols and the corrupt and 
compliant local officials in neighboring countries.583 While the extent of the FARC and 
ELN in the trafficking portion of narcotics is not clear, it is understood that the corridors 
where most of the shipments of drugs and guns in and out of Colombia are controlled by 
the FARC and ELN. The FARC in particular found a sympathetic ear in Hugo Chavez 
the president of neighboring Venezuela.584 This is problematic due to the need for 
international support for Colombia to have an effective containment strategy. The main 
point of the containment strategy will keep the domestic fight from becoming an 
international one. Without the ability to resupply or cross borders freely the abilities of 
the FARC and ELN will be reduced.  
Future # 16 The containment of the country would lead the FARC and ELN to 
positions of ineffectiveness and will group together. (14 votes) 
With the supply lines for drugs and weapons cut off, the FARC will have some difficulty 
drawing new income but have significant stores of weapons and money. For the ELN, 
their primary forms of income in kidnapping and extortion will be untouched by the 
containment strategy but their resources of weapons and men are small. The two 
organizations will find that their ideological differences will fall secondary to their desire 
to continue the fight. By this point the increased people and supplies from the FARC 
coupled with the local income opportunities of the ELN will make the two forces far 
more effective as a singular force.  
                                                 
583 International Crisis Group. 2003. Colombia and its Neighbors: The Tentacles of Instability. Latin 
America No 3. (April): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/home/index.cfm?id=1534&l=1 3. 
584 Ibid 5.  

 134 
Future # 2 The FARC will continue to fight while the ELN negotiates. (13 votes) 
Alternate future four is similar in that the FARC will continue to fight while the ELN will 
form an alliance with the FARC. These two alternatives fit well together since they both 
hinge of the position of the ELN if their corridors to other countries are cut off. It is 
understood that the ELN is a smaller and weaker force and with the containment policy 
of the government the ELN will be limited in its economic options and its supply options. 
In regions where the FARC is stronger the ELN uses the FARC forces as a shield for 
protection as in the Cesar and Magdalena highlands.585 While both groups have 
established bases in the Venezuelan states of Apure and Bolivar, the ELN presence is 
stronger and more vital to their operations.586 For the ELN their struggle has been more 
political than military and their organization both avoids direct military confrontations 
and has asked its militants at conferences to focus their efforts on a broader social 
movement  more  “in  tune”  with  other  Latin  American  movements.587 Based on their 
flexibility in working with other revolutionary movements and their need for the border 
regions the ELN will need to negotiate to be able to survive. As the weaker force, if the 
ELN is cut off from their greatest areas of strength in the Venezuelan corridor, the ELN 
will be forced to seek protection from the FARC through government negotiations or by 
forming an alliance with the FARC.  
Future # 4 The FARC continues to fight while the ELN aligns with the FARC. (11 
votes) 
In this future the ELN is the smaller and weaker force, and with the containment strategy 
of the government the ELN will not survive alone. Negotiations may not be an option if 
                                                 
585 International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward with the ELN?  5. 
586 Ibid.  
587 Ibid 6. 

 135 
the ELN has no strength or income left with which to negotiate. This future sees the ELN 
as too weak to resist advancement of the FARC into their territory and is forced with the 
choice of military defeat or cooperation with the FARC and concession of their fighting 
forces and fronts to FARC control. In some of the higher regions of the country and the 
areas where drug production has expanded into ELN territory this problem has already 
began. This reduced ability to fight and collect income coupled with their aversion to 
direct confrontation would lead the ELN to form an alliance.    
Future # 5 The FARC will negotiate and the ELN will continue fighting. (11 votes) 
This is the most remote possibility when looking at the outcomes for the top five alternate 
futures. This future assumes that the FARC, since the majority of their income is drug 
related, will face a force and supply payment that they can no longer afford thus 
diminishing the size and strength of the FARC. Unlike the ELN the FARC has been 
known for direct confrontations with the military, which actions require funding and 
supplies.588 FARC support is also at a serious low in recent times and with the people 
refusing  to  pay  extortion  or  “taxes”  to  the  FARC  the  organization  may  have  trouble 
finding enough income.589 With the FARC losing sources of support and income the 
fighters will defect to the government making matters worse as the FARC position 
weakens. Perhaps the FARC may see the negotiating table as a way to minimize 
defection while maximizing what little bargaining power they have left. This event would 
be different for the ELN since their ability to derive income from local companies and 
resources and kidnapping has not changed with the containment policy. This will become 
                                                 
588 International  Crisis  Group.  2009.  Ending  Colombia’s  FARC  Conflict 3. 
589 Ibid 5. 

 136 
an opportunity for the ELN to expand their territory and absorb deserting FARC militants 
to increase their military capabilities. 
Focal Events: 
Scenario 2: The Colombian government imposes a containment strategy. 
Future # 1 The FARC and ELN continue fighting the government. (14 votes)  
FOCAL EVENT- Colombia gains the help of Panama, Venezuela, Peru, Brazil, and 
Ecuador to contain the guerrillas 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries are too weak and corrupt to help the Colombian 
government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN appeal to the international community for support 
against the government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN form offensives against the government in border 
regions 
 
Future # 16 The containment of the country would lead the FARC and ELN to 
positions of ineffectiveness and will group together. (14 votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries strengthen their border security and remove the 
corrupt officials from the area 
FOCAL EVENT- Leaders in Latin America publicly denounce the legitimacy of the 
FARC and ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries engage the guerrillas with the Colombian 
government 
 
Future # 2 The FARC will continue to fight while the ELN negotiates. (13 votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries strengthen their border security and remove the 
corrupt officials from the area 
FOCAL EVENT- Leaders in Latin America publicly denounce the legitimacy of the 
FARC and ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries engage the guerrillas with the Colombian 
government 
FOCAL EVENT- The ELN is unable to gain public support or funding and is forced into 
a corner 
 
Future # 4 The FARC continues to fight while the ELN aligns with the FARC. (11 
votes). 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries strengthen their border security and remove the 
corrupt officials from the area 
FOCAL EVENT- Leaders in Latin America publicly denounce the legitimacy of the 
FARC and ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries engage the guerrillas with the Colombian 
government 

 137 
FOCAL EVENT- The ELN is unable to gain public support or funding and is forced into 
a corner 
 
Future # 5 The FARC will negotiate and the ELN will continue fighting. (11 votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries strengthen their border security and remove the 
corrupt officials from the area 
FOCAL EVENT- Leaders in Latin America publicly denounce the legitimacy of the 
FARC and ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries engage the guerrillas with the Colombian 
government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC is unable to gain funding and supplies and their larger force 
weakens quickly  
 
Indicators: 
 
FOCAL EVENT- Colombia gains the help of Panama, Venezuela, Peru, Brazil, and 
Ecuador to contain the guerrillas 
KEY INDICATOR- Organization of American States (OAS) work to 
make agreements between Colombia and its neighbors to combat the 
guerrillas 
KEY INDICATOR- International states and organizations support the 
cooperation between the nations publicly 
KEY INDICATOR- Colombia begins working to support neighboring 
countries militaries 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries are too weak and corrupt to help the Colombian 
government 
KEY INDICATOR- Borders are controlled on the Colombian side but not 
on  neighboring  nation’s  sides 
KEY INDICATOR- Guerrilla support and camps in bordering countries 
are able to stage offensives on government forces from inside and outside 
of Colombia  
KEY INDICATOR- The movement of drugs, guns, and chemicals in the 
border  regions  of  neighboring  countries  increases  as  Colombia’s  borders  
are closed tighter 
KEY INDICATOR- Guerrilla forces are uncontested or easily defeat 
government forces in the border regions of Colombia’s  neighbors 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN appeal to the international community for support 
against the government 
KEY INDICATOR- FARC and ELN forces try to make deals with 
governments not heavily aligned with Colombia  
KEY INDICATOR- Kidnap victims will all be released unconditionally 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC and ELN will work with humanitarian 
organizations 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN form offensives against the government in border 
regions 

 138 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC and ELN will move out of the urban areas 
and into the border areas with difficult terrain 
KEY INDICATOR- Indigenous people of border regions will move out of 
the region and/or report increases in attacks 
KEY INDICATOR- Reports of fighting spilling over into neighboring 
countries will increase 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries strengthen their border security and remove the 
corrupt officials from the area 
KEY INDICATOR- Neighboring countries will build up their military 
presence at the Colombian border 
KEY INDICATOR- Officials will be increasingly jailed and tried on 
corruption charges 
KEY INDICATOR- Drug, weapons, and chemical seizures along the 
border will increase 
KEY INDICATOR- Reporting on displaced persons and refugees will 
increase in border regions 
FOCAL EVENT- Leaders in Latin America publicly denounce the legitimacy of the 
FARC and ELN 
KEY INDICATOR- Leaders will denounce the human rights violations of 
the FARC and ELN and their refusal to allow humanitarian groups to 
work in regions under their control 
KEY INDICATOR- This has already begun as of 2008 where President 
Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, President Rafael Correa of Ecuador, and Fidel 
Castro of Cuba called for the FARC to release all hostages 
unconditionally.590 
FOCAL EVENT- Neighboring countries engage the guerrillas with the Colombian 
government 
KEY INDICATOR- FARC and ELN actions will slow or become 
nonexistent at the border areas 
KEY INDICATOR- FARC and ELN actions will increase frequency and 
severity in urban areas  
KEY INDICATOR- Neighboring countries to Colombia will face an 
increase in jailed guerrillas and trials 
FOCAL EVENT- The ELN is unable to gain public support or funding and is forced into 
a corner 
  KEY INDICATOR- FARC combatant ranks will grow quickly 
KEY INDICATOR- The local populations will fight the ELN and refuse 
to give them money or support 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN and FARC will stop fighting each other and 
the ELN will attempt to hold a conference with FARC leaders 
KEY INDICATOR- ELN proposes peace negotiations to the government 
before their negotiating position is too weak 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC is unable to gain funding and supplies and their larger force 
weakens quickly  
                                                 
590 Ibid 18.  

 139 
KEY INDICATOR- Combatants dissert their fronts or defect to the 
government 
KEY INDICATOR- FARC units retreat from government controlled areas 
KEY INDICATOR- Local populations report more activity relating to 
taxes and theft of supplies from towns by the FARC 
 
Transposition: 
 
Scenario 2: The Colombian government imposes a containment strategy. 
When looking at futures # 1 and # 16 the FARC and ELN will continue fighting and 
while that has been a historical guarantee there is uncertainty when looking at how these 
organizations supply themselves. If the FARC loses its main source of income and the 
ELN is faced with waning supplies and troops then they should easily move into the 
realm of alliances future # 16. In many regions the two organizations have a symbiotic 
relationship and there is nothing to suggest that if the advantages of one group 
compliment the other they will not join forces. When looking to alternate futures # 2 and 
# 4 the FARC continuing to fight is held constant but the position of the ELN will change 
based on the actions of the FARC. If the FARC sees this as an opportunity to go to war 
with the ELN to take their territory, supplies, and forms of income the ELN may not be 
able to stop this incursion and thus negotiate with the government future # 2. It is also 
possible that they will make the move to align themselves with the FARC, future # 4, 
since the relations of the two groups have soured when the ELN tried to negotiate with 
the government alone. Alternate future # 5 would transpose from future # 1 as a result of 
the FARC being economically decimated by the loss of the drug and trafficking income 
and their ability to fight gone, thus they would negotiate but only as a last option when 
fighting and surviving are no longer possible.  
   

 140 
Table 4: 
Scenario  3:  The  Colombian  government  employs  a  “victory”  strategy. 
Possible Future # FARC ELN Votes 
6 NEGO NEGO 14 
16 ALLI ALLI 14 
8 NEGO ALLI 13 
14 ALLI NEGO 11 
7 NEGO WITH 11 
4 CONT ALLI 10 
5 NEGO CONT 9 
15 ALLI WITH 8 
2 CONT NEGO 7 
13 ALLI CONT 7 
3 CONT WITH 5 
10 WITH  NEGO 4 
9 WITH CONT 3 
12 WITH ALLI 3 
11 WITH WITH 1 
1 CONT CONT 0 
Total: 120 
  
Alternate Futures: 
Scenario 3: The  Colombian  government  employs  a  “victory”  strategy. 
Future # 6 The FARC and ELN both negotiate with the government. (14 votes) 
With the government employing a constant barrage of troops and munitions on the 
guerrillas and their fronts, the ability of the guerrillas to fight will be eroded. This 
scenario has similarities to the current tactics of the Uribe administration. Looking at how 
the past few years have changed the dynamic between the government and the guerrillas 
provides valuable insight to this scenario and its alternate futures. In alternate future # 6 
the FARC and ELN will negotiate with the government. Under the current Uribe 
administration’s offensive against the FARC, the organization has never before faced 
such a magnitude of force. Several FARC units have been wiped out, morale is falling 

 141 
and soldiers are deserting their units, commanders have been killed or deserted, and three 
of the top FARC leaders have died or were killed.591 This all came at a time when public 
opinion was at a high in government favor and at a low for the FARC.592 This has 
effectively left the FARC fragmented. While the organization has adapted to the new 
situation, the  objective  for  Uribe’s  administration  was  to  force  the  FARC  into  peace  talks.  
This future looks to the administration to continue its onslaught and drive the FARC to 
the point where they have no option but to negotiate, by which time the organization will 
be so weak it will have little to offer beyond disarming.  
Meanwhile, the Uribe administration saw the ELN as a low priority in peace 
negotiations.593 After multiple rounds of peace talks the absence of mutual trust and the 
harder-line nature of the government demands produced little in the way of progress.594 
With this rigid attitude the ELN cannot afford to take on the government as directly as the 
FARC has. Once the government shifts its focus off the FARC and toward a more 
complete strategy for fighting both groups the ELN will be in grave danger. Since the 
organization is smaller and less militant than the FARC their ability to recover from 
direct armed actions with the government is also smaller. With the government following 
this system of eradication on the FARC and ELN they will have no choice but to 
negotiate or die fighting.  
Future # 16 The FARC and ELN form alliances with each other. (14 votes)  
As noted before, in the history of these groups they have formed alliances when needed. 
Due to the recent offensive of the Uribe administration the ELN and FARC are 
                                                 
591 Ibid 5. 
592 Ibid.  
593 International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward with the ELN? 8.  
594 Ibid 12.  

 142 
cooperating more than ever. After the death of one  of  the  FARC’s  founding  leaders  the  
ELN called for an alliance between the two groups but divisions in regions where the 
groups have traditionally fought resisted this measure.595 For most other regions the 
FARC has helped weaker ELN units and the stronger ELN units have helped the 
FARC.596 The main differences are the ELN establishing a social base and limited 
involvement in the drug trade while the FARC’s  focus is on imposing its presence locally 
and heavy reliance on the drug trade, have hindered alliances between the two.597 The 
FARC and ELN will have no choice but to form alliances as the government continues to 
press the groups closer together. Since the regions traditionally controlled by the FARC 
and ELN have been geographically close the movement of the government to drive these 
forces closer together will force a bond of survival. This will give the organizations better 
defenses against government attacks and better positioning in future negotiations.  
Future # 8 The FARC negotiates with the government while the ELN tries to form 
alliances with the FARC. (13 votes) 
The FARC will negotiate while the ELN form alliances and in future # 14 the ELN will 
negotiate while the FARC form alliances. This future outcome is close due to the nature 
of these organizations when one tries to negotiate with the government and the other is 
left out of the process. The FARC negotiating is higher in probability due to the track 
record of the groups. The FARC has shown repeatedly that they are willing to negotiate 
with the government without the ELN. At the same time it has always been the ELN that 
has instigated talks and attempts at alliances between the organizations. Based on 
historical patterns, the FARC will enter negotiations to stall or gain a respite from 
                                                 
595 International  Crisis  Group.  2009.  Ending  Colombia’s  FARC Conflict 13. 
596 Ibid.  
597 Ibid.  

 143 
government attacks while the ELN, feeling ignored will try and support its ranks with the 
help of the FARC.  
Future # 14 The FARC calls for an alliance while the ELN negotiates with the 
government. (11 votes)  
While it is less likely that the FARC would call for an alliance as the ELN negotiated 
with the government, the change in the FARC abilities due to the government offensives 
could change their thinking. In this future the FARC have no power left for peace talks 
and through aligning themselves with the ELN they gain some of the political legitimacy 
they have lost adding new combatants to their ranks. For the ELN their preferred forum 
has always been political and if there is something to be gained they will negotiate with 
the government without the FARC. 
Future # 7 The FARC negotiates with the government while the ELN withdraws 
from the conflict. (11 votes) 
The ELN has avoided direct confrontations with the government and since that has been 
their mode of operation they are a militarily weaker force than the FARC. This future 
assumes that the ELN will be faced with destruction from both sides, the government on 
one and the FARC on the other. With the pressing of these two offensively capable 
groups the ELN will be forced to withdraw from the conflict. That withdrawal, coupled 
with government offensives on FARC fronts, forces the FARC into negotiations with the 
government but give them more power at the negotiating table since they are the only 
revolutionary group left to deal with. Looking for resolution the government and FARC 
have a good chance of ending the conflict in this scenario.  
 

 144 
Focal Events: 
Scenario  3:  The  Colombian  government  employs  a  “victory”  strategy. 
Future # 6 The FARC and ELN both negotiate with the government. (14 votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Government approval is at an all time high while guerrilla support is 
falling rapidly 
FOCAL EVENT- The general populace fights the FARC and ELN with the government 
and refuses to allow the guerrillas sanctuary 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are forced from their territories and suffer heavy 
losses in fighting with the government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are listed as terrorist organizations by the 
international community thus removing the legitimacy of the fight 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN reach out to the international community to make 
their fight legitimate and force the government into negotiations through international 
pressure 
 
Future # 16 The FARC and ELN form alliances with each other. (14 votes)  
FOCAL EVENT- Peace negotiations fail between the government and the FARC and 
ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Government approval is at an all time high while guerrilla support is 
falling rapidly 
FOCAL EVENT- The general populace fights the FARC and ELN with the government 
and refuses to allow the guerrillas sanctuary 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are forced from their territories and suffer heavy 
losses in fighting with the government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are listed as terrorist organizations by the 
international community thus removing the legitimacy of the fight 
 
Future # 8 The FARC negotiates with the government while the ELN tries to form 
alliances with the FARC. (13 votes) 
 
FOCAL EVENT- Peace negotiations fail between the government and the FARC and 
ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Government approval is at an all time high while guerrilla support is 
falling rapidly 
FOCAL EVENT- The general populace fights the FARC and ELN with the government 
and refuses to allow the guerrillas sanctuary 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are forced from their territories and suffer heavy 
losses in fighting with the government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are listed as terrorist organizations by the 
international community thus removing the legitimacy of the fight 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC tries to negotiate while they have some power left in the 
negotiations and the ELN will be excluded making them push for an alliance with the 
FARC 
 

 145 
Future # 14 The FARC calls for an alliance while the ELN negotiates with the 
government. (11 votes)  
FOCAL EVENT- Peace negotiations fail between the government and the FARC and 
ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Government approval is at an all time high while guerrilla support is 
falling rapidly 
FOCAL EVENT- The general populace fights the FARC and ELN with the government 
and refuses to allow the guerrillas sanctuary 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are forced from their territories and suffer heavy 
losses in fighting with the government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are listed as terrorist organizations by the 
international community thus removing the legitimacy of the fight 
FOCAL EVENT- The government starts negotiations with the ELN while excluding the 
FARC and the FARC calls for an alliance against the government 
 
Future # 7 The FARC negotiates with the government while the ELN withdraws 
from the conflict. (11 votes) 
FOCAL EVENT- Peace negotiations fail between the government and the FARC and 
ELN 
FOCAL EVENT- Government approval is at an all time high while guerrilla support is 
falling rapidly 
FOCAL EVENT- The general populace fights the FARC and ELN with the government 
and refuses to allow the guerrillas sanctuary 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are forced from their territories and suffer heavy 
losses in fighting with the government 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are listed as terrorist organizations by the 
international community thus removing the legitimacy of the fight 
FOCAL EVENT- The government offensive is too great and the ELN troops are 
decimated or desert their fronts 
 
Indicators: 
 
FOCAL EVENT- Peace negotiations fail between the government and the FARC and 
ELN 
KEY INDICATORS- Talks stall for day and months at a time calling for 
the addition of international arbitrators to get the talks out of a stalemate 
KEY INDICATORS- Benchmark agreements throughout negotiations are 
not honored by the government or the guerrillas 
KEY INDICATOR- The hostilities by the guerrillas and government do 
not stop for the negotiations 
FOCAL EVENT- Government approval is at an all time high while guerrilla support is 
falling rapidly 
KEY INDICATOR- Public demonstrations show support for the 
government  
KEY INDICATOR- Public demonstrations are against the guerrillas 

 146 
KEY INDICATOR- The general public turns out in large numbers for 
government events, like voting 
KEY INDICATOR- The free media supports the government 
KEY INDICATOR- Humanitarian issues are positive and government 
suppression or disappearances are no longer a factor 
 
FOCAL EVENT- The general populace fights the FARC and ELN with the government 
and refuses to allow the guerrillas sanctuary 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC and ELN are refused taxes and supplies 
from the fronts they control 
KEY INDICATOR- The public informs on the guerrillas to the 
government  
KEY INDICATOR- The public refuses to join the guerrillas groups and 
fights forced recruitment 
 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are forced from their territories and suffer heavy 
losses in fighting with the government 
  KEY INDICATOR- Forced recruitment of peasantry into combat ranks 
KEY INDICATOR- Actions against the guerrillas move into higher and 
more remote parts of the country as the guerrillas retreat 
KEY INDICATOR- The government has more and more combatants from 
the FARC and ELN defect and inform on the organizations 
 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN are listed as terrorist organizations by the 
international community thus removing the legitimacy of the fight 
KEY INDICATOR- International terrorist organization lists are formed in 
each country and international organization containing the FARC and 
ELN 
KEY INDICATOR- The Colombian government outlines the actions of 
the FARC and ELN as terrorist actions to international organizations 
KEY INDICATOR- The international community denounces the actions 
of the FARC and ELN as no longer in the interest of the people and 
therefore terrorist, not revolutionary 
 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC and ELN reach out to the international community to make 
their fight legitimate and force the government into negotiations through international 
pressure 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC and ELN will request the involvement of 
humanitarian and non-government organizations involvement in 
negotiations 
KEY INDICATOR- Both groups will offer to release all hostages 
unconditionally 
KEY INDICATOR- Both organizations will stress the political goals of 
their organizations on the international stage 
KEY INDICATOR- Both organizations will try to improve their human 
rights records 

 147 
 
FOCAL EVENT- The FARC tries to negotiate while they have some power left in the 
negotiations and the ELN will be excluded making them push for an alliance with the 
FARC 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC will try to negotiate with the government 
quickly using everything they have as leverage 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN will realize their weak position and lack of 
government attention in negotiations through increased actions and attacks 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN will call for a conference with the FARC 
leadership 
KEY INDICATOR- The ELN will stop fighting FARC fronts in contested 
areas 
 
FOCAL EVENT- The government starts negotiations with the ELN while excluding the 
FARC and the FARC calls for an alliance against the government 
KEY INDICATOR- The government will convince the ELN to enter 
negotiations without the FARC 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC will attempt to interfere with the 
negotiations between the government and the ELN 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC will contact the ELN leadership for a 
conference 
KEY INDICATOR- The FARC will stop fighting ELN fronts in contested 
areas 
 
Transposition: 
 
Scenario  3:  The  Colombian  government  employs  a  “victory”  strategy. 
It would be very similar to past patterns of government negotiations with the guerrillas, 
future # 6, to see the failure of talks with both the FARC and ELN transpose into the two 
forming alliances future # 16. Trying to negotiate with the government and failing to 
come to an agreement would be similar to the history of the guerrilla groups’ talks with 
the government, future # 6. With the government resuming an offensive after talks, the 
FARC and ELN would begin the immediate forming of alliances for survival. When 
looking at the other futures # 8 and # 14 the transposition would be the government 
negotiating talks with only the FARC or the ELN. While the government negotiates with 
the FARC, the ELN will see forming an alliance with the FARC as a necessity both for a 

 148 
better position in negotiations and for a stronger united front against a government 
offensive. The transposition into the future where the ELN negotiates while the FARC 
moves to form an alliance (future # 14) will be as a result of the FARC trying to end ELN 
talks with the government and strengthen their position in vital regions where the ELN is 
strong. In the last future # 7 the ELN negotiations fail and the ELN is forced to withdraw 
or be annihilated, or the negotiations are a success and the ELN withdraws as part of the 
agreement. Any of these future scenarios can transpose into each other since it has been 
shown in the past that when the guerrillas are facing continuous armed action from the 
government they will eventually begin to negotiate. Knowing this, it is simply a matter of 
how the negotiations go with each group that will determine the transposition into 
alternate futures.     
Conclusion 
 This LAMP study set out to predict the future actions of the FARC and ELN 
based on the actions of the Colombian government. The study was able to identify the 
most likely future actions for both the FARC and ELN and through the scenarios; the 
most likely government actions were also analyzed. Through the discussion of the 
transpositions, focal points, and indicators, this work will help mark the progression of 
the future actions of these groups. This study set out to complete the work on the FARC 
and ELN and achieved a thorough grasp of how these organizations will behave in the 
future.  
 The LAMP study indicates that the third scenario with the negotiation between 
the government and guerrillas is the most likely. If this path is continued after the 2010 
elections this is the most likely future. In this research the Marxist-Leninist ideology 

 149 
takes a back seat to survival for the FARC and ELN. The more these organizations adapt 
to survive the more their ideology changes. On one hand, if the two groups had followed 
their ideologies closer to the letter they may have developed a much stronger social base. 
On the other hand, rigid ideologies would have led to the defeat of the FARC and ELN 
long ago.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 150 
Bibliography 
 
CIA. 2009. World Factbook Colombia. Central Intelligence Agency. (April). Internet: 
Available from: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/co.html 
 
Demarest, Geoffrey, 2003. Mapping Colombia: The Correlation Between Land Data and 
 Strategy. Strategic Studies Institute.  
 
Harper,  Liz.  2002.  Colombia’s  Civil  War:  National  Liberation  Army  (ELN).  Online  
News Hour. Internet. Available from: 
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/latin_america/colombia/players_eln 
 
International  Crisis  Group.  2009.  Ending  Colombia’s  FARC  Conflict:  Dealing  the  Right 
Card. Latin America Report No 30. (March): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/home/index.cfm?id=6016 
 
International Crisis Group. 2007. Colombia: Moving Forward with the ELN? Latin 
America Briefing No16. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/latin_america/b16_colombia_eln.p
df 
 
International Crisis Group. 2003. Colombia and its Neighbors: The Tentacles of  
Instability. Latin America No 3. (April): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/home/index.cfm?id=1534&l=1 
 
International Crisis Group. 2002. Colombia: Prospects for Peace with the ELN. ICG 
Latin America Report No2. (October): Internet. Available from: 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/report_archive/A400790_04102002
.pdf 
 
Lockwood  Johnathan  S.  and  Kathleen  O’Brien  Lockwood.  1994.  The Lockwood 
Analytical Method for Prediction (LAMP). MBS: American Military University 
 
Ortiz,  Roman  D.  2002.  “Insurgent  Strategies  in  the  Post-Cold War: The Case of the  
Revolutionary  Armed  Forces  of  Colombia”  Studies in Conflict and Terrorism. 
vol. 25 . 127-143.  
 
Rabasa, Angel and Peter Chalk. 2001. Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and 
 Insurgency and its Implications for Regional Stability. Santa Monica: RAND. 
 
Rempe, Dennis. 2002. Implementing Plan Colombia The Past as a Prologue? A History 
of U.S. Counterinsurgency Policy in Colombia 1958-66. Strategic Studies 
Institute. 
 
Restrepo, Jorge, Michael Spagat and Juan F. Vargas. 2003. The Dynamics of the 

 151 
Colombian Civil Conflict: A New Data Set. Center for Economic Policy Research 
No 4108. (November). Internet: Available from: 
www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP4108.asp 
 
Tuft, Eva Irene. 1997. Democracy and Violence: The Colombian Paradox. Chr. 
Michelsen Institute Report Series. Internet. Available from: 
http://bora.cmi.no/dspace/bitstream/10202/307/1/R%201997.%201.%20Eva%20I.
%20Tuft-07092007_1.pdf 
 
Zambrano, Jair Cortazar and Lynn L. Adams. 2008. Colombia: Indications of a Never- 
Ending Conflict in Relation to the Adams Revolutionary Model. Utah Valley 
University. Internet: Available from: 
http://law.creighton.edu/wernerInstitute/complexityconference/speaker_materials/
Table%20Topic%20Paper%20Presentations/Colombia%20-
%20Lynn%20Adams%20&%20Jair%20Cortazar.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 152 
 
Conclusion 
 
This research focuses on the Colombian revolutionary armed groups of the FARC 
and ELN. This work followed the emergence of Marxism and the communist movement 
through history, its applications in Russia and China, and its profound effect on the 
revolutionary movements in Latin America, particularly the FARC and ELN in 
Colombia. In studying the formation of these revolutionary groups, their origins and 
adaptability are as important as their futures. As this research provides the histories, 
structures, and adaptations of these groups, the end result is a better understanding of the 
actors in the Colombian conflict and a consideration of the best possible resolutions to 
this conflict.  The matrices on the FARC and the ELN demonstrate that their Marxist 
ideologies are subordinated to the economic realities of survival.  Further, based on this 
LAMP study, and based on the current status of the FARC and ELN, I have argued that 
the most likely outcomes are a negotiated end to the conflict, where the FARC and the 
ELN are compelled to the bargaining table.  
Looking at the evolution of the FARC and ELN, the irony of their actions has 
become  evident.  Marx’s  utopian  project  united  the  workers  of  the  world  under  a  
revolutionary strategy and hope that social equality was attainable. Unfortunately, this 
ideal fell far short in application. Lenin and Stalin found the dark reality of absolute 
power that comes with the communist ideology and eventually the systems became a 
victim of global isolation and destruction within. While the revolutionary path 
nevertheless seemed plausible to Third World revolutionaries, adaptation necessarily kept 
the movements alive. The FARC and ELN ultimately became players in the global 
capitalist system their movements sought to critique and wanted to destroy. Now their 

 153 
economic livelihoods depend on the capitalist system and their ideologies take a back 
seat to the material conditions of survival.   
The FARC and ELN continually maintain and promote their position as the 
resistance in Colombia against elite exploitation and structural inequalities.  While the 
Colombian government and the elite have tried to improve their image with the public, 
there are still those who believe that the guerrillas have their best interests at heart. The 
only constant in all of these scenarios and conflicts over the years in Colombia is that the 
peasantry and agrarian areas of the country are faced with the violent realities of the 
conflict between the government and the guerrillas.  The tragic reality is that for the 
people philosophically moved to join the FARC and ELN in support of the revolutionary 
cause now see these groups as mere parallel versions of a corrupt government that 
delivers the rhetoric of equality but not the social remedies.  In this way, the FARC and 
the ELN are seen as poor alternatives to the state and have lost significant popular 
support.  Finally, the necessity of survival has altered the ideologies of the FARC and 
ELN to the point where the world sees them as little more than terrorist organizations 
who exploit the people they claim to be fighting for. But that does not seem to deter the 
revolutionary fighters that believe in their cause. 
The research follows the path of resolution to the conflict through understanding 
the FARC and ELN. The only way to strengthen the relationship between the Colombian 
government and its people is through control of the state and social redress of inequalities 
for the masses impoverished. That can never happen with two armed revolutionary 
groups within its borders. The basic goal is to end the conflict, which will also enrich the 
scholarship on revolutionary groups for the purpose of better understanding how to 

 154 
prevent and or deal with them. As seen in this research, the reality of a resolution can be 
attained if the parties involved in the negotiations hold up their end of the agreement. By 
looking at the adaptations of the FARC and ELN, this research was able to provide 
possible alternatives to the futures of the FARC and ELN, in the hopes of working toward 
a viable resolution to the Colombian conflict. This research also helps advance the 
understanding of Marxist revolutionary movements in general and how the ideas of an 
important nineteenth century philosopher continues to impact the contemporary world.   