25 July 2019
Joint Air Operations
Joint Publication 3-30

 

i 
 PREFACE 
 
1.  Scope 
 
This publication provides fundamental principles and guidance for the conduct of joint 
air operations.  It addresses considerations to form and establish a joint force air component 
with a designated joint force air component commander and provi des principles and 
guidance to plan, execute, and assess joint air operations acro ss the range of military 
operations. 
 
2.  Purpose 
 
This publication has been prepared under the direction of the C hairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff (CJCS).  It sets forth joint doctrine to govern the activities and performance 
of the Armed Forces of the United States in joint operations, and it provides considerations 
for military interaction with governmental and nongovernmental agencies, multinational 
forces, and other interorganizational partners.  It provides military guidance for the exercise 
of authority by combatant commanders and other joint force comm anders (JFCs), and 
prescribes joint doctrine for operations and training.  It provides military guidance for use 
by the Armed Forces in preparing and executing their plans and orders.  It is not the intent 
of this publication to restrict the authority of the JFC from o rganizing the force and 
executing the mission in a manner the JFC deems most appropriate to ensure unity of effort 
in the accomplishment of objectives.  
 
3.  Application 
 
a.  Joint doctrine established in this publication applies to the Joint Staff, commanders 
of combatant commands, subordinate unified commands, joint task  forces, subordinate 
components of these commands, th e Services, the National Guard Bureau, and combat 
support agencies. 
 
b.  This doctrine constitutes official advice concerning the en closed subject matter; 
however, the judgment of the commander is paramount in all situations. 
 
c.  If conflicts arise between the contents of this publication and the contents of Service 
publications, this publication wi ll take precedence unless the CJCS, normally in 
coordination with the other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has provided more current 
and specific guidance.  Commanders of forces operating as part of a multinational (alliance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Preface 
ii JP 3-30 
or coalition) military command should follow multinational doct rine and procedures 
ratified by the United States.  For doctrine and procedures not ratified by the United States, 
commanders should evaluate and follow the multinational command ’s doctrine and 
procedures, where applicable and consistent with US law, regulations, and doctrine. 
 
For the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: 
 
 
 
 
 DANIEL J. O’DONOHUE 
 Lieutenant General, USMC 
 Director, Joint Force Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
iii 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES 
REVISION OF JOINT PUBLICATION 3-30 
DATED 10 FEBRUARY 2014 
 
• Changes the title to remove “Command and Control” and updates the scope. 
 
• Corrects terminology on coordination measures for airspace control. 
 
• Updates the area air defense commander responsibilities. 
 
• U p d a t e s  t h e  f i g u r e  f o r  t h e  T h e a t e r  A i r  C o n t r o l  S y s t e m :  A r m y  A i r-Ground 
System. 
 
• Adds a description of the technique of using an “integrated air tasking order.” 
 
• Changes the process title to “joint planning process for air” t o align with the 
joint planning process. 
 
• Updates and aligns the description of joint targeting entities and processes. 
 
• Expands the discussion of the process for the assessment of joint air operations. 
 
• Updates the discussion of the employment of unmanned aircraft s ystems 
(UASs), to include considerations for countering enemy UASs. 
 
• Adds a discussion of considerations and integration of cyberspace operations. 
 
• Adds a description of the roles and responsibilities for space and cyberspace 
liaisons within the joint air operations center. 
 
  

Summary of Changes 
iv JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 
 

 
v 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................... ix 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 General ........................................................................................................................ I-1 
 Organization of Forces ................................................................................................ I-2 
 Joint Air Operations .................................................................................................... I-3 
 
CHAPTER II 
COMMAND AND CONTROL OF JOINT AIR OPERATIONS 
 
Section A.  Establishing Command and Control 
 Joint Force Commander .............................................................................................II-1 
 Joint Force Air Component Commander ...................................................................II-2 
 Airspace Control Authority ........................................................................................II-4 
 Area Air Defense Commander ...................................................................................II-6 
 
Section B.  Exercising Command and Control 
 Joint Air Operations Command and Control System ................................................II-8 
 Joint Force Air Component Command Organization ..............................................II-14 
 Joint Force Staff Options .........................................................................................II-21 
 Liaisons ....................................................................................................................II-22 
 Joint Force Air Component Commander Basing and Transition.............................II-23 
 Communications System .........................................................................................II-25 
 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations for Defense Support 
of Civil Authorities and Homeland Defense ............................................................II-26 
 
CHAPTER III 
PLANNING AND EXECUTING JOINT AIR OPERATIONS 
 
Section A.  Planning and Executing Joint Air Operations 
 Joint Air Operations Planning .................................................................................. III-1 
 The Joint Air Estimate ............................................................................................. III-1 
 The Joint Planning Process for Air .......................................................................... III-2 
 Joint Targeting ....................................................................................................... III-16 
 The Targeting Effects Team .................................................................................. III-18 
 The Joint Air Tasking Cycle .................................................................................. III-19 
 
Section B.  Other Considerations 
 Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Considerations ........................... III-27 
 Air Mobility Considerations .................................................................................. III-28 
 Unmanned Aircraft Systems Considerations ......................................................... III-30 
 Personnel Recovery Considerations ...................................................................... III-34 

Table of Contents 
vi JP 3-30 
 Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Environments .......................... III-35 
 Operations Near International Borders .................................................................. III-35 
 Command and Control of Space Forces ................................................................ III-35 
 Integration of Cyberspace Operations and Considerations .................................... III-36 
 Air Operations in Maritime Surface Warfare ........................................................ III-36 
 
APPENDIX 
 
A  Sample Mission Statement and Commander’s Intent ............ ................... A-1 
B  Joint Air Estimate of the Situation Template ............... ..............................B-1 
C  Joint Air Operations Plan Template ......................... ..................................C-1 
D  Air Operations Directive Template .......................... ................................. D-1 
E  Joint Air Operations Center Divisions and Descriptions ........................... E-1 
F  Liaison Elements Within the J oint Air Operations Center ......................... F-1 
G  The Joint Air Component Coordination Element ............... ...................... G-1 
H  Points of Contact .......................................... ............................................. H-1 
J  References ................................................. .................................................. J-1 
K  Administrative Instructions ................................ ....................................... K-1 
 
GLOSSARY 
 
Part I Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Initialisms ............... ............................... GL-1 
Part II Terms and Definitions ................................. ............................................ GL-6 
 
FIGURE 
 
II-1  Airspace Control Procedures Objectives .................. ..................................II-4 
II-2  Methods of Airspace Control ............................. ........................................II-5 
II-3  Key Air Force and Army Com ponents of the Theater Air 
  Control System:  Army Air-Ground System ..................... .......................II-11 
III-1 Joint Air Operations Planning ........................... ....................................... III-2 
III-2 Joint Air Estimate ...................................... ............................................... III-3 
III-3 Example Subject Matter Expertise for Joint Air Planning . ...................... III-4 
III-4 Joint Planning Process fo r Air Inputs, Steps, Outputs ............................. III-5 
III-5 Sample Joint Force Air Component Commander’s 
  Mission Statement ........................................... ......................................... III-6 
III-6 Sample Joint Force Ai r Component Commander’s  
  Intent Statement ............................................ ............................................ III-7 
III-7 Linking Objectives, Eff ects, and Tasks Examples ................................. III-11 
III-8 Combat Support Considerations ............................................................. III-12 
III-9 Risk Management:  Combat Support Factors ................ ........................ III-13 
III-10 Risk Management:  Operational Factors .................. .............................. III-13 
III-11 Joint Force Air Component Commander Air Tasking 
  Process Responsibilities .................................... ..................................... III-20 
III-12 Joint Air Operations Cente r Air Tasking Order Battle Rhythm ............. III-21 
III-13 Joint Air Tasking Cycle ................................ .......................................... III-22 

 Table of Contents 
vii 
III-14 Unmanned Aircraft Syste ms Categorization Chart ................................ III-31 
E-1  Joint Force Air Component Commander Staff and Joint Air 
  Operations Center organization .............................. .................................... E-2 
G-1  Structure for Joint Force  Air Component Commander Internal to a 
  Joint Task Force ............................................ ............................................ G-2 
G-2  Structure for Joint Force  Air Component Commander External 
  to a Joint Task Force ....................................... .......................................... G-4 
  

Table of Contents 
viii JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 

 
ix 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
COMMANDER’S OVERVIEW 
 
• Discusses options for the joint force commander to organize for ces for joint 
air operations. 
• Describes the duties of the joint force air component commander. 
• Discusses methods to establish and exercise command and control of joint air 
operations. 
• Outlines how to develop the joint air estimate, the joint plann ing process for 
air, joint targeting considerations, and the joint air tasking cycle. 
 
Introduction 
 
 Although the joint force commander (JFC) has several 
organizational options for command and control (C2) of 
joint air operations, a joint force air component 
commander (JFACC) is often the first option for 
consideration.  
 
Control of the Air In the air, the degree of control can range from no 
control, to a parity (or neutral) situation wherein neither 
adversary can claim any level of control over the other, 
to local air superiority in a specific area, to air 
supremacy over the entire operational area.  Control may 
vary over time.  It is important to remember, the degree 
of control of the air lies within a spectrum that can be 
enjoyed by any combatant.  Likewise, that degree of 
control can be localized ge ographically (horizontally 
and vertically) or defined i n the context of an entire 
theater.  The desired degree of control will be at the 
direction of the JFC and based on the JFC’s concept of 
operations (CONOPS) and will  typically be an initial 
priority objective of joint air operations. 
 
Organization of Forces A JFC has three basic organizational options for C2 of 
joint air operations: designate a JFACC, designate a 
Service component commander, or retain C2 within the 
JFC’s headquarters.  In each case, effectively and 
efficiently organizing the staff, C2 systems, and 
subordinate forces that will plan, execute, and assess 
joint air operations is key.   Factors impacting selection 
of each option may include the overall mission, forces 
available, the ability to C2, and the desired span of 
control.  
  

Executive Summary 
x JP 3-30 
Joint Air Operations Joint air operations are performed by forces made 
available for joint air tasking.  Joint air operations do not 
include those air operations that a component conducts 
as an integral and organic part of its own operations.  
Though missions vary widely within the operational 
environment and across the range of military operations, 
the framework and process for the conduct of joint air 
operations should be consistent. 
 
 Joint air operations are normally conducted using 
centralized control and decentralized execution to 
achieve effective control and foster initiative, 
responsiveness, and flexibility.   
 
Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
 
Joint Force Commander The JFC establishes subor dinate commands, assigns 
responsibilities, establishes  or delegates appropriate 
command relationships, and establishes coordinating 
instructions for subordinate commanders.   
 
 When contemplating C2 options for joint air operations 
within the operational area,  t h e  J F C  c a n  c h o o s e  t o  
exercise C2 through a functional component commander 
by designating a JFACC, one of the Service component 
commanders, or the joint force staff.  Many factors will 
weigh on the JFC’s selection—most notably the type 
and availability of forces and capabilities to accomplish 
the assigned mission.   
 
Joint Force Air Component 
Commander (JFACC) 
The JFC normally designates a JFACC  to establish 
unity of command and unity of effort for joint air 
operations.  T h e  J F C  w i l l  n o r m a l l y  a s s i g n  J F A C C  
responsibilities to the component commander having the 
preponderance of forces to be  tasked and the ability to 
effectively plan, task, and control joint air operations.  
However, the JFC will always  consider the mission, 
nature, and duration of the operation, force 
capabilities, and  the C2 capabilities in selecting a 
commander. 
 
 The responsibilities of the JFACC are assigned by the 
JFC.  These include, but are not limited to: 
 

 Executive Summary 
xi 
 Develop a joint air operations plan (JAOP) in 
coordination with the other Service and 
functional components. 
 
 Recommend air apportionment priorities to  
the JFC. 
 
 Allocate and task the j oint air capabilities and 
forces made available by the Service components 
based on the JFC’s air apportionment decision. 
 
 Provide the JFACC’s guidance in the air 
operations directive. 
 
 Provide oversight and guidance during execution 
of joint air operations. 
 
 Assess the results of joint air operations. 
 
 Perform the duties of the airspace control 
authority (ACA), if designated. 
 
 Perform the duties of the area air defense 
commander (AADC), if designated. 
 
 Perform the duties of the space coordinating 
authority, if designated. 
 
 Perform the duties of the personnel recovery 
coordinator, as required. 
 
Airspace Control Authority The ACA is a commander designated by the JFC to 
assume overall responsibility for the operation of the 
airspace control system (ACS) in the airspace control 
area.  Developed by the ACA and approved by the JFC, 
the airspace control plan establishes general guidance 
for the control of airspace and procedures for the ACS 
for the joint force operational area.  The airspace control 
order implements specific control procedures for 
established time periods.  It defines and establishes 
airspace for military operations as coordinated by the 
ACA and notifies all agencies of the effective time of 
activation and the structure of the airspace. 
 
Area Air Defense 
Commander 
T h e  A A D C  i s  r e s p o n s i b l e  f o r  d e f e n s i v e  c o u n t e r a i r  
(DCA) operations, which  include the integrated air 

Executive Summary 
xii JP 3-30 
defense system for the joint operations area.  DCA 
and offensive counterair operations combine as the 
counterair mission, which is designed to attain and 
maintain the degree of control of the air and protection 
desired by the JFC.  In coordination with the component 
commanders, the AADC develops, integrates, and 
distributes a JFC-approved joint area air defense plan.  
  
Joint Air Operations 
Command and Control 
System 
Normally, the joint air operation C2 system will be built 
around the C2 system of the Service component 
commander designated as the JFACC.  Each Service 
component has an organic system designed for C2 of 
their air operations.  Whether it is the Air Force’s theater 
air control system (TACS), the Army air-ground system 
(AAGS), the Navy’s composite warfare commander 
(CWC)/Navy tactical air control system (NTACS), 
Marine air command and cont rol system (MACCS), or 
the special operations air-ground system (SOAGS) that 
serves as the nucleus for C2 of joint air operations, the 
remainder will be integrated to best support the  
JFC’s CONOPS. 
 
 Theater Air-Ground System (TAGS).  When all 
elements of the TACS, AAGS, CWC/NTACS, MACCS 
with fire support coordina tion center hierarchy, and 
SOAGS integrate, the entire system is labeled  
the TAGS.   
 
Joint Force Air Component 
Command Organization 
The JFACC should establish a close working 
relationship with the JFC to advise on the optimum use 
of joint air power.  This working relationship should 
extend through the JFC and JFACC staffs, as well as the 
other component staffs that play a crucial role in 
supporting the JFC with air capabilities.  The JFACC 
will normally operate from a joint air operations center 
(JAOC).  The JAOC and the JFACC’s staff should be 
manned with subject matter experts who reflect the 
capabilities/forces available  to the JFACC for tasking 
and include appropriate component representation.  
  
 JAOC organizations may differ.  Elements that should 
be common to all JAOCs are the strategy division; 
combat plans division; intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance division; ai r mobility division; and 
combat operations division.   
 

 Executive Summary 
xiii 
 Options available during contingency operations to 
establish a joint force air component command include 
designating a JFACC within a subordinate command 
(e.g., JTF or subordinate unified command), designating 
a theater JFACC operating in support of subordinate 
commands, or a combination of a theater and 
subordinate command JFACCs. 
 
Joint Force Staff Option In operations of limited scope, duration, or complexity, 
or in which air operations are a relatively small aspect of 
the overall joint force, the JFC may plan, direct, and 
control joint air operations with the assistance of the 
joint force staff.  In this situ ation, the JFC would retain 
command authority and responsibility and would 
normally request augmentation from appropriate 
components to perform the C2 air function and assist in 
planning and coordinating joint air operations.  In the 
joint force staff option, all previously discussed JFACC 
responsibilities will be accomplished by the joint force 
staff as directed by the JFC.   
 
Liaisons In addition to the JFC and staff, other component 
commanders and their staffs require continuous and 
ready access to the JFACC and the JFACC’s staff.  
Principal means of accomplishing this are through 
personal contact, the esta blished communications and 
information support system, and liaison personnel.  
These liaisons work for their  respective component 
commanders and work with the JFACC and staff.   
 
JFACC Basing and 
Transition 
Procedures for joint air operations are designed to 
exploit the flexibility of air operations to achieve joint 
force objectives while providing support to component 
operations.  Joint air operations scenarios may vary, and 
each scenario requires extensive planning when 
transition of JFACC responsibilities is necessary.  
Basing of the JFACC depends on the nature and scale of 
the operation and may shift as the operation or  
campaign progresses. 
 
Communications System Centralized control and decentralized execution requires 
a robust communications architecture.  Planning should 
anticipate the need for communications in degraded 
environments at all levels and phases of operations  
and include considerati ons for alternate routing, 
redundant systems, use of other systems, protocols, and 

Executive Summary 
xiv JP 3-30 
message standards.  Impair ed/inadequate information 
exchange capability should be anticipated and 
incorporated into risk management considerations 
during air operations planning. 
 
Command and Control of 
Joint Air Operations for 
Defense Support of Civil 
Authorities and Homeland 
Defense 
Commander, United Stat es Northern Command 
(USNORTHCOM), and Commander, United States Indo-
Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM), share the primary 
mission for US homeland defense (HD) and defense 
support of civil authorities (DSCA) within their assigned 
areas of responsibility (AORs).  The Commander, Pacific 
Air Forces, is the JFACC for the USINDOPACOM AOR.  
For US-only HD and DSCA air operations within the 
continental US, the Commander, Air Force North (1st Air 
Force) is designated the JFACC and is dual-hatted as the 
Commander, Continental United States North American 
Aerospace Defense Command Region.  USNORTHCOM 
has established a subordinate unified command, Alaska 
Command, to facilitate opera tions in Alaska.  North 
American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) is the 
bi-national command (Unite d States and Canada) that 
conducts aerospace warning , control, and maritime 
warning in defense of North America.  NORAD is divided 
into three regions: Continental NORAD Region, Alaskan 
NORAD Region, and Canadian NORAD Region.  Each 
region commander is triple-hatted with duties as the 
JFACC, ACA, and AADC for executing DCA missions. 
 
Planning and Executing Joint Air Operations 
 
Joint Air Operations 
Planning 
Planning for joint air operations begins with 
understanding the JFC’s mission and intent.  The JFC’s 
estimate of the operational environment and articulation 
of the objectives needed to accomplish the mission form 
the basis for determining components’ objectives.  The 
JFACC uses the JFC’s mission, commander’s estimate 
and objectives, commander’s intent, CONOPS, and the 
components’ objectives to develop a course of action 
(COA).  When the JFC approves the JFACC’s COA, it 
becomes the basis for more detailed joint air operations 
planning—expressing what, where, and how joint air 
operations will affect the adversary or current situation.  
The JFACC’s daily guidance ensures joint air operations 
effectively support the joint force objectives while 
retaining enough flexibility in execution to adjust to the 
dynamics of military operations. 

 Executive Summary 
xv 
 
The Joint Air Estimate The joint air estimate is often produced as the 
culmination of the COA development and selection 
stages of the joint planning process.  The joint air 
estimate reflects the JFACC’s analysis of the various 
COAs that may be used to accomplish the assigned 
mission(s) and contains the recommendation for the  
best COA.   
 
The Joint Planning Process 
for Air 
The JFACC uses the joint planning process for air (JPPA) 
to develop a JAOP, which guides employment of air 
capabilities and forces made available to accomplish 
missions assigned by the JFC. 
 
 The JFACC uses the entire staff during planning to explore 
the full range of adversary  and friendly COAs and to 
analyze and compare friendly  air capabilities with the 
threat.  The JFACC should en sure planning occurs in a 
collaborative manner with other components.  
  
 The JAOP is the JFC’s plan to integrate and 
coordinate joint air operations  and encompasses air 
capabilities and forces supported by, and in support of, 
other joint force components.  The JFACC’s planners 
should anticipate the need to make changes to plans 
(e.g., sequels or branches) in a dynamic and time-
constrained environment. 
 
 JPPA follows the joint planning process found in Joint 
Publication (JP) 5-0, Joint Planning,  w i t h  s p e c i f i c  
details for joint air operations.  JPPA drives the 
production of the JAOP and supporting plans and orders.  
JPPA is used during planning to produce JAOPs that 
support operation plans or concept plans.  JPPA may 
also be used as part of crisis planning.  It is always tied 
closely to the overall joint planning being done by the 
JFC’s staff and other Service or functional component 
staffs. 
 
 While the steps are presented  in sequential order, work 
on them can be concurrent, sequential, or even recursive.  
Nevertheless, the steps are integrated and the products 
of each step should be checked and verified for 
coherence and consistency: 
 

Executive Summary 
xvi JP 3-30 
 Step 1, Initiation.  Planning is usually initiated 
by direction of a JFC, but the JFACC may 
initiate planning in anticipation of a planning 
requirement not directed by higher authority but 
within the JFACC’s authority. 
 
 Step 2, Mission Analysis.  Mission analysis 
results in the JFACC’s final mission statement 
that describes the joint air component’s essential 
tasks.  It should include the “who, what, when, 
where, and why” for the joint air operation but 
seldom specifies “how.”   
 
 Step 3, COA Development.  COA development 
is based on mission analysis and a creative 
determination of how the mission will be 
accomplished.  The staff develops COAs.  A 
COA represents a potential plan the JFACC 
could implement to accomplish the assigned 
mission.  A ll COAs sh ould m eet the JFACC’s 
intent and accomplish the mission. 
 
 Step 4, COA Analysis and Wargaming.  COA 
analysis involves wargaming each COA 
against the adversary’s most likely and most 
dangerous COAs.   Wargaming is a recorded 
“what if” session of actions and reactions 
designed to visualize the flow of the conflict or 
operation and evaluate each friendly COA in the 
light of adversary adaptation.   
 
 Step 5, COA Comparison.  Comparing air 
COAs against predetermined criteria provides an 
analytical method to identify the best 
employment options for air forces and 
capabilities.  The same method used in JP 5-0, 
Joint Planning, is used in air COA comparison. 
 
 Step 6, COA Approval.  The staff determines the 
best air COA to recommend to the commander.  
The staff presents their recommended air COA 
usually in the form of a briefing.  The air COA is 
identified, adjusted (if required), and selected by 
the JFACC for presentation to the JFC.  Once the 
JFC approves an air COA, the JPPA contributes 
directly to JAOP preparation. 

 Executive Summary 
xvii 
 
 Step 7, Plan or Order Development.   For the 
joint air component, this step concentrates on the 
preparation of the JAOP.  The JAOP details 
how the joint air effort supports the JFC’s 
overall operation or campaign plan.  JAOP 
development is a collaborative effort of the 
JFACC staff, the JFC staff, other joint force and 
Service component staffs, and outside agencies. 
 
Joint Targeting The joint targeting cycle is an iterative process that is not 
time-constrained, and steps may occur concurrently, but 
it provides a helpful framework to describe the steps 
required to successfully conduc t joint targeting.  The 
deliberate and dynamic nature  of the joint targeting 
process is adaptable through all phases of the air tasking 
cycle.  As the situation changes and opportunities arise, 
steps of the joint targeting process can be accomplished 
quickly to create the commander’s desired effects.  
There are six phases to the joint targeting cycle: end 
state and commander’s objectives, target 
development and prioritization, capabilities analysis, 
commander’s decision and force assignment, mission 
planning and force execution, and assessment. 
 
The Joint Air Tasking Cycle The joint air tasking cycle begins with the JFC’s 
objectives, incorporates guidance received during 
JFC and component coordination, and culminates 
with assessment of previous actions.   The air tasking 
order (ATO) articulates the tasking for joint air 
operations for a specific execution timeframe, normally 
24 hours.  The joint air tasking cycle is synchronized 
w i t h  t h e  J F C ’ s  b a t t l e  r h y t h m .   T h e  J A O C  n o r m a l l y  
establishes a 72- to 96-hour  ATO planning cycle.  The 
battle rhythm or daily operations cycle (schedule of 
events) articulates briefings, meetings, and report 
requirements.  It provides suspense for targeting, air 
support requests, friendly order of battle updates, etc., to 
produce the air battle plan that includes the ATO 
message and other products. 
 
 Joint Air Tasking Cycle Stages.   The joint air tasking 
cycle consists of six stages. Unlike the joint targeting 
cycle, the joint air tasking cycle is time-dependent, built 
around finite time periods to plan, prepare for, and 
conduct joint air operations.  There are set suspenses for 

Executive Summary 
xviii JP 3-30 
product inputs and outputs for each stage of the joint air 
tasking cycle: 
 
 Stage 1: Objectives, Effects, and Guidance. 
 
 Stage 2: Target Development. 
 
 Stage 3: Weaponeering and Allocation. 
 
 Stage 4: ATO Production and Dissemination. 
 
 Stage  5:  Execution Planning and Force 
Execution. 
 
 Stage 6: Assessment.  Assessment is performed 
by all levels of the joint force. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
 This publication provides fundamental principles and 
guidance for the conduct of joint air operations.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
I-1 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.  General 
 
a.  This publication provides joint doctrine for the conduct of joint air operations and 
discusses the respons ibilities of a joint force air component c ommander (JFACC).  
Command and control (C2) is established by the joint force comm ander (JFC) through 
command relationships among subordinate commanders as described  in Joint Publication 
(JP) 3-0, Joint Operations.  Although the JFC has several organizational options for C2 of 
joint air operations, a JFACC is often the first option for consideration. 
 
b.  Air Domain.  The air domain is the atmosphere, beginning at the Earth’s su rface, 
extending to the altitude where its effects upon operations bec ome negligible.  While 
domains are useful constructs for visualizing and characterizing the physical environment 
in which operations are conducted (the operational area), the u se of the term “domain” is 
not meant to imply or mandate exclusivity, primacy, or C2 of an y domain.  Specific 
authorities and responsibilities within an operational area are  as specified by the 
appropriate JFC. 
 
c.  Control of the Air.   H i s t o r i c a l l y ,  c o n t r o l  o f  t h e  a i r  h a s  b e e n  a  p r e r e q u i s i t e  t o  
success for modern operations or campaigns because it prevents enemy air and missile 
threats from effectively interfering with operations of friendl y air, land, maritime, space, 
cyberspace, and special operations forces (SOF), facilitating f reedom of action and 
movement.  Dominance of the air cannot be assumed.  In the air, the degree of control can 
range from no control, to a parity (or neutral) situation wherein neither adversary can claim 
any level of control over the other, to local air superiority i n a specific area, to air 
supremacy over the entire operational area.  Control may vary over time.  It is important to 
remember, the degree of control of  the air lies within a spectr um that can be enjoyed by 
any combatant.  Likewise, that degree of control can be localiz ed geographically 
(horizontally and vert ically) or defined in the context of an e ntire theater.  The desired 
degree of control will be at the direction of the JFC and based  on the JFC’s concept of 
operations (CONOPS) and will typically be an initial priority o bjective of joint air 
operations. 
 
d.  Commanders at all levels should consider how space, cyberspace, and information-
related activities can impact the effectiveness and execution of joint air operations.  Proper 
recognition, integration, and pr otection of these force capabil ities during planning and 
execution is essential. 
“The lesson from the last war that stands out clearly above all the others is that 
if you want to go anywhere in modern war, in the air, on the sea, on the land, you 
must have command of the air.” 
 
Fleet Admiral William F. “Bull” Halsey, Jr.,  
Testimony to Congress following WWII 

Chapter I 
I-2 JP 3-30 
2.  Organization of Forces 
 
a.  JFCs organize forces to accomplish missions based on their intent and CONOPS, 
developed in coordination with their component commanders and s upporting 
organizations.  Sound organizati on should provide for unity of command, centralized 
planning and direction, decentralized execution, and flexibility to meet the planned phases 
of the operation.  JFCs provide direction and guidance to subor dinate commanders and 
establish command relationships to enable effective spans of co ntrol, responsiveness, 
tactical flexibility, and protection. 
 
b.  The JFC’s air component should be organized for coordinated action through unity 
of command using the air capabilities of the joint force.  Cent ralized control and 
decentralized execution are key C2 considerations when organizing for joint air operations.  
While JFCs have full authority, within establishing directives, to assign missions, redirect 
efforts, and direct coordination among subordinate commanders, they should allow Service 
tactical and operational groupings, as well as national groupin gs (allies and multinational 
partners as applicable), to generally function as they were designed.  The intent is to meet 
the needs of the JFC while maintaining the tactical and operational integrity of the Service 
organizations. 
 
See JP 3-0, Joint Operations, for further discussion on the organization of joint forces. 
 
c.  A JFC has three basic organiz ational options for C2 of join t air operations: 
designate a JFACC, designate a Service component commander, or retain C2 within the 
JFC’s headquarters.  In each case, effectively and efficiently organizing the staff, C2 
systems, and subordinate forces that will plan, execute, and as sess joint air operations is 
key.  Factors impacting selection of each option may include th e overall mission, forces 
available, the ability to C2, and the desired span of control.   
 
d.  When designated, the JFACC is the commander  within a combatant command 
(CCMD), subordinate unified com mand, or joint task force (JTF) responsible for tasking 
joint air forces, planning and coordinating joint air operation s, or accomplishing such 
operational missions as may be assigned.  The JFACC is given th e authority necessary to 
accomplish missions and tasks assigned by the establishing commander.   
“The inherent flexibility of air power is its greatest asset.  This flexibility makes 
it possible to employ the whole weight of the available air power against 
selected areas in turn; such concentrated use of the air striking force is a battle 
winning factor of the first importance.  Control of available air power must be 
centralized and command must be exercised through the air force commander 
if this inherent flexibility and ability to deliver a decisive blow are to be fully 
exploited.” 
 
Field Manual 100-20, Command and Employment of Air Power, 1943 

 Introduction 
I-3 
See Chapter II, “Command and Control of Join t Air Operations,” for further detailed 
discussion of JFC options for C2 of joint air operations and the roles and responsibilities 
of the JFACC. 
 
3.  Joint Air Operations 
 
a.  Joint air operations are performed by forces made available  for joint air tasking.  
Joint air operations do not include those air operations that a  component conducts as an 
integral and organic part of its own operations.  Though missio ns vary widely within the 
operational environment and across the range of military operat ions, the framework and 
process for the conduct of joint air operations should be consistent. 
 
b.  Joint air operations are normally conducted using centralized c ontrol and 
decentralized execution to achieve effective control and foster initiative, responsiveness, 
and flexibility.  Centralized control  is giving one commander the responsibility and 
authority for planning, directing, and coordinating a military operation or group/category 
of operations.  Because of air power’s speed, range, flexibility, and generally limited assets, 
centralized control best facilitates the integration of forces for the joint air effort and 
maintains the ability to focus the impact of joint air forces a s needed throughout the 
operational area.  Contested and congested communications pathw ays may require the 
commander to distribute planning  and coordination activities to  subordinate C2 nodes to 
achieve the commander’s objectives.  Decentralized execution  is the delegation of 
execution authority to subordinate commanders.  Decentralized e xecution is essential to 
generate the required tempo of operations and to cope with the uncertainty, disorder, and 
fluidity of combat in air operations. 
 
(1)  Mission command  is the conduct of military operations through 
decentralized execution based upon mission-type orders and is a key component of the C2 
function.  Commanders delegate decisions to subordinates wherev er possible, which 
minimizes detailed control and empowers subordinates’ initiative to make decisions based 
on the commander’s guidance rather  than constant communications .  While 
philosophically consistent with historical C2 of air operations, modern joint air operations 
demand a balanced approach to C2.  This approach is best codifi ed in centralized control 
and decentralized execution. 
 
(2)  Factors such as mission requirements, air capabilities, te mpo, and scale of 
operations drive the level of centralized control and decentral ized execution required for 
joint air operations.  Close air  support (CAS), personnel recov ery (PR), and support to 
special operations missions typically have a high degree of uncertainty and complexity and, 
therefore, require greater latitude in mission tasking and a hi gher degree of decentralized 
execution.  Large-scale combat operations will also require greater decentralized execution 
to meet the wide range of mission tasking.  Conversely, highly sensitive strike missions 
against long-range strategic targets will generally require a h igher level of detailed 
planning and more centralized control.  Low-intensity and small -scale operations, which 
may include very restrictive rules of engagement (ROE), may als o require a higher level 
of centralized control. 

Chapter I 
I-4 JP 3-30 
(3)  Over-controlling joint air operations can reduce tactical flexibility, taking 
away initiative from operators.  Insufficient guidance may result in failure to capitalize on 
joint force integration or may degrade operational-level flexib ility, such as shifting JFC 
priorities, thus reducing effectiveness.  A balanced approach t o C2 of joint air operations 
using centralized control and decentralized execution can best meet the needs of the JFC. 
 
(4)  Recent advances in technology and communication have provi ded 
commanders with a much greater ability to exercise highly centr alized control and even, 
potentially, centralized execution.  Commanders should be cauti ous in exercising such 
capability except for very limited and highly sensitive missions.  No single commander or 
headquarters can have the necessary situational awareness or ma i n t a i n  t h e  t e m p o  o f  
operations required to effectively execute tactical operations in a highly dynamic combat 
environment. 
 
c.  Because joint air operations for a particular operation or campaign are often 
conducted theater-wide, the JFC will normally delegate some theater-wide authorities and 
responsibilities to the air component.  To ensure proper force integration, all Service and 
functional components should supp ort the development of the joi nt air operations plan 
(JAOP).  This includes adherence to the JFC’s approved guidance  provided by the ROE, 
airspace control plan (ACP), airspace control order (ACO), area air defense plan (AADP), 
and special instructions (SPINS) located in the air tasking order (ATO).  This will greatly 
aid in maximizing combat effectiveness, minimizing the risk of friendly fire incidents and 
collateral damage, assuring deconfliction, and achieving the JFC’s overall objectives. 
 
d.  Joint air operations may be co mplicated by civilian use of airspace and require 
coordination with other United States Government (USG) departme nts and agencies, 
international organizations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and/or integration of 
host nation or multinational air forces.  For example, the requ irements for joint air 
operations may exceed the host nation’s airspace control struct ure and require the joint 
force to establish or augment that structure.  Close coordination, deconfliction, and liaison 
with all participating military, government, and nonmilitary an d non-US entities are 
essential to effect unity of effort in the conduct of joint air  operations.  The civil-military 
operations directorate, if estab lished, in conjunction with the  logistics directorate, can 
directly assist with deconfliction of civil and military transportation systems. 
 
See Chapter III, “Planning and Execution of Joint Air Operations,” for detailed discussion 
of the processes and products for planning and executing joint air operations. 
  

 
II-1 
CHAPTER II 
COMMAND AND CONTROL OF JOINT AIR OPERATIONS 
 
SECTION A.  ESTABLISHING COMMAND AND CONTROL 
 
1.  Joint Force Commander 
 
a.  Authority.  The JFC has the authority to organize both assigned and attached forces 
to best accomplish the assigned mission.  The JFC establishes s ubordinate commands, 
assigns responsibilities, estab lishes or delegates appropriate command relationships, and 
establishes coordinating instructions for subordinate commanders.  When organizing joint 
forces, simplicity and clarity are critical. 
 
b.  C2 Options.  When contemplating C2 options  for joint air operations within  the 
operational area, the JFC can choo se to exercise C2 through a f unctional component 
commander by designating a JFACC, one of the Service component commanders, or the 
joint force staff.  Many factors will weigh on the JFC’s select ion—most notably the type 
and availability of forces and capabilities to accomplish the a ssigned mission.  Other 
factors for consideration in determining which C2 option to use include:  
 
(1)  Span of control is the JFC’s ability to effectively manage the actions of 
subordinates.  Span of control is based on the number of subordinates, number of activities, 
range of weapon systems, force capabilities, and the size and complexity of the operational 
area. 
 
(2)  When joint air operations are the only operations or the duration an d 
scope of air operations a re of a very limited nature,  the JFC may elect to plan, direct, 
and control joint air operations through the joint forces staff. 
 
(3)  Expertise in effective and efficient employment of joint air assets to 
accomplish the JFC’s mission is available.  If the JFC elects to conduct joint air operations 
through the joint force staff, t he staff must be properly manne d and adequately equipped 
with both the personnel expertise and the C2 equipment and processes necessary to direct 
and control the joint air effort. 
 
(4)  If the scope or complexity of the operations is significan t, the JFC should 
consider designating a JFACC.  This provides the JFC time to fo cus on the overall 
operation or campaign vice spending it on directing joint air operations. 
 
c.  Theater-Level Considerations.   The geographic combatant commander (GCC) 
will weigh the operational circumstances and decide if available air forces/capabilities can 
be most effectively employed at the GCC level, the subordinate JFC level, or some 
“If we lose the war in the air, we lose the war and we lose it quickly.” 
 
Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, 1887-1976 

Chapter II 
II-2 JP 3-30 
combination thereof.  This decision requires careful consideration after a thorough dialogue 
among the joint and Service component/force commanders.  Theate r-level considerations 
may also require the GCC to coordinate and conduct cross-area o f responsibility (AOR) 
boundary operations. 
 
2.  Joint Force Air Component Commander 
 
a.  Designation.  The JFC normally designates a JFACC  to establish unity of 
command and unity of effort for joint air operations.   The JFC will normally assign 
JFACC responsibilities to the component commander having the pr eponderance of forces 
to be tasked and the ability to effectively plan, task, and con trol joint air operations.  
However, the JFC will always  consider the mission, nature, and duration of the 
operation, force capabilities, and the C2 capabilities in selecting a commander. 
 
b.  Authority.  The JFC delegates the JFACC the authority necessary to accompli sh 
assigned missions and tasks.  The JFACC will normally exercise tactical control (TACON) 
over forces made available for tasking.  Service component comm anders will normally 
retain operational control (OPCON) over their assigned and attached Service forces.  Since 
the JFC will normally designate one of the Service component commanders as the JFACC, 
the dual-designated Service component commander/JFACC will exer cise OPCON over 
their own Service forces as the Service component commander and  TACON over other 
Services’ forces made available for tasking.  The JFC may also establish support 
relationships between the JFACC and other components to facilit ate operations.  The 
JFACC conducts joint air operations in accordance with  the JFC’s intent and 
CONOPS. 
 
c.  The JFC may designate the JFACC as the supported commander for strategic 
attack; air interdiction; PR; a nd airborne intelligence, survei llance, and reconnaissance 
(ISR) (among other missions).  As such, the JFACC is responsible to the JFC for planning, 
coordinating, executing, and assessing these missions.  Other component commanders may 
support the JFACC in accomplishing these missions, subject to t he demands of their own 
JFC-assigned missions or as explicitly directed by the JFC.  No rmally, the JFACC is the 
supported commander for the JFC’s overall air interdiction effort and the land and maritime 
forces commanders are supported commanders for interdiction in their designated area of 
operations (AO) and have the autho rity to designate target prio rity, effects, and timing of 
fires within their AOs. 
 
d.  Responsibilities.  The responsibilities of the JFACC are assigned by the JFC.  
These include, but are not limited to:  
 
(1)  Develop a JAOP in coordination with the other Service and functional 
components to best support the JFC’s CONOPS or operation plan (OPLAN) (see example 
in Appendix C, “Joint Air Operations Plan Template”). 
(2)  Recommend air apportionment priorities to the JFC that should be 
devoted to the various air operations for a given period of time, after considering objective, 
priority, or other criteria and consulting with other component commanders. 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-3 
(3)  Allocate and task the joint air capabilities and forces made available by the 
Service components based on the JFC’s air apportionment decision. 
 
(4)  Provide the JFACC’s guidance in the air operations directive (AOD) for the 
use of joint air capabilities for a specified period that is used throughout the planning stages 
of the joint air tasking cycle and the execution of the ATO.  T he AOD may include the 
JFC’s apportionment decision, the JFACC’s intent, objectives, weight of effort, and other 
detailed planning guidance that includes priority of joint air support to JFC and other 
component operations (see Appendix D, “Air Operations Directive Template”). 
 
(5)  Provide oversight and guidance during execution of joint air operations, 
to include making timely adjustments to taskings of available joint air forces.  The JFACC 
coordinates with the JFC and affected component commanders, as appropriate, or when 
the situation requires changes to planned joint air operations. 
 
(6)  Assess the results of joint air operations and forward assessments to the 
JFC to support the overall assessment effort. 
 
(7)  Perform the duties of the airspace control authority (ACA), if designated. 
 
For further detailed discussion of the ACA, see JP 3-52, Joint Airspace Control. 
 
(8)  Perform the duties of the  area air defense commander (AADC),  i f  
designated. 
 
For more information on the AADC, see JP 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats. 
 
(9)  Perform the duties of the space coordinating authority (SCA), if designated.  
The SCA is responsible for planning, integrating, and coordinat ing space operations 
support in the operational area, to include ascertaining space requirements within the joint 
force.  If the individual design ated to be the JFACC is also de signated the SCA, the 
individual will normally designate a senior subject matter expe rt, typically the director of 
space forces (if the commander, Air Force forces [COMAFFOR], is the JFACC) to execute 
the daily actions associated with SCA.  SCAs for a joint force will normally coordinate 
their requirements for space effects with the CCMD SCA (if established) or United States 
Strategic Command’s (USSTRATCOM’s) Joint Force Space Component Command. 
 
For further detailed discussion of the SCA, see JP 3-14, Space Operations. 
 
(10)  Perform the duties of the PR coordinator, as required. 
 
For further detailed discussion of PR, see JP 3-50, Personnel Recovery. 
 
(11)  In concert with the above responsibilities, perform tasks  within various 
mission areas to include, but not limited to: 
(a)  Defensive counterair (DCA) and offensive counterair (OCA). 

Chapter II 
II-4 JP 3-30 
(b)  CAS. 
 
(c)  Airborne ISR and incident awareness and assessment. 
 
(d)  Air mobility operations. 
 
(e)  Strategic attack. 
 
(f)  Air interdiction. 
 
3.  Airspace Control Authority 
 
a.  The ACA is a commander designated by the JFC to assume over all responsibility 
for the operation of the airspace control system (ACS) in the a irspace control area.  
Developed by the ACA and approved by the JFC, the ACP establish es general guidance 
for the control of airspace and procedures for the ACS for the joint force operational area 
(see Figure II-1).  The ACO implements specific control procedu res for established time 
periods.  It defines and establishes airspace for military oper ations as coordinated by the 
ACA and notifies all agencies of the effective time of activati on and the structure of the 
airspace.  The ACO is normally pub lished either as part of the ATO or as a separate  
document and provides the details of the approved requests for coordination measures such 
as airspace coordinating measures, air defense measures, and fi re support coordination 
measures (FSCMs).  All air missions are subject to the ACO and the ACP.  The ACO and 
ACP provide direction to integrate , coordinate, and deconflict the use of airspace within 
the operational area.  (Note: This does not imply any level of command authority over any 
air assets.)  Methods of airspace control vary by military oper ation and level of conflict 
from positive control of all air assets in an airspace control area to procedural control of all 
such assets or any effective combination (see Figure II-2).   
 
b.  Airspace Control Considerations.  Airspace control is provided to reduce the risk 
of friendly fire incidents, enhance air defense operations, and permit greater flexibility of 
operations.  The JFC will determine the degree of airspace cont rol required in the joint 
operations area (JOA).  Depending on the mission, ROE, and weapons engagement zones, 
the degree of control of air assets may need to be rigorous, close, and restrictive, especially 
 
Figure II-1.  Airspace Control Procedures Objectives 
Airspace Control Procedures Objectives
 Enhance effectiveness in accomplishing the joint force commander’s objectives.
 Prevent mutual interference.
Facilitate air defense identification.
Safely accommodate and expedite the flow of all air traffic in the operational area.
Prevent friendly fire incidents.




 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-5 
in an operational environment that can transition quickly from combat to noncombat and 
back again.  
 
(1)  Airspace control may requir e a combination of positive con trol, procedural 
control, and real-time joint battl e management to control the o perational activity of the 
joint force including strict constraints on the forces, weapons , and tactics employed.  
Additionally, airspace control planning should include continge ncy plans to mitigate 
potential interference.  Such interference, whether intentional or unintentional, may inhibit 
positive control.  In such a scenario, procedural control measu res should be used, such as 
setting a coordinating altitude for designated airspace in the JOA.  No matter what methods 
the JFC chooses, the methods need to be continually evaluated f or effectiveness and 
efficiency as the environment and mission change.   
 
(2)  As a matter of controlling joint air operations, the JFC m ay require all air 
missions, including fixed-wing, rotary-wing, tiltrotor, and unmanned aircraft systems 
(UASs) (except Group 1 and 2 systems, unless their planned operating altitude would 
conflict with other airborne operations), to appear on the appr opriate ATO and/or 
flight plan.  Also, all aircrew and unmanned aircraft (UA) operators adhere  to approved 
operational procedures.  Typically, these procedures are promulgated by the JFACC in the 
SPINS annex of the ATO.  The mix of friendly, adversary, and neutral aircraft and mission 
constraints may require the JFC t o strictly control flights in the operational area.  In such 
situations, the JFACC may elect t o augment forward theater air- ground system (TAGS) 
elements with additional planning personnel, training, and capabilities. 
 
c.  ACA Responsibilities.  The ACA achieves airspace control through positive or 
procedural methods.  This includes centralized direction of the ACP, with the authority of 
the ACOs, supplemented by coordination measures, and coupled with an ACS.  The ACA 
should coordinate with joint for ce components’ liaisons prior t o commencement of 
 
Figure II-2.  Methods of Airspace Control  
Methods of Airspace Control
Positive Control Procedural Control
Positively identifies, tracks, and 
directs air assets using:
Radars
Other sensors
Identification, friend or foe
Selective identification feature
Digital data links
Other elements of the 
communications system






Relies on previously agreed to and 
distributed control procedures and 
measures such as:
Comprehensive air defense 
identification procedures and rules of 
engagement
Airspace coordinating measures
Aircraft identification maneuvers
Fire support coordination measures
Maneuver control measures
Communications between aircraft and 
airspace control elements







Chapter II 
II-6 JP 3-30 
operations.  The ACA integrates and  coordinate the airspace requirements of all the 
components.  The ACA does not have the autho rity to approve or disapprove co mbat 
operations.  That authority is only vested in operational comma nders.  The ACA assumes 
responsibility for the ACS in the designated operational area.  Subject to the authority and 
approval of the JFC, the broad responsibilities of the ACA include: 
 
(1)  Coordinate and integrate the use of the airspace control area. 
 
(2)  Develop broad policies and procedures for airspace control  and for the 
coordination required among all users of airspace within the airspace control area. 
 
(3)  Establish an ACS that provides for integration of host and  o t h e r  a f f e c t e d  
nations’ constraints and requirements. 
 
(4)  Coordinate and deconflict airspace control area user requirements. 
 
(5)  Promulgate ACS policies and procedures via the JFC-approved ACP. 
 
d.  A key responsibility of the ACA is to provide the flexibility needed within the ACS 
to meet contingency situations that necessitate rapid employmen t of forces, as well as 
dynamic changes made by component staffs.  The ACO is published  either as part of the 
ATO or as a separate document. 
 
For further detailed discussion of the ACA, see JP 3-52, Joint Airspace Control. 
 
4.  Area Air Defense Commander 
 
a.  The AADC is responsible for DCA operations, which  include the integrated 
air defense system for the JOA.  DCA and OCA operations combine as the counterair 
mission, which is designed to attain and maintain the degree of  control of the air and 
protection desired by the JFC.  In coordination with the compon ent commanders, the 
AADC develops, integrates, and distributes a JFC-approved joint  AADP.  Typically, for 
forces made available for DCA, the AADC retains TACON of air so rties, while surface-
based air and missile defense forces (e.g., Patriot missile sys tems) may be provided in 
support from another component commander.  As such, the Army ai r and missile defense 
command (AAMDC) should be collocated with the joint air operati ons center (JAOC), if 
established, and conduct collabora tive intelligence preparation  of the battlespace (IPB), 
planning, and execution control.  In distributed operations, the AAMDC may not be in the 
JAOC but is still functionally tied to it.  The Navy component commander (NCC) (or joint 
force maritime component commander [JFMCC], if designated) exer cises OPCON of 
maritime multi-mission and missile defense ships.  When designated, these air and missile 
defense capabilities are in direct support of the AADC for C2 and execution of air defense. 
 
b.  Area Air Defense Considerations.  DCA operations  are integrated with other 
air operations within the operational area through the AADP .  The AADC normally 
develops an integrated air defense system by integrating the ca pabilities of different 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-7 
components with a robust C2 architecture.  Because of their time-sensitive nature, DCA 
operations require streamlined coordination and decision-making processes,  
facilitated by the  AADP.  The AADP is the integration of active air defense design, 
passive defense measures, and the C2 system to provide a compre hensive approach to 
defending against the threat.  It should address command relationships, the adversary and 
friendly situations, the AADC’s intent, CONOPS, and logistics a nd C2 requirements, as 
well as detailed weapons control and engagement procedures.  Weapons control procedures 
and airspace control procedures for all air defense weapon syst ems and forces must be 
established.  These procedures facilitate DCA operations while minimizing the risk of 
friendly fire incidents.  Planners will routinely be required to modify the AADP due to the 
dynamic nature of joint counterair operations.  The AADP should  also be integrated with 
the ACP to ensure airspace control areas/sectors are synchroniz e d  w i t h  a i r  d e f e n s e  
regions/sectors.  Ideally, as t he JFC’s operation/campaign prog resses and the AADP is 
refined, the combination of DCA and OCA operations should diminish the enemy’s ability 
to conduct air and missile attacks, reducing the requirement fo r DCA operations and the 
threat to the JFC’s freedom of action. 
 
c.  AADC responsibilities  include the planning, inte gration, synchronization, and 
coordination of DCA operations wit h other tactical operations t hroughout the JOA.  This 
may be facilitated by the JFC’s designation of regional and sector air defense commanders 
to enhance decentralized execution of DCA.  Additional AADC responsibilities include: 
 
(1)  Develop, integrate, and di stribute a JFC-approved AADP in coordination 
with Service and functional components. 
 
(2)  Appoint a deputy AADC, as re quired, to advise on how to in tegrate and 
synchronize Service component DCA capabilities and assets. 
 
(3)  Develop and execute a detailed plan to disseminate timely air and missile 
warning and cueing information to components, forces, multinati onal partners, and civil 
authorities, as appropriate, in coordination with the intelligence directorate of a joint staff 
(J-2), the operations directorate of a joint staff (J-3), and t he communications system 
directorate of a joint staff. 
 
(4)  Develop and implement identification and engagement proced ures that are 
appropriate to the air and missile threats. 
 
(5)  Establish timely and accurate track reporting procedures among participating 
units to provide a consistent common tactical picture. 
 
(6)  Make DCA recommendations after consultation with DCA repre sentatives 
from the joint force components. 
 
(7)  Make OCA attack operations recommendations to help counter  the air and 
missile threat. 
For further detailed discussion, see JP 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats. 

Chapter II 
II-8 JP 3-30 
SECTION B.  EXERCISING COMMAND AND CONTROL 
 
5.  Joint Air Operations Command and Control System 
 
a.  Joint Air Operations C2 System.  The C2 system for joint air operations will vary 
depending on the operational area and specific missions.  Given  the flexibility of modern 
C2 capabilities, geographic considerations have less of an impa ct on organizational 
structure today than in the past.  The entire C2 system may be spread across the operational 
area or concentrated in a specific location, either in close proximity to the fight or far from 
it.  Ultimately, there is no standard template for C2 design. 
 
(1)  Normally, the joint air operation C2 system will be built around the C2 system 
of the Service component commander designated as the JFACC.  Each Service component 
has an organic system designed for C2 of their air operations.  Whether it is the Air Force’s 
theater air control system (TACS ), the Army air-ground system ( AAGS), the Navy’s 
composite warfare commander (CWC)/Navy tactical air control system (NTACS), Marine 
air command and control system (MACCS), or the special operatio ns air-ground system 
(SOAGS) that serves as the nucleus for C2 of joint air operatio ns, the remainder will be 
integrated to best support the JFC’s CONOPS. 
 
(2)  TAGS.  When all elements of the TACS, AAGS, CWC/NTACS, MACCS 
with fire support coordination center hierarchy, and SOAGS integrate, the entire system is 
labeled the TAGS.  Technology has improved the JFACC’s ability to C2 joint air 
operations.  The speed of modern warfare and the precision of t oday’s weapons dictate 
close coordination in the operational area among the JFC’s comp onents.  The JFACC 
ensures the C2 architecture supports joint air operations by primarily relying upon assigned 
subordinate C2 elements (e.g., Air Force forces TACS).  Other T AGS elements may be 
made available for tasking to enhance C2 of joint air operation s if required.  The other 
components’ elements facilitate C2 of their component’s operati ons as an integrated part 
of the TAGS and do not receive d irections/tasking directly from  t h e  J F A C C  o r  J A O C  
unless made available to support/augment the JFACC’s ability to C2 joint air operations or 
accomplish other JFC delegated authorities.  TAGS elements role s, responsibilities, and 
authorities should be clearly spe lled out in theater-wide docum ents such as the AADP, 
ACP, SPINS, etc., particularly when tasks exceed their componen t commander’s normal 
scope of operations. 
 
b.  Air Force 
 
(1)  The COMAFFOR uses TACS to C2 component air and space operations.  It 
consists of airborne and ground elements to conduct t a i l o r e d  C 2  o f  a i r  a n d  s p a c e  
operations during military operations,  including air defense, airspace control, and 
coordination of space mission support not resident within theat er.  The structure of the 
TACS should reflect sensor cove rage, component liaison elements , and the 
communications systems required to provide adequate support.  A s an organic Air Force 
system, elements of the TACS remain under OPCON of the COMAFFOR .   I n  

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-9 
multinational commands, the name and function of certain TACS e lements may differ; 
however, multinational air components have similar capabilities. 
 
(2)  The air operations center (AOC) is the senior C2 element of the  TACS 
and includes personnel and equi pment of necessary disciplines t o ensure the effective 
planning and conduct of component air and space operations (e.g ., communications, 
operations, ISR).  The AOC is designed to expand with joint aug mentation to form the 
JAOC when the COMAFFOR is designated by the JFC as the JFACC. 
 
(3)  Air Support Operations Center (ASOC).  The ASOC is the primary control 
agency of the TACS for execution of air operations in direct su pport of land operations.  
Its primary mission is to control air operations short of the f ire support coordination line 
(FSCL) or in its assigned area.  Normally collocated with the s enior Army fires element, 
the ASOC coordinates and directs air support for land forces.  The ASOC is directly 
subordinate to the AOC and is responsible for the coordination and control of air 
component missions in its assigned area. 
 
(a)  The tactical air control party (TACP) is an air liaison unit collocated with 
ground maneuver units.  TACPs are subordinate to the ASOC and h ave two primary 
missions: advise ground commanders on the capabilities and limi tations of air operations 
and provide the joint terminal attack controllers that perform primary control of CAS attack 
aircraft.  A forward air controller (airborne) is an extension of the TACP and is a specially 
trained and qualified aviation officer who exercises control of CAS aircraft while airborne. 
 
(b)  Air Force ASOC and TACP personnel at the Army division will normally 
be integrated with the division fires cell and airspace element  to form a joint air-ground 
integration center, which fully integrates and coordinates fires and air operations over and 
within the division commander’s AO.  
 
(4)  Other elements of the TACS include the control and reporti ng center (CRC) 
and the Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS).  Both prov ide battle 
management, early warning and surveillance, weapons control, and data link management.  
The CRC is a ground-based mobile radar while AWACS is an airbor ne radar system.  
Finally, the joint surveillance target attack radar system is a n airborne, wide-area, 
surveillance, ground-moving target  indicator and synthetic aper ture radar.  It provides 
battle management, early warning, and surveillance of ground ta rgets, weapons control, 
and ISR support.  
 
c.  Army 
 
(1)  AAGS.  The AAGS is the Army’s control system to synchronize, coordinate, 
and integrate air and ground operations with the ground command er’s CONOPS.  AAGS 
provides the framework to initiat e and process air support requ ests (AIRSUPREQs), 
collection requirements, airspace coordination, joint fires, ai r and missile defense, and 
exchange of liaisons.  It is use d to deconflict airspace users (including air and missile 
defense and fires) and other warf ighting functions with the Arm y ground commander’s 

Chapter II 
II-10 JP 3-30 
scheme of maneuver.  The Army depends on its joint partners for  capabilities that do not 
reside within the Army.  Other elements, such as the TACP, ASOC , and air naval gunfire 
liaison company, belong to different Services.  They function a s a single entity to plan, 
coordinate, and integrate air support operations with unified l and operations.  The Army 
and Air Force routinely operate in this capacity, and it is ref erred to as TACS-AAGS (see 
Figure II-3).  
 
(2)  The AAGS provides interface  between Army and air support a gencies of 
other Services to plan, evaluate , process, and coordinate air s upport requirements and 
operations.  Utilizing organic staff members and communications  systems, the AAGS 
works in conjunction with the TACS to coordinate and integrate Air Force and/or joint air 
support with Army maneuver and fires.  Airspace control is also  part of the AAGS.  The 
AAGS helps ground commanders and staffs integrate and synchronize Army airspace users 
with the other airspace users in the operational area.  The Arm y’s application of airspace 
control is to coordinate assigned and supporting airspace user requirements as an integral 
part of the operations process.  Airspace control is an Army co mmander’s responsibility 
and is part of risk management.  Airspace elements are at the s enior Army echelon and 
extend down through all tactical c ommand levels to maneuver uni ts.  Corps/division 
airspace elements are responsible for airspace control within t heir assigned airspace, 
regardless of whether the airspace has been further subdivided.   When a corps/division 
partitions its assigned airspace, subordinate brigades may be d elegated some airspace 
management responsibilities.  The  air defense airspace manageme nt/brigade aviation 
element (ADAM/BAE) cell is located in the brigade combat team.  The ADAM/BAE 
coordinates airspace requirements with higher headquarters as w ell as other affected joint 
forces.  
 
d.  Navy 
 
(1)  The maritime operations center (MOC)  provides the commander 
(numbered fleet commander, NCC, or JFMCC) with a functionally organized staff and C2 
systems, to include collaborative air planning tools such as th e theater battle management 
core system (TBMCS).  Operational-level air planning occurs in the MOC.  The MOC 
conducts planning for naval strike, air interdiction, Tomahawk land attack missile 
operations, naval surface fire support, missile defense, maritime patrol and reconnaissance 
aircraft operations, and PR missi ons.  Maritime ai r operations’ planning is collaborative 
involving the MOC, the JAOC, and Navy task force commanders and  other subordinate 
staffs.  The JFMCC/NCC will typically establish a naval and amp hibious liaison element 
(NALE) to coordinate with the JAOC on matters pertaining to Nav y and Marine 
amphibious, maritime, and air operations and to serve as the MO C’s primary point of 
contact in the AOC.  The NALE director is the JFMCC/NCC’s perso nal representative to 
the JFACC and will act as the interface between the JFMCC/NCC a nd the JFACC.  The 
JFMCC/NCC provides overall opera tional-level guidance and plann ing.  Tactical air 
planning is conducted largely by subordinate forces at sea.   
 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-11 
(2)  CWC doctrine enables the officer in tactical command (OTC) of a naval force 
to conduct combat operations against air, surface, and subsurfa ce threats, while 
contributing to the JFC’s overall operation or campaign.  The O TC (typically the 
JFMCC/NCC in AOs with multiple task forces) may delegate author i t y  t o  a  C W C  t o  
conduct some or all of the offensive and defensive functions of the maritime force.  Critical 
air operations positi ons under the CWC include the strike warfa re commander, air and 
missile defense commander, ACA, and air resource element coordi n a t o r .   T h e  w a r f a r e  
commanders normally exercise TACON over assigned assets.  If there are multiple carrier 
 
Figure II-3.  Theater Air Control System / Army Air-Ground System 
AAMDC Army air and missile defense 
commander
ADA BDE air defense artillery brigade
ADAFCO air defense artillery fire control 
operations
ADAM/BAE air defense airspace 
management/brigade aviation element
AE airspace element
AOC air operations center
ASOC air support operations center
AWACS Airborne Warning and Control System
BCD battlefield coordination detachment
BCT brigade combat team
BN battalion
CP command post
CRC control and reporting center
DIV division
FAC(A) forward air controller (airborne)
FC fires cell
GLD ground liaison detachment
JACCE joint air component coordination element
JAGIC joint air ground integration center
JFACC joint force air component commander
JFC joint force commander
JFLCC joint force land component commander
JOC joint operations center
JSTARS Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar 
System
RLD reconnaissance liaison detachment
TAC(A) tactical air coordinator (airborne)
TACP tactical air control party
TTP tactics, techniques, and procedures
WOC wing operations center
Legend
* NOTE: This depicts a possible arrangement where an Army Corps 
is designated as the senior tactical echelon within the land 
component, and the subordinate division retains division-assigned 
airspace using the JAGIC TTP.
TAC(A)
AWACS
AAMDC
GLD/RLD WOC
DIV
Corps*XX
XXX
BN
II
JSTARS
ADAFCO
FAC(A)
CRC
ADA BDE
Airbases
ADAFCOBCDJACCE
FC
FC
FC
AE
AE
ADAM/
BAE
TACP
TACP
TACP
ASOC
TACP
Theater Air Control System / Army Air-Ground System
Joint Air Request Net
JFC
JFLCC JFACC
JOC
CP AOC
JAGIC
BCT
X
FC

Chapter II 
II-12 JP 3-30 
strike groups, expeditionary str ike groups, and/or amphibious r eady groups operating 
within a maritime AO, more than one CWC may be designated.  
 
(3)  During amphibious operations, NTACS is the Navy system to control and 
coordinate all air operations w ithin an amphibious objective ar ea (AOA) or AO.  Its 
counterpart is the MACCS.  The NTACS comprises the Navy tactica l air control center 
(Navy TACC) and tactical air dir ection center(s).  The Navy TAC C  i s  t h e  p r i m a r y  a i r  
control agency within the amphibious operations area from which  all air operations 
supporting the amphibious task force are controlled.  
 
e.  Marine Corps 
 
(1)  The MACCS consists of various air C2 agencies designed to provide the 
Marine air-ground task force (MAGTF) commander the ability to C2 aviation assets in the 
application of the six functions of Marine aviation: anti-air warfare, offensive air support, 
assault support, electronic warfare, aerial reconnaissance, and  the control of aircraft and 
missiles.  
 
(2)  Marine Tactical Air Command Center (Marine TACC).   T h e  a v i a t i o n  
combat element (ACE) commander exercises air operations authority through the MACCS.  
The Marine TACC is the senior MACCS agency.  It is the operational wing command post 
from which the ACE commander and his staff plan, supervise, coo rdinate, and execute 
MAGTF air operations (this includes the planning and execution o f  a l l  A T O s  a n d  t h e  
execution of the current ACE operation order or fragmentary ord er).  It integrates the six 
functions of Marine aviation with the MAGTF command element through linkage with the 
MAGTF combat operations center and the force fires coordination center/fires and effects 
coordination center.  The Marine TACC provides functional inter face for employment of 
MAGTF aviation in joint and multinational operations.  The Mari ne TACC is similar to 
the Air Force AOC.  The Marine TACC uses subordinate agencies t o facilitate the 
centralized command and decentralized control of the MAGTF’s air assets.  These agencies 
follow: 
 
(a)  Direct Air Support Center (DASC).  T h e  D A S C  i s  t h e  M A C C S ’ s  
principal air control agency res ponsible for the direction of a ir operations directly 
supporting ground forces.  The DASC processes immediate AIRSUPR EQs; coordinates 
aircraft employment with other  supporting arms; manages termina l control assets 
supporting the ground combat eleme nt (GCE) and logistics combat  element forces; and 
procedurally controls assigned aircraft, UASs, and itinerant ai rcraft transiting through 
DASC-controlled airspace.  The DASC controls and directs air support activities that affect 
the GCE commander’s focus on close operations and those air mis sions requiring 
integration with the ground combat forces (CAS, assault support , and designated air 
reconnaissance).  It is similar to the Air Force ASOC. 
 
(b)  Tactical Air Operations Center (TAOC).   The TAOC performs three 
primary functions within the MACCS: air surveillance, air direc tion, and air control.  As 
the MAGTF’s only air surveillance agency, the TAOC uses its org anic radars and tactical 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-13 
data links to create a recognized air picture for the MAGTF, as  well as joint and 
multinational forces.  Management of the air picture is conduct ed through detailed 
coordination with higher and adjacent MAGTF and joint surveilla nce platforms.  This 
s h a r e d  a i r  p i c t u r e  p r o v i d e s  s i t uational awareness and contribut es to force protection 
through its use by a wide variety of C2 systems including missi le defense platforms.  The 
TAOC also performs positive and procedural air control under a variety of delegated air 
direction functions, including coordination and deconfliction of airspace, anti-air warfare, 
tanker management, asset management, routing of itinerant aircr aft, and coordination and 
control of fires in deep areas of the AO and/or JOA.  The TAOC is similar to the Air Force 
CRC.  
 
(c)  Early Warning Center Detachment.   Provides air surveillance and 
control of friendly aircraft and surface-to-air weapons in supp ort of offensive air support 
and anti-air warfare, continuous  all-weather radar, non-radar, airspace management, and 
meteorological and oceanographic services in support of the MAGTF. 
 
(d)  Marine air traffic control (ATC) personnel and equipment p rovide the 
MAGTF a scalable and adaptable means to provide expeditionary airfield services at every 
level of operations.  A fully staffed and equipped Marine ATC d etachment provides all 
weather radar and non-radar appr oach, departure, en route, and tower ATC services to 
friendly aircraft.  It is the principle terminal ATC organization with the MACCS and serves 
as the ATC interface with other military C2 agencies and civili an agencies, to include the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the International Civil Aviation Organization. 
 
f.  Special Operations 
 
(1)  Theater special operations are normally under the control of the commander, 
theater special operations command (TSOC), special operations j oint task force (SOJTF), 
or a joint special operations t ask force (JSOTF).  The commande r of a TSOC may also 
function as the joint force special operations component commander (JFSOCC) for a joint 
force.  The commander of a TSOC or the JFSOCC may designate a joint special operations 
air component commander (JSOACC) to control SOF aviation.  The JSOACC is normally 
for planning and executing joint special operations air activit ies.  If a JSOACC is not 
designated, then SOF aviation is normally controlled by a Servi ce component within the 
joint force special operations command.  The SOAGS serves as th e nucleus for C2 of 
special operations air activities.  Principal organizations and  personnel that support the 
SOAGS are the JSOACC (along with the air component planning staff), special operations 
liaison element (SOLE), special tactics teams, and terminal att ack control special 
operations personnel.  Whether operating autonomously or in con junction with 
conventional forces, special operations must be synchronized and closely coordinated with 
other air operations conducted in  theater.  To coordinate and d econflict operations, the 
JFSOCC and the JFACC exchange liaison teams. 
 
(2)  The SOLE is a team provided by the JFSOCC to the JFACC or appropriate 
Service component air C2 organization to coordinate, deconflict, and synchronize special 
operations air and surface operations with conventional air operations.  The SOLE director 

Chapter II 
II-14 JP 3-30 
works directly for the JFSOCC as a liaison and has no command a uthority for mission 
tasking, planning, and execution.   The SOLE provides coordinati on for the visibility of 
SOF operations in the ATO and the ACO.  The SOLE also coordinat es appropriate 
coordination measures between t he JAOC and the SOF headquarters  to help prevent 
friendly fire incidents. 
 
For more information on the TAGS, see Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 3-52.2 (Field 
Manual [FM] 3-52.2)/Marine Corps Reference Publication (MCRP) 3-25F/Navy Tactics, 
Techniques, and Procedures (NTTP) 3-56.2/Air Force Tactics, Techniques, and 
Procedures (AFTTP) 3-2.17, Multi-Service Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for the 
Theater Air-Ground System. 
 
6.  Joint Force Air Component Command Organization 
 
a.  The JFACC should establish a close working relationship wit h the JFC to advise 
on the optimum use of joint air p ower.  This working relationsh ip should extend through 
the JFC and JFACC staffs, as well as the other component staffs that play a crucial role in 
supporting the JFC with air capabilities.  The JFACC will normally operate from a 
JAOC.  The JAOC and the JFACC’s staff should be manned with subject matter experts 
who reflect the capabilities/forces available to the JFACC for tasking and include 
appropriate component representation.  This representation will  provide the JFACC with 
the knowledge and experience required.  JFACC staff billets req uiring specific expertise 
or individuals should be identified, staffed accordingly, train ed, and employed during 
peacetime exercises to ensure their preparedness for military o perations.  To be most 
effective, the JFACC should incorporate appropriate component representation throughout 
the JAOC and staff, rather than just limiting them to liaison positions. 
 
Note:  The JAOC staff is under the command of the JFACC.  This staff should not be 
confused with organizational liaisons that remain under the com mand of their parent 
organization.  See paragraph 8, “Liaisons,” for more on liaisons to the JAOC. 
 
b.  JAOC Organization.  The JAOC is structured to operate as a fully integrated 
command center and should be staffed by members of all participating components, to 
include key staff positions, to fulfill the JFACC’s responsibilities.  A JAOC provides the 
capability to plan, coordinate, allocate, task, execute, monitor, and assess the activities of 
assigned or attached forces.  Through the JAOC, the JFACC monitors execution of joint air 
operations and directs changes as the situation dictates.  As a synchronizing C2 mechanism 
of the TAGS and focal point for ATO execution, the JAOC should have secure and 
redundant communications with operations, logistics, weather, and intelligence centers and 
higher and lateral headquarters, as well as subordinate units to preclude degradation in its 
ability to control joint air forces.  It should ensure plans an d processes are in place and 
rehearsed to mitigate any degradation in that ability.  
 
(1)  JAOC organizations may differ.  Elements that should be common to all 
JAOCs are the  strategy division (SD); combat p lans division (CPD); intelligen
ce, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance division (ISRD); air mobility division (AMD); and 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-15 
combat operations division (COD).  Divisions, cells, or teams within the JAOC should be 
established as needed (see Appendix E, “Joint Air Operations Ce nter Divisions and 
Descriptions,” for JAOC divisions and descriptions).  The JAOC director is responsible to 
the JFACC for integrating the planning, coordinating, allocatin g, tasking, executing, and 
assessing tasks for all joint air operations.  The JAOC director coordinates with the director 
of mobility forces (DIRMOBFOR) to meet airlift and tanker priorities with support of United 
States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) mobility forces.  Similarly, the JAOC 
director coordinates space operations and space support requests with the SCA and/or US 
Air Force component’s director of space forces.  Planning futur e joint air operations and 
assessing the effectiveness of past operations is usually the responsibility of the SD, while 
the CPD is usually devoted to near-term planning and drafting of the daily ATO.  Execution 
of the daily ATO is carried out by the COD and closely follows the action of current joint 
operations, shifting air missions from their scheduled times or  targets, and making other 
adjustments as the situation requires.  The AMD integrates inte rtheater and intratheater 
airlift, aerial refueling, and aeromedical evacuation (AE) into air plans and tasking orders 
and coordinates with the JFC’s m ovement requirements and contro l authority and Air 
Mobility Command’s 618th Air Operations Center (Tanker Airlift Control Center) (618 
AOC [TACC]).  The ISRD provides the JFACC with predictive and actionable intelligence, 
targeting support, and collection management expertise to support the air tasking cycle.  Each 
of the JAOC’s major activities relies on expertise from liaisons (e.g., battlefield coordination 
detachment [BCD], AAMDC liaison  team, NALE, Air Force liaison e lement [AFLE], 
SOLE, Marine liaison element [MARLE]) to coordinate requests or  requirements and 
maintain a current and relevant picture of the other component operations.  For more on 
liaisons, see Appendix F, “Liaison Elements within the Joint Air Operations Center.” 
 
For further detail on air mobility, see Chapt er III, “Planning and Execution of Joint Air 
Operations,” paragraph 8, “Air Mobility Considerations,” and JP 3-17, Air Mobility 
Operations. 
 
(2)  Functional Area and Mission Experts.   Functional area experts (such as 
force protection, intelligence, meteorological and oceanographic, logistics, legal, airspace, 
plans, and communications personn el) provide the critical exper tise in support, plans, 
execution, and assessment functions.  Mission experts in air-to-air, air-to-ground, ground-
to-air, space operations, cybers pace operations (CO), informati on activities, intelligence, 
air refueling, PR, and other areas provide the technical warfig hting expertise required to 
plan for joint air operations and employ capabilities/forces ma de available by the 
components.  Functional and mission experts from all components  will provide manning 
throughout the JAOC and at all levels of command and may be organized in special teams.  
Reachback capability can be used for technical issues related t o planning, targeting, 
collateral damage estimates, joint intelligence preparation of the operational environment 
(JIPOE), and force protection.  E xamples of organizations that can provide reachback 
support include the Defense Threat Reduction Agency National Co untering Weapons of 
Mass Destruction Technical Reachback Enterprise for weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD) or chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN)
 support and the 
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency for geospatial and national intelligence support. 
 

Chapter II 
II-16 JP 3-30 
(3)  Preparation.  The nucleus of the JFACC’s  staff should be formally 
educated and trained to perform fundamental operational activit ies in joint air 
operations and be representative of the joint  force.  Staff augmentation with manning 
as identified above ensures joi nt representation throughout the  JAOC.  The JFACC, in 
coordination with other component commanders, will determine sp ecific manning 
requirements based on the size and scope of the operation, forc e list, and personnel 
availability. 
 
(4)  The role of intelligence is extremely important and is an integral part of the 
daily functions of the JAOC.  Intelligence personnel monitor an d assess adversary 
capabilities and intentions, especially WMD threats, and provid e assistance in target, 
weapon, fuse, and platform selec tion, including UA recommendati ons, and WMD 
response.  In coordination with the SD’s operational assessment  team, they also conduct 
an assessment of the effectiveness of combat operations and provide an up-to-date picture 
of the enemy, expected enemy operations, and the status and priority of assigned targets to 
assist in execution day changes. 
 
c.  The JFACC may establish one or more joint air component coo rdination elements 
(JACCEs) with other commanders’ headquarters to better integrate joint air operations with 
their operations.  When established, the JACCE is a component-level liaison that serves as 
the direct representative of the JFACC.  The JACCE does not per form any C2 functions 
and the JACCE director does not have command authority over any air forces.  The JACCE 
is established by the JFACC to better integrate with other comp onent’s senior deployed 
headquarters.  JACCE may also be assigned to the supported JTF headquarters (if the 
theater JFACC is designated in s upport to a JTF) to better inte grate air component 
operations within the overall joint force.  When established, t he JACCE acts as the 
JFACC’s primary representative to the respective commander and facilitates interaction 
among the respective staff to communicate, advise, coordinate, and support effective 
integration.  JACCE expertise s hould include plans, operations,  ISR, space, cyberspace, 
airspace management, air mobility, and administrative and communications support. 
 
See Appendix G, “The Joint Air Compone nt Coordination Element,” for JACCE 
responsibilities and notional organization. 
 
d.  Tasking Component Forces 
 
(1)  The JFC directs and controls the joint air effort by providing broad guidance, 
prioritized objectives, targeting priorities, procedures, and a ssigning appropriate 
authorities to subordinate commanders.  Each component commande r may be tasked to 
support other components and/or t o provide support to the joint  force as a whole.  The 
JFACC, in consultation with other component commanders, is resp onsible for the air 
apportionment recommendation to the JFC who makes the air apportionment decision. 
 
(a)  Forces are tasked by the JFACC based on the JFC’s approval  o f  t h e  
JFACC’s air apportionment recommendation.  In the case of a the ater JFACC, the GCC 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-17 
will decide what air capabilities/forces are provided to each s ubordinate JFC.  The air 
apportionment decision referenced here is made by each subordinate JFC. 
 
(b)  Component forces must comply with the ROE, ACP, ACO, AADP,  and 
SPINS.  The ATO includes all scheduled and prospective aircraft  (e.g., alert, medical 
evacuation, PR) that may fly during that ATO day, even if not apportioned to the JFACC.  
The overarching intent is to identify all potential flights to airspace managers and users in 
the JOA.  The inclusion of air assets in the ATO does not imply  any change in command 
relationships or tasking authority over them, nor does it restr ict component commanders’ 
flexibility to respond to the dynamics of the operational environment. 
 
(2)  Army forces (ARFOR) conduct land operations in an assigned AO.  The 
Army identifies air support re quirements to the supporting air component or JFACC. 
Likewise, the JFACC may require mutual support and ARFOR may be  made available to 
the JFACC in a support relationship.  The integration of Army a ssets/forces, to include 
UASs, aviation, and fires, with the air component’s operations requires detailed planning 
and coordination. 
 
(3)  Marine Corps Aviation Assets.   The MAGTF commander will retain 
OPCON of organic air assets.  The primary mission of the MAGTF ACE is to support the 
MAGTF GCE.  During joint operations, the MAGTF aviation assets will normally be in 
support of the MAGTF mission.  The MAGTF commander will make so rties available to 
the JFC for tasking through the JFACC for air defense, long-ran ge air interdiction, and 
long-range reconnaissance.  Sorties in excess of MAGTF direct support requirements will 
be provided to the JFC for tasking through the JFACC for the support of other components 
of the joint force or the joint force as a whole.   
 
Note:  Sorties provided for air defense, long-range interdictio n, and long-range 
reconnaissance are not “excess” sorties and will be covered in the ATO.  These sorties 
provide a distinct contribution to the overall joint force effort.  The JFC exercises integrated 
control of air defense, long-ra nge reconnaissance, and long-ran ge interdiction aspects of 
the joint operation or campaign, and these sorties provide a distinct contribution to the joint 
force effort.   
 
(4)  Navy Aviation Assets.  Navy assets normally are retained for employment in 
support of the assigned joint maritime missions, including sea control, deterrence, and 
maritime power projection within the operational area.  Assets include sea- and land-based 
naval aircraft, as well as cruise missiles.  Navy assets not re quired for assigned joint 
missions or for fleet defense will normally be made available f or tasking via the joint air 
tasking process.   
 
(5)  Air Force Air and Space Assets.  The air expeditionary task force (AETF) is 
the primary means by which the Air Force presents forces to a J FC during contingency 
operations.  AETFs are sized and tailored to meet the JFC’s specific mission requirements.  
Air Force assets include bombers, specialized reconnaissance, C2 air and ground platforms 
and centers, air mobility aircraft, single- and multi-role figh t e r s ,  a n d  U A S s .   A i r  F o r c e  

Chapter II 
II-18 JP 3-30 
capabilities also include interth eater and intratheater airlift , air-to-air refueling, ISR, 
PR/combat search and rescue, and extensive space assets.  To plan, execute, and assess air 
and space operations, the Air Force has developed tailored Air Force AOCs to exercise C2 
of the full range of Air Force air, space, and cyberspace capabilities for a joint force.  These 
AOCs may be further tailored to  address changing operational en vironments and may be 
augmented by operations centers anywhere else in the world.  With the exception of certain 
national assets, special operations, and intertheater air mobility assets, the COMAFFOR will 
normally have OPCON over Air Force assets in the operational ar ea.  In most cases, Air 
Force assigned or attached aircraft are made available for empl oyment as directed by the 
JFACC. 
 
(6)  SOF Assets.   The TSOC/SOJTF/JSOTF, as a ppropriate, will exercise 
OPCON of SOF aviation assets, to  include United States Special Operations Command 
(USSOCOM)-sourced ISR, as an integral part of the joint special operations mission, usually 
through a JSOACC.  Theater SOF aviation assets are typically on ly sufficient to support 
special operations mission requirements.  Assets and aircrews not represented on the daily 
ATO are routinely planning or b eing prepared for subsequent spe cial operations.  The 
TSOC/SOJTF/JSOTF commander, through the JSOACC, will make sorties available to the 
JFC for tasking through the JFACC in support of conventional ai r operations, as feasible.  
The TSOC/SOJTF/JSOTF commander, through the JSOACC, will make e xcess sorties 
available to the JFC for tasking through the JFACC.  Command re lationships, launch 
authority, and other coordination measures between the componen ts should specifically 
address situations where the same SOF aviation assets may be ta sked to conduct missions 
for both components during the same ATO period.  JFACC coordina tion is normally 
accomplished through the SOLE located in the JAOC.  The JACCE c oordinates with the 
SOF organization, representing the JFACC’s needs in either a supporting or supported role.   
 
e.  Options for Establishing a Joint Force Air Component Command.  Options 
available during contingency oper ations to establish a joint fo rce air component 
command include: designating a JF ACC within a subordinate comma nd (e.g., JTF or 
subordinate unified command), de signating a theater JFACC opera ting in support of 
subordinate commands, or a combination of a theater and subordinate command JFACCs.  
The organization of the air component in many recent operations , characterized by a 
theater-level JFACC, were driven by key force structure and org anizational decisions.  
The additional options listed below detail alternative methods to execute C2 of joint air 
operations and still implement th e tenet of centralized control  and decentralized 
execution.  Multiple factors, such as available force structure , mission type, breadth of 
the operational area, and contested environments, are JFC consi derations in organizing 
the air component. 
 
(1)  Designated JFACC for JTF or Subordinate Unified Commands.  When a 
GCC establishes a subordinate JTF to conduct operations and air forces are attached, with 
specification of OPCON to the subo rdinate JFC, the JFC has the option of designating a 
JFACC.  This option will place de dicated air assets and indepen dent C2 capability under 
the OPCON of the JFC for whom they are performing the mission.  It provides unity of 
command over the forces employed within the assigned JOA and gr
eater direct control and 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-19 
predictability as to which air assets are available.  When ther e is only one JTF in a given 
theater, this is normally the preferred option. 
 
(2)  Theater JFACC.  When a GCC establishes multiple JTFs within the AOR, 
the GCC will normally retain C2 of joint air forces at the GCC level.  Joint air forces will 
be controlled to support the multiple JTF commanders according to the JTF commanders’ 
objectives and the GCC’s AOR-wide priorities.  In this situatio n, joint air forces are 
controlled at the theater level , under the direction of the “th eater JFACC,” subordinate to 
the GCC.  The theater-level JFACC provides flexibility in manag ing limited air assets to 
meet the requirements of the GCC and multiple JTFs.  When there are multiple JTFs in one 
GCC’s AOR, this is normally the preferred option. 
 
(a)  The theater JFACC will be the supporting commander to the GCC’s 
subordinate JTF commanders’ join t air operations within their r espective JOAs.  An 
establishing directive should be  promulgated to clearly delinea te support command 
relationships.  Unless limited by the establishing directive, the supported JTF commanders 
will have the authority to exercise general direction of the su pporting effort.  General 
direction includes the designati on and prioritization of target s or objectives, timing and 
duration of the supporting action, and other instructions neces sary for coordination and 
efficiency.  
 
(b)  The theater JFACC, as the s upporting commander, determines  t h e  
forces, tactics, methods, procedures, and communications to be employed in providing 
this support.  The JFACC will advise and coordinate with the supported JTF commanders 
on matters concerning the employm ent and limitations (e.g., log istics) of such support, 
assist in planning for the integration of such support into the supported JTF commanders’ 
efforts as a whole, and ensure su pport requirements are appropr iately communicated 
within the JFACC’s organization.  When the JFACC cannot fulfill  the needs of the 
supported JTF commander, the GCC will be notified by either the  supported JTF 
commander or JFACC.  The GCC is responsible for determining a s olution.  For their 
operations, these JTF commanders —as JFCs—will exercise approval  authority for 
products normally generated for “JFC approval” (including produ cts generated by the 
theater JFACC for their JOA). 
 
(c)  The theater JFACC may deploy one or more JACCEs to the JTF  
headquarters and other component headquarters as needed to ensu re they receive the 
appropriate level of joint air support (see Appendix G, “The Jo int Air Component 
Coordination Element,” for a mor e detailed description of JACCE ).  The JACCE will 
provide on-hand air expertise to the JTF commanders and the direct link back to the theater 
JFACC and the JAOC.   
 
(3)  Combination Theater and Subo rdinate Command-Level JFACCs.  
There may be a theater and subordinate command JFACC.  While in  some cases, this 
may be the most operationally desirable option, it is also the most demanding on available 
C2 resources (manpower  and equipment).   
 

Chapter II 
II-20 JP 3-30 
(4)  Beyond the three options presented, there are several pote ntial 
organizational variations.  Whil e it is impossible to assemble a complete list of all 
potential C2 arrangem ents, the following two additional options  a r e  p r e s e n t e d  f o r  
consideration: 
 
(a)  Multiple JFACCs Shari ng a Theater JAOC.  Typical arrangements 
of this nature have been driven by unforeseen, short-term incid ents outside the scope of 
the original JAOC establishment.  This case requires sufficient  manning and 
infrastructure to support each of the individual JFACC missions prior to establishing such 
an arrangement.  Appropriate aut horities should clearly detail,  prioritize, and apportion 
limited air and C2 assets. 
 
(b)  Theater JFACC or JTF’s JFACC to o perate concurrently with a 
JSOACC assigned to a commander, joint special operations task force (C DRJSOTF).  
This is a possible arrangement, although not commonly used, whe n a JSOTF is formed 
and air assets not being used at a given time by the CDRJSOTF m ay be made available 
to the JFACC for tasking. 
 
(5)  The organizational options discussed above describe combat ant commander 
(CCDR) and subordinate command re lationships.  JFC plans and or ders should clearly 
detail these command relationshi ps.  Approval authority is inhe rent in command; 
therefore, it is imperative subordinate JFCs exercise approval authority over those 
processes affecting operations w ithin their JOAs regardless of whether the products are 
developed by resources allocated  to that commander or by other headquarters.  This 
includes, but is not limited to: air apportionment decision, ta rgeting products, joint air 
estimates, JAOP, AOD, A TO, ACP, ACO, and AADP. 
 
(6)  It should be noted that th eater manning limitations and fo rce protection 
concerns, coupled with advance d communications c apabilities and  C2 systems, have 
driven and enabled JFACCs to cond uct distributed operations mor e frequently.  JFACC 
distributed operations are when independent or interdependent f orces, some which may 
be outside the JOA, participate in operational planning, decisi on making, or operations.  
Examples include portions of headquarters planning staffs (e.g. , targeting, intelligence) 
being geographically separated f rom the main headquarters or combat forces being based 
o u t s i d e  t h e  J O A .   W h i l e  t h i s  c o nstruct affords many advantages,  i t  a l s o  p r e s e n t s  
challenges in ensuring command re lationships and authorities ar e clearly detailed and 
understood by al l participants to ensure unity of effort. 
 
7.  Joint Force Staff Option 
 
a.  In operations of limited scope, duration, or complexity, or in which air operations are 
a relatively small aspect of the overall joint force, the JFC may plan, direct, and control joint 
air operations with the assistance of the joint force staff.  In this situation, the JFC would retain 
command authority and responsib ility and would normally request
 augmentation from 
appropriate components to perform the C2 air function and assist in planning and coordinating 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-21 
joint air operations.  In the jo int force staff option, all pre viously discussed JFACC 
responsibilities will be accomplished by the joint force staff as directed by the JFC.   
 
b.  The joint force staff operates out of the joint operations center (JOC).  Under the JFC 
staff option, the JOC also functions as the C2 node for joint air operations.  The composition 
of a joint force staff should reflect the composition of the subordinate joint forces to ensure 
those responsible for employing forces have a thorough knowledge of their capabilities and 
limitations.  The presence of liaisons on a single-Service staff does not transform that Service 
staff into a joint force staff.  The joint force staff should be composed of appropriate members 
in key positions of responsibility  from each Service or functio nal component having 
significant forces assigned to the command.  The same general g uidelines for joint force 
staffs apply to multinational operations.  Key staff positions ought to be a representative mix 
of US and multinational officers with shared responsibilities and trust. 
 
c.  JFC’s Staff Authority and Responsibilities.  The JFC’s staff derives its authority 
from the JFC.  JFC staff relationships and responsibilities should be specified early in the 
planning process.  Although command authority for tasking subor dinate commanders is 
retained by the JFC, the JFC may assign responsibility for coordinating joint air operations 
COMMAND AND CONTROL OF AIR OPERATIONS DURING OPERATION 
ODYSSEY DAWN 
On 3 March, 2011, USAFRICOM [United States Africa Command] was 
directed to establish a JTF [joint task force] under the comman d of 
Admiral Samuel Locklear, USN [United States Navy], Commander US  
Naval Forces Africa, initially to facilitate a noncombatant eva cuation 
operation, provide humanitarian assistance as required, and tra nsport 
Egyptian civilians from Tunisia to Egypt in support of the US Department 
of State.  This mission soon expanded to include enforcement of  
maritime exclusion and no-fly zones, and offensive operations to protect 
the Libyan civilian population.  JTF Odyssey Dawn included naval assets 
from the US 6th Fleet and air assets from both USAFE [United States Air 
Forces in Europe] and 17 AF [Air Force] (AFAFRICA). 
USAFE and 17 AF (AFAFRICA) headquarters were both located at 
Ramstein Air Base, Germany.  As the AF component to USAFRICOM, the 
17 AF (AFAFRICA) commander was designated the JFACC [joint forc e 
air component commander] supported by 17 AF’s 617th AOC [Air 
Operations Center].  However, 17 AF (AFAFRICA) was organized an d 
resourced primarily for logistics and lift operations, not comb at 
operations.  The JFACC received heavy augmentation from the mor e 
broadly staffed USAFE and 3 AF’s 603rd AOC facility.  For Opera tion 
Odyssey Dawn, these two staffs in effect merged under the leade rship 
of the 17 AF (AFAFRICA) commander operating out of the 603rd AO C, 
providing increased capacity for the JFACC. 
Libya: Operation ODYSSEY DAWN (OOD) 
A Case Study In Command And Control 
Joint and Coalition Operational Analysis 
4 October 2011 

Chapter II 
II-22 JP 3-30 
to a staff directorate (e.g., J- 3), a specific staff officer (e .g., J-3 air officer), or a special 
staff. 
 
(1)  Planning.  The JFC staff prepares the JAOP to support the JFC’s objectives.  
They may also prepare the ACP, AADPs, and defended asset list. 
 
(2)  Coordination.  The JFC’s staff coordinates joint air activities with other 
operations in the operational area.  As appropriate, subordinat e commanders and 
coordinating agencies furnish lia ison elements and augmentation  personnel to the JFC’s 
staff to coordinate with the joint force. 
 
(3)  Execution.  The JFC’s staff monitors the execution of joint air operations by 
subordinate commanders tasked through the ATO.  This may includ e redirecting sorties, 
as directed by the JFC, to accomplish joint force objectives. 
 
(4)  Supporting Operations.   Joint air operations m ay require support (e.g., 
suppression of enemy air defenses, ground-based air defense) fr om resources other than 
aircraft.  The JFC may direct components to support joint air o perations with assets, 
capabilities, or forces, in addition to the air capabilities/forces provided. 
 
8.  Liaisons 
 
a.  In addition to the JFC and staff, other component commander s and their staffs 
require continuous and ready access to the JFACC and the JFACC’s staff.  Principal means 
of accomplishing this are through personal contact, the establi shed communications and 
information support system, and liaison personnel.  These liaisons work for their  
respective component commanders and work with the JFACC and sta ff.  Each 
component normally provides liai son elements (BCD, SOLE, NALE, MARLE, AFLE, 
AAMDC, and others, as appropriate) that work within the JAOC.  These liaison elements 
consist of trained personnel who provide component planning and  tasking expertise and 
coordination capabilities.  They help integrate and coordinate their component’s operations 
with joint air operations.  If the JFC retains the functions normally given to a JFACC, then 
the liaisons would work directly with the JFC’s staff responsib le for joint air operations.  
In all such arrangements, the JFC must clearly define the roles , responsibilities, and 
interorganizational decision authorities for liaison personnel. 
 
b.  Component Liaisons.  Component liaisons serve a s conduits for coordination 
between the JFACC and their res pective component commanders.  F unctional or Service 
component commanders should delegate appropriate authority to t heir liaisons to 
effectively participate in the JAOC environment and processes.  Component commanders 
should determine liaison responsib ilities and authorize direct coordination with specified 
commanders and staff.  They should be equipped and authorized t o communicate directly 
with their respective component c ommander.  The liaisons have t he responsibility of 
presenting component perspectives  and considerations regarding planning and executing 
joint air operations.  Component liaisons should be familiar wi th the details of all 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-23 
component air, surface, and subsurface missions to coordinate t heir impact on joint air 
operations and understand its possible impact upon their respective missions. 
 
c.  Other Liaisons.  Other USG departments and agencies, international organizations, 
and NGOs conduct activ ities near or in areas of military operat ions.  CCDRs must be 
cognizant of these organizations and their actions.  To the extent possible, commanders should 
ensure these organizations’ efforts and military efforts are coordinated and complementary 
(or at least not in conflict).  Commanders should establish coordination and mutual support 
mechanisms, as needed, to eliminate or mitigate conflict and support US goals in the region.  
Liaisons from these organizations to the JFACC may be appropriate.  Multinational partners, 
particularly in operations being conducted in conjunction with or in close proximity to those 
of partner nations, may provide liaisons that work with the JFA CC to ease coordination 
between forces.  They work with the JFACC to coordinate the act ivities of their sending 
organizations.  In addition, the JFACC should consider sending liaisons to appropriate 
organizations, for example, multinational force intelligence collection, air defense, homeland 
defense (HD), and airborne-related functions. 
 
See Appendix F, “Liaison Elements within the Joint Air Operations Center.” 
 
9.  Joint Force Air Component Commander Basing and Transition 
 
a.  Procedures for joint air ope rations are desig ned to exploit  the flexibility of air 
operations to achieve joint force objectives while providing su pport to component 
operations.  Joint air operations scenarios may vary, and each scenario requires extensive 
planning when transition of JFA CC responsibilities is necessary .  Basing of the JFACC 
depends on the nature and scale of the operation and may shift as the operation or campaign 
progresses. 
 
b.  Land-Based JFACC.  In large-scale air operations, land-based JFACCs and 
JAOCs are normally desired because of the enhanced logistics an d communications 
provided by additional equipment and workspaces that may not be  available on sea-based 
facilities. 
 
c.  Sea-Based JFACC.  The JFACC and JAOC may be sea-based when any one of 
the following conditions are present: 
 
(1)  Maritime forces provide the preponderance of air assets an d have the 
organizational construct, operating experience, and management functions capability to 
effectively plan, task, and control joint air operations. 
 
(2)  Land-based facilities or sufficient infrastructure does not exist. 
 
(3)  A secure land-based area i s not available, and ground supp ort forces are 
forced to withdraw. 
 

Chapter II 
II-24 JP 3-30 
d.  JFACC Transition.  Effective joint air operations planning should include 
provisions to transition JFACC responsibilities between compone nts of the joint force 
and/or JFC’s staff.  The JFACC transition should be identified in the JAOP. 
 
(1)  Planned Transition.  The JFACC should develop a plan for transition of 
JFACC duties to another component or location.  Planned JFACC transitions are possible as 
a function of buildup or scale down of joint force operations.  During transition of JFACC 
responsibilities, the component passing responsibilities should continue monitoring joint air 
planning, tasking, and control systems and remain ready to reassume JFACC responsibilities 
until the gaining component has achieved full operational capability. 
 
(2)  Unplanned Transition.  During unplanned shifts of JFACC responsibility, as a 
possible result of battle damage or major C2 equipment failure, a smooth transition is unlikely.  
Therefore, the JFC should predesignate alternates (both inter- and intracomponent) and 
establish preplanned responses/options to the temporary or permanent loss of primary JFACC 
capability.  Frequent backup and ex change of databases is essen tial to facilitate a rapid 
resumption of operations should an unplanned transition occur. 
 
(3)  Transition Events.  The following events may cause the JFACC 
responsibilities to shift: 
 
(a)  Establishment of a subordina te JTF with delegated joint ai r operations 
responsibilities and attachment of forces to that JTF. 
 
(b)  Coordination requirements, related to ATO planning and exe cution, 
exceed the component capability. 
 
(c)  Buildup or relocation of f orces shifts preponderance of th e air 
capabilities/forces and the ability to effectively plan, task, and control joint air operations 
to another component commander, and the JFC decides the other component is in a better 
position (location, C2 capability, or other considerations) to accomplish the JFACC 
responsibilities. 
 
(d)  C2 systems become unresponsive or unreliable. 
 
(4)  Considerations.  Considerations to aid in JFACC transition planning and 
decisions include: 
 
(a)  Continuous, uninterrupted, and unambiguous guidance and direction for 
joint air operations are the primary objective of any JFACC transition. 
 
(b)  Appropriate communications s ystem capabilities to ensure s hift of 
JFACC duties is as transparent to the components as possible. 
 
(c)  Specific procedures for c oordinating and executing planned  and 
unplanned shifts of JFACC should be published in the JAOP. 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-25 
(d)  The relieving component mus t have adequate communications,  
connectivity, manning, intelligence support, and C2 capability prior to assuming JFACC 
responsibilities. 
 
(e)  Continuous planning supports both the expansion and transi tion of the 
communications system to support the JFC’s CONOPS for future operations. 
 
(f)  The ability to plan, publish, and disseminate an ATO and SPINS. 
 
(g)  The JFC’s objectives to conduct supporting joint air operations. 
 
(h)  Established timely, reliable, and secure communications li nks with all 
appropriate coordination cells to facilitate continuous and dyn amic exchange of 
information. 
 
(i)  Complete familiarity with the AADP and ACPs. 
 
(j)  Complete, current, and su fficiently interoperable database s to expedite 
the transition. 
 
e.  Transition of C2 for Joint Air Operations.  The JFC may choose to assign C2 of 
joint air operations to a JFACC when the duration and scope of joint air operations exceed 
the JFC’s span of control.  Additionally, the JFC may transfer designated mission experts 
and functional area augmentees from the JFC staff to the JFACC’ s JAOC to assist in the 
transition and coordination of j oint air operations.  Conversel y, a transition from JFACC 
to JFC staff may also be directed when the JFC determines that operational requirements 
warrant such a change. 
 
10.  Communications System 
 
a.  The JFACC is responsible for identifying and validating joint a ir 
requirements that affect the JFC’s mission and support accomplishment of the JFC’s 
directives.   
 
b.  The ability to exchange information via reliable secure communications with the JFC, 
joint force staff, other compone nt commanders, and tactical uni ts is a key factor to the 
successful integration of the joint air effort.  Planning should address the following areas: 
(1)  Data exchange requirements should be promulgated as early as possible to 
ensure each component can meet interoperable interface requirements.  Every effort should 
be made to confirm data exchange connectivity requirements during planning. 
 
(2)  Planning for all information exchange requirements and pro cedures should 
consider the cybersecurity elements of Department of Defense (D OD) information 
network operations affecting co nfidentiality, availability, and  integrity of networks 
used for air operations. 
 

Chapter II 
II-26 JP 3-30 
(3)  The best mix of computer-aided systems should be available for data 
transmission.  The JAOC and liaison elements depend on secure, reliable, beyond-line-of-
sight communications and data exchange equipment to respond to joint force requirements.  
For example, the TBMCS is often used.  The use of ATO generatio n and dissemination 
software portions of TBMCS has been standardized.  This ATO feature enables the JAOC 
to be interoperable with other force-level Service systems.   
 
(4)  Centralized control and decentralized execution requires a  robust 
communications architecture.  Planning should anticipate the need for communications in 
degraded environments at all levels and phases of operations and include considerations 
for alternate routing, redundant systems, use of other systems,  protocols, and message 
standards.  Impaired/inadequate information exchange capability should be anticipated and 
incorporated into risk management considerations during air operations planning. 
 
For additional information on communication systems, see JP 6-0, Joint Communications 
System.  For additional information on CO, see JP 3-12, Cyberspace Operations. 
 
11.  Command and Control of Joint Air Operations for Defense Su pport of Civil 
Authorities and Homeland Defense  
 
a.  Commander, United States Nort hern Command (USNORTHCOM), and  
Commander, United States Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM), share the primary 
mission for US HD and defense support of civil authorities (DSCA) within their assigned 
AORs.  Commander, Pacific Air Forces, is the JFACC for USINDOPA COM AOR.  For 
US-only HD and DSCA air operations within the continental US, C ommander, Air Force 
North (1st Air Force), is designated the JFACC and is dual-hatt ed as Commander, 
Continental United States North A merican Aerospace Defense Comm and Region.  
USNORTHCOM has established a subordinate unified command, Alask a Command, to 
facilitate operations in Alaska.  North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) 
is the bi-national command (United States and Canada) that cond ucts aerospace warning, 
control, and maritime warning in defense of North America.  NORAD is divided into three 
regions: Continental NORAD Regi on, Alaskan NORAD Region, and Ca nadian NORAD 
Region.  Each region commander is triple-hatted with duties as the JFACC, ACA, and 
AADC for executing DCA missions. 
 
b.  C2 of joint air operations during Operation NOBLE EAGLE (ON E) and most 
DSCA operations is conducted under peacetime rules.  When there  are no combat 
operations, a civil organization provides air traffic service, with plenary authority to 
regulate the national airspace system.  For the US, this agency is the FAA and for Canada 
it is NAV CANADA.  These agencies are charged by their respecti ve nations with 
managing airspace and may request the assistance of their milit ary or NORAD to support 
airspace control.  ONE is the ongoing operation covering aerosp ace warning and control 
for the US and its territories. 
 
c.  During DSCA operations, at the  request of the lead federal agency and with 
approval of the Secretary of Defense, the appropriate JFACC, wo rking in support of the 

 Command and Control of Joint Air Operations 
II-27 
FAA, assists in developing procedural control rules for safe us e of the airspace by the 
multitude of participating agencies.  Joint forces will coordin ate all DSCA air operations 
with the JFACC to facilitate unity of effort, even while other air activities may be occurring 
elsewhere in the nation.  USNOR THCOM’s JAOC typically establish es and activates an 
unclassified and voluntary scheduling system to prevent overtax ing fragile or limited 
control systems.  USG departments and agencies can then identif y their necessary flight 
operations to enable collaborative deconfliction. 
 
(1)  The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has overall resp onsibility for 
US homeland security (HS), and DOD may be asked to provide supp ort to DHS for HS 
operations.  DHS has peacetime oversight of the US Coast Guard.   In HS operations, it is 
possible for the JFACC to have the preponderance of military ai r assets but not the 
preponderance of USG air assets to coordinate.  During HS opera tions with a threat 
emanating from United States Southern Command’s (USSOUTHCOM’s) AOR, DOD may 
direct USSOUTHCOM to lead DOD s upport to DHS, with the Air Forc e Southern 
Command commander designated as the JFACC.   
 
(2)  Although numerous interagency partners are responsible for  DSCA mission 
accomplishment, most air operations fall under the FAA or are impacted by FAA authority.  
For instance, aerial search and rescue may be accomplished by s tate (e.g., Army National 
Guard, Air National Guard, or sta te police helicopters), federa l (e.g., Air Force or Coast 
Guard), or civil (e.g., Civil Air Patrol) agencies, but all still operate within the procedures 
established by the FAA. 
 
(3)  DSCA support is often provided by National Guard forces, either federalized 
under Title 10, United States Code (USC); Title 32, USC; or state active duty status.  Each 
state, territory, and the District of Columbia has the latitude  to develop aviation C2 
procedures pursuant to the appropriate governor’s directives.  Often, these C2 architectures 
will incorporate many joint concepts.  To enhance unity of effo rt during emergencies, 
USNORTHCOM’s JAOC has pre-coordinated airspace C2 procedures with both the FAA 
and through the National Guard Bureau as the channel of communi cations with the 
numerous state adjutants general.  During DSCA operations, the state governors typically 
retain C2 of civil and National Guard air assets and execute op erations through National 
Guard joint force headquarters-state or the state’s emergency operations center. 
 
d.  As the nation moves from peacetime to hostilities, the FAA,  NAV CANADA, 
USNORTHCOM, NORAD, and USINDOPACOM coordinate to provide military support 
to the civil airspace control agencies.  The FAA provides liaisons to USNORTHCOM and 
USINDOPACOM to collaborate and minimize conflicts during mission execution.  In the 
event the FAA is unable to perform airspace control responsibil ities, the appropriate 
JFACC should be prepared to take over the airspace control role .  This may occur at pre-
coordinated points, where air def ense and some airspace control  is accomplished by the 
military agencies on behalf of the government through the appli cation of emergency 
security control of air traffic and the declaration of various air defense emergencies.  Close 
cooperation and coordination with  interagency partners, includi ng FAA and DHS,  
is essential.  

Chapter II 
II-28 JP 3-30 
For additional detailed information on DSCA, see JP 3-28, Defense Support of Civil 
Authorities.  For additional detailed information on HD, see JP 3-27, Homeland Defense. 
 
 

 
III-1 
CHAPTER III 
PLANNING AND EXECUTING JOINT AIR OPERATIONS 
SECTION A.  PLANNING AND EXECUTING JOINT AIR OPERATIONS 
 
1.  Joint Air Operations Planning 
 
While the discussion in this chapter assumes the JFC has design ated a JFACC, if the 
JFC retained control of joint air operations, the JFC’s designa ted staff would plan and 
execute joint air operations and should follow a similar proces s.  Planning for joint air 
operations begins with understanding the JFC’s mission and intent.  The JFC’s estimate 
of the operational environment and articulation of the objectives needed to accomplish the 
mission form the basis for determining components’ objectives.  T h e  J F A C C  u s e s  t h e  
JFC’s mission, commander’s estimate and objectives, commander’s intent, CONOPS, and 
the components’ objectives to develop a course of action (COA).  When the JFC approves 
the JFACC’s COA, it becomes the basis for more detailed joint a ir operations planning—
expressing what, where, and how j oint air operations will affec t the adversary or current 
situation.  The JFACC’s daily guidance ensures joint air operations effectively support the 
joint force objectives while retaining enough flexibility in ex ecution to adjust to the 
dynamics of military operations (see Figure III-1). 
 
2.  The Joint Air Estimate 
 
The joint air estimate is described as a process of reasoning b y which the air 
component commander considers all the circumstances affecting the military situation and 
decides on a COA to be taken to accomplish the mission.  The jo int air estimate is often 
produced as the culmination of the COA development and selectio n stages of the joint 
planning process.  The joint air estimate reflects the JFACC’s analysis of the various COAs 
that may be used to accomplish the assigned mission(s) and contains the recommendation 
for the best COA.  Figure III-2 shows a joint air estimate overview format. 
 
See Appendix B, “Joint Air Estimate of the Situation Template,” for more information. 
  
“It is improbable that any terrorization of the civil population which could be 
achieved by air attack would compel the government of a great nation to 
surrender.  In our own case, we have seen the combative spirit of the people 
roused, and not quelled, by the German air raids.  Therefore, our air offensive 
should consistently be directed at striking the bases and communications upon 
whose structure the fighting power of his armies and fleets of the sea and air 
depends.”   
 
Winston Churchill (1917) 

Chapter III 
III-2 JP 3-30 
 3.  The Joint Planning Process for Air 
 
a.  The JFACC uses the joint planning process for air (JPPA) to  develop a JAOP, 
which guides employment of air capabilities and forces made ava ilable to accomplish 
missions assigned by the JFC. 
 
b.  JFACC Planning Responsibilities.   The JFACC’s role is to plan joint air 
operations.  In doing so, the JFACC provides focus and guidance  to the JAOC staff.  The 
amount of direct involvement depends on the time available, pre ferences, and the 
experience and accessibility of the staff.  The JFACC uses the entire staff during planning 
to explore the full range of adversary and friendly COAs and to  analyze and compare 
friendly air capabilities with the threat.  The JFACC should ensure planning occurs in 
a collaborative manner with other components.   Joint air planners should meet on a 
regular basis with the JFC’s planners and with planners from other joint force components 
 
Figure III-1.  Joint Air Operations Planning 
Legend
JFACC/JFC Staff Estimate of the Situation
Joint Air Operations Plan
Joint Force Mission
JFC Estimate
Objectives and Comprehensive AOR and JOA Perspective
JFACC and/or JFC Staff Recommended COA
JFC Approves COA
Supporting Plan
Area Air Defense Plan–Airspace Control Plan
JFACC’s Daily
Guidance
Master Air Attack Plan and Supporting Orders
Air Tasking Order
Airspace Control Order
Air Operations Directive–
Joint Air Operations Planning
AOR area of responsibility
COA course of action
JFACC joint force air component commander
JFC joint force commander
JOA joint operations area

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-3 
to integrate operations across the joint force.  Planning is a continuous process and only 
ends with mission accomplishment. 
 
c.  The JAOP is the JFC’s plan to integrate and coordinate joint ai r operations 
and encompasses air capabiliti es and forces supported by, and i n support of, other joint 
force components.  The JFACC’s planners should anticipate the n eed to make changes to 
plans (e.g., sequels or branches) in a dynamic and time-constrained environment.  Planners 
should include representatives from all components providing air capabilities or forces to 
enable their effective integration.  Expertise requirements may include, but are not limited 
to, those listed in Figure III-3. 
 
d.  JPPA follows the joint planning process  found in JP 5-0, Joint Planning, with 
specific details for joint air operations.  JPPA drives the pro duction of the JAOP and 
supporting plans and orders.  JPPA is used during planning to produce JAOPs that support 
OPLANs or concept plans.  JPPA may also be used as part of crisis planning.  It is always 
tied closely to the overall joint planning being done by the JFC’s staff and other Service or 
functional component staffs.  While the steps are presented in sequential order, work on 
them can be concurrent, sequential, or even recursive.  Neverth e l e s s ,  t h e  s t e p s  a r e  
integrated and the products of each step should be checked and verified for coherence and 
consistency.  Figure III-4 illustrates the seven steps of JPPA and key inputs and outputs. 
 
(1)  Step 1.  Initiation 
 
Figure III-2.  Joint Air Estimate 
Joint Air Estimate



Purpose of the operation
References
Description of military operations
 Remarks—Site plan identification number of the file where detailed requirements 
have been loaded into the Joint Operation Planning and Execution System





Mission
Situation and courses of action
Analysis of opposing courses of action (adversary capabilities and intentions)
Comparison of friendly courses of action
Recommendation or decision
Operational Description
Remarks
Narrative–Five Paragraphs

Chapter III 
III-4 JP 3-30 
(a)  Planning is usually initiat ed by direction of a JFC, but t he JFACC may 
initiate planning in anticipation of a planning requirement not directed by higher authority 
but within the JFACC’s authority.   Joint air operations should be coordinated with all 
relevant lines of operation (LOOs) and lines of effort (LOEs).  Military air options are 
normally developed in combination with the other military and nonmilitary options so the 
JFC can appropriately respond to a given situation.  
 
(b)  The JFACC and staff perform an assessment of the initiating directive to 
determine how much time is available until mission execution, t he current status of 
 
Figure III-3.  Example Subject Matter Expertise for Joint Air Planning 
Example Subject Matter Expertise for Joint Air Planning
1.    Logistics
2.    Air mobility (airlift, air drop, and air refueling) planning
3.    Targeting
4.    Command and control
5.    Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
6.    Air and missile defense planning
7.    Airspace control
8.    Political-military affairs
9.    Religious-cultural affairs
10.  Information activities
11.  Cyberspace operations
12.  Space operations
13.  Service and component liaisons
14.  Weapon system capabilities
15.  Mission planning/air tactics
16.  Public affairs
17.  Legal
18.  Modeling and simulation
19.  Electronic warfare, to include counter-improvised explosive device operations
20.  Personnel recovery, to include combat search and rescue
21.  Meteorological and oceanographic
22.  Aeromedical evacuation/medical care
23.  Administrative support
24.  Munitions maintenance management
25.  Counter chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear planning
26.  Force protection
27. Assessment

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-5 
intelligence products and staff estimates, and other relevant f actors that influence the 
planning situation.  The JFC and JFACC typically provide initial guidance that may specify 
time constraints, outline initial coordination requirements, au thorize movement of key 
capabilities within the commanders’ authority, and direct other  actions as necessary.  The 
JFACC may produce an initial commander’s intent during this step.  Refer to Appendix A, 
 
Figure III-4.  Joint Planning Process for Air Inputs, Steps, Outputs 
Initial planning time line
JFACC’s initial guidance
Enemy COAs
Mission analysis brief
Essential tasks
JFACC mission statement
JFACC initial operational approach, 
planning guidance and intent
Support concepts to friendly air COAs
JFACC objectives
Narratives and graphics
Refined, valid air COAs with support 
concepts
Strengths and weaknesses
Branch/sequel requirements
JFACC decision points and CCIRs
Decision matrix
Preferred COAs
Selected air COA
Summary of operational 
design/approach 
JFACC refinement
JFC-approved air COA
Refined and approved JFACC
OPLAN/OPORD with appropriate 
annexes
Joint Planning Process for Air Inputs, Steps, Outputs
Key Inputs JPPA Steps Key Outputs
Legend
CCIR commander's critical information requirement
COA course of action
JFACC joint force air component commander
JFC joint force commander
JIPOE joint intelli gence preparation of the operational 
environment
JPPA joint planning process for air
OPLAN operation plan
OPORD operation order
Tasking from JFC
Guidance from JFACC
JFC mission and intent
Friendly situation
JIPOE
Facts and assumptions
JFACC tasks/guidance
JFACC operational approach and 
guidance
Enemy COAs
Staff estimates supporting JFACC’s 
COAs
Support concepts to friendly air COAs
Enemy most likely/dangerous COAs
Coordinated wargame method
Coordinated evaluation criteria
Coordinated critical events/actions
Coordinated evaluation criteria
Wargame results
Coordinated comparison method
Decision briefing
Approved air COA
Staff estimates
Initiation
Mission Analysis
COA Development
COA Analysis and 
Wargaming
COA Comparison
COA Approval
Plan/Order 
Development

Chapter III 
III-6 JP 3-30 
“Sample Mission Statement and Commander’s Intent,” to see a sam ple JFACC mission 
statement and commander’s intent.  
 
(2)  Step 2.  Mission Analysis 
 
(a)  Mission analysis is critical to ensure thorough understanding of the task 
and subsequent planning.  It results in the JFACC’s final missi on statement that describes 
the joint air component’s essential tasks.  It should include t he “who, what, when, where, 
and why” for the joint air operation but seldom specifies “how.”  (See Figure III-5.)  At the 
end of mission analysis, the JFACC should issue a commander’s intent for the overall joint 
air operation, that is, the JFACC’s contribution to the JFC’s m ilitary end state.  The 
JFACC’s intent should express the end state to be attained by j oint air operations and the 
purpose for reaching it.  It should also include the JFACC’s assessment of where and how 
much risk is acceptable during the operation (see Figure III-6) .  Commander’s intent is a 
concise expression of the purpos e of the operation and the desi red end state.  While the 
commander’s intent for the overall operation is needed at the e nd of mission analysis, the 
JAOP will eventually contain the commander’s intent for each phase of the operation, and 
the AODs will contain the JFACC’s intent for a specific ATO or period of time.  Hence 
the commander’s intent articulates a desired set of conditions for a given point in time and 
the purpose those conditions will support. 
 
Figure III-5.  Sample Joint Force Air Component Commander’s Mission Statement 
Sample Joint Force Air Component Commander’s 
Mission Statement
When directed, the joint force air component commander (JFACC) will 
conduct joint air operations to deter aggression and protect deployment 
of the joint force.
Should deterrence fail, the JFACC, on order, will gain and maintain air 
superiority to enable joint oper ations within the operational a rea. 
Concurrently, the JFACC will support the joint force land compo nent 
commander (JFLCC) in order to prevent enemy seizure of vital areas (to 
be specified).
On order, the JFACC, in conjunc tion with the JFLCC and joint fo rce 
maritime component commander (JFMCC), will render enemy fielded  
military forces combat ineffect ive and prepare the operational 
environment for a counte roffensive.  Concurrently, the JFACC wi ll 
support the JFMCC in gaining and maintaining maritime superiority. 
The JFACC, on order, will suppor t JFLCC and joint force special  
operations component commander ground offensive operations, 
degrade the ability of enemy national leadership to rule the country as 
directed, and destroy enemy weapons of mass destruction in order to 
restore territorial integrity, e liminate the enemy  military thr eat to the 
region, support legitimate friendly government, and restore reg ional 
stability.

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-7 
(b)  Anticipation, prior preparation, and a trained staff are c ritical to timely 
mission analysis.  Staff estimates generated during mission ana lysis are continually 
revisited and updated during the course of planning, execution, and assessment.  
 
(c)  Mission analysis includes developing a list of critical fa cts and 
assumptions.  Facts are statements of known data concerning the  situation.  Assumptions 
are suppositions on the current situation or a presupposition on the future course of events, 
either or both assumed to be true in the absence of positive pr oof, necessary to enable the 
commander in the process of planning to complete an estimate of the situation and make a 
decision on the COA.  Assumptions may also become commander’s c ritical information 
requirements or drive the development of branch plans to mitiga te the risks of a wrong 
assumption.  Assumptions must be continually reviewed to ensure  validity.  Once an 
assumption is proven correct, it becomes a fact or, if proven i ncorrect, a new fact or 
assumption is determined.  They are necessary to enable a comma nder to complete an 
estimate of the situation, influ ence commander’s critical infor mation requirements, drive 
branch planning, and make decisions on COAs. 
 
1.  IPB should identify and analy ze adversary and friendly cent ers of 
gravity (COGs) at the operational and tactical levels and contr ibute to the JIPOE.  JIPOE 
is the analytical process used by joint intelligence organizati ons to produce intelligence 
assessments, estimates, and other intelligence products in supp ort of the JFC’s decision-
making process.  The process is used to analyze the physical do mains; the information 
environment; political, military, economic, social, information, and infrastructure systems; 
and all other relevant aspects of the operational environment a nd to determine an 
adversary’s capabilities to operate within that environment.  The IPB effort should be fully 
coordinated, synchronized, and in tegrated with the JIPOE effort  of a joint intelligence 
center.  A COG is a source of power that provides moral or phys ical strength, freedom of 
 
Figure III-6.  Sample Joint Force Air Component Commander’s Intent Statement 
Sample Joint Force Air Component Commander’s 
Intent Statement


Purpose  
The purpose of this joint air op eration will be initially to de ter enemy aggression.  
Should deterrence fail, I will ga in air superiority, render ene my fielded forces 
ineffective with joint airpower, degrade enemy leadership and o ffensive military 
capability as directed, and support joint group and special operations forces in order 
to restore territorial integrity and ensure the survival or res toration of legitimate 
government in a stable region.
End State  
At the end state of this operation: Enemy military forces will be capable of limited 
defensive operations, will have c eased offensive action, and wi ll have complied 
with war termination conditions.  The succeeding state will reta in no weapons of 
mass destruction capability; I will have passed air traffic control to local authorities, 
territorial integrity will be re stored, and joint force air com ponent commander 
operations will have transitioned to support of a legitimate an d stable friendly 
government.

Chapter III 
III-8 JP 3-30 
action, or will to act.  In coordination with the JFC, the join t air component may focus on 
strategic and operational COGs, in addition to tactical-level d etails of adversary forces, 
because air operations can often directly affect COGs through a pplication of capabilities 
to create strategic and operational effects. 
 
See JP 2-01.3, Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment,  for greater 
detail on JIPOE. 
 
2.  The JFACC and staff prioritize the analyzed adversary and f riendly 
critical vulnerabilities (CVs) associated with COGs based on their impact on achieving the 
objectives most effectively, in the shortest time possible and at the lowest cost.  The 
analyses of adversary and friendly CVs are incorporated into the various COAs 
considered during COA development. 
 
(d)  The JFACC, supported by the staff, determines the joint ai r objectives 
and the specified, implied, and essential tasks.  The JFACC typ ically includes essential 
tasks in a mission statement.  Essential tasks are specified or implied tasks the JFACC must 
perform to accomplish the mission. 
 
(e)  The JFACC and staff examine readiness of all available air  capabilities 
and forces to determine if there is enough capacity to perform all the specified and implied 
tasks.  The JFACC identifies additional resources needed for mission su ccess to the 
JFC.  Factors to consider should include all available forces (incl uding multinational 
contributions), command relations hips (joint force, national, a nd multinational), force 
protection requirements, ROE, law of war, applicable treaties a nd agreements (including 
existing status of force agreements), base use (including land,  sea, and air), overflight 
rights, logistics information (what is available in theater por ts, bases, depots, war reserve 
material, host-nation support), and what can be provided by oth er theaters and 
organizations. 
 
(f)  The end state is the set of required conditions that defines achievement 
of the commander’s objectives and  specific criteria for mission  success.  By articulating 
the joint air component’s purpose, the JFACC provides an overar ching vision of how the 
conditions at the end state support the joint operation and follow-on operations. 
 
(3)  Step 3.  COA Development 
 
(a)  COA development is based on mission analysis and a creativ e 
determination of how the missi on will be accomplished.  The sta ff develops COAs.  A 
COA represents a potential plan the JFACC could implement to ac complish the 
assigned mission.  All COAs should meet the JFACC’s intent and accomplish the mission. 
 
(b)  A COA consists of the following information: what type of military 
action will occur, why the action is required (purpose), who will take the action, when the 
action will begin and how long it will last (best estimate), where the action will occur, and 
how the action will occur (method of employment of forces).  CO As may be broad or 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-9 
detailed, depending on available planning time and JFACC’s guid ance.  The staff should 
assess each COA to estimate its success against all possible ad versary COAs.  The staff 
converts the approved COA into a CONOPS.  COA determination consists of four primary 
activities: COA development, analysis and wargaming, comparison , and approval.  Air 
COAs will often require input from other component commanders t o synchronize them 
with land and maritime operations. 
 
(c)  When time is limited, the JFACC should determine how many COAs the 
staff will develop and which adversary COAs to address.  A comp lete COA should 
consider, at a minimum: 
 
1.  The JFACC’s mission and intent (purpose and vision of military end 
state). 
 
2.  Desired end state. 
 
3.  Commander’s critical information requirements. 
 
4.  C2 structure. 
 
5.  Essential tasks. 
 
6.  Available logistics support. 
 
7.  Available forces. 
 
8.  Available support from agencies and organizations. 
 
9.  Transitions between each phase. 
 
10.  Decision points. 
 
(d)  COAs should include the following specifics: 
 
1.  Operational and tactical objec tives and effects and their r elated 
tactical tasks, in order of accomplishment. 
 
2.  Forces required and the force providers. 
 
3.  Force projection concept. 
 
4.  Employment concept. 
 
5.  Sustainment concept. 
 

Chapter III 
III-10 JP 3-30 
(e)  The speed, range, persistence, and flexibility of air asse t s  a r e  t h e i r  
greatest advantages, and their em ployment location and purpose may change in minutes.  
Air strategists and planners d eal with objective sequencing and prioritization, operational 
phasing, employment mechanisms, and weight of effort.  In addit ion, COAs may vary by 
the phase in which an objective is achieved or the degree to which an objective is achieved 
in each phase. 
 
(f)  Air COAs may be presented in several ways.  They may be pr esented as 
text and may discuss the priority and sequencing of objectives.   Air COAs may also be 
depicted graphically—displaying weights of effort, phases, decision points, and risk.  One 
helpful way to depict an air COA graphically is to depict it as  one or more logical LOOs 
or LOEs, as described in JP 5-0, Joint Planning.  Any quantitative estimates and assessment 
criteria presented should clearly indicate common units of meas urement to make valid 
comparisons between COAs.  For example, a sortie is not a const ant value for analysis—
one F/A-18 sortie does not equate to one B-2 sortie.  Air COAs should avoid numerical 
presentation.  Ultimately, the JFACC will direct the appropriat e style and content of  
the COA. 
 
(g)  The first step in COA development is to determine the measures that will 
accomplish the JFACC’s mission and support achievement of the J FC’s objectives.  The 
framework of objectives, effects, and tasks provides a clear li nkage of overall strategy to 
task.  While the JFC normally provides operational objectives to the JFACC, they may also 
emerge through mission analysis or COA development, developed b y the JFACC and the 
JAOC SD staff in consultation with the JFC.  An objective shoul d be clearly defined, 
decisive, and state an attainable goal.  JFACC support to other components should also be 
expressed in terms of objectives.  Resulting objectives can the n be prioritized with other 
JFACC objectives in accordance with the JFC’s CONOPS.  Supporting objectives should 
describe what aspect of the adversary’s capability the JFC or other component wants 
to affect.  For example, the joint force land component commander’s (JFLC C’s) attack 
may require disrupting the enemy’s operational reserve.  Suppor ting JFACC objectives 
could be expressed as “render en emy’s operational reserve unabl e to conduct 
counterattacks on JFLCC forces” or “destroy enemy’s operational  r e s e r v e ’ s  o f f e n s i v e  
capability.”  Clearly defined objectives prevent confusion over  what the force is trying to 
accomplish and reduce the risk of mission failure. 
 
(h)  Commanders plan joint opera tions by developing objectives supported 
by measurable effects and assessment indicators.  Analysis of e ffects (desired and 
undesired) and determination of measures of effectiveness (MOEs ) during planning for 
joint air operations are usually  conducted by the JAOC strategy  plans and operational 
assessment teams, assisted by all other planning elements of the JAOC. 
 
(i)  Specifically, objectives prescribe friendly goals.  Effects describe 
system behavior in the operational environment.  Desired effects are the conditions related 
to achieving objectives.  Tasks, in turn, direct friendly action.  Objectives and effects are 
assessed through MOEs.  Empirically verifiable MOEs may help ensure the JFACC knows 
when objectives have been achieved.  Accomplishment of friendly
 t a s k s  i s  a s s e s s e d  

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-11 
through measures of performance (MOPs).  MOEs help answer the q uestions, “Are we 
doing the right things?” or “Are alternative actions required?”   MOEs also help focus 
component operational assessment efforts; inform processing, ex ploitation, and 
dissemination (PED) priorities; and identify ISR requirements.  M O P s  he lp  a n s w e r t h e  
questions, “Are we doing things right?” and “Were the tasks com pleted to standard?”  
Figure III-7 depicts the relationship of objectives, effects, a nd tasks and their associated 
assessment measures.  
 
(j)  Once strategists and planne rs define the joint air objecti ves and 
supporting effects and tasks, they further refine potential air COAs based on the objective 
priority, sequence, phasing, weight of effort, and matched reso urces.  This is one method 
of differentiating COAs.  Other methods include varying time av ailable, anticipated 
adversary activities, friendly forces available, and higher-level guidance.  For air planning, 
a single COA may be developed with several branches and sequels  that react to possible 
adversary activities. 
 
(k)  Planners should determine the validity of each air COA based on  
suitability, feasibility, acceptability, distinguishability, and completeness. 
 
 
Figure III-7.  Linking Objectives, Effects, and Tasks Examples 
Linking Objectives, Effects, and Tasks Examples
C2 command and control
MOE measure of effectiveness
MOP measure of performance
SAM surface-to-air missile
SRBM short-range ballistic missile
Legend
Objective: Gain and maintain air superiority over Sector X.
Effect 1: Multinational air forces capable of conducting air ope rations over Sector X 
without prohibitive interference from Red counter-air forces.
MOE: Proportion of multinational a ir missions ineffective due to  prohibitive 
interference from Red counter-air forces.
Task: Destroy all Red SAM r adars covering Sector X.
MOP: Proportion of known Red force SAM radars covering Sector X destroyed.
Task: Degrade Red air C2 capacity by 90%.
MOP: % of Red air C2 links severed.
Effect 2: Coalition ground forces capable of conducting operatio ns in Sector X 
without prohibitive interference from Red forces air or missile attack.
MOE: % of coalition ground force phase objectives achieved witho ut delay or 
losses from Red air or missile attack.
Task: Destroy known fixed Red SR BM launch facilities within range of Sector X.
MOP: Proportion of known Red SRBM launch facilities within range  of Sector X 
destroyed.
Task: Deny Red attack aircraft sortie generation.
MOP: Proportion of Red attack airfields denied sortie generation  capability.

Chapter III 
III-12 JP 3-30 
(l)  The relationship between resources and COA development is critical.  
COA development must take into account the resource constraints  of the joint force 
at large (see Figure III-8).  Competing requirements for limited airlift will often result in 
deployment orders less than ideal for all components but optima l for the joint force as a 
whole.  The JFC must ensure the time-phased force and deployment data (TPFDD) reflects 
the priorities and requirements of the joint force.  Planners e nsure the COA developed 
adheres to deployment considerations across the force and does not assume away potential 
mobility and distribution system pitfalls. 
 
(m)  During air COA development, the JFACC and staff help the 
commander identify risk areas that require attention.   These will vary based on the 
specific mission and situation and may be divided into two broa d areas: combat support 
and operational considerations.  Combat support includes TPFDD planning that will 
critically affect the joint for ce strategy and execution.  Also  considered with the TPFDD 
are basing, access, logistic support available, and force protection requirements (see Figure 
III-9).  However, since TPFDD execution, basing, and logistics support are the 
responsibility of the JFC and Se rvice components, the JFACC’s p lanning effort needs to 
focus on the operational limitations imposed by them. 
 
(n)  Decisions related to operational assumptions may drive cha nges in how 
the JFACC operates.  These chang es range from JPPA process chan ges to targeting and 
weaponeering methods.  O n e  o f  t h e  f i r s t  c o n s i d e r a t i o n s  f o r  t h e  J F A C C  i s  a i r  
superiority.  The JFACC is responsible for considering the risk related to air defense 
planning when designated as the AADC.  The commander’s operatio nal assumptions will 
determine the resources committed, force posturing, and structu re of the air and missile 
defense plan.  
 
(o)  The individual designated t o be the JFACC may also be desi gnated the 
SCA within a joint force to coordinate joint space operations a nd integrate space 
capabilities.  This responsibility  may entail the coordination and integration of the 
capabilities of other Services’ and national agencies’ space as sets to maintain space 
 
Figure III-8.  Combat Support Considerations 
Combat Support Considerations





Basing
Force protection
Petroleum, oils, and lubricants 
availability
Armaments/precision-guided 
munitions availability
After action report planning






Reachback
Out of theater staging
Long-range assets
Sustainment (airlift and sealift)
Communications systems
Aerial port and seaport of 
debarkation location

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-13 
superiority and exploit space capabilities to create effects ac ross the operational 
environment to achieve JFC objectives.  Space considerations sh ould be fully integrated 
with operations in the operational environment and should be fully incorporated into COA 
development. 
 
(p)  The JFC’s assumptions will also affect the operational assumptions made 
by the joint force air strategists and planners.  The joint for ce structure and campaign or 
OPLAN directly influence the JFACC’s risk estimate and guidance. 
 
(q)  Minimizing the risk of friendly fire incidents and collate ral damage are 
operational factors in risk management (see Figure III-10) and the commander must 
balance these with mission success.  When the risk becomes unacceptable, the commander 
should consider changes in operational employment. 
 
(4)  Step 4.  COA Analysis and Wargaming 
 
(a)  COA analysis involves wargaming each COA against the adversary’s 
most likely and most dangerous COAs.   Wargaming is a recorded “what if” session of 
actions and reactions designed to visualize the flow of the conflict or operation and evaluate 
 
Figure III-10.  Risk Management: Operational Factors 
Risk Management: Operational Factors



Joint force commander 
assumptions concerning the 
operation
Friendly fire incidents
Collateral damage




Force protection
Cybersecurity
Multinational considerations
Command and control architecture
 
Figure III-9.  Risk Management:  Combat Support Factors 
Risk Management: Combat Support Factors






Time-phased force and 
deployment data
Basing
Regional access
Logistics support
Airbase defense requirements
Reachback operations





Just-in-time logistic 
considerations
Bandwidth
Host-nation support
Communications networks
Force protection

Chapter III 
III-14 JP 3-30 
each friendly COA in the light of adversary adaptation.  Wargam ing is a valuable step in 
the planning process because it stimulates ideas and provides i nsights that might not 
otherwise be discovered.  It also provides initial detailed pla nning while determining the 
strengths and weaknesses of each COA.  This may alter or create  a new COA based on 
unforeseen critical events, tasks, or problems identified.  War gaming is often a sequential 
process, but planning groups should adjust their wargame style based on JFACC guidance, 
time available, situation, and staff dynamics.  Wargaming begin s by assembling all the 
tools and information planners r equire and establishing the gen eral rules to follow.  
Recording the activity is vital and directly contributes to ide ntifying the advantages and 
disadvantages of a COA and providing sufficient detail for futu re JAOP development.  
Planners may use a synchronization matrix to detail the results of wargaming. 
 
(b)  Time permitting, the staff should: 
 
1.  Consider all facts and assumptions in each proposed COA and  their 
possible effects on the action. 
 
2.  Consider active and passive meas ures to decrease the impact  o f  
adversary counteractions. 
 
3.  Consider conflict termination issues and the end state. 
 
4.  Think through one’s own actions, adversary reactions, and f riendly 
counteractions.  
 
(c)  COA analysis and wargaming conclude when planners have refined each 
COA in detail and identified the advantages and disadvantages of each.  Automation in the 
planning process and joint analysis centers may provide additio nal modeling support to 
wargaming, increasing the accuracy and speed of COA analysis. 
 
(5)  Step 5.  COA Comparison 
 
(a)  Comparing air COAs against predetermined criteria provides  a n  
analytical method to identify the best employment options for a ir forces and capabilities.  
The same method used in JP 5-0, Joint Planning, is used in air COA comparison. 
 
(b)  Another technique for air COA comparison involves developi ng an 
objective-risk timeline.  LOOs and LOEs may help to elucidate t he relationships between 
objectives, effects, time, and risk.  In LOOs and LOEs, objectives, decisive points, or other 
significant events are plotted against a timeline that identifi es when certain objectives or 
actions will occur.  Risk for each air COA based on the LOO or LOE is identified.  The 
resulting graphical representation may form the basis for the s taff’s recommendation and 
presentation to the JFACC. 
 
(6)  Step 6.  COA Approval.  The staff determines the best air COA to 
recommend to the commander.  The staff presents their recommended air COA usually in 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-15 
the form of a briefing.  This briefing includes a summary of th e operational design and 
planning process that led to the recommended air COA.  Ideally,  the JFACC should be 
involved in the process, especia lly in the early operational de sign stages.  Depending on 
the level of JFACC involvement and the degree of parallel plann ing the commander 
accomplishes, air COA selection will vary from choosing among various alterna tives 
to directly approving the staff-recommended air COA.   The air COA is identified, 
adjusted (if required), and selected by the JFACC for presentat ion to the JFC.  Once the 
JFC approves an air COA, the JPPA contributes directly to JAOP preparation. 
 
(7)  Step 7.  Plan or Order Development 
 
(a)  For the joint air component, this step concentrates on the  preparation of 
the JAOP.  The JAOP details how the joint air effort supports the JFC’s ov erall 
operation or campaign plan.  JAOP development is a collaborative effort of the JFACC 
staff, the JFC staff, other joint force and Service component s taffs, and outside agencies.  
Once the total force structure is determined, force availability, deployment, timing, basing 
availability, and sustainment requirements are matched with log istic and planning 
requirements.  With this information, the JFACC’s ability to ac complish the assigned 
mission is reevaluated and adjusted as necessary.  The JAOP sho uld accomplish the 
following: 
 
1.  Integrate the efforts of joint air capabilities and forces and, where 
applicable and appropriate, space and cyberspace capabilities a nd/or support 
mechanisms/enablers. 
 
2.  Identify objectives, effects, and tasks. 
 
3.  Identify MOEs and indicators used to determine whether air 
operations are creating desired effects and achieving objectives. 
 
4.  Account for adversary COAs. 
 
5.  Integrate and synchronize the phasing of operations with the 
JFC’s plan. 
 
6.  Indicate what capabilities and forces are required to achieve joint 
air objectives.  In addition to air capabilities and forces, planners should i nclude land, 
maritime, space, cyberspace, and information-related activities  required to meet joint air 
objectives. 
 
7.  Develop specific procedures for allocating, tasking, exercising , 
and transitioning C2 of joint air capabilities and forces. 
 
(b)  In addition to building the plan for the employment of air forces, the 
JAOP should also include considerations for phase transitions, decision points, conflict 
termination, redeployment (if applicable), and procedures to ca pture lessons learned.  

Chapter III 
III-16 JP 3-30 
Incomplete planning for conflict termination and the end state can result in the waste of 
valuable resources, aggravate a tenuous peace, cause a return t o hostilities, or lead to 
numerous other unintended consequences.  The list of considerat ions for conflict 
termination is specific to each situation and is never formulat ed in a vacuum or without 
extensive consultations with national leadership.  This part of the plan should also address 
the prospect of the “surge” of air forces to accomplish phases of the operation, based on 
projected operating tempo. 
 
For information on the joint planning process, see JP 5-0, Joint Planning. 
 
4.  Joint Targeting  
 
a.  Targeting is the process of selecting and prioritizing targets and matching the 
appropriate response to them, considering operational requirements and capabilities.  
Targeting is both a joint- and component-level function and requires a continuous, analytic 
process to identify, develop, and affect targets to create specific desired effects that achieve 
the JFC’s objectives.  Targeting is complicated by the requirement to deconflict 
unnecessary duplication of target nominations by different forces or different echelons 
within the same force and to integrate the attack of those targ ets with other 
components of the joint force.   An effective and efficient target development process 
coupled with the joint air tasking cycle is essential for the JFACC to plan and execute joint 
air operations.  The joint targe ting process should integrate t he intelligence databases, 
analytical capabilities, and data collection efforts of nationa l agencies, CCMDs, 
subordinate joint forces, and co mponent commands.  Targeting he lps integrate and 
synchronize fires with other joint functions. 
 
b.  The joint targeting cycle is an iterative process that is n ot time-constrained, and 
steps may occur concurrently, but it provides a helpful framewo rk to describe the steps 
required to successfully conduct joint targeting.  The deliberate and dynamic nature of the 
joint targeting process is adaptable through all phases of the air tasking cycle.  As the 
situation changes and opportunitie s arise, steps of the joint t argeting process can be 
accomplished quickly to create the commander’s desired effects.  There are six phases to 
the joint targeting cycle: end state and commander’s objectives , target development 
and prioritization, capabilities analysis, commander’s decision and force assignment, 
mission planning and force execution, and assessment. 
 
For more detailed information on targeting and joint fires, see JP 3-60, Joint Targeting; 
and JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support. 
 
c.  JFC Targeting Responsibilities.  The JFC’s primary targeting responsibility lies 
in integrating, synchronizing, and establishing the objectives component commanders will 
achieve throughout the operational environment with their force s (assigned, attached, and 
supporting).  With the advice of s ubordinate component commanders, JFCs set priorities 
and provide clear targeting guida n c e .   T h e  J F C  n o r m a l l y  e s t a b l ishes a joint targeting 
coordination board (JTCB), and may establish a joint fires element (JFE) and joint targeting 
working group (JTWG), directing their composition and specific responsibilities. 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-17 
(1)  JTCB.  Targeting integration and coordination tasks are normally 
accomplished through the JFC-established JTCB or like body.  To provide the appropriate 
level of experience and focus, t he JFC normally appoints the de puty JFC, J-3, or a 
component commander to chair the JTCB.  When a JTCB is not esta blished and the JFC 
decides not to delegate targeting oversight authority to a deputy or subordinate commander, 
the JFC performs this task at the joint force headquarters, wit h the assistance of the J-3.  
The JFC ensures this is a joint effort involving applicable sub ordinate commands, other 
agencies, and multinational partners, as appropriate.  If the JFC delegates authority for joint 
target planning, coordination, and deconfliction to a subordina te commander, that 
commander should possess or have access to a sufficient C2 infr astructure, adequate 
facilities, and joint planning e xpertise to effectively manage and lead the JFC’s joint 
targeting operations.  The JTCB typically reviews the joint integrated prioritized target list 
(JIPTL) for JFC approval.  The JFC may use a JTWG to review targeting integration before 
the JTCB. 
 
(2)  JFE.  The JFC may approve the formation of a JFE within the J-3.  The  JFE 
is an optional staff element comprised of representatives from the J-3; the components; 
liaisons; and other elements of the JFC’s staff, to include the  J-2 targeting staff, logistics 
directorate of a joint staff (J-4), plans directorate of a join t staff, and others as required.  
The JFE is an integrating staff element that synchronizes and c oordinates planning and 
coordination on behalf of the JFC. 
 
(3)  JTWG.  To assist in the coordination a nd integration throughout the jo int 
targeting process, the JFC may approve the formation of a JTWG.   The JTWG supports 
the JTCB by reviewing, as require d, initial collection, consolidation, and prioritization of 
targets and synchronization of target planning and coordination on behalf of the JFC.  The 
JTWG is an action officer-level venue, chaired by the JFE chief , J-2 (chief of targets), or 
similar representative.  When the JFACC has been delegated targeting oversight authority, 
the JAOC targeting effects team (TET) may function as the JTWG.   
 
d.  The JFACC develops a JAOP that includes the objectives directed by the JFC.  The 
JAOP also includes a strategy to task methodology that links th e JFACC’s operational 
objectives to tactical object ives to tactical tasks.  Integration, synchronization, 
deconfliction, allocation of air capabilities and forces, and m atching appropriate 
weapons against target vulnerabilities are essential targeting functions for the 
JFACC.  National agencies; higher headquarters; JTFs; and task forces subordinate to the 
JFC, supporting unified commands, and functional/Service compon ents may nominate 
targets to the JFC for processing and inclusion on the JIPTL th rough a target nomination 
list (TNL).  Targets scheduled for attack by co mponent air capabilities and forces 
should be included on an ATO for deconfliction and coordination .  All component 
commanders within the joint force should have a basic understanding of each component’s 
mission and general scheme of maneuver.  All components should 
provide the JFACC a 
description of their air plan to minimize the risk of friendly fire incidents, assure 
deconfliction, avoid duplication of effort, and provide visibility to all friendly forces.  This 
basic understanding allows for int egration of targeting efforts  between components and 
within the JFC staff and agencies.  

Chapter III 
III-18 JP 3-30 
For more information on the JTCB, JFE, JTWG, and TNL, see JP 3-60, Joint Targeting. 
 
e.  To enhance targeting integration, some CCMDs use an integra ted ATO, which 
compiles air, space, and cyberspace taskings and may also inclu de other component 
targeting actions.  An integrated ATO does not change C2 author ities; rather, it enables 
integration, coordination, sync hronization, and deconfliction b etween supporting 
components and CCMDs during execution. 
 
5.  The Targeting Effects Team 
 
a.  The TET is one of typically four functional teams of the CP D.  While varied, the 
TET’s responsibilities are essential to the targeting process.  The TET validates targets to 
be engaged by joint air forces per the JFC’s targeting guidance, links targets to appropriate 
tactical tasks in the AOD, weaponeers targets to create desired  effects, and verifies 
MOEs/MOPs.  It also deconflicts and coordinates target nominati ons based on estimates 
of what targets can be attacked and provides other targeting support requiring component 
input at the JFACC level.  If the JFC delegates joint targeting coordination authority to the 
JFACC, the TET receives all target nominations that have not be en addressed by other 
components, and prioritizes them in accordance with the objecti ves and tactical tasks set 
forth in the AOD to form the draft JIPTL.   
 
b.  Additionally, the TET provides the SD with apportionment re commendations 
based on a munitions expenditure/joint desired point of impact prosecution requirements 
calculation. 
 
c.  Draft JIPTL Construction.  The draft JIPTL is formed from a prioritized listing 
of targets based on JFC and component target priorities.  To be a true integrated target list, 
the TET presents the JFACC with a draft JIPTL that includes targets and associated desired 
effects for engagement by all available means.  In the case of a theater JFACC supporting 
multiple JFCs (e.g., two or more JTF commanders), the draft JIPTL should be constructed 
to meet the requirements of each supported JFC.  Members consider the estimated available 
capabilities and their ability to engage the targets on the lis t.  A draft JIPTL “cut line” is 
normally established.  The draft JIPTL “cut line” should reflec t which nominated targets 
will most likely be serviced (barring technical problems with a ircraft, weather, retasking 
for higher-priority targets, or other operational circumstances ) with the projected 
apportionment of assets assigned or made available to the JFACC .  Component liaison 
officers (LNOs) and JAOC staff members should be ready to justify and/or prioritize target 
nominations among all the priori ties of the joint operation.  The JFACC may also 
recommend to the JFC that additional assets from other components be used against 
targets on the draft JIPTL.   However, only the JFC can approve the use of other 
components’ assets and forces.  Close coordination continues with the development of the 
JIPTL and with the development of  the joint integrated prioriti zed collection list (JIPCL) 
to ensure effective and efficien t use of assets that may be use d to address targets on both 
the JIPTL and/or the JIPCL.   
  

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-19 
6.  The Joint Air Tasking Cycle 
 
a.  The joint air tasking cycle provides for the effective and efficient employment of 
joint air capabilities and forces made available.  This process  provides an iterative, cyclic 
process for the planning, apportionment, allocation, coordinati on, and tasking of joint air 
missions and sorties within the guidance of the JFC.  The cycle accommodates changing 
tactical situations or JFC guidance, as well as requests for su pport from other 
component commanders.  The joint air tasking cycle is an analytical, systematic cycl e 
that focuses joint air efforts on accomplishing operational requirements.  Much of the 
day-to-day tasking cycle is conduc ted through an interrelated s eries of information 
exchanges and active involvement in plan development, target development, air execution, 
and assessment (through designated component LNOs and/or messages), which provide a 
means of requesting and sche duling joint air missions.  A timely ATO is critical— other 
joint force components conduct their planning and operations ba sed on a prompt, 
executable ATO and are dependent on its information.  Figure III-11 shows typical JFACC 
air tasking process responsibilities. 
 
b.  The joint air tasking cycle begins with the JFC’s objectives, i ncorporates 
guidance received during JFC and component coordination, and cu lminates with 
assessment of previous actions.  The ATO articulates the tasking for joint air operations for 
a specific execution timeframe, normally 24 hours.  The joint air tasking cycle is synchronized 
with the JFC’s battle rhythm.  The JAOC normally establishes a 72- to 96-hour ATO planning 
cycle.  The battle rhythm or daily operations cycle (schedule of events) articulates briefings, 
meetings, and report requirements.  It provides suspense for ta rgeting, AIRSUPREQs, 
friendly order of battle updates, etc., to produce the air battle plan (ABP) that includes the 
ATO message and other products.  The battle rhythm is essential  to ensure information is 
available when and where required to provide products necessary for the synchronization of 
joint air operations with the JFC’s CONOPS and supporting other components’ operations.  
Nonetheless, air operations must be responsive to a dynamic operational environment and the 
joint air tasking cycle must be flexible and capable of modification during ATO execution.  
The net result of the tasking process is a series of ATOs and related products in various stages 
of progress at any time (see Figure III-12).  The primary factor that drives the daily schedule 
for the development of the ATO is the battle rhythm.  The battle rhythm is a detailed timeline 
that lists a series of briefings, meetings, etc., to produce specific products by a specified time 
to support decision making. 
 
c.  The full joint air tasking cycle, from JFC guidance to the start of ATO execution, is 
dependent on the JFC’s and JFACC’s procedures.  A 72-hour cycle, starting with objectives, 
effects, and guidance, is fairly standard.  The precise time frames should be specified in the 
JFC’s OPLAN or the JFACC’s JAOP.  Long-range combat air assets positioned outside the 
theater but operating in the JOA may be airborne before ATO publication or execution.  These 
assets require the most current ATO information and updates.  T
he JAOC, however, possesses 
the capability to retask such mis sions even during execution.  Intertheater air mobility 
missions may not necessarily operate within the established tasking cycle.  The AMD is an 
AOC division that assists the CPD with intertheater and intratheater air mobility missions that 
should be integrated into the ATO. 

Chapter III 
III-20 JP 3-30 
d.  The ATO matches and tasks air forces and capabilities made available to the 
J F A C C  f o r  t a s k i n g  t o  p r o s e c u t e  t a r g e t s  a n d  r e s o u r c e  A I R S U P R E Q s  and other 
requirements.  Other component air missions should be on the ATO to improve joint force 
visibility and to assist with overall coordination and deconfli ction.  The other component 
air missions that appear on the ATO may not be under the contro l of the JFACC, and the 
JFACC will coordinate changes with all affected components.   
 
e.  Joint Air Tasking Cycle Stages.  The joint air tasking cycle consists of six stages 
(see Figure III-13).  The joint air tasking cycle receives prod ucts from information 
developed during the joint targeting cycle and other joint forc e processes.  Both the joint 
targeting cycle and joint air tasking cycle are systematic proc esses to match available 
capabilities and forces with specific targets to achieve the JFC’s objectives.  Unlike thejoint 
targeting cycle, the joint air tasking cycle is time-dependent,  built around finite time 
periods to plan, prepare for, a nd conduct joint air operations.  There are set suspenses for 
 
Figure III-11.  Joint Force Air Component Commander Air Tasking Process Responsibilities 
Joint Force Air Component Commander 
Air Tasking Process Responsibilities













Plan, integrate, coordinate, allocate, task, and direct the joint air effort in accordance 
with the joint force commander’s (JFC’s) guidance and joint force objectives.
Develop a joint air operations plan derived from the JFC’s broader operation or 
campaign objective and guidance regarding the objectives, effects, tasks, and 
responsibilities of joint air capabilities and forces.
After consulting with other component commanders, recommend apportionment of the 
joint air effort by priority that should be devoted to various air operations for a given 
period of time.
Translate air apportionment into allocations and develop targeting guidance into the air 
operations directive and air tasking order.
Direct and ensure deconfliction of joint air operations.
Synchronize joint air operations with space and cyberspace operations.
Coordinate with the appropriate components’ agencies or liaison elements for 
integration and deconfliction with land and maritime operations.
Coordinate with the appropriate components’ agencies or liaison elements for tasking of 
the air forces and capabilities made available.
Coordinate with the joint force special operations component commander’s special 
operations liaison element for integration, synchronization, and deconfliction with 
special operations.
Monitor execution and redirect joint air operations as required.
Compile component target requirements and prioritize targets based on JFC guidance, if 
delegated the responsibility.
Accomplish tactical and operational assessment, and support higher-headquarters 
assessments.
Establish a process for reporting of surface fire engagements, combat damage to air 
assets, and combat casualties from these events.

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-21 
product inputs and outputs for each stage of the joint air task ing cycle.  Prior to the JFC 
and component commanders’ meeting, the JFACC should meet with s enior 
component liaisons and the JFC’s staff to develop recommendatio ns on joint air 
planning and apportionment for future operations  (The use of the term “meeting” is 
notional; other methods of information exchange can also be use d).  This meeting may 
review JFC objectives and guidance; assess and analyze results of joint force operations 
and consider changes to ongoing joint air operations; review ad versary capabilities and 
COAs, COGs, decisive points, CVs , and key targets; and discuss updates to the JIPTL, 
based on JFC guidance.  The JFACC should provide objectives and  guidance to the staff 
for joint air operations to achieve the JFC’s objectives, recom m e n d  a n  a i r  s c h e m e  o f  
maneuver, review joint capabilities and forces available to exe cute assigned tasks, refine 
requirements for capabilities and forces from other components,  and, in consultation with 
other component commanders, formulate an air apportionment reco mmendation for 
presentation to the JFC. 
 
(1)  Stage 1: Objectives, Effects, and Guidance 
(a)  The JFC consults often with component commanders to assess the results 
of the joint force’s efforts and to discuss the strategic direc tion and future plans.  This 
provides component commanders an opportunity to make recommendations, make support 
 
Figure III-12.  Joint Air Operations Center Air Tasking Order Battle Rhythm 
AOD air operations directive
ATO air tasking order
JIPTL joint integrated pr ioritized target list
Legend
Joint Air Operations Center Air Tasking Order Battle Rhythm
ATO A
ATO B
ATO C
ATO D
ATO E
AOD A
AOD B
AOD C
AOD D
AOD E
D-3
JIPTL A
D-2
Send A
Send B
Send C
Send D
Send E
JIPTL B
D-1
Fly A
Fly B
Fly C
Fly D
Fly E
JIPTL C
D Day
Assess
Assess
Assess
Assess
Assess
JIPTL D
D+1
JIPTL E
D+2 D+3 D+4 D+5

Chapter III 
III-22 JP 3-30 
requirements known, and state their ability to support other components.  The JFC provides 
updates to the guidance, priori ties, and objectives based on en emy operations and the 
current/expected friendly order of battle.  The JFC also refines the intended CONOPS.  The 
 
Figure III-13.  Joint Air Tasking Cycle 
Joint Air Tasking Cycle
meetings or sub-processes
common products of this phase
Italic Text
Bold Text
ACO airspace control order
ALLOREQ allocation request
AOD air operations directive
ATO air tasking order
JAOP joint air operation plan
JIPTL joint integrated pr ioritized target list
JTCB joint targeting coordination board
MAAP master air attack plan
Legend
ROE rules of engagement
SORTIEALOT sortie allotment message
SPINS special instructions
MAAP 
Briefing
AOD/ALLOREQ
JIPTL
JAOP
MAAP
SORTIEALOT 
message
ATO
ACO
SPINS
Recommendations for 
future action; tactical, 
operational, and 
operation/campaign 
assessment
Physical damage 
assessment; inflight 
reports, mission 
reports
Component/
Agency
Target
Coordination
ROE ALLOREQ
JTCB
JTCB
Objectives, 
Effects, and 
Guidance
ATO Production  
and 
Dissemination
Assessment Target 
Development
Weaponeering 
and Allocation
Execution 
Planning and 
Force Execution
Campaign and 
Contingency 
Planning

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-23 
JFC’s guidance on objectives and effects will identify targetin g priorities and will 
include the JFC’s air apportionment decision. 
 
(b)  Air Apportionment.  Air apportionment enables the JFC to ensure the 
priority of the joint air effort is consistent with campaign or  operation phases and 
objectives.  Given the many functions joint air forces can perform, its operational area-wide 
application, and its ability to rapidly shift from one function to another, JFCs pay particular 
attention to air apportionment.  After consulting with other component commanders, the 
JFACC makes the air apportionment recommendation to the JFC.  The methodology the 
JFACC uses to make the recommend ation may include priority or p ercentage of effort 
devoted to assigned mission-type orders, JFC objectives, or other categories significant to the 
campaign or operation.  The air apportionment recommendation is a vital part of the joint air 
planning and tasking process.  The JAOC SD formulates the air a pportionment 
recommendation the JFACC submits to the JFC for upcoming iterations of the joint tasking 
cycle.  With air capabilities made  available to the JFACC, the strategy plans team can 
recommend the relative level of effort and priority that may be applied to various JFC and/or 
JFACC objectives.  The end result is an air apportionment recommendation.  This product is 
normally forwarded to the JTCB for coordination and approval by the JFC.  In the case of a 
theater JFACC supporting multiple JFCs (e.g., two or more JTF c ommanders), the air 
apportionment recommendation referenced here is made to each supported JFC.  The JFC is 
the final approval authority for the air apportionment decision. 
 
(2)  Stage 2: Target Development.  At this point in the joint targeting cycle and 
intelligence process, after analysts from other organizations h ave incorporated all-source 
intelligence reports into a targeting database, the joint air targeting cycle focuses on relating 
target development to air taski ngs, selecting target aimpoints,  and submitting these and 
other data to the TET.  The TET correlates target nominations t o the tactical tasks in the 
AOD for that ABP period.  It screens nominated targets, ensuring once attacked, they create 
the desired effects that meet JFC guidance as delineated in the  AOD and verifies chosen 
MOEs will accurately evaluate pr ogress and can be collected aga inst.  It prioritizes 
nominated targets based on the best potential for creation of the JFC’s desired effects and 
components’ priorities and timing requirements.  The product of this effort, when approved 
by the JFC or the JFC’s designated representative (e.g., JTCB), is the JIPTL. 
 
(3)  Stage 3: Weaponeering and Allocation 
 
(a)  During this stage, JAOC personnel quantify the expected results of 
the employment of all available means, to include air, maritime , land, space, 
cyberspace, and information-relat ed activities, against priorit ized targets to create 
desired lethal and nonlethal effects.   The JIPTL provides the basis for weaponeering 
assessment activities.  All appr oved targets are weaponeered, t o include recommended 
aimpoints, weapon systems and munitions, fusing, target identif ication and description, 
desired direct effects of targe t attack, probability of creatin g the desired effect, and 
collateral damage concerns.  The final prioritized targets are developed and are then 
provided to the master air attack plan (MAAP) team.  The TET may provide the MAAP 
team a draft JIPTL to begin initial planning.  Once the JIPTL i s approved by the JFC, the 

Chapter III 
III-24 JP 3-30 
MAAP team can finalize force allocation (sortie flow plan).  The force application cell can 
complete coordination with the supporting force enhancement cel l to satisfy mission 
requirements to ensure the prioritized targets are planned to p roduce effects to achieve 
objectives while maximizing the combat effectiveness of joint a ir assets.  The resulting 
MAAP is the plan for employment that forms the foundation of the ATO.  The MAAP 
is normally a graphic depiction of capabilities required for a given period.  The 
development of the MAAP includes review of JFC and JFACC guidance, component plans 
and their AIRSUPREQs, updates to targets, availability of capab ilities and forces, target 
selection from the JIPTL, and weapon system allocation.  Components may submit critical 
changes to targets, AIRSUPREQs and asset availability during th e final stages of ATO 
development.  The completed MAAP matches available resources to the prioritized target 
list, and accounts for air refueling requirements, suppression o f  e n e m y  a i r  d e f e n s e s  
requirements, air defense, ISR, and other factors affecting the plan. 
 
(b)  Air Allocation.   Following the JFC’s air apportionment decision, the 
JFACC translates that decision into a total number of sorties by weapon system type 
available for each objective and task.   Based on the apportionment decision, internal 
requirements, and AIRSUPREQ messages, each air-capable componen t prepares an 
allocation request (ALLOREQ) message for transmission to the JFACC (normally not less 
than 36 hours prior to the start of the ATO execution period, t hus coinciding with the 
beginning of the MAAP process).  ALLOREQ messages report (from other components to 
the JFACC): 
 
1.  Number and type of air assets made available for tasking as directed 
by the JFC air apportionment decision.  These may be excess sor ties not required by the 
air-capable components and made available for tasking by the JF ACC.  The air-capable 
component commander will normally direct what missions those as sets are capable of 
conducting.  
 
2.  Requests for air support from components to the JFACC that exceed 
the unit’s capabilities. 
 
(c)  Allotment.  The sortie allotment message (SORTIEALOT) confirms 
(and where necessary modifies) the ALLOREQ and provides general guidance to plan joint 
air operations.  The JAOC reviews each component’s allocation d ecision/ALLOREQ 
message and may prepare a SORTIEALOT back to the components as required, in 
accordance with established operations plans guideline.  The SO RTIEALOT addresses 
three basic requirements:  
1.  Revisions, if any, to the component’s planned allocation of  joint air 
sorties necessitated by unforeseen joint force requirements and  w i t h i n  t h e  J F C ’ s  a i r  
apportionment guidance.  
 
2.  Approval/disapproval of component requests and allotment of  other 
component’s excess sorties.  
 
3.  Revisions to mission data for component AIRSUPREQs. 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-25 
(4)  Stage 4: ATO Production and Dissemination.   The ATO production team 
constructs, publishes, and disseminates the daily ATO and applicable SPINS to appropriate 
forces.  The ATO production team disseminates the ATO.  They de velop and maintain a 
comprehensive address list of app roved ATO recipients and coord inate redundant 
procedures for timely ATO dissemination and receipt.  The air o perations database 
(AODB) manager is an experienced ATO production technician who oversees the AODB 
update and change process.  The AODB consists of the friendly order of battle that includes 
bases, units, aircraft, mission types, call signs, etc. and inc orporates the identification, 
friend or foe/selective identification feature plan.  JFC and JFACC guidance, including the 
AOD, target worksheets, the MAAP, and component requirements, are used to finalize the 
ATO, SPINS, and ACO.  Planners should develop airspace control and air defense 
instructions in sufficient detail for components to plan and ex ecute all air missions 
listed in the ATO.  These directions should enable operations without undue restrictions, 
balancing combat effectiveness with the safe, orderly, and expe ditious use of airspace.  
Instructions should provide for quick coordination of task assi gnment and reassignment 
(redirection, retargeting, or ch ange of type of mission) and mu st direct aircraft 
identification and engagement procedures and ROE appropriate to the nature of the threat.  
These instructions should also consider the volume of friendly and possibly neutral air 
traffic; friendly air defense requirements; identification, friend or foe technology; weather; 
and adversary capabilities.  Inst ructions are contained in SPIN S and in the ACO and are 
updated as frequently as required.  The AOD, ATO, ACO, and SPINS provide operational 
and tactical direction at appropriate levels of detail.  The le vel of detail should be very 
explicit when forces operate from different bases and multi-com ponent or composite 
missions are tasked.  In contrast, less detail is required when missions are tasked to a single 
component or base. 
 
(5)  Stage 5: Execution Planning and Force Execution.  The JFACC dir ects 
the execution of air capabilities and forces made available for  joint air operations.   
Inherent in this is the authority to redirect joint air assets.  The JFACC will coordinate with 
affected component commanders upon redirection of joint sorties previously allocated for 
support of component operations.  Aircraft or other capabilities and forces not 
apportioned for joint air operations, but included in the ATO f or coordination 
purposes, may be redirected only with the approval of the respe ctive component 
commander or JFC.  Aircraft or other capabilities and forces made available for joint 
air operations may be redirected with the approval of the JFACC. 
(a)  The JAOC must be responsive to required changes during the 
execution of the ATO.  In-flight reports, discovery of time-sensitive targets (TSTs), and 
an initial assessment (such as battle damage assessment [BDA]) may cause a redirecting 
of joint air capabilities and forces before launch or a redirection once airborne. 
 
(b)  During execution, the JAOC is the focal point for changes to the ATO 
and is the centralized control node for tasking of joint air ca pabilities and forces.  It 
is also charged with coordinating and deconflicting changes wit
h appropriate control 
agencies and components. 
 

Chapter III 
III-26 JP 3-30 
Note:  Care must be taken when redirecting sorties from one target to another to ensure 
the proper weapons and fuses are available for the new target. 
 
(c)  Due to the dynamic nature of joint operations, the JFACC may be 
required to make changes to pla nned joint air operations during  execution.  
Employment of joint air assets against emerging targets require s efficient, timely 
information sharing and decision making among components.  It is critical that procedures 
be established, coordinated and pr omulgated by the JFC before o perations begin.  The 
dynamic targeting portion of the joint targeting cycle is estab lished to facilitate this 
process.  The JFACC will coordinate with affected component commanders to ensure 
deconfliction of targets and to ensure those forces are out of danger relative to the new 
target area(s). 
 
(d)  During execution, the JFACC redirects joint air assets to respond to 
moving targets or changing priorities.   Ground or airborne C2 platform mission 
commanders may be delegated authority from the JFACC to redirec t sorties or missions 
made available to higher priority targets.  It is essential, however, that the JAOC be notified 
of all redirected missions. 
 
(6)  Stage 6: Assessment.  Assessment is performed by all levels of the joint 
force. 
 
(a)  The JFC should establish a dynamic system to conduct asses sment 
throughout the joint force and to ensure all components are contributing to the overall joint 
assessment effort.  Normally, the joint force J-3 coordinates assessment, assisted by the J-
2.  Assessment is a continuous process that measures the overall effectiveness of employing 
joint force capabilities during operations.  It determines prog ress toward accomplishment 
of tasks, creation of effects, and achievement of objectives.  The JFACC should 
continuously plan and evaluate the results of joint air operati ons and provide 
assessments to the JFC for consol idation into the overall asses sment of the current 
operation. 
 
(b)  Within the joint force, assessment of joint air operations  is conducted at 
both the tactical and operational levels.  At the tactical leve l, assessment is essential to 
ATO development and execution.  It evaluates tactical tasks and  their contribution to 
achieving tactical objectives.  Ai r planners should determine M OPs to evaluate task 
accomplishment and MOEs to assess any changes in system behavior and/or capability or 
in the operational environment.  Planners should ensure they establish logical links between 
air objectives and tasks and the measures used to evaluate them  early in the planning 
process.  They should also ensure they identify intelligence co llection management and 
other intelligence collection re quirements as part of the plann ing process.  The tactical 
assessment process continues over days and weeks to evaluate the effectiveness of weapons 
and tactical engagements as additional information and analysis  become available from 
sources within and outside the operational area.  This includes  a determination and 
assessment of actual collateral damage.   
 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-27 
(c)  At the operational level, assessment is concerned with gatherin g 
information on the broader objectives achieved by joint air ope rations and planning 
for future operations.  The assessment process at the tactical level provides one of th e 
major sources of information for performing assessment at the operational level.  Tactical 
inputs, along with a wide assortment of other information, aid in the development of the 
air component’s operational-level assessment.  Just as with tac tical assessments, it is 
imperative planners determine useful MOPs and MOEs at the operational level and ensure 
there are logical links between operational air objectives and tasks.  The operational-level  
assessment is then used to recommend changes to JFACC strategy and guidance, develop 
or recommend changes to measures and indicators, determine addi tional assessment 
information requirements, and assess the overall effectiveness of operations to achieve 
JFACC and JFC operational objectives and attain end state conditions. 
 
(d)  The JFACC’s operational-level assessment is also forwarded to the joint 
force J-3 as one component’s i nput to the JFC’s overall determi nation of the operation’s 
success.  Operational-level assessments can also serve as the b a s i s  f o r  i m p o r t a n t  
recommendations that can affect the JFC’s apportionment decisio n and the JFACC’s 
allocation of air resources. 
 
(e)  Although assessment appears to mark the end of the air tas king cycle, it 
is an ongoing activity that provides important inputs to decisi on making and aiding 
processes throughout that cycle. 
 
SECTION B.  OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
 
7.  Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Considerations 
 
a.  The GCC J-2 may retain collection management authority (CMA ) to establish, 
prioritize, and validate theater collection requirements; estab lish sensor tasking guidance; 
and develop theater-wide collection policies.  CMA may reside at the JTF level or may be 
delegated to components.  The J-2 retains full CMA (i.e., to va lidate, to modify, or to 
nonconcur) over all intelligence collection requirements within the AOR.  The J-2 and J-3 
jointly develop an overall coll ection strategy and posture for I S R .   T h e  J - 2  r e v i e w s ,  
validates, and prioritizes all intelligence requirements for th e JFC.  Users requesting 
airborne ISR support should make a  concerted effort to request a clear identification of 
their required information or I SR product and not a specific IS R platform to perform a 
mission.  For example, many different aircraft can provide imag ery and data.  Depending 
on the request, there might be m ore than one type of asset avai lable to support a mission.  
Airborne ISR aircraft are typically high-demand assets due to m ission duration, with the 
ability to quickly respond to TST requests and support multiple  users.  Retasking an 
airborne ISR asset during mission execution requires careful co nsideration.  Dynamic 
retasking of ISR assets should be done by the appropriate commander after evaluating the 
full impacts of diverting the capability from the current missi on and the impact to 
operational success or consequences without the asset.  Dynamic  ISR retasking priorities 
and procedures must be clearly specified in the ROE and SPINS. 
 

Chapter III 
III-28 JP 3-30 
b.  The JFACC will normally be the supported commander for the airborne ISR 
effort.  The JFC will normally delegate collection operations management  for joint 
airborne ISR to the JFACC to aut horitatively direct, schedule, and control collection 
operations for use by the J-2 in associated processing, exploit ation, and reporting.  The 
JAOC should request ISR support from the JFC or another compone nt if available assets 
cannot fulfill specific airborne ISR requirements.  It is imper ative the JFACC remains 
aware of all surveillance and r econnaissance capabilities that can be integrated into joint 
air operations.  ISRD collection managers build a daily collection plan, the reconnaissance, 
surveillance, and target acquisition annex, as a commonly under stood plan which tasks 
airborne ISR platforms sensors and PED nodes.  This product is an annex to the ATO and 
is available to the entire joint force.  It is completed by ISR personnel in the MAAP. 
 
c.  National and non-DOD ISR resources are not normally placed under OPCON of 
the JFC.  These resources may provide direct support to the JFC or one of the components, 
either full-time or on-call, but are normally shared with other  commands or components.  
The supported commander will be provided with liaison teams upon request.  These teams 
will normally be the points of contact for coordinating their s pecific ISR resources and 
associated capabilities with t he supported commander’s ISR oper a t o r s .   I S R  o p e r a t o r s  
forward the requirements to the appropriate command authority for approval. 
 
d.  ISR personnel are integrated i nto the JAOC.  The complexity  of integrating 
airborne ISR will normally determine whether the function is handled by a specialty team, 
cell, or division within the JAOC.  The JFACC’s ISR collection managers and operations 
planners will work with the joint force staff and other components to effectively coordinate 
national and theater ISR objectives.  The ISR collection elements will manage and satisfy 
the JFACC’s information requirements. 
 
e.  The JFACC provides integrated airborne ISR for the JFC.  The JAOC provides the 
force integrated information from the JFACC’s available airborne ISR support. 
 
See JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence  Support to Military Operations,  for further 
information. 
 
f.  ISR systems undergoing the acquisition and research and dev elopment process, 
particularly the advanced concept technology demonstration phase, are normally requested 
through military development organizations and involve the applicable contractor.  In such 
cases, the contractor is often re quested to provide technical r epresentatives in the JAOC 
and/or at the national or theater intelligence agency. 
8.  Air Mobility Considerations 
 
a.  Air mobility missions are integral to the success of joint operations.  Both airlift 
and air refueling are critical fo r deployment, air operations, airdrop, AE, 
sustainment, and redeployment.   Commander, USTRANSCO M, normally retains 
OPCON of intertheater air mobility assets due to their global mission and nature.  A support 
relationship is typically establi shed between Commander, USTRAN SCOM, and other 
CCDRs.  Intratheater airlift and theater refueling assets may b
e attached to a joint force, 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-29 
with OPCON normally delegated down to the appropriate Service component commander 
(usually the COMAFFOR).  Integrating air mobility planning into  t h e  J A O P  a n d  
monitoring mission execution is normally the responsibility of the AMD chief supported 
by a team of mobility specialists in the JAOC. 
 
b.  The DIRMOBFOR is normally a senior officer who is familiar with the AOR and 
possesses an extensive background in air mobility operations.  The DIRMOBFOR may be 
sourced from the theater’s organizations or from USTRANSCOM.  O perationally, the 
DIRMOBFOR exercises coordinating authority for air mobility wit h commands and 
agencies within and external to the joint force for USTRANSCOM supporting missions.  
Specifically, the DIRMOBFOR coordinates with the Air Force forces staff, JAOC director, 
618 AOC (TACC), and joint movement center (JMC)/joint deploymen t and distribution 
operations center (JDDOC) to expe dite the resolution of air mob ility issues.  The 
DIRMOBFOR may also be supported by an Air Mobility Command LNO who collaborates 
with the DIRMOBFOR and AMD chief on USTRANSCOM-tasked movements .  
Additionally, the DIRMOBFOR, when designated, advises the JFACC and JAOC director, 
and assists the AMD chief, to ensure the effective integration of intertheater and 
intratheater air mobility operations.  While the DIRMOBFOR shou ld be collocated with 
the AMD to maximize effectiveness, the JAOC AMD remains under control of the JAOC 
director who manages execution of air mobility operations for t he JFACC through the 
AMD chief. 
 
c.  The DIRMOBFOR also has distinct responsibilities in relation to  JFC staffs.  
Air mobility requirements do not originate in the JAOC.  They originate at the component 
level and are validated by either the JDDOC, the theater JMC (when established), or by the 
GCC’s J-3 in coordination with the J-4.  This may vary slightly  in different theaters.  
Consequently, a n  e s s e n t i a l  r o l e  f o r  t h e  D I R M O B F O R  i s  t o  s e r v e  a s  t h e  p r i n c i p al 
interface between the JAOC, the theater’s J-4, and the JMC/JDDO C to ensure 
appropriate prioritization of air mobility tasks while balancin g requirements and air 
mobility capability. 
 
d.  When a joint force is forme d, command relationships for air  mobility forces will 
be established in accordance with the Unified Command Plan  and the global force 
management process.  Command of these forces will be as establi shed by the JFC and 
normally exercised through the COMAFFOR and/or JFACC with the advice and assistance 
of the DIRMOBFOR.  The JAOC director is charged with the effect iveness of joint air 
operations and focuses on planning, coordinating, allocating, t asking, executing, and 
assessing air operations in the operational area based on JFACC  guidance and 
DIRMOBFOR coordination.  While t he JAOC director provides direc tion to all AOC 
divisions, to include the AMD, th e DIRMOBFOR coordinates direct ly with the AMD to 
focus on the integration of USTRANSCOM forces to meet JFACC guidance, requirements, 
and prioritization as published in the AOD.   
 
For more detailed information, see JP 3-17, Air Mobility Operations. 
 

Chapter III 
III-30 JP 3-30 
9.  Unmanned Aircraft Systems Considerations 
 
a.  Friendly UAS Operations 
 
(1)  General Considerations.  UAS technology can provide commanders with 
critical capabilities to enhance their situational awareness to  make informed decisions, 
protect forces, reduce collateral damage, and achieve objective s.  For planning and 
execution, UASs should be treated similarly to manned systems with regard to the 
established doctrinal warfighting principles.   Like manned aircraft, the operation of a 
UAS should adhere to the guidance contained in this and other j oint and multi-Service 
publications.  While the JFC retains the authority to determine the use and control of UAS 
forces, there are some unique issues for planners and commander s to consider when 
employing these systems. 
 
Note:  Because of the wide range in UASs’ size and operating ch aracteristics, it is 
helpful to address them by categories, based primarily on weight and flight characteristics 
(see Figure III-14).  The Air Force refers to its Groups 4 and 5 UASs as remotely piloted 
aircraft to differentiate its operators who have been trained to similar standards as manned 
aircraft pilots. 
 
(2)  Unique Characteristics Associated with C2 of UASs.   W h i l e  t h e  C 2  
processes for UASs are similar to those for manned assets, several characteristics of 
UASs can make C2 particularly challenging. 
 
(a)  UAS communication links are generally more critical than those required 
for manned systems.  Although UASs can be programmed to return to base upon loss of 
communication, they rely on a nearly continuous stream of communications (for both flight 
control and payload) to successfully complete a mission.  Therefore, coordinated spectrum 
management and communications security, specifically emission security (from both 
friendly interference and adversary action), is imperative. 
 
(b)  UASs may be capable of transferring control of the aircraf t and/or 
payloads to multiple operators while airborne.  Clear transfer of authority and close 
coordination amongst all potential operators and supporting units is required. 
 
(c)  Most larger UASs have considerably longer endurance times  t h a n  
comparable manned systems.  This may allow these UASs to be use d to support multiple 
taskings during a single mission.  Planners should exploit this capability, if available, when 
tasking UAS assets. 
 
(d)  Compliance with the ACO is critical.  Unlike manned aircra ft, UASs 
cannot typically “see and avoid” other aircraft.  Additionally,  UASs generally have small 
radar and visual signatures and may not have identification, friend or foe capability.  Both 
positive and procedural airspace control procedures will likely be required for UAS control 
and deconfliction.  
 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-31 
(e)  A supporting UAS LNO/subject m atter expert can facilitate the flow of 
information between UAS operato rs and the supported unit to ens ure the supported unit 
understands UAS capabilities and limitations. 
 
(f)  Many UASs are sensitive to and impacted by adverse weather conditions, 
such as thunderstorms, strong wi nds, precipitation, and icing, which will limit their 
employment.  Depending on the type of UAS and mission being con ducted, planners and 
operators may have to consider the weather in four separate and widely dispersed locations 
(satellite relay, launch and recovery base, transit route[s], and anticipated target location).  
Weather considerations should also include space environmental monitoring, as solar 
activity may adversely affect satellite communications. 
 
 
Figure III-14.  Unmanned Aircraft Systems Categorization Chart 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems Categorization Chart
Legend
UA
Category
Group 1
Maximum
Gross Takeoff
Weight (lbs)
Normal 
Operating 
Altitude (ft)
Speed
(KIAS)
Representative 
UAS
0-20 < 1200 AGL 100 kts
WASP III, TACMAV
RQ-14A/B, Buster,
Nighthawk, RQ-11B, 
FPASS, RQ16A, 
Pointer, Aqua/Terra 
Puma
Group 2 21-55 < 3500 AGL < 250 ScanEagle, Silver Fox, 
Aerosonde
Group 3
< 1320
< 18,000 MSL
< 250
RQ-7B Shadow, RQ-15 
Neptune, XPV-1 Tern, 
XPV-2 Mako
Group 4
> 1320
Any 
Airspeed
MQ-5B Hunter, MQ-8B 
Fire Scout, MQ-1C 
Gray Eagle, MQ-1A/B/C 
Predator
Group 5
> 18,000 MSL
MQ-9 Reaper, RQ-4 
Global Hawk, RQ-4N 
Triton
> 1320
Any 
Airspeed
AGL above ground level
FPASS force protection aeri al surveillance system
ft feet
KIAS knots indicated airspeed
kts knots
lbs pounds
MSL mean sea level
TACMAV tactical micro air vehicle
UA unmanned aircraft
UAS unmanned aircraft system

Chapter III 
III-32 JP 3-30 
(g)  Some larger UASs may be employed using remote split operat ions 
(RSO).  RSO refers to the geograp hical separation of the launch  and recovery crew from 
the mission crew who employ the aircraft at a location other th a n  w h e r e  th e  a irc ra f t i s  
based.  Advantages of this construct are typically reduced forw ard footprint, more rapid 
deployment, and potential flexibi lity in asset allocation betwe en other JOAs.  However, 
this construct also presents unique C2 challenges.  Command relationships and tasking and 
support authorities must be clearly articulated and understood by all participating forces. 
 
(3)  Mission Planning Considerations.  Current doctrinal planning considerations 
for manned aircraft are generally applicable to UASs.   
 
(a)  Allocation of UASs in Joint Operations.  The JFC process for allocating 
UAS assets to the JFACC will be the same as the manned aircraft  allocation decision 
process.  Transferring C2 of UAS s within a Service or functiona l component can be 
accomplished through Service or functional command structures. 
 
(b)  C2 of Theater-Capable UASs.  Theater-capable UASs can range the 
theater of operations and support multiple users.  They can be used to support the JFC 
(UASs made available by component commanders), a component commander’s operations 
(organic UASs), other component  commanders, or potentially GCC’ s in adjacent AORs.  
As these low-density assets can be in high demand, the JFC and JFACC should carefully 
consider apportionment and allocation decisions.  The JFC shoul d ensure the JFACC has 
the assets needed to execute JFC-assigned, JOA-wide operations, while attempting to meet 
the organic needs of the other component commanders.  As with a ny joint-capable asset, 
the JFC retains the authority to use any UAS asset to meet the needs of the JFC mission.  
How theater-capable UAS operations are managed and planned will vary based on the type 
and phase of an operation. 
 
(c)  Flight Planning.  All UA flights, regardless of the size of the UA, the 
mission profile, or the flight location, should follow approved  planning, guidance, and 
procedures as prescribed in the AOD, ACO, ATO, and SPINS, as applicable.  Typically, it 
is not necessary to include Groups 1-2 UASs on the ATO unless their planned operating 
altitudes could cause a conflict with other airborne operations .  All other UASs 
(Groups 3-5) should be included in the ACO, ATO, and SPINS.  
The ACA may establish 
specific flight routes, altitudes, and coordination measures  to deconflict UAS operations.  
These should be published in the ACO. 
 
(d)  UAS Emergency Planning.  The unique requirements of UAS data links 
require detailed planning for lost link and emergency recoverie s.  UAS emergency 
procedures may be more complicated than those of manned platforms.  Detailed planning for 
lost link; lost positio ning, navigation, and timing (PNT) self- awareness (typically due to 
Global Positioning System [GPS] signal interference); and other emergency procedures and 
recoveries are required due to the dependence on PNT information and the control data link.  
Planned lost link and emergency profiles must be safe and consi stent with all airspace 
requirements, follow ACO guidance, and deconflict with other airspace users.  Emergency 
planning must also consider the possible recovery of UA, potent ially armed, into an 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-33 
emergency divert base.  The divert base must incorporate a compatible launch and recovery 
element to ensure safe UA recovery. 
 
(4)  Employment Considerations.  Effective UAS employment requires an in-
depth knowledge of, and compliance with, theater SPINS, ROE, ACP, ACO, and ATO, as 
well as UAS capabilities and limitations.   
 
(a)  Tasking UASs   
 
1.  For UASs made available to the JFACC for tasking, units requesting 
support should not request a specific UAS asset.  Requests shou ld follow standard theater 
request procedures for either ISR (see paragraph 7, “Intelligen ce, Surveillance, and 
Reconnaissance Considerations”), strike, or direct support miss ions (e.g., CAS, armed 
overwatch) with the desired eff ect.  Depending on the desired e ffect, there may be more 
than one type of manned or unmanned asset available to support a particular requirement.  
Requests are generally categorized as preplanned or dynamic. 
 
a.  Preplanned.  Requests for support of a preplanned mission 
should be requested using the f orms and procedures established for the theater, such as 
Department of Defense Form 1972, Joint Tactical Air Strike Request, or the Air Support 
Request.  Requests should attempt to be made in accordance with standar d ATO tasking 
cycle timelines.  Requests made inside the ATO cycle may still be accommodated but 
require close coordination with JAOC planning staffs. 
 
b.  Dynamic.  Dynamic requests entail redirecting UASs from an 
existing mission to a new mission based on published priorities  and criteria.  Historically, 
reasons for retasking include troops in contact, high-priority target opportunities, and PR.  
Procedures and decisions for dynamic retasking of UAS assets in -flight to meet an 
immediate support request are governed by the plan/order, ROE, and/or SPINS. 
 
2.  Retasking a preplanned UAS mission must be carefully considered.  
Dynamic retasking of a UAS should be done by the governing C2 a gency and only after 
evaluating the full impact of diverting the capability from the  current mission and the 
impact to operational success or consequences without the asset .  Issues such as JFC 
priorities, transit time, and required PED must be considered a nd coordinated when 
dynamically retasking UASs.   
 
(b)  UAS C2 for Dynamic Targeting.  Recent operations have demonstrated 
that UASs can be highly effective for dynamic targeting mission s prosecuting targets of 
opportunity (unscheduled, unanticipated).  UAS controlling agen cies should follow 
established procedures for executing dynamic targeting operations.  Specific tasks for the 
UASs may include target acquisition/marking, terminal guidance of ordnance, providing 
precision coordinates for GPS-ai ded munitions, delivery of onbo ard precision-guided 
ordnance, tactical assessment, B DA, and retargeting (i.e., “sho ot-look-shoot”).  In the 
dynamic targeting role, UASs are routed, controlled, and deconflicted in the same manner 
as tiltrotor, fixed-wing, and rotary-winged manned aircraft, as outlined in joint doctrine. 

Chapter III 
III-34 JP 3-30 
b.  Counter-UAS.  Adversaries are also developing and acquiring UASs, with the 
same capabilities and missions described above.  Planners must consider the capabilities 
and processes to counter adversary UASs and incorporate them in to counterair and air 
defense planning. 
 
(1)  Larger adversary UASs (Groups 4 and 5) can generally be co untered with 
existing counterair capabilities.  It is generally the low, slo w, and smaller UASs (Groups 
1, 2, and some 3) that pose a challenge to detect, track, ident ify, and engage.  New 
capabilities are being developed to counter these systems and m ust be considered and 
integrated into the overall counterair planning and JOA integrated air defense system. 
 
(2)  It is imperative C2 and DCA nodes are able to identify enemy small UA, 
some of which may be similar or identical to friendly UAs.   Complicating this is the 
increasing use of small UAs by other government agencies and/or by private or commercial 
entities.  Friendly UAS operators m ust follow prescribed airspace control and air defense 
identification procedures closely to help prevent friendly fire incidents.  Adversaries may 
attempt to exploit airspace “gaps,” so these should be kept to a minimum when developing 
ACPs.  Positive control of airspace is generally most effective for airspace control and air 
defense, but many smaller UASs are not capable of positive control.  The use of coordinating 
altitudes and other coordinating measures should be employed for efficient and timely use of 
the airspace, and to aid air defense operators differentiate between friend and foe UA.   
 
For further details on counter-UAS procedures, refer to JP 3-01, Countering Air and Missile 
Threats. 
 
10.  Personnel Recovery Considerations 
 
Since PR often relies on air assets to accomplish some of the P R execution tasks, 
coordination between the joint p ersonnel recovery center (JPRC)  and JAOC is essential.  
The JPRC provides the information that goes into the PR portion of the ATO SPINS.  The 
JFACC should ensure the ATO includes air assets sufficient to a ccomplish PR tasks.  
Deconfliction of PR missions from other air missions is accompl ished through the ATO.  
If the JPRC is not collocated and integrated into the JAOC, it is essential the JPRC director 
establish a liaison element within the JAOC to facilitate taski ng of dedicated PR assets in 
the ATO, coordinate tasking or redirection of air assets to sup port PR mission execution, 
monitor ATO and PR mission execution, coordinate changes to PR information in the ATO 
SPINS, assess the effectiveness of PR, and recommend changes to  JFC/JFACC guidance 
for PR.  Service components shou ld establish a personnel recove ry coordination cell 
(PRCC)/rescue coordination team (RCT) to coordinate all component PR activities.  When 
the JFACC is the supported commander for PR, the PRCC/RCT and a ssociated 
communications structure may be collocated and form the nucleus  of the JPRC.  In this 
case, the PRCC/RCT, when augmented by other members of the join t force, is normally 
designated as the JPRC and the JPRC director is tasked with coo rdinating all PR joint 
activities.  Coordination of PR missions, employing JFACC asset s, requires integration 
with the J-3 and COD.  The deta ils for PR can usually be found in annex C (Operations), 
appendix 5 (Personnel Recovery) of the JAOP. 

 Planning and Executing Jo int Air Operations 
III-35 
For additional information on joint PR, see JP 3-50, Personnel Recovery. 
 
11.  Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Environments 
 
CBRN hazards (from any source) have the potential to affect air operations planning, 
C2, and mission execution.  Planning should identify, assess, and estimate the adversary’s 
CBRN capabilities, intentions, a nd most likely COAs and provide  recommendations to 
senior commanders to protect against, counter, and/or mitigate their effects.  Options for 
generating and executing missions in a CBRN environment, includ ing airspace control 
issues, must be assessed.  Intelligence collection missions may  more likely encounter 
CBRN hazards and, in some cases, their objective will be to locate and characterize CBRN 
threats and hazards.  As such, taskings should consider specifi c platform CBRN 
contamination avoidance or CBRN hazard survivability capabilities/limitations.   
 
For more detailed information on operations  in a CBRN environment, see JP 3-11, 
Operations in Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Environments. 
 
12.  Operations Near International Borders 
 
Near border operations are particularly difficult because the violation of a border could 
complicate an operation.  Near border operations require close coordination between the 
ACA, AADC, Service component commanders, CCDR, US Department of  State, 
multinational partners, and other organizations as necessary.  Staffs, including public 
affairs and the staff judge advocate, must be prepared to deal effectively with the 
anticipated and unanticipated outcomes of near border operations. 
 
13.  Command and Control of Space Forces 
 
a.  Commander, United States Strategic Command (CDRUSSTRATCOM), exercises 
combatant command (command authority) over assigned space forces and assets to ensure 
availability of space capabilities to the joint warfighter.  CD RUSSTRATCOM typically 
delegates TACON of assigned space units to the USSTRATCOM Joint  Force Space 
Component Commander.  CDRUSSTRATCOM provides general and direct  support to 
other JFCs.  Supported commanders identify priorities to ensure there is clear guidance on 
the supported commander’s intent, integrate space capabilities into planning and 
operations, and consider the impact if space capabilities are u navailable.  GCCs may 
designate a SCA and delegate appr opriate authorities for planni ng and integrating space 
requirements and support for the theater.  
b.  USSTRATCOM provides direct and general support to CCMDs for  space 
operations.  However, a GCC may require OPCON or TACON of speci fied space forces 
for an operation, based on the situation or mission.  In this case, forces may be transferred 
with the specification of OPCON  and/or TACON as appropriate, to  t h e  G C C  ( w i t h  
Secretary of Defense approval), depending on the ability of the  G C C  t o  C 2  s p a c e  
operations, as well as other factors like the nature and durati on of the operation and the 
degree of integration (particularly timing and tempo) with non-space assets that is required. 
 

Chapter III 
III-36 JP 3-30 
For more information on the C2 of space forces, see JP 3-14, Space Operations. 
 
14.  Integration of Cyberspace Operations and Considerations 
 
a.  Commander, United States Cybe r Command (CDRUSCYBERCOM), int egrates, 
synchronizes, and conducts day-t o-day global CO.  Typically, CO  require coordination 
between theater and global opera tions, creating a dynamic C2 en v i r o n m e n t .   C O  a r e  
integrated and synchronized by the supported commander into the ir CONOPS, detailed 
plans and orders, and specific joint offensive and defensive op erations.  The GCCs are 
generally the supported commander for CO conducted in support o f operations in their 
AORs.  However, functional CCMDs with a global responsibility a re also supported.  
Similarly, CDRUSCYBERCOM is generally the supported commander a t the global or 
transregional (across AOR boundaries) level and will provide gl obal synchronization of 
CO planning and execution.  
 
b.  Like operations in the physical domains, CO create offensive and defensive effects 
that can enable the air component to achieve strategic, operational, and tactical objectives.  
Because CO can produce effects within or across AORs, integrati n g  C O  i n  t h e  a i r  
component scheme of maneuver requires coordination and synchron ization with multiple 
e n t i t i e s ,  w h i c h  m a y  i n c l u d e  t h e  J F C ’ s  C O  p l a n n i n g  s t a f f ,  t h e  a ssociated cyberspace 
operations-integrated planning element (CO-IPE), a CO JTF, or o ther planning and 
operational components associated with the Cyber Mission Force C 2  s t r u c t u r e .   T o  
effectively synchronize with other CO elements, the JAOC should  have representative 
offensive and defensive cyberspace expertise in the strategy, c ombat plans, combat 
operations, and ISR divisions.  Additionally, the JFACC should consider including 
personnel with CO experience in JACCEs at theater and other component headquarters.   
 
For more information on the C2 of cyberspace forces, see JP 3-12, Cyberspace Operations. 
 
15.  Air Operations in Maritime Surface Warfare 
 
Air operations in maritime surface warfare are missions involvi ng air assets 
conducting maritime surface warfare.  Seamless integration of j oint air assets conducting 
maritime surface warfare enables effective joint and multinational air participation to plan 
and execute five specific missions: surface surveillance coordi nation, armed 
reconnaissance/strike coordinatio n and reconnaissance, war-at-s ea strike, counter fast 
attack craft/fast inshore attack craft, and airborne maritime mining.  
For more information, refer to ATP 3-04.18/MCRP 3-25J/NTTP 3-20.8/AFTTP 3-2.74, 
Multi-Service Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for Air Operations in Maritime Surface 
Warfare. 
 
 

 
A-1 
APPENDIX A  
SAMPLE MISSION STATEMENT AND COMMANDER’S INTENT 
 
The initiation or mission analysis stages of JPPA should produce a mission statement 
and a statement of the commander’s intent, both approved by the JFACC. 
 
1.  Sample Mission Statement 
 
When directed, JFACC-West conducts joint air operations in the Pacific region to 
protect the deployment of the joi nt force and to deter aggressi on.  Should deterrence fail, 
JFACC-West, on order, gains air superiority to enable multinati onal military operations 
within the operational area.  Concurrently, JFACC-West supports JFLCC-West to prevent 
seizure of NV Pacifica mineral fields.  On order, JFACC-West sh apes the operational 
environment for a joint counteroffensive, supports JFMCC-West f or maritime superiority 
and JFLCC-West for ground offensive operations, degrades conven tional military power, 
and destroys WMD long/medium delivery capability to defeat the military forces in the 
region.” 
 
2.  Sample Statement of Commander’s Intent: 
 
a.  Purpose.  The purpose of the joint air ope ration is to deter aggression.  Should 
deterrence fail, I will gain and maintain air superiority, cond uct joint offensive air 
operations, and support the JFLCC counteroffensive to restore t he territorial integrity and 
ensure the establishment of a legitimate government in a stable Pacifica region. 
 
b.  Military End-State.  At the end of this operation: 
 
(1)  Enemy military forces will be capable of limited defensive  operations, have 
ceased offensive combat operations, and complied with multinati onal war termination 
conditions. 
 
(2)  Enemy will retain no WMD capability. 
 
(3)  Allied territorial integrity will be restored. 
 
(4)  JFACC-West will have passed ATC to local authorities. 
 
(5)  JFACC-West will have been disestablished. 
  

Appendix A 
A-2 JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 

 
B-1 
APPENDIX B 
JOINT AIR ESTIMATE OF THE SITUATION TEMPLATE 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
The JFACC’s estimate of the situation is often produced as the culmination of the air 
COA development and selection stages of JPPA.  It can be submit ted in response to or in 
support of creation of a JFC’s estimate of the situation.  It s hould also be used to assist in 
creation of the JAOP and daily AODs (as required).  It reflects  the JFACC’s analysis of 
the various air COAs that may be used to accomplish the assigned mission(s) and contains 
the recommendation for the best air COA.  The estimate may cont ain as much supporting 
detail as needed to assist further plan development, but if the  air estimate is submitted to 
the JFC or CCDR for a COA decision, it will generally be submitted in greatly abbreviated 
format, providing only the information essential to the JFC for arriving at a decision.  The 
following is an  example of a joint air estimate.  Use of the format is desirabl e, but not 
mandatory and may be abbreviated or elaborated where appropriat e.  It is often published 
in message format. 
 
For additional information on commander’s estim ates, see Chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff Manual (CJCSM) 3130.03, Adaptive Planning and Execution (APEX) Planning 
Guidance and Formats. 
 
2.  Joint Air Estimate of the Situation Template 
 
a.  Mission.  State the assigned or deduced mission and its purpose. 
 
(1)  JFC’s mission statement (from the JFC’s estimate) or other  overarching 
guidance if the latter is unavailable. 
 
(2)  JFACC’s mission statement.  Include additional language in dicating how 
overarching guidance will be supported, as required. 
 
b.  Situation and COAs 
 
(1)  Commanders’ Intent: 
 
(a)  JFC’s intent statement, if available (or other overarching  guidance 
stipulating the end state, as required). 
 
(b)  JFACC’s intent statement (see Appendix A, “Sample Mission Statement 
and Commander's Intent”). 
 
(2)  Objectives.  Explicitly state air component objectives and the effects required 
to support their achievement.  Include as much detail as required to ensure each objective 
is clear, decisive, achievable, and measurable. 

Appendix B 
B-2 JP 3-30 
(3)  Summary of the Results of JIPOE.  Include a brief summary of the major 
factors pertaining to the chara cteristics of the operating envi ronment and the relative 
capabilities of all actors within it that may have a significan t impact on alternative air 
COAs. 
 
(4)  Adversary Capability.  Highlight, if applicable, the adversary capabilities and 
psychological characteristics that can seriously affect the acc omplishment of the mission, 
giving information that would be useful in evaluating the vario us air COAs.  This section 
should describe, at a minimum, the enemy’s most likely and most  dangerous potential 
COAs. 
 
(5)  Force Protection Requirements.  Describe potential threats to friendly forces, 
including such things as the threat of terrorist action prior to, during, and after the mission 
that can significantly affect accomplishment of the mission. 
 
(6)  Own COAs.  List air COAs that offer suitable, feasible, and acceptable means 
of accomplishing the mission.  If specific air COAs were prescr ibed in the warning order, 
they must be included.  For each air COA, the following specifi c information should be 
addressed: 
 
(a)  Combat Forces Required.  List capabilities needed, and, if  applicable, 
specific units or platforms.  For each, list the following, if known: 
 
1.  Force provider. 
 
2.  Destination. 
 
3.  Required delivery date(s). 
 
4.  Coordinated deployment estimate. 
 
5.  Employment estimate. 
 
6.  Strategic lift requirements, if appropriate. 
 
(b)  ISR Capabilities Required.  List capabilities needed, and,  if applicable, 
specific units or capabilities. 
 
(c)  PR Capabilities Required.  List capabilities needed, and, if applicable, 
specific units or organizational capabilities. 
 
(d)  Support Forces Required.  Lis t capabilities needed, and, i f applicable, 
specific units or capabilities. 
 
c.  Analysis of Opposing COAs.  Highlight adversary capabilities and intent (where 
known) that may have significant impact on friendly COAs. 

 Joint Air Estimate of the Situation Template 
B-3 
d.  Comparison of Own COAs.   For submission to the JFC, include only the final 
statement of conclusions and prov ide a brief rationale for the favored air COA.  Discuss 
the relative advantages and disadvantages of the alternative air COAs if this will assist the 
JFC in arriving at a decision. 
 
e.  Recommended COA.  State the JFACC’s recommended COA. 
  

Appendix B 
B-4 JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 
 

 
C-1 
APPENDIX C 
JOINT AIR OPERATIONS PLAN TEMPLATE 
 
The JAOP format generally follows the same format as the JFC’s OPLAN, detailing 
air operations support to that OPLAN.  Each air operations plan  will differ with the JOA, 
situation, and capabilities of the joint force.  A sample template follows: 
 
Copy No. 
Issuing Headquarters 
Place of Issue 
Date/Time Group of Signature 
 
JOINT AIR OPERATIONS PLAN: 
(Number or Code Name) 
 
REFERENCES: Relevant documents, maps, and charts.  This should generally in clude 
CJCSM 3130.03, Planning and Execution Planning Formats and Guidance. 
 
1.  SITUATION 
 
Briefly describe the situation that the plan addresses (see the  JFC’s estimate and the 
following template as a guide).  Related OPLAN(s) should be identified, as appropriate. 
 
a.  General Guidance.   Summarize the operational environment and overall JFC 
mission, guidance, intent, prior itized effects, operational lim itations, and specified tasks 
for the JFACC and established support relationships among compo nents that are relevant 
to that guidance. 
 
b.  Area of Concern.   Description of and applicable  boundaries of the operational 
area(s), area(s) of interest, etc.  Include maps as appropriate. 
 
c.  Deterrent Options.  Describe air operations role in these JFC options, if applicable. 
 
d.  Enemy Forces.  Overview of the hostile threat, to include: 
 
(1)  Composition, location, disposition, and movement of major enemy forces and 
capabilities that can influence action in the operational environment. 
 
(2)  Enemy strategic concept (if known): should include enemy’s  perception of 
friendly vulnerabilities and enemy’s intention regarding those vulnerabilities. 
 
(3)  Major enemy objectives (strategic and operational). 
 
(4)  Enemy commanders’ motivations, thought patterns, idiosyncr asies, and 
doctrinal patterns (to the extent known). 

Appendix C 
C-2 JP 3-30 
(5)  Operational and sustained capabilities (all relevant enemy forces, not just air 
and counterair). 
 
(6)  Enemy COGs and decisive points. 
 
(a)  Analysis of critical capabilities (CCs), critical requirem ents (CRs), and 
critical vulnerabilities (CVs) for each. 
 
(b)  Description using LOOs and LOEs, if appropriate. 
 
e.  Friendly Forces.  Overview of friendly (US and multinational partner), to include: 
 
(1)  Forces available according to TPFDD considerations. 
 
(2)  Forces required, based on employment CONOPS.  Highlight shortfalls. 
 
(3)  Intent of higher, adjacent, and supporting US and multinat ional forces and 
commands. 
 
(4)  Friendly COGs. 
 
(a)  Analysis of CCs, CRs, and CVs. 
 
(b)  Steps to be taken to protect friendly CVs. 
 
f.  Assumptions.  List, as required.   
 
g.  Legal Considerations.  List those of critical importance to operations, such as legal 
restrictions and guidance on targeting.  Refer to annexes, as required. 
 
2.  MISSION 
 
JFACC’s Mission Statement 
 
3.  EXECUTION 
 
a.  C O N O P S  f o r  J o i n t  A i r  O p e r a t i o n s .  A statement of the JFACC’s intent, 
objectives, desired effects, and broad employment concepts, to include LOOs and LOEs 
for the desired end state.  Phase plans for each phase of the operation. 
 
(1)  Operational concept for the phase, including objectives (ongoing and specific 
to the phase), intent, desired effects, risk, LOOs, LOEs, plan of operations, timing, and 
duration. 
(2)  General guidance for subor dinate units and component’s sup ported and 
supporting requirements.  Ensure all subordinates’ missions are complementary. 

 Joint Air Operations Plan Template 
C-3 
(3)  Forces or capabilities required by objective. 
 
(4)  “Be prepared to” missions; phase branches. 
 
(5)  Reserve capabilities and/or forces, if applicable–reserve in this sense meaning 
capabilities held in operational reserve, not Reserve Component elements of the joint force. 
 
(6)  Mobility considerations, such as transportation, lines of communications, 
overflight, and basing, that are unique to the phase of the operation. 
 
(7)  Information-related activities that contribute to military  deception, military 
information support operations, and operations security, that are unique to the phase of the 
operation.  
 
(8)  CO considerations, such as DOD information network operati ons, offensive 
CO, and defensive CO, that are unique to the phase. 
 
b.  Tasks.  State the component’s supporting and supported requirements f or the 
operation in general.  Include implied tasks and guidance to su bordinates that are not 
specific to a given phase of the operation. 
 
c.  Coordinating Instructions.  Explain the operational terms required for complete 
understanding of the operation.   
 
d.  Exchange of LNOs.  Explain and direct any liais on requirements here, including 
the role of the JACCE. 
 
4.  ADMINISTRATION AND LOGISTICS 
 
a.  Concept of Sustainment.  A broad statement of the functional areas of logistics, 
transportation, personnel policies, and administration, if required. 
 
b.  Logistics.  Broad sustainment concept for air operations.  Phase consider ations 
(synchronized with execution phase s–may not be required if alre ady explained in phase 
plans). 
 
(1)  Basing and Overflight.  Explain any unique clearance and b uildup 
requirements in this section, if not already explained in phase plans. 
 
(2)  Lines of Communications.  Explain any requirements relevant to the operation. 
 
(3)  Base Opening and Development.  Explain any general base op ening 
requirements for the operation.  Information may also be included in phase plans. 
 
(4)  Maintenance and Modification.  Use as required. 

Appendix C 
C-4 JP 3-30 
(5)  Host-Nation Considerations .  Explain any unique requiremen ts for the 
operation. 
 
(6)  Reconstitution of Forces.  Use as required. 
 
(7)  Inter-Service, Interagenc y, and Inter-Component Requiremen t s .   U s e  a s  
required. 
 
(8)  Foreign Military Assistance.  Use as required. 
 
(9)  Operational Contract Suppor t.  Identify known, required ca pabilities being 
satisfied through contracted support. 
 
c.  Personnel.  Use as required. 
 
d.  Public Affairs.   Identify key public affairs requirements necessitated by majo r 
event (may also be identified in phase plans). 
 
e.  Civil Affairs.  Use as required. 
 
f.  Meteorological and Oceanographic.  Explain factors like climate and terrain, and 
how they will likely affect air operations. 
 
g.  Geospatial Information.  Explain common geospatial reference system requirements 
and plans here. 
 
h.  Medical Services.  Use as required. 
 
5.  COMMAND AND CONTROL 
 
a.  Command 
 
(1)  Command Relationships.  Specify command relationships for all organizations 
relevant to the JFACC operations.  Be as specific as possible.   
 
(2)  Memoranda of Understanding.  As applicable. 
 
(3)  Command Headquarters.  Designation and location of all air-capable command 
headquarters. 
 
(4)  Continuity of Operations.  Any general considerations unique to the operation. 
 
(5)  Command Posts.  List the designations and locations of eac h major 
headquarters. 
(6)  Succession to Command.  Designate, in order of succession, the commanders 
responsible for assuming command of the operation in specific applicable circumstances. 

 Joint Air Operations Plan Template 
C-5 
b.  C2 and Communications Systems.   G e n e r a l  o v e r v i e w  o f  C 2  s y s t e m s  a n d  
communication systems required to support air operations.  
 
6.  ANNEXES 
 
JAOP annexes should be written f or functional-specific audience s and contain 
technical details necessary for C2 of all air organizations and  capabilities across the joint 
force.  They should contain any details not considered appropriate for the relevant section 
of the main plan. 
 
A.  Task Organization. 
 
B.  Intelligence. 
 
C.  Operations. 
 
D.  Logistics. 
 
E.  Personnel. 
 
F.  Public Affairs. 
 
G.  Civil-Military Operations. 
 
H.  Meteorological and Oceanographic Operations. 
 
I.  Knowledge and Information Management. 
 
J.  Command Relationships. 
 
K.  Command, Control, Communications, and Computer Systems. 
 
L.  Environmental Considerations. 
 
N.  Assessments. 
 
O.  Foreign Disclosure Guidance. 
 
P.  Host-Nation Support. 
 
Q.  Health Services. 
 
R.  Reports. 
 
S.  Special Technical Operations. 
T.  Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Response. 

Appendix C 
C-6 JP 3-30 
U.  Notional Counterproliferation Decision Guide. 
V.  Interorganizational-Interagency Coordination. 
W.  Operational Contract Support. 
X.  Execution Checklist. 
Y.  Commander's Communication Strategy. 
Z.  Distribution. 
 
 
(Signed) (Commander) 
 
DISTRIBUTION: 
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION. 
 
  

 
D-1 
APPENDIX D 
AIR OPERATIONS DIRECTIVE TEMPLATE 
 
Issuing Headquarters 
Place of Issue 
AOD Effective Period 
Date/Time Group of Signature 
 
1.  SITUATION 
 
a.  JFC guidance (verbatim). 
 
(1)  JFC’s intent statement. 
 
(2)  Execution guidance (if issued). 
 
(3)  Supported and supporting command relationships. 
 
b.  Enemy situation. 
 
c.  Friendly situation (by joint force component). 
 
2.  MISSION 
 
The JFACC’s mission statement (verbatim).  Covers all phases of  the operation, but 
AOD may state which phase this AOD applies to.  This should not  change unless the 
mission itself changes. 
 
3.  EXECUTION–AIR OPERATIONS 
 
a.  JFACC’s intent. 
 
(1)  Purpose. 
 
(2)  End state. 
 
b.  Execution: What to do, when. 
 
c.  Focus of effort by objective. 
 
d.  Weight of effort by objective. 
 
e.  Acceptable level of risk. 
 
f.  Collateral damage and civilian casualty guidance. 

Appendix D 
D-2 JP 3-30 
g.  TST guidance. 
 
h.  Other issues (e.g., ISR, information, space, mobility, focus of effort, PR). 
 
4.  ADMINISTRATION AND LOGISTICS 
 
Logistics considerations affecting operations during the AOD period. 
 
5.  COMMAND AND CONTROL 
 
C2 considerations affecting operations during the AOD period.  If there are no unique 
considerations, refer the reader to the JAOP commander relationship annex. 
 
6.  ANNEXES 
 
Use as required.  Typical annexes: 
 
a.  Full listing of end state cond itions, objectives, effects, and tasks, including MOP 
and effectiveness for each (as applicable). 
 
b.  Commander’s critical informati on requirements and essential  elements of 
information applicable for the AOD period. 
 

 
E-1 
APPENDIX E 
JOINT AIR OPERATIONS CENTER DIVISIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS 
 
1.  Joint Air Operations Center Director 
 
The JAOC director is charged with effectively managing joint ai r operations and 
establishing the JAOC battle rhythm.  The JAOC director develop s and directs processes 
to plan, coordinate, allocate, task, execute, and assess joint air operations in the JOA based 
on JFC and JFACC guidance.  The JAOC director’s staff includes division chiefs, ATO 
coordinators, the JAOC manager, information management personnel, and the ATO SPINS 
coordinator (see Figure E-1). 
 
2.  Strategy Division 
 
The SD concentrates on long-range and near-term planning of joi nt air operations to 
achieve JFC objectives by developing, refining, disseminating, and assessing the JFACC’s 
strategy.  In addition, the SD does near-term planning for spac e operations, CO, and 
information activities in coordi nation with joint air operation s.  Strategy activities are 
primarily reflected in the JAOP, AOD, and the operational asses sment report.  The SD is 
divided into four teams:  strate gy plans, strategy guidance, in formation activities, and 
operational assessment.  Despite physical proximity to the ATO planning, production, and 
execution areas within the JAOC, SD personnel should not become caught up in execution 
details.  Although the information activities team is organizationally aligned with the SD, 
it coordinates information efforts across all the divisions within the JAOC. 
 
3.  Combat Plans Division 
 
The CPD is responsible for near-t erm air operations planning (w ithin 48 hours prior 
to ATO execution).  The CPD is divided into four teams: TET, MA AP, ATO production, 
and C2 plans.  The TET develops the JFACC’s TNL and may produce  a draft JIPTL for 
JFC approval.  The primary daily products of CPD processes are the ATO and ACO.  CPD 
develops the MAAP, assembles the SPINS, and finalizes ISR synchronization matrix.  The 
MAAP team needs the current AOD, ABP shell, preplanned AIRSUPRE Qs, and JIPTL 
loaded to build missions in the proper TBMCS format.  The C2 pl ans team produces the 
daily ACO, tactical operations data, and operational task link message.  The ATO 
production team develops the ABP databases and assembles, publi shes, and disseminates 
the ATO and SPINS.  Additionally, various specialty/support per sonnel are embedded in 
the CPD. 
 
4.  Combat Operations Division 
 
The COD is responsible for the execution of the current ATO (us ually the 24 hours 
encompassing the effective period of the ATO).  The COD is divi ded into four teams: 
offensive operations, defensive operations, interface control, and the senior intelligence 
duty officer (SIDO) team.  Additionally, various specialty/support personnel are embedded 
in the COD. 

Appendix E 
E-2 JP 3-30 
5.  Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Division  
 
For operations in theaters outside the continental US, the ISRD  provides the JFACC 
and JAOC with awareness of threat activity in the operational area; assists with integrating, 
 
Figure E-1.  Joint Force Air Component Commander Staff and Joint  
Air Operations Center Organization 
Joint Force Air Component Commander Staff and 
Joint Air Operations Center Organization
AAMDC Army air and mi ssile defense command
AFLE Air Force liaison element
ATO air tasking order
BCD battlefield coordination detachment
C2 command and control
ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
JAOC joint air operations center
JFACC joint force air component commander
MAAP master air attack plan
MARLE Marine liaison element
NALE naval and amphibious liaison element
NGO nongovernmental organization
PED processing, exploitation, and dissemination
SIDO senior intelli gence duty officer
SOLE special operati ons liaison element
TET targeting effects team
Legend
command and control
coordination
AFLE BCD NALE SOLE MARLEAAMDC
 Liaison Elements
 Unit Liaisons
Interagency Liaisons NGOs International Organizations Contractors M ultinational Liaisons
JFACC
Communications
JAOC Director Other Staff
Personal and Special Staff Personnel
Specialty 
and 
Support 
Teams
Combat 
Plans
TET
MAAP
ATO 
Production
C2 Plans
Strategy
Strategy Plans
Strategy 
Guidance
Operational 
Assessment
Information 
Operations
Combat 
Operations
Offensive 
Operations
Defensive 
Operations
SIDO Team
Interface 
Control
ISR
Analysis, 
Correlation, 
and Fusion
Targets/ 
Tactical 
Assessment
ISR Operations
PED 
Management
Air 
Mobility
Airlift Control
Air Refueling 
Control
Air Mobility 
Control
Aeromedical 
Evacuation

 Joint Air Operations Center Divisions and Descriptions 
 
E-3 
planning, and managing airborne ISR operations; develops and ma intains targeting 
information about the threat; and assists with execution of ISR operations.  In addition, the 
ISRD has integrated teams or assigned personnel in other JAOC d ivisions.  The ISRD is 
divided into four teams: analysis, correlation, and fusion; tar gets and tactical assessment; 
ISR operations; and PED team.  ISR personnel, assigned in the S D, assist in the 
development of overall JFACC st rategy, JAOP, and operational as sessment.  ISR 
personnel, assigned in the CPD, provide tailored ISR operations planning, threat analysis, 
and targeting expertise necessary to develop detailed execution  plans for joint air 
operations.  ISR personnel, assi gned to the COD, are part of th e SIDO team and provide 
current situational awareness, targeting, and ISR operations management for execution of 
the ATO. 
 
6.  Air Mobility Division 
 
The AMD plans, coordinates, tasks, executes, and assesses the a ir mobility mission 
for assigned and attached mobility forces in support of JFC objectives.  The AMD consists 
of an airlift control team (ALCT), an air refueling control tea m (ARCT), an air mobility 
control team (AMCT), and an aeromedical evacuation control team  (AECT).  It may also 
include an air mobility support team and a theater direct deliv ery cell.  The ALCT plans, 
schedules, and manages theater airlift operations.  The ARCT plans, schedules, tasks, and 
assists in execution of air refueling missions to support opera tions.  The AMCT is the 
central C2 entity for execution of air mobility missions and provides support for the overall 
air mobility effort.  The AECT plans, schedules, and monitors e xecution of AE missions 
to support patient movements.  Elements within the AMD are matr ixed throughout other 
divisions to enhance integration, mission planning, and execution.  
 
7.  Specialty and Support Functions 
 
Various teams provide the JAOC with diverse capabilities necess ary to successfully 
integrate and orchestrate joint air operations.  Key functions include force protection, 
public affairs, PR, staff judge advocate, weather, airspace man agement, and information 
management.  Integration of these  capabilities is crucial to th e success of the JAOC and 
joint air operations. 
  

Appendix E 
E-4 JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 

 
F-1 
APPENDIX F 
LIAISON ELEMENTS WITHIN THE JOINT AIR OPERATIONS CENTER 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Liaison between forces is essentia l for coordinated and effecti ve joint air operations.  
Component commanders will exchange liaison elements to assist a nd coordinate the 
planning and execution of their component’s operations with joint air operations.  Liaison 
elements provide senior-level interface for air, land, maritime, space, cyberspace, and SOF.  
These elements consist of personnel who provide component plann ing and tasking 
expertise, coordination capabilities, and the ability to deconflict component operations and 
joint air operations.  A brief summary follows of typical liais on elements.  Detailed 
information can be found in respective command and Service documents. 
 
2.  Battlefield Coordination Detachment 
 
A BCD is a specialized, regionally focused Army element that serves as the senior Army 
operational commander's liaison with the air component.  A BCD is co-located with the 
JAOC, multinational AOC, or the Air Force AOC.  The BCD is the Army's interface for 
systems connectivity to the JAOC and for personnel integration with their JAOC counterparts.  
BCD tasks include facilitating th e exchange of current intellig ence and operational data, 
processing AIRSUPREQs, monitoring and interpreting the land battle situation, coordinating 
air and missile defense, coordinating airlift, and integrating airspace requirements.  When a 
US Army headquarters is designated as the joint forces land component command, the BCD 
may serve as the land component commander's liaison to the air component commander when 
augmented with other land force representatives.  It expedites information exchange through 
face-to-face coordination with JAOC division/teams.  BCD personnel are trained to operate 
in the JAOC environment using both Army systems and joint air C2 systems and understand 
the operations process, joint C2 processes (e.g., joint targeti ng), and the air component 
processes (e.g., joint air taskin g cycle).  The BCD coordinates  and receives objectives, 
guidance, and priorities from th e ARFOR commander and staff.  A dditionally, the BCD 
supervises the Army air reconnaissance liaison teams and Army ground liaison detachments 
that coordinate ARFOR requirements with supporting Air Force reconnaissance, fighter, and 
airlift wings.  BCD personnel work with their counterparts in the JAOC to facilitate planning, 
coordination, and execution of air-ground operations by ensuring:  
 
a.  The JFACC understands the Army commander’s operational inte nt, priorities, 
objectives, and air support requirements. 
 
b.  Pertinent Army command operational data and operational sup port requirements 
are forwarded to the JFACC, to include AIRSUPREQs, airspace coo rdinating measure 
requests, manned and unmanned in formation collection, cyberspac e and electromagnetic 
activities, airlift, and joint suppression of enemy air defenses. 
c.  Army requests for airspace coordination and air support are  coordinated with the 
appropriate elements. 

Appendix F 
F-2 JP 3-30 
d.  The ATO accurately reflects air support to the Army and Arm y aircraft missions, 
and the ACO reflects coordination measures approved for the Army. 
 
e.  All changes to theater-wide air defense warnings, weapons c ontrol status, ROEs, 
and aircraft identification standards among the JAOC, Army force headquarters, and senior 
land-based air and missile defense headquarters are coordinated. 
 
f.  Planned and unplanned changes to the FSCL and selected FSCMs are coordinated 
as required. 
 
g.  Army airspace risk guidance and airspace use priorities are  coordinated with the 
appropriate joint C2 elements/JAOC.  
 
h.  Priorities of JFC airspace risk guidance and airspace use are forwarded to the senior 
Army headquarters. 
 
i.  Priorities for use of joint air assets and changes to missions supporting ground forces 
are forwarded to the senior Army headquarters. 
 
3.  Special Operations Liaison Element  
 
The SOJTF commander, JSOTF commander, or JFSOCC provides a SOLE  t o  t h e  
JFACC, or appropriate Service c omponent air C2 facility, to coo rdinate and synchronize 
SOF air and surface operations with joint air operations.  The SOLE director places LNOs 
throughout the JFACC’s staff, located in the JAOC.  The SOLE coordinates, synchronizes, 
and deconflicts all SOF activities by providing a SOF presence in the JAOC that is aware 
of special operations activities.  Special operations must be c losely coordinated with joint 
air operations planning and execution to prevent friendly fire incidents and ensure 
achievement of mission objectives.   
 
For more information on the SOLE, see JP 3-05, Special Operations,  and USSOCOM 
Directive 525-7, Joint Special Operations Liaison Element. 
 
4.  Naval and Amphibious Liaison Element 
 
The JFMCC/NCC should establish a NALE to coordinate with the JA OC on matters 
pertaining to Navy and Marine amphibious, maritime, and air ope rations and to serve as 
the MOC’s primary point of contact in the AOC.  Placement of billets at the JAOC will be 
in coordination with t he appropriate commanders’ guidance (JFAC C and JFMCC/NCC) 
and should facilitate synchroniza tion of maneuver and synergy o f effects.  The NALE 
integrates JFMCC objectives into the AOD; advocates JFMCC/NCC target nominations to 
reflect desired effects in the J FC’s JIPTL; and coordinates, in tegrates, and deconflicts all 
naval air and surface activities in the JFACC’s ATO and ACO.  T he NALE facilitates 
JFMCC requests for air support and monitors and interprets the maritime battle situation 
for the JAOC.  The NALE supports incorporation of naval assets into the ATO, ensuring 
JFMCC/NCC assets are suitably integrated into joint air operati ons.  The NALE provides 

 Liaison Elements within the J oint Air Operations Center 
F-3 
the necessary interface for the exchange of current operational  and intelligence data 
between the components and the JAOC.  The NALE coordinates mari time requirements 
for air defense support and long- range interdiction.  The NALE also monitors maritime 
airspace, ATC requirements, and changes within the maritime AO or AOA, as specified.  
The NALE provides feedback to the JAOC and components on current and future joint air 
operations concerning integration of force requirements.  Speci alty/platform LNO 
positions may be required to be in the JAOC to cover specific m aritime platforms and 
capabilities that require special coordination. 
 
5.  Marine Liaison Element 
 
The MARLE is the Marine Corps forces commander’s representative within the JAOC 
and is responsive to the JFACC on matters pertaining to Marine Corps operations.  The 
MARLE provides feedback to organizations within the JAOC on cur rent and future joint 
air operations concerning integration of force requirements.   
 
6.  Air Force Liaison Element 
 
The AFLE provides an interface between the COMAFFOR and the JFA CC for 
coordinating and synchronizing Air Force units in support of jo int air operations if the 
JFACC is not also the COMAFFOR.  Normally, the AFLE is composed  of personnel and 
equipment for a general purpose, numbered Air Force’s staff and component organizations.  
AFLE manning is based on a cadre concept with personnel selecte d for their battle 
management expertise and knowledge of C2 concepts and procedure s.  The cadres are 
augmented by additional personnel who are specialists knowledge able in the capabilities 
and tactics of the aircraft, intelligence, or weapons systems b eing employed.  The AFLE 
can be tailored to perform a variety of missions and management  functions to match the 
contingency or operation. 
 
7.  Army Air and Missile Defense Command Liaison Team 
 
The AAMDC liaison team is the senior Army air and missile defense element.  It is the 
primary interface for all land-based Army air and theater missile defense operations.  The 
BCD air defense section will coordinate its activities with the AAMDC liaison if required.  
Although the BCD has an air defense section, responsibility to integrate the ARFOR air and 
missile defense resides with the senior air defense artillery c ommander, normally the 
commander, AAMDC.  The AAMDC liaison team responsibilities normally include: 
 
a.  Assisting the AADC with the AADP development. 
 
b.  Integrating land-based air and missile defense into theater defensive operations. 
c.  Advising the JFACC/AADC regard ing ROE, air defense measures , weapons 
control measures, fire control orders, and air defense warnings. 
d.  Advising the AADC on matters r egarding land-based air and m issile defense 
operations. 

Appendix F 
F-4 JP 3-30 
8.  Space Liaison 
 
Effective coordination is vital to facilitate integration of sp ace operations and 
capabilities across the joint force.  Space professionals on Se rvice and joint functional 
component staffs ensure JFCs and their staffs have a common und erstanding of space 
operations and how they should be integrated with other militar y operations to achieve 
unity of effort.  The SCA may r equire additional liaison with o ther organizations such as 
JFC headquarters, subordinate commands, and multinational forces. 
 
9.  Cyberspace Liaison 
 
A United States Cyber Command (USC YBERCOM) CO-IPE integrates wi thin a 
CCDR’s CO support staff to provide CO expertise and reachback c apability to 
USCYBERCOM.  CO-IPEs are organi zed from USCYBERCOM, Joint Force  
Headquarters-Department of Defense Information Network, and joi nt force headquarters-
cyberspace personnel and are co-l ocated with each CCMD for full  integration into their 
staffs.  CO-IPEs provide a CCDR with CO planners and other subj ect matter experts 
required to support development of CCMD requirements for CO and  to assist CCMD 
planners with coordinating, integrating, and deconflicting CO. 
 
10.  Other Liaison 
 
Liaisons representing multinational forces or interagency organ izations can improve 
JAOC situational awareness and co ntribute to unity of effort.  They provide invaluable 
information on their nations’ or agencies’ capabilities and sensitivities.  They can also help 
overcome cultural barriers.  The JFACC must anticipate the need for LNOs and be prepared 
to proactively coordinate as appropriate.   
 
For further discussion of liaisons, see JP 3-0, Joint Operations; JP 3-08, Interorganizational 
Cooperation; and JP 3-16, Multinational Operations. 
 

 
G-1 
APPENDIX G 
THE JOINT AIR COMPONENT COORDINATION ELEMENT 
 
1.  General 
 
A  J A C C E  i s  a  s m a l l  t e a m  o f  a i r  o p e r a t i o n s  e x p e r t s  t h a t  c a n  b e  used to facilitate 
coordination between a JFACC and other component commanders or the JFC.  The JACCE 
is intended as a facilitator and should not be used in place of existing, more formal methods 
of coordination.  The JACCE will not bear any responsibilities of the JAOC nor will it 
replace any JAOC processes or sub-processes.  The JFACC may sim ultaneously deploy 
multiple JACCEs as liaisons to the JTF, subordinate joint force s, or Services, while 
operating from home station or a deployed location.  Some general considerations include:  
 
a.  The JACCE director should be senior enough to work effectively with the JFC or 
component commander whom they are supporting. 
 
b.  The JACCE director should be supported by a staff.  Its size should reflect the 
breadth of the operation and normally includes plans, operation s, intelligence, airspace 
management, space, and air mobility.  Additionally, administrat ion and communications 
support may be needed. 
 
(1)  The JACCE staff should be representative of the JFACC’s st aff and should 
be composed primarily of personnel from the JFACC’s Service or component (e.g., if the 
JFACC is a naval officer and the JAOC is composed primarily of naval personnel, then the 
JACCE should also be composed primarily of naval personnel). 
 
(2)  JACCE composition and expertise should be tailored to the needs of the 
supported/supporting headquarters.  For example, the JACCE comp osition and expertise 
required for combat operations may be considerably different th an those required for a 
dedicated humanitarian operation. 
 
c.  Authority and responsibility of the JACCE should be tailored to JFACC needs.  
In some situations, the JFACC may give the JACCE significant la titude in their authority 
to represent the JFACC; in other situations, the JFACC may be more restrictive. 
 
d.  Working Relationships.  The JFACC should introduce the JACCE director to the 
supported component commander or JFC to establish the desired working relationship.  If 
this is not possible, the JFACC should at least meet face-to-fa ce with the JACCE prior to 
the JACCE assuming their duties.  Typically, when Army units ar e designated to provide 
the JTF or JFLCC and the COMAFFOR is designated the JFACC, the habitually aligned 
air support operations group will p rovide the JACCE nucleus due  to the established 
working relationships. 
 
e.  Communications.  A key to the JACCE’s success is its ability to communicate and 
gather information.  Better communication should lead to better  information and thus to 
better advice from the JACCE.  Some members of the JACCE will require access to special 

Appendix G 
G-2 JP 3-30 
access programs or compartmentalized information and they shoul d deploy with the 
requisite clearances. 
 
2.  Presentation and Command and Control Relationships 
 
Ideally, the JFACC and other component commanders would be located together and 
there would be no need for a JACCE—the JFACC and other commanders could work side-
by-side and talk face-to-face.  Headquarters are often not loca ted together, however, so a 
JACCE is presented to the other commanders to bridge that physi cal separation.  The 
JFACC retains OPCON of the JACCE, but Service components retain  administrative 
control of their personnel within it.  There are two general modes of JACCE presentation:  
internal and external to a JTF.  
 
a.  Presentation with JFACC internal to a JTF 
 
(1)  In this model, the CCDR has established a JTF; the JFACC is subordinate to 
the commander, JTF; and JACCE are presented as needed laterally  to other functional 
component commanders and upward to the JTF.  This is illustrated in Figure G-1. 
 
Figure G-1.  Structure for Joint Force Air Component Commander Internal to a Joint Task 
Force 
Structure for Joint Force Air Component Commander 
Internal to a Joint Task Force
Legend
BCD battlefield coordination detachment
JACCE joint air component coordination element
JFACC joint force air component commander
JFLCC joint force land component commander
JFMCC joint force maritime component commander
JFSOCC joint force special operations component commander
JTF joint task force
NALE naval and amphibious liaison element
SOLE special operations liaison element
joint
air
land
maritime
special operations
Combatant Commander
JFLCC JFMCC JFSOCCJFACC
JTF Commander
JACCE
JACCENALE
SOLE
BCD JACCE JACCE

 The Joint Air Component Coordination Element 
 
G-3 
(2)  Although a TSOC/SOJTF/JSOTF normally includes a JSOACC, th e 
JSOACC is focused on employment of SOF aviation.  A JACCE may b e required if 
conventional aviation provided by the JFACC is to be integrated with SOF to provide non-
SOF capabilities. 
 
b.  Presentation with JFACC external to a JTF.  In this model, there is a mix of 
several JTFs within a theater, but only one fully capable JAOC to service all components.  
In such instances, there is usually one JFACC reporting to the GCC.  The JFACC provides 
centralized control of all joint air operations across the theater and supports multiple JTFs 
based on the CCDR’s priorities.  This arrangement usually occur s because there are 
insufficient air assets to supply each JTF with adequate air co mponent representation and 
thus there is no separate air component within the JTFs. 
 
c.  Presentation to Service components.   In those cases when a JFC elects not to 
designate functional component co mmanders, the COMAFFOR may pro vide JACCEs to 
the other Service component commanders and the JFC as necessary .   D u t i e s  a n d  
relationships remain as stated. 
 
d.  Presentation in multinational operations.  In multinational operations, JACCEs 
may be presented as necessary.  The model should be similar to that depicted in Figure G-
1 above.  (See Figure G-2.) 
 
3.  Joint Air Component Coordination Element Authority, Command Relationships, 
and Functions and Responsibilities 
 
The JACCE: 
 
a.  Derives all authority from the JFACC. 
 
b.  Authorities can vary and change over time, depending on JFA CC objectives, 
CONOPS, and operational dynamics. 
Example 1:  During Operations IRAQI FREEDOM and ENDURING 
FREEDOM, the Commander of United States Air Forces Central 
Command, while acting as the joint force air component commande r 
(JFACC) for the Commander, United States Central Command, 
simultaneously provides support to separate joint task forces ( JTFs) in 
Iraq, Afghanistan, and the Horn of Africa. 
Example 2:  The Commander, United States Air Forces Northern 
Command, acting as the JFACC for Operation NOBLE EAGLE in the 
continental United States (CONUS), may also support separate JT Fs 
responding to separate disasters in CONUS.  In this case, if th ere are 
very limited Air Force forces operational control to the JTF, then the joint 
air component coordination element (JACCE) director could be du al-
hatted as the commander, Air Force forces, depending on the JAC CE 
director’s ability to handle both jobs. 

Appendix G 
G-4 JP 3-30 
c.  Is typically presented in a liaison role (i. e., without com mand authority) and 
communicates, facilitates, advise s, coordinates, and supports t he effective integration 
between the JFACC and the host commander(s).  However, a Servic e component may 
delegate some command authorities of Service forces to the JACC E based on operational 
requirements and to enhance overall C2 and integration and employment.   
 
d.  Communicates: 
 
(1)  The host commander’s decisi ons, priorities, interests, and  p l a n s  t o  t h e  
JFACC. 
 
(2)  The JFACC’s intent, capabilities, restraints, and air component perspective to 
the host commander. 
 
e.  Advises and assists in planning supporting and supported relationship options. 
 
f.  Facilitates the staff process for the JFACC and host commander. 
 
Figure G-2.  Structure for Joint Force Air Component Commander External to a Joint Task 
Force 
Structure for Joint Force Air Component Commander 
External to a Joint Task Force
Legend
BCD battlefield coordination detachment
JACCE joint air component coordination element
JFACC joint force air component commander
JFLCC joint force land component commander
JFMCC joint force maritime component commander
JFSOCC joint force special operations component commander
JTF joint task force
NALE naval and amphibious liaison element
SOLE special operations liaison element
joint
air
land
maritime
special operations
Combatant Commander
JFLCC JFMCC JFSOCC
JFACC
JTF Commander
JACCE
JACCE
NALE
SOLE
BCD
JACCE JACCE

 The Joint Air Component Coordination Element 
 
G-5 
g.  Should not replace, replicate, or circumvent in-place reque st mechanisms (e.g., 
target requests and air apportionment). 
 
  
THE JOINT AIR COMPONENT COORDINATION ELEMENT DURING 
OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM AND OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM 
In United States Central Command during later operations of Ope ration 
IRAQI FREEDOM and Operation ENDURING FREEDOM, the JFACC [joint 
force air component commander] found the typical liaison role o f the 
ACCE [air component coordination element] [precursor to the joi nt air 
component coordination element] insufficient to satisfy his and  t h e  
supported JFC [joint force commander] requirements.  He therefo re 
delegated additional specific responsibilities and personnel, i ncluding 
limited command authority over some forces, to better integrate  
planning at all levels and respond to JFACC and JFC needs.  The ACCE 
effectively became dual-hatted as an air expeditionary task for ce 
commander, which eventually became the final solution. 
“To improve the integration of airpower with the ground scheme of 
maneuver, I empowered the ACCE-Afghanistan and ACCE-Iraq throug h 
a verbal order in 2009.  Specifically, I delegated limited oper ational 
control and full administrative control over AFCENT [United Sta tes Air 
Forces Central] forces in each joint operations area to the res pective 
ACCE.”  
“Although the tactical control of theater-wide air assets remai ns at the 
AFCENT CAOC [Combined Air Operations Center], the ACCE has 
authority to organize forces, recommend courses of action, and provide 
authoritative direction to the subordinate air expeditionary wi ngs.  The 
ACCE also ensures that inputs to the air tasking order meet the  needs 
of the operation or plan.  Reachback to the Air Force forces staff and the 
CAOC permits the ACCE to accomplish these tasks without having to 
maintain a large forward staff and robust command and control 
capability.” 
“A Seat at the Table: Beyond the Air Component  
Coordination Element” 
Lt Gen Mike Hostage, US Air Force 
Air and Space Power Journal, Winter 2010 

Appendix G 
G-6 JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 
 
 

 
H-1 
APPENDIX H 
POINTS OF CONTACT 
 
Joint Staff/J-7/Doctrine Division 
Website: http://www.jcs.mil/doctrine/ 
E-mail Support: js.pentagon.j7.jedd-support@mail.mil 
Phone Number: 1-703-692-7273 (DSN 222) 
 
Joint Staff Doctrine Sponsor 
Joint Staff/J35 
Deputy Director for Regional, Force Management and Future Ops 
Phone number: 757-836-6454 (DSN 836) 
 
Air Force LeMay Center for Doctrine Development and Education 
Mailing Address: 401 Chennault Circle 
 Maxwell Air Force Base, AL 36112 
E-mail Support: AFDDEC.DDJ@us.af.mil 
Phone Number: 334-953-2640 (DSN 493) 
 
  

Appendix H 
H-2 JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 

 
J-1 
APPENDIX J 
REFERENCES 
 
The development of JP 3-30 is based upon the following sources: 
 
1.  Department of Defense Publications 
 
DOD Directive 5100.01, Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major 
Components. 
 
2.  Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Publications 
 
a.  Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3150.25G, Joint Lessons 
Learned Program. 
 
b.  CJCSI 3151.01C, Global Command and Control System Common Operational 
Picture Reporting Requirements. 
 
c.  CJCSM 3130.03A, Planning and Execution Planning Formats and Guidance. 
 
d.  JP 2-0, Joint Intelligence. 
 
e.  JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations. 
 
f.  JP 2-01.3, Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment. 
 
g.  JP 3-0, Joint Operations. 
 
h.  JP 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats. 
 
i.  JP 3-03, Joint Interdiction. 
 
j.  JP 3-05, Special Operations. 
 
k.  JP 3-08, Interorganizational Cooperation. 
 
l.  JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support. 
 
m.  JP 3-09.3, Close Air Support. 
 
n.  JP 3-11, Operations in Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear 
Environments. 
 
o.  JP 3-12, Cyberspace Operations.  
 
p.  JP 3-13, Information Operations. 

Appendix J 
J-2 JP 3-30 
q.  JP 3-13.1, Electronic Warfare. 
 
r.  JP 3-14, Space Operations. 
 
s.  JP 3-15.1, Counter-Improvised Explosive Device Activities. 
 
t.  JP 3-16, Multinational Operations. 
 
u.  JP 3-17, Air Mobility Operations. 
 
v.  JP 3-50, Personnel Recovery. 
 
w.  JP 3-52, Joint Airspace Control. 
 
x.  JP 3-60, Joint Targeting. 
 
y.  JP 4-02, Joint Health Services. 
 
z.  JP 4-10, Operational Contract Support. 
 
aa.  JP 5-0, Joint Planning. 
 
bb.  JP 6-0, Joint Communications System. 
 
cc.  JP 6-01, Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Management Operations. 
 
3.  Multi-Service Publications 
 
a.  ATP 3-04.18/MCRP 3-25J /NTTP 3-20.8/AFTTP 3-2.74, Multi-Service Tactics, 
Techniques, and Procedures for Air Operations in Maritime Surface Warfare.   
 
b.  ATP 3-52.2 (FM 3-52.2)/MCRP 3-25F/NTTP 3-56.2/AFTTP 3-2.17, Multi-Service 
Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for the Theater Air-Ground System. 
 
c.  NTTP 3-04M/Marine Corps Tactical Publication 13-10L/Coast G uard Tactics, 
Techniques, and Procedures 3-90.5/ATP 3-04.19/AFTTP 3-2.4/USSOCOM Publication 3-
04, Multi-Service Tactics Techniques and Procedures for Shipboard Helicopter 
Operations. 
 
4.  Service Publications 
 
a.  Air Force Instruction 13-1 AOC, Volume 3, Operational Employment Procedures-
Air Operations Center (AOC). 
 
b.  AFTTP 3-3.AOC, Operational Employment–Air Operations Center. 
c.  NTTP 3-03.4, (U) Naval Strike and Air Warfare. 

 References 
 
J-3 
d.  Navy Warfare Publication 3-30, Maritime Command and Control of Air Operations 
(Organizations and Processes). 
 
5.  United States Special Operations Command Publications 
 
a.  USSOCOM Directive 525-7, Joint Special Operations Liaison Element. 
 
b.  USSOCOM Directive 525-8, Joint Special Operations Air Component. 
  

Appendix J 
J-4 JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 

 
K-1 
APPENDIX K 
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTIONS 
 
1.  User Comments 
 
Users in the field are highly encouraged to submit comments on this publication using the 
Joint Doctrine Feedback Form located at:  https://jdeis.js.mil/jdeis/jel/jp_feedback_form.pdf 
and e-mail it to:  js.pentagon.j7.mbx.jedd-support@mail.mil.  These comments should address 
content (accuracy, usefulness, consistency, and organization), writing, and appearance. 
 
2.  Authorship 
 
a.  The lead agent for this publ ication is the US Air Force.  T he Joint Staff doctrine 
sponsor for this publication is the J-3. 
 
b.  The following staff, in conjunction with the joint doctrine development community, 
made a valuable contribution to the revision of this joint publication: lead agent, Mr. James 
Burlingame, US Air Force LeMay Center; Joint Staff doctrine spo nsor, LtCol Stephen 
Fiscus, Joint Staff J-35; Lt Col John Stratton, Joint Staff J-7 , Joint Doctrine Analysis 
Division; and LCDR Adam Yates, Joint Staff J-7, Joint Doctrine Division. 
 
3.  Supersession 
 
This publication supersedes JP 3-30, Command and Control of Joint Air Operations,  
10 February 2014. 
 
4.  Change Recommendations 
 
a.  To provide recommendations for urgent and/or routine changes to this publication, 
please complete the Joint Doctrine Feedback Form located at:  
https://jdeis.js.mil/jdeis/jel/jp_feedback_form.pdf and e-mail it to: 
js.pentagon.j7.mbx.jedd-support@mail.mil. 
 
b.  When a Joint Staff directorate submits a proposal to the CJ CS that would change 
source document information reflected in this publication, that  directorate will include a 
proposed change to this publication as an enclosure to its proposal.  The Services and other 
organizations are requested to notify the Joint Staff J-7 when changes to source documents 
reflected in this publication are initiated. 
 
5.  Lessons Learned 
 
The Joint Lessons Learned Program (JLLP) primary objective is to enhance joint force 
readiness and effectiveness by contributing to improvements in doctrine, organization, 
training, materiel, leadership  and education, personnel, facili ties, and policy.  The Joint 
Lessons Learned Information System (JLLIS) is the DOD system of  record for lessons 
learned and facilitates the collection, tracking, management, s haring, collaborative 

Appendix K 
K-2 JP 3-30 
resolution, and dissemination of lessons learned to improve the development and readiness 
o f  t h e  j o i n t  f o r c e .   T h e  J L L P  i n tegrates with joint doctrine th rough the joint doctrine 
development process by providing lessons and lessons learned de rived from operations, 
events, and exercises.  As these inputs are incorporated into j oint doctrine, they become 
institutionalized for future use, a major goal of the JLLP.  Lessons and lessons learned are 
routinely sought and incorporat ed into draft JPs throughout for mal staffing of the 
development process.  The JLLIS Website can be found at https:/ /www.jllis.mil 
(NIPRNET) or http://www.jllis.smil.mil (SIPRNET). 
 
6.  Distribution of Publications 
 
Local reproduction is authorized, and access to unclassified pu blications is 
unrestricted.  However, access to and reproduction authorization for classified JPs must be 
IAW DOD Manual 5200.01, Volume 1, DOD Information Security Program: Overview, 
Classification, and Declassification, and DOD Manual 5200.01, Volume 3, DOD 
Information Security Program: Protection of Classified Information. 
 
7.  Distribution of Electronic Publications 
 
a.   Joint Staff J-7 will not print copies of JPs for distribution.  Electronic versions are 
available on JDEIS Joint Electronic Library Plus (JEL+) at https://jdeis.js.mil/jdeis/index.jsp 
(NIPRNET) and https://jdeis.js.smil.mil/jdeis/generic.jsp (SIPRNET), and on the JEL at 
http://www.jcs.mil/doctrine (NIPRNET).  
 
b.  Only approved JPs are releasable outside the combatant commands, Services, and 
Joint Staff.  Defense attachés may request classified JPs by se nding written requests to 
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)/IE-3, 200 MacDill Blvd., Join t Base Anacostia-
Bolling, Washington, DC 20340-5100.   
 
c.  JEL CD-ROM.  Upon request of a joint doctrine development community member, 
the Joint Staff J-7 will produce and deliver one CD-ROM with current JPs.  This JEL CD-
ROM will be updated not less than semi-annually and when receiv ed can be locally 
reproduced for use within the co mbatant commands, Services, and  combat support 
agencies. 
 
 

 
GL-1 
GLOSSARY 
PART I—ABBREVIATIONS, ACRONYMS, AND INITIALISMS 
 
AADC area air defense commander 
AADP area air defense plan 
AAGS Army air-ground system 
AAMDC Army air and missile defense command 
ABP air battle plan 
ACA airspace control authority 
ACE aviation combat element (USMC) 
ACO airspace control order 
ACP airspace control plan 
ACS airspace control system 
ADAM/BAE air defense airspace man agement/brigade aviation element 
AE aeromedical evacuation 
AECT aeromedical evacuation control team 
AETF air expedit ionary task force 
AFLE Air Force liaison element 
AFTTP Air Force tactics, techniques, and procedures 
AIRSUPREQ air support request 
ALCT airlift control team 
ALLOREQ allocation request 
AMCT air mobility control team 
AMD air mobility division 
AO area of operations 
AOA amphibious objective area 
AOC air operations center  
AOD air operations directive 
AODB air operations database 
AOR area of responsibility 
ARCT air refueling control team 
ARFOR Army forces 
ASOC air support operations center 
ATC air traffic control 
ATO air tasking order 
ATP Army techniques publication 
AWACS Airborne Warni ng and Control System 
 
BCD battlefield coordina tion detachment (USA) 
BDA battle damage assessment 
 
C2 command and control 
CAS close air support 
CBRN chemical, biological, r adiological, and nuclear 
CC critical capability 
CCDR combatant commander 

Glossary 
GL-2 JP 3-30 
CCMD combatant command 
CDRJSOTF commander, joint s pecial operations task force 
CDRUSCYBERCOM Commander, U nited States Cyber Command 
CDRUSSTRATCOM Commander, Unite d States Strategic Command 
CJCSI Chairman of the Joint C hiefs of Staff instruction 
CJCSM Chairman of the Joi nt Chiefs of Staff manual 
CMA collection management authority 
CO cyberspace operations 
COA course of action 
COD combat operations division 
COG center of gravity 
CO-IPE cyberspace operations-i ntegrated planning element 
COMAFFOR commander, Air Force forces 
CONOPS concept of operations 
CPD combat plans division 
CR critical requirement 
CRC control and reporting center 
CV critical vulnerability 
CWC composite warfare commander 
 
DASC direct air support center 
DCA defensive counterair 
DHS Department of Homeland Security 
DIRMOBFOR director of mobility forces 
DOD Department of Defense 
DSCA defense support of civil authorities 
 
FAA Federal Aviation Administration (DOT) 
FM field manual (USA) 
FSCL fire support coordination line 
FSCM fire support coordination measure 
 
GCC geographic combatant commander 
GCE ground combat element (USMC) 
GPS Global Positioning System 
 
HD homeland defense 
HS homeland security 
 
IPB intelligence preparation of the battlespace 
ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
ISRD intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance division 
 
J-2 intelligence directorate of a joint staff 
J-3 operations directo rate of a joint staff 
J-4 logistics director ate of a joint staff 

 Glossary 
 
GL-3 
JACCE joint air component  coordination element 
JAOC joint air operations center 
JAOP joint air op erations plan 
JDDOC joint deployment and di stribution operations center 
JFACC joint force air component commander 
JFC joint force commander 
JFE joint fires element 
JFLCC joint force land component commander 
JFMCC joint force maritime component commander 
JFSOCC joint force special  operations component commander 
JIPCL joint integrated pr ioritized collection list 
JIPOE joint intell igence preparation of the operational  
  environment 
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized target list 
JMC joint movement center 
JOA joint operations area 
JOC joint operations center 
JP joint publication 
JPPA joint planning process for air 
JPRC joint personnel recovery center 
JSOACC joint special operati ons air component commander 
JSOTF joint special operations task force 
JTCB joint targeti ng coordination board 
JTF joint task force 
JTWG joint targeting working group 
 
LNO liaison officer 
LOE line of effort 
LOO line of operation 
 
MAAP master air attack plan 
MACCS Marine air comma nd and control system 
MAGTF Marine air-ground task force 
Marine TACC Marine tactical air command center 
MARLE Marine liaison element 
MCRP Marine Corps reference publication 
MOC maritime operations center 
MOE measure of effectiveness 
MOP measure of performance 
 
NALE naval and amphibious liaison element 
Navy TACC Navy tactical air control center 
NCC Navy component commander 
NGO nongovernmental organization 
NORAD North American Aerospace Defense Command 
NTACS Navy tactical air control system 

Glossary 
GL-4 JP 3-30 
NTTP Navy tactics, techni ques, and procedures 
 
OCA offensive counterair 
ONE Operation NOBLE EAGLE 
OPCON operational control 
OPLAN operation plan 
OTC officer in tactical command  
 
PED processing, exploitation, and dissemination  
PNT positioning, navigation, and timing 
PR personnel recovery 
PRCC personnel recovery coordination cell 
 
RCT rescue coordination team (USN) 
ROE rules of engagement 
RSO remote split operations 
 
618 AOC (TACC) 618th Air Operations Center (Tanker Airlift Cont rol Center) 
SCA space coordinating authority 
SD strategy division 
SIDO senior intelligence duty officer 
SOAGS special operations air-ground system 
SOF special operations forces 
SOJTF special operations joint task force 
SOLE special operations liaison element 
SORTIEALOT sortie allotment message 
SPINS special instructions 
 
TACON tactical control 
TACP tactical air control party 
TACS theater air control system 
TAGS theater air-ground system 
TAOC tactical air operations center (USMC) 
TBMCS theater battle man agement core system 
TET targeting effects team 
TNL target nomination list 
TPFDD time-phased force and deployment data 
TSOC theater special operations command 
TST time-sensitive target 
 
UA unmanned aircraft 
UAS unmanned aircraft system 
USC United States Code 
USCYBERCOM United States Cyber Command 
USG United States Government 
USINDOPACOM United States Indo-Pacific Command 

 Glossary 
 
GL-5 
USNORTHCOM United States Northern Command 
USSOCOM United States Speci al Operations Command 
USSOUTHCOM United States Southern Command 
USSTRATCOM United States Strategic Command 
USTRANSCOM United States Transportation Command 
 
WMD weapons of mass destruction 
 

 
GL-6  JP 3-30 
PART II—TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
 
air domain.  The atmosphere, beginning at the Earth’s surface, extending to the altitude where 
its effects upon operations become negligible.  (DOD Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 
 
air expeditionary task force.  A deployed numbered air force or command echelon 
immediately subordinate to a nu mbered air force provided as the  United States Air 
Force component command committed to a joint operation.  Also called AETF.  (DOD 
Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 
 
air operations center.  The senior agency of the Air Force component commander that 
provides command and control of Air Force air and space operations and coordinates 
with other components and Services.  Also called AOC.  (DOD Dictionary.  Source: 
JP 3-30) 
 
air support request.  A means to request preplanned and immediate close air support, air 
interdiction, air reconnaissance,  surveillance, escort, helicop ter airlift, and other 
aircraft missions.  Also called AIRSUPREQ.  (DOD Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 
 
air tasking order.  A method used to task and disseminate to components, subordinat e 
units, and command and control agencies projected sorties, capabilities, and/or forces 
to targets and specific missions.  Also called ATO.  (Approved for incorporation into 
the DOD Dictionary.) 
 
allocation request.  A daily message that provides an estimate of the total air effo rt, 
identifies any excess and joint force general support aircraft sorties, and identifies 
unfilled air requirements for preplanned missions.  Also called  ALLOREQ.  
(Approved for incorporation into the DOD Dictionary.) 
 
centralized control.  1. In air defense, the control mode whereby a higher echelon makes 
direct target assignments to fire units.  (JP 3-01)  2. In join t air operations, placing 
within one commander the responsibility and authority for plann ing, directing, and 
coordinating a military operation or group/category of operations.  (DOD Dictionary.  
Source: JP 3-30) 
 
decentralized execution.  Delegation of execution authority to subordinate commanders.  
(DOD Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 
 
flight.  1. In Navy and Marine Corps usage, a specified group of aircraft usually conducting 
a common mission.  2. The basic tactical unit in the Air Force,  consisting of four or 
m o r e  a i r c r a f t  i n  t w o  o r  m o r e  e l e m e n t s .   3 .  A  s i n g l e  a i r c r a f t  a irborne on a 
nonoperational mission.  (Approved for incorporation into the DOD Dictionary.) 
 
joint air component coordination element.   A general term for the liaison element that 
serves as the direct representative of the joint force air component commander for joint 
air operations.  Also called JACCE.  (DOD Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 

 Glossary 
GL-7 
joint air operations.  Air operations performed with air capabilities/forces made available 
by components in support of the j oint force commander’s operati on or campaign 
objectives, or in support of othe r components of the joint forc e.  (DOD Dictionary.  
Source: JP 3-30) 
 
joint air operations center.  A jointly staffed facility established for planning, directin g, 
and executing joint air operations in support of the joint force commander’s operation 
or campaign objectives.  Also called JAOC.  (DOD Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 
 
joint air operations plan.  A plan for a connected series of joint air operations to achieve 
the joint force commander’s objectives within a given time and joint operational area.  
Also called JAOP.  (DOD Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 
 
mission.  1. The task, together with the purpose, that clearly indicates the action to be taken 
and the reason therefore.  (JP 3-0)  2.  In common usage, espec ially when applied to 
lower military units, a duty assigned to an individual or unit;  a task.  (JP 3-0)  3. The 
dispatching of one or more air craft to accomplish one particula r task.  (DOD 
Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30)   
 
reachback.  The process of obtaining products , services, and applications, or forces, or 
equipment, or material from orga nizations that are not forward deployed.  (DOD 
Dictionary.  Source: JP 3-30) 
 
sortie.  In air operations, an operational flight by one aircraft.  (DOD Dictionary.  Source: 
JP 3-30) 
 
sortie allotment message.  The means by which the joint force commander allots excess 
sorties to meet requirements of subordinate commanders that are expressed in their air 
employment and/or allocation plan.  Also called SORTIEALOT.  (DOD Dictionary.  
Source: JP 3-30) 
 
unmanned aircraft.  An aircraft that does not carry  a human operator and is capab le of 
flight with or without human remote control.  Also called UA.  (DOD Dictionary.  
Source: JP 3-30) 
 
unmanned aircraft system.   That system whose components include the necessary 
equipment, network, and personnel to control an unmanned aircraft.  Also called UAS.  
(DOD Dictionary. Source: JP 3-30) 
  

Glossary 
GL-8 JP 3-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 
 
 
 
 

Maintenance
Approval Development
Initiation
JOINT
DOCTRINE
PUBLICATION
ENHANCED
JOINT
WARFIGHTING
CAPABILITY
STEP #3 - Approval STEP #2 - Development
l
l
l
l
JSDS delivers adjudicated matrix to JS J-7
JS J-7 prepares publication for signature
JSDS prepares JS staffing package
JSDS staffs the publication via JSAP for 
signature  
l
l
l
l
l
l    
LA selects primary review authority (PRA) to develop the first 
draft (FD)
PRA develops FD for staffing with JDDC
FD comment matrix adjudication
JS J-7 produces the final coordination (FC) draft, staffs to 
JDDC and JS via Joint Staff Action Processing (JSAP) system
Joint Staff doctrine sponsor (JSDS) adjudicates FC comment 
matrix
FC joint working group
STEP #4 - Maintenance
l
l
l
l
JP published and continuously 
assessed by users 
Formal assessment begins 
24-27 months following 
publication
Revision begins 3.5 years 
after publication
Each JP revision is completed 
no later than 5 years after 
signature
STEP #1 - Initiation
l
l
l
l
l
l
Joint doctrine development 
community (JDDC) submission to fill 
extant operational void
Joint Staff (JS) J-7 conducts front-
end analysis
Joint Doctrine Planning Conference 
validation
Program directive (PD) development 
and staffing/joint working group
PD includes scope, references, 
outline, milestones, and draft 
authorship
JS J-7 approves and releases PD to 
lead agent (LA) (Service, combatant 
command, JS directorate)  
JOINT DOCTRINE PUBLICATIONS HIERARCHY
JOINT
DOCTRINE
JP 1
LOGISTICS COMMUNICA TIONS
SYSTEMPLANSOPERATIONSPERSONNEL INTELLIGENCE
JP 1-0 JP 2-0 JP 3-0 JP 4-0 JP 5-0 JP 6-0
OPERATIONS
JP 3-0
All joint publications are organized into a comprehensive hierarchy as shown in the chart above. Joint 
Publication (JP) 3-30 is in the Operations series of joint doctrine publications. The diagram below 
illustrates an overview of the development process:

