PIN : 079476–000
Ç Tear along perforated lines for the CSA’s Professional Reading List bookmark È
THE U.S. ARMY 
 CHIEF OF STAFF’S
PROFESSIONAL 
READING LIST
THE U.S. ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF’S
PROFESSIONAL READING LISTFollow the CSA on:
 
  @USArmyChiefofStaff
 
  @USArmyChiefofStaff
 
  @ArmyChiefStaff
Follow the CSA on     &     @USArmyChiefofStaff and on     @ArmyChiefStaff




ABOUT THE PROGRAM
The U.S. Army Chief of Staff’s Professional Reading 
List is divided into six categories: Strategic Environment, 
Regional Studies, History and Military History, Leadership, 
Army Profession, and Fiction. These sub-lists are intended 
to steer readers to topics in which they are most interested. 
Each of these books is suitable for readers of any rank or 
position.
The books included in this list offer entry points into 
the many publications available regarding military art and 
science. They are provided as selected works that can help 
soldiers, Department of the Army civilians, and anyone 
interested in the Army to learn more about the Army 
profession and to sharpen their knowledge of the Army’s 
long and distinguished history, as well as the decisive role 
played by landpower in conflicts across the centuries.
A sustained personal commitment to critical study 
of a wide range of readings constitutes an essential 
responsibility for members of the Army profession. The 
U.S. Army today confronts extraordinary complexity in the 
strategic environment with new and emerging missions 
competing with core war fighting requirements to challenge 
Army professionals. This reading list is intended to serve 
as a guide to the many topics worthy of professional 
consideration, contemplation, and serious discussion.
The appearance of a title on this reading list does not 
imply that the Chief of Staff endorses the author’s views or 
interpretations. Nevertheless, these books contain thought-
provoking ideas and viewpoints relevant to our Army.




STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT
The Accidental Superpower: The Next 
Generation of American Preeminence and 
the Coming Global Disorder 
Peter Zeihan // New York: Twelve Publishing, 2014
This is a contrarian and eye-opening assessment of 
American power. Zeihan examines how the hard rules 
of geography are eroding the American commitment to 
free trade; how much of the planet is aging into a mass 
retirement that will enervate markets and capital supplies; 
and how, against all odds, it is the ever-ravenous American 
economy that—alone among the developed nations—is 
rapidly approaching energy independence. Combined, 
these factors are doing nothing less than overturning the 
global system and ushering in a new order. He concludes 
that geography will matter more than ever in a deglobalizing 
world and that America’s geography is simply sublime.


Another Bloody Century: Future Warfare 
Colin S. Gray // London: Phoenix, 2006
In this book, an acclaimed scholar of strategy and 
strategic theory turns his attention to how warfare is 
changing at a rapid pace in the twenty-first century. While 
political, technological, social, and religious forces are 
shaping the future of warfare, most Western armed forces 
have yet to evolve significantly from the Cold War era 
when they trained to resist a conventional invasion by the 
Warsaw Pact. America is now the only superpower, but its 
dominance is threatened by internal and external factors. 
The world’s most high-tech weaponry seems helpless in 
the face of determined guerrilla fighters not afraid to die for 
their beliefs.
The Big Stick: The Limits of Soft Power and the 
Necessity of Military Force 
Eliot A. Cohen // New York: Basic Books, 2016
American leaders must learn to use hard power in 
different ways for new circumstances. The rise of China, 
Russia’s conquest of Crimea and eastern Ukraine, nuclear 
threats from North Korea and Iran, and the spread of 
radical Islamist movements all pose threats to global 
peace and stability. If the United States fails to preserve 
global stability, it runs the risk of unleashing disorder, 
violence, and tyranny on a scale not seen since the 1930s. 
As Madeline Albright once said, the United States is still 
“the indispensable nation.”


Concrete Hell: Urban Warfare from Stalingrad 
to Iraq 
Louis A. DiMarco // Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 
2012
From sieges to street fighting and peacekeeping to coups 
de main, cities have always been key terrain in warfare. 
Although strategists have warned against urban operations 
for millennia because they are so costly, difficult, and 
fraught with risk, armies and generals have nevertheless 
been forced to attack and defend cities, and victory has 
required that they do it well. In this masterful study of urban 
warfare, DiMarco explains what it takes to seize and hold a 
city literally block by block and provides lessons for today’s 
tacticians that they neglect at their own peril.
Connectography: Mapping the Future of Global 
Civilization 
Parag Khanna // New York: Random House, 2016
Khanna, a strategist, travels the world to explain the 
rapid and unprecedented changes affecting every part 
of the planet. He shows how nations are less at war over 
territory than engaged in a tug-of-war over pipelines, 
railways, shipping lanes, and Internet cables. The new 
arms race is about who can connect to the most markets. 
China is now winning this race, having launched a wave of 
infrastructure investments to unite Eurasia around its new 
“Silk Roads.” The United States can only regain ground by 
joining its neighbors in a super continental North American 
union of shared resources and prosperity.
The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in 
Historical Perspective 
Hew Strachan // New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2013
A British historian, Strachan argues that recent wars 
fought by the United States and Britain were the products 
of a fundamental misunderstanding and misapplication of 
strategy. He contends that the wars since 2001 have not, in 
reality, been as “new” as has been widely assumed and that 
the British and Americans need to adopt a more historical 
approach to contemporary strategy in order to identify what 
is really changing in how they wage war. If war is to fulfill the 
aims of policy, then decision makers need first to understand 
war. He makes a case for drawing more on the lessons of 
history to evaluate the contemporary strategic environment.

The Future Declassified: Megatrends That Will 
Undo the World Unless We Take Action 
Matthew Burrows // New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2014
Burrows examines recent trends to forecast tectonic 
shifts that will drive us to 2030. A staggering amount of 
wholesale change is happening—from unprecedented 
and widespread aging to rampant urbanization and growth 
in a global middle class to an eastward shift in economic 
power and a growing number of disruptive technologies.
The Future of Land Warfare 
Michael E. O’Hanlon // Washington, D.C.: 
Brookings Institution, 2015
O’Hanlon offers an analysis of the future of the world’s 
ground forces. He wonders where large-scale conflicts 
or other catastrophes are most plausible. Which of these 
could be important enough to require the option of a U.S. 
military response? And which of these could, in turn, 
demand significant numbers of American ground forces 
for their resolution? He is not predicting or advocating 
big American roles in such operations—only cautioning 
against overconfidence that the United States can and will 
avoid them.
The Future of Power 
Joseph S. Nye Jr. // New York: PublicAffairs, 2011
This exploration of the changing nature of power 
considers the dramatic role that the Internet and information 
technologies have played in redefining how nations project 
power and influence. Nye considers the transformation of 
power as defined during the Cold War, with its emphasis 
on industrial capacity, nuclear weapons, and armed forces, 
and the current era, where nonstate actors and cyber-
attacks have become increasing threats.

Great Powers and Geopolitical Change 
Jakub J. Grygiel // Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2008
In an era of high technology and instant communication, 
the role of geography in the formation of strategy and politics 
can be undervalued. But the mountains of Afghanistan 
and the sun-blasted streets of Iraq have provided stark 
reminders that geographical realities continue to have a 
profound impact on the success of military campaigns. 
In a series of case studies, Grygiel, a political scientist, 
highlights the importance of incorporating geography 
into grand strategy. He argues that states can increase 
and maintain their position of power by pursuing a 
geostrategy that focuses on control of resources and lines 
of communications.


Making the Unipolar Moment: U.S. Foreign 
Policy and the Rise of the Post–Cold War 
Order 
Hal Brands // Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 
Press, 2016
Brands examines global changes and U.S. policy 
from the late 1970s to the early 1990s through the lens 
of the Cold War, the rise of globalization, the advance of 
democracy, and the emergence of Islamic extremism and 
international terrorism. He argues that structural changes in 
the international system interacted with strategies pursued 
by Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, and George H. W. Bush 
to usher in an era of reinvigorated and, in many ways, 
unprecedented American primacy. This work is an important 
account of the foundation of the post–Cold War order.
No One’s World: The West, the Rising Rest, and 
the Coming Global Turn 
Charles A. Kupchan // New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2012
Between 1500 and 1800, the West sprinted ahead of 
other centers of power in Asia and the Middle East. Since 
then, Europe and the United States have dominated the 
world. Today, that preeminence is in decline as China, 
India, Brazil, and other emerging powers rise. Kupchan 
considers how those principles associated with the 
West—democracy, capitalism, and secular nationalism—
will continue to endure as new states outside the Western 
world gain greater economic and political prominence.


Out of the Mountains: The Coming Age of the 
Urban Guerrilla 
David Kilcullen // New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2013
Scrutinizing major environmental trends—population 
growth and coastal urbanization—and increasing digital 
connectivity, Kilcullen forecasts a future of feral cities where 
crime and war and the real and virtual worlds increasingly 
overlap. Informed by his fieldwork in the Caribbean, Central 
America, Somalia, the Middle East, and Afghanistan, he 
presents detailed, on-the-ground accounts of the new 
faces of modern conflict—from the 2008 Mumbai, India, 
terrorist attacks to transnational drug networks, local street 
gangs, and the uprisings of the Arab Spring.
Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power 
and Peace 
Hans J. Morgenthau // Rev. ed.; Boston: McGraw-
Hill, 2006
First published at the start of the Cold War, Morgenthau’s 
work is a foundational text for the theory of political 
realism in international relations. In his effort to craft a 
comprehensive theory for international politics, the author 
asserts that nation-states’ actions are driven by self-
interest and power rather than ideology, material interests, 
or values. As a result, he contends, the world is composed 
of nation-states pursuing often opposing interests, making 
conflict between them inevitable. 
The Post-American World: Release 2.0 
Fareed Zakaria // New York: W. W. Norton, 2011
This is not a book about the decline of America, but 
rather about “the rise of the rest.” Zakaria’s work draws 
on lessons from the two great power shifts of the past 500 
years―the rise of the Western world and the rise of the 
United States―to identify how might the nation continue 
to thrive in a truly global era. Washington needs to begin a 
serious transformation of its global strategy, moving from 
its traditional role of dominating hegemon to that of a more 
pragmatic, honest broker. It must seek to share power, 
create coalitions, build legitimacy, and define the global 
agenda―all formidable tasks.

The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: 
Economic Change and Military Conflict from 
1500 to 2000 
Paul Kennedy // New York: Random House, 1987
In an impressive feat of scholarship, Kennedy tackles 
the history of great powers from the dawn of modernity 
to the end of the twentieth century. His far-ranging survey 
explores the relationship between economics, strategy, 
technology, and military power. He argues for the primacy 
of economic factors to explain why some states achieved 
great power status. By the same token, nations stumbled 
and declined when their financial resources could no 
longer support their military ambitions and commitments. 
The book’s thesis and its discussion of the dangers of 
“imperial overstretch” remain as relevant today as when it 
was first published in 1987.
The Rise and Fall of Nations: Forces of Change 
in the Post-Crisis World 
Ruchir Sharma // New York: W. W. Norton, 2016
Shaped by his twenty-five years traveling the world, 
Sharma rethinks the “dismal science” of economics as a 
practical art. Narrowing the thousands of factors that can 
shape a country’s fortunes to ten clear rules, he explains 
how to identify political, economic, and social changes 
in real time and how to spot political headlines, black 
markets, the price of onions, and billionaire rankings as 
signals of booms, busts, and protests. In a post-crisis age 
of slow growth and political revolt, his pioneering book is 
an entertaining field guide to understanding change in this 
or any era.

Strategic Vision: America and the Crisis of 
Global Power 
Zbigniew Brzezinski // New York: Basic Books, 
2012
The end of the Cold War left the United States as the 
world’s only superpower, and the twenty-first century 
seemed destined to be another American century. That 
optimism ended with the costly wars of the George W. 
Bush administration’s first term and a global recession. 
Brzezinski, who served as national security adviser from 
1977 to 1981, argues that to quell mounting anxieties 
about the growing capacity for Eastern economic and 
technological innovation, America must define and pursue 
a long-term geopolitical vision.
Superpower: Three Choices for America’s Role 
in the World 
Ian Bremmer // New York: Penguin, 2015
Bremmer believes that American foreign policy has 
become directionless and too expensive, and he argues 
that it is time for the United States to choose between 
three strategic options. The first he calls Independent 
America, in which the country should focus its energies 
on rebuilding the United States and lead by example. In 
the second, referred to as Moneyball America, the nation, 
based on limited resources, must make tough choices 
to protect only vital interests, and do no more. The third 
option, Indispensable America, the United States would 
pursue a stable world through its willingness to defend the 
values and interests on which that stability depends. The 
author presents the cases for and against each option.


The Tragedy of Great Power Politics 
John J. Mearsheimer // New York: W. W. Norton, 
2001
Mearsheimer argues that his concept, “offensive 
realism,” is the best means for explaining international 
relationships over the past two centuries. Contending 
that states throughout history have been driven to acquire 
greater power and influence as a means of guaranteeing 
their own security, the author concludes that current efforts 
at engagement and seeking harmonious relations between 
states will ultimately fail and predicts that the U.S. security 
competition with a rising China will inevitably intensify.
Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and 
Conflict in the 21st Century 
P. W. Singer // New York: Penguin, 2009
Singer explores the greatest revolution in military 
affairs since the atom bomb—the dawn of robotic warfare. 
Blending historical evidence with interviews of an amazing 
array of individuals, he shows how technology is changing 
not just in how wars are fought, but also in the politics, 
economics, laws, and the ethics that surround war itself. 
As humanity enters an era where technology makes a 
reality of what was once only science fiction, the author 
asks important questions about the future of warfare.


The World America Made 
Robert Kagan // New York: Knopf, 2012
Upon its first printing in 2012, this slim volume made 
an oversized impression, becoming one of the most 
talked about political books of the year. In these incisive 
and engaging pages, Kagan responds to those who 
anticipate—or even long for—a post-American world 
order. He shows what a decline in America’s influence 
would truly mean for the United States and the rest of 
the world, as the vital institutions, economies, and 
ideals currently supported by American power wane or 
disappear. He delivers a powerful reminder of the salutary 
effects of U.S. global power and leadership.
A World in Disarray: American Foreign Policy 
and the Crisis of the Old Order 
Richard Haass // New York: Penguin, 2017
In this timely work, Haass argues for an updated global 
operating system—call it world order 2.0—that reflects the 
reality that power is widely distributed and that borders 
count for less. One critical element of this adjustment will 
be adopting a new approach to sovereignty that embraces 
its obligations and responsibilities as well as its rights and 
protections. He also details how the United States should 
act toward key rivals and regions. He suggests, too, what 
our country should do to address its dysfunctional politics, 
mounting debt, and conflicting views on foreign policy.
World Order 
Henry Kissinger // New York: Penguin, 2014
Kissinger investigates the roots of international harmony 
and global disorder. Drawing on his experience as one of 
the foremost statesmen of the modern era, he presents an 
assessment of what he argues is the ultimate challenge for 
the twenty-first century: how to build a shared international 
order in a world of divergent historical perspectives, 
violent conflict, proliferating technology, and ideological 
extremism.



REGIONAL STUDIES
Blood Year: The Unraveling of Western 
Counterterrorism 
David Kilcullen // New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2016
In this volume, Kilcullen provides a view of the current 
situation in the Middle East and analyzes how America and 
the West ended up in such dire circumstances. Whereas in 
2008 it appeared that the United States might pull a modest 
stalemate from the jaws of defeat in Iraq, six years later 
the situation had reversed. After America pulled out of Iraq 
completely in 2011, the Shi’ite president cut Sunnis out of 
the power structure and allowed Iranian influence to grow. 
And in Syria an extremist Sunni organization even more 
radical than al-Qaeda arose. Unlike al-Qaeda, the Islamic 
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) was intent on establishing its 
own state, and within a remarkably short time it did. The 
author highlights how former Iraqi Ba’athist military officers 
were key contributors to ISIS’ military successes.


Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin 
Timothy Snyder // New York: Basic Books, 2010
Before the U.S. entry into World War II, Soviet leader 
Joseph Stalin had killed millions of his own citizens—and 
kept killing them during and after the war. Before Adolf Hitler 
was finally defeated, the German dictator had murdered six 
million Jews and nearly as many other Europeans. At war’s 
end, most German and Soviet killing sites fell behind the 
Iron Curtain, leaving the history of mass killing in darkness. 
Snyder presents the mass murders committed by the Nazi 
and Stalinist regimes as two facets of a single history in 
the place and time when they occurred: between Germany 
and Russia when Hitler and Stalin both wielded power.
Flashpoints: The Emerging Crisis in Europe 
George Friedman // New York: Anchor Books, 
2016
A major new book by Friedman, a political scientist, 
with a bold thesis about coming events in Europe. This 
provocative work examines geopolitical hot spots where 
tensions have erupted throughout history and where 
conflict is due to emerge again. The book depicts the 
German-dominated European Union and Eurozone as a 
tense, fragile construct, particularly after the 2008 financial 
crisis, which broke the promise of prosperity that had 
drawn nations to join in the first place. The author identifies 
sources of instability in the numerous “borderlands” of 
Europe, most strikingly between Russia and a “barely 
functional” North Atlantic Treaty Organization.


Hirohito’s War: The Pacific War, 1941–1945 
Francis Pike // London: Bloomsbury, 2015
Pike offers a new narrative on the Pacific theater in 
World War II. He gives a detailed account of campaigns 
and battles and presents his views on a variety of topics: 
the causes of the war; Emperor Hirohito’s war guilt; 
the inevitability of U.S. victory; the abilities of General 
Douglas MacArthur and Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto; the 
roles of China, Great Britain, and Australia; military and 
naval technology; the need for fire-bombing Japan; and 
the eventual use of the atom bomb on Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. While his views may not be as original as he 
believes, the history is a useful synthesis.
Milestones 
Sayyid Qutb // New Delhi: Islamic Book Service, 
2016
Just as it was critical to read Karl Marx and Vladimir 
Lenin during the Cold War, it is now important to read the 
writings of the father of modern Salafi jihadism, Sayyid 
Qutb. A guiding light for the Muslim Brotherhood, the 
author writes of the characteristics of Islamic society, 
jihad in the cause of God, and a Muslim’s nationality. He 
was imprisoned by Egyptian nationalists and executed in 
1966. This volume is an ideological treatise and a call for 
radical violence to re-create the Muslim world that merits 
professional reading by American military leaders.
Monsoon: The Indian Ocean and the Future of 
American Power 
Robert D. Kaplan // New York: Random House, 
2010
In this examination of the countries known as Monsoon 
Asia—including India, Pakistan, China, Indonesia, Burma, 
Oman, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, and Tanzania—Kaplan 
shows how crucial this dynamic area has become to 
American power. Here the fight for democracy, energy 
independence, and religious freedom will be lost or won, 
and American foreign policy must concentrate on this 
sector if the United States is to remain relevant in an ever-
changing world. From the Horn of Africa to the Indonesian 
archipelago and beyond, the author exposes the effects of 
population growth, climate change, and extremist politics on 
this unstable region, demonstrating why Americans can no 
longer afford to ignore this important section of the world.

The Next Great War? The Roots of World War I 
and the Risk of U.S.-China Conflict 
Richard N. Rosecrance and Steven E. Miller, eds. 
// Cambridge: MIT Press, 2014
A century ago, many popular histories allege, Europe’s 
diplomats mismanaged the crisis triggered by the murder 
of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and the continent 
plunged into World War I. Today, as the hundredth 
anniversary of the Great War prompts renewed debate 
about the war’s causes, scholars and policy experts 
are also considering the parallels between the present 
international system and the world of 1914. Are China and 
the United States fated to follow in the footsteps of previous 
great power rivals?
Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung 
Mao Zedong // Peking: Foreign Language Press, 
1966
Mao Zedong, also known as Chairman Mao, was a 
Chinese Communist revolutionary and founding father 
of the People’s Republic of China, which he ruled as an 
autocrat from its establishment in 1949 until his death 
in 1976. This volume comprises 427 quotations, divided 
thematically into 33 chapters. The extracts range in length 
from a sentence to a few short paragraphs and borrow 
heavily from a group of about two dozen documents in the 
four volumes of Mao’s Selected Works.
Restless Empire: China and the World Since 
1750 
Odd Arne Westad // New York: Basic Books, 2012
In this book, Westad traces China’s foreign affairs over 
the past 250 years, identifying the forces that will determine 
the country’s path in the decades to come. Since the height 
of the Qing Empire in the eighteenth century, China’s 
interactions—and confrontations—with foreign powers 
have caused its worldview to fluctuate between extremes 
of dominance and subjugation. Many of these encounters 
have left the Chinese with a lingering sense of humiliation 
and resentment and inflamed their notions of justice, 
hierarchy, and Chinese centrality in world affairs. As the 
author shows, the nation’s success will ultimately hinge on 
its ability to engage with potential international partners while 
simultaneously safeguarding its own strength and stability. 

The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 
1914 
Christopher Clark // New York: HarperCollins, 
2012
Drawing on new diplomatic evidence, Clark offers a 
fresh look at the origins of World War I, focusing not on the 
battles and atrocities of the war itself, but on the complex 
events and relationships that led world leaders into brutal 
conflict. He traces the paths to war in a narrative that cuts 
between the key decision centers in Vienna, Berlin, St. 
Petersburg, Paris, London, and Belgrade and examines 
the decades of history that informed the events of 1914. 
He details the mutual misunderstandings and unintended 
signals that drove the crisis forward in a few short weeks.


Strategy 
Aleksandr A. Svechin // Minneapolis, Minn.: East 
View Information Services, 1992
Svechin, a Russian and Soviet military leader, writer, 
and theorist, wrote this volume in the 1920s while serving 
as a professor at the Academy of the General Staff in 
St. Petersburg. Often overlooked after his execution in 
the Stalinist purges of 1938, the author emphasizes the 
concepts of attrition (the defensive) and destruction (the 
offensive) as different approaches to military operations, 
which could be balanced depending on terrain, technology, 
and force size.


The Unquiet Frontier: Rising Rivals, Vulnerable 
Allies, and the Crisis of American Power
Jakub J. Grygiel and A. Wess Mitchell // Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2016
From the Baltic to the South China Sea, newly assertive 
authoritarian states sense an opportunity to resurrect old 
empires or build new ones at America’s expense. Hoping 
that the U.S. decline is real, nations such as Russia, Iran, 
and China are testing Washington’s resolve by targeting 
allies at the frontiers of American power. The authors 
explain why the United States needs a new grand strategy 
that uses strong frontier alliance networks to raise the 
costs of military aggression in the new century. They detail 
why the United States must strengthen the international 
order that has provided greater benefits to the world than 
any in history.
War in European History 
Michael Howard // New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2009
Howard provides a survey of the changing ways that war 
has been waged in Europe, from the Norse invasions to 
the present day. More than a military history, the book is a 
succinct overview of the development of European society 
as a whole over the last millennium. From the medieval 
period to the industrialized mass warfare of the twentieth 
century, the author illuminates how warfare has shaped 
the history of Europe, its effect on social and political 
institutions, and the ways in which technological and social 
change have, in turn, affected how wars are fought.




HISTORY AND MILITARY 
HISTORY
1776
David McCullough // New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2005
This is a brisk narrative of the Revolutionary War from 
the summer of 1775 to George Washington’s stunning 
twin victories at Trenton and Princeton in late 1776. 
McCullough shows that remarkable endurance, fierce 
dedication to the American cause, and Washington’s 
singular leadership were all essential. Together, these 
factors propelled a minuscule and ill-equipped American 
army to overcome severe hardships and defeats and 
saved the American Revolution from collapse during the 
war’s first, and most tumultuous, year.
The American Military Frontiers: The United 
States Army in the West, 1783–1900 
Robert Wooster // Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 2009
Wooster looks at the U.S. Army on the American frontier 
from the end of the Revolution to 1900. As the new nation 
expanded beyond the Appalachian Mountains, the Army 
was at the forefront of the advance, tasked with defending 
the nation’s interests against Spain, Great Britain, France, 
Mexico, the Confederacy, and Indians. This study examines 
the importance of military affairs to social, economic, and 
political life throughout the borderlands and western frontiers.


America’s First Battles, 1776–1965 
Charles E. Heller and William A. Stofft, eds. // 
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986
A benchmark work in American military history for three 
decades, these eleven essays focus on the transition of the 
U.S. Army from the peacetime parade ground to wartime 
battleground in nine wars. Through careful analysis of the 
organization, training, and doctrine, each essay seeks to 
illustrate the root strengths and weaknesses evidenced in 
the first significant engagement or campaign of the war. 
While this volume is focused on operational history, it gives 
readers a deeper understanding of the underlying “rhythm” 
of American military traditions.
An Army at Dawn: The War in North Africa, 
1942–1943 
Rick Atkinson // New York: Henry Holt, 2002
The Day of Battle: The War in Sicily and Italy, 
1943–1944
New York: Henry Holt, 2007
The Guns at Last Light: The War in Western 
Europe, 1944–1945 
New York: Picador, 2013
The Liberation Trilogy draws the reader into the U.S. 
Army’s monumental struggle to defeat Nazi Germany, 
with the Army transforming into a coherent and capable 
force over three years and three bloody campaigns. An 
Army at Dawn, which won the Pulitzer Prize, masterfully 
tells the story of the North Africa Campaign, as Americans 
struggled to adapt to the intensity of modern warfare. The 
Day of Battle follows the campaign in the Mediterranean, 
where the elimination of Italy as a member of the Axis 
was perhaps less important than gaining the experience 
needed to fight Germany and win. The Guns at Last Light 
moves from the bloody landings at Normandy to the final 
defeat of Adolf Hitler’s empire.

Blitzkrieg to Desert  storm : The Evolution of 
Operational Warfare 
Robert M. Citino // Lawrence: University Press of 
Kansas, 2004
Beginning with Germany’s blitzkrieg invasion of 
France in 1940, numerous military commanders have 
sought to emulate this rapid victory through maneuvers 
of armored vehicles and motorized troops. Despite this 
clear template, most commanders have been unable to 
achieve comparable victories. Citino describes multiple 
cases, including Korea, the Arab-Israeli wars, Vietnam, 
and D
esert S torm , to appreciate modern operational 
warfare and assesses the respective roles of firepower, 
training, doctrine, and command and control mechanisms. 
He shows that technical superiority is no guarantee 
of victory and that understanding past campaigns is 
essential to anyone who wishes to grasp, and survive, 
modern warfare.


Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the 
Rise of Western Power 
Victor Davis Hanson // New York: Doubleday, 
2001
Though technology and superior weapons have played 
a part in Western military dominance, Hanson argues 
that cultural distinctions are decisive. Studying nine major 
battles from Salamis to Tet, he contends that Western 
powers leveraged personal freedom, self-imposed 
discipline, and civic organization to become “marching 
democracies.” In contrast, non-Western nations were often 
hindered by hierarchical governments and intolerance of 
debate. In one example, Greek armies, who elected their 
own generals and openly debated strategy, were able to 
win wars despite being massively outnumbered and far 
from home, with only their comrades in arms for support. 


Combat Ready? The Eighth U.S. Army on the 
Eve of the Korean War 
Thomas E. Hanson // College Station: Texas A&M 
University Press, 2010
In the decades since the “forgotten war” in Korea, 
conventional wisdom has castigated the Eighth Army as 
consisting largely of poorly trained and undisciplined troops 
who were easily brushed aside by North Korean troops in 
1950. Hanson’s careful study of combat preparedness in the 
Eighth Army in 1949 and 1950 concedes that soldiers sent 
to Korea suffered gaps in their instruction, but after a year of 
progressive, focused, and developmental collective training 
these soldiers expected to defeat the Communist enemy.
The Conquering Tide: War in the Pacific 
Islands, 1942–1945 
Ian W. Toll // New York: W. W. Norton, 2015
Toll’s sequel to his earlier book on the war in the Pacific 
is as grand and sweeping as the ocean upon which it 
was fought. These were the years in which the Japanese 
offensive in the Pacific was driven back with increasing 
speed and destruction. The reader is confronted with just 
how massive this theater was but is still able to connect to 
the individuals who fought in it due to the author’s heavy 
reliance on firsthand accounts and other primary source 
material.
Death of the Wehrmacht: The German 
Campaigns of 1942 
Robert M. Citino // Lawrence: University Press of 
Kansas, 2007
The year 1942 was a key turning point of World War 
II, as a bloodied but still lethal Wehrmacht was unable 
to replicate its brilliant victories and huge territorial gains 
against increasingly capable opponents. In this major 
reevaluation of that crucial time, Citino shows that the 
German Army’s addiction to the “war of movement” and 
Adolf Hitler’s flawed management of the war slowly sapped 
military effectiveness as the initiative shifted to the Allies.

Fast Tanks and Heavy Bombers: Innovation in 
the U.S. Army, 1917–1945 
David E. Johnson // Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 
Press, 2013
In 1941, the U.S. Army entered World War II unprepared 
for Germany’s combined use of armor and airpower. Limited 
funding and public apathy during the 1930s were a factor, 
but Johnson persuasively argues that the principal failures 
were internal to the military. Army culture and bureaucracy, 
shaped by conservative officers in the powerful infantry 
and cavalry branches, hindered the incorporation of tanks 
into ground forces. In addition, aircraft development was 
distorted by strategic bombing advocates, neglecting the 
mission of close air support for ground troops.
The First World War 
Hew Strachan // New York: Penguin, 2005
Strachan’s work is a broad study of the First World War 
aimed at the general reader. He examines the political, 
economic, and social factors that set the conditions for war 
before delving into general analysis of how the war was 
conducted at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels. 
The reader will gain an appreciation for the challenges faced 
in bringing the war to a satisfactory conclusion. The author 
closes with a look at why the peace that was settled in 1919 
could not last and what this meant for Europe long term.

The German Way of War: From the Thirty Years’ 
War to the Third Reich 
Robert M. Citino // Lawrence: University Press of 
Kansas, 2005
In his study of over 350 years of German military history, 
Citino reveals a recurrent pattern of rapid movement, 
surprise attacks, and assaults on enemy flanks, which 
made it possible for generations of German leaders to fight 
and win against larger armies and more powerful nations. 
Through battlefield victories and grim determination to 
carry out its distinctive style of warfare, German military 
culture influenced the history of Europe and later the world 
through its singular approach to warfare.


The Guns of August: The Outbreak of World 
War I 
Barbara W. Tuchman // New York: Random 
House, 1962
In this 1963 Pulitzer Prize–winning account of the 
coming of the Great War in Europe, Tuchman re-creates 
the month leading up to World War I and the first month 
of the conflict: thirty dramatic days in the summer of 1914 
when the continent erupted in fighting. Beginning with the 
funeral of England’s King Edward VII, the author traces each 
step that led to the clash and the subsequent outbreak of 
battle. She also highlights the numerous misconceptions, 
miscalculations, and mistakes that resulted in the tragedy 
of trench warfare.
Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human 
Societies 
Jared Diamond // New York: W. W. Norton, 1999
Diamond, a professor of geography and physiology, 
attempts to explain why Eurasian and North African 
civilizations have survived and prospered more than others. 
He argues that the gaps in power and technology between 
human societies originated primarily in environmental 
differences, which are amplified by various positive 
feedback loops. When cultural or genetic differences 
occur, such as written languages or the development 
of resistance to endemic diseases, he asserts that 
these advantages occurred because of the influence of 
geography on societies and cultures.


History of Rome 
Michael Grant // New York: Charles Scribner’s 
Sons, 1978
From a small settlement on the banks of the Tiber, 
Rome grew to become the center of an empire that 
dominated what was then known of the Western world. 
Grant re-creates the evolution of the city, describing the 
individuals and events that made Rome a political and 
cultural hub based on conquest, politics, and economics. 
The book presents many of the familiar names of Rome—
Julius Caesar, Marc Antony, and Cleopatra—but also the 
artistic, economic, and engineering accomplishments of 
the “eternal city.”
Inferno: The World at War, 1939–1945 
Max Hastings // New York: Knopf, 2011
World War II involved tens of millions of soldiers and 
cost sixty million lives, and Hastings, a distinguished 
historian who has researched and written about the war for 
over thirty years, provides a richly detailed single-volume 
history of the entire war. Through his stories of everyday 
people, ranging from soldiers, sailors, and airmen to 
housewives, civilians under attack, and even Japanese 
suicide pilots, he offers an intimate portrait of the most epic 
and destructive war in human history.
The Landmark Thucydides: A Comprehensive 
Guide to the Peloponnesian War 
Robert B. Strassler, ed. // New York: Touchstone, 
1998
Thucydides is recognized as a pioneer in the writing of 
military history. His study of the protracted Peloponnesian 
War between Athens and Sparta in the fifth century BC is 
the definitive work, but it has been relatively inaccessible 
to the student of military history who does not possess a 
Greek classicist background. Strassler’s book opens the 
world of ancient military campaigns and battles, and the 
valuable political, military, and moral lessons it holds, to 
the general public.

Pacific Crucible: War at Sea in the Pacific, 
1941–1942 
Ian W. Toll // New York: W. W. Norton, 2012
The years 1941–1942 were crucial in the war to defeat 
Japan in the Pacific theater. The decisions and, in the case 
of Japan, strategic missteps made during this time would 
have consequences once the United States and its Allies 
could mobilize on a scale never before seen. Toll draws 
on primary source material to put the reader on board the 
ships and in the offices and conference rooms where the 
foundations for victory were laid.
The Path to Blitzkrieg: Doctrine and Training in 
the German Army, 1920–1939 
Robert M. Citino // Mechanicsburg, Pa.: Stackpole 
Books, 2007
In 1939, the German Army shocked the world with a 
highly mobile and aggressive style of warfare. Twenty 
years earlier, that army had lain in ruins, unsuccessful on 
the battlefield and constrained by the Treaty of Versailles. 
Citino shows how German officers of the Weimar Republic 
transformed their doctrine and built the institutional 
capability for Germany’s rapid rearmament. Using largely 
unpublished materials from U.S. and German archives, he 
centers his analysis on critical maneuvers conducted by 
the German Army in the 1930s that provided the critical 
skills for future victories.
The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed 
Force, and Society since A.D. 1000 
William H. McNeill // Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1982
The relationship between power and military, 
technological, and social history is explored by McNeill 
in this sweeping narrative of “hard power” since the year 
1000. The author traces the development of new ideas 
from the crossbow to the intercontinental ballistic missile 
to argue that the commercial transformation of society and 
advances in technology have continually upset balances of 
power and established new political structures.

The Regulars: The American Army, 1898–1941 
Edward M. Coffman // Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 2004
In a lively and brisk social history, Coffman details 
the transformation of the U.S. Army between the War 
with Spain and the beginning of World War II. In 1898, 
America’s army was a small constabulary engaging 
in skirmishes on a vanishing frontier and dealing with 
protesting workers, completely isolated from broader 
American social, political, and cultural currents. Within four 
decades, it emerged reborn as a large modern army drawn 
from all corners of America to fight a global war against 
highly skilled opponents.
A Savage War: A Military History of the Civil 
War 
Williamson Murray and Wayne Wei-siang Hsieh // 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016
As a new military history of the Civil War, this book 
distinguishes itself by its expansive vision and scope. 
Built around a core argument that the American Civil War 
began an enduring style of “modern warfare,” the narrative 
moves from the first shots at Fort Sumter to the surrender 
of Robert E. Lee’s army at Appomattox. Murray and Hsieh 
highlight the powerful historical forces unleashed by the 
Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution’s impact 
on military culture, leaders, and decision making.


Thinking in Time: The Uses of History for 
Decision Makers 
Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May // New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1988
This book, by a political scientist and a historian, is not 
a work of history but a guidebook for decision makers 
about how to use history. The authors employ a number 
of historical case studies that highlight both how a lack of 
knowledge affected those making decisions and how those 
individuals might have employed historical thinking to better 
effect. The authors do not shy from practical suggestions 
and offer tips and techniques for incorporating history 
into decision making. This work should be considered 
mandatory reading for strategists and policymakers and 
their staffs.
This Kind of War: A Study in Unpreparedness 
T. R. Fehrenbach // New York: Macmillan, 1963
Fehrenbach’s dramatic account of the Korean War in all 
its horror and bravery is written from the perspective of those 
who fought in it. Using unit records and personal journals, 
the author provides compelling individual narratives of the 
small-unit commanders and their troops. Sixty years later, 
understanding the struggles of the “forgotten war,” through 
the voices of those who battled over the rocky Korean hills, 
both commemorates the past and offers vital lessons for 
the future.
The Wehrmacht Retreats: Fighting a Lost War, 
1943 
Robert M. Citino // Lawrence: University Press of 
Kansas, 2012
Throughout 1943, the German Army, a force that 
perfected relentless offensive operations, was ground 
down by strategic overreach and the demands of twentieth-
century industrialized warfare. Citino draws on German-
language sources to offer a fresh and vivid analysis of key 
campaigns as Germany shifted to a desperate defensive 
campaign against increasingly skilled military opponents. 
From the Allied landings in North Africa and the German 
counterattack at Kasserine Pass to the titanic battle of 
Kursk, he reveals how a German military establishment 
struggled to react when the tables were turned.

LEADERSHIP
American Ulysses: A Life of Ulysses S. Grant 
Ronald C. White // New York: Random House, 
2016
For many years Ulysses S. Grant’s success as a 
general in the Civil War was explained as merely the 
result of the Union’s superiority in resources. White sides 
with those who argue that defeating the rebellion actually 
depended in large part on Grant’s abilities and character. 
While not ignoring Grant’s poor choices during his two 
terms as president, the author also reminds us that Grant 
was a defender of civil equality for the freed slaves and 
demonstrated that character again during his race to 
complete his superb memoirs before cancer killed him.
The Anatomy of Courage: The Classic WWI 
Account of the Psychological Effects of War 
Charles Wilson // New York: Carroll and Graf, 
2007
First published in 1945, this account of the psychological 
effects of war is based on Wilson’s service as a doctor 
to a battalion of the Royal Fusiliers during World War I. A 
groundbreaking work, produced when the psychic damage 
inflicted by combat was still widely equated with cowardice, 
the author warns that the sustained pressures of modern 
war can break any soldier. He sets out the relationship 
between fear and courage and ways to manage the effects 
of fear so as to avoid exhausting a soldier’s courage.


Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in 
Iraq, 2003 to 2005 
Thomas E. Ricks // New York: Penguin, 2006
This book covers the second Iraq War from its origins 
in the Gulf War to 2006, when the issue for the Americans 
was still very much in doubt. While Ricks does not spare 
civilian officials, his was the first book to examine the 
failure of the military to properly prepare for and conduct 
this war. From division commanders to the chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff, he argues that most of these leaders 
repeated the mistakes made in Vietnam. By 2006, these 
failures left the United States in a strategic position that 
“painfully resembled that of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan 
in the early 1980s.”


The Generals: American Military Command 
from World War II to Today 
Thomas E. Ricks // New York: Penguin, 2013
Ricks traces how the promotion and relief of generals in 
the U.S. Army changed from the 1940s to the present day. 
During World War II, generals who failed to perform to the 
expected standard were relieved. After the war, the Army 
gradually abandoned this approach for one in which the 
relief of general officers became rare and almost never for 
battlefield performance. This change has played a crucial 
role in American wartime failures from 1950 to the present. 
Only a return to the World War II method, the author 
argues, can reinvigorate the Army’s senior leadership and 
its wartime performance.
The Generalship of Ulysses S. Grant 
J. F. C. Fuller // New York: Da Capo Press, 1991
A once-common view of Ulysses S. Grant was that 
he was an inept general who relied solely on brute force 
to overwhelm his opponents at a tremendous cost to his 
own army. Fuller argues that while Grant may not have 
appreciated the tactical character of the war, he was 
unsurpassed at the operational level. Furthermore, Grant 
understood, better than any other general of the war, 
the requirement that operations must serve the strategy 
devised to achieve a war’s objectives.
George C. Marshall, 4 vols. 
Forrest C. Pogue // New York: Viking, 1963–1987
George C. Marshall was the greatest American soldier-
statesman of the twentieth century. Like any leader, he was 
not perfect, but he set a very high standard of ethical and 
effective leadership. The first volume details how Marshall 
developed as a soldier, through his own efforts and those 
of several mentors. The subsequent volumes show how 
those skills, combined with his commitment to selfless 
service, enabled Marshall to lead the U.S. Army to victory 
in World War II as chief of staff and play a crucial role as 
secretary of state and secretary of defense in securing the 
peace afterward.

Hubris: The Tragedy of War in the Twentieth 
Century 
Alistair Horne // New York: HarperCollins, 2015
The ancient Greeks used the word hubris to describe 
the arrogant belief that man could challenge the gods and 
survive. Horne uses this concept in case studies of battles 
to show the recurrence of a deadly pattern in which the 
United States, Japan, France, Russia, and Germany fell 
victim to illusions of invincibility that resulted in catastrophic 
defeats.
Leaders Eat Last: Why Some Teams Pull 
Together and Others Don’t 
Simon Sinek // New York: Penguin, 2014
Sinek looks at the creation of loyalty in organizations, 
the evolutionary basis of leadership, and lessons about 
leadership. He stresses that the principal cause of 
failure in organizations is the tendency to focus more on 
numbers and short-term results than on the people in the 
organization. When leaders prioritize the welfare of their 
people, those people will give everything they have to 
protect and advance the well-being of one another and the 
organization.
Memoirs and Selected Letters: Personal 
Memoirs of U. S. Grant, Selected Letters, 
1839–1865 
Ulysses S. Grant // New York: Library Classics of 
the United States, 1990
With the concise, clear language that also distinguished 
his orders, Grant takes the reader through his service in the 
Mexican War and the Civil War. In doing so, readers follow 
his path from young lieutenant to the general entrusted 
by President Abraham Lincoln with finally crushing the 
rebellion. Grant’s account of how he accomplished that 
task provides relevant lessons in linking operational art with 
strategy, civil-military relations, and the vital importance of 
a leader’s moral courage.

A Message to Garcia 
Elbert Hubbard // Lexington, Ky.: Seven Treasures 
Publication, 2009
This classic essay from 1899, based on the true story of 
Lt. Andrew Rowan in Cuba during the War with Spain, is a 
notable testament of initiative and responsibility. It provides 
commonsense advice on the importance of personal 
responsibility, loyalty, hard work, and enterprise.
A Passion for Leadership: Lessons on Change 
and Reform from Fifty Years of Public 
Service 
Robert M. Gates // New York: Knopf, 2016
Gates headed three very different large organizations: 
the Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Department, 
and Texas A&M University. From those experiences he 
distills advice on how other leaders can transform their 
organizations. He stresses that people, not systems, are 
the key to implementation, and those who ignore good 
leadership practices will not bring about effective change.


The Seventh Sense: Power, Fortune, and 
Survival in the Age of Networks 
Joshua Cooper Ramo // New York: Little, Brown, 
2016
The dominant feature of the current age is the 
unstoppable spread of networks with their ever-faster 
connections in a wide variety of human activities from 
commerce to war. These networked systems are as 
transformational a way to organize power as those created 
by earlier technological advances like the printing press 
and the telegraph. Ramo covers how the networked world 
arose, how the networked world works, and how leaders 
could and should adapt to this world.


Supreme Command: Soldiers, Statesmen, and 
Leadership in Wartime 
Eliot A. Cohen // New York: Free Press, 2002
Using case studies from the United States, France, 
Britain, and Israel, Cohen argues against the current 
American conventional wisdom that civilian leaders should 
set wartime objectives and then cede control over how the 
war is fought to military leaders. Rather, war is an activity in 
which the political and the military aspects are so intertwined 
that civilian leaders, who leave how the war is prosecuted 
solely in the hands of military leaders, risk losing the war. 
These officials must remain in a constant dialogue in which 
civilian leaders continually assess whether military actions 
are, or are not, moving the nation toward victory.
Team of Teams: New Rules of Engagement for a 
Complex World 
Stanley McChrystal // New York: Penguin, 2015
Based on his experience leading the Joint Special 
Operations Task Force in Iraq, McChrystal provides guidance 
on how to use small teams to infuse organizations with 
dynamic and adaptive leadership. He distinguishes between 
problems that are “linear” (easily understood and predictable) 
and “nonlinear” (complex systems where the causes and 
effects are far more difficult to understand). Hierarchical 
organizations can deal with linear problems, but nonlinear 
problems require a network of teams that is decentralized, 
empowered, situationally aware, and adaptive.
Thunderbolt: General Creighton Abrams and 
the Army of His Times 
Lewis Sorley // New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992
By the time of his death in 1974, Abrams’ tactical 
competence, disdain for bureaucratic small-mindedness, 
five years of purgatory in Vietnam, and love for the 
American soldier had made him the most respected and 
admired officer of his generation. Although some historians 
have challenged Sorley’s analysis of Abrams’ role in the 
Vietnam War, his portrayal of the man himself provides a 
clear and compelling picture of an outstanding officer. 

The Unforgiving Minute: A Soldier’s Education 
Craig M. Mullaney // New York: Penguin, 2009
U.S. Army Capt. Craig Mullaney recounts the hard 
lessons that only war can teach while fighting al-Qaeda in 
Afghanistan. This is a portrait of a junior officer grappling 
with the weight of war and coming to terms with what it 
means to lead others in combat.
William Tecumseh Sherman: In the Service of 
My Country: A Life 
James Lee McDonough // New York: W. W. 
Norton, 2016
In the iconography of the Civil War, the March to the 
Sea is forever linked with William T. Sherman. McDonough 
argues that Sherman had to be harsh because he knew 
that the only way to convince the traitors to end the war 
was that they “should be made to feel the war.” This book 
shows how Sherman’s remarkably modern understanding 
of war evolved from his upbringing in a politically important 
family, his prewar experiences, and his early service in 
the war. Learning to cope with the tensions of command 
in wartime, Sherman forged a partnership with Ulysses S. 
Grant that proved crucial to crushing the rebellion.


ARMY PROFESSION
The American Way of War 
Russell F. Weigley // New York: Macmillan, 1973
This work remains one of the best introductions to 
American military history from colonial times through 
the Vietnam War and particularly to themes about 
contradictions between how the United States has planned 
and prepared for wars and how it has waged them. Today, 
Weigley’s examination of the foundations of American 
thinking about grand strategy and operational methods 
is best read in conjunction with Antulio J. Echevarria’s 
Reconsidering the American Way of War.
The Art of War 
Antoine Henri de Jomini // Westport, Conn.: 
Greenwood Press, 1971
A classic of military strategy first published in 1838, this 
nineteenth-century author defined strategy as identifying 
decisive points in a theater of war and then concentrating 
mass against that point and the enemy’s lines of 
communications. Jomini held that warfare’s principles are 
immutable and that offensive operations are typically the 
most advantageous. He also emphasized the importance 
of logistics and intelligence.


The Art of War 
Sun Tzu, trans. Samuel B. Griffith // New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1963
This work is as valuable today as it was in ancient China. 
Written more than 2,000 years ago, this is the first known study 
of the planning and conduct of military operations. These terse, 
aphoristic essays are unsurpassed in comprehensiveness 
and depth of understanding, examining not only battlefield 
maneuvers, but also relevant economic, political, and 
psychological factors. The precepts outlined by Sun Tzu are 
also regularly applied outside the realm of military theory.
Brute Force: Allied Strategy and Tactics in the 
Second World War 
John Ellis // New York: Viking, 1990
Ellis argues that the Allied victory in World War II was 
inevitable, due to advantages in manpower and materiel, 
but delayed because of ineptness on the Allied side. The 
author examines several major campaigns, such as the 
Battle of the Atlantic and the Bomber Offensive, as well 
as the campaigns in Northwest Europe and the Pacific, 
and finds them all wanting for skillful execution. He 
critiques Allied tactical and operational skill as simplistic 
and emphasizes the economic might of the Allies and their 
ability to employ that might. His views provided a useful, if 
overdone, corrective to World War II historiography when 
this work was published.


The Campaigns of Napoleon: The Mind and 
Method of History’s Greatest Soldier 
David G. Chandler // New York: Macmillan, 1966
Chandler’s work may be a half-century old, but 
this exhaustive study of how Napoleon conducted his 
campaigns—not just his battles—remains a starting point 
for understanding the “Little Corporal.” He shows the 
development of Napoleon as commander and strategist 
and demonstrates how he consistently combined attention 
to basic principles of operations with initiative and 
improvisation for a quarter-century.
Civil War Command and Strategy: The Process 
of Victory and Defeat 
Archer Jones // New York: Free Press, 1992
Instead of applying later concepts in this comparative 
history of Union and Confederate command and strategy, 
Jones analyzes each side using the art of war as the 
participants understood it. He argues that the two sides 
adapted existing tactical and strategic concepts to a war 
featuring mass armies and new technologies waged over 
vast distances. Each side developed effective systems of 
command and generally astutely balanced political and 
military considerations.
Frederick the Great on the Art of War 
Jay Luvaas, ed. // New York: Da Capo Press, 1999
Frederick the Great (1712–1786), King of Prussia, 
outfought the formidable French, Russian, and Austrian 
armies aligned against him in the Seven Years’ War (1756–
1763) and established Prussia as a major continental 
power, decisively influencing the next two centuries of 
European history. He was also a brilliant military thinker 
whose observations arose from extensive battlefield 
experience. This book presents a balanced selection from 
Frederick’s writings on strategy, tactics, and mobility; the 
problems of logistics and a two-front war; the combined 
use of infantry, cavalry, and artillery; the history of the 
Prussian Army; the critical battles of the Seven Years’ War; 
and generalship as an art.

The Grand Design: Strategy and the U.S. Civil 
War 
Donald J. Stoker // New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2010
Stoker examines the differences in Union and Confederate 
strategies and gives a comprehensive account of how they 
evolved between Fort Sumter and Appomattox. He shows 
that Jefferson Davis failed as a strategist by losing control 
of the political side of the war. Abraham Lincoln, in contrast, 
evolved a clear strategic vision, but he failed for years to 
make his generals implement it. Arguing that the North’s 
advantages in population and industry did not ensure its 
victory, the author reasserts the centrality of overarching 
military ideas—strategy—on each side, showing how those 
strategies helped determine the war’s outcome.
History of the U.S. Army 
Russell F. Weigley // Rev. ed.: Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1984
Weigley’s study is an authoritative look at the 
administrative and logistical history of America’s army, 
rather than a history of the U.S. Army’s campaigns and 
wars. Beginning in the early seventeenth century with 
the militia roots of the Army’s birth, the author provides 
an analysis of policy, military interactions with the civilian 
populace, logistics, administration, and the evolution of the 
Army’s command structure.
How the North Won: A Military History of the 
Civil War 
Herman Hattaway and Archer Jones // Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1991
A wide-ranging, lucid analysis of Union victory in the 
Civil War, the authors emphasize the North’s superior 
managerial systems, staff organizations, and industrial 
mobilization. They also emphasize the firm commitment to 
the cause of crushing the rebellion, in contrast to a lack 
of Southern nationalism. Moreover, Hattaway and Jones 
downplay the role of battles in winning the war for the 
Union.

Infantry in Battle 
George C. Marshall, ed. // Washington, D.C.: The 
Infantry Journal Inc., 1939
The Military History and Publications Section of the 
Infantry School prepared this compilation of small-unit 
actions from World War I in 1934. The intent was to allow 
students to examine how the ideas and concepts of 
peacetime instruction held up in the experience of battle—
that is, to see how theoretical discussion fared against the 
“realities of war.” 
Just War Reconsidered: Strategy, Ethics, and 
Theory 
James M. Dubik // Lexington: University Press of 
Kentucky, 2016
A retired soldier, general, and scholar, Dubik combines 
study and personal experience to address the shortcoming 
he finds in the literature on military ethics. In particular, 
he argues that both political and military leaders are 
accountable for the planning and execution of war and 
addresses the issue of the morality of pursuing strategies 
that cannot achieve war aims. He also offers five principles 
for waging just wars in the modern era.


Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to 
the Nuclear Age 
Peter Paret, Gordon A. Craig, and Felix Gilbert, 
eds. // Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986
This is a large essay collection on war and strategy 
over the past five centuries. The subjects addressed 
range from major theorists and political and military 
leaders to impersonal forces. Historical figures including 
Niccolo Machiavelli, Carl von Clausewitz, and Karl Marx 
and Friedrich Engels are discussed, along with Napoleon 
Bonaparte, Winston Churchill, and Mao Zedong. Other 
essays trace the interaction of theory and experience 
over generations—the evolution of American strategy, 
for instance, or the emergence of revolutionary war in 
the modern world. Still others analyze the strategy of 
particular conflicts—the First and Second World Wars—
or the relationship between technology, policy, and war 
in the nuclear age. Whatever its theme, each essay 
places the specifics of military thought and action in their 
political, social, and economic environment. Together, the 
contributors have produced a book that reinterprets and 
illuminates war, one of the most powerful forces in history 
and one that cannot be controlled in the future without an 
understanding of its past.


Man, the State, and War: A Theoretical Analysis 
Kenneth N. Waltz // Rev. ed.; New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2001
Waltz examines war focusing on the beliefs of major 
thinkers and philosophers throughout the history of 
Western civilization. He explores works both by classic 
political philosophers, such as St. Augustine, Thomas 
Hobbes, Immanuel Kant, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 
and by modern psychologists and anthropologists to 
discover ideas intended to explain war among states and 
related prescriptions for peace.
Masters of War: Classical Strategic Thought 
Michael I. Handel // Rev. ed.: New York: 
Routledge, 2001
Handel was a longtime professor at the U.S. Army War 
College and the Naval War College before his death in 
2001. In this study, he compares and contrasts the writings 
of Carl von Clausewitz, Sun Tzu, and Mao Zedong—and 
to a lesser extent, Niccolo Machiavelli and Baron Antoine 
Henri de Jomini—on a variety of topics and in a manner 
that allows the reader to perceive similarities as well as 
differences.
On War 
Carl von Clausewitz, trans. Michael Howard and 
Peter Paret // Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1984
Clausewitz was a Prussian officer who first participated 
in the wars of the French Revolution at age twelve. This 
volume is the product of his lifelong effort to understand 
and articulate the nature of war. It remains valuable 
reading today, as do the introductory essays by the editors, 
because Clausewitz’s cogent identification of the forces 
that make war so simple to understand, yet so difficult to 
control for favorable outcomes, remains unsurpassed in 
Western writing. 

Reconsidering the American Way of War: U.S. 
Military Practice from the Revolution to 
Afghanistan 
Antulio J. Echevarria II // Washington, D.C.: 
Georgetown University Press, 2014
This book examines the history of American strategy and 
operations from the Revolutionary War to the present era. 
The author demonstrates, contrary to popular belief, that 
the conduct of America’s wars has always been “thoroughly 
political.” In addition, Echevarria provides insightful and 
trenchant critiques of contemporary operational and 
strategic practices that deserve reading by all officers.
Restraint: A New Foundation for U.S. Grand 
Strategy 
Barry Posen // Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 
Press, 2014
Posen argues that since the collapse of Soviet power 
America has grown incapable of moderating its ambitions 
in international politics. The United States has pursued a 
grand strategy that he calls “liberal hegemony,” one that is 
unnecessary, counterproductive, costly, and wasteful. The 
author explains why this strategy works poorly and provides 
an alternative grand strategy and an associated military 
strategy and force structure. In contrast to the failures and 
unexpected problems that have stemmed from America’s 
consistent overreaching, he makes an urgent argument for 
restraint in the future use of U.S. military strength.


The Soldier and the State: The Theory and 
Politics of Civil-Military Relations 
Samuel P. Huntington // Cambridge, Mass.: 
Belknap Press, 1957
In a classic work, Huntington challenges most of the old 
assumptions and ideas on the role of the military in society. 
Stressing the value of the military outlook for American 
national policy, the author has performed the distinctive 
task of developing a general theory of civil-military relations 
and subjecting it to rigorous historical analysis.
Some Principles of Maritime Strategy 
Julian S. Corbett // Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute 
Press, 1988
Corbett was a prominent British naval historian and 
strategist of the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries. With this work, first published in 1911, he sought 
to craft a modern naval doctrine. In doing so, he generated 
some opposition from British naval officers for advocating 
a maritime strategy that emphasized maintaining 
command of the sea over seeking out decisive battles 
with enemy fleets. He focuses on what naval warfare—
as well as broader issues such as alliances and economic 
resources—meant to the power of a nation.
Strategy: A History 
Lawrence Freedman // New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2013
This is an exhaustive survey of strategy and strategists 
from the Bible to the present. Freedman provides almost 
encyclopedic treatment of the subject as he summarizes 
and critiques strategists while also providing a thorough 
dissection of what strategy is and why it is so difficult.

Strategy: The Indirect Approach 
Basil H. Liddell Hart // 3d ed.; London: Faber and 
Faber, 1954
Hart was among the most widely read strategists of 
the twentieth century, notably for his promotion of the 
“indirect approach.” Written in response to what he viewed 
as misunderstandings of Carl von Clausewitz’s On War 
that led to the tragic errors of World War I, he sought to 
highlight a new strategic framework, one that eschews 
the importance of battle but focuses instead on achieving 
victory without the bloodshed he observed in the two 
world wars. He advocates strategies that emphasize 
cutting enemy supply lines, dislocating enemy command 
and control, and paralyzing a foe with attacks on the rear.


The Strategy of Conflict 
Thomas C. Schelling // Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1960
This influential series of essays on game theory was 
important during the Cold War. It deals with situations 
when there is a common interest as well as conflict 
between adversaries: negotiations, war and threats of 
war, criminal deterrence, extortion, and tacit bargaining. It 
proposes enlightening similarities between, for instance, 
maneuvering in limited war and in a traffic jam; deterring 
the Russians and one’s own children; and the modern 
strategy of terror and the ancient institution of hostages.
War Comes to Long An: Revolutionary Conflict 
in a Vietnamese Province 
Jeffrey Race // Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1972
This landmark study of the Vietnamese conflict written 
by a U.S. Army officer examines the war through a lens of 
the revolutionary and counterrevolutionary movements in 
the rural province of Long An until American intervention 
in the area.
War in the Modern World Since 1815 
Jeremy Black, ed. // London: Routledge, 2003
Black has edited a collection of essays that offers an 
accessible entry to an often-ignored subject: military 
developments and the conduct of war outside of Western 
Europe and the United States. Two-thirds of the studies 
examine events in regions such as China, Latin America, 
and sub-Saharan Africa and present the reader with 
different stories—and causes—of military progress.

FICTION
The Aeneid 
Virgil, trans. Robert Fitzgerald // New York: 
Vintage, 1990
The poet Virgil grew up during the turbulent fall of the 
Roman Republic. In his epic poem about the founding 
of Rome by refugees from the Greek defeat at Troy, he 
presents a meditation on the cost of war, the price of 
founding nations and building empires, and the role of 
myth and history in the shaping of national identity.
Gates of Fire: An Epic Novel of the Battle of 
Thermopylae 
Stephen Pressfield // New York: Doubleday, 1998
At Thermopylae, a rocky mountain pass in northern 
Greece, the feared and admired Spartan soldiers stood 
three hundred strong. Theirs was a suicide mission: to 
hold the pass against the invading millions of the mighty 
Persian Army. Day after bloody day they withstood the 
terrible onslaught, buying time for the Greeks to rally their 
forces. Spartans would be remembered for the greatest 
military stand in history—one that would not end until the 
rocks were awash with blood, leaving only one gravely 
injured Spartan squire to tell the tale.


Ghost Fleet: A Novel of the Next World War 
P. W. Singer and August Cole // Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2015
The United States, China, and Russia eye each other 
across a twenty-first–century version of the Cold War, 
which suddenly heats up at sea, on land, in the air, in outer 
space, and in cyberspace. The fighting involves everything 
from stealthy robotic-drone strikes to old warships from 
the navy’s “ghost fleet.” Fighter pilots unleash a Pearl 
Harbor–style attack; American veterans become low-tech 
insurgents; teenage hackers battle in digital playgrounds; 
Silicon Valley billionaires mobilize for cyber war; and 
a serial killer carries out her own vendetta in Hawaii 
against the Chinese occupation forces. Ultimately, victory 
will depend on blending the lessons of the past with the 
weapons of the future.
The Iliad and the Odyssey 
Homer, trans. Robert Fagles // New York: 
Penguin, 1998
From the beginnings of the Western literary tradition, 
Homer’s epic poems The Iliad and The Odyssey  depict 
the war between the Greeks and Trojans and its chaotic 
aftermath. The first text portrays a world in upheaval as the 
opposing armies are locked in combat before the walls of 
Troy, while the second reveals the global upheaval the war 
has caused as it follows the veteran Odysseus in his ten-
year struggle to reach home while his wife Penelope faces 
her own challenges at home.
Matterhorn: A Novel of the Vietnam War 
Karl Marlantes // New York: Grove, 2011
Marlantes, a Vietnam veteran, presents a realistic, 
boots-on-the-ground look at the Vietnam War. He depicts 
a young U.S. Marine lieutenant as he begins his command 
of a squad in the jungle, facing hunger, thirst, rain, difficult 
terrain, and enemy attacks. His soldiers connect with one 
another, but personalities and racial tensions build during 
the mission. The vivid battle scenes and frank depictions 
of the marines make this novel a gripping story.

U.S. ARMY CENTER OF MILITARY HISTORY
CMH Pub 105–5–1



PIN : 079476–000
Ç Tear along perforated lines for the CSA’s Professional Reading List bookmark È
THE U.S. ARMY 
 CHIEF OF STAFF’S
PROFESSIONAL 
READING LIST
THE U.S. ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF’S
PROFESSIONAL READING LISTFollow the CSA on:
 
  @USArmyChiefofStaff
 
  @USArmyChiefofStaff
 
  @ArmyChiefStaff
Follow the CSA on     &     @USArmyChiefofStaff and on     @ArmyChiefStaff
