 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
                       
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk and Resiliency:  
China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat 
 
 
 
Oriana Skylar Mastro  
and  
Ian Easton 
November 8, 2017 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Introduction: Phauk-Phaw and its Evolution ………………………………………………....3 
 
About the Project 2049 Institute 
 
The Project 2049 Institute  seeks to guide decision makers toward a more secure Asia by the century’s mid -
point. Located in Arlington, Virginia, the organization fills a gap in the public policy realm through forward -
looking, region -specific research on alterna tive security and policy solutions. Its interdisciplinary approach 
draws on rigorous analysis of socioeconomic, governance, military, environmental, technological, and political 
trends, and input from key players in the region, with an eye toward educating  the public and informing policy 
debate. 
About the Authors 
 
Oriana Skylar Mastro  is an assistant professor of security studies at the  Edmund A. Walsh School of 
Foreign Service at Georgetown University , where her research focuses on Chinese military and security 
policy, Asia-Pacific security issues, war termination, and coercive diplomacy. Dr. Mastro also continues to 
serve as an officer in the United States Air Force Reserve, for which she works as a Pol itical Military Affairs 
Strategist at  Pacific Air Forces  (PACAF). For her contributions to U.S. strategy in Asia, she won the 
Individual Reservist of the Year Award in 2016.  Dr. Mastro is currently a  Jeanne Kirkpatrick Scholar at the 
American Enterprise In stitute (AEI)  where she is working on a book about China's approach to global 
leadership. 
 
Previously, she was the Stanton Nuclear Security Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations,  a fellow in the 
Asia-Pacific Security program at the Center for a New American Security (CNAS), a University of Virginia 
Miller Center National Fellow, a Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) Pacific Forum  fellow, 
a Sasakawa Peace Fellow , and a pre -doctoral fellow at the Institute for Security and Conflict Studies at 
George Washington University. Additionally, she has worked on China policy issues at the Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, RAND Corporation, U.S. Pacific Command, and the Project 2049  
Institute. She holds a B.A. in East Asian Studies fro m Stanford University and an M.A. and Ph.D . in Politics 
from Princeton University. Her research and commentary can be found at: www.orianaskylarmastro.com.  
 
Ian Easton  is a research fellow at the Project 2049 Institute, where he conducts research on defens e and 
security issues in Asia. During the summer of 2013 , he was a visiting fellow at the Japan Institute for 
International Affairs (JIIA) in Tokyo. Previously, Ian worked as a China analyst at the Center for Naval 
Analyses (CNA) for two years. Prior to that, he lived in Taipei from 2005 to 2010. During his time in Taiwan, 
he worked as a translator for Island Technologies Inc. and the Foundation for Asia -Pacific Peace Studies. 
While in Taiwan, he also conducted research with the Asia Bureau Chief of Defense  News. 
  
Ian holds an M.A. in China Studies from National Chengchi University in Taiwan and a B.A. in International 
Studies from the University of Illinois Urbana -Champaign. He also holds a certification in advanced 
Mandarin Chinese, having formally studie d the language at Fudan University in Shanghai, and National 
Taiwan Normal University in Taipei. Ian’s research has been featured in major media outlets in the United 
States and Asia, including the New York Times , Reuters, US News and World Report , Huffington Post , 
NHK, CCTV, the Diplomat, and the Taipei Times . He has testified before the U.S. -China Economic and 
Security Review Commission and lectured at the U.S. Naval War College, Japan’s National Defense 
Academy, and Taiwan’s National Defense Unive rsity. Ian is the author of "The Chinese Invasion Threat: 
Taiwan's Defense and American Strategy in Asia" (The Project 2049 Institute, October 2017).  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Dr. Mastro would like to thank Annie Kowalewski for her expert research assistance. The  authors would also 
like to thank Emily David and Rachael Burton for reviewing paper drafts and making corrections. The 
following represents the authors’ own personal views only. 
 
 
 
Cover Image: YJ-12 supersonic anti-ship missiles in their first public debut for the “ 70th Victory Day Parade” in front of 
the Forbidden City in Beijing, China. Credit: Weibo @Antithesis, via Popular Science 
 
 
        

 
1 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Introduction……………….………...............………………….…..….……......................................................2 
PLA Threat to Regional Air Bases: Strategy, Capacity, and Trajectory.…..……………..………..……...3 
Implications for a Regional Contingency..............................................................................…...…..9 
Base Resiliency Initiatives..............................................................................……………………….…..10 
Recommendations...........................................................................................................................18 
Endnotes.........................................................................................................................................20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
Introduction   
The Asia -Pacific region is the center of gravity for U.S. strategic interests. Home to 
major and rising powers such as Japan and China, the region increasingly represents the 
primary hub of human activity by any measure . Some of the regional developments that 
occupy American strategic planners and decision makers include China's rapid military 
modernization, weapons proliferation, arms racing, and lack of military transparency. 
These issues promote insecurity among regional actors that rely on the United States for 
strategic assurance, and that count on its uncontested military strength to foster peace  
and stability. 
In particular, China's investments in anti -access/area denial (A2/AD) systems are 
undermining the United States’ ability to live up to regional expectations. Given the 
centrality of air  power for U.S. power projection  in the Western Pacific, the Chinese 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has focused on prioritizing the development of 
asymmetric capabilities to target American  air superiority where it is weakest ―on the 
ground. China’s military modernization program is closely  associated with a number of 
maturing precision strike capabilities designed for attacking air base s. Referred to as 
“airfield runway blockades” by the  PLA, such operations intend to overcome traditional 
Chinese weaknesses in the air by negating enemy air power on the surface. This strategy 
benefits from both the limited number and the relative fragility of America’s forward -
deployed air bases. For example, the U.S. Air Force’s principal front -line facility in Asia, 
Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, is remarkably v ulnerable to missile attack due to its lack of 
active and passive defenses, which includes hardening. 1 Other U.S. and allied air base s 
are similarly unprepared for surviving, defending, mitigating, or recovering from missile 
attacks. China’s strategy furth er benefits from the technical sophistication of the PLA’s 
strategic missile forces.  
While air superiority alone does not ensure success in deterring aggression or winning a 
military campaign, it is often decisive in military operations. 2  Furthermore, cri sis 
stability depends on eliminating any incentives for preemptive or first strikes, and base 
resiliency is crucial to this deterrent message. As the United States evaluates future force 
postures during a period of continued fiscal uncertainty, China’s def ense establishment 
is making significant advances in developing a force capable of dominating the air 
environment around its periphery. In light of these trends, what is Chinese strategic 
thinking on adversary air base  vulnerability, and how well positioned is the PLA to 
exploit U.S. weaknesses? What steps has the United States taken to improve its air bases’ 
resiliency, defined as the capacity to withstand attack, adapt, and generate sufficient 
combat power to achieve campaign object ives in the face of continued enemy action? 
What more can be done? 
This paper seeks to provide an overview of the evolving airpower challenge that the 
United States faces in the Western Pacific and beyond. We will begin by exploring 
Chinese military writin gs on air base  strike operations, and then evaluate the current 
trajectory of the PLA’s precision strike capabilities for conducting such operations. 
Following this, we will describe how the U.S. military is seeking to respond to the threat 
to its air base s. Finally, we will assess the future implications of this evolving situation, 

 
3 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
and conclude with recommendations for how American airpower in Asia can be more 
resilient against threats.  
PLA Threat to Regional Air Bases: Strategy, Capacity, and Trajectory3 
Given the need for air superiority to support regional contingency operations such as 
maritime control, air strikes, and landing operations, U.S. air bases are a logical target 
for Chinese thinkers and planners. In this regard, Taiwan scenarios drive much  of the 
PLA’s thinking on air base  attacks. For the PLA, obtaining the ability to rapidly and 
decisively defeat Taiwan, while at the same time complicating American intervention, is 
the principal driver of its modernization program. Not surprisingly, count ering the 
defense of Taiwan factors heavily in Chinese thinking on airfield attacks, and this 
mission shapes the PLA's development of strategies to exploit perceived U.S. base 
vulnerabilities. 
Strategy  
Chinese strategists emphasize the employment of air a nd missile strikes as a means of 
leveraging the PLA’s advantages over its opponents. Illustrating the importance the PLA 
places on air superiority, the Science of Military Strategy  argues that strategic air raids 
“may replace ground operations as the main operations to attain strategic aims. Success 
or failure…has direct bearing and constraint on the course and outcome of war.” 4 In 
describing the selection of targets for such strikes, the authors of the Science of Military 
Strategy state that “fighter forces are to destroy or contain threatening enemy planes 
through…blocking enemy airfields.” 5 Missile forces, referred to as “striking fire” in PLA 
materials, would likely play the most critical role in an air raid. The Science of Military 
Strategy describes the use of missiles to attack enemy airpower in the following terms, 
“In terms of striking fire…guided and precision-guided missiles are to be used to destroy 
and suppress the enemy’s radar stations, ground air defense weapons, and airfields.”6   
 
Chinese strategists indicate that in the event of conflict , the PLA would consider air 
bases to be the principal targets of its land -based missile units and air force assets. For 
example, the PLA’s Second Artillery Force Science of Campaign s lists the primary 
mission of the conventionally armed missile units of the newly renamed Strategic 
Rocket Force (PLARF) as “suppressing enemy air force air base s, airfields, and missile 
defense (air defense) systems.” 7 Such operations would be conducted in coordination 
with air units in order to achieve air superiority. PLARF strategists write that: 
 
To achieve air superiority, long distance firepower must be applied to ‘control 
the air through the ground.’ Enemy combat aircraft would be suppressed or 
destroyed on the ground, and/or blockaded inside their bunkers; thus making it 
difficult for their air combat forces to play an effective role.8    
 
The PLA Air Force (PLAAF) appears to have started developing doctrine for conducting 
air and missile strikes o n air bases prior to the 1995 –1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis. In 1995, 
the PLAAF Command Academy published a book that included a section on air base  
strike operations. In the book, The Application of Air Force Operations , the authors 
referred to air base  strikes as “airfield runway blockades” —terminology that is widely 

 
4 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
used by writers across the PLA today. The authors defined an airfield runway blockade 
in following terms: 
 
The standard of a blockade is measured according to the loss of the smallest 
area requir ed for taking off. Once runways have been attacked, the enemy’s 
planes should be unable to find an area sufficient to satisfy the minimum 
runway length and width requirements for taking off. This is the standard by 
which to measure the success or failure of a blockade.9     
 
Based on the Second Artillery Force Science of Campaigns , a notional operation against 
an enemy's air defenses would proceed as follows:  
 
First, anti-radiation unmanned aerial vehicles would engage in anti -radiation 
attacks [on radars]. Either at the same time or following this, conventionally 
armed missiles carrying penetrating submunitions would carry out firepower 
strikes to cut apart important enemy airfield targets; thereby causing enemy 
planes to be unable to take  off or land…Afterwards, our aviation forces would 
engage in gap -filling bombing to destroy enemy air combat forces’ ground 
infrastructure, and take air superiority.10 
 
Numerous research articles, technical studies, and simulation reports further indicate 
that the main focus of air base  strike operations would likely be runways. PLARF 
researchers writing in 2009 argued that “combat aircraft rely on runways for taking off 
and landing. Once runways have been destroyed, airfields are unable to provide combat 
aircraft with fuel, munitions, maintenance, and other support. As such, when executing 
strikes on airfields, runways will be the principal targets.” 11 Likewise, a team of Chinese 
missile designers wrote in a 2013 textbook that the main target of air base missile strikes 
is runways. 12 Another more detailed PLA study assessed that runways, parking ramps, 
and taxiways would be the highest value targets at any air base.13  
 
Early PLA writings emphasize the importance of attacking runways to gain air 
superiority over an otherwise stronger opponent. Ballistic missiles and cruise missiles 
are viewed as optimal means of delivering such strikes due to their ability to penetrate 
enemy air defenses through the use of speed and surprise. 14 One study argued that 
having capabilities that could effectively penetrate air defenses to strike enemy air bases 
would be “an extremely important question in actual combat operations.” 15  These 
researchers assumed that if initial barrages of conventional theater missiles could not 
effectively close enemy air bases, more vulnerable bomber fleets and their fighter escorts 
would be ordered to conduct follow-on surprise attacks. The results of their simulations, 
while not publically available, led the authors to conclude that more emphasis needed to 
be placed on theater missile strikes if air attacks were to have an acceptably high chance 
of success. 16 The implications of these studies are clear: PLA researchers do not have 
confidence in their aging bomber fleet’s ability to survive missions inside denied 
airspace. If bombers and fighters were going to be successful, the enemy’s air force 
would have to be first knocked out on the ground by missile strikes.  
   

 
5 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
More recent Chinese studies indicate that a significant amount of simulation and 
planning has been devoted to exploring how the PLA’s missile units could engage in 
strikes on air base s. Using a campaign against the Republic of China (Taiwan) as an 
illustrative example, one recent PLA study simulated strikes on air base s using surface -
to-surface missiles . The study, noting the PLA’s “limited” inventory of missiles and 
inability to launch a simultaneous attack against all of Taiwan’s air base s at once, 
assessed the respective threat posed by each air base . The authors then proposed a 
targeting sequence whereby each base’s runways would be attacked in order of priority 
to optimize overall campaign effects. 17 Based upon their findings, the study’s authors 
recommended striking Pingtung Air Base first in order to ground Taiwan’s fleet of E- 2 
“Hawkeye” airborne e arly warning and control (AEW&C) aircraft and C -130 “Hercules” 
military transport and electronic warfare aircraft. 18 Based upon this assessment, it is 
logical to assume that the PLA would view Kadena Air Base, the home of the United 
States Air Force (USAF)’ s forward-deployed AEW&C aircraft, to be a priority target in a 
conflict with the United States or Japan. The PLA’s emphasis on striking air base s 
supporting adversary airborne reconnaissance and strategic lift platforms might cause it 
to see U.S. air bases at Misawa and Yokota in Japan as high-priority targets as well. 
 
Capacity  
 
To meet operational requirements for a contingency that could involve the United States, 
the PLARF and PLAAF have been investing heavily into developing and testing a 
number of specialized weapons for air base  attacks. These weapons include both ground 
and air-launched missile variants that are armed with runway penetrating submunitions. 
Most notably, the PLARF appears to have developed the world’s first conventionally 
armed ballistic missile warhead capable of conducting strikes on air base  runways. 
Chinese military-technical writings indicate that preliminary research in support of this 
program began in the wake of the 1995–1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis.19  
 
In 1997, researchers affiliated with the PLA’s Beijing Artillery Research Institute and the 
Beijing Institute of Technology drafted a detailed technical study on runway attacks. The 
study modeled airfield strikes aimed at damaging or “cutting” a 3,000 -meter long 
runway at its mid -point with fifteen  terminally guided submunitions delivered by a 
ballistic missile.20 Shortly thereafter, researchers at the PLARF (then -Second Artillery) 
Engineering Academy in Xi’an published a computer simulation designed to assess the 
number of missiles required to successfully blockade an enemy runway. 21 While their 
results were n ot made publically available, this study appears to have ignited a heated 
internal debate on the number of missiles required to blockade an airfield runway.22    
 
The majority of available PLARF research focuses on statistically modeling ballistic 
missile attacks on a single runway with penetrating submunitions. 23 As early as 2000, 
however, studies also began on the impact of striking large air base s that had two or 
more runways.24 In particular, research focused on optimizing the process whereby aim-
points wo uld be selected for maximizing the effects of dispersed submunitions over 
multiple runways. 25 Reflecting the technological and budgetary constraints facing the 
PLA from the late 1990s and into the 2000s, early studies assumed for imprecise missile 
targeting capabilities and emphasized the need to maximize the effects of a small 

 
6 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
number of relatively expensive ballistic missiles. For example, researchers assumed that 
even under the most optimal conditions, submunitions would impact the surface up to 
187 meters  off target. 26 They also assumed that cutting runways in half would be the 
only mission assigned, due to the limited number of ballistic missiles available.27     
 
It was not long before some researchers began to evince greater confidence in their 
research assumptions. For example, improvements in Chinese satellite imagery and 
sensor capabilities in the early 2000s appear to have led researchers at the Second 
Artillery Engineering Academy’s Information Engineering Institute to claim that it was 
“extremely easy to satisfy” requirements for target guidance such that air base  runways, 
and even individual warships docked in military ports, could be targeted. 28 The results 
of their simulations showed that a payload of submunitions dispersed over a target 
under favor able conditions could achieve a 3.7  percent probability of destroying an 
enemy warship and a 5.2  percent probability of destroying targets of importance 
elsewhere ashore. Though not particularly impressive, the results were considered an 
improvement over previous simulations on strikes against targets such as runways.29 
 
As the anti -air base  program advanced, the pace of runway -penetrating warhead 
development appears to have slowed due to challenges associated with developing an 
entirely new class of weapons. For example, in 2007 , operations research analysts 
affiliated with the Chinese aerospace industry published a study cautioning that ballistic 
missile-delivered submunitions would be subject to a number of complicating factors 
during operations. Th ese factors included wind direction and speed , guidance sensor 
and engine ignition-related positioning errors, guidance sensor errors, internal electrical 
system and engine timing errors, engine power errors, and warhead spin speed errors. 30 
Further highlig hting the technical challenges designers faced, they emphasized that 
problems could occur during the flight of the supersonic delivery vehicle when the 
“mother” warhead released and dispersed submunitions over target, when the 
submunitions’ parachutes deployed, and when they impacted the surface.31 
 
Many PLARF -affiliated studies have discussed warhead design requirements for 
runway-penetrating submunitions in great detail. 32 Chinese technical studies have also 
emphasized the need to strike the same runway wit h penetrating submunitions on 
multiple occasions. Indeed, rather than assume for a “one -and-done” strategy, these 
studies emphasize the need to keep air base s blockaded over time in the face of skillful 
enemy rapid runway repair teams. In what appears to b e a reference to a Taiwan 
scenario, one study in 2007 noted “an enemy’s very strong [runway] repair capabilities” 
and expressed concern that “comprehensive killing bombs” 33 may not be available for 
use against rapid runway repair teams. 34 As an alternative, the study suggests using 
multiple salvos of conventional ballistic missiles to disrupt air base  engineering teams 
and slow the pace of repair work. The most effective way to keep a notional air base  
runway closed for two hours, the researchers argued, woul d be to fire 18 ballistic 
missiles in three salvos spaced out in forty -minute increments.35 According to data from 
the study, the first salvo would optimally be comprised of twelve  missiles, and the next 
two salvos would have three missiles apiece. 36 Using t his technique, the researchers 
estimated that the PLA could expect an 87  percent chance of success. 37 Undoubtedly, 
technological advances made by PLARF and PLAAF weapons designers since the 

 
7 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
production of these studies have significantly improved missile payloads. In the event of 
war, these new weapons will elevate the threat posed to American, allied, and partner 
nation air bases.   
 
Trajectory     
    
China already has significant capability to deliver strikes against U.S. air base s in the 
region. The range of the aerial refueling –capable SU -30MKK fighters deployed in the 
Eastern Theater Command and Southern Theater Command is sufficient to hold 
Okinawa at risk. PLAAF’s H -6K bombers armed with air -launched cruise missiles can 
even strike as far out as Guam. 38 Once operational, the J -20 stealth fighter will also 
increase China’s ability to strike regional air bases, logistical facilities, and other ground-
based infrastructure. The PLA Navy (PLAN) also fields a growing inventory of 
conventional and nuclear-powered attack submarines that may soon become capable of 
launching land attack cruise missiles. PLAN surface combatants, such as guided -missile 
destroyers equipped with long -range cruise missiles and surface -to-air missile ( SAM) 
systems, could also allow China to hold U.S. air operations at risk far from its shores.  
 
 
(Left: PLA SU-30MKK fighter jet with missiles. Source: Sino-Defense. Right: PLAAF H-6K bomber. Source: Medium) 
 
(PLA Chengdu J-20 stealth fighter jet. Source: Wikipedia) 


 
8 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
More importantly, China has the world’s most active land -based ballistic and cruise 
missile program, providing Beijing with a real capacity for conventional precision strikes 
at significant ranges. Given the right coordination and surveillance networks, China 
could now strike air base  targets well beyond the first island chain, reaching the second 
island chain, a line that runs in a north -south line from the Kuriles through Japan, the 
Bonins, the Marianas, the Carolines, and Indonesia. According to publicly available 
analyses, the PLA has between fifteen  and twenty liquid-fueled CSS -2 intermediate 
range ballistic missiles (IRBMs), and about fifty  CSS-5 road -mobile, solid -fueled 
medium-range ballistic missiles ( MRBMs), all of which are highly  relevant for regional 
deterrence missions.39  
 
 
(Map of the First and Second Island Chains. Source: CIMSEC) 
In addition to these nuclear capabilities, reports indicate that the PLA has been testing a 
number of conventional missile warheads capable of  attacking air base  runways. 
Perhaps the first reported instance came in September 2005, when analysts discovered 
that the PLA had constructed a mock air base  on Daluo Island off the Guangdong 
coastline for target practice. 40 This model air base  reportedly included a fuel sto rage 
facility, two mock F -16 fighters, aircraft hangars, and an alert station at the end of the 
runway. Soon thereafter, satellite imagery revealed that the entire base was destroyed 
with munitions that created large craters. According to reports, two mont hs later the 
PLARF (then-Second Artillery) conducted what appeared to be a cruise missile strike on 
a hardened aircraft shelter (HAS) target in Xinjiang, hitting it three times.41  
 


 
9 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
In 2006, it was reported that the PLA had built a mock air base  in the desert of Gansu 
Province. Based on satellite imagery of the mock -up, which is modeled after Taiwan’s 
Ching Chuan Kang (CCK) Air Base, this site is primarily used to practice air raids. 42 
Built near the PLAAF’s Dingxin Air Force Test and Training Bas e (also known as 
Shuangchengzi Air Base), this area is also used for missile testing. 43 Other mock air base 
targets, including one resembling Kadena Air Force Base, have also been constructed in 
the deserts of Western China.44   
 
One report in the PLA’s Libe ration Army Daily indicates that the Chinese rocket forces 
began experimenting with cluster munitions capable of spreading proximity mines 
around test ranges by the mid -2000s.45 While speculative, these weapons could have 
been early versions of those being developed for slowing rapid runway repair crews. 46 
Whatever the case, the first confirmed live- fire test of a ballistic missile warhead 
designed to disperse runway-penetrating submunitions occurred more recently. In April 
2010, a warhead design team from the PLARF/Second Artillery Equipment Academy 
published a report that revealed the live-fire testing of this weapon on a runway target to 
confirm optimal warhead design parameters. 47  Beyond ballistic missile warheads 
developed for the PLARF, China’s defense industry has also produced standoff  weapon 
systems for the PLAAF , as well as for export customers. Two examples include the 
stealthy air -launched Tianlei “Sky Thunder” and CS/BCC5 cruise missiles, which are 
designed to deliver penetrating submunitions thro ugh adversary air defense systems. 
While current ranges are unknown, in 2012  these air-launched missiles were believed to 
have ranges up to 60 kilometers and have the capacity to carry 500- kilogram warheads 
designed for runway strike missions.48     
 
Implications for a Regional Contingency 
The intent and capabilities of the PLA have made the protection of forward U.S. Air 
Force bases within the U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM) Area of Responsibility a 
growing concern.  The capabilities of China’s missile force ar e qualitatively different 
from anything the United States has faced in the past. Chinese CSS-5 and CSS-6 missiles 
both have longer range, greater ease of operation, higher reliability and accuracy, and 
warhead options that make them more destructive than p revious generations of 
missiles.49 According to the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, current missile defense 
systems may not be adequate to defend against advanced land-attack cruise missiles and 
theater-range ballistic missiles. By some estimates, miss ile and air attacks could disable 
up to 70  percent of the aircraft at U.S. overseas bases in the opening minutes of a 
conflict. This is largely because only four of the eight USAF bases in the region currently 
have hardened aircraft shelters, and none are designed to protect against Chinese 
missile strikes. 50 But even if hardened shelters prove capable of protecting the aircraft, 
planes and their crews could still become trapped due to massive debris piles on 
operating surfaces, rendering them inoperable and  leaving them vulnerable targets for 
any follow -on attacks by cruise missiles. According to one study, only 82 out of 268 
aircraft deployed to Kadena would be available for operations after an initial attack by 
only 34 Chinese warheads.51   
The USAF has dea lt with challenges of defending its overseas bases in the past, in 
particular during the Cold War. NATO military commanders worried about the 

 
10 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
possibility that massed Soviet forces could launch a successful strike on NATO airfields 
that could undermine U.S.  control of the air, something that was critical to the strategic 
deterrence mission and to executing ground missions against hypothetical invading 
Warsaw Pact armies. As a result, NATO embarked on numerous initiatives designed to 
improve the resiliency of  its bases. For example, the Collocated Operating Base (COB) 
program allowed the U.S. to increase dispersal to around sixty  COBs in Europe by 1984. 
In addition, due to an extensive hardening program, one quarter of NATO fighter -
capable airfields featured s ome hardening, such as protective shelters for aircraft and 
maintenance gear. The United States also strengthened its air defenses on vulnerable 
bases in the form of advanced fighters, SAMs, better radar, and stronger defensive 
coordination.52 
In 1985, the USAF conducted a multi -week airpower exercise, Salty Demo, designed to 
assess whether these efforts were sufficient to ensure a modern air base  could survive a 
heavy and sustained attack. During this exercise, the USAF learned that the most critical 
resources for sustaining its operations at a base under attack were personnel and heavy 
equipment—the latter to move debris and begin reconstruction. After the exercise, the 
USAF proposed committing more resources to a number of resiliency measures. 
However, it was ultimately unable to execute the full range of initiatives envisioned in 
the air base  operability program. Some of these unfulfilled requirements are still 
relevant to the challenges of today, including the use of camouflage, concealment and 
deception, increasing operating surfaces and taxiways, and stockpiling runway repair 
equipment and supplies.53  
Thirty years later, the USAF still suffers from significant gaps in air base  defense. In 
light of growing threats, the Quadrennial Defense Review Report (QDR) called for 
increasing the resiliency of U.S. forward base infrastructure as early as 2006, arguing 
that “in the absence of dominant U.S. power projection capabilities, the integrity of U.S. 
alliances and security partnerships could be called into quest ion, reducing U.S. security 
and influence, and increasing the possibility of conflict.” 54 The latest QDR, released in 
March 2014, commits the Department of Defense (DOD) to improving the resilience of 
air, naval, ground, space, and missile -defense capabilit ies in the face of large- scale 
coordinated attacks.  
Base Resiliency Initiatives 
China has developed capabilities designed to target vulnerabilities in air base  defenses. 
Moreover, Chinese writings and activities suggest that PLA strategists are thinking 
about employing these capabilities to undermine the ability of the U.S. to sustain 
airpower during a conflict. This section describes how the United States and t he services 
have responded to this challenge with a focus on indications and warning (I&W), 
dispersal, selective hardening, and both  active and passive defenses. Base resiliency is 
not only an operational issue; enhancing base defenses creates crisis stability by 
reducing the benefits of a quick surprise attack and significantly shifting China’s 
strategic calculus in order to deter war. While U.S. initiatives are a step in the right 
direction, U.S. partners and allies, in particular Japan, also need to unde rtake such 
efforts to ensure they, too, can sustain operations in a contingency. 

 
11 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
Indications and Warning 
Providing advanced warning of Chinese preparations for an attack , and warning that an 
attack may be underway , are almost certainly the highest priority  for all U.S. allied and 
partner nations’ information collection platforms. I&W is essential during peacetime to 
prevent China from obtaining the advantage of surprise. As has been demonstrated 
repeatedly over the past two decades, I&W is especially critic al during periods of crisis 
or limited conflict to provide strategic warning of the imminence of attack or the 
escalation of armed hostilities. Timely and reliable I&W greatly contributes to good 
decision-making, allowing leaders to take appropriate steps ranging from increasing the 
readiness levels of forces to activating contingency plans. Information about Chinese 
activities collected by a variety of sources is a basis for action by United States and allied 
decision-makers. 
 
In particular, several capabi lities fielded by Taiwan, such as its land, air , and sea-based 
listening posts, have the potential to contribute important I&W information on China. 55  
Taiwan’s close cultural, linguistic, and geographic proximity to China give Taiwan 
significant advantages  in collecting signals intelligence (SIGINT). 56  Taiwan works 
closely with the United States to provide SIGINT on the intentions, activities, and 
capabilities of China’s military and security forces. 57 Taiwan’s ability to penetrate PLA 
systems benefits from its well -regarded computer hacking and cybersecurity 
communities, as well as its commanding position on the supply chains that support 
China’s electronics and computer technology industries. 58 While d irect comparative 
analysis is unavailable due to the opaque nature of the subject, anecdotal evidence 
suggests that Taiwan’s computer and software engineering talent continues to outpace 
competition in China.59               
      
Active Defense 
If the United States receives indications and warnings of an imminent attack, active 
defense becomes critical for reducing the effectiveness of any military action against the 
base. Active defense refers to the employment of limited offensive action and 
counterattacks to protect a friendly air, land, sea, or space platform, or to deny the 
enemy a contested area or position. Active defenses can include electronic warfare, 
antiaircraft weapons, and other means of reducing the effectiveness of incoming attacks . 
There are two types of active defense against air and missile attacks: air defenses and 
ballistic missile defenses (BMD). Air defenses are defensive measures designed to 
destroy attacking aircraft or cruise missiles , or to nullify or reduce the effective ness of 
such attacks. Ballistic missile defense (BMD) is a system, weapon, or technology 
involved in the detection, tracking, interception, and destruction of incoming ballistic 
missiles in their boost, mid -course, and/or terminal phases. U.S. Patriot Adva nced 
Capability-3 (PAC-3) missiles—which have been deployed to Okinawa, Japan , and Osan 
AFB, South Korea —and Terminal High -Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) missiles —
which have been deployed to Andersen Air Force Base on Guam and Osan AFB as well — 
are examples  of such systems. Aegis ships with SPY -1 radars and SM -3s are also 
designed to counter ballistic missiles, with the bigger and better  SM-3 IIA interceptor 
due for delivery in 2018.60 

 
12 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
In a conflict, active defenses buy time for the United States to decide how to most 
effectively use its airpower. They also allow  the National Command Authority to 
determine the most effective course of war fighting when an adversary is willing to strike 
American or allied forces and territory with missiles. 61 Lastly, increasing active defenses 
decreases the likelihood an adversary will use force at lower levels of conflict . I t 
decreases the effectiveness of such moves and thus acts as a deterrent. In this w ay, the 
improvement of active defenses is inherently stabilizing.   
 
(Left: Launch of a U.S. Patriot Advanced Capability-3 (PAC-3) missile. Source: Military.com. Right: Launch of a U.S. Terminal High-
Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) missile. Source: Missile Defense Agency) 
 
(Launch of SM-3 missile on U.S. Aegis ship. Source: Missile Defense Agency) 
However, U.S. air base s are still not adequately protected. Even those bases that have 
significant active defenses are still vulnerable to saturation attacks. Andersen Air Force 
Base, w ith its long runways, large parking ramps, and vulnerable fuel storage areas , 
desperately needs hardening. For example, the THAAD and PAC -3 systems do little to 
protect Guam against potential Chinese missiles with supersonic and m aneuverable 


 
13 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
warhead capabilities, such as the 1,500 km –range CJ-20 LACM, supersonic YJ -12, and 
the YJ-18 ASCM.62 THAAD and PAC-3 units are insufficient because any Chinese attack 
could overwhelm the small number of available interceptors. To remedy this 
discrepancy, the Department of Defense (DoD) could consider a mix of medium -range 
kinetic and non -kinetic defenses , adding Indirect Fire Protection Capability (IFPC) 
Increment 2 -1, 400 kW lasers, Surface Electronic Warfare Improvement Programs 
(SEWIP) Block 3, and HPM broadband systems to strengthen Guam’s intercept 
capabilities.63 The IFPC Increment B lock 2  protects a gainst unmanned aerial vehicles 
(UAVs) and cruise missiles, and it blocks against smaller and faster threats through its 
counter-rocket and counter -mortar capabilities. 64  Therefore, active defense efforts 
should be coupled with passive defenses, such as the dispersal of combat aircraft across 
a larger number of bases, and other steps such as burying fuel lines, training in rapid 
runway repair, and deception and camouflage. 
 
(Left: Chinese Changjian-20 (CJ-20) Land-Attack Cruise Missiles (LACM). Source: Missile Defense Advocacy Alliance. Right: PLAN 
Yingji-12A (YJ-12A) supersonic anti-ship missile unveiled during victory day parade in 2015. Source: Navy Recognition) 
 
(Chinese Yingji-18 (YJ-18) anti-ship cruise missile. Source: Missile Defense Advocacy) 
For its part, the Republic of China Air Force (ROCAF) in Taiwan has sought to balance 
its active and passive defenses against a Chinese missile attack—an upgrade to the U.S. 
approach that emphasizes active defenses over passive. 65 In terms of active defense, 
Taiwan has been investing heavily in BMD, as well as defense systems for “air -breathing” 
targets such as cruise missiles, fighters, bombers, and UAVs to diminish the coercive 
utility of China’s military buildup. Taiwan currently has three Patriot missile  batteries 
(or fire units) deployed around its capital , Taipei, and six more batteries for overlapping 
coverage over central and southern Taiwan. Taiwan has also acquired a tenth Patriot 
battery to be kept on training and reserve status. All of these syste ms will be PAC -3 


 
14 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
capable systems, with PAC- 2 missiles integrated into firing units for defense against 
both ballistic missiles and air breathing targets. 66 According to one PLA assessment, 
Taiwan’s Patriot missile batteries could each intercept twenty -four targets at a time, 
with an expected success rate of over 90 percent per missile.67 
Taiwan has also developed a capable indigenous SAM system that uses the Tien Kung  
(TK) “Sky Bow” missile. Benefiting from U.S. technical assistance, Taiwan’s  TK SAMs 
are reportedly comparable to Patriot systems in most respects. TK -1s are fielded in both 
static and mobile variants, with a range of 100 kilometers, and TK- 2s are deployed in 
hardened silo facilities , with engagement ranges up to 200 kilometers. Currently, 
Taiwan is replacing its older units with six batteries of mobile TK -3 SAMs that are 
roughly comparable to PAC-3s. At least two TK SAM batteries are deployed on the outer 
islands of Penghu and Tungyin, giving Taiwan the ability to engage frontline PLAAF 
fighters as soon as they take off from their air base s in Fujian Province, assuming they 
are not themselves first targeted by PLARF fire. 68 Aside from its BMD capable systems, 
Taiwan is believed to have some thirteen  MIM-23 HAWK missile batteries deployed. 
This air defense system was the predecessor to the Patriot and would be most useful for 
defending against aircraft and cruise missile targets.  
 
 
 
(Taiwan’s Tien-Kung III (Sky Bow III) Surface-to-Air Missile System. Source: Army-Technology.com) 
 
(MIM-23 Hawk medium-range surface-to-air missile on display. Source: CopyBook) 


 
15 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
Passive Defense 
Balancing its aforementioned investments in the area of active defense, Taiwan has done 
more to develop passive defenses against Chinese air and missile attacks than any other 
country in Asia.69 This has included significant investments into air base  hardening and 
dispersal. Hardening involves building or improving structures to protect personnel, 
equipment, or infrastructure against enemy attack, which can be done with permanent 
structures or de ployable shelters. Dispersal refers to the spreading or separating of 
troops, material, establishments, or activities, which are usually concentrated in limited 
areas, to reduce vulnerabilities. The scale and sophistication of Taiwan’s engineering 
and training efforts in these areas are remarkable.  
  
In terms of hardening, Taiwan has constructed underground tunnel complexes, bunkers, 
and hardened aircraft hangars. Many of the most notable projects to harden critical 
facilities in Taiwan and on its outer is lands began in the wake of the shock that followed 
the U.S. decision to switch diplomatic recognition from the Republic of China (ROC) to 
the People’s Republic of China (PRC)  government. For example, in 1979, Taiwan began 
building a massive tunnel complex inside Chiashan , or “Optimal Mountain ,” near the 
city of Hualien. This mountain base is intended to serve as a “last line of defense” for the 
ROCAF’s air superiority fighters. Completed in 1993, this base includes an air defense 
missile site, an air base  runway, two hardened tunnels large enough for securely 
operating over 200 fighter aircrafts, and ten  blast doors for aircraft entering or exiting 
the underground tunnel network. 70 This facility also includes underground 
infrastructure for storing water, food,  munitions, spare parts, and jet fuel. Furthermore, 
it features a national command center, a hospital, a large power generator, aircraft 
repair facilities, and living quarters.71     
 
As a further means of protecting its forces from Chinese air and missile attacks, Taiwan 
constructed a second tunnel complex, dubbed Shizishan , or “Stone Mountain”, near 
Taitung Air Force Base on its southeast coast. This facility is somewhat smaller than 
Chiashan but is still believed to be able to securely house sixty  to eighty ROCAF 
fighters.72 In tandem with these efforts, Taiwan has hardened all of its primary air base s 
and several reserve airfields. One study assessed that by 2008 , ROCAF had completed 
252 hardened aircraft shelters and 178 revetments. 73 These numbers have co ntinued to 
grow. Taiwan is currently expanding its parking ramp space, building new taxiways, and 
constructing “super -hard” aircraft hangars that can surpass the ability of its tunnel 
complexes to resist direct hits by penetrating warheads.74  
 
To increase its rapid runway repair capabilities, ROCAF has acquired a large fleet of 
armored repair vehicles and other advanced equipment from the United States. These 
have been deployed to all of Taiwan’s main air base s.75 Frequent drills and exercises 
have helped Taiwan enhance the capabilities of its rapid runway repair teams. Recently , 
one team at CCK Air Base demonstrated the ability to repair seven large craters in 
ninety minutes.76  Taiwan has also benefited from U.S. Air Force combat engineering 
team visits to T aiwan, and ROCAF has participated in the premier Silver Flag exercises 
with their American counterparts on Okinawa and Guam. 77 American training teams 
have also been working with their Taiwanese counterparts to improve the ROCAF’s 
ability to rapidly clear u nexploded ordinance from runways. 78  Taiwan regularly 

 
16 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
practices the rapid dispersal of its aircraft operations to move key units, which are 
usually concentrated in limited areas, to reduce vulnerabilities. Moreover, Taiwan uses 
the employment of airfield cam ouflage and deception techniques to confuse the PLA’s 
reconnaissance and operational planning communities. However, the ROCAF still lacks 
sufficient capability to protect Taiwan against PLA fighters. For example, some ROCAF 
fighters, such as the F -CK and Mirage 2000, can only engage one PLA fighter at a time, 
so the PLA’s numerical superiority is a concern for ROCAF loss rates.79 
 
 
 
(Three F-CK Ching-Kuo Indigenous Defense Fighters (IDF). Source: Airforce-Technology.com) 
 
 
 
(A Taiwanese Mirage 2000-5Di fighter. Source: TaiwanAirPower.org) 
 
For its part, the U.S. Air Force is pursuing a more modest and selective effort to harden 
its bases and increase its airfield damage repair capabilities in Asia. This includes a 
number of efforts in concert with the other services to ensure continuous and credible 
forward operations. The QDR calls for the capability to disperse land-based forces to 
other bases and operating sites, and for the ability to operate and maintain frontline 
combat aircraft from austere bases with only a small amount of logistical and support 
personnel and equipment.80 A key initiative of the former Pacific Air Forces (PACAF) 
Commander General Herbert J. Carlisle was to find ways to disperse aircraft and to land 


 
17 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
aircraft, in the enormous distances of the Pacific theater, on airfields from which they 
did not take off. The current PACAF Commander General Terrence O’Shaughnessy has 
developed a new operational maneuver built upon this Rapid Raptor concept called 
Agile Combat Employment, or ACE. ACE focuses on “quickly deploying small 
contingents of F-22s to smaller, sometimes austere, bases along with a much smaller 
logistics package.”81 Dispersal of high-value targets like the F-22 to non-traditional 
bases would hopefully keep the adversary from guessing their location, complicating 
enemy targeting.82  
PACAF is also working with allies and partners throughout the region to provide 
logistical support and coordinate capabilities to create more “places not bases” from 
which the U.S. can project airpower. 83  However, dispersal also comes with an 
operational cost. In a hypo thetical conflict over the Taiwan Strait, sortie rates would be 
40 percent less from air base s 1,600 miles from the Strait, such as those on Guam and 
Northern Japan, compared to operations out of Kadena.84  
The U.S. Defense Department has promised to invest  in airfield repair capabilities , as 
well as to procure fuel bladders to ensure survivability of supplies necessary to sustain 
operations. 85  PACAF was also honing its resiliency strategy as part of the Pacific 
Airpower Resiliency Initiative. This plan envisions improvements such as bolstered 
defensive systems and the presence of Rapid Engineer Deployable Heavy Operation 
Repair Squadron Engineers (RED HORSE) Airfield Operations at theater bases. 86 
Planned hardened facilities on Guam, including select hangars, are also part of this 
initiative. Furthermore, Congress has allocated funds to hardening facilities that are 
critical to maintaining stability and executing the rebalance to Asia. 
Major resiliency initiatives, including the Hardened Install ation Protection for 
Persistent Operations (HIPPO) and Critical Runway Assessment and Repair (CRATR) 
efforts, will enhance USAF rapid repair, which is the capability to quickly return an 
airfield to a condition in which it can continue air operations follo wing an attack. Rapid 
Airfield Damage Repair (RADR) modernization and CRATR provide methods to counter 
emerging threats, reduce re-repairs, support mixed aircraft inventory, and provide long -
term sustainment. The RADR modernization process first assesses t he runway damage 
and presence of unexploded ordnance (UXO). Computer software identifies the 
minimum crater repair required, the UXO is then rendered safe, and the craters on the 
runway can be repaired. This allows the airfield to be operational again with in eight 
hours. The fielding of these new capabilities is expected to begin soon, though problems 
with funding persist.  
HIPPO aims to ensure the survivability of operational activities and critical 
infrastructure against newer threat weapons. The purpose of HIPPO is to apply cost -
effective application of hardening and resiliency methods to protect aircraft, fuel and 
water supply, and storage, as well as munitions, C3I, and other systems. For the first 
time since the Cold War, the services, including the Ar my Corps of Engineers and the 
Air Force Civil Engineer Center, are doing research on hardened structures, specifically 
permanent protective shelters designed to withstand large blasts. This is distinct from 
the current technology deployed in theater, the M odular Protective System, which is a 

 
18 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
lightweight space frame and composite armor panels that are rapidly deployable and 
recoverable.87 Because personnel are the critical assets in any fight, these efforts also 
focus on enhancing the protection for critical rooms to protect them from quasi -static 
pressure, shock, and fragmentation. The program includes the testing and evaluation of 
the proposed technologies against munitions of interest. While this is a joint effort, 
USAF has taken the lead, with most efforts  focused on PACOM’s AOR. Given the 
growing Chinese air and missile threats, such programs are needed to enhance the 
resiliency of U.S. bases currently in South Korea, Japan, Guam , and Australia, as well as 
in any potential future bases in Southeast Asia. 
Recommendations   
U.S. aircraft deployed in Asia currently face a substantial risk of damage or destruction. 
One potential countermeasure, to operate from bases farther from the fight, raises 
serious questions about the United States’ ability to fight an e ffective and efficient air 
campaign. For example, in a Taiwan contingency, the loss of one or two bases could 
severely degrade the USAF ability to generate and sustain combat air power. In Asia the 
threat is large, but the United States has few bases, and political access to current bases 
could be limited or constrained. 88 The current initiatives to improve active and passive 
defense are still insufficient to guarantee that the USAF will be able to exercise its 
capabilities of global strike, rapid global mob ility, and air superiority , given China’s 
increasing capabilities. Research should focus on driving down the cost of future 
interceptors and improving attack operations to strike Chinese air and missile bases.89 
 
In terms of passive defenses, the U.S. shoul d prioritize the extension of hardening to 
additional bases , and to include the protection of large support aircraft (tankers, 
AWACS, Global Hawk, etc.)  on the four U.S. bases in the region that have hardened 
aircraft shelters. 90  Hardening is admittedly exp ensive; e stimated costs of building 
shelters to protect about $10 billion worth of USAF assets from ballistic to  cruise 
missiles is $700 million. The United States needs to invest resources into breaking the 
code on how to protect all aircraft cheaply, but , in the short-term, expensive efforts may 
be necessary given the drastic operational advantages of resiliency. In 1967, the Israel 
Air Force (IAF) was able to destroy 400 unprotected aircraft. Six years later, after Syrian 
and Egyptian hardening efforts, the IAF was only able to destroy twenty -two enemy 
aircraft.91  
 
If the United States is serious about its security and partners and allies in the Asia -
Pacific, it must look critically  at passive defenses on Okinawa, Guam, and beyond. The 
Air Force is working with its joint and coalition partners to improve its multi- and cross-
domain capabilities to ensure that adequate I&W and tracking are available to enhance 
protective postures, and to provide warfighters with the ability to survive and operate 
from forward bases. But more political engagement is needed to ensure the United 
States can rely on allies to help it  sustain operations while under attack. For example, 
several allies are building more robust tanker fleets, access to which could impact the 
course of a conflict. Resiliency generally, and greater base hardening in particular, is a 
crucial element to operations, but it is also  crucial to the U.S. goal of maintaining peace 
and stability in the region. Given their  experience and requirements in this  area, U.S. 
defense planners should work more closely with Taiwan to mutually improve 

 
19 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
capabilities. Moreover, there clearly needs to be a greater sense of urgency —not only 
plans or proposed programs that are partially funded, but the actual implementation of 
programs that reach the unit  level with new technology, new CONOPS , and new 
organizational constructs that are actually exercised regularly with results accountable 
to senior leadership of the Services, Joint Staff, and OSD.    
 
The strength of U.S. pea cetime operations and deterrence are determined by the 
opponent’s perceptions of the capabilities and resolve of the United States and its allies 
and partners. The joint force needs to take substantive steps in base and port resiliency, 
continue the primac y of partnered air and naval forces (e.g., the Joint Concept for 
Access and Maneuver in the Global Commons (JAM -GC)), and stress the need for 
services, allies, and partners to embrace new priorities, roles, and missions in the Asia -
Pacific. In addition, th ere should be a continued evaluation of the USAF’s 
modernization, force structure capability, and capacity, along with its forward presence 
and posture. Peacetime USAF engagement must take into account the factors that 
impact Chinese behavior, and, consequently, regional stability. By strengthening U.S. air 
base hardening and resiliency, and by engaging with partners and allies, the USAF will 
be able to play a strong, positive role in shaping regional security and in keeping the 
peace in Asia. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
20 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
ENDNOTES  
                                                           
1 David Ochmanek, “Restoring the Power Projection Capabilities of the U.S. Armed Forces,” Testimony presented 
before the Senate Armed Services Committee, February 16, 2017, 
https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/testimonies/CT400/CT464/RAND_CT464.pdf ; Alan J. Vick, Air Base 
Attacks and Defensive Counters: Historical Lessons and Future Challenges, (Washington, DC: RAND Corporation, 
2015).    
2 For the most recent thinking on air superiority in the face of new threats, see Joint Doctrine Publication 3 -01, 
Countering Air and Missile Threats, (Washington DC, 21 April 2017); USAF, Air Superiority 2030: Enterprise 
Capability Collaboration Team, May 2016; and Brig Gen Alex Grynkewich, “The Future of Air Superiority, Part 1,” 
(and subsequent Part II, Part III, Part IV), https://warontherocks.com/2017/01/the -future-of-air-superiority-part-i-
the-imperative/. 
3 This section draws from Ian Easton, Able Archers: Taiwan Defense Strategy in an Age of Precision Strike 
(Arlington, VA: Project 2049 Institute, September 2014).    
4 Peng Guangqian and Yao Youzhi (eds.), The Science of Military Strategy (Beijing: Military Science Publishing 
House, 2005), 321.  
5 Ibid., 327.  
6 Ibid.  
7 Yu Jixun, ed., Dier Paobing Zhanyi Xue [Second Artillery Force Science of Campaigns] (Beijing: Liberation Army 
Press, 2004), 392.  
8 Ibid., 398.   
9 Hangkongbing Zuozhan Yunchou [The Application of Air Force Operations] (Beijing: Air Force Command 
Academy, 1995), cited in Qing Jianjun, at al., “Jizai Busaqi Dui Fengsuo Jichang Paodao Zuoyong FangzhenYanjiu 
[Research on the Application of Air Delivered Dispenser for Blockading Airfield Runways],” Dan Jian Yu Zhidao 
Xue [Journal of Projectiles, Rockets, Missiles and Guidance] Vol. 24, No. 1 (2004):297.  
10 Yu Jixun, 398.  
11 Wang Xiaomei, et al., “Zimu Dantoubu Dui Jichang Fengsuo Jilu de Gaijin SuanfaYanji u [Research on Improved 
Algorithm for Calculating Airfield Blockade Probabilities with Submunition Warhead],” Xitong Fangzhen Xuebao 
[Journal of System Simulation], (April 2009): 1859. 
12 Zhang Xiaojin, et al., Daodan Xitong Xingneng Fenxi [Performance Analysis of Missile Systems] (Beijing: 
National Defense Industry Press, 2013), 39. 
13 Fan Yangtao, et al., “Jiyu Huishang de Jichang Zuozhan Xiaoneng Pinggu [Operational Effects Assessment Based 
on Airfield Destruction],” Sichuan Binggong Xuebao [Journal of Sichuan Ordinance], (October 2009): 93-95.  
14 Yu Renshun, et al., “Dandao Daodan Moxiu Zhidao Zimudan Dui Fengsuo Jichang Paodao Zhidaolu Yanjiu 
[Research on Guiding Principles for Blockading Airfield Runway using Ballistic Missile with Termin al Course-
Correcting Submunitions],” Zhanshu Daodan Jishu [Tactical Missile Technology], No. 2 (1998): 25-31.    
15 Jiang Qingshan, Wu Guoliang, and Fan Botao, “Hangkongbing Fengsuo Di Jichang de Moni [Simulation Study 
on Blockading Enemy Airfields with Aviation Forces],” Huoli Yu Zhihui Kongzhi [Fire Control and Command 
Control], (October 2005): 33-35.  
16 Ibid., 49.  
17 Tao Guiming, et al. “Didi Daodan Daji Jichang Paixu Moxing [Modeling the Order of Surface to Surface Missile 
Strikes on Airfields],” Diannao Yu Xinxi Jishu [Computer and Information Technology], (February 2013): 12-14. 
Note that the authors are affiliated with the Ordnance Engineering Academy’s Forth Department in Shijiazhuang, 
Hebei; the Institute of Electronics in Changsha, Hunan; and the General Armaments Department’s Office in the 
Changsha area, respectively.   
18 The study did not explicitly reference place names, instead it referred to a certain island region’s airfields. The 
location of each Taiwan air base is based on the author’s assessment of the data provided (for example of 60 IDFs at 
an air base 150 km from China). Open source reporting on where the ROC Air Force deploys its aircraft, and 
Google Earth measurements of the distance of each air base from the PRC coast helped to further narrow the range 
of possibilities. Nonetheless, it is not certain that the author’s assessment is correct in every case. See tables three 
and four on page 14 of Tao Guiming, et al.      
19 For an excellent, if somewhat dated, study on Taiwan’s air base operability under wartime stresses, see David A. 
Shlapak, David T. Orletsky, and Barry A. Wilson, “Dire Strait? Military Aspects of the China -Taiwan Confrontation 
and Options for U.S. Policy,” (Santa Monica, RAND Corporation, 2000), 31 -34 and Appendix A, available at  
<http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/2007/MR1217.pdf >. and David A. Shlapak, et al., 

 
21 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
A Question of Balance  (Santa Monica, RAND Corporation, 2009), 31-90, available at 
<,http://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG888.html>. 
20 Yu Renshun, et al., 25-31.    
21 Jiang Minle and Gao Xiaoguang, “Zhanshu Daodan Dui Jichang Gongji Zuozhan X iaoneng de Jisuanji Moni 
[Computer Simulation of Tactical Missile Attack Operations Effects Against Airfields], Huoli Yu Zhihui Kongzhi  
[Fire Control and Command Control] Vol. 23, No. 2 (June 1998): 59-62.  
22 Moreover, this debate soon spread to Taiwan, and eventually to U.S. Air Force and Navy circles. More on this 
will be discussed later in the paper.  
23 Of many sources, see Shi Xilin and Tan Junfeng, “Feiji Paodao Shixiaolu Jisuan de Tongji Shiyan Fa [Law of 
Statistical Calculations for Experiments on Aircraft Runway Loss Rates],” Huoli Yu Zhihui Kongzhi [Fire Control 
and Command Control] Vol. 25, No. 1 (January 2000): 74-76.  
24 Shi Xilin and Tan Junfeng, “Zhanshu Didi Daodan Daji Fuza Feiji Paodao de Huoli Yunyong [Firepower 
Operations for Tactical Surface to Surface Missile Strikes on Complex Aircraft Runways],” Huoli Yu Zhihui 
Kongzhi [Fire Control and Command Control] Vol. 26, No. 2 (June 2001): 38-40.  
25 Ibid.  
26 However, the average future CEP they envisioned was around 80 meters. See table one in Yu  Renshun, et al., 31.    
27 See Jiang Minle and Gao Xiaoguang, 1998; Shi Xilin and Tan Junfeng, 2001; and Xue Wentong, et al., “Zimudan 
Dui Fuza Xingzhuang Mubiao Cuishang Xiaoguo de Jisuanji Fangzhen [Computer Simulation of Sub -Munitions 
Damage Effects against Complex Target Configuration],” Jisuanji Fangzhen [Computer Simulation] Vol. 20, No. 4 
(April 2003):16-18.  
28 See Xue Wentong, et al., 17.  
29 Note that the senior researcher involved in this project had previously conducted the computer modeling of 
conventional ballistic missiles strikes on runways. See Song Guangming and Song Jianshe, “Changgui Daodan Daji 
Jichang Paodao de Jisuan Moni [Computer Simulation of Conventional Missile Strikes on Airfield Runway],” Huoli 
Yu Zhihui Kongzhi [Fire Control and Command Control] Vol. 26, No. 4, (2001).      
30 See Liu Hengjun, et al., “Yizhong Paodao Moxiu Zimudan Jiqi dui Fengsuo Xiaolu Yanjiu [Research on the 
Runway Blockade Effects of One Type of Terminal Course Correcting Submunitions],” Dan Jian Yu Zhidao 
Xuebao (Journal of Projectiles, Rockets, Missiles and Guidance) Vol. 27, No. 1, (2007): 135-140.        
31 Liu Hengjun, et al., 136-137. 
32 Yin Zhihong, et al., “Kongdi Daodan dui Jichang Fengsuo Zhan Jianmo yu Fangzhen [Model and Simulation of 
Air-to-Surface Missile for Airfield Blockade Operations],” Xitong Fangzhen Xuebao [Journal of System Simulation], 
(February 2008): 583-585; Wang Xiaomei, et al.,1859-1861; and Lei Yuli and Tang Xuemei, “Qinqie Zimudan dui 
Jichang Paodao Fengsuo Suanfa Jilu Yanjiu [Research on Algorithm for Calculating Probability of Penetrating 
Submunition Used Against Airfield Runway],” Xitong Fangzhen Xuebao [Journal of System Simulation] Vol. 16, 
No. 9 (2004): 2030-2032.   
33 The Chinese term used in the study was: Zhengti Shabao Dan. This would appear to be a euphemistic reference to 
a nuclear bomb or perhaps some other weapon of mass destruction.  
34 Li Xinqi and Wang Minghai, “Changgui Daodan dui Fengsuo Jichang Paodao Xiaoneng Zhunze Wenti Yanjiu 
[Research on Standard Problems of Conventional Missile Effects for Blockading Airfield Runways],” Zhihui 
Kongzhi Yu Fangzhen [Command Control and Simulation] Vol. 29, No. 4 (August 2007): 78.     
35 Ibid, 81.  
36 Other possibilities under consideration included one large 18-missile salvo; two salvos (first 12 missiles and then 
6 missiles) separated by 60 minutes; three salvos (10, 4, 4) separated by 40 minutes; and four salvos (8, 4, 3, 3) 
separated by 30 minutes. These were assessed to have the following chances of success: 74, 82, 82, and 77 percent, 
respectively.     
37 Li Xinqi and Wang Minghai, 81.  
38 Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China (Arlington, VA: Office of the 
Secretary of Defense, 2014), 9, 31, accessible online at 
<http://www.defense.gov/pubs/2014_DoD_China_Report.pdf>.   
39 Ibid, 30, 34. 
40 Gao Zhiyang, “Qiangxiu Paodao Zhiwai Jichang Beidong Fengyu de Xin Siwei [Beyond Runway Recovery – the 
New Thinking on Passive Airfield Defense],” Quanqiu Fangwei Zazhi [Defence International], (May 2006), 
accessible online at <http://www.diic.com.tw/mag/mag261/261-38.htm>.  
41 Ibid.   

 
22 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
42 Carolyn O’Hara, “China builds a mock Taiwanese air base,” Foreign Policy , August 11, 2006, available at 
<http://blog.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2006/08/11/china_builds_a_mock_taiwanese_air_base >.    
43 See David Axe, “China’s Increasingly Good Mock Air Battles Prep Pilots for Real War,” Wired Magazine, 
February 7, 2013, available at <http://www.wired.com/2013/02/china-mock-air-war/all/>. For a good map of the 
facility, see “Dingxin/ Shuangchengzi Air Base,” available at <http://wikimapia.org/835014/Dingxin-
Shuangchengzi-Air-Base>.     
44 Easton’s interviews with U.S. Air Force officer and Japanese military analyst in Washington D.C., July 2014. See 
also Ray Walters, “China’s mysterious desert lines mystery solved,” Geek, November 15, 2011, available at 
<http://www.geek.com/geek-cetera/chinas-mysterious-desert-lines-mystery-solved-1441125/>.   
45 See Wang Tie, et al., “Er Pao Daodan Zhandoubu Dongku Cangcun Guanjian Jishu Yijing Pojie [Second Artillery 
Missile Warhead Storage Facility Cracks Critical Technologies]”, Jiefangjun Bao [PLA Daily], April 12, 2007, 
available online at <http://mil.eastday.com/m/20070412/u1a2760363.html>.   
46 See for example, the discussion in Huang Guangyan, et al. 
47 See Jiang Zengrong, et al., “Zhadian Shendu dui Fan Paodao Qinbao Zhandoubu Cuishang Xiaoguo Yingxiang 
Shuzhi Moni [Numerical Modeling of Blast Depth Influence on Destruction Effects of Runway Penetrating 
Warhead],” Conference Paper Presented at China’s Ninth National Forum on Blast Dynamics, undated, 175-179; 
and Jiang Zengrong, et al., “Zhadian Shendu dui Qinbao Dantoubu Cuishang Xiaoguo Yingxiang Shuzhi Moni 
[Numerical Modeling of Blast Depth Influence on Destruction Effects of Penetrating Warhead],” Binggong Xuebao 
[Acta Armamentarii], April 2010, 28-31.      
48 Xiao Feizhu, “Wo Guo Hangzhan Liangchu Tianlei he CS/BCC5 Liangzhong Danyao Sabu Xitong [Tianlei and 
CS/BCC5 Type Munitions Dispensing Systems Unveiled at Our Nation’s Aerospace Expo],” Baxue Net , November 
13, 2012, available at <http://www.baxue.com/zhongguojunqing/18828.html>.    
49 John Stillion, “Fighting Under Missile Attack,” Air Force Magazine, August 2009, 35.  
50 Easton’s interviews with Japanese and U.S. officials at Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa, August and 
November 2013. See also Stillion, “Fighting Under Missile Attack,” 34-35.  
51 Ibid. 
52 Christopher J. Bowie, “The Lessons of Salty Demo,” Air Force Magazine 92, No. 3 (March 2009): 55.  
53 Ibid., 57. 
54 Quadrennial Defense Review, 2006, ix.  
55 Ian M. Easton,testimony before the U.S.-China Economic Security Review Commission during the Hearing on 
China’s Relations with Taiwan and North Korea, June 5, 2014, available at 
<http://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Easton_USCC_Taiwan_Hearing_Statement_2014.pdf>.   
56 See Guo Nairi, Kanbujian de Taihai Zhanzheng [The Unseen War in the Taiwan Strait] (Xizhi, Taiwan: Gaoshou 
Publishing, 2005), 16-30.; see also Mark A. Stokes, Revolutionizing Taiwan’s Security: Leveraging C4ISR for 
traditional and non-traditional challenges (Arlington, VA: Project 2049 Institute, February 2010), available at 
<http://www.project2049.net/documents/revolutionizing_taiwans_security_leveraging_c4isr_for_traditional_and_no
n_traditional_challenges.pdf>.    
57 See Wendell Minnick, “Spook Mountain: How US Spies on China,” Asia Times, March 6, 2003, available at 
<http://www.atimes.com/atimes/China/EC06Ad03.html>. and Wendell Minnick, “Taiwan-US Link Up on SIGINT,” 
Jane’s Defence Weekly, January 24, 2001, available at <https://www.fas.org/irp/news/2001/01/jdw-taiwan-
sigint.html>. For a detailed Taiwanese view, see Guo Nairi, Kanbujian de Taihai Zhanzheng [The Unseen War in 
the Taiwan Strait] (Xizhi, Taiwan: Gaoshou Publishing, 2005), 16-30. 
58 Multiple interviews in Arlington (VA), 2013-2014.  
59 Multiple interviews with U.S. cyber security experts in Arlington (VA), 2013 -2014.  
60 Thomas Karako, "The Future of Missile Defense in the Asia Pacific," Foreign Policy Initiative, May 31, 
2017, http://www.foreignpolicyi.org/content/fpi-analysis-future-missile-defense-asia-pacific.  
61 Robbin Laird, “Pacific Needs Better Allied, US Air-Missile Integration: PACAF Gen. Carlisle,” Breaking 
Defense, March 7, 2014, available at <http://breakingdefense.com/2014/03/pacific-needs-better-allied-us-air-
missile-integration-pacaf-gen-carlisle-on/>. 
62 Wendell Minnick, “China puts Guam within Missile Range,” Defense News, May 12, 2016, 
http://www.defensenews.com/story/defense/international/asia-pacific/2016/05/12/china-guam-us-missile-
range/84279494/.  
63 Mark Gunzinger and Bryan Clark, Winning the Salvo Competition: Rebalancing America’s Air and Missile 
Defense Systems, (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2016), 55. 

 
23 
 
 
 
                           
          |Risk and Resiliency: China’s Emerging Air Base Strike Threat| 
       
    
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
64 Michael J. Lostumbo, David R. Frellinger, James Williams, and Barry Wilson, Air Defense Options for Taiwan: 
An Assessment of Relative Costs and Operational Benefits, (Washington, DC: RAND Corporation, 2016), 107. 
65 This section draws from Ian Easton, Able Archers: Taiwan Defense Strategy in an Age of Precision Strike 
(Arlington, VA: Project 2049 Institute, September 2014).   
66 Easton’s interview in Arlington (VA), April 2014.  
67 PLA General Staff Department 54 Research Institute, “Fangkong Yujing Ziliao Huibian [Compilation of Air 
Defense Early Warning Information],” 37. 
68 Sean O’Connor, “Taiwan’s SAM Network.”  
69 This section draws from Ian Easton, Able Archers: Taiwan Defense Strategy in an Age of Precision Strike 
(Arlington, VA: Project 2049 Institute, September 2014).    
70 Jiang Yanyu (ed.), Taiwan Diqu Wushi Nian Junshi Shi 1949-2006 [A Military History of Fifty Years in the 
Taiwan Area 1949-2006] (Beijing: Liberation Army Press, 2013), 84.     
71 Ibid.     
72 Matthew Hallex, “Taiwan Facing Up to the Air base Survival Challenge,” AsiaEye Blog, May 14, 2010, available 
at < http://blog.project2049.net/2010/05/taiwan-facing-up-to-air base-survival.html>. and “Taitung Air 
Base/Chihhang Air base,” Global Security, available at 
<http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/taiwan/taitung.htm>.   
73 William Murray, “Revisiting Taiwan’s Defense Strategy,” Naval War College Review, (Summer 2008): 22. 
74 Zhou Yang, “Tai Moni Zhanji Gongji Jichang: Junguan Cheng 90 Fenzhong Kexiu 7 Ge Dankeng [Taiwan 
Simulates Fighter Attacks on Airfield: Military Official Says Can Repair 7 Bomb Craters i n 90],” Global Times, 
January 14, 2014, available at <http://mil.huanqiu.com/china/2014 -01/4752220.html>.   
75 Easton’s interview with retired U.S. Air Force officer involved in this security assistance program, Arlington 
(VA), 2014.  
76 Zhou, Global Times. 
77 See Zachery Wilson, “Civil Engineer exercise open for business,” Stars and Stripes , March 20, 2014, available at  
<http://guam.stripes.com/base-info/civil-engineer-exercise-open-business-guam>. and Matthew Rochon, “Last 
Silver Flag on Kadena ends,” Kadena Air Base News, May 29, 2013, available at  
<http://www.kadena.af.mil/news/story.asp?id=123350478>.       
78 Easton’s interviews with U.S. defense officials in Taipei, March and June 2014.   
79 Michael J. Lostumbo, et. al, Air Defense Options for Taiwan, 103.  
80 Quadrennial Defense Review 2014, 38.  
81 Amy McCullough, “Rapid Raptor 2.0.” Air Force Magazine, March 7, 2017, available at < 
http://www.airforcemag.com/DRArchive/Pages/2017/March%202017/March%2007%202017/Rapid- Raptor-
2.0.aspx>. 
82 For more on PACAF thinking about basing in contingencies, see “The Air Force Association Presentation by Gen 
O’Shaughnessy and Gen Wolters: Basing for Attack, Where Do We Go?” September 19, 2017, available at < 
http://secure.afa.org/events/Conference/2017/recordings/Tuesday-210-BAPanel.asp>. 
83 Laird, Breaking Defense.  
84 John Stillion, “Fighting Under Missile Attack,” Air Force Magazine, August 2009, 37.  
85 Quadrennial Defense Review 2014, 38.  
86 “Resiliency Goes Beyond Hardening,” Air Force Magazine, April 23, 2013, available at 
<http://www.airforcemag.com/DRArchive/Pages/2013/April%202013/April%2029%202013/Resiliency -Goes-
Beyond-Hardening.aspx>. 
87 US Army Corps of Engineers, “Two-year hardened installation effort ends on a high note,” July 5, 2013, available 
at <http://www.erdc.usace.army.mil/Media/NewsStories/tabid/9219/Article/15844/two-year-hardened-installation-
effort-ends-on-a-high-note.aspx>. 
88 Stillion, Air Force Magazine, 34. and David J. Berteau and Michael J. Green, “US Force Posture Strategy in the 
Asia-Pacific Region: An Independent Assessment?,” The Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 
2012, available at < http://csis.org/files/publication/120814_FINAL_PACOM_optimized.pdf>.  
89 Laird, Breaking Defense. 
90 Ibid.  
91 Bowie, Air Force Magazine, 55. 