Research Department    Bank of Israel  
Targeted Killings: 
Evaluating the Effectiveness of a 
Counterterrorism Policy 1 
by   
     Asaf Zussman *       Noam Zussman **  
      
   Discussion Paper  No. 2005.02 
 January 2005 
1 The paper was updated and edited on October 2005. A condensed version is 
forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Perspectives.  For their assistance with the data 
we thank Yoni Fighel, Shalom Harari, and Yochanan Tzoreff of the International Policy 
Institute for Counterterrorism and Arnon Regular and Dani Rubinstein of the newspaper 
Ha’aretz.  We thank Isaac Ben-Israel, Steve Coate, Jeremy Pressman, Enrico Spolaore, 
Tim Vogelsang, Romain Wacziarg, Amos Zehavi, and participants of presentations at the 
Bank of Israel, Cornell Univ ersity, SUNY Binghamton, Te l Aviv University, and the 
2005 American and Israeli Economic Association meetings for helpful comments and 
suggestions. 
   
*     Economics Department, Cornell Universi ty. E-mail: azussman@cornell.edu.  
**   Research Department, Bank of Israel. E-mail: noamz@boi.gov.il.  
Any views expressed in the Discussion Paper Series are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Israel.  
 
 , 
 
  
"  
780  ,  
91007  
 Research Department, Bank of Israel, POB 780, Jerusalem 91007, Israel  


1 
Abstract 
targeted killing (henceforth assassinati on) of members of Palestinian terrorist 
organizations was a major element in Israel’s counterterrorism effort during 
the Palestinian uprising which started in  2000.  We evaluate the effectiveness 
of this policy indirectly by examining Israeli stock market reactions to 
assassinations.  Our approach relies on the assumption that the market should 
react positively to news of effective counterterrorism measures but negatively 
to news of counterproductive ones.  The main result of the analysis is that the 
market reacts strongly to assassinations of senior members in Palestinian 
terrorist organizations: it declines following attempts to assassinate political 
leaders but rises following attempts  to assassinate military ones. 
JEL classification codes: G14, H56 
Keywords: Counterterrorism, Stock Market 

2 
I. Introduction 
 Since September 11, 2001 terrorism has been at the center of world attention.  The 
attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon are widely perceived as the 
beginning of a new era of terrorism.  Other countries have also suffered heavily since 
then at the hands of terrorists.  The sever ity of these attacks naturally resulted in 
enhanced efforts to find effective ways of combating terrorism. 
One of the most controversial counterterrorism policies is that of assassinating 
members of terrorist organizations. 1   The policy of assassinations is controversial for 
several reasons.  One objection to it is legal:  the argument is that assassinations are extra- 
judicial executions.  Another objection to the policy is moral and focuses on the 
possibility that assassination attempts will hurt noncombatants.  The third objection to 
assassinations is based on the claim that they are ineffective, or even worse, 
counterproductive: they might ultimately result in increased terrorism.   This paper offers 
a unique quantitative analysis of the effectiveness of assassinations.  In order to do so it 
focuses on Israel, a country that has been suffering from terrorism for years. 
The terrorist attacks against Israelis have  intensified since the outbreak of the Al- 
Aksa  (or second) Intifada  at the end of September 2000. 2   Figure 1 displays the number of 
Israeli civilians killed in Palestinian terrorist attacks from September 29, 2000 to the end 
of April, 2004.  In total, close to 600 Israeli civilians were killed in Palestinian terrorist 
attacks during this period. 3   Israel has responded to the terrorist offensive in various 
ways, including attempts to assassinate memb ers of Palestinian terrorist organizations. 
The Al-Aksa Intifada  is not the first time Israel has employed assassinations as a 
policy instrument.  In the past assassinati on targets included Egyptian intelligence 
officers involved in orchestrating infiltrations  into Israel in the 1950s, German scientists 
developing missiles for Nasser’s Egypt in the 1960s, Palestinian terrorists involved in the 
1  Assassination is commonly defined as the murder of an important person in a surprise attack for political 
reasons.  In the context of counterterrorism other terms, such as “pinpoint killing” or “targeted killing”, are 
sometimes used to describe the same phenomenon. 
2  For analysis of Palestinian terrorism in recent years, and particularly of the use of suicide bombings, see 
Ehud Sprinzak (2000), Gal Luft (2002), Bruce Hoffman (2003), and Robert A. Pape (2003).  For a brief 
historical overview of Palestinian terrorism see Walter Laqueur (2003). 
3  Two thirds of the victims were killed in attacks that took place within Israel’s 1967 borders.  The others 
were killed in the Occupied Territories.  Source: B’tselem, the Israeli Information Center for Human Rights 
in the Occupied Territories. 

3 
1972 Munich Olympics attack, and senior leaders of Palestinian and other terrorist 
organizations such as Khalil al-Wazir (Abu Jihad), the deputy chairman of the Palestinian 
Liberation Organization (Tunisia, 1988), Abas Musawi, the secretary general of 
Hizbullah (Lebanon, 1992), Fathi Shkaki, the head of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (Malta, 
1995), and Khaled Mashaal, a senior Hamas leader (Jordan, 1997).  It is widely believed 
that the Israeli Defense Forces planned to assassinate Saddam Hussein after Iraq attacked 
Israel during the Gulf War of 1991.  The plan was scrapped following the death of 
several soldiers in a 1992 training exercise. 4 
Two important characteristics distinguish between the assassinations carried out 
since September 2000 and the previous ones.  First – frequency: previous assassinations 
were rare events.  In contrast, since September 2000 Israel has carried out more than a 
hundred assassination attempts.  Second – importance of the targets.  The fact that Israel 
has carried out so many assassination attempts during the Al-Aksa Intifada  necessarily 
means that a large share of the targets were of relatively low rank. 
 The effectiveness of assassinations as a counterterrorism policy has been the 
subject of a fierce debate in Israel. 5   The debate focuses on the impact the assassinations 
have on the capabilities and the motivation of terrorist organizations.  The two sides to 
the debate seem to agree that the production of terrorism is positively related to both 
capabilities and motivation. 6   There is disagreement, however, on the magnitude of the 
effects of assassinations on capabilities and motivation and therefore on the production of 
terrorism. 
Most analysts agree that the assassination of a terrorist hurts his organization’s 
capabilities.  Assassinations work to disrupt the preparation of terrorist attacks by the 
individuals targeted and make other members of the terrorist organizations spend 
valuable time and resources in guarding themselves.  The threat of assassination may 
deter a terrorist from carrying out further attacks and has the potential of hurting his 
organization’s recruiting efforts.  With regard to motivation, most observers agree that 
4  These and other assassination attempts and plans are described in Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman (1990), 
Ian Black and Benny Morris (1991), Carmi Gilon (2000), Moshe Zonder (2000), Gad Shimron (2002), and 
Amos Harel and Avi Isacharoff (2004). 
5  Steven R. David (2002), Shlomo Gazit (2002), Shmuel L. Gordon (2002), Boaz Ganor (2003) and Gal 
Luft (2003) offer qualitative analyses of the issues raised in the debate. 
6  Motivation should be thought of as willingness to employ capabilities to carry out terrorist attacks. 

4 
the assassination of a terrorist may increase the motivation of other members of his 
organization (and possibly of the wider population) to carry out attacks. 7 
The broad agreement on these basic analytic al issues notwithstanding, two crucial 
distinctions should be emphasized with respect to the effect of an assassination on the 
production of terrorism.  First, the magnitude of the effect is likely dependent on the 
seniority of the target.  It is reasonable to  assume that an assassination would be most 
effective in reducing the capabilities of a terror ist organization if the target is a senior 
leader with specialized knowledge and skills. 8   The assassination of a low rank terrorist, 
in contrast, is not likely to seriously disrupt the operation of his organization.  It is also 
reasonable to assume that the assassination of a low rank terrorist, unlike that of a more 
senior leader, will generate little increase in  the motivation of his organization to carry 
out attacks. 
The second crucial distinction is that  between members of the political and 
military wings of terrorist organizations. 9   Military leaders are involved in planning 
operations, and recruiting, training, armi ng and dispatching terrorists.  Thus the 
assassination of a military leader has the potential of severely disrupting his 
organization’s terrorist operations.  Senior pol itical leaders, in contrast, are primarily 
responsible for political and spiritual guidance.  Thus it is possible that assassinating a 
senior political leader is less likely to signi ficantly decrease the operational capability of 
his organization. 
Relative to a senior military leader, how ever, attempts to assassinate a senior 
political leader would tend to great ly increase the motivation to carry out terrorist attacks.  
This is due to two factors.  First, political leaders are typically far better known to the 
Palestinian public than military ones.  Second,  the targeting of military leaders seems to 
be perceived, by both Palestinian and Israelis, as part of the “rules of the game”.  In 
7  The possibility does exist, however, that an assassination or a series of assassinations will lead to a 
decline in motivation – or demoralization – among the members of a terrorist organization.  
8  Isaac Ben-Israel et al. (forthcoming) argue that one of the key weaknesses of terrorist organizations is 
their high vulnerability to any action against their leadership.  They estimate that the number of key 
activists in the Hamas is only a few hundred and argue (p. 5) that “one only needs to neutralize 20%-30% 
of them for the organization’s ‘production’ of acts of terror to drop significantly”. 
9  On the structure of Palestinian terrorist organizations see Luft (2003). 

5 
contrast, attempts to assassinate political lead ers are perceived as crossing a “red line”. 10 
For these two reasons the assassination of military leaders would tend to evoke less rage 
and calls for retaliation than the assassination of political leaders. 
 Summing up, the discussion above leads to  several conclusions.  First, the net 
effect of an assassination on the production of terrorism is indeterminate because it 
embodies two conflicting effects: on capabilities and motivation. 11   Second, the 
conflicting effects would both tend to be quite small in assassinations targeting low rank 
terrorists.  Third, taking into account the tw o conflicting effects, the assassination of a 
senior military leader is more likely than the assassination of a senior political leader to 
be followed by a decrease in the production of terrorism. 12 
The debate within Israel on the effectiveness of assassinations has been raging for 
years.  Yet, very few attempts have been made to date to substantiate either position by a 
quantitative analysis.  The fact that Israel  has resorted to assassinations so frequently 
since September 2000 allows us to address the effectiveness question econometrically.   
The empirical literature on counterterrorism (which we briefly survey in section 
III) has up to date focused on measuring the direct effect of counterterrorism efforts on 
the production of terrorism.  This has typically been done by comparing the number of 
terrorism incidents of certain types before and after the implementation of various 
counterterrorism policies.  However, it is our vi ew that the direct approach is not readily 
applicable to the analysis of the Israeli assa ssinations of Palestinian terrorists during the 
Al-Aksa Intifada .  A major difficulty in applying this approach is identifying the reaction 
functions of Palestinian terror ist organizations to Israeli assassination attempts.  One 
source for the difficulty lies in the fact th at Israel has adopted other counterterrorism 
measures (such as conducting raids into Pales tinian cities and villages to arrest terrorism 
10  A “red line” is a threshold, the crossing of which by an enemy would tend to trigger retaliatory action.  In 
several instances during the Al-Aksa Intifada  assassination attempts directed at Palestinian political leaders 
were portrayed by observers (on both the Palestinian and Israeli sides) as crossing a “red line”. 
11  B. Peter Rosendorff and Todd Sandler (2004) present a theoretical model that captures the same 
conflicting effects. 
12  In examining the role of seniority and wing membership we chose to focus on the capabilities/motivation 
tradeoff because it figures prominently in the assassinations debate in Israel.  It has to be emphasized, 
however, that our aim is to identify the net effects of assassinations and not their separate effects on 
capabilities and motivation.  What is crucial for our analysis is the ability to empirically identify the 
dependence of effectiveness on target characteristics and not the mechanisms that are behind this 
dependence. 

6 
suspects, setting up roadblocks, and constructing a separation barrier) during the period 
under investigation.  Very little high quality information is available on some of these 
and other relevant measures.  The difficulty in applying the direct approach also stems 
from the fact that several Palestinian terrorist organizations operate simultaneously but 
with different goals and from the inability to ascertain whether any given terrorist attack 
was carried out as a retaliation to an assassination attempt or not.  Thus we believe that 
separating out the effect of the assassinations policy using a direct approach is practically 
impossible. 13 
We propose an indirect test to evaluate the effectiveness of the assassinations 
policy.  Our approach builds on the fact that terrorism has had a significant adverse 
macroeconomic effect on Israel, as was demonstrated by, among others, David Fielding 
(2003a and 2003b), Samer Haj-Yehia (2003), and Zvi Eckstein and Daniel Tsiddon 
(2004). 14   We rely on this fact and on the forward-looking, information-aggregating 
nature of the stock market to argue that market reactions to news regarding 
counterterrorism measures should depend on their perceived effectiveness.  In specific we 
claim that the Israeli stock market should react positively to news of effective 
counterterrorism measures but negatively to news of counterproductive ones.  
Two important points should be emphasized with respect to our reliance on stock 
market reactions. 15   First, these reactions reflect the perceptions of investors about the 
expected behavior of the public, both in the short-run and in the long-run.  Second, stock 
market reactions factor in a wide spectrum of potentially relevant repercussions of the 
13  Two recent studies which attempt to directly examine the effect of Israeli counterterrorism policies on the 
production of Palestinian terrorism and suffer, in our opinion, from these and other methodological 
problems are David A. Jaeger and M. Daniele Paserman (2005) and Edward H. Kaplan et al. (2005).  The 
former finds (using our data) that successful assassination attempts reduce Israeli fatalities while the latter 
finds no such effect. 
14  The adverse macroeconomic effects of terrorism are not limited to Israel.  Alberto Abadie and Javier 
Gardeazabal (2003), for example, offer evidence of such effects in Spain’s Basque Country.  A recent 
survey of the economic costs of terrorism is included in Bruno S. Frey et al. (2004). From this perspective 
terrorism can be seen as a form of economic warfare.   
15  Our approach is close in spirit to the literature on prediction markets.  Recent examples from this 
literature include Andrew Leigh et al. (2003) and Yakov Amihud and Avi Wohl (2004).  A review of the 
literature is offered by Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz (2004).  See also James Surowiecki (2004).   

7 
policy, most importantly the possible retaliat ion by the terrorists  and effects on the 
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. 16 
We implement our approach by conducting a series of event studies, where each 
event constitutes an assassination attempt.  A crucial element in the application of this 
methodology, which is standard in the economics  and finance literatures, is establishing 
that the examined events indeed constitute “news.” We argue that the assassinations 
carried out by Israel during the Al-Aksa Intifada  indeed constitute news.  This is because 
Israel’s policy of assassinations has always been vague, with no government commitment 
to continue carrying them out.  Indeed, during the Al-Aksa Intifada  there have been sub- 
periods in which Israel has refrained from assassinating terrorists.  At any point in time 
the government’s intentions and the makeup of the approved list of targets were for the 
most part unknown to the public.  Even in those cases where the name of a potential 
target is publicly known, there is always uncertainly about the chances of his 
elimination. 17 
It also has to be emphasized that the assassinations do not reflect the passive 
response of the Israeli government to changes in the supply of terrorists.  It is true that 
when the Israeli authorities receive new inte lligence about an imminent threat they 
attempt to take immediate action to thwart it, including in some cases assassinating a 
terrorist.  However, our examination of the data  points to the fact that the majority of the 
assassinations, especially of the terrorist organizations’ leaders, were carried out either as 
a response to new intelligence about the whereabouts of a long sought after target (with 
no new information about his terrorism plans) or as a response to a new government 
16  The fact that stock market reactions capture a very wide spectrum of short- and long-run considerations 
offers another advantage of our approach over the direct examination of the effects of counterterrorism 
policies on the production of production. 
17  The appropriate interpretation of the nature of the news is an important question.  We focus on a narrow 
interpretation: a member of a given rank in the political or the military wing of a terrorist organization was 
assassinated.   However, the news may contain much more information.  For example, they may lead the 
public to update on how aggressively the government will continue to pursue the assassinations policy and 
how successful the government will be at carrying it out.  News regarding assassinations should also be 
interpreted in light of the overall political and military circumstances.  For the most part (and, admittedly, 
at a cost) we are leaving such issues out of our analysis because of the difficulty of quantifying them. 

8 
decision to cancel the implicit immunity given to an individual (with no new intelligence 
about either his location or plans). 18    
The most important result of our analysis is that the reaction of the Tel Aviv 
Stock Exchange to assassinations depends on the seniority and wing membership of the 
target.  The market does not react to assassinations of low ranked members of Palestinian 
terrorist organizations.  The ma rket does react strongly, however, to the assassinations of 
senior leaders of terrorist organizations: it declines following assassinations targeting 
senior political leaders but rises following assass inations of senior military leaders.  This 
implies that the market perceives the first type  of assassinations as  counterproductive but 
the second as an effective counterterrorism policy. 
In the next section we describe our dataset.  We then turn to the empirical 
analysis.  Discussion of our results in the context of the existing literature on terrorism 
and counterterrorism follows.  The final section concludes. 
II. Data 
 Our analysis focuses on the period September 2000 - April 2004.  Most of the 
data on assassination attempts was collected from four sources.  The first is a list of 
assassinations compiled by the Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group.  This list 
covers the entire period under investigation and includes 121 events.  The second source 
is a list of “targeted killings” compiled by the International Policy Institute for 
Counterterrorism in Israel. 19   This list also covers the entire period and includes 78 
events.  The third source is a list of assassinations compiled by B’tselem, the Israeli 
Information Center for Human Rights in the Occupied Territories.  This list covers the 
period September 2000 - June 2003 and includes 75 events.  The last source is a list of 
assassinations compiled by the Public Committee against Torture in Israel and the 
18  According to media reports the process that leads to an assassination begins with intelligence gathering 
by the Israeli Defense Forces, the General Security Services, and the Mossad (external intelligence agency).  
Feasibility studies are then conducted.  Authorization for the operations is typically given by the defense 
minister and the prime minister.  In certain cases the operation is voted upon by the government’s security 
cabinet. 
19  The International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism is an apolitical research institute and think tank 
dedicated to the study of international terrorism. 

9 
Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment.  This list 
covers the period September 2000 - January 2002 and includes 49 events. 
 There is a large amount of overlap in the four lists of assassination attempts (for 
the period covered in all).  Nevertheless, differences among them do exist.  The main 
source of differences seems to be the definition of what exactly qualifies as an 
assassination attempt.  Another difference has to do with the inclusion or exclusion of 
assassination attempts in whic h the target survived.  Our dataset includes all the incidents 
that appear in any of the four lists.  By adopting this approach we allow the data to 
determine which events matter. 
Data on assassinations obtained from the four sources mentioned above was 
expanded with the use of media reports.  The most intensively used media sources (via 
the LexisNexis service) were the Jerusalem Post and reports of news agencies, such as 
the Associated Press.  Stock market data were obtained from the Tel Aviv Stock 
Exchange database, through the Bank of Israel and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.  
Data on the timing of events allowed us to assign all events to the appropriate Tel Aviv 
Stock Exchange trading days. 20 
 Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on assassination attempts.  During the 
period from September 2000 to April 2004 there were 159 Israeli assassination attempts 
targeted at members of Palest inian terrorist organi zations.  The year 2002 saw the largest 
number of attempts - 56.  More than two thir ds of the assassination attempts were carried 
out in the West Bank and the remainder in the Gaza Strip. 
The most frequently used assassination method (employed in 47 percent of the 
cases) was shooting (light arms) – either from cl ose range or by snipers.  In 34 percent of 
the cases the Israeli Air Force used missiles from attack helicopters.  In 14 percent of the 
cases various explosive devices (e.g. booby-trapped vehicles) were used.  Roughly 50 
percent of the assassination attempts were targeted at Hamas members, 31 percent at 
Fatah members, and 17 percent at Islamic Jihad members.  The rest were targeted at 
members of smaller organizations.  In 85 percent of the cases the target of the 
20  The Tel Aviv Stock Exchange operates from 8:30AM to 5:00PM local time, Sunday through Thursday, 
except on holidays.  The cutoff time for classification of events was 4:30PM, i.e. events that took place 
before 4:30PM, Sunday through Thursday, were assigned to the same trading day.  Other events were 
assigned to the next trading day according to the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange trading schedule.  For further 
details on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange see its website: http://www.tase.co.il/. 

10 
assassination attempt was killed.   Overall, 317 individuals were killed in assassination 
attempts, almost 80 percent of whom were combatants. 
Two issues are crucial for our analysis: (1) establishing the seniority of each 
assassination target and (2) the classification of  each target into either the political or the 
military wing of his organization.  We a dopted two types of measures to establish 
seniority and to classify targets as political  or military: (a) measures based on Israeli 
media coverage and (b) measures based on expert opinion. 
The reason we use Israeli media coverage is straightforward: this is how investors 
learn about events.  In specific we use the coverage in the Israeli English-language daily 
newspaper, The Jerusalem Post. 21   Although the Jerusalem Post is not a mass circulation 
newspaper in Israel, one can safe ly assume that its coverage of assassinations is highly 
correlated with that of ot her Israeli media sources. 22 
Using the Jerusalem Post’s coverage of assassinations we construct a measure of 
target seniority based on the following 3 conditions: (1) whether in the day after the 
assassination it was covered in a front page article; 23  (2) whether in the day after the 
assassination its target was mentioned in more than one article; (3) whether the name of 
target was mentioned in the newspaper prior to his assassination (starting from September 
2000). 24   We define a target as senior if at least two of the three conditions hold. 25 
It has to be noted that media coverage of an assassination depends on factors other 
than the seniority of the target.  For example, a concurrent major news event may crowd 
the coverage of an assassination out of the head lines.  This is one reason why we also rely 
21  The Jerusalem Post is the only Israeli daily newspaper available through the LexisNexis service. 
22  For a sample of events we have verified this by comparing the coverage in the Jerusalem Post with that 
of the Israeli Hebrew language newspaper Ha’aretz . 
23  The “day after the assassination” refers to publishing day.  The Jerusalem Post is published Sunday 
through Friday, except for holidays.  Thus, for example, events that occurred on a Friday or a Saturday 
would typically be covered in the following Sunday.  It has to be noted that for events that occur during a 
trading day the reaction of the market cannot obviously be influenced by the following day’s coverage in 
the Jerusalem Post.  As was mentioned earlier, however, it is reasonable to assume that the coverage of 
events is highly correlated across media outlets including radio and online sources which report news 
almost immediately. 
24  The third criterion has the potential drawback of making it more likely that later assassination targets 
would be classified as senior. 
25  Using a less restrictive criterion, in specific demanding that only one condition is met, would have 
resulted in an unreasonable (almost a three-fold) increase in the number of targets classified as senior 
leaders.  Using a very restrictive criterion, in specific demanding that all three conditions be met, would 
have resulted in an equally unreasonable (almost two-thirds) decrease in the number of targets classified as 
senior leaders. 

11 
on expert opinion.  Five experts on the Israel i-Palestinian conflict were asked to rank (on 
the scale of 1 to 10) the seniority of assassination targets. 26   We use the average score 
across the five expert rankings to establish se niority.  We classify as a senior leader any 
target with an average rank of at least 2. 27   This resulted in a similar number of targets 
being classified as senior as that obtained using the media coverage criterion. 28 
To classify the targets of assassination attempts into the political and military 
wings of terrorist organizations we rely on expert opinion. 29   These opinions differ 
somewhat and we therefore adopt three approaches to the classification.  According to the 
first, least restrictive approach, the target would be classified as a member of the political 
wing if at least one of the experts classified him in such a way.  According to the second, 
more restrictive approach, the target needs at least two votes to be classified as a member 
of the political wing.  According to the last, most restrictive approach, a target would be 
classified as a member of the political wing if there is consensus about it among the 
experts. 30 
Applying the media coverage seniority criterion to an adjusted database which 
consists of 136 observations, we identified 39 assassination attempts in which the target 
was a senior leader. 31   In 33 of these incidents the target of the assassination was killed.  
Table 2 provides summary statistics on these assassinations.  Under the least restrictive 
criterion for classification of targets into  the political wing there were 15 such 
26  The experts are Yoni Fighel, Shalom Harari, and Yochanan Tzroreff, all research fellows at the 
International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism, and Arnon Regular and Dani Rubinstein of the 
newspaper Ha’aretz .  A potential drawback in the use of expert opinion is the possibility that it is colored 
by ex post  developments. 
27  This cutoff level suggested itself as natural because the expert rankings displayed clustering.  Targets 
could essentially be classified into three groups.  The low rank military wing members (foot soldiers) 
tended to receive the rank of 1.  Mid-level military wing members tended to receive ranks of 3 or 4.  
Political wing leaders tended to receive ranks of 9 or 10.  Thus by using the cutoff level of 2 we are able to 
differentiate between the foot soldiers and the rest. 
28  There is a large amount of overlap in the lists of targets classified as senior using the two criteria: almost 
three quarters of the targets classified as senior by the media coverage criterion were also classified as such 
by the expert opinion criterion. 
29  One expert declined to classify targets into the political and military wings. 
30  We also attempted to classify targets as political or military using the reporting in the Jerusalem Post.  
Despite some ambiguities on this issue in the newspaper’s coverage, the result was broadly similar to the 
one obtained by the intermediate expert opinion criterion described above. 
31  We needed to reduce the size of our database because in some cases several assassination attempts have 
taken place in the same trading day.  In such cases we kept in our adjusted database the incident with the 
most senior target, and for incidents with equally senior targets, the earliest one.  We also had to drop 
several observations where the name of the target was unknown – these were probably low ranked targets. 

12 
assassination attempts.  Under the more restri ctive criterion there were 10 attempts and 
under the most restrictive criterion there were only 8 such incidents. 
Table 3 provides some details on the assassinations that targeted senior leaders.  
Twenty two of the attempts ta rgeted Hamas leaders, nine Fatah leaders, six Islamic Jihad 
leaders and two leaders from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.  The 
climax of the assassinations policy came in the spring of 2004 with the killing of Ahmed 
Yassin and Abdel Aziz Rantisi, the leader of Hamas and his successor.  The spring of 
2004 therefore offers a natural end point for our empirical investigation. 
III. Empirical Analysis 
In this section we examine the determinants of the Israeli stock market reactions 
to assassination attempts.  Figure 2 is a hist ogram of the percentage change in the Tel 
Aviv 25 stock market index during the 136 (trading) days in which assassination attempts 
took place.  The Tel Aviv 25 index represents the prices of the 25 most important stocks 
in the market.  The average percentage change is -0.01 (i.e. one percent of one percentage 
point).  This apparent lack of market reaction to assassination attempts masks important 
differences between cases.  The next sub-sections analyze these differences. 
A. The Role of Seniority and Political/Military Wing Membership  
As we have argued above, there are tw o potentially crucial determinants of 
market reactions: the seniority of the assassination target and his identification with either 
the political or the military wing of his organization.  Table 4 A  presents results of several 
regressions addressing these two issues.  The dependent variable in each regression is the 
daily percentage change in the Tel Aviv 25 index.  All regressions include on the right 
hand side the percentage change in the NASDAQ stock market index, expressed in Israeli 
currency terms, and a constant.  The percentage change in NASDAQ was added in order 
to control for external events that mi ght be relevant for the Israeli market. 32   Since the 
32  We obtained similar results when we used alternative U.S. stock market indices, in particular Standard 
and Poor’s 500 and Dow-Jones.  Most dual-listed stocks of Israeli firms (those that are listed both in the 
Israeli and the U.S. markets) are listed in NASDAQ, leading us to prefer this index over the others.  Data 
were adjusted to reflect the fact that trading in NASDAQ and in the Israeli foreign exchange market, unlike 
the trading in the Israeli stock market, is conducted Monday through Friday.  Stock market data for the U.S. 
was obtained from Datastream ; exchange rate data were obtained from the Bank of Israel. 

13 
Israeli economy is highly integrated with the rest of the world we expect the coefficient 
for this variable to be positive and significant, as indeed it is in all regressions. 33 
The regression presented in the first column includes on the right hand side a 
dummy variable for all assassinations.  The coefficient for this variable has a value of 
zero and is statistically insignificant.  This  reinforces our conclusion (based on Figure 2) 
that, on average, the market does not react to assassinations.  We turn our focus now to 
the assassination of senior leaders.  In column (2) we include two dummy variables, one 
for assassinations of junior targets (all junior targets are military) and one for senior (both 
political and military) targets, where seniority is established by the media coverage 
criterion discussed above.  The coefficients are both close to zero and statistically 
insignificant.  One should not draw the conclusion that seniority does not matter, 
however, as we show next. 
In the last three columns of Table 4 A  we incorporate the distinction between 
political and military targets, using our three classification criteria.  Under all 
classification criteria the regressions find strong and statistically significant reactions of 
the market to assassinations of senior targets: negative reactions (of 0.7-1.1 percentage 
points) to assassinations of senior political  targets and positive reactions (of 0.5-0.7 
percentage points) to assassinations of senior  military targets.  The distinction between 
military and political leadership in Palestinian terrorist organi zations turns out to be very 
important to investors. 34 
An interesting pattern is evident in the last three columns of Table 4 A .  As we 
move to the right from column (3) to colu mn (5) we gradually apply more restrictive 
criteria for classification into the political wing.   Since the total number of senior leaders 
33  When we ran the regressions reported below without the NASDAQ variable results remained practically 
unchanged.  This suggests that the U.S. stock market is in general not sensitive to Israeli assassinations.  It 
is reasonable to assume that the addition of other economic variables to the right hand side of the 
regressions would not have changed the results much either because the timing of the assassinations is in 
principle orthogonal to the state of the Israeli economy at the time of their execution. 
34  An alternative interpretation of this result can rely on the fact (noted above) that senior political leaders 
are on average higher ranked than senior military leaders.  Our regression results may therefore be 
interpreted as reflecting a non-linear reaction of the market to assassinations: the market does not react to 
the assassinations of low-ranked terrorists, reacts positively to the assassinations of mid-level terrorists, and 
reacts negatively to the assassinations of top terrorists.  This interpretation mirrors the “too much of a good 
thing” argument made by Rosendorff and Sandler (2004).  We believe, however, that the Israeli public is 
aware of and accepts the distinction between the military and the political wings, and thus that our 
interpretation of the results is more valid. 

14 
is constant this means that we are taking individuals who where originally classified as 
political leaders (the assassination of which has a negative effect on the market) and 
reclassifying them as military leaders (the assassination of which has a positive effect on 
the market).  Not surprisingly, this transi tion manifests itself in the table by the 
strengthening of the political leadership vari able and the weakening of the military 
leadership variable. 
A potentially important factor that we have ignored so far is the question of 
whether the target of the as sassination attempt was killed or not.  An assassination 
attempt should have a reduced effect on the capabilities of a terrorist organization if the 
target was unhurt or wounded rather than killed.  On the other hand it is not clear whether 
the effect on motivation should be much different depending on whether the target was 
killed or not.  This seems to be especially true with respect to senior political leaders.  As 
we have argued above, the attempt to assassina te a political leader could be perceived as 
crossing a “red line”, regardless of whether he was killed or not. 
Following these arguments we redefine the dummy variables to take the value of 
unity only in those cases where the assassination ended in the death of the target.  Table 
4 B  reports the results of this exercise.  They are very similar to the ones reported in Table 
4 A .  The main difference is that the negative reaction to assassinations targeting political 
leaders is now weaker.  We interpret this as lending credence to our “red line” argument.  
This is demonstrated well by the cases of Abdel Aziz Rantisi and Ahmed Yassin.  Market 
reactions to the assassination attempts that ul timately killed both leaders (in 2004) were 
much milder than the reactions to the first assassination attempts that targeted them (in 
2003). 35   The first two assassination attempts signaled that these two top political leaders 
are not off limits; the final two attempts were thus less of a surprise.  The “red lines” 
were already crossed in 2003. 
Table 4 C  is almost identical in structure to Table 4 A .  The difference between 
them is that we now rely on the expert opinion seniority criterion in addition to the media 
coverage seniority criterion.  This allows us to check the robustness of our previous 
results which were based exclusively on the second criterion.  We now define an 
35  The Tel Aviv 25 index dropped by more than two percent on average in the first two assassination 
attempts; it dropped by only 0.9 percent on average in the final two (see the last column in Table 3). 

15 
assassination target as senior if he satisfies bot h seniority criteria.  This leads to 28 targets 
being classified as senior.  The results reported in Table 4 C  are almost identical to those 
reported in Table 4 A . 
B. Additional Determinants of Market Reactions to Assassinations 
We proceed by examining several other potential determinants of the stock 
market reactions to assassination attempts.  We do so by adding explanatory variables to 
a basic specification – that of column (4) in Table 4 A .  We first examine whether the fact 
that more than one assassination attempt took place in the same (trading) day affects the 
stock market reaction.  There are 17 such case s in our original dataset.  We construct a 
dummy variable that takes the value of 1 in e ach of these cases and 0 otherwise.  Column 
(1) in Table 5 shows that the coefficient for this  variable is positive and significant.  This 
is not surprising since all the additional incidents involved the targeting of military wing 
members. 36 
The second issue that we explore has to do with the timing of assassination 
attempts relative to major terrorist attack s against Israelis.  During the period under 
investigation there were several instances where a terrorist attack occurred either shortly 
before or shortly after an assassination attempt,  within the same (trading) day.  In the first 
case assassinations are sometimes seen as serving to placate the Israeli public’s demand 
for revenge, although Israeli officials tend to deny this connection.  In the second case the 
assassinations are sometimes seen by the Is raeli public as manifesting the ability of 
terrorist organizations to quickly retaliat e following assassination attempts.  Israeli 
officials tend to reject  this possibility too by claiming that terrorist attacks take a long 
time to prepare and therefore cannot be executed immediately following an assassination 
attempt. 
To address this issue we compiled a list of the major terrorist attacks directed 
against Israeli civilians in the period from September 2000 to April 2004. 37   The list 
includes all events in which five or more Is raelis were killed.  During the period under 
36  It is possible that the carrying out of several assassination attempts within a short period of time signaled 
to the Israeli public that the security forces were conducting a massive counterterrorism raid and this 
translated into the observed strong positive reaction in the stock market. 
37  The main source for information about the terrorist attacks was the International Policy Institute for 
Counterterrorism.  This was augmented by information provided in the media. 

16 
investigation there were 42 such attacks: 7 in 2001, 24 in 2002, 8 in 2003, and 3 in 
2004. 38   We construct a dummy variable that ta kes the value of 1 if  a terrorist attack 
occurred within the same (trading) day as an assassination and 0 otherwise.  Column (2) 
of Table 5 demonstrates that the effect of such incidents is strongly negative but 
insignificant at conventional levels.  This effect has the same sign and is similar in 
magnitude to that of assassinations targ eting senior Palestinian political leaders. 
An interesting question that we address in column (3) is the following: does the 
market reaction to an assassination attempt depend on whether it was closely preceded by 
terrorist attacks?  One could argue that if we compare market reactions to two 
assassination attempts, one that was closely preceded by terrorist attacks and another that 
was not, the reaction in the first case should be more negative (or less positive) than in 
the second.  This is because the preceding terrorist attacks demonstrated the capability of 
the terrorist organizations to strike back.  To carry out the test we construct a dummy 
variable that takes the value of 1 if at least one major terrorist attacks took place in the 
week preceding the assassination (not including the day of the assassination).  There are 
22 such observations in our database.  When we add this variable to our baseline 
regression we obtain a quantitatively  small and insignificant coefficient. 
Does the fact that noncombatants were killed in an assassination attempt affect the 
market reaction to it? 39   We argue that the market should react negatively to the death of 
noncombatants in assassinations.  This is because their death either does not affect or 
might even increase the capabilities of terror ist organizations and is likely to raise the 
motivation of these organizations to carry out attacks. 40   To test this hypothesis we add to 
our baseline regression a variable that cap tures the number of noncombatants killed in 
assassination attempts. 41   Column (4) shows that noncombatants’ death has a negative 
and significant effect on the market. 
38  An assassination coupled (in the same trading day) with a major terrorist attack occurred in 9 cases (out 
of 136). 
39  Noncombatants are defined here as individuals who are not members of terrorist organizations.  This 
definition excludes members of the political wings of terrorist organizations. 
40 The death of noncombatants may positively affect the capabilities of terrorist organizations because it 
makes it easier for them to recruit relatives of those killed and others to participate in terrorist activities. 
41 Noncombatants were killed in 18 out of the 136 assassination attempts in our adjusted dataset.   The 
average noncombatant death toll in these cases was 3 persons. 

17 
The last issue that we examine in Table 5 is how market reactions to assassination 
attempts have changed over time.  We divided the period under investigation into two 
equal sub-periods: September 2000 to June 2002 (“early period”) and July 2002 to April 
2004. 42   We then interacted the dummy variable for the early period with the senior 
political leader and military leader variable s.  Column (5) examines the result of a 
regression that includes the two interaction variables.   
We find that the early reactions to assa ssinations directed at senior political 
leaders in Palestinian terrorist organizations were negative but much  weaker than later 
reactions.  This result quite likely reflects an escalation in the Israeli assassinations 
campaign.  We also find that the early reac tions to assassinations of senior military 
leaders in Palestinian terrorist organizations we re positive but weaker than later reactions.  
However, this difference is not statistically significant. 
The last column of Table 5 examines all the additional variables together.  Results 
are qualitatively similar to the ones obtained wh en the variables were added one at a time.  
Most importantly, column (6) demonstrates that even when we control for additional 
explanatory variables we still obtain the result that assassination attempts targeting 
political leaders have a negative effect on th e market while assassinations of military 
leaders have a positive effect. 
C. Aggregate, Sectoral and Specific Firm  Reactions to Terrorism-Related Events 
This section examines how different market indices and stocks of specific firms 
react to assassinations of senior leaders and to all major terrorist attacks. 43   Table 6 A 
compares the reaction of three aggregate stock market indices: the Tel Aviv 25 index 
which we have examined so far, the Tel Aviv 100 index, which represents prices of 100 
major stocks, and the Tel Aviv general index, which represents the prices of all the stocks 
traded in the market.  In each regression reported in the table the dependent variable is 
the daily percentage change in a stock market index and the independent variables 
42  The division of the period into two halves closely coincides with a major change in circumstances on the 
ground.  In April 2002, after a series of major Palestinian terrorist attacks, Israel has invaded and 
reoccupied large areas in the West Bank.  Israeli forces did not evacuate most of the reoccupied areas by 
the end of the period under examination. 
43  Note that previously we focused on major terrorist attacks that coincided with assassination attempts 
while here we examine all major terrorist attacks.  Rafi Eldor and Rafi Melnik (2004) offer a detailed 
examination of the effects of terrorist attacks on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange. 

18 
include dummies for assassinations that targeted senior political leaders, assassinations 
that targeted senior military leaders, and major terrorist attacks. 44   As an additional 
control variable we include the percentage change in NASDAQ.   
The reactions of all three indices to te rrorism related events is qualitatively 
identical: the market declines following assa ssinations of senior political targets and 
following major terrorist attacks; the market  rises following assassinations of senior 
military targets.  For all three types of even ts the reaction of the Tel Aviv 25 index is 
stronger than that of the Tel Aviv 100 index, which in turn is stronger than the reaction of 
the Tel Aviv general index.  A back of the envelope calculation allows us to put these 
market reactions in perspective.  The average market capitalization of the Tel Aviv Stock 
Exchange during the period under investigation was about 60 billion U.S. dollars.  
Israel’s Gross Domestic Product was about 100 billion U.S. dollars.  Thus a one percent 
change in the Tel Aviv general index is equivalent to a change in market value worth 
about 0.6 percent of GDP.  This means that  political assassinations and major terrorist 
attacks wipe out market value equivalent to about 0.4 and 0.5 percent of GDP, 
respectively.  Military assassinations, on the ot her hand, lead to increases in market value 
equivalent to roughly 0.3 percent of GDP. 
Table 6 B  compares the reaction of nine sectoral stock market indices to terrorism- 
related events. 45   In these regressions we replace the NASDAQ index with the Tel Aviv 
general index.  Almost all the reaction coeffici ents are statistically insignificant, implying 
that all sectors react to terrorism-related events in a similar way.  The three exceptions are 
the reactions of the banks sector to major terrorist attacks and the reactions of the 
insurance sector to assassinations of senior political targets and to major terrorist attacks. 
The fact that all sectors display the same  qualitative reactions to terrorism-related 
events masks some potentially interesting differences.  Although it is clear that for most 
Israeli firms more terrorism is bad news, for some it means more business.  To contrast 
the reactions of the two types of firms to terrorism-related events we focus on two 
specific firms.  The first is Blue Square – Isra el Ltd., one of the major retailers in Israel.  
Because of the type of business it is in, we expect that terrorism would be associated with 
44  As in Table 5, we use the intermediate political wing classification criterion to assign senior leaders into 
the political and military wings of their organizations. 
45  These are the only sectoral indices officially reported by the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange. 

19 
a decline in Blue Square’s stock price. The second firm is Magal Security Systems Ltd., a 
major manufacturer in the field of outdoor perimeter protection.  It is to be expected that 
for Magal an increase in terrorism would represent a business opportunity.   
What is especially interesting about thes e two firms is that they are dual listed: 
their stocks are traded in both the Israeli and the U.S. markets.  Blue Square is the only 
dual listed Israeli firm that is exclusively in retail.  Its stock trades on the New York 
Stock Exchange.  Magal is the only dual listed Israeli firm that exclusively produces 
security related products.  Its stock trades on NASDAQ.  The fact that the two firms are 
in different businesses and that their stocks are traded in both the Israeli and the U.S. 
markets allows us to add another layer to our analysis of reactions to terrorism-related 
events. 
Table 6 C  reports the results of this analysis for the U.S. market. 46   In each 
regression the dependent variable is the daily percentage change in the price of the 
specific stock.  The explanatory variables in clude the three dummies for terrorism-related 
events and the percentage change in the relevant aggregate stock market index (Standard 
and Poor’s 500 for Blue Square and NASDAQ for Magal). 
The reaction of Blue Square’s stock price to terrorism-related events is 
qualitatively identical to that of the Israel i market but quantitatively stronger for the 
assassination variables.  The price of the stock decreases following assassinations 
targeting senior Palestinian political leaders and following terrorist attacks against 
Israelis; it increases followin g assassinations of senior Palestinian military leaders.  
Magal’s stock price reaction to terrorism-related events is qualitatively a mirror image of 
Blue Square’s: it increases sharply following assassinations targeting senior Palestinian 
political leaders and following terrorist attack s against Israelis (in the first case the 
reaction is statistically insignificant at conventional levels) but decreases following 
assassinations of senior Palestinian military leaders.  In sum, the results presented in 
46  Arbitrage should work to eliminate any differences in stock prices between the Israeli and U.S. markets 
implying that we need to analyze the behavior of stocks in only one market.  We were able to obtain more 
stock price data for Magal in the U.S. market so we focus on the stocks’ record there. 

20 
Table 6 C  complement and strengthen those obtained from the analysis of the Israeli stock 
market. 47 
D. The Dynamics of Market Reaction 
We turn now to an analysis of the dynamic properties of market reactions to 
terrorism-related events.  In specific we want to examine whether the market reaction 
represents just a “blip” – a sharp change followed by an immediate reversion - or tends to 
persist for a longer period.  To conduct the analysis we construct a set of ten lags of the 
dummy variables for the three terrorism-related events.  This enables us to capture the 
dynamics of market reaction for the two trading weeks that follow these events.  The 
regression we employ has on the left hand side the percentage change in the Tel Aviv 25 
index.  On the right hand side we have the entire set of lagged and contemporaneous 
dummies as well as the percentage change in the NASDAQ index. 
Table 7 reports the results of this regression.  Figure 3 uses the output of the 
regression to plot the cumulative change in the stock market.  The impact (same trading 
day) reaction of the market to an assassina tion attempt targeting a Palestinian political 
leader is a drop of 1.1 percent.  This negativ e reaction weakens but does not reverse itself 
completely during the next two trading weeks.  The immediate reaction of the market to 
the assassination of a Palestinian military leader is an increase of 0.6 percent.  This effect 
too seems to persist and even strengthen in the following trading weeks.  The immediate 
reaction of the market to a ma jor terrorist attack is a drop of 1.2 percent.  The market 
seems to stay quite stable in the following da ys.  We conclude that the evidence does not 
seem to support a “blip” view of market reactions. 48 
47  Claude Berrebi and Esteban F. Klor (2005) examine how terrorism in Israel affects the performance of all 
Israeli stocks traded in U.S. markets.  They find that terrorism has a positive effect on the stocks of defense 
and security related companies and a negative effect on the stocks of other firms. 
48  According to the Efficient Market Hypothesis an efficient market should react to new information 
immediately and completely.  Our analysis demonstrates that market reactions to terrorism-related events 
are indeed immediate (within the same trading day).  The fact that the market continues to exhibit some 
fluctuations after the initial reaction may imply that it is not fully efficient.  Thus in the case of military 
assassinations the market seems to under-react initially while in the case of political assassinations the 
market seems to over-react initially.  However, since our regression does not control for many other 
potential determinants of market movements and since it is likely that over time market participants receive 
more news one should be cautious in drawing such conclusions.  

21 
E. Palestinian Stock Market Reactions 
In order to examine terrorism and counterterrorism from a different, potentially 
complementary, perspective we now turn to an analysis of Palestinian reactions to 
terrorism-related events, as they are manifest ed in the Palestinian Securities Exchange. 49 
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to use data from the Palestinian 
Securities Exchange in an examination of stock market reactions to terrorism-related 
events.  The Palestinian Securities Exchange st arted its operation in 1997.  The market is 
relatively thin and trading suffe rs from periodic interruptions. 50   Surprisingly, despite the 
drawbacks in the underlying data results are intuitively appealing and strong. 
We focus our analysis on the Al-Quds  index, which represents the prices of 10 
major stocks in the market.  Data for this index was available to us for the period January 
2001 to April 2004.  Figure 4 contrasts the behavior of the Tel Aviv 25 stock market 
index with that of the Al-Quds  index.  The two series tend to display the same broad 
patterns of behavior.  Given the fact that the Palestinian economy is dependent on the 
Israeli one and that the two stock markets are heavily influenced by the ups and downs of 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, this  result should not be surprising. 
Table 8 examines the reactions of the Pa lestinian market to terrorism-related 
events.   In the first column of the table we reproduce, for the purpose of comparison, 
previously reported results on the effects of terrorism-related events on the Tel Aviv 25 
index. 51   In the second column we report the results of a regression of the percentage 
change in the Al-Quds  index on terrorism-related event dummies and the percentage 
change in NASDAQ.  Comparing the two columns we find that: both markets react 
negatively to assassination attempts targeting senior Palestinian political leaders, 
49 http://www.p-s-e.com/. 
50  As of June 2004 26 companies were listed in the Palestinian Securities Exchange.  From January to April 
2004 there were 3,200 transactions in the market with the total value of trades equal to 47 million U.S. 
dollars.  Trading days are typically Sunday through Thursday, but occasionally the market does not open 
for several days or more.  We adjusted our terrorism-related events data to the Palestinian Securities 
Exchange trading schedule.  Most importantly, we dropped from our dataset observations where two 
consecutive trading days were more than three days apart.  Experimenting with different thresholds did not 
alter the results qualitatively.  
51  These are the results displayed in the “Tel Aviv 25” row of Table 6 A . 

22 
although the reaction of the Al-Quds  index is stronger; both markets react positively to 
assassination attempts targeting senior Palestinian military leaders (the reaction of the 
Palestinian market is statistically insignific ant); both markets react negatively, and in a 
quantitatively similar way, to majo r terrorist attacks against Israelis. 
Summing up, it seems that there is a la rge degree of similarity in Israeli and 
Palestinian stock market reaction to terrorism-related events.  One possible interpretation 
of the results is that investors on both sides of the conflict share a common view 
regarding its desired solution.  We plan to further investigate this question in future work. 
IV. Discussion 
Our analysis addresses some of the main issues raised by the literature on 
counterterrorism.  A key distinction emphasized in this literature is that between 
defensive and offensive counterterrorism meas ures.  The most important lesson of the 
analysis of defensive measures is that they induce substitution by the terrorist 
organizations: policies designed to reduce one type of terrorist attacks tend to increase 
other attack modes.  For example, Jon Cauley and Eric I. Im (1988) and Walter Enders 
and Todd Sandler (1993) have demonstrated that installation of metal detectors in airports 
during the 1970s reduced skyjackings but increased other kinds of hostage attacks. 52 
According to this literature offensive co unterterrorism measures could lead to 
inter-temporal substitution: a concentrated counterterrorism offensive during one period 
could yield a temporary decline in the production of terrorism in that period but at the 
cost of increased terrorism in later periods.  This kind of substitution is suggested by the 
Enders and Sandler (1993) analysis of the U.S. retaliatory raid on Libya in 1986.  The 
analysis demonstrated that the raid had no long-term effect on curbing terrorist attacks 
directed against U.S. interests.  Bryan Brophy-Baermann and John A.C. Conybeare 
(1994) studied the Israeli retaliation for the 1972 Munich terrorist attack and reached 
similar conclusions. 
Our analysis focuses on an offensive counterterrorism policy.  From an economic 
perspective assassinations are aimed at diminishing the resources available for terrorist 
52  A survey of the counterterrorism literature on substitution effects is provided by Todd Sandler and 
Walter Enders (2004).  A classic reference on substitution effects in warfare is Mancur Olson Jr. (1962). 

23 
organizations.  They target individuals who are involved in different modes of terrorist 
activity, such as shooting attacks, mortar shelling, and suicide bombings.  Thus the 
substitution effects induced by assassinations are relatively limited.  Moreover, because 
the assassinations policy was applied so frequently throughout the Al-Aksa Intifada , inter- 
temporal substitution effects were probably also limited. 
 Some lessons relevant for counterterrorism policies are implied by the recent 
economic literature that attempts to examine th e root causes of terrorism.  Two lines of 
research are notable within this literature.  The first analyzes the connection between 
poverty and education on the one hand and involvement in terrorism on the other.  
Studies by Claude Berrebi (2003), Alan Krueger and Jitka Maleckova (2003), and 
Alberto Abadie (2004) argue that, contrary to conventional wisdom, there is little direct 
connection between poverty or lack of education and participation in terrorism.  These 
results seem to suggest that economic growth would not necessarily result in the decline 
of terrorism.  Both Berrebi (2003) and Kr ueger and Maleckova (2003) argue that on the 
educational front the focus should not be on the quantity of education provided but rather 
on educational contents. 
 The second line of research examines terrorism from the perspective of a “club- 
good” model.  Examples include Eli Berman (2003), Eli Berman and David D. Laitin 
(forthcoming), and Laurence R. Iannaccone (2003).  The counterterrorism policy 
recommendations that are implied by this type of analysis call for action aimed at 
weakening the terrorist organizations’ social service provision networks and 
strengthening of competing networks through government and markets.  The emphasis is 
on political, economic, and social measures. 
The offensive military approach which we have analyzed in this paper could be 
viewed as a complement to such measures.   There is a wide consensus among observers 
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has no military solution and that political dialogue 
should play the major role in any attempt to resolve it.  At the same time it is widely 
believed, at least among the Israeli public, that the use of force to combat terrorism is 
inescapable. 53   During the period under investigation assassinating members of 
53  Opinion polls show that during the period under investigation the Israeli public was by and large 
supportive of the assassinations policy.  The Tami Steinmetz Center of Peace in Tel Aviv University 

24 
Palestinian terrorist organizations was a major element in Israel’s counterterrorism effort.  
We hope that our study has shed some light on the question of the effectiveness of this 
policy.  Despite the differences in circumstances, the lessons learned from the Israeli 
experience may serve other countries which face similar dilemmas. 
V. Conclusion 
Since September 11, 2001 terrorism has been at the center of world attention.  The 
severity of this and other terrorist attacks na turally resulted in enhanced efforts to find 
effective ways of combating terrorism.  One of the most controversial counterterrorism 
policies is that of assassinations. 
This paper offers a unique quantitative economic analysis of the effectiveness of 
assassinations.  We examine the case of Israel, a country that has been suffering from 
terrorism for years and extensively employs various counterterrorism measures.  In the 
period that we focus on, September 2000 to April 2004, assassinating members of 
Palestinian terrorist organizations was a major element in Israel’s counterterrorism effort. 
Our indirect approach to evaluating the e ffectiveness of assassinations is based on 
Israeli stock market reactions to news of such operations.  We rely on the fact that 
terrorism has adverse macroeconomic effects on the Israeli economy and on the forward- 
looking, information-aggregating nature of asset markets to claim that the stock market 
should react positively to new about effectiv e counterterrorism measures but negatively 
to news about counter-productive ones.   
Using a unique dataset on more than a hundred assassinations attempted during 
the Al-Aksa Intifada  (from September 2000 to April 2004), our analysis demonstrates that 
the reaction of the Tel Aviv Stock Exch ange to assassinations depends on two 
characteristics of the targets: seniority and wing membership.  The market does not react 
to assassinations of low ranked members of  Palestinian terrorist organizations.  The 
market does react strongly, however, to the assassinations of senior leaders of terrorist 
organizations: it declines following assassinations targeting senior political leaders but 
rises following assassinations of senior milita ry leaders.  This implies that the market 
conducts monthly opinion polls focusing on issues related to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  In several of 
the polls respondents were asked whether they support the assassinations policy.  In all the polls support for 
the policy was in the range of 60 to 70 percent, with no clear upward or downward trend. 

25 
perceives the first type of assassinations as counterproductive but the second as an 
effective counterterrorism policy. 

26 
REFERENCES 
Abadie, Alberto.  “Poverty, Political Freedom, and the Roots of Terrorism.” National 
Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 10859, October 
2004. 
Abadie, Alberto and Gardeazabal, Javier.  “The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case 
Study of the Basque Country.” American Economic Review , March 2003, 93(1), pp. 
113-32. 
Amihud, Yakov and Wohl, Avi.  “Political News and Stock Pr ices: The Case of Saddam 
Hussein Contracts.” Journal of Banking & Finance , May 2004, 28(5), pp. 1185- 
1200. 
Ben-Israel, Isaac; Setter, Oren and Tishler, Asher.  “R&D and the War on Terrorism: 
Generalizing the Israeli Experience,” in Andrew James, ed., Science and Technology 
Policies for the Anti-Terrorism Era , Oxford: IOS Press, forthcoming. 
Berman, Eli.  “Hamas, Taliban and the Jewish Underground: An Economist’s View of 
Radical Religious Militias.” National Bu reau of Economic Research (Cambridge, 
MA) Working Paper No. 10004, September 2003. 
Berman, Eli and Laitin, David D.  “Rational Martyrs vs. Hard Targets: Evidence from 
the Tactical Use of Suicide Attacks,” in Eva Meyersson Milgrom, ed., Suicide 
Bombing from an Interdisciplinary Perspective . Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, forthcoming.  
Berrebi, Claude.  “Evidence about the Link between Education, Poverty and Terrorism 
among Palestinians.” Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working 
Paper No. 477, September 2003. 
Berrebi, Claude and Klor, Esteban F.  “The Impact of Terrorism across Different 
Industries: An Empirical Study.” Mimeo, Rand Corporation and Hebrew University, 
February 2005. 
Black, Ian and Morris, Benny. Israel’s Secret Wars: A Hist ory of Israel’s Intelligence 
Services . New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1991. 
Brophy-Baermann Bryan a nd Conybeare, John A.C.  “Retaliating against Terrorism: 
Rational Expectations and the Optima lity of Rules versus Discretion.” American 
Journal of Political Science , February 1994, 38(1), pp. 196-210. 

27 
Cauley, Jon and Im, Eric I.  “Intervention Policy Analysis of Skyjackings and Other 
Terrorist Incidents.” American Economic Review , May 1988 ( Papers and 
Proceedings) , 78(2), pp. 27-31. 
David, Steven R.  “Fatal Choices: Israel’s Policy of Targeted Killing.” Bar-Ilan 
University Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies Working Paper No. 51, 
September 2002. 
Eckstein, Zvi and Tsiddon, Daniel.  “Macroeconomic Conseque nces of Terror: Theory 
and the Case of Israel.” Journal of Monetary Economics , July 2004, 51(5), pp. 971- 
1002. 
Eldor, Rafi and Melnick, Rafi.  “Financial Markets and Terrorism.” European Journal 
of Political Economy , June 2004, 20(2), pp. 367-386. 
Enders, Walter and Sandler, Todd.  “The Effectiveness of Antiterrorism Policies: A 
Vector-Autoregression-Intervention Analysis.” American Political Science Review , 
December 1993, 87(4), pp. 829-44. 
Fielding, David. “Modelling Political Instability and Economic Performance: Israeli 
Investment during the Intifada .” Economica , February 2003 (2003a), 117(70), pp. 
159–186. 
_______. “Counting the Cost of the Intifada : Consumption, Saving and Political 
Instability in Israel.” Public Choice , September 2003 (2003b), 116(3-4), pp. 297– 
312. 
Frey, Bruno S.; Luechinger, Simon and Stutzer, Alois . “Calculating Tragedy: 
Assessing the Costs of Terrorism.” Zuri ch University Institute for Empirical 
Research in Economics Working Paper No. 205, September 2004. 
Ganor, Boaz. The Counterterrorism Puzzle: A Guide for Decision Makers . Herzliya, 
Israel: International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism, 2003 [In Hebrew]. 
Gazit, Shlomo.  “Israel,” in Yonah Alexander, ed., Combating Terrorism: Strategies of 
Ten Countries . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2002. 
Gilon, Carmi. Shin-Beth between the Schisms . Tel Aviv: Yedioth Ahronoth, 2000 [in 
Hebrew]. 
Gordon, Shmuel L. Israel against Terror: A National Assessment .  Tel Aviv: Meltzer, 
2002 [In Hebrew]. 

28 
Haj-Yehia, Samer.   “Terrorizing the Consumers and Investors.” Mimeo, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, November 2003. 
Harel, Amos and Isacharoff, Avi. The Seventh War . Tel Aviv: Yedioth Ahronoth, 2004 
[in Hebrew]. 
Hoffman, Bruce.  “The Logic of Suicide Terrorism.” Atlantic Monthly , June 2003, 
291(5), pp. 40-47. 
Iannaccone, Laurence R.  “The Market for Martyrs.” Mimeo, George Mason University, 
December 2003. 
Jaeger, David A. and Paserman, M. Daniele . “The Spiral of Violence? An Empirical 
Analysis of Fatalities in the Palestinian -Israeli Conflict.” College of William and 
Mary, Department of Economics, Working Paper No. 22, October 2005.  
Kaplan, Edward H.; Mintz, Alex; Mishal, Shaul and Samban, Claudio.  “What 
Happened to Suicide Bombings in Israel? Insights from a Terror Stock Model.” 
Studies in Conflict & Terrorism , May-June 2005, 28(3), pp. 225-235. 
Krueger, Alan B. and Maleckova, Jitka.  “Education, Poverty and Terrorism: Is There a 
Causal Connection?” Journal of Economic Perspectives , Fall 2003, 17(4), pp. 119- 
44. 
Laqueur, Walter. No End to War: Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century . New York: 
Continuum, 2003. 
Leigh, Andrew; Wolfers, Justin and Zitzewitz, Eric.  “What do Financial Markets 
Think of War in Iraq?” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) 
Working Paper No. 9587, March 2003. 
Luft, Gal.  “The Palestinian H-Bomb: Te rror’s Winning Strategy.” Foreign Affairs , 
July/August 2002, 81(4), pp. 2-7. 
_______.  “The Logic of Israel’s Targeted Killing.” Middle East Quarterly , Winter 2003, 
10(1), pp. 6-13. 
Olson, Mancur Jr.  “The Economics of Target Selection for the Combined Bomber 
Offensive.” The Royal United Services Institution Journal , November 1962, 107, pp. 
308-14. 
Pape, Robert A.  “The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism.” American Political Science 
Review , August 2003, 97(3), pp. 343-61. 

29 
Raviv, Dan and Melman, Yossi. Every Spy a Prince: The Complete History of Israel’s 
Intelligence Community . Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990. 
Rosendorff, B. Peter and Sandler, Todd.  “Too Much of a Good Thing? The Proactive 
Response Dilemma” Journal of Conflict Resolution , October 2004, 48(5), pp. 657- 
71. 
Sandler, Todd and Enders, Walter.  “What Do We Know About the Substitution Effect 
in Transnational Terrorism ?” in Andrew Silke, ed ., Researching Terrorism: Trends, 
Achievements, Failures . London: Frank Cass, 2004. 
Shimron, Gad. The Mossad and its Myth . Jerusalem: Keter, 2002 [In Hebrew]. 
Sprinzak, Ehud.  “Rational Fanatics.” Foreign Policy , September/October 2000, 120(5), 
pp. 66-73. 
Surowiecki, James. The Wisdom of Crowds .  New York: Doubleday, 2004. 
Wolfers, Justin and Zitzewitz, Eric.  “Prediction Markets.” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives , Spring 2004, 18(2), pp. 107-26. 
Zonder, Moshe. The Elite Unit of Israel . Jerusalem: Keter, 2000 [In Hebrew]. 

30 
T ABLE 1 - D ESCRIPTIVE S TATISTICS ON A SSASSINATION A TTEMPTS 
Total number September 2000 - April 2004 159 
Year 2000 (September - December) 10 
 2001 40 
 2002 56 
 2003 44 
 2004 (January - April) 9 
Location West Bank 110 
 Gaza Strip 49 
Method  Shooting (light arms) 75 
 Helicopter missiles 54 
 Explosive devices 22 
 Other 8 
Organization a Hamas 80 
 Fatah 49 
 Islamic Jihad 27 
 Other 8 
Target killed Yes 135 
 No 24 
Persons killed Combatants b  248 
 Non-combatants 69 
 Total 317 
Source: Based on a dataset compiled by the authors as described in the text. 
Notes: 
a  In some cases members of more than one organization were targeted simultaneously. 
b  Combatants are defined as members of terrorist organizations. 

31 
T ABLE 2 - A SSASSINATIONS T ARGETED AT S ENIOR M EMBERS OF T ERRORIST O RGANIZATIONS 
S UMMARY S TATISTICS 
 Political wing classification criterion 
 Least restrictive Restrictive Most restrictive 
Senior member of the political wing 15 10 8 
(killed) (10) (7) (5) 
Senior member of the military wing 24 29 31 
(killed) (23) (26) (28) 
Total 39 39 39 
(killed) (33) (33) (33) 
Notes: The political wing classification criteria are based on the opinions of four experts.  According to the least 
restrictive criterion the target of an assassination would be classified as a member of the political wing (as opposed 
to the military wing) of his organization if at least one of the experts classified him in such a way.  According to the 
more restrictive criterion the target needs at least two votes to be classified as a member of the political wing.  
According to the most restrictive criterion a target would be classified as a member of the political wing if there is 
consensus about it among the experts.  Target seniority was established by analyzing coverage in the Israeli 
newspaper The Jerusalem Post.  We define a target as senior if at least two of the following three conditions hold: 
(1) in the day after the assassination it was covered in a front page article; (2) in the day after the assassination its 
target was mentioned in more than one article; (3) the name of target was mentioned in the newspaper prior to his 
assassination. 

32 
T ABLE 3 – L IST OF A SSASSINATIONS T ARGETED AT S ENIOR M EMBERS OF 
T ERRORIST O RGANIZATIONS 
        
Political b Date Main target’s name a  Organization Killed 
L R M 
TA25 c 
11/09/2000 Hussein Abayat Fatah Yes 0 0 0 -1.33 
12/11/2000 Anwar Mahmoud Hamran Islamic Jihad Yes 0 0 0  1.58 
12/31/2000 Thabet Thabet Fatah Yes 1 1 1 -1.26 
02/13/2001 Massoud Iyyad Fatah Yes 1 0 0 -0.13 
04/05/2001 Iyad Hardan Islamic Jihad Yes 0 0 0  3.66 
06/24/2001 Osama Jawabri Fatah Yes 0 0 0 -0.33 
07/01/2001 Mohammed Besharat Hamas Yes 0 0 0 -0.04 
07/31/2001 Jamal Mansour Hamas Yes 1 1 0 -1.09 
08/22/2001 Mohammed Deif Hamas No 1 0 0 -0.27 
08/27/2001 Mustafa Zibri  PFLP d  Yes 1 1 1  0.35 
09/06/2001 Raed Karmi Fatah No 0 0 0  0.12 
10/14/2001 Abdel Rahman Hamad Hamas Yes 0 0 0 -0.58 
10/18/2001 Atef Abayat Fatah Yes 1 0 0  0.86 
11/23/2001 Mahmoud Abu Hanoud Hamas Yes 0 0 0  1.40 
12/17/2001 Yakub Idkadak Hamas Yes 0 0 0 -0.82 
01/14/2002 Raed Karmi Fatah Yes 0 0 0 -0.05 
01/22/2002 Nassim Abu-Ros Hamas Yes 0 0 0  0.67 
03/05/2002 Muhand Dirya Abu Haliwa Fatah Yes 0 0 0 -1.98 
04/05/2002 Qais Adwan Hamas Yes 0 0 0  2.87 
04/10/2002 Akram al-Atrash Hamas Yes 0 0 0  1.73 
07/23/2002 Salah Shehadeh Hamas Yes 1 0 0 -1.76 
08/06/2002 Ali Ajouri Fatah Yes 0 0 0  0.79 
09/26/2002 Muhammad Deif Hamas No 1 0 0  0.55 
11/09/2002 Iyad Sawalha Islamic Jihad Yes 0 0 0  1.18 
02/17/2003 Riad Abu Zeid Hamas Yes 0 0 0  2.82 
03/08/2003 Ibrahim al-Makadme Hamas Yes 1 1 0 -0.72 
03/18/2003 Nasser Asida Hamas Yes 0 0 0  4.00 
04/29/2003 Nidal Salama PFLP d  Yes 0 0 0  2.53 
05/08/2003 Iyad al-Bek Hamas Yes 0 0 0 -0.24 
06/10/2003 Abdel Aziz Rantisi Hamas No 1 1 1 -1.38 
06/11/2003 Tito Massoud Hamas Yes 0 0 0 -0.60 
08/14/2003 Muhammad Sider Islamic Jihad Yes 0 0 0 -0.75 
08/21/2003 Ismail Abu Shanab Hamas Yes 1 1 1 -1.10 
09/06/2003 Ahmed Yassin Hamas No 1 1 1 -2.72 
09/10/2003 Mahmoud Zahar Hamas No 1 1 1 -1.70 
09/25/2003 Diab Rahim Shweike Islamic Jihad Yes 0 0 0 -0.29 
12/25/2003 Makhled Hamed Islamic Jihad Yes 0 0 0  1.84 
03/22/2004 Ahmed Yassin Hamas Yes 1 1 1 -1.79 
04/17/2004 Abdel Aziz Rantisi Hamas Yes 1 1 1  0.00 
a  In some cases several individuals were targeted simultaneously. 
b  Political wing classification criteria (L = Least restrictive, R = Restrictive, M = Most 
restrictive).  See the note in Table 2 for details. 
c  Percentage change in the Tel-Aviv 25 stock market index. 
d  PFLP = Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. 

33 
T ABLE 4 A - M ARKET R EACTIONS TO A SSASSINATIONS 
Dependent variable: percentage change in the Tel Aviv 25 stock market index 
 Distinction between members of political and military wings 
 None None Political wing  classification criterion 
   Least 
restrictive 
Restrictive Most 
restrictive 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
All assassinations -0.00 
(0.14) 
Junior (military) target  -0.07 
(0.16) 
-0.07 
(0.16) 
-0.07 
(0.16) 
-0.07 
(0.16) 
Senior target 0.16 
(0.25) 
Senior political target -0.71 *** 
(0.25) 
-1.09 *** 
(0.27) 
-1.11 *** 
(0.33) 
Senior military target 0.70 ** 
(0.32) 
0.59 ** 
(0.27) 
0.49 * 
(0.27) 
Percentage change in NASDAQ 0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.14 *** 
(0.02) 
0.15 *** 
(0.02) 
0.14 *** 
(0.03) 
Constant 0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
R 2  0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 
Observations 881 881 881 881 881 
Notes: The wing classification and seniority criteria are described in a note in Table 2.   Estimated by ordinary least squares . 
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.  * , ** , ***  represent statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels in 
a two-sided t-test. 

34 
T ABLE 4 B - M ARKET R EACTIONS TO A SSASSINATIONS , T ARGET K ILLED 
Dependent variable: percentage change in the Tel Aviv 25 stock market index 
 Distinction between members of political and military wings 
 None None Political wing  classification criterion 
   Least 
restrictive 
Restrictive Most 
restrictive 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
All assassinations 0.08 
(0.15) 
Junior (military) target -0.02 
(0.17) 
-0.02 
(0.17) 
-0.02 
(0.17) 
-0.02 
(0.17) 
Senior target 0.34 
(0.27) 
Senior political target -0.54 ** 
(0.25) 
-0.73 *** 
(0.26) 
-0.63 * 
(0.35) 
Senior military target 0.72 ** 
(0.33) 
0.63 ** 
(0.30) 
0.51 * 
(0.29) 
Percentage change in NASDAQ 0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.14 *** 
(0.02) 
0.15 *** 
(0.02) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
Constant -0.00 
(0.05) 
-0.00 
(0.05) 
-0.00 
(0.05) 
-0.00 
(0.05) 
-0.00 
(0.05) 
R 2  0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 
Observations 881 881 881 881 881 
Notes: see notes for Table 4 A . 

35 
T ABLE 4 C - M ARKET R EACTIONS TO A SSASSINATIONS OF S ENIOR T ARGETS 
(Combining Media Coverage and Expert Opinion Seniority Criteria) 
Dependent variable: percentage change in the Tel Aviv 25 stock market index 
 Distinction between members of political and military wings 
 None Political wing classification criterion 
Least 
restrictive Restrictive Most 
restrictive 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) 
Junior (military) target -0.02 
(0.15) 
-0.02 
(0.15) 
-0.02 
(0.15) 
-0.02 
(0.15) 
Senior target 0.04 
(0.31) 
Senior political target  -0.71 *** 
(0.25) 
-1.08 *** 
(0.27) 
-1.11 *** 
(0.33) 
Senior military target  0.90 * 
(0.50) 
0.66 * 
(0.38) 
0.50 
(0.36) 
Percentage change in NASDAQ 0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.14 *** 
(0.02) 
0.15 *** 
(0.02) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
Constant 0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01- 
(0.05) 
R 2  0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 
Observations 881 881 881 881 
Notes: see notes for Table 4 A .  An assassination target is defined as senior only if he satisfies both the media 
coverage and the experts\ ranking seniority criteria 

36 
T ABLE 5 - D ETERMINANTS OF THE M ARKET R EACTIONS TO A SSASSINATIONS 
Dependent variable: percentage change in the Tel Aviv 25 stock market index 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Junior (military) target -0.17 
(0.16) 
-0.01 
(0.15) 
-0.09 
(0.16) 
-0.05 
(0.16) 
-0.07 
(0.16) 
-0.13 
(0.16) 
Senior political target -1.16 *** 
(0.29) 
-0.98 *** 
(0.28) 
-1.12 *** 
(0.28) 
-0.89 *** 
(0.28) 
-1.33 *** 
(0.30) 
-1.14 *** 
(0.40) 
Senior military target 0.51 * 
(0.27) 
0.66 ** 
(0.28) 
0.56 ** 
(0.28) 
0.70 ** 
(0.28) 
0.89 * 
(0.47) 
1.08 ** 
(0.43) 
Same day assassination (military targets) 0.77 ** 
(0.39) 
0.86 ** 
(0.35) 
Same day terrorist attack -1.03 
(0.63) 
-1.03 
(0.65) 
Major terrorist attack  in previous week 0.15 
(0.38) 
0.24 
(0.34) 
Number of noncombatants killed  -0.13 *** 
(0.04) 
-0.17 *** 
(0.05) 
Senior political target, early period     0.82 * 
(0.48) 
0.90 * 
(0.48) 
Senior military target killed, early period     -0.50 
(0.56) 
-0.73 
(0.53) 
Percentage change in NASDAQ 0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.14 *** 
(0.02) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
0.15 *** 
(0.03) 
Constant 0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
R 2  0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.07 
Observations 881 881 881 881 881 881 
Notes: Estimated by ordinary least squares.  Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.  * , ** , ***  represent 
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels in a two-sided t-test. 

37 
T ABLE 6 A - M ARKET R EACTIONS TO M AJOR T ERRORISM -R ELATED E VENTS 
A GGREGATE I NDICES 
Dependent variable: percentage change in the stock market index 
 Tel Aviv 25 Tel Aviv 100 Tel Aviv general 
Assassination: senior political target -1.02 *** 
(0.28) 
-0.89 *** 
(0.25) 
-0.57 ** 
(0.25) 
Assassination: senior military target 0.63 ** 
(0.28) 
0.60 ** 
(0.24) 
0.48 ** 
(0.20) 
Major terrorist attack -1.09 *** 
(0.20) 
-0.98 *** 
(0.18) 
-0.79 *** 
(0.15) 
Percentage change in NASDAQ 0.15 *** 
(0.02) 
0.13 *** 
(0.02) 
0.11 *** 
(0.02) 
Constant 0.05 
(0.05) 
0.05 
(0.05) 
0.05 
(0.04) 
R 2  0.08 0.08 0.07 
Observations 881 881 881 
Notes: Estimated by ordinary least squares.  Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.  * , ** , ***  represent 
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels in a two-sided t-test. 

38 
T ABLE 6 B - M ARKET R EACTIONS TO M AJOR T ERRORISM -R ELATED E VENTS 
S ECTORAL I NDICES 
Dependent variable: percentage change in the sectoral stock market index 
Technology Banks Mortgage 
banks 
Insurance Commerce, 
services 
Real estate, 
construction, 
agriculture 
Industry 
Assassination: senior political target -0.64 
(0.65) 
-0.17 
(0.22) 
-0.45 
(0.41) 
-0.66 ** 
(0.30) 
0.27 
(0.38) 
-0.05 
(0.10) 
0.11 
(0.12) 
Assassination: senior military target 0.13 
(0.18) 
0.11 
(0.14) 
0.05 
(0.15) 
-0.16 
(0.11) 
0.06 
(0.09) 
0.06 
(0.08) 
-0.08 
(0.09) 
Major terrorist attack 0.22 
(0.13) 
-0.24 ** 
(0.12) 
0.19 
(0.28) 
-0.23 * 
(0.14) 
-0.05 
(0.09) 
-0.00 
(0.05) 
0.16 
(0.10) 
Percentage change in Tel Aviv general 1.22 *** 
(0.04) 
1.08 *** 
(0.03) 
0.75 *** 
(0.05) 
1.15 *** 
(0.04) 
1.07 *** 
(0.02) 
0.53 *** 
(0.02) 
0.97 *** 
(0.02) 
Constant -0.07 ** 
(0.03) 
0.00 
(0.03) 
0.05 
(0.04) 
0.06 * 
(0.03) 
-0.03 * 
(0.02) 
0.00 
(0.02) 
0.03 
(0.02) 
R 2  0.69 0.70 0.39 0.68 0.83 0.60 0.78 
Observations 881 881 881 881 881 881 881 
Notes: see notes for Table 6 A . 

39 
T ABLE 6 C - M ARKET R EACTIONS TO M AJOR T ERRORISM -R ELATED E VENTS 
S TOCKS OF S PECIFIC F IRMS 
Dependent variable: percentage change in stock price of selected firm 
 Blue Square Magal 
Assassination: senior political target -2.52 ***  5.58 
(0.57) (3.55) 
Assassination: senior military target 1.39 *  -1.55 * 
(0.78) (0.83) 
Major terrorist attack -0.79 *  2.70 *** 
(0.45) (1.00) 
Percentage change in aggregate stock market index 0.25 ***  0.09 
(0.08) (0.15) 
Constant 0.10 0.16 
(0.11) (0.20) 
R 2  0.05 0.03 
Observations 533 796 
Notes: see notes for Table 6 A .  The aggregate stock market index is Standard and Poor 500 for 
column (1) and NASDAQ for column (2).  The number of observations in each regression varies 
because the stocks do not trade every day. 

40 
T ABLE 7 - S TOCK M ARKET B EHAVIOR A FTER M AJOR T ERRORISM -R ELATED E VENTS 
Dependent variable: percentage change in the Tel Aviv 25 stock market index 
 Assassination: senior 
political target 
Assassination: senior 
military target 
Major terrorist attack 
 Coefficient Standard 
error 
Coefficient Standard 
Error 
Coefficient Standard 
Error 
t -1.08 ***  0.31 0.60 **  0.27 -1.25 ***  0.22 
t+1 -0.01 0.36 0.07 0.39 0.10 0.21 
t+2 -0.39 0.39 0.05 0.26 0.17 0.22 
t+3 0.08 0.61 -0.03 0.22 -0.10 0.27 
t+4 0.17 0.31 0.58 *  0.33 -0.32 0.26 
t+5 0.11 0.40 0.42 *  0.23 0.38 0.33 
t+6 -0.17 0.27 -0.20 0.29 -0.17 0.24 
t+7 0.85 **  0.40 -0.55 **  0.23 0.05 0.22 
t+8 -0.16 0.33 0.19 0.34 -0.08 0.26 
t+9 0.42 0.34 0.20 0.28 0.13 0.19 
t+10 0.02 0.37 0.35 0.33 0.28 0.22 
NASDAQ 0.14 ***  0.03     
Constant 0.01 0.08     
R 2  0.15      
Observations 862      
Notes:  The set of explanatory variables includes contemporaneous values and 10 lags of the dummy 
variables for the three terrorism-related events, the percentage change in NASDAQ, and a constant. The 
regressions were estimated by ordinary least squares with robust standard errors.  * , ** , ***  represent 
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels in a two-sided t-test. 

41 
T ABLE 8 - I SRAELI AND P ALESTINIAN S TOCK M ARKET R EACTIONS TO M AJOR T ERRORISM - 
R ELATED E VENTS 
Percentage change in the 
Tel Aviv 25 index (Israel) a 
Percentage  change in the 
Al-Quds index (Palestine) 
Assassination-political leader -1.02 ***  -2.08 *** 
(0.28) (0.52) 
Assassination-military leader 0.63 **  0.42 
(0.28) (0.52) 
Major terrorist attack -1.09 ***  -1.19 *** 
(0.20) (0.37) 
Percentage change in NASDAQ 0.15 ***  0.03 
(0.02) (0.03) 
Constant 0.05 0.07 
(0.05) (0.07) 
R 2  0.08 0.06 
Observations 881 456 
Notes:  Estimated by ordinary least squares.  Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.  * , ** , *** 
represent statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels in a two-sided t-test. 
a  Replicates results from column (1) of Table 6 A . 

Figure 1 
Israeli Civilians Killed in Palestinian Terrorist Attacks 
September 2000 - April 2004 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
Within Israel's 1967 borders Inside the Occupied Territories (Including East Jerusalem) 
Source: B'tselem - The Israeli Information Center for Human Rights in the Occupied Territories 

Figure 2 
Histogram of Stock Market Reactions to Assassination Attempts 
September 2000 - April 2004 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
-6 to -5 -5 to -4 -4 to -3 -3 to -2 -2 to -1 -1 to 0 0 to 1 1 to 2 2 to 3 3 to 4 4 to 5 
TA25 percentage change 
Source: see text 

Figure 3 
The Dynamics of Market Reactions to Major Terrorism-Related Events 
-2.0 
-1.5 
-1.0 
-0.5 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7 t+8 t+9 t+10 
assassination: senior military target 
assassination: senior political target 
major terrorist attack 
Source: see text. 

Figure 4 
Israeli and Palestinian Stock Markets 
January 2001 - April 2004 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120 
Israel (Tel Aviv 25 Index) Palestine (Al-Quds Index) 
Source: See text 
Note: the figure displays data for all trading days in which either index is available 