FEBRUARY 2024
IOP-2024-U-037683-Final Approved for public release: distribution unlimited. © 2024 CNA Corporation
Strategic Stability and 
the Ukraine War 
Implications of Conventional 
Missile Technologies
Fabian Hoffmann

Abstract
The war in Ukraine represents the first major inter-state conflict involving the widespread employment of long-range 
strike weapons and missile defense. The implications resulting from the deployment and use of these weapon systems 
extend beyond the Ukrainian theater and affect the broader strategic competition between Russia and NATO. This paper 
explores those implications, asking how the deployment and use of long-range strike weapons and missile defense 
systems in Ukraine affect NATO-Russia strategic stability. I argue that the missile war in Ukraine affects the prospects 
of strategic stability by shaping Russian and NATO force posture and strategy development, and helping to predict 
the technological trajectories of offensive and defensive missile capabilities. In the medium to long term, this can put 
additional pressure on arms control and crisis stability between Russia and NATO.
This report is part of a series generously funded by a grant from the Carnegie Corporation of New York. 
CNA’s Occasional Paper series is published by CNA, but the opinions expressed are those of the author and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of CNA or the client.
Approved for public release. Unlimited distribution.
This work was performed under Specific Authority Contract No. G-19-56503.
Cover image: Launch of Iskander missile. Russian Ministry of Defense.
This document may contain materials protected by the Fair Use guidelines of Section 107 of the Copyright Act, for 
research purposes only. Any such content is copyrighted and not owned by CNA. All rights and credits go directly to 
content’s rightful owner.
Approved by:  February 2024
Colleen “Kelly” McCue, Acting Research Program Director 
Countering Threats and Challenges 
Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division
© 2024 CNA Corporation
Request additional copies of this document through inquiries@cna.org. 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   i  | www.cna.org   
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction .....................................................................................1
Defining Strategic Stability ............................................................... 3
The Use of Advanced Conventional Weapons in Ukraine ................... 5
Long-range strike weapons ..................................................................................................5
Force employment and effectiveness ...............................................................................7
Missile defense .........................................................................................................................10
Implications for Strategic Stability .................................................. 15
First-strike instability ..............................................................................................................15
Credibility of Russian missile doctrine ............................................................................17
Feasibility of conventional counterforce ........................................................................19
Conclusion .....................................................................................23
References .................................................................................... 24

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   ii  | www.cna.org   
PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   1  | www.cna.org   
INTRODUCTION
The Russia-Ukraine war marks the first instance of 
a major inter-state war involving the large-scale 
deployment and use of conventional ballistic 
and cruise missile technology. As a result, 
the Ukrainian theater has become a 
test bed for missile technology 
and strategy and has revealed 
the strengths and weaknesses 
of contemporary missile forces 
and doctrines. The implications 
of the deployment and use of 
offensive conventional missile 
capabilities and defenses 
against such capabilities in 
Ukraine extend beyond the 
battlefield and affect the 
broader strategic competition 
between Russia and the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO). This paper explores 
those implications, asking 
how the deployment and use 
of long-range strike weapons 
and missile defense systems in 
Ukraine affects Russia-NATO 
strategic stability. 
In this analysis, long-range strike weapons include 
Russian, Ukrainian, and Western conventional 
cruise and ballistic missiles as well as conventional 
long-range drones that have been used by both 
sides to engage targets at standoff range, including 
deep inside the adversary’s homeland territory. The 
1  Fabian Hoffmann and William Alberque, Non‑Nuclear Weapons with Strategic Effect: New Tools of Warfare? , 
International Institute for Strategic Studies, Mar. 2022, https://www.iiss.org/research-paper/2022/03/
non-nuclear-weapons-with-strategic-effect-new-tools-of-warfare/.
meaning of standoff range  is context dependent 
and relates to the distance between adversaries. In 
the context of the Russia-Ukraine war (and in 
the broader European context), standoff 
implies the ability to engage targets 
several hundred kilometers 
behind the front line.1 In terms 
of missile defense, this analysis 
considers Russian, Ukrainian, 
and Western nonstrategic air 
and missile defense forces that 
have been deployed around 
the front line and deeper inland 
to protect military and civilian 
targets. 
The paper is structured as 
follows. In section one, we 
briefly discuss the concept 
of strategic stability, 
conceptualizing it in terms of 
crisis and arms race stability. 
We also draw attention to the 
effect of long-range strike 
weapons and missile defense 
on strategic stability and 
outline the implications that 
the deployment and use of conventional missile 
technology in Ukraine can have for strategic stability. 
In section two, we analyze offensive and defensive 
developments in the missile domain in Ukraine. We 
then briefly describe the different long-range strike 
and missile defense systems that have been employed 
The implications of the 
deployment and use of 
offensive conventional 
missile capabilities 
and defenses against 
such capabilities in 
Ukraine extend beyond 
the battlefield and 
affect the broader 
strategic competition 
between Russia and the 
North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO).


Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   2  | www.cna.org   
by Ukraine and Russia and assess their effectiveness 
(and lack thereof) in the war so far. Section three 
analyzes the medium- to long-term implications of 
the deployment and use of long-range strike weapons 
and missile defense systems in Ukraine for strategic 
stability. Demonstrated levels of effectiveness and 
ineffectiveness of these weapon systems shape 
the prospects of crisis and arms control stability as 
well as the general likelihood of strategic nuclear 
exchanges between NATO and Russia. 
Two caveats follow. First, the Russia-Ukraine war is still unfolding. 
As such, this analysis represents a snapshot of the events up until 
January 2024. As the war continues and states adapt, assessments 
regarding the effectiveness of offensive and defensive missile 
technologies are subject to change. Second, this analysis relies exclusively 
on open-source information, which may lack accuracy or may be subject 
to misinformation and disinformation in a contested information space, 
especially when the source is one of the conflict parties and veracity cannot be 
independently verified. The report clearly states when this occurs. 
CAVEATS


Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   3  | www.cna.org   
Strategic stability as a concept has been pervasive in 
theory and practice. In its broadest sense, strategic 
stability refers to the absence of armed conflict 
between states that possess nuclear weapons. More 
narrowly, the concept can be defined in terms of 
crisis stability and arms race stability. Crisis stability 
pertains to a state in which neither side of a nuclear 
conflict dyad is motivated to use nuclear weapons 
first. Arms race stability, in contrast, refers to a state 
in which neither side has an incentive to increase its 
nuclear arsenal in terms of quantity or quality.2
The concept of strategic stability has traditionally 
been centered on the nuclear dimension of great 
power competition, particularly the number of 
strategic nuclear warheads deployed by each side. 3 
During the Cold War and especially in more recent 
times, the concept has been broadened to include 
a conventional dimension as well. Russian analysts 
and officials, in particular, have emphasized the role 
of offensive and defensive advanced conventional 
weapons for strategic stability.4
Offensive advanced conventional weapons 
encompass a range of long-range strike capabilities. 
2  James Acton, “Reclaiming Strategic Stability,” in Strategic Stability: Contending Interpretations, ed. Elbridge A. Colby and Michael 
S. Gerson (Carlisle, PA: US Army War College Press, 2013), 117–146, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA572928.pdf. 
3  Elbridge A. Colby, “Defining Strategic Stability: Reconciling Stability and Deterrence,” in Strategic Stability: Contending Interpretations, 
ed. Eldridge A. Colby and Michael S. Gerson (Carlisle, PA: US Army War College Press, 2013), 47–84, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/
ADA572928.pdf.
4  James Acton, “Russia and Strategic Conventional Weapons: Concerns and Responses,” Nonproliferation Review 22, no. 2 (2015), 
pp. 141–154, https://doi.org/10.1080/10736700.2015.1105434; Dennis M. Gormley, “US Advanced Conventional Systems and 
Conventional Prompt Global Strike Ambitions: Assessing the Risks, Benefits, and Arms Control Implications,” Nonproliferation Review 
22, no. 2 (2015), pp. 123–139, https://doi.org/10.1080/10736700.2015.1117735; Dmitry Stefanovich, “Proliferation and Threats of 
Reconnaissance-Strike Systems: A Russian Perspective,” Nonproliferation Review 27, no. 1–3 (2020), pp. 97–107, https://doi.org/10.10
80/10736700.2020.1795370.
This category includes conventional cruise and 
ballistic missiles as well as conventionally armed 
hypersonic boost-glide vehicles. Because of 
substantial advancements in guidance, propulsion, 
and warhead technologies in recent years, these 
weapon systems now have the potential to pose 
a credible threat to critical nuclear infrastructure 
and nuclear assets, including nuclear missile silos 
DEFINING STRATEGIC STABILITY
Because of substantial 
advancements in guidance, 
propulsion, and warhead 
technologies in recent years, 
these weapon systems now 
have the potential to pose 
a credible threat to critical 
nuclear infrastructure and 
nuclear assets, including 
nuclear missile silos and 
mobile missile launchers.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   4  | www.cna.org   
and mobile missile launchers. 5 As such, long-range 
strike weapons can complement and upgrade the 
first-strike capability of existing nuclear arsenals. 
This interaction may undermine crisis stability by 
heightening incentives to preempt the adversary in 
a nuclear crisis and increase pressures to build up 
one’s nuclear arsenal to retain sufficient survivability.6  
Concerns surrounding defensive advanced 
conventional weapons have traditionally centered 
on strategic missile defense. Strategic missile 
defense can reinforce the counterforce capabilities 
of nuclear weapon states by threatening to intercept 
any warheads that may have survived the nuclear first 
strike. More recently, Russia has made the argument 
that not only strategic missile defense but also 
operational-tactical missile defense integrated into 
the broader missile defense network can undermine 
this stability. 7 Because strategic and nonstrategic 
missile defenses may undermine the guaranteed 
retaliatory capability of a nuclear weapon state, 
they may incentivize the state to quantitatively or 
qualitatively improve its nuclear arsenal in an effort 
to maintain a credible nuclear capability, thus driving 
arms race instability. 8 As such, from a strategic 
stability perspective, deployments of missile defense 
5  Fabian Hoffmann, Cruise Missile Proliferation: Trends, Strategic Implications, and Counterproliferation , 
European Leadership Network, Mar. 2021, https://www.europeanleadershipnetwork.org/report/
cruise-missile-proliferation-trends-strategic-implications-and-counterproliferation/; Fabian Hoffmann, Strategic 
Non‑Nuclear Weapons and Strategic Stability – Promoting Trust Through Technical Understanding , Fondation 
pour la Recherche Stratégique, Nov. 2021, https://www.frstrategie.org/en/programs/npt-and-the-p5-process/
strategic-non-nuclear-weapons-and-strategic-stability-promoting-trust-through-technical-understanding-2021. 
6  Andrew Futter and Benjamin Zala, “Strategic Non-Nuclear Weapons and the Onset of a Third Nuclear Age,” European Journal of 
International Security 6, no. 3 (2021), pp. 257–277, https://doi.org/10.1017/eis.2021.2.
7  Nicholas Khoo and Reuben Steff, “‘This Program Will Not Be a Threat to Them:’ Ballistic Missile Defense and US Relations with 
Russia and China,” Defense & Security Analysis 30, no. 1 (2014), pp. 17–28, https://doi.org/10.1080/14751798.2013.864869. 
8  Andrew Futter and Benjamin Zala, “Advanced US Conventional Weapons and Nuclear Disarmament: Why the Obama Plan Won’t 
Work,” Nonproliferation Review 20, no. 1 (2013), pp. 107–122, https://doi.org/10.1080/10736700.2012.761790. 
9  For an analysis of these short-term implications, see Mary Chesnut, US/NATO‑Russian Strategic Stability and the War in Ukraine, 
CNA, IOP-2023-U-035792-Final, June 2023, https://www.cna.org/reports/2023/06/us-nato-russian-strategic-stability-in-ukraine. 
have generally been considered controversial and 
not conducive to a stable nuclear balance.
The Russia-Ukraine war creates short-, medium-, 
and long-term implications for strategic stability. 
The short-term implications center on the likelihood 
of the war expanding to a broader conflict between 
Russia and NATO, which may eventually escalate to 
the use of nuclear weapons. 9 Although these risks 
are real, they appear to have been managed by both 
sides, and a broader NATO-Russia conflict as a result 
of accidental, inadvertent, or deliberate escalation—
although not impossible—appears less likely. 
The implications of the war for strategic stability in 
the medium to long term revolve around the lessons 
and insights that NATO and Russia can draw from 
the realities of the war regarding force posture 
and strategy development and the technological 
trajectories of weapon systems that the war helps 
predict. The following sections consider these 
medium- and long-term implications for strategic 
stability that result from the deployment of offensive 
and defensive advanced conventional weapons in 
Ukraine, in particular conventional long-range strike 
weapons and nonstrategic or tactical-operational 
missile defense. 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   5  | www.cna.org   
Both Russia and Ukraine have employed substantial 
long-range strike and missile defense assets 
throughout the war. This section discusses the 
weapon systems used on both sides as well as their 
effectiveness in this war so far. The following section 
dives into the strategic stability implications of 
their use. 
Long‑range strike weapons
Throughout the war, Russia has employed a breadth 
of long-range strike capabilities in Ukraine, including 
land-attack and anti-ship cruise missiles, ground- 
and air-launched ballistic missiles, and long-range 
drones. 
The backbone of Russia’s long-range strike arsenal 
is its land-attack cruise missile arsenal. This arsenal 
consists of older cruise missile systems, such as the 
Kh-555 (RS-AS-22 Kluge), as well as more modern 
and advanced capabilities, including the Kh-101 
(RS-AS-23a Kodiak) and 3M-14 Kalibr (RS-SS-N-30a 
Sagaris).10 These air- and sea-launched land-attack 
10  “3M-14 Kalibr (SS-N-30A),” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project, Aug. 11, 2016, last modified Mar. 7, 2022, https://
missilethreat.csis.org/missile/ss-n-30a/; “Kh-55 (AS-15),” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project, Aug. 10, 2016, last modified 
Aug. 2, 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/kh-55/; “Kh-101/Kh-102,” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project, Oct. 26, 
2017, last modified July 31, 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/kh-101-kh-102/.
11  “Russia’s Kh-22 – the Missile Ukraine Has Yet to Shoot Down,” Kyiv Post, Dec. 29, 2023, https://www.kyivpost.com/post/26102. 
12  Ivana Kottasová et al., “Ukrainian Air Defenses in Odesa Outgunned as Russia Targets Global Grain Supply,” CNN, July 21, 
2023, https://edition.cnn.com/2023/07/20/europe/ukraine-air-defenses-odesa-russia-strikes-grain-intl/index.html; “Ukraine 
Unable to Shoot Down Kh-22 Missiles, Says Air Force,” The New Voice of Ukraine, Jan. 15, 2023, https://english.nv.ua/nation/
air-defense-cannot-shoot-down-russian-kh-22-missiles-ukraine-war-50297621.html. 
cruise missiles reportedly have a range greater than 
2,000 kilometers and carry a payload of several 
hundred kilograms. Russia has also employed 
repurposed anti-ship cruise missiles in land-attack 
roles. These missiles include the Cold War Kh-22 
(RS-AS-4 Kitchen) anti-ship cruise missile and 
the more modern P-800 Oniks (SS-N-26 Strobile) 
supersonic anti-ship cruise missile that have been 
used to engage civilian and military targets on 
land.11 Although these missiles are less accurate 
against land-based targets because of their lack of 
suitable terminal guidance, Ukraine has struggled to 
deal with them because of their supersonic terminal 
speed.12 
In addition to cruise missiles, Russia’s ground and 
air forces have employed ballistic and quasi-ballistic 
missiles in Ukraine. These weapons include the 
9K729 Iskander-M (RS-SS-26 Stone) short-range 
ballistic missile with a range of 500 kilometers and 
the medium-range Kh-47M2 Kinzhal (RS-AS-24a 
Killjoy) air-launched ballistic missile with a range of 
THE USE OF ADVANCED 
CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS IN 
UKRAINE

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   6  | www.cna.org   
1,500 to 2,000 kilometers.13 Russia has also employed 
repurposed S-300 air defense missiles in land-attack 
roles. Although comparatively inaccurate and 
lacking in firepower, these missiles have been used 
to saturate Ukraine’s missile defense network.14
Finally, the war has seen the large-scale 
employment of Russian Geran-1 and Geran-2 
one-way attack drones, which are rebranded and 
now license-produced versions of the Iranian 
Shahed-131 and Shahed-136 long-range drones. 15 
These long-range drones with an official range of up 
to 2,000 kilometers are equipped with a 40-kilogram 
warhead that, although relatively small, has been 
able to cause substantial damage to Ukrainian 
civilian infrastructure facilities.16 
Ukraine’s long-range strike arsenal has largely 
consisted of Western-made long-range strike 
weapons and is complemented by a small but 
growing number of Soviet-legacy and domestically 
produced long-range strike weapons.
Ukraine first started to receive Western long-range 
strike weapons in May 2023 when the United 
Kingdom delivered British Storm Shadow 
air-launched cruise missiles. 17 In July 2023, France 
13  “Kh-47M2 Kinzhal,” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project, Mar. 27, 2018, last modified Mar. 19, 2022, https://missilethreat.
csis.org/missile/kinzhal/. 
14  Thomas Newdick, “Russia Now Firing S-300 Surface-to-Air Missiles at Land Targets in Ukraine: Official,” The War Zone, July 8, 2022, 
https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/russia-now-firing-s-300-surface-to-air-missiles-at-land-targets-in-ukraine-official. 
15  US Defense Intelligence Agency, Iranian UAVs in Ukraine: A Visual Comparison , Aug. 2023, https://www.dia.mil/Portals/110/
Documents/News/Military_Power_Publications/UAV_Book.pdf. 
16  Howard Altman, “Russia’s Shahed-136 Drones Now Feature Tungsten Shrapnel,” The War Zone, Sept. 28, 2023, https://www.
thedrive.com/the-war-zone/russias-shahed-136-drones-now-feature-tungsten-shrapnel. 
17  Jim Sciutto, “Britain Has Delivered Long-range ‘Storm Shadow’ Cruise Missiles to Ukraine Ahead of Expected Counteroffensive, 
Sources Say,” CNN, May 12, 2023, https://edition.cnn.com/2023/05/11/politics/uk-storm-shadow-cruise-missiles-ukraine/index.html.  
18  Barbara Gabel, “‘A Strong Gesture:’ French Delivery of SCALP Missiles to Ukraine 
Marks Shift in Western Strategy,” France 24, July 13, 2023, https://www.france24.com/en/
europe/20230713-a-strong-gesture-french-delivery-of-scalp-missiles-to-ukraine-marks-shift-in-western-strategy. 
19  “SCALP EG/Storm Shadow/SCALP Naval/Black Shaheen/APACHE AP,” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project, Dec. 2, 2016, 
last modified Sept. 20, 2023, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/apache-ap/.  
20  Thomas Newdick, “SU-24 Fencer Is Ukraine’s Storm Shadow Missile Carrier,” The War Zone, May 24, 2023, https://www.thedrive.
com/the-war-zone/su-24-fencer-is-ukraines-storm-shadow-missile-carrier. 
followed suit and supplied identical cruise missiles, 
known in Paris under the name SCALP-EG. 18 Storm 
Shadow/SCALP-EG are relatively modern long-range 
strike weapons that are in use in several air forces 
around the world. They have a range of around 
560 kilometers and carry a powerful 450-kilogram 
multi-effect penetrator warhead .19 Storm Shadow/
SCALP-EG have been integrated with and launched 
from Ukrainian SU-24M (Fencer-D) aircraft. 20 More 
recently, Ukraine has started to receive MGM-140 M39 
Block 1 ATACMS short-range maneuvering missiles 
Finally, the war 
has seen the 
large-scale 
employment of 
Russian Geran-1 
and Geran-2 one-way attack 
drones, which are rebranded and 
now license-produced versions 
of the Iranian Shahed-131 and 
Shahed-136 long-range drones.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   7  | www.cna.org   
from the United States. 21 These ground-launched 
quasi-ballistic missiles have a range of around 165 
kilometers and carry a cluster ammunition warhead 
capable of dispersing 950 bomblets over a target 
area.22 
In addition to Western long-range strike weapons, 
Ukraine also possessed a relatively small arsenal 
of Soviet-legacy systems at the start of the war in 
the form of 9K79 Tochka-U short-range ballistic 
missiles, which have been employed against a 
range of Russian targets. 23 Ukraine has also used a 
small number of domestically produced Neptune 
anti-ship cruise missiles for both maritime and 
land-attack purposes.24 Finally, Ukraine has achieved 
domestic production of long-range drones, which 
have been used in multiple instances to target 
locations deep inside Russia.25
Force employment and 
effectiveness
The effectiveness of Russian and Ukrainian 
long-range strike weapons in the war has been a 
mixed bag on both sides. Russia’s employment of 
long-range strike weapons has been plagued by 
several issues from the outset of the campaign, 
including poor force employment and mission 
21  “US-Supplied ATACMS Enter the Ukraine War,” Reuters, Oct. 19, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/
atacms-us-may-send-ukraine-their-cluster-bomb-payloads-2023-10-19/. 
22  “MGM-140 Army Tactical Missile System (ATACMS),” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project, Nov. 30, 2016, last modified July 
31, 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/atacms/. 
23  David Axe, “After a Six-Month Lull, the Ukrainians Are Lobbing Tochka Ballistic Missiles Again,” Forbes, Nov. 23, 2023, https://www.
forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2023/11/23/after-a-six-month-lull-the-ukrainians-are-lobbing-tochka-ballistic-missiles-again/. 
24  Mikhail Zhirohov, “Ukraine Adopts Neptune Coastal Defence Missile,” Janes, Aug. 27, 2020, https://www.janes.com/defence-news/
news-detail/ukraine-adopts-neptune-coastal-defence-missile. 
25  Mark Jacobsen, “Ukraine’s Drone Strikes Are a Window into the Future of Warfare,” Atlantic Council, Sept. 14, 2023, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/ukraines-drone-strikes-are-a-window-into-the-future-of-warfare/. 
26  Justin Bronk, “Is the Russian Air Force Actually Incapable of Complex Air Operations?,” RUSI, Mar. 4, 2022, https://www.rusi.org/
explore-our-research/publications/rusi-defence-systems/russian-air-force-actually-incapable-complex-air-operations. 
27  Paul Sonne et al., “Battle For Kyiv: Ukrainian Valor, Russian Blunders Combined to Save the Capital,” Washington Post, Aug. 24, 
2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/interactive/2022/kyiv-battle-ukraine-survival/.  
28  William Alberque et al., Russia’s War in Ukraine: Ballistic and Cruise Trajectories, International Institute for Strategic Studies, Oct. 
2023, https://www.iiss.org/research-paper/2023/10/russias-war-in-ukraine-ballistic-and-cruise-trajectories/. 
planning; qualitative deficiencies in Russian missiles; 
the inability to deploy a functioning missile kill 
chain by integrating actionable intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) data; and an 
initial lack of sufficient stockpiles for a protracted 
missile campaign.
Russia began its invasion of Ukraine by launching 
a barrage of conventional cruise and ballistic 
missiles that targeted critical military infrastructure, 
in particular airfields and air defense sides, in an 
effort to establish air supremacy early in the conflict. 
Russian missiles managed to hit some targets but 
were unable to systematically degrade Ukraine’s 
missile defense network at the outset of the conflict 
and unable to ground and destroy a substantial part 
of Ukraine’s military aviation assets. 26 Reportedly, 
Russia was unable to retarget some of its long-range 
strike weapons after enemy air defense assets were 
moved at the last minute from previously known 
locations.27 In addition, Russia’s opening salvo 
revealed inaccuracies in Russian long-range strike 
weapons, with pictures indicating several near misses 
of Russian missiles.28 
Russia initially employed long-range strike weapons 
with relative restraint, especially when compared to 
past high-intensity wars in which significant missile 
assets were used early to destroy crucial enemy 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   8  | www.cna.org   
targets to facilitate the subsequent ground invasion.29 
This restraint is surprising considering that Russian 
doctrine, in principle, provides for the large-scale 
employment of long-range strike weapons against 
military and critical civilian 
targets early. 30 Russia’s initial 
restraint may be explained 
by a lack of mission planning 
and target allocation, a 
potential desire to protect 
Ukrainian civilian and military 
infrastructure in the belief that 
Russia would soon administer 
that infrastructure itself, and 
the perceived need to retain a 
robust reserve stockpile for a 
NATO contingency in case the 
war escalates. 
Despite an overall increase 
in the use of long-range 
strike weapons after the 
initial months of the war, 
Russia seems to have faced 
difficulties in orchestrating 
a coherent missile campaign and integrating its 
long-range strike assets into its broader warfighting 
strategy. In general, Russia appears to have assigned 
both tactical-operational and strategic functions 
to its missile forces. In their tactical-operational 
29  Alberque et al., Russia’s War in Ukraine.  
30  Michael Kofman, Anya Fink, and Jeffrey Edmonds, Russian Strategy of Escalation Management: Evolution of Key Concepts, CNA, 
DRM-2019-U-022455-1Rev, Apr. 2020, https://www.cna.org/reports/2020/04/russian-strategy-for-escalation-management-key-
concepts.
31  This is also because Ukraine excelled in the use of decoys to lure missile strikes against false targets. John Hudson, “Ukraine 
Lures Russian Missiles with Decoys of US Rocket System,” Washington Post , Aug. 30, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
world/2022/08/30/ukraine-russia-himars-decoy-artillery/. 
32  Randy Noorman, “The Russian Way of War in Ukraine: A Military Approach Nine Decades in the Making,” Modern War Institute, June 
15, 2023, https://mwi.westpoint.edu/the-russian-way-of-war-in-ukraine-a-military-approach-nine-decades-in-the-making/; Andreas 
Kluth, “Russia’s ‘Human Wave Attacks’ Are Another Step into Hell,” Washington Post, Feb. 14, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
business/russias-human-wave-attacks-are-another-stepinto-hell/2023/02/14/574e7202-ac27-11ed-b0ba-9f4244c6e5da_story.html. 
33  Marcel Plichta, “Ukraine Vows to Strike Back If Russia Resumes Energy Infrastructure Attacks,” Atlantic Council, Nov. 16, 2023, 
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/ukrainealert/ukraine-vows-to-strike-back-if-russia-resumes-energy-infrastructure-attacks/. 
role, Russian long-range strike capabilities have 
been employed to engage high-value military 
targets at tactical and operational depth. Although 
these strikes have complicated Ukraine’s defensive 
and offensive efforts, 
they do not seem to have 
significantly contributed 
to Russian successes along 
the front line. 31 Other 
factors, such as close-range 
artillery superiority, terrain, 
and ground tactics, played 
a more crucial role in 
determining the outcome of 
individual battles.32
Starting in the fall of 2022, 
Russian long-range strike 
forces have been conducting 
large-scale attacks on critical 
civilian infrastructure in 
Ukraine as part of a strategic 
strike campaign. 33 This 
campaign has been aimed 
at undermining the morale 
of the Ukrainian population and weakening their 
resistance against the Russian attackers. Despite 
using thousands of long-range strike weapons, 
including land-attack cruise missiles, ballistic 
missiles, and long-range drones, the overall effect of 
Despite an overall 
increase in the 
use of long-range 
strike weapons 
after the initial months of 
the war, Russia seems to 
have faced difficulties in 
orchestrating a coherent 
missile campaign and 
integrating its long-range 
strike assets into its 
broader warfighting 
strategy.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   9  | www.cna.org   
these attacks has been decisive. 34 The most critical 
moment of the strategic missile campaign was 
likely in December 2022, when initial damage had 
been dealt and Russia was expanding its attacks but 
Ukraine had not yet received the means to deal with 
the strategic missile threat. Once Western missile 
defense systems started to 
arrive in more substantial 
numbers, pressure on Ukraine’s 
civilian infrastructure started 
to decrease. In hindsight, 
Russia likely would have been 
able to put these ammunitions 
to better use by employing 
them against frontline targets 
in Ukraine, similar to how the 
Russian air force successfully 
employed glide bombs against Ukrainian trenches 
throughout the second half of 2023 to pressure 
Ukrainian tactical positions. 35 Alternatively, Russia 
may have improved the outcome of the strategic 
missile campaign by attempting to systematically 
degrade and limit Ukraine’s industrial capacity rather 
than focusing on civilian targets.
Ukrainian use of missiles, especially longer range 
assets, has been more reserved—not necessarily 
out of desire but because of necessity. Ukraine’s 
long-range strike arsenal has never been substantial 
34  “How Ukraine Tamed Russian Missile Barrages and Kept the Lights on,” Economist, Mar. 12, 2023, https://www.economist.com/
europe/2023/03/12/how-ukraine-tamed-russian-missile-barrages-and-kept-the-lights-on.  
35  Stefan Korshak, “Russian Glider Bombs Are Hitting Ukrainian Positions with Impunity,” Kyiv Post, Oct. 10, 2023, https://www.
kyivpost.com/post/22570. 
36  Michael Peck, “Storm Shadow Missiles Give Ukraine ‘a Much Longer Stick,’ but Russia Is Already 
Learning to Adapt, Expert Says,” Business Insider, July 31, 2023, https://www.businessinsider.com/
ukraine-storm-shadow-effective-long-range-missile-but-russia-adapts-2023-7.  
37  “Russia Salvages Landing Ship Hit by Ukraine Missile Fire,” BBC, July 2, 2022, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-62022476; 
David Axe, “A Ukrainian Cruise Missile with a Special Warhead Blew Up That Russian Submarine from the Inside,” Forbes, Sept. 18, 2023, 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2023/09/18/a-ukrainian-cruise-missile-with-a-special-warhead-blew-up-that-russian-subm
arine-from-the-inside/; Joseph Trevithick, “Full Devastation from Cruise Missile Attack on Russian Ship Comes into View,” The War Zone, Dec. 
27, 2023, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/full-devastation-from-cruise-missile-attack-on-russian-ship-coming-into-view. 
38  Thomas Newdick, “Black Sea Fleet Headquarters Takes Direct Hit from Cruise Missile,” The War Zone, Sept. 22, 2023, https://www.
thedrive.com/the-war-zone/black-sea-fleet-headquarters-takes-direct-hit-from-cruise-missile.  
39  Howard Altman, “Ukraine Using Land Attack Variant of Neptune Anti-Ship Missile,” The War Zone, Aug. 29, 2023, https://www.
thedrive.com/the-war-zone/ukraine-now-using-land-attack-neptune-anti-ship-missile-variant.  
enough to enable the large-scale use of these 
weapon systems, forcing the Ukrainian armed forces 
to carefully allocate available weapon systems 
to individual targets. Ukraine was still able to 
effectively engage several important logistic nodes 
and ammunition depots deep behind the front line. 
This move likely aggravated 
Russia’s already-strained 
logistical situation across the 
southern and eastern theaters 
but did not critically strain 
it.36 Ukraine was also able to 
engage several high-value 
targets that carried important 
symbolic and military value. 
For example, Ukrainian forces 
successfully struck several 
Russian naval vessels docked in Crimea 37 and 
destroyed the Black Sea Fleet Naval Headquarters 
with at least two Storm Shadow/SCALP-EG 
cruise missiles in September 2023, killing several 
high-ranking officers. 38 This counter-leadership 
strike was reportedly enabled by repurposed 
Neptune anti-ship cruise missiles that successfully 
engaged Russian S-400 air defense batteries to 
weaken Russia’s air defense bubble around Crimea.39 
In October 2023, Ukraine launched several ATACMS 
maneuvering missiles with cluster ammunition 
Ukrainian use of missiles, 
especially longer 
range assets, has been 
more reserved—not 
necessarily out of desire 
but because of necessity.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   10  | www.cna.org   
warheads to destroy dozens of Russian aviation 
assets across several air bases.40  
Ukrainian use of Western long-range strike weapons 
has also revealed qualitative differences between 
Russian and Western missile systems. French-British 
Storm Shadow/SCALP-EG cruise missiles have 
proved more reliable and survivable than their 
Russian counterparts, meaning that they have a 
much higher chance of successfully reaching and 
hitting their targets. Furthermore, no reports have 
been made of systemic errors or low accuracy in the 
use of Western-made long-range strike weapons. 
On the contrary, satellite pictures taken for battle 
damage assessment purposes have repeatedly 
demonstrated the impressive accuracy with which 
Western long-range strike weapons are able to hit 
their intended targets.41
Unfortunately for Ukraine, the limited number of 
long-range strike weapons available to its armed 
forces has prevented it from achieving the types of 
effects that could decisively affect the war. In addition, 
the lack of quantity has hindered Ukraine’s ability 
to consistently support offensive and defensive 
operations across the front line, limiting its strikes to 
individual high-value targets. Nevertheless, Ukraine’s 
position is likely stronger today compared to the start 
of the war because of its access to Western-made 
long-range strike weapons and its growing arsenal 
of domestically produced missile capabilities. 
Notably, Ukraine’s effective use of long-range 
strike weapons has been partially prevented by 
Western targeting restrictions attached to Western 
40  Joseph Trevithick and Tyler Rogoway, “Destruction from Ukraine’s First ATACMS Strike Now Apparent,” The War Zone, Oct. 18, 
2023, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/destruction-from-ukraines-first-atacms-strike-now-apparent.  
41  For example, during the Black Sea Fleet Naval Headquarters engagement, Storm Shadow cruise missiles were able to accurately 
strike individual wings of the buildings. Newdick, “Black Sea Fleet.”
42  Thomas Spencer, “Can UK’s Storm Shadow Missiles Change Ukraine’s Fight Against Russia?,” BBC, June 6, 2023, https://www.bbc.
com/news/world-europe-65813770. 
43  Another reason may be that Ukraine is waiting for the most opportune moment to engage this target, potentially to coincide with 
a future ground offensive. 
44  Bronk, “Is the Russian Air Force;” Justin Bronk, “The Mysterious Case of the Missing Russian Air Force,” RUSI, Feb. 28, 2022, https://
rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/mysterious-case-missing-russian-air-force. 
missile deliveries.42 For example, even though Storm 
Shadow/SCALP-EG cruise missiles equipped with 
potent penetrator warheads would almost certainly 
be capable of heavily damaging the Kerch Bridge 
connecting Crimea with mainland Russia, Ukraine 
has not yet engaged this critical target, likely 
because of Western targeting restrictions. 43 These 
restrictions also allowed Russia to partially adapt to 
Ukrainian long-range strikes by moving equipment 
and infrastructure outside of range, including by 
redeploying assets to internationally recognized 
Russian territory where Ukraine is likely not allowed 
to use Western missile systems.
Missile defense
Initially, missile defense played a secondary role in 
the war compared with the broader objective of air 
defense. At the beginning of the conflict, Ukraine 
relied on various Soviet-legacy air and missile defense 
systems, including 9K330 Tor (SA-15 Gauntlet) 
short-range surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems, 
9K37 Buk (SA-11 Gadfly) medium-range SAM 
systems, and S-300 (SA-10 Grumble) long-range 
SAM batteries.44 Despite these air defense capabilities 
not representing the state of the art, they were able 
to deny Russia control of Ukrainian airspace.
Missile defense assumed a central role in fall 2022 
when Russia started its large-scale long-range 
strike campaign against Ukrainian cities and critical 
civilian infrastructure. Initially Ukraine’s air defense 
capabilities were unable to match the missile 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   11  | www.cna.org   
onslaught, resulting in substantial damage to 
Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. 45 Once Ukraine 
began receiving modern Western air and missile 
defense capabilities, its track record in defending 
against Russia’s strategic missile campaign improved. 
These capabilities included 
American-made MIM-104 Patriot 
batteries, German-made Iris-T 
SLM missile defense systems, the 
American-Norwegian NASAMS 
air and missile defense system, 
and self-propelled German 
Gepard anti-air guns. 46 Ukraine 
also received several so-called 
Franken-SAMs, which combine 
Soviet launchers with Western 
ammunition.47 
According to official Ukrainian 
sources, Russia has launched 
more than 4,000 long-range 
strike systems since October 2022.48 Most long-range 
strike ammunition launched toward Ukraine are 
subsonic cruise missiles and long-range drones. 
These weapons are complemented by a smaller 
45  Hugo Bachega and Yaroslav Lukov, “Ukraine War: Blackouts in 1,162 Towns and Villages After Russia Strikes,” 
BBC, Oct. 18, 2022, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-63297239; “Another Mass Attack on Monday Morning: 
Russia Hits Energy Infrastructure Across Ukraine,” Kyiv Independent , Oct. 31, 2022, https://kyivindependent.com/
another-mass-attack-on-monday-morning-russias-hits-energy-infrastructure-across-ukraine/; Luke Harding, Dan Sabbagh, and 
Isobel Koshiw, “Russia Targets Ukraine Energy and Water Infrastructure in Missile Attacks,” Guardian, Oct. 31, 2022, https://www.
theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/31/russian-missiles-kyiv-ukraine-cities. 
46  Adam Pemble, “US-Made Patriot Guided Missile Systems Arrive in Ukraine,” Associated Press, Apr. 20, 2023, https://apnews.
com/article/russia-ukraine-war-patriot-missile-system-4c79f9110899ca1880a61f2d1f328179; “The Arms and Military Equipment 
Germany Is Sending to Ukraine,” German Federal Government, Jan. 4, 2024, https://www.bundesregierung.de/breg-en/news/
military-support-ukraine-2054992; “Zelensky: Newly-Delivered NASAMS Systems Enter Service in Ukraine,” Kyiv Independent, Nov. 7, 
2023, https://kyivindependent.com/zelensky-newly-delivered-nasams-systems-enter-service-in-ukraine/. 
47  Lolita C. Baldor, “Pentagon’s ‘FrankenSAM’ Program Cobbles Together Air Defense Weapons for Ukraine,” Associated Press, Oct. 
12, 2023, https://apnews.com/article/ukraine-russia-war-military-missiles-16c344bdba2e0695a2286a55d9614ff4. 
48  Author’s assessment based on publicly released information by the Ukrainian Air Force via its Facebook social media page. 
“Командування Повітряних Сил ЗСУ/Air Force Command of UA Armed Forces,” Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/kpszsu. 
49  “Командування Повітряних Сил ЗСУ/Air Force Command of UA Armed Forces,” Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/kpszsu. 
50  Alberque et al., Russia’s War in Ukraine.
51  An example is the May 16, 2023, attack, which saw the use of air- and ground-launched ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, S-300 
rockets, and long-range drones against Kyiv. No missile system appears to have reached its target. Shawn Johnson, “Defense Expert 
Says Russia’s Position ‘Never Looked Weaker’ After Ukraine Downed Putin’s ‘Invincible’ Missiles,” Business Insider, May 20, 2023, 
https://biz.crast.net/defense-expert-says-russias-position-never-looked-weaker-after-ukraine-downed-putins-invincible-missiles/.  
number of supersonic cruise missiles as well as 
air- and ground-launched ballistic missiles. Overall, 
Ukraine reports an interception rate of about 80 
percent, meaning that 4 of every 5 long-range strike 
weapons launched at Ukrainian territory are shot 
down before they reach their 
target.49 These numbers cannot 
be independently verified at this 
point and are likely exaggerated 
for strategic communication 
purposes. Nevertheless, videos 
and pictures on social media, 
as well as post-strike damage 
assessments, confirm that 
Ukraine manages to intercept a 
substantial number of Russian 
long-range strike weapons, 50 
including in complex missile 
raids in which missile threats 
engage from multiple directions, 
at different speeds, and from 
various trajectories.51 
The effectiveness of Ukrainian missile defense is 
somewhat unexpected, at least compared with 
According to official 
Ukrainian sources, 
Russia has launched 
more than 4,000 
long-range strike 
systems since 
October 2022.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   12  | www.cna.org   
the predictions of analysts who wrote about the 
prospects of effective missile defense before the 
war. Most previous reports and analyses on US 
missile defense in Iraq during 
the 1990s and early 2000s 
consistently suggested 
that missile defense, even 
against short-range and 
low-velocity threats, would 
remain challenging and not 
cost-effective.52 The analysis 
of Saudi Arabia’s more recent 
experience with missile 
defense also supported this 
pessimistic assessment. In 
recent years, Saudi Arabia 
came repeatedly under 
attack from Iranian-made 
cruise missiles, short- and 
medium-range ballistic 
missiles, and long-range 
drones fired by Houthi rebels 
from Yemen. Saudi Arabia’s missile defense network, 
which largely consists of US air and missile defense 
capabilities (including Patriot, which is currently 
deployed in Ukraine), failed to provide adequate and 
reliable protection.53 
Without access to more accurate data, explaining this 
discrepancy in the expected and actual effectiveness 
52  Joe Cirincione, “In Ukraine, a New Chance to Judge the Patriot Missile,” Defense One, May 5, 2023, https://www.defenseone.com/
ideas/2023/05/ukraine-another-chance-judge-patriot-missile/386036/.  
53  Jeffrey Lewis, “Patriot Missiles Are Made in America and Fail Everywhere,” Foreign Policy, Mar. 28, 2018, https://foreignpolicy.
com/2018/03/28/patriot-missiles-are-made-in-america-and-fail-everywhere/; Max Fisher, “Did American Missile Defense Fail in Saudi 
Arabia?,” New York Times, Dec. 4, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/12/04/world/middleeast/saudi-missile-defense.
html.  
54  Russia has been confirmed to employ active countermeasures, such as integrated decoy flares, in its cruise missiles. Joseph 
Trevithick, “Russian Kh-101 Cruise Missile Filmed Firing-Off Decoy Flares,” The War Zone, Dec. 29, 2023, https://www.thedrive.com/
the-war-zone/russian-kh-101-cruise-missile-filmed-firing-off-decoy-flares. Although these are reported to be effective against 
relatively simple anti-air capabilities, such as handheld stingers, they provide limited protection against more advanced interceptors 
systems. “Ukraine’s Mobile Air Defences Have Ammo for ‘Few More Attacks:’ Commander,” France 24, Jan. 4, 2024, https://www.
france24.com/en/live-news/20240104-ukraine-s-mobile-air-defences-have-ammo-for-few-more-attacks-commander. 
55  Chris Panella, “Shooting Down Russia’s Overhyped Missiles with Patriots Is a Win for More Than Just Ukraine. 
The War Is an ‘Intelligence Bonanza’ for the West,” Business Insider, Jan. 4, 2024, https://www.businessinsider.com/
western-weapons-wins-against-russia-are-intelligence-bonanza-2024-1. 
of Ukrainian missile defense is difficult. Several 
factors likely play a role, including the impressive 
competence of Ukrainian servicemembers 
operating their systems, 
the lack of stealth features 
and countermeasures in 
Russian long-range strike 
weapons undermining 
their survivability, and the 
generally improved state 
of Western missile defense 
compared with previous 
conflicts.54 Western engineers 
reportedly continue to 
improve their missile 
defense systems by adapting 
software algorithms based on 
empirical data from previous 
successful and failed missile 
intercepts to further optimize 
missile defense against 
different types of threats.55
Although Ukrainian missile defense has generally 
been effective, interception rates have differed by 
type of long-range strike weapon. For example, 
Ukraine reports interception rates of more than 
70 percent and 80 percent for subsonic cruise 
missiles and long-range drones, respectively, but 
interception rates of only about 40 percent for 
Most previous 
reports and 
analyses 
on US missile defense 
in Iraq during the 
1990s and early 2000s 
consistently suggested 
that missile defense, even 
against short-range and 
low-velocity threats, would 
remain challenging and 
not cost-effective.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   13  | www.cna.org   
Russian ground- and air-launched ballistic missiles.56 
Interception rates for high-velocity cruise missiles, 
in particular P-800 Oniks and Kh-22 anti-ship cruise 
missiles flying at medium and high subsonic speeds, 
approach zero.57 In general, Ukraine’s ability to deal 
with more complex and higher velocity threats 
appears to depend on the 
geographical area of the 
attack. Ukraine has managed 
to establish a dense and 
multilayered missile defense 
network around Kyiv that is 
capable of defending against 
most types of missile attacks 
relatively reliably. Other cities 
and areas in Ukraine remain 
much more vulnerable. 
Compared to Ukraine, 
Russia’s experience with 
missile defense in this war is more limited, mainly 
because of Ukraine’s limited capability to launch 
long-range strikes against Russian targets. However, 
when Russian missile defense systems have been 
employed, they have not met expectations. Although 
Russian subsonic cruise missiles and long-range 
drones have been vulnerable to Ukrainian air 
defense, the survivability of Ukrainian subsonic 
cruise missile systems has been high. Although 
Russia regularly claims to intercept Western and 
Ukrainian long-range strike weapons in large 
numbers, it has been unable to produce credible 
evidence to support these claims. In fact, no evidence 
exists that Russia has managed to intercept a single 
56  Author’s assessment based on publicly released information by the Ukrainian Air Force via its Facebook social media page. 
“Командування Повітряних Сил ЗСУ/Air Force Command of UA Armed Forces,” Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/kpszsu. 
57  “Russia’s Kh-22.” 
58  In July 2023, pictures of a downed Storm Shadow emerged. However, there are no indications of a kinetic interception. The missile 
likely landed itself because of a systemic error. Fabian Hoffmann (@FRHoffmann1), “First pictures of a downed Storm Shadow,” Post, 
X, July 4, 2023, 6:07 a.m. https://twitter.com/FRHoffmann1/status/1676170771507433472. 
59  Iryna Sitnikova, “The Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation Acknowledged the Attacks on Its Military Airfields. Blames 
Ukraine” [Міноборони рф визнало удари по своїх військових аеродромах. Звинувачує Україну], Hromadske, Dec. 5, 2022, https://
hromadske.ua/posts/minoboroni-rf-viznalo-udari-po-svoyih-vijskovih-aerodromah-zvinuvachuye-ukrayinu. 
French-British Storm Shadow/SCALP-EG land-attack 
cruise missile or Ukrainian -built Neptune anti-ship 
cruise missile.58 There is also no evidence that Russian 
missile defense has managed to intercept any of the 
ATACMS short-range maneuvering missiles that have 
occasionally been launched against Russian airfields.
Russia has also struggled 
with protecting its capital 
from relatively small 
numbers of Ukrainian 
slow-flying long-range 
drones that occasionally 
attempt to penetrate 
Moscow’s airspace. Ukraine 
even managed to strike two 
Russian airbases hundreds 
of kilometers behind the 
front line with improvised 
long-range drone systems, 
reportedly damaging multiple strategic bombers in 
the process.59 This strike is not necessarily surprising, 
given that Russia’s airspace has not undergone 
extensive militarization, at least compared to that 
of Ukraine. In addition, small and low-flying drones 
can be difficult to intercept even with defenses in 
place. Nevertheless, Russia’s lack of preparedness 
for strikes on its homeland territory was somewhat 
unexpected. 
In general, given that Russian air and missile defense 
systems were once considered among the world’s 
best, their lack of success in the war is surprising, 
especially considering that Russian missile defense 
systems were specifically designed and built to 
Russia has also struggled 
with protecting its capital 
from relatively small 
numbers of Ukrainian 
slow-flying long-range 
drones that occasionally 
attempt to penetrate 
Moscow’s airspace.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   14  | www.cna.org   
counter the types of missile threats that they are 
now facing. Note also that Ukraine has asserted that 
its Soviet-legacy S-300 batteries have effectively 
defended against Russian subsonic cruise missiles, 60 
which indicates that Russian missile defense systems 
are capable, in principle, of handling this type of 
threat. The fact that Russia has been unable to do 
so suggests either that there are differences in terms 
of the training and competence between Ukrainian 
and Russian operators or that Western-made 
subsonic cruise missiles are more survivable than 
their Russian counterparts. A combination of both 
factors likely plays a role. One video on social media 
shows what appears to be a Russian Pantsir-S1 
60  See the markings on this S-300. Fabian Hoffmann(@FRHoffmann1), “There is no reason to assume that Russian S-300s cannot 
intercept Storm Shadows,” Post, X, May 11, 2023, 9:34 a.m. https://twitter.com/FRHoffmann1/status/1656653906091573251.
61  Calibre Obscura (@CalibreObscura), “Pantsir-S1 can’t even intercept a Storm Shadow even when it has it locked on thermals,” Post, 
X, June 22, 2023, 3:35 p.m. https://twitter.com/CalibreObscura/status/1671965086959673357. 
(SA-22 Greyhound) missile defense system having a 
clear target lock on an approaching Storm Shadow/
SCALP-EG cruise missile. The system operator, 
however, launches the interceptor when the target 
is right above the Pantsir system, resulting in what 
looks like the interceptor’s fuse not arming and the 
interceptor flying past the incoming missile without 
detonating.61 Storm Shadow/SCALP-EG cruise 
missiles also incorporate several low-observability 
features, such as an S-ducted fan, that reduce the 
radar cross section quite substantially, especially 
compared with older Russian cruise missiles that 
carry drop-down fans. 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   15  | www.cna.org   
The Russia-Ukraine war has constituted a test bed 
for conventional missile technology and redefines 
our understanding of the use of long-range strike 
weapons and missile defense in modern warfare. 
This section outlines some implications for strategic 
stability. These implications, in the medium to long 
term, revolve around the lessons and insights that 
NATO and Russia can draw from the realities of the war 
regarding force posture and strategy development 
and the technological trajectories of weapon systems 
that the war helps predict. This section identifies three 
implications for strategic stability resulting from 
the use of conventional missile technologies in the 
Russia-Ukraine war relating to decreased first-strike 
stability, the credibility of Russian missile doctrine 
and strategy, and the feasibility of conventional 
counterforce strikes. 
First‑strike instability
The Russia-Ukraine war demonstrates the enormous 
utility of long-range strike weapons in modern wars. 
Long-range strike weapons can perform a range of 
key tactical, operational, and strategic functions on 
both sides.62 Similarly, missile defense is acquiring an 
elevated role in contemporary warfighting because 
of its ability to deny the adversary the benefits of 
conducting long-range strikes. The track record of 
62  Fabian Hoffmann, “Europe’s Missile Conundrum,” War on the Rocks, July 25, 2023, https://warontherocks.com/2023/07/
europes-missile-conundrum/; Hoffmann and Alberque, “Non‑Nuclear Weapons.”
63  “Joint Procurement Makes Baltic Defensive Capabilities More Robust,” Ministry of National Defence, Republic of Lithuania, Mar. 
28, 2023, https://kam.lt/en/joint-procurement-makes-baltic-defensive-capabilities-more-robust/. 
64  Emma Helfrich, “The Netherlands Is Going to Bet Big on Long-range Weapons,” The War Zone, Apr. 3, 2023, https://www.thedrive.
com/the-war-zone/the-netherlands-is-going-to-bet-big-on-long-range-weapons. 
65  “European Sky Shield – An Overview of the Initiative” [European Sky Shield – Die Initiative im Überblick], Federal Ministry of 
Defense Germany, https://www.bmvg.de/de/aktuelles/european-sky-shield-die-initiative-im-ueberblick-5511066. 
these weapon systems in the war so far—although 
not impeccable on either side—leaves little doubt 
that conventional missile technologies have become 
a core capability of modern war. Long-range strike 
weapons and missile defense facilitate offensive and 
defensive maneuvers on the battlefield and can, 
under certain circumstances, create the conditions 
of victory independently of the warfighting effort 
along the front line. 
Therefore, that the war has spurred global efforts 
to acquire robust long-range strike arsenals and 
upgrade missile defense is unsurprising. In Europe, 
several states have recently signed contracts for 
the procurement of long-range strike weapons, 
most notably the Baltic states and Poland, which 
together have acquired hundreds of M-142 HIMARS 
rocket artillery launchers equipped with ATACMS 
maneuvering missiles, among others. 63 Other 
states, such as the Netherlands, will soon deploy a 
long-range strike triad consisting of ground-, air-, 
and sea-launched long-range strike capabilities. 64 
European states have also made a more or less 
concerted effort to acquire additional missile defense 
capabilities, including through the European Sky 
Shield Initiative.65
Russia itself has doubled down on long-range strike 
weapons and has gone to great lengths to overcome 
IMPLICATIONS FOR STRATEGIC 
STABILITY

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   16  | www.cna.org   
Western sanctions aiming to curb its supply. 66 The 
Russian arms industry reportedly continues to scale 
up production of cruise and ballistic missiles and has 
invested in a new production facility east of Moscow 
to license-produce Iranian Shahed long-range 
drones.67 Russia is well aware 
that its long-range strike 
arsenal grants it military 
advantages and coercive 
leverage that Ukraine 
currently cannot match. In 
any war termination scenario 
that does not result in the 
complete destruction of 
Russia’s military capabilities, 
including its industrial 
capacity, Russia will likely be 
able to rapidly rearm in the 
missile domain and re-equip 
its forces with a substantial 
long-range strike arsenal. 
Therefore, there is little doubt that long-range strike 
weapons and missile defense will play a critical role in 
any future confrontation between Russia and NATO. 
Given that long-range strike weapons can inflict rapid 
damage not only at tactical and operational depth 
but also extending into the adversary’s homeland 
territory, attaining superiority in the missile domain 
will constitute a core objective of future militaries.68 As 
a result, military officials will plan to quickly destroy 
an adversary’s offensive and defensive missile forces 
66  Maria Shagina, “Why Can’t the West Stop Supplying Technology for Russian Weapons?,” Foreign Policy, Nov. 9, 2023, https://
foreignpolicy.com/2023/11/09/russia-sanctions-weapons-technology-exports-evasion-arms-production-missiles-chips/. 
67  Ian Williams, “Russia Isn’t Going to Run Out of Missiles,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, June 28, 2023, https://www.
csis.org/analysis/russia-isnt-going-run-out-missiles. 
68  Attaining superiority in the missile domain can be defined as the ability to strike the enemy from a distance while preventing or 
severely limiting the adversary’s ability to do the same.
69  David Blagden, “Strategic Stability and the Proliferation of Conventional Precision Strike: A (Bounded) Case for Optimism?,” 
Nonproliferation Review 27, no. 1–3 (2020), pp. 123–136, https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.no/10.1080/10736700.2020.1799569. 
to achieve long-range strike superiority as early as 
possible. To counter this strategy, armed forces will 
require not only large but also survivable arsenals. As 
such, future long-range strike arsenals must ideally 
be not only able to threaten the adversary’s missile 
capabilities but also robust 
enough to survive an enemy 
first strike. At present, no 
European country, including 
Russia, deploys this kind of 
long-range strike arsenal.
Most European states rely 
on airborne delivery for 
their existing long-range 
strike weapons. As long 
as these aircraft remain 
grounded and are not on 
alert, they remain vulnerable 
to an adversary first strike. 69 
Europe’s ground-based 
launchers will likely remain 
similarly vulnerable unless states invest in hardened 
infrastructure, including underground storage 
facilities, to protect them at the outset of a conflict. 
Submarines are the only truly survivable long-range 
strike platforms. At present, the United States, France, 
and the United Kingdom are the only NATO member 
states that deploy submarine-launched long-range 
strike weapons. Several other NATO member 
states are currently considering the acquisition or 
procurement of submarine-launched long-range 
Most European states rely 
on airborne delivery for 
their existing long-range 
strike weapons. As long 
as these aircraft remain 
grounded and are not 
on alert, they remain 
vulnerable to an adversary 
first strike.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   17  | www.cna.org   
strike capabilities.70 Until NATO’s submarine-launched 
long-range strike arsenal grows, especially in Europe, 
and unless NATO member states invest in the 
survivability of their other long-range strike assets, 
they will remain vulnerable to a Russian first strike.71 
Russia faces the same issues, and a large part of 
Russian long-range strike capabilities are vulnerable 
to a NATO conventional first strike. Russia’s inflexibility 
and rigid command structures, as demonstrated in 
Ukraine, also raise doubts regarding Russia’s ability to 
quickly move and relocate its launchers under attack. 
For example, following the delivery of HIMARS rocket 
artillery launchers in June 2022, Ukraine managed to 
destroy dozens of logistics hubs and ammunition 
depots through M30 and M30 GMLRS strikes before 
Russia adapted and moved its facilities farther from 
the front line. Similarly, even though US deliveries 
of ATACMS were announced several weeks before 
delivery, Russia failed to move its vulnerable assets in 
time and adapted to the possibility of ATACMS strikes 
only once initial damage was taken. 72 The future 
deployment of ground-based intermediate-range 
missile systems that were previously banned under 
the Intermediate-Range Forces Treaty will further 
reinforce the vulnerability of time-sensitive Russian 
targets. 
Overall, NATO’s and Russia’s long-range strike 
arsenals will likely remain vulnerable. This vulnerability 
could introduce strong “use them or lose them” 
pressures into the calculations of decision-makers, 
leading to the early and large-scale employment of 
long-range strike weapons in an effort to achieve 
70  Helfrich, “The Netherlands Is Going to Bet Big;” Jaroslaw Adamowski, “Subs, Cruise Missiles to Drive Poland’s Navy 
Modernization,” Defense News, Aug. 28, 2017, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/european-balance-of-power/2017/08/28/
subs-cruise-missiles-to-drive-polands-navy-modernization/; Maksymilian Dura, “Korean Submarine Capable 
of Carrying Cruise Missiles Offered to Poland,” Defence 24, Dec. 4, 2023, https://defence24.com/industry/
korean-submarine-capable-of-carrying-cruise-missiles-offered-to-poland. 
71  Blagden, “Strategic Stability.” 
72  Jack Watling and Nick Reynolds, “Meatgrinder: Russian Tactics in the Second Year of its Invasion of Ukraine,” pp. 11–14, Royal 
United Services Institute, May 2023, https://static.rusi.org/403-SR-Russian-Tactics-web-final.pdf. 
73  Kofman, Fink, and Edmonds, Russian Strategy of Escalation Management.
74  Kofman, Fink, and Edmonds, Russian Strategy of Escalation Management.
superiority in the missile domain. Therefore, a conflict 
between Russia and NATO could escalate rapidly 
once the initial fighting has begun. Ultimately, being 
faced with a large-scale missile attack and losing a 
substantial part of a long-range strike arsenal may 
pave the way for earlier nuclear use, leaving less time 
to form and seize off-ramps. 
Credibility of Russian missile 
doctrine
Conventional long-range strike weapons play a key 
role in Russia’s military strategy. In contrast to the 
missile doctrine of most NATO states, Russia’s missile 
doctrine is widely debated inside Russia, and Russian 
experts have formulated a clear understanding of 
how they intend to use Russia’s long-range strike 
arsenal in a conflict with NATO.73 Russia’s long-range 
strike weapons constitute a central component 
of its military strategy centered on the notion of 
escalation control and escalation management.74 The 
track record of Russian long-range strike weapons in 
Ukraine and their relative vulnerability to Western air 
defense systems deployed by the Ukrainian armed 
forces call into question certain aspects of Russia’s 
missile doctrine, with important implications for 
strategic stability. 
Russia’s military-political thinking is centered on 
the concept of “strategic deterrence.” This concept 
encompasses both nonmilitary and military 
approaches and measures to contain the adversary, 
manage escalation, and terminate wars. These 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   18  | www.cna.org   
measures are implemented during peacetime and 
war. In times of peace, they aim to prevent direct 
aggression or the use of military pressure against 
Russian interests. During wartime, their purpose is 
to manage escalation, deescalate conflicts, and bring 
the war to an early end on terms that benefit Russia.75 
Russian leaders intend to 
use strategic deterrence to 
convey their capability to inflict 
progressively escalating damage 
on crucial targets. The goal is to 
signal to the adversary the need 
to refrain from further aggression, 
deescalate hostilities, and end the 
conflict to avoid unacceptable 
levels of damage. These actions 
also aim to limit the scope of 
the conflict and deter third-party 
intervention, preventing 
escalation into a large-scale war.76 
In this strategy, select nuclear 
and nonnuclear weapons capable 
of creating strategic-level effects, 
particularly conventional long-range strike weapons, 
play a key role. 
Russian doctrine expects the use of demonstrative, 
individual, or grouped long-range strikes to 
systematically increase the inflicted damage on the 
adversary, forcing the adversary to back down. 77 
Within this framework, Russian military theorists 
assert that long-range strike weapons afford Russia 
the flexibility to precisely engage key structural 
elements of the adversary with varying intensity for 
75  Kristin Ven Bruusgaard, “Russian Strategic Deterrence,” Survival 58, no. 4 (2016), pp. 7–26, https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.no/10.1080
/00396338.2016.1207945. 
76  Kofman, Fink, and Edmonds, Russian Strategy of Escalation Management.
77  Dave Johnson, Russia’s Conventional Precision Strike Capabilities, Regional Crises, and Nuclear Thresholds , Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory – Center for Global Security Research, Feb. 2018, https://cgsr.llnl.gov/content/assets/docs/
Precision-Strike-Capabilities-report-v3-7.pdf. 
78  Kofman, Fink, and Edmonds, Russian Strategy of Escalation Management.
79  This also depends on the density of missile defense assets in the targeted geographical area.
escalation management purposes. The crucial aspect 
lies in the targeted nature of the inflicted damage. 78 
Without the ability to carefully calibrate the pain that 
the adversary experiences, the perceived ability to 
control escalation gets lost. 
The Russia-Ukraine war may render certain aspects 
of this strategy uncertain, most 
notably the ability to reliably 
inflict precise levels of damage 
to carefully control the speed 
of escalation and the intensity 
of conflict. Russian long-range 
strike weapons have proved 
less survivable than previously 
assumed. In particular, Russian 
subsonic land-attack cruise 
missiles, which constitute the 
backbone of Russia’s long-range 
strike arsenal, have been shot 
down in substantial numbers. 79 
To bring even a small number 
of land-attack cruise missiles to 
their targets, Russia has to launch 
large missile volleys. In addition, the Russia-Ukraine 
war demonstrates that missile defense even 
against large -scale missile attacks is possible if 
the defender invests in and deploys a sufficient 
concentration of relevant missile defense systems 
as part of an integrated and layered air and missile 
defense network. 
This possibility has two implications regarding 
Russia’s missile-based escalation management 
strategy. First, under the right circumstances, a 
Russian leaders 
intend to use 
strategic deterrence 
to convey their 
capability to inflict 
progressively 
escalating damage 
on crucial targets.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   19  | www.cna.org   
defender might be able to deny the benefits of 
Russian missile strikes and completely escape the 
coercive conundrum they pose, especially if missile 
defense assets are prepared and in place. Second, 
the uncertain nature of the damage caused by missile 
attacks challenges the assumption that the damage 
inflicted can be carefully scaled and calibrated. In 
fact, Russian decision-makers may question the 
ability of single or demonstrative strikes to produce 
guaranteed effects against a peer competitor such 
as NATO, even while considering that NATO may be 
less casualty tolerant than wartime Ukraine. 
This lack of guaranteed effects has consequences 
for strategic stability. First, as Western and even 
Russian analysts have pointed out, Russia’s focus on 
escalating conflicts early for the sake of deescalating 
them is potentially destabilizing. There is no 
guarantee that Western European decision-makers 
would back down and sue for peace rather than 
attempt to match Russia’s escalation. The ability to 
deny this highly destabilizing strategy by means of 
effective missile defense, therefore, offers stabilizing 
prospects. Sufficient missile defense may convince 
Russian decision-makers to forgo such “deescalation 
strikes” in favor of other, potentially less destabilizing, 
strategies. On the other hand, the inability to reliably 
dose the levels of damage inflicted may result in 
Russian decision-makers rejecting smaller scale strike 
options in favor of larger scale missile strikes early 
to achieve an appropriate level of damage. Russian 
officials may even learn from the Russia-Ukraine 
war that long-range strike weapons can no longer 
produce guaranteed effects, incentivizing early 
tactical nuclear use. Both aspects may undermine 
crisis stability and could lead to more rapid strategic 
nuclear use. 
80  The only missile defense system remotely capable of fulfilling this task reliably is the US Ground-based Midcourse Defense 
System. “Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) System,” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project, June 14, 2018, last modified 
July 26, 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/system/gmd/. 
81  Acton, “Russia and Strategic Conventional Weapons;” Gormley, “US Advanced Conventional Systems;” Stefanovich, “Proliferation 
and Threats of Reconnaissance-Strike Systems.”
Finally, the effectiveness of missile defense in Ukraine 
may have additional long-term implications for 
strategic stability related to perceived survivability 
of strategic nuclear weapon systems. Undoubtedly, 
defending against incoming strategic nuclear 
warheads delivered by intercontinental ballistic 
missiles is significantly more challenging than 
engaging conventional warheads delivered by 
long-range drones, cruise missiles, or short-range 
ballistic missiles. Doing so requires specialized 
interceptor missiles and enabling ISR capabilities. 80 
Nevertheless, the track record of nonstrategic 
missile defense assets in Ukraine will not be ignored 
by Russian (or Chinese, for that matter) nuclear 
strategists, who will take these developments into 
account when deciding on future force posture 
requirements. Amid a crumbling arms control 
architecture, the demonstrated effectiveness of 
missile defense in Ukraine may render future 
increases of deployed strategic nuclear warheads 
more likely, creating additional pressures on arms 
control stability. 
Feasibility of conventional 
counterforce
The war demonstrates that long-range strike 
weapons have become increasingly potent weapon 
systems that may be employed for a range of tasks. 
A major concern of Russian officials and analysts 
in recent decades has been the substitutability of 
nuclear weapons for conventional weapon systems 
in counterforce engagements. 81 According to this 
argument, the potential vulnerability of nuclear 
weapons and nuclear weapons–related infrastructure 
to conventional weapons may increase Russia’s 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   20  | www.cna.org   
vulnerability in the nuclear domain and undermine 
its secured second-strike capability. 
This fear is not necessarily novel, and the issue was 
already discussed during the later part of the Cold 
War when precision-guided weapons first emerged.82 
The issue came to the forefront in the context of US 
ambitions relating to the Conventional Prompt Global 
Strike program and more recently 
in the context of the deployment 
and sale of American AGM-158 
Joint Air-to-Surface Standard 
Missiles (JASSMs) to US partners 
and allies around the world, 
including several NATO allies in 
Europe.83 The development and 
deployment of a next generation 
of advanced conventional 
weapons, including hypersonic 
missiles, is aggravating existing 
conventional counterforce fears, 
especially when the weapons are 
considered not in isolation but 
in combination with increasingly 
effective strategic and nonstrategic missile defense.84 
The Russia-Ukraine war is likely to compound 
preexisting Russian fears regarding the conventional 
counterforce potential of the United States and 
its allies. The principal long-range strike weapon 
employed by Ukraine in this war has been the 
British-French Storm Shadow/SCALP-EG cruise 
missile. This cruise missile is equipped with a powerful 
82  Carl Builder, The Prospects and Implications of Non‑Nuclear Means for Strategic Conflict , International Institute for Strategic 
Studies, 1985, https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.no/10.1080/05679328508448692; Carl H. Builder, Strategic Conflict Without Nuclear 
Weapons, RAND, 1983, https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R2980.html; Richard Burt, “Nuclear Proliferation and the Spread of New 
Conventional Weapons Technology,” International Security 1, no. 3 (1977), pp. 119–139, https://www.jstor.org/stable/2626661. 
83  Acton, “Russia and Strategic Conventional Weapons;” Gormley, “US Advanced Conventional Systems;” Stefanovich, “Proliferation 
and Threats of Reconnaissance-Strike Systems.”
84  Dean Wilkening, “Hypersonic Weapons and Strategic Stability,” Survival 61, no. 5 (2019), pp. 129–148, https://doi-org.ezproxy.
uio.no/10.1080/00396338.2019.1662125; Tong Zhao, “Conventional Long-range Strike Weapons of US Allies and China’s Concerns of 
Strategic Instability,” Nonproliferation Review 27, no. 1–3 (2020), pp. 109–122, https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.no/10.1080/10736700.2020
.1795368.  
85  “SCALP EG/Storm Shadow/SCALP Naval/Black Shaheen/APACHE AP.”
penetrator warhead system capable of engaging 
and destroying hardened targets, including nuclear 
assets.85 The missile was developed in the 1990s and 
entered into service in the early 2000s. As such, the 
technology behind the missile is some 30 years old, 
meaning it no longer represents the state of the 
art by any means. Nevertheless, Russia has proved 
largely incapable of dealing with this missile. As 
outlined previously, no confirmed 
intercepts of the missile system 
have taken place. At the same 
time, Storm Shadow/SCALP ‑EG 
has been capable of reliably 
engaging and destroying a range 
of high-value targets with pinpoint 
accuracy. 
The performance of Storm Shadow/
SCALP-EG will cause Russian 
decision-makers to question 
what more advanced types of 
long-range strike weapons are able 
to do. The JASSM cruise missile 
largely constitutes a comparable 
but more modern land-attack cruise missile, 
especially in terms of its low-observability features 
that likely make it even more difficult to intercept. 
In addition, in a broader confrontation with NATO, 
Russia will not be subjected to only individual and 
sequential cruise strikes as in Ukraine. Instead, it may 
face grouped and parallel missile strikes potentially 
targeting its nuclear infrastructure. 
The Russia-Ukraine 
war is likely 
to compound 
preexisting Russian 
fears regarding 
the conventional 
counterforce 
potential of the 
United States and 
its allies.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   21  | www.cna.org   
Russian decision-makers will also be increasingly 
concerned about substantial increases in allied 
long-range strike arsenals, as outlined previously. 
Essentially, Russia’s war of aggression 
against Ukraine has manifested 
what Russian analysts and 
officials have long feared: large 
numbers of long-range strike 
weapons at Russia’s doorstep 
that might be used for 
counterforce and decapitation 
purposes, as well as effective 
missile defense that may 
undermine the second-strike 
capability of its nuclear arsenal. 
Although an argument can 
be made that a quantitative 
expansion of long-range 
strike weapons and missile 
defense systems in Europe was 
inevitable in the medium to long 
term, the current pace at which 
it is proceeding would not have 
occurred without Russia’s war 
of choice in Ukraine.
The Russia-Ukraine war also provides insights into 
the ability to defend conventional counterforce 
strikes. The war has proven that defending against 
conventional missile capabilities is possible, 
even under complex strike scenarios. This ability 
means that although long-range strike weapons 
may have become a more potent threat in recent 
years, including to the nuclear assets of a nuclear 
weapon state, there is growing potential to defend 
against conventional counterforce strikes. The war 
demonstrates that it should be possible, in principle, 
86  Gerry Doyle and Mariano Zafra, “The Air War over Ukraine,” Reuters, Dec. 14, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/graphics/
UKRAINE-CRISIS/FIGHTER-JETS/jnvwwqyylvw/.  
87  Russia reportedly already had to redeploy air defense assets from Kaliningrad to backfill losses on the front line. Sofiia Syngaivska, 
“The UK Defense Intelligence: Russia Deploys Strategic Air Defense Systems from Kaliningrad to Ukraine,” Defense Express, Nov. 26, 
2023, https://en.defence-ua.com/news/the_uk_defense_intelligence_russia_deploys_strategic_air_defense_systems_from_kaliningrad_
to_ukraine-8680.html.  
to effectively defend nuclear silo fields and other 
types of nuclear assets by protecting them with a 
layered missile defense shield that protects against 
different types of conventional threats 
by means of medium, short, 
and point missile defense 
systems. Ukraine’s success in 
intercepting long-range drones 
and land-attack cruise missiles 
with scrambled fighter jets 
also indicates that protecting 
nuclear targets with airborne 
assets is possible, especially if 
those assets are located deep 
inland, leaving ample time 
to scramble fighter jets and 
bring countermeasures into 
position.86 
Although this possibility of 
defense may be reassuring for 
Chinese decision-makers who 
share Russian concerns about 
the conventional counterforce 
potential of the United States 
and its regional allies, Russian decision-makers are 
unlikely to find it similarly comforting. Their likely 
continued discomfort is the result of their own 
experience with missile defense in the war and the 
challenges that they faced in intercepting Ukrainian 
and Western long-range strike weapons. In addition, 
given the substantial losses of air and missile defense 
systems after two years of fighting in Ukraine, Russia 
is largely incapable of redeploying missile defense 
assets from the Ukrainian theater.87 Therefore, Russia 
will most likely not have the equipment necessary 
to expand protection of its nuclear infrastructure, 
The Russia-Ukraine war 
also provides insights 
into the ability to 
defend conventional 
counterforce strikes. 
The war has proven 
that defending against 
conventional missile 
capabilities is possible, 
even under complex 
strike scenarios.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   22  | www.cna.org   
even if it wanted to. At least in the short to medium 
term, Russian decision-makers will likely consider 
their nuclear weapons capabilities more vulnerable 
to conventional counterforce attacks. 
This perception of threat may convince Russian 
decision-makers that their nuclear arsenal is 
increasingly vulnerable to both nuclear and 
conventional attack, resulting in decreased crisis 
stability. In addition, such a threat perception may 
render future arms control talks with the United 
States more difficult or incentivize Russia to invest 
in the survivability of its arsenal, including by 
quantitative expansion. 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   23  | www.cna.org   
The Russia-Ukraine war marks the first instance of 
a major inter-state conflict involving the extensive 
deployment and utilization of long-range strike 
weapons and nonstrategic missile defense systems. 
Consequently, it has become a testing ground 
for advanced offensive and defensive missile 
technologies, showcasing both their capabilities and 
limitations.
As this paper indicates, aspects related to the 
deployment and use of offensive and defensive 
missile technologies in the Russia-Ukraine war may 
negatively affect NATO-Russia strategic stability. 
These aspects relate to the decreased first-strike 
stability resulting from the proliferation of long-range 
strike weapons; the credibility of Russian missile 
doctrine, which may suffer because of Russia’s 
long-range strike track record in Ukraine; and the 
feasibility of successful conventional counterforce 
engagements, which Russian decision-makers may 
deem more likely. Overall, these issues could put 
pressure on crisis and arms race stability in the 
medium to long term and increase the likelihood of 
strategic nuclear exchanges in future conflict.  
Can adverse strategic stability implications related 
to the deployment and use of long-range strike 
weapons and missile defense systems in Ukraine be 
mitigated? Such mitigation will be difficult, at least 
in the near future. Long-range strike weapons and 
missile defense have emerged as core capabilities 
of modern war. NATO states will not want to forgo 
these critical weapon systems in favor of distant 
prospects related to increased strategic stability, nor 
should they. Nevertheless, retaining an awareness 
about how the proliferation, deployment, and use of 
new capabilities, including in the conventional realm, 
shape the conduct of nuclear strategy is important. 
CONCLUSION

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   24  | www.cna.org   
“3M-14 Kalibr (SS-N-30A).” Missile Threat, CSIS 
Missile Defense Project. Aug. 11, 2016, last 
modified Mar. 7, 2022. https://missilethreat.
csis.org/missile/ss-n-30a/.
Acton, James. “Russia and Strategic Conventional 
Weapons: Concerns and Responses.” 
Nonproliferation Review 22, no. 2 (2015): 
141–154. https://doi.org/10.1080/10736700.2
015.1105434.
Acton, James. “Reclaiming Strategic Stability.” In 
Strategic Stability: Contending Interpretations. 
Edited by Elbridge A. Colby and Michael S. 
Gerson. Carlisle, PA: US Army War College 
Press, 2013, 117–146. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/
pdfs/ADA572928.pdf.
Adamowski, Jaroslaw. “Subs, Cruise Missiles to Drive 
Poland’s Navy Modernization.” Defense News. 
Aug. 28, 2017. https://www.defensenews.com/
smr/european-balance-of-power/2017/08/28/
subs-cruise-missiles-to-drive-polands-
navy-modernization/.
Alberque, William, Douglas Barrie, Zuzanna 
Gwadera, and Timothy Wright. Russia’s 
War in Ukraine: Ballistic and Cruise 
Trajectories. International Institute for 
Strategic Studies. Oct. 5, 2023. https://
www.iiss.org/research-paper/2023/10/
russias-war-in-ukraine-ballistic-and-cruise-tra
jectories/. 
Altman, Howard. “Russia’s Shahed-136 Drones Now 
Feature Tungsten Shrapnel.” The War Zone. 
Sept. 28, 2023. https://www.thedrive.com/
the-war-zone/russias-shahed-136-drones-no
w-feature-tungsten-shrapnel.
Altman, Howard. “Ukraine Using Land Attack Variant 
of Neptune Anti-Ship Missile.” The War Zone. 
Aug. 29, 2023. https://www.thedrive.com/
the-war-zone/ukraine-now-using-land-attack-
neptune-anti-ship-missile-variant.  
“Another Mass Attack on Monday Morning: 
Russia Hits Energy Infrastructure Across 
Ukraine.” Kyiv Independent. Oct. 31, 2022. 
https://kyivindependent.com/another-
mass-attack-on-monday-morning-russias-hits
-energy-infrastructure-across-ukraine/.
“The Arms and Military Equipment Germany 
Is Sending to Ukraine.” German Federal 
Government. Jan. 4, 2024. https://www.
bundesregierung.de/breg-en/news/
military-support-ukraine-2054992.
Axe, David. “After a Six-Month Lull, the Ukrainians 
Are Lobbing Tochka Ballistic Missiles 
Again.” Forbes. Nov. 23, 2023. https://www.
forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2023/11/23/
after-a-six-month-lull-the-ukrainians-are-lob
bing-tochka-ballistic-missiles-again/?sh=7d0c
b22f7adb. 
REFERENCES

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   25  | www.cna.org   
Axe, David. “A Ukrainian Cruise Missile with a 
Special Warhead Blew Up That Russian 
Submarine from the Inside.” Forbes. 
Sept. 18, 2023. https://www.forbes.com/
sites/davidaxe/2023/09/18/a-ukrainia
n-cruise-missile-with-a-special-warhe
ad-blew-up-that-russian-submarine-
from-the-inside/?sh=64d95cc25efd.
Bachega, Hugo, and Yaroslav Lukov. “Ukraine War: 
Blackouts in 1,162 Towns and Villages After 
Russia Strikes.” BBC. Oct. 18, 2022. https://
www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-63297239.
Baldor, Lolita C. “Pentagon’s ‘FrankenSAM’ Program 
Cobbles Together Air Defense Weapons for 
Ukraine.” Associated Press. Oct. 12, 2023. 
https://apnews.com/article/ukraine-russia-
war-military-missiles-16c344bdba2e0695a228
6a55d9614ff4.
Blagden, David. “Strategic Stability and the 
Proliferation of Conventional Precision 
Strike: A (Bounded) Case for Optimism?” 
Nonproliferation Review 27, no. 1–3 (2020): 
123–136. https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.no/10.10
80/10736700.2020.1799569. 
Bronk, Justin. “Is the Russian Air Force Actually 
Incapable of Complex Air Operations?” 
RUSI. Mar. 4, 2022. https://www.rusi.
org/explore-our-research/publications/
rusi-defence-systems/russian-air-force-
actually-incapable-complex-air-operations. 
Bronk, Justin. “The Mysterious Case of the Missing 
Russian Air Force.” RUSI. Feb. 28, 2022. 
https://rusi.org/explore-our-research/
publications/commentary/mysterious-case-
missing-russian-air-force.
Builder, Carl. The Prospects and Implications of 
Non‑Nuclear Means for Strategic Conflict. 
International Institute for Strategic 
Studies. 1985. https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.
no/10.1080/05679328508448692.
Builder, Carl H. Strategic Conflict Without Nuclear 
Weapons. RAND. 1983. https://www.rand.org/
pubs/reports/R2980.html.
Burt, Richard. “Nuclear Proliferation and the Spread 
of New Conventional Weapons Technology.” 
International Security 1, no. 3 (1977): 119–139. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2626661. 
Calibre Obscura (@CalibreObscura). “Pantsir-S1 
can’t even intercept a Storm Shadow 
even when it has it locked on thermals.” 
Post. X. June 22, 2023, 3:35 p.m. 
https://twitter.com/CalibreObscura/
status/1671965086959673357.
Chesnut, Mary. US/NATO‑Russian Strategic Stability 
and the War in Ukraine. CNA. IOP-2023-U-
035792-Final. June 2023. https://www.cna.org/
reports/2023/06/us-nato-russian-strategic-
stability-in-ukraine.
Cirincione, Joe. “In Ukraine, a New Chance to Judge 
the Patriot Missile.” Defense One. May 5, 2023. 
https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2023/05/
ukraine-another-chance-judge-patriot-missi
le/386036/.  

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   26  | www.cna.org   
Colby, Elbridge A. “Defining Strategic Stability: 
Reconciling Stability and Deterrence.” In 
Strategic Stability: Contending Interpretations. 
Edited by Eldridge A. Colby and Michael S. 
Gerson. Carlisle, PA: US Army War College 
Press, 2013, 47–84. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/
pdfs/ADA572928.pdf.
Doyle, Gerry, and Mariano Zafra. “The Air War over 
Ukraine.” Reuters. Dec. 14, 2023. https://
www.reuters.com/graphics/UKRAINE-CRISIS/
FIGHTER-JETS/jnvwwqyylvw/.  
Dura, Maksymilian. “Korean Submarine Capable of 
Carrying Cruise Missiles Offered to Poland.” 
Defence 24. Dec. 4, 2023. https://defence24.
com/industry/korean-submarine-capable-of-c
arrying-cruise-missiles-offered-to-poland. 
“European Sky Shield – An Overview of the 
Initiative” [European Sky Shield – Die Initiative 
im Überblick]. Federal Ministry of Defense 
Germany. https://www.bmvg.de/de/aktuelles/
european-sky-shield-die-initiative-im-
ueberblick-5511066. 
Fisher, Max. “Did American Missile Defense 
Fail in Saudi Arabia?” New York Times. 
Dec. 4, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2017/12/04/world/middleeast/
saudi-missile-defense.html.  
Futter, Andrew, and Benjamin Zala. “Advanced 
US Conventional Weapons and Nuclear 
Disarmament: Why the Obama Plan Won’t 
Work.” Nonproliferation Review 20, no. 1 
(2013): 107–122. https://doi.org/10.1080/1073
6700.2012.761790.
Futter, Andrew, and Benjamin Zala. “Strategic 
Non-Nuclear Weapons and the Onset of 
a Third Nuclear Age.” European Journal of 
International Security 6, no. 3 (2021): 257–277. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/eis.2021.2.
Gabel, Barbara. “‘A Strong Gesture:’ French Delivery 
of SCALP Missiles to Ukraine Marks Shift in 
Western Strategy.” France 24. July 13, 2023. 
https://www.france24.com/en/europe/202307
13-a-strong-gesture-french-delivery-of-scalp
-missiles-to-ukraine-marks-shift-in-western-s
trategy.
Gormley, Dennis M. “US Advanced Conventional 
Systems and Conventional Prompt Global 
Strike Ambitions: Assessing the Risks, 
Benefits, and Arms Control Implications.” 
Nonproliferation Review 22, no. 2 (2015): 
123–139. https://doi.org/10.1080/10736700.2
015.1117735.
“Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) 
System.” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense 
Project. June 14, 2018, last modified July 26, 
2021. https://missilethreat.csis.org/system/
gmd/. 
Harding, Luke, Dan Sabbagh, and Isobel Koshiw. 
“Russia Targets Ukraine Energy and 
Water Infrastructure in Missile Attacks.” 
Guardian. Oct. 31, 2022. https://www.
theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/31/
russian-missiles-kyiv-ukraine-cities. 
Helfrich, Emma. “The Netherlands Is Going to Bet 
Big on Long-range Weapons.” The War Zone. 
Apr. 3, 2023. https://www.thedrive.com/
the-war-zone/the-netherlands-is-going-to-
bet-big-on-long-range-weapons.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   27  | www.cna.org   
Hoffmann, Fabian. Cruise Missile Proliferation: 
Trends, Strategic Implications, and 
Counterproliferation. European Leadership 
Network. Mar. 2021. https://www.
europeanleadershipnetwork.org/report/
cruise-missile-proliferation-trends-strategic-
implications-and-counterproliferation/.
Hoffmann, Fabian. “Europe’s Missile Conundrum.” 
War on the Rocks. July 25, 2023. https://
warontherocks.com/2023/07/europes-missile-
conundrum/.
Hoffmann, Fabian. Strategic Non‑Nuclear Weapons 
and Strategic Stability – Promoting Trust 
Through Technical Understanding. Fondation 
pour la Recherche Stratégique. Nov. 2021. 
https://www.frstrategie.org/en/programs/npt-
and-the-p5-process/strategic-non-nuclear-
weapons-and-strategic-stability-promoting-
trust-through-technical-understanding-2021. 
Hoffmann, Fabian (@FRHoffmann1). “First pictures 
of a downed Storm Shadow.” Post. X. July 
4, 2023, 6:07 a.m. https://twitter.com/
FRHoffmann1/status/1676170771507433472. 
Hoffmann, Fabian (@FRHoffmann1). “There is 
no reason to assume that Russian S-300s 
cannot intercept Storm Shadows.” Post. X. 
May 11, 2023, 9:34 a.m. https://twitter.com/
FRHoffmann1/status/1656653906091573251.
Hoffmann, Fabian, and William Alberque. Non‑
Nuclear Weapons with Strategic Effect: New 
Tools of Warfare? International Institute for 
Strategic Studies. Mar. 2022. https://www.iiss.
org/research-paper/2022/03/non-nuclear-
weapons-with-strategic-effect-new-tools-of-
warfare/. 
“How Ukraine Tamed Russian Missile Barrages 
and Kept the Lights on.” Economist. Mar. 
12, 2023. https://www.economist.com/
europe/2023/03/12/how-ukraine-tamed-
russian-missile-barrages-and-kept-the-lights-
on.  
Hudson, John. “Ukraine Lures Russian Missiles 
with Decoys of US Rocket System.” 
Washington Post. Aug. 30, 2022. https://www.
washingtonpost.com/world/2022/08/30/
ukraine-russia-himars-decoy-artillery/. 
Jacobsen, Mark. “Ukraine’s Drone Strikes Are 
a Window into the Future of Warfare.” 
Atlantic Council. Sept. 14, 2023. https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/
ukraines-drone-strikes-are-a-window-into-
the-future-of-warfare/.
Johnson, Dave. Russia’s Conventional Precision 
Strike Capabilities, Regional Crises, and 
Nuclear Thresholds. Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory – Center for Global 
Security Research. Feb. 2018. https://cgsr.llnl.
gov/content/assets/docs/Precision-Strike-
Capabilities-report-v3-7.pdf. 
Johnson, Shawn. “Defense Expert Says Russia’s 
Position ‘Never Looked Weaker’ After Ukraine 
Downed Putin’s ‘Invincible’ Missiles.” Business 
Insider. May 20, 2023. https://biz.crast.net/
defense-expert-says-russias-position-never-
looked-weaker-after-ukraine-downed-putins-
invincible-missiles/.  

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   28  | www.cna.org   
“Joint Procurement Makes Baltic Defensive 
Capabilities More Robust.” Ministry of 
National Defence, Republic of Lithuania. Mar. 
28, 2023. https://kam.lt/en/joint-procurement-
makes-baltic-defensive-capabilities-more-
robust/. 
“Kh-101/Kh-102.” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile 
Defense Project. Oct. 26, 2017, last modified 
July 31, 2021. https://missilethreat.csis.org/
missile/kh-101-kh-102/.
“Kh-47M2 Kinzhal.” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile 
Defense Project. Mar. 27, 2018, last modified 
Mar. 19, 2022. https://missilethreat.csis.org/
missile/kinzhal/.
“Kh-55 (AS-15).” Missile Threat, CSIS Missile 
Defense Project. Aug. 10, 2016, last modified 
Aug. 2, 2021. https://missilethreat.csis.org/
missile/kh-55/.
Khoo, Nicholas, and Reuben Steff. “‘This Program 
Will Not Be a Threat to Them:’ Ballistic Missile 
Defense and US Relations with Russia and 
China.” Defense & Security Analysis 30, no. 1 
(2014): 17–28. https://doi.org/10.1080/147517
98.2013.864869.
Kluth, Andreas. “Russia’s ‘Human Wave Attacks’ Are 
Another Step into Hell.” Washington Post. Feb. 
14, 2023. https://www.washingtonpost.com/
business/russias-human-wave-attacks-are-
another-stepinto-hell/2023/02/14/574e7202-
ac27-11ed-b0ba-9f4244c6e5da_story.html.
Kofman, Michael, Anya Fink, and Jeffrey Edmonds. 
Russian Strategy of Escalation Management: 
Evolution of Key Concepts. CNA. DRM-2019-
U-022455-1Rev. Apr. 2020. https://www.cna.
org/reports/2020/04/russian-strategy-for-
escalation-management-key-concepts.
Korshak, Stefan. “Russian Glider Bombs Are Hitting 
Ukrainian Positions with Impunity.” Kyiv Post. 
Oct. 10, 2023. https://www.kyivpost.com/
post/22570.
Kottasová, Ivana, Olga Voitovich, Mick Krever, Alex 
Marquardt, Scott McWhinnie, and Sebastian 
Shukla. “Ukrainian Air Defenses in Odesa 
Outgunned as Russia Targets Global Grain 
Supply.” CNN. July 21, 2023. https://edition.
cnn.com/2023/07/20/europe/ukraine-air-
defenses-odesa-russia-strikes-grain-intl/index.
html.
Lewis, Jeffrey. “Patriot Missiles Are Made in America 
and Fail Everywhere.” Foreign Policy. Mar. 28, 
2018. https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/03/28/
patriot-missiles-are-made-in-america-and-
fail-everywhere/.
“MGM-140 Army Tactical Missile System (ATACMS).” 
Missile Threat, CSIS Missile Defense Project. 
Nov. 30, 2016, last modified July 31, 2021. 
https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/atacms/.
Newdick, Thomas. “Black Sea Fleet Headquarters 
Takes Direct Hit from Cruise Missile.” The 
War Zone. Sept. 22, 2023. https://www.
thedrive.com/the-war-zone/black-sea-fleet-
headquarters-takes-direct-hit-from-cruise-
missile.  

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   29  | www.cna.org   
Newdick, Thomas. “Russia Now Firing S-300 
Surface-to-Air Missiles at Land Targets in 
Ukraine: Official.” The War Zone. July 8, 2022. 
https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/
russia-now-firing-s-300-surface-to-air-
missiles-at-land-targets-in-ukraine-official.
Newdick, Thomas. “SU-24 Fencer Is Ukraine’s Storm 
Shadow Missile Carrier.” The War Zone. May 
24, 2023. https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-
zone/su-24-fencer-is-ukraines-storm-shadow-
missile-carrier.
Noorman, Randy. “The Russian Way of War in 
Ukraine: A Military Approach Nine Decades in 
the Making.” Modern War Institute. June 15, 
2023. https://mwi.westpoint.edu/the-russian-
way-of-war-in-ukraine-a-military-approach-
nine-decades-in-the-making/. 
Panella, Chris. “Shooting Down Russia’s Overhyped 
Missiles with Patriots Is a Win for More Than 
Just Ukraine. The War Is an ‘Intelligence 
Bonanza’ for the West.” Business Insider. Jan. 
4, 2024. https://www.businessinsider.com/
western-weapons-wins-against-russia-are-
intelligence-bonanza-2024-1?r=US&IR=T.
Peck, Michael. “Storm Shadow Missiles Give 
Ukraine ‘a Much Longer Stick,’ but Russia 
Is Already Learning to Adapt, Expert Says,” 
Business Insider, July 31, 2023, https://www.
businessinsider.com/ukraine-storm-shadow-
effective-long-range-missile-but-russia-
adapts-2023-7?utm_source=copy-link&utm_
medium=referral&utm_content=topbar. 
Pemble, Adam. “US-Made Patriot Guided Missile 
Systems Arrive in Ukraine.” Associated Press. 
Apr. 20, 2023. https://apnews.com/article/
russia-ukraine-war-patriot-missile-system-4c7
9f9110899ca1880a61f2d1f328179.
Plichta, Marcel. “Ukraine Vows to Strike Back If 
Russia Resumes Energy Infrastructure Attacks.” 
Atlantic Council. Nov. 16, 2023. https://
www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/ukrainealert/
ukraine-vows-to-strike-back-if-russia-
resumes-energy-infrastructure-attacks/.
“Russia Salvages Landing Ship Hit by Ukraine 
Missile Fire.” BBC. July 2, 2022. https://www.
bbc.com/news/world-europe-62022476.
“Russia’s Kh-22 – the Missile Ukraine Has Yet to 
Shoot Down.” Kyiv Post. Dec. 29, 2023. https://
www.kyivpost.com/post/26102.
“SCALP EG/Storm Shadow/SCALP Naval/Black 
Shaheen/APACHE AP.” Missile Threat, CSIS 
Missile Defense Project. Dec. 2, 2016, last 
modified Sept. 20, 2023. https://missilethreat.
csis.org/missile/apache-ap/.  
Sciutto, Jim. “Britain Has Delivered Long-range 
‘Storm Shadow’ Cruise Missiles to Ukraine 
Ahead of Expected Counteroffensive, Sources 
Say.” CNN. May 12, 2023. https://edition.cnn.
com/2023/05/11/politics/uk-storm-shadow-
cruise-missiles-ukraine/index.html.  
Shagina, Maria. “Why Can’t the West Stop 
Supplying Technology for Russian Weapons?” 
Foreign Policy. Nov. 9, 2023. https://
foreignpolicy.com/2023/11/09/russia-
sanctions-weapons-technology-exports-
evasion-arms-production-missiles-chips/.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   30  | www.cna.org   
Sitnikova, Iryna. “The Ministry of Defense of the 
Russian Federation Acknowledged the Attacks 
on Its Military Airfields. Blames Ukraine” 
[Міноборони рф визнало удари по своїх 
військових аеродромах. Звинувачує 
Україну]. Hromadske. Dec. 5, 2022. https://
hromadske.ua/posts/minoboroni-rf-viznalo-
udari-po-svoyih-vijskovih-aerodromah-
zvinuvachuye-ukrayinu. 
Sonne, Paul, Isabelle Khurshudyan, Serhiy 
Morgunov, and Kostiantyn Khudov. 
“Battle For Kyiv: Ukrainian Valor, Russian 
Blunders Combined to Save the Capital.” 
Washington Post. Aug. 24, 2023. https://
www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/
interactive/2022/kyiv-battle-ukraine-survival/.  
Spencer, Thomas. “Can UK’s Storm Shadow Missiles 
Change Ukraine’s Fight Against Russia?” BBC. 
June 6, 2023. https://www.bbc.com/news/
world-europe-65813770.
Stefanovich, Dmitry. “Proliferation and Threats of 
Reconnaissance-Strike Systems: A Russian 
Perspective.” Nonproliferation Review 27, no. 
1–3 (2020): 97–107. https://doi.org/10.1080/1
0736700.2020.1795370.
Syngaivska, Sofiia. “The UK Defense Intelligence: 
Russia Deploys Strategic Air Defense Systems 
from Kaliningrad to Ukraine.” Defense Express. 
Nov. 26, 2023. https://en.defence-ua.com/
news/the_uk_defense_intelligence_russia_
deploys_strategic_air_defense_systems_from_
kaliningrad_to_ukraine-8680.html.  
Trevithick, Joseph. “Full Devastation from Cruise 
Missile Attack on Russian Ship Comes into 
View.” The War Zone. Dec. 27, 2023. https://
www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/full-
devastation-from-cruise-missile-attack-on-
russian-ship-coming-into-view.
Trevithick, Joseph. “Russian Kh-101 Cruise Missile 
Filmed Firing-Off Decoy Flares.” The War 
Zone. Dec. 29, 2023. https://www.thedrive.
com/the-war-zone/russian-kh-101-cruise-
missile-filmed-firing-off-decoy-flares.
Trevithick, Joseph, and Tyler Rogoway. “Destruction 
from Ukraine’s First ATACMS Strike Now 
Apparent.” The War Zone. Oct. 18, 2023. 
https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/
destruction-from-ukraines-first-atacms-strike-
now-apparent.  
“Ukraine Unable to Shoot Down Kh-22 Missiles, 
Says Air Force.” The New Voice of Ukraine. 
Jan. 15, 2023. https://english.nv.ua/nation/air-
defense-cannot-shoot-down-russian-kh-22-
missiles-ukraine-war-50297621.html.
“Ukraine’s Mobile Air Defences Have Ammo for 
‘Few More Attacks:’ Commander.” France 24. 
Jan. 4, 2024. https://www.france24.com/en/
live-news/20240104-ukraine-s-mobile-air-
defences-have-ammo-for-few-more-attacks-
commander.
US Defense Intelligence Agency. Iranian UAVs in 
Ukraine: A Visual Comparison. Aug. 2023. 
https://www.dia.mil/Portals/110/Documents/
News/Military_Power_Publications/UAV_Book.
pdf.

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   31  | www.cna.org   
“US-Supplied ATACMS Enter the Ukraine War.” 
Reuters. Oct. 19, 2023. https://www.reuters.
com/world/atacms-us-may-send-ukraine-
their-cluster-bomb-payloads-2023-10-19/. 
Ven Bruusgaard, Kristin. “Russian Strategic 
Deterrence.” Survival 58, no. 4 (2016): 7–26. 
https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.no/10.1080/00396
338.2016.1207945.
Watling, Jack, and Nick Reynolds. “Meatgrinder: 
Russian Tactics in the Second Year of its 
Invasion of Ukraine.” pp. 11–14, Royal United 
Services Institute. May 2023. https://static.rusi.
org/403-SR-Russian-Tactics-web-final.pdf.
Wilkening, Dean. “Hypersonic Weapons and 
Strategic Stability.” Survival 61, no. 5 (2019): 
129–148. https://doi-org.ezproxy.uio.no/10.10
80/00396338.2019.1662125;
Williams, Ian. “Russia Isn’t Going to Run Out 
of Missiles.” Center for Strategic and 
International Studies. June 28, 2023. https://
www.csis.org/analysis/russia-isnt-going-run-
out-missiles. 
“Zelensky: Newly-Delivered NASAMS Systems 
Enter Service in Ukraine.” Kyiv Independent. 
Nov. 7, 2023. https://kyivindependent.com/
zelensky-newly-delivered-nasams-systems-
enter-service-in-ukraine/#:~:text=The%20
NASAMS%20systems%20have%20been,to%20
deliver%20two%20more%20launchers. 
Zhao, Tong. “Conventional Long-range Strike 
Weapons of US Allies and China’s Concerns of 
Strategic Instability.” Nonproliferation Review 
27, no. 1–3 (2020): 109–122. https://doi-org.
ezproxy.uio.no/10.1080/10736700.2020.1795
368.  
Zhirohov, Mikhail. “Ukraine Adopts Neptune 
Coastal Defence Missile.” Janes. Aug. 27, 
2020. https://www.janes.com/defence-news/
news-detail/ukraine-adopts-neptune-coastal-
defence-missile. 

Strategic Stability and the Ukraine War
Implications of Conventional Missile Technologies
   32  | www.cna.org   
PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK

This report was written by CNA’s Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division (SP3).
SP3 provides strategic and political-military analysis informed by regional expertise to support operational and policy-
level decision-makers across the Department of the Navy, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the unified combatant 
commands, the intelligence community, and domestic agencies. The division leverages social science research methods, 
field research, regional expertise, primary language skills, Track 1.5 partnerships, and policy and operational experience 
to support senior decision-makers.
Any copyright in this work is subject to the Government’s Unlimited Rights license as defined in DFARS 252.227-7013 and/or DFARS 252.227-
7014. The reproduction of this work for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited. Nongovernmental users may copy and distribute this document 
noncommercially, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice is reproduced in all copies. Nongovernmental users may not use technical 
measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies they make or distribute. Nongovernmental users may not accept 
compensation of any manner in exchange for copies.
All other rights reserved. The provision of this data and/or source code is without warranties or guarantees to the Recipient Party by the Supplying 
Party with respect to the intended use of the supplied information. Nor shall the Supplying Party be liable to the Recipient Party for any errors or 
omissions in the supplied information.
This report may contain hyperlinks to websites and servers maintained by third parties. CNA does not control, evaluate, endorse, or guarantee content 
found in those sites. We do not assume any responsibility or liability for the actions, products, services, and content of those sites or the parties that 
operate them.
ABOUT CNA  
CNA is a nonprofit research and analysis organization dedicated to the safety and security of the nation. It operates the 
Center for Naval Analyses—the federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) of the Department of the 
Navy—as well as the Institute for Public Research. CNA develops actionable solutions to complex problems of national 
importance. With nearly 700 scientists, analysts, and professional staff, CNA takes a real-world approach to gathering 
data. Its unique Field Program places analysts on aircraft carriers and military bases, in squad rooms and crisis centers, 
working side by side with operators and decision-makers around the world. CNA supports naval operations, fleet 
readiness, and strategic competition. Its non-defense research portfolio includes criminal justice, homeland security, 
and data management.

www.cna.org
IOP-2024-U-037683-Final © 2024 CNA Corporation