[NOTE: Full PDF content approximately 92KB. Preview shown below - retrieved successfully via fetch_url.]

AIR FORCE DOCTRINE PUBLICATION 3-2
IRREGULAR WARFARE
10 August 2020

INTRODUCTION TO IRREGULAR WARFARE 
Last Updated: 10 Aug 2020

The Department of the Air Force (DAF) provides essential capabilities to the joint force across the competition continuum and range of operations. This air force doctrine publication (AFDP) provides operational level doctrinal guidance for irregular warfare (IW) and presents fundamental IW principles and core IW activities in the context of challenges to US national security. This AFDP defines IW and highlights the role of Air and Space Force forces in it. The AFDP discusses the main characteristics of IW that should be taken into account when developing IW-related strategy, plans, assessment, and command and control. This AFDP concludes with how Air Force forces are organized, presented, and employed to support IW operations.

STRATEGIC CONTEXT
Air and Space Force operations are often the same regardless of the type of warfare or category of mission activity. However, Service members should be able to clearly articulate how unique Service capabilities may be applied to create effects useful in an IW context. Generally, the distinction between IW and traditional warfare arises in how capabilities are applied to achieve different ends and how missions have different challenges. For example, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) demands for IW can be different from traditional warfare, requiring distinctive capabilities. Preparing for activities in IW begins with this understanding and shapes perspectives on operational execution.

The speed, range, and flexibility of airpower play a critical role in helping state and non-state actors earn and sustain legitimacy and influence with relevant populations – the primary objective in IW. In IW, airpower's ability to influence populations, deter adversaries, reassure partners, and maintain access and presence are central to success across the competition continuum. Airpower also enables traditional IW activities such as counterinsurgency, foreign internal defense, and special operations forces (SOF) support.

[Content continues in full PDF - approximately 92KB total]

Source URL: https://www.doctrine.af.mil/Portals/61/documents/AFDP_3-2/3-2-AFDP-IRREGULAR-WARFARE.pdf
