‘Terrorism’ or ‘Liberation’? Towards a Distinction: A Case Study of the Armed Struggle of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) | Perspectives on Terrorism
Skip to main content
/issue/volume-xx-issue-1-2026
Search
VOL.
                  XII, Issue
                  2
‘Terrorism’ or ‘Liberation’? Towards a Distinction: A Case Study of the Armed Struggle of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
by
Muttukrishna Sarvananthan
Download PDF
Share:
This article based on extensive empirical field research and primary sources/data attempts to distinguish terrorism from liberation / freedom struggle by means of a case study of the armed struggle of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka. It is argued here that the LTTE was primarily a terrorist organisation/movement because: (i) it’s struggle was overwhelmingly based on armed violence; (ii) it demanded support from the masses through persecution; (iii) it intentionally targeted civilians; (iv) it substantially relied on suicide attacks; (v) it substantially deployed under-age children; and (vi) it was proactively involved in internecine war.
Previous article
Next article
Authors
Muttukrishna Sarvananthan
Download PDF
ICCT Latest Research
Visit icct
Hybrid Threat Signals: Assessing Possible Iranian Involvement in Recent Attacks in Europe
Julian Lanchès
Recent Developments of Anti-Government Threats: Online Activities and Transnational Connections
Kacper Rekawek, Thomas Renard, Julian Lanchès, Maria Zotova, Menso Hartgers, Morgan Finnsiö, Alessandro Bolpagni, Marco Lombardi, Silvano Rizieri Lucini, Jacob Ware
From Tehran to Europe: Terrorism Risks After the Killing of Iran’s Ayatollah
Graig R. Klein
About ICCT
The International Centre for Counter-Terrorism (ICCT) is a think-and-do tank based in The Hague, Netherlands. We provide research, policy advice, training and other solutions to support better counter-terrorism policies and practices worldwide. We also contribute to the scientific and publi.…
Get to know more
PT updates
Subscribe to receive each new issue of Perspectives on Terrorism in your mailbox.
Email
*