                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 53 
Research Publish Journals 
 
Why and how the Tamil Tiger lost the Battle: 
LTTE Case Study 
Rashmi Raghav 
Abstract: The present essay has tried to look at various factors which led to the defeat of LTTE . It has been argued 
that the downfall of Tamil Tigers was the result of both internal and external components. At the internal level, the 
LTTE as an organisation experienced various flaws which made them weak. While, at the external level, the strong 
political will of the Sri Lankan government to curb terrorism made the authority victorious . 
Keywords: LTTE, Tamil Tiger, curb terrorism. 
1.    INTRODUCTION 
Ever since the Second World War, numerous developing nations have witnessed political v iolence as one of the 
distinctive features of their internal politics . Military coup, revolution, guerrilla warfare, political homicides and political 
terrorism were experienced by almost all the developing states . Huntington claimed that by 1960s  almost all the third 
world nation s had experienced  the course of modernisation which caused this political violence.  And the political 
modernisation included the reasoning of power, the segregation of arrangement and the enlargement of political 
participation (Samarnayake,1997).       
Sri Lanka an island, situated in the Indian Ocean showed some similar pattern. In 1948 it became independent  from the 
British Rule . And subsequently it has experienced  the inter nal political violence. Since 19 70s Sri Lankan politics was 
dominated by the left wing revolution, guerrilla fighting and political terrorism  (Samaranayake, 1999). The Janatha 
Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) and the Tamil Tigers were the two organisations which could be said to have emanated from 
the same p rocess of the political modernisation. The Tamil Tigers  or the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam  which later 
became the terrorist  organisation emerged during the 1970s. The emergence was against the backdrop of ethnic conflict 
between Tamils who were minori ty and  the Sinhalese being the majority.  The Tamil Tigers deman ded a separate 
homeland ‘Tamil Eelam’ because they believed , that was the only way Tamils could enjoy all the  constitutional rights. 
And from then, they had been a great threat to the Sri Lankan politics.  The Tamil Tigers which influenced the Sri Lankan 
politics for nearly three decades were eventually defeated in 2009 by the government. 
RAND C orporation ( 2008) conducted a study on how t errorist groups end,  on exami ning 648 terrorist groups which 
existed between 1968  to 2006,  found that 43 percent ended with the transition in political process, 40 percent ended 
because of good policing strategy. For 10 percent, the goals were achieved while for other 7 percent  military force 
resulted to the end of terrorist groups.  Military force were effective in cases where the groups were large , well organised, 
and were involved in insurgency.  The case of Tamil Tigers could be included in the last category. But the way they had 
been defeated, is still of a great debate in the international community as Wickramasinghe  (2009, p.65)  commented, ‘By 
claiming that terrorism is the gravest threat facing Sri Lanka, Rajapaksa’s government has given it - self a license to use 
undemocratic, often brutal methods to govern, with the quiet approval of a war-weary Sinhalese majority community.’ 
The present essay has studied the context in which  Tamil Tigers had emerged because it is very important to know the 
root of any cause before deriving at any conclusion. Also, how they were defeated at the hands of Sri Lankan government 
has been evaluated by looking at the counter - terrorism mechanism of the authority.  Further, the factors which led to the 
failure of Tamil Tigers to lose their struggle for separate land have been identified. The essay has tried to  argue that there 
were several factors that weakened the Tamil Tigers as an organisation . Some of them were internal factors arising inside 
from the organisation whereas others emanated from outside the org anisation. Therefore, the failure was a combination of 

                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 54 
Research Publish Journals 
 
internal and external elements . However, the larger argument which this paper has tried to make is on t he conclusion of 
Bloom (2005, p.71) who stated, ‘The LTTE is not defeated but neither is it victorious’.  
2.    SRI LANKA- ETHNIC CONFLICT AND RISE OF THE TAMIL TIGERS 
Sri Lanka, an island is located at just south of India formerly known as Ceylon. It became independent in 1948 from the  
British rule. Its politics has  been turbulent almost ever since. There are two ethnic groups namely Sinhalese who is in the 
majority and Tamils being the minority. Tamils are backed up by larger Tamil population residing  in Tamil Nadu, a state 
of India, since some of them were brought to the island as labourers. The Sinhalese policy which ruled in majority has 
been less than tolerant towards the minority. This was clear from the language policy which gave importance to Si nhalese 
only, the refusal of citizenship to Tamils, and sends  them back to India even if they had been born in Sri Lanka. 
(Whittaker, 2007 ). The Tamils were  occupied the regions called Jaffna,  Batticaloa, Vavuniya, and Trincomalee.  The 
Indian Tamils were r emarkably remained in the Nuwara Eliya and Badulla,the central highlands districts. Within  
Colombo and adjacent areas both Indian and Sri Lankan Tamils reached above 11 percent of the inhabitants. The 
population breakdown was 74 percent Sinhalese, 16 percent Tamils including both native and Indian Tamils and 10 
percent Muslims. The majority of the Tamils were in the  eastern and northern part of Sri Lanka while Colombo and south 
had noticeable numbers. (Bloom, 2005). 
The Europeans began to colonise the island of Ceylon, they were least concerned for the peninsula of Jaffna because of its 
unsuitability for the  agriculture. Hence, they  focused on  increasing large scale tea plantations in southern areas which 
were more fertile . The Sinhalese of that region were outranked to serve as plantation labo ur, while the British  imported 
Tamils from the north to promote them in running the colonial economy. Thus, as a result of the ‘divide and rule’ policy, 
Tamils had an advantage  of British education. Sinhalese , who  were deprived of all those perks, were annoyed and 
anguished (Mason, 2003). 
From 1948 onwards Sinhalese who were religiously Buddhist with a few Christians increased their control over Sri 
Lankan government. This outcome had been feared by Tamil leaders l ike G.Ponnambalam of the Tamil Congress, w ho 
tried until last minute to persuade the British not to decolonize before adequate minority protection had been established.  
In 1956 Sinhala was made the official language of Ceylon under Prime Minister S.W.R.D B andaranaika. The Sinhala 
Only Act sparked off non- violent civil disobedience by Tamil politicians that immediately provoked first anti Tamil riots. 
These were followed by more serious anti -Tamil riots in 1958 after Bandaranaike had an agreement in 1957 wi th the head 
of Tamil Federal Party  S.J.V Chelvanayakam to set up regional council for the Tamils. In 1959 Bandaranaike was 
assassinated. In 1960 Bandaranaike’s widow, Sirimavo took over as the Prime Minister who took tougher line with the 
Tamils. The biased legislation was enacted under a novel republican constitution in 1972. Under which Sinhala was made 
as the national language, Buddhism the state religion and Ceylon became Sri Lanka. P rotections for minorities contained 
in the post - independence constitution of 1947  were abolished. Not only that, introduction of  quotas prevented Tamils 
from entering universities and public services. (Hopgood in Gambetta, 2004).  
During 1970’s Tamils called for separation and increased militancy. The policy of the United National Party  (UNP), 
during the general elections of 1977  which got Junius Richard Jayewardene to power finally acknowledged Tamils.  
Despite Tamils’ support for Jayewardene’s campaign on the grounds of improved ethnic relations, Sri Lanka observed the 
eruption of brutal communal violence which blew-out all over the island. In 1972, four Tamil political groups namely the 
Tamil Federal Party (TFP), the All Ceylon Tamil Congress (ACTC), the Tamil Progressive Front and the Ceylon 
Worker’s congress united to form Tamil United Front (TUF)  so that Tamil language could get  equal status. In May 1973 
the TUF decided to work for  sovereign state ‘’Tamil Eelam’’ the Tamil Homeland. The Tamil United Liberation Front 
(TULF) recognised in 1972, began calling for a separate state in 1976 to be attained legitimately (Bloom, 2005). The 1983 
riots prompted Tamils to leave the island in droves and seek refugee position in India and Western nations, thus creating a 
Tamil diaspora that would shortly backed up the quest for Eelam. Many of others escaped to their cities and villages in the 
north-east, believed that forming a separate Tam il state was their only substitute. Thus, rebel groups  number increased 
dramatically. Sri Lanka’s civil war had begun. (DeVotta, 2009). 
The Tamil guerrilla movement was largely comprised of groups well-known as the 'Tigers'. This is a comprehensive word 
given to the several factions of the secretive organisations which came about from  the Tamil United Liberation Front 
(TULF). Primarily, there were 35 guerrilla groups.Five groups, namely, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), the 
Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization (TELO),  the Peoples Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE), Eelam  
People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF) and the Eelam Revolutionary Organization of Students (EROS) had  

                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 55 
Research Publish Journals 
 
dominated over the other guerrilla groups.  Further, the LTTE became the hegemon among  the other guerrilla 
organisations through factional strug gles. The continuing objective and the slogan  of the LTTE was to form an 
independent Tamil Eelam or state including Sri Lanka’s northern and eastern provinces.  (Samarnayake, 1997).Formed 
under the leadership of Velupillai Prabhakaran on May 5 1976, the LTTE had developed as the most deadly, well planned 
and self-controlled terrorist force. Wanni being its headquarter. The Governments of India, Malaysia, USA, Canada, UK, 
Australia, European Union proscribed  the LTTE as a terrorist organisation. It had a substantial terrorist arrangement for 
propagating, funds raising, obtaining and shipping supplies to sustain their terrorist campaign in Sri Lanka.  India was the 
first country to ban LTTE in May 1992, while Sri Lanka itself is the newest in the list banning the organisation on January 
7, 2009 (South Asia Terrorism portal, 2013) . FBI (2008) stated ‘Needless to say, the Tamil Tigers are among the most 
dangerous and deadly extremists in the world. For more than three decades, the group has l aunched a campaign of 
violence and bloodshed in Sri Lanka, the island republic off the southern coast of India.’  
The organisational structure of the L TTE was enormously hierarchical .The Central Governing Committe, was 
commanded by the leader Vellupillai Prabhakaran who was responsible for the military and political branches.  The 
organization was driven by commands with the leader dictating in consultation with a select group of military and 
political leaders, all aspect of policy. The LTTE military wing w as divided into elite fighting wing ( Charles Anthony 
Regiment), an amphibious group (Sea Tigers),an airborne group( Air Tigers), a suicide commando unit (Black Tigers), 
and an intelligence group. S.P. Tamilchelvan and Prabhakaran’s political adviser Anton  Balasingham headed political 
office. The specific ideological orientatio n that had created solidarity bonds within LTTE combines ethnonationalism and 
Maoism . Prabhakaran was influenced by the militant thoughts and deeds of Subhas Chandra Bose,  who’s Indian National 
Army challenged Gandhi’s nonviolent anti colonialism in the 1940s The training and indoctrination process was based on 
high degree of mental and physical discipline. The extent of ideological commitment to the cause was represented by the 
cyanide capsule worn by all cadres, including the leader which was taken to avoid live capture by the Sri Lankan security 
forces. (O’Duffy in Heiberg et.al, 2007). 
The Tigers had used many p atterns to fight with  the government. Guerrilla insurgency had been their major approach.  
Early strategies included hit and run attacks against security forces and secluded military targets.  In addition to the 
guerrilla strikes, terrorism was used by the Tamil Tigers. Practice of assassinations against vital government officials like 
president, defence minister etc. were very regular. To terrify other government officials into leaving threatened areas , they 
would attack government officials. Therefore weakening the control once they fled.  Those Tamils who cooperated with 
the government were also killed. Any cooperation was seen as readiness to agree government positions. The tigers also 
launched attack on Sinhalese population. Later, they adopted suicide  attacks to achieve their goals  (Lutz and Lutz, 2004). 
Suicide terrorism became a dominant method in LTTE planning.  The idea of embracing this approach was twofold as 
Hoffman (2005) stated firstly  to differentiate  the group from its many  well-known political contenders within the Tamil 
resistance and entice a solid base of popular support, and second ly, to attain a perceptual force multiplier that would allow 
the LTTE play equal the with the  Sri Lankan government. 
LTTE had involved in  different phases of war.  Samarnayake (1999) identified three phases of ethnic insurgency. During 
the first Eelam war, from middle of 1970s to 1989 LTTE mostly assassinated Tamil moderate politicians, police 
informers, and Sinhala civilians residing in eastern and Northern Province. Attacks were also carried out in Colombo and 
Anuradhapura.The second eelam war , from 1990 to 1994 whereby  the LTTE had an armed fight with the government 
militaries in North-Eastern Province. The year 1996 to 2002 was  the phase of third  Eelam war , broke out with an attack 
launched by  the LTTE on a naval boat using a suicide squad on 19 April 1994. By the start of 1995, the government 
forces had recaptured a major part of the  LTTE controlled Jaffna peninsula, and the LTTE had been forced to withdraw to 
the Vanni jungles. The fourth phase was phase of defeat which lasted in 2009. 
3.    HOW THE TAMIL TIGERS DEFEATED 
The LTTE was defeated on 19 May 2009.The defeat came about by Sri Lankan military recapturing all the controlled 
territory by the LTTE and killing all its leadership. The year 2002 -2006 with Norway intervention a peace talk was going 
on between the LTTE and t he Sri Lankan government. But due to two failed Ceasefire which happened earlier, there was 
lack of support from the leadership of the Sri Lanka. And the scenario changed when the Mahinda Rajapaksa came into 
power in 2005 (APDR, 2009). 
President Rajapaksa took the charge, in 2005 of a separated country with LTTE head Prabhakaran who held the authority 
of Sri Lanka with the quarter of its land area and a third of its shore. He confronted with the tough military of LTTE with 

                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 56 
Research Publish Journals 
 
his weak and fragile  military. He firstly took the path of minimum fighting, conveying the army to stay passive in return 
to the attack of LTTE  on civilians. However, simultaneously he began to individually attend each of the weekly 
conferences of the National Security Council. Gotebhaya was made defence secretary of Sri L anka who was his brother. 
Rajapaksa assured his force that the war would terminate only with the eradication of the LTTE and Prabhakaran's 
detention or death.  By close to 2006, Rajapaksa  strengthened the military with in creased funds and added around 80,000 
troops. (Nalapat,2011).The counter -insurgency model which was known as Rajapakse Model was based on the premise 
that terrorism has to be fight  out militarily and not politically. It had some fundamental attributes:  
 Political Will 
 Go To Hell, which included elimination and annihilation 
 No Negotiation 
 Regulation Of Media 
 No Cease Fire 
 Complete Operational Freedom 
 Accent on Young Commanders 
 Keep your neighbours in loop 
The so called humanitarian operations against terrorism commenced in August 2006. By that time the LTTE controlled an 
area of 15,000 square kilometres. The security forces killed almost all top leaders of the LTTE and drove them away from 
their ruled a rea. Fo r example, a fter rescuing the Eastern Province from the control of terrorist in  June   The troops 
launched the Wanni humanitarian operation to release the innocent civilians from the terrorists in 2007. Gradually , 
captured Kilinochchi, the de-facto administrative and the political capital of the LTTE, Elephant Pass and Chalai, marking 
the liberation of the whole Jaffna peninsula from the terrorists. (Shashikumar, 2009) . The military killed almost all the 
leaders of the LTTE including the chief Prabhakaran.  Finally, Sri L ankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa confirmed 
victory over terror on May 18, 2009 and invited the world, involved in a so -called global war on terror (GWOT), to be  his 
pupil in counter-terrorism (Parasram,2012). 
Gunaratna (2009), an expert on the terrorism and LTTE identified three elements of the Colombo government that made 
them successful to win the war and led them to defeat LTTE. They comprised of political, naval and military strategies. 
Firstly, appointment of Colonel Karuna  by the government in 2004 who was the former commander of the Eastern 
Province of LTTE.  With his help and intelligence the government could planned the strategy to fight.  Secondly, the 
strategy of Admiral Wasantha Karannagoda the navy chief who was able to take the Sri Lanka Navy’s convoy out to the 
deep sea, into international territorial waters, to search and destroy LTTE supply ships .Through his leadership qualities 
and intelligence the LTTE ships were destroyed which used t o carry killing machine in Sri L anka. And  Thirdly, the 
expertise of Sri L ankan army under. General Sarath  Fonseka and Gotabhaya Rajapaksa. They realised the fighting 
strategy on various levels and weakened the ability of LTTE to fight. 
However, the counter terrorism adopted by the Sri Lankan government is still of great debate among the international 
community. An international panel was invited by the government to carry out investigation of alleged human rights 
abuses in 2008 but one of the panel members said that the authorities were disturbing the panel’s work. The government 
argued that any criticism on grounds of human rights abuses would be a challenge to sovereignty of the Sri Lankan State. 
Journalists were also attacked physically for cr iticizing the government’s con duct of the war. Those miserable records of 
human rights annoyed the internatio nal human rights bodies as well  (Wickramasinghe, 2009). In 2011, the credibility of 
the report, mandated by United Nations confirmed the accusations. Sri Lankan authority abused civilia ns during the last 
stage of the war .The U.N. and other global agencies estimated that around 40,000 civilians were killed at that time. Later, 
the dreadful details of the carnages that happened were exposed the international community demanded for the 
international investigation. Since the Sri Lankan government opposed for the inquiry, the U.N. Human Rights Council 
(UNHRC) in Geneva took the issue. It condemned Sri Lanka in 2012 and 2013 for grave human rights abuses. The Prime 
Minister of United kingdom D avid Cameron visited Jaffna during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 
where he witnessed the tales of the Tamils. In a press conference, he called for a reliable mechanism to probe allegations 

                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 57 
Research Publish Journals 
 
of the war crime. Cameron fixed a deadline i.e. March  2014 for setting up the independent inquiry commission by the Sri 
Lankan government. Else, he cautioned, Britain being the permanent member of the U. N. Security Council would to 
appeal the UNHRC to launch an international investigation (Cherian, 2013).  
4.    WHY THE TAMIL TIGERS DEFEATED 
‘The victory achieved by defeating the LTTE is the victory of the entire country.’(India Today, 2009).  The statement was 
made by the President Rajapaksa subsequently the demise of LTTE leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran. The final downfall of 
the Tamil Tigers which came with the death of its leader was the outcome of several factors operating at different level.  
The leadership style is very important to any organisation.  And for the Tamil Tigers, their leader had a great role to play 
as Hoffman  (2006, p.142 ) stated ’From its inception, the development and strategic evolution of the LTTE has been 
inexorably guided by Prabhakaran’ s domineering leadership and omnipresent influence.’  O’Duffy  (2007)  explored the 
dominant position of the LTTE leader Prabhakaran through the way of handling the dissent. He eliminated the rival 
paramilitary organisations very comprehensively and ruthlessly. Prabhakaran’s elimination of Mahattaya who was his 
closest allies and confidants, who also established credentials in furthering the struggle and the ejection of 
Vinayagamoorthy Muralitharan, an important military leader in the Eastern Batticaloa region, revealed the totalitarian grip 
of the leader. Similarly, Whittaker (2007) examined two decisions which he called as ‘political blunder’ by the Tamil 
Tigers leadership. Firstly,  the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in 1991 which made India not to show any sympathy towards 
them. Since India had helped in the insurgenc y at an earlier stages. And secondly, when they rejected autonomy offer ed 
by the Sri Lankan government in 1995.   These traits of personality of Prabhakaran made him a kind of dictator of the 
organisation. This made Nalapat (2011) to state that  the individual dictatorship of  Prabhakaran and his denial to endure 
anyone other than flatterers had  so discouraged LTTE commanders that  some of them  even admit defeat to the 
government. This in turn could be discouraging for the organisation and its cause of struggle. Many argue that the reason 
for the downfall of the Tamil Tigers was  the megalomaniac approach of LTTE supremo Prabhakaran.  His confidence that 
he was larger than life led to fake idea of supremacy and an obstinate approach. The LTTE had any asso ciation left wit h 
the Tamil cause was doubtful.  The cause which had brought them together seemed fading gradually and they were 
interested in constructing their supremacy. Had LTTE interested in finding the solution they should have had given up the 
guns a nd concerned themselves to the ballot long ago.  However, the organisation fix ed with its adamant perspective  
(Sethi, 2009). 
The overconfidence of Prabhakaran came out to be disastrous when he decided to boycott the 2005 election. The election 
made Mahinda Rajapaksa to win indirectly. Prabhakaran took it very casually and under -estimated the will of the 
government to curb terrorism. Price of this decision had to paid by the LTTE (Buncombe,  2011)  
Caste factor was very sensitive among the Tamils. It was one o f the features of the LTTE that every leader other than in 
the east should originate from Jaffna, whereas a major chunk which came from the lower castes were recruited in Ampara, 
Mannar, and Batticaola. Many argued that LTTE was using the lower castes as cannon fodder for their war (Bloom,2005). 
The so called upper caste T amils saw other Tamils inferior. LTTE as an organisation also had this superiority -inferiority 
complex. It taxed cruelly to eastern Tamils in government controlled areas whereas it was not  so with the northern 
government controlled areas. With these grievances Colonel Karuna who was fr om the east split from the LTTE  
(DeVotta, 2009).  
The LTTE had a unique feature of recruiting the women and children. Though, the organisation did see it as a n 
advantageous in many ways. For example women and children could easily escape the security. However, it did manifest 
a flip side to the coin which showed that the organisation lacked the man -power.  LTTE initiated the policy of recruiting 
women and children just after the ratification of the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Accord in 1987. This was to fill 
up the gap of shortage. In furtherance of this they forcibly kidnapped and threatened the families to give the child  
(SATP,2013).This could be one of the reasons why Tamil Tigers lost the support among its people (Buncombe, 2011).    
And the spilt of Vinayagamoorthy Muralitharan (aka) Colonel Karuna is seen as one of the major causes of the weakening 
of the organisation. As Bloom (2005 , p.71) stated that ‘In March 2004 , a rebel on the East coast formally broke with the 
LTTE complaining that the east was not being represented by the organization’s northern - based leaders.’ While leaving 
LTTE, Karuna took 6000 troops of the 15,000 strong rebel movements. 
The other factor that  weakened the LTTE as an organisation was the natural catastrophe in 2005,  called tsunami. It had 
changed the balance of power. Before that the LTTE either sought too much or the government was willing to yield too 

                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 58 
Research Publish Journals 
 
much. I t did a sever e damage to many areas of Sri Lanka that the rebels and government forces were contesting. The 
calamity eventually weakened the dissidents and their resource base permitting the go vernment to gain the upper hand  
(Lutz and Lutz, 2013). 
The organisation had also been criticised as it was never serious with the ceasefire and the peace processes. Chandrika 
Kumaratunga, the former president of Sri Lanka was convinced that Prabhakaran was a merciless megalomaniac who was 
insincere about negotiating settlement, and determined to eliminate any LTTE rivals interested in peace.  The negotiating 
settlement had been interpreted as purely tactical to relieve pressure and allow LTTE to rearm  for the next phase of 
struggle (O Duffy, 2007). The organisation did not care about the anguish and wound of people and therefore weakened 
because it lost people's support. It destroyed all peace efforts, development and reconstruction projects in the North ern 
and Eastern parts of Sri L anka. When Japan and other donor countries  tried to give aid  in 2003. LTTE, rejected it  as it 
linked the peace process to the offer (Sethi, 2009). 
Looking the factors arising fro m outside of the organisation DeVotta (2009) stated the factors which changed the 
dynamics of the conflict, President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s election in November 2005 was one of them.  He succeeded 
President Chandrika Kumaratunga in November 2005. While Kumaratunga was looking solution with Tamil Tigers on 
federal set up, Raja paksa, like Kumaratunga, belonged  to  SLFP, yet his election manifesto determined to maintain the 
unitary state structure.  The government was determined to wipe out the LTTE, not to just defeat it. The counter 
insurgency tool employed by the President Rajapakse  revolved around the idea that  if there was a political determination, 
the military can fight terrorism. Hence it is clear that the new government was keen to crush the Tamil Tigers which it did 
eventually in 2009. 
The US  led Global Wa r on Terror had marginalised  LTTE. After 9/11 the organisation suffered financially. The 
international cooperation against terrorist financial and procurement networks was bound to cause problems to LTTE.  It 
therefore weakened the organisation to achieve the form of self-determination that met historical aspiration and 
contemporary interest of Tamils. Freezing LTTE controlled bank accounts worldwide had prevented $4 billion f rom 
reaching the Tigers in 2002 (O’Duffy, 2007). The biggest blow came when Canada banned the LTTE’s funding networks 
in 2005. LTTE received arou nd $12 million per year from  networks in Canada.  Similarly, European Union carried out  
processes in 2006 to prevent expatriate transfer of funds. So unfortunately, the LTTE lost almost all monetary sustenance 
from the West. This was the period  when the government was growing s tronger than LTTE as it wa s facing multilayered 
problems (Smith,2010) . 
Parasram (2012) argued that the new meaning of Global War on Terror helped the government of Sri Lanka in 
overcoming the LTTE militarily. After the Al Qaeda attacked the US and the whole equation of terror changed. Now the 
government had a strong mandate to e nd the terrorism. In addition to prevent any division of Sri Lanka as a singular state.  
The idea of who had a right to wage war and how that war ought to be waged was not clear.  
The crucial factor in the victory of  Sri Lankan government  over LTTE was the diplomatic achievement acquired by the 
President Rajapaksa.  Norway and the EU were barred for the first time from striking a cease-fire that would let the LTTE 
to regroup and rearm. The critical element of the plan was Rajapaksa's obtaining India's  assistance and China's open 
sustenance for his war ambitions (Nalapat,2011) .In defeating the LTTE, China factor played an important role in Sri  
Lanka. Conventionally Sri L anka was given military aid by US, European Union, Japan and Canada.  However, during 
2005, China st arted giving aid. This led Sri L anka to cut its ties from the Western countries regarding the aid given for 
anti-LTTE operations. On return China got rights for the port services and other several investments.  Through this China 
influenced the balance of power of South Asia , giving competition to India. Through the help Sri Lanka got all the 
military control which it required to defeat the Tamil Tigers (Smith, 2010). On larger picture China also helped Sri Lanka 
on political front. China and Russia protected Sri L anka from being targeted in U.N. Security Council.(DeVotta,2009) .Sri 
Lankan military operations  was helped by India as it provided  intelligence and other kinds of strategic backing 
(Shashikumar, 2009).  
5.    CONCLUSION 
The growth of Tamil Tigers was the result of ethnic rivalry between Sinhalese and Tamils. Later, it adopted lethal terrorist 
ways to attain a separate land, Tamil ‘Eelam’. As O’Duffy (2007,p.257) remarked, ‘The rise of the LTTE from a group of 
30 poorly armed dissidents in 1983 into one of the world’s foremost paramilitary groups by 1991 demonstrates what may 
happen to states that attempt to ignore ethno nationalism and impose majoritarian democracy. ’ The terror of LTTE came 
to an end in 2009 with the government’s new model of countering terrorism. 

                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 59 
Research Publish Journals 
 
The present essay has  tried to look at various factors which led to the defeat of LTTE and thus it may be argued that 
downfall of Tamil Tigers was the result of both  internal and external elements. At the internal level, the LTTE as an 
organisation experienced various flaws which made them weak. While, at the external level, the strong political will of the 
Sri Lankan government to curb terrorism made the authority victorious. 
However, looking at the counter -terrorism mechanism adopted  by the government, that actually crushed the physical 
existence of the organisation by eliminating all the leaders and cadres of the LTTE. It  could be argued that military defeat 
is just a temporary solution for the insurgency problem.  The major problem, which includes addressing the sentiments of 
Tamils and protecting their right are  crucial for the government. Hence, it could be said that ‘The Sri Lankan government 
has won a battle  but not the war’  (Sethi, 2009). As the crushing of LTTE is under the scrutiny of the international 
community, this essay t herefore to certain extent  has argued on the conclusion of  Bloom (2005, p.71) ‘The LTTE is not 
defeated but neither is it victorious’. 
REFERENCES 
[1] APDR (2009), ‘How Sri Lanka Won the Unwinnable War’, 1 st September [Online]. Available 
at:http://www.asiapacificdefencereporter.com/articles/36/How-Sri-Lanka-Won-the-Unwinnable-War (Accessed : 5 
December 2013). 
[2] Bloom,M.(2005) Dying to kill The allure of suicide terror. New York: Columbia University Press, pp.45-75. 
[3] Buncombe, A.(2011) ‘Tamil rebels recruited children for last stand against Sri Lankan army’. The Independent, 12 
December [Online].Available at: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/tamil-rebels-recruited-children-for-
last-stand-against-sri-lankan-army-6275874.html (Accessed :5 December 2013) 
[4] Cherian, J. (2013) ‘The Commonwealth summit in Colombo is overshadowed by the issue of the Sri Lank an 
government’s alleged violation of human rights towards the end of the country’s civil war in 2009’. Frontline, 
December [Online] Available at: 
[5] http://www.frontline.in/the-nation/fractious-summit/article5383203.ece?ref=sliderNews 
[6] (Accessed : 5 December 2013). 
[7] DeVotta,N.(2009) ’  The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and the Lost Quest for Separatism in Sri Lanka’,  Asian 
Survey, 49(6) pp. 1021-1051, JSTOR [Online].Available at:  
[8] http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/as.2009.49.6.1021 (Accessed:13 November 20 13). 
[9] Gunaratna, R.(2009) ‘Sri Lanka’s challenge: winning the peace’, Open Democracy, 27 May [Online]. Available at: 
http://www.opendemocracy.net/article/sri-lanka-s-challenge-winning-the-peace (Accessed: 20 Nov 2013). 
[10] Hoffman, B. (2006) Inside terrorism. New York: Columbia University Press, pp.137-145. 
[11] 5Hopgood, S.(2005) ‘Tamil Tigers, 1987 -2002’ in Gambetta,D.(ed) Making sense of suicide mission. New York:  
Oxford University Press, pp.43-76. 
[12] India Today (2009), ‘LTTE's defeat is victory for country: Sri Lan kan president’, 19 May [Online].  Available at: 
:http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/Lanka%20celebrates%20end%20of%20Tigers/1/42765.html (Accessed: 20 Nov 
2013). 
[13] Lutz, M.J. and Lutz,J.B. (2004) Global terrorism. 3rd edn. New York:Routledge, pp.260 -266. 
[14] Mason, D.T. (2003) ‘Structures of ethnic conflict: Revolution versus secession in Rwanda and Sri Lanka’ , Terrorism 
and Political Violence,15(4),pp. 83 -113 [Online].Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09546550390450492 
(Accessed: 09 November 2013). 
[15] Nalapat, D.M.(2011) ‘Defeating Terrorism - Why the Tamil Tigers Lost Eelam..and how Sri Lanka won the war’, 
The Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs [Online]. Available at: http://www.jinsa.org/publications/global -
briefing/defeating-terrorism-why-tamil-tigers-lost-eelamand-how-sri-lanka-won-war (Accessed : 16 Nov 2013) 

                                                                                                                                        ISSN 2348-3156 (Print) 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanities Research  ISSN 2348-3164 (online) 
Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp: (53-60), Month:  July - September 2016, Available at: www.researchpublish.com 
  
Page | 60 
Research Publish Journals 
 
[16] O’Duffy, B.(2007) ‘LTTE: Majoritarianism, Self -Determination, and Military -to-Political Transition in Sri Lanka’, 
in Heiberg,M.,O’Leary,B.and Tirman,J.(eds) Terror,Insurgency,and the State E nding Protracted Conflicts. 
Philadelphia:University of Pennsylvania Press, pp.257-287. 
[17] Parasram, A.(2012) ‘Erasing Tamil Eelam: de/re territorialisation in the global war on terror’,  Academia edu 
[Online]. Available at: 
http://www.academia.edu/1253527/Erasing_Tamil_Eelam_De_Re_Territorialisation_in_the_Global_ [Online].( 
Accessed: 19 Nov 2013) 
[18] RAND (2008) How terrorists groups end lessons for countering Al Qa’ida [Online]. Available at: 
http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monographs/2008/RAND_MG741 -1.pdf (Accessed: 16 Nov 2013). 
[19] Samaranayake,G. (1997) ‘Political violence in Sri Lanka:A diagnostic approach, Terrorism and Political Violence’, 
Terrorism and Political Violence, 9(2),pp.  99-119 [Online] Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/095465597  
08427405(Accessed: 09 November 2013). 
[20] Samaranayake,S. (1999) ‘Patterns of political violence and responses of the government in Sri Lanka’, Terrorism 
and Political Violence, 11(1),pp.110 -122 [Online].Available at:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09546559908427497 
(Accessed: 09 November 2013). 
[21] Sethi, A.(2009) ‘How the Tamil Tigers lost their stripes’ , The Times of India, 3 May [Online].Available at: 
http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2009-05-03/special-report/28189046_1_ltte-terror-groups-prabhakaran 
(Accessed:15 Nov 2013). 
[22] Shashikumar, K.V. (2009) ‘Lessons from Sri Lanka's War’, Indian Defence Review 24(3) [Online].Available at: 
http://www.indiandefencereview.com/spotlights/lessons-from-the-war-in-sri-lanka/ (Accessed: 19 Nov 2013). 
[23] Smith, A.N.(2010) ‘Understanding Sri Lanka’s defeat of the Tamil Tigers’, Joint Forces Quarterly,59(4) [Online]. 
Available at: http://sangam.org/understanding-sri-lankas-defeat-tamil-tigers/ (Accessed :16 Nov 2013). 
[24] South Asian Terrorism Portal(2013) Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) [Online].Availableat: 
http://www.satp.org/satporgtp/countries/shrilanka/terroristoutfits/LTTE.HTM (Accessed: 16 Nov 2013)  
[25] The FBI (2008) Taming the Tamil Tigers from here in t he U.S.  [Online].Available at: http://www.fbi.gov  
/news/stories/2008/january/tamil_tigers011008 (Accessed: 17 Nov 2013). 
[26] Whittaker, J.D. (ed.) (2001) The terrorism reader.3rd edn. New York:Routledge, pp.101 -116. 
[27] Wickramasinghe, N.(2009) ‘ Sri Lanka in 2008: Waging War for Peace ‘ , Asian Survey, 49(1), pp. 59 -65, JSTOR 
[Online]. Available at: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/as.2009.49.1.59 (Accessed:13 November 2013). 