SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 1
SPECIAL REPORT
NO. 494 | M Ay  2021 UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE    www.usip.org
The Evolution and Potential Resurgence 
of the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan
By Amira Jadoon
Summary
• Established in 2007, the Tehrik-i- 
Taliban Pakistan (TTP) became 
one of Pakistan’s deadliest militant 
organizations, notorious for its bru -
tal attacks against civilians and the  
Pakistani state. By 2015, a US drone 
campaign and Pakistani military  
operations had destroyed much of 
the TTP’s organizational coherence 
and capacity. 
• While the TTP’s lethality remains 
low, a recent uptick in the number 
of its attacks, propaganda releases, 
attempts to intimidate local pop-
ulations, and mergers with prior 
splinter groups suggest that the 
TTP is attempting to revive itself.
• Multiple factors may facilitate this 
ambition. These include the Afghan 
Taliban’s potential political ascend-
ency in a post–peace agreement 
Afghanistan, which may enable 
the TTP to redeploy its resources 
within Pakistan, and the potential 
for TTP to deepen its links with 
other militant groups such as the  
regional affiliates of al-Qaeda and  
the Islamic State. 
• Thwarting the chances of the TTP’s 
revival requires a multidimensional 
approach that goes beyond kinetic 
operations and renders the group’s 
message irrelevant. Efforts need to 
prioritize investment in countering 
violent extremism programs, en-
hancing the rule of law and access 
to essential public goods, and cre-
ating mechanisms to address legiti-
mate grievances peacefully.
A Pakistani soldier surveys what used to be the headquarters of Baitullah Mehsud, the TTP 
leader who was killed in March 2010. (Photo by Pir Zubair Shah/New Y ork Times)
Contents
Introduction ................................... 3
The Rise and Decline  
of the TTP, 2007–18 ..................... 4
Signs of a Resurgent  
TPP, 2019–Early 2021  ............... 12
Regional Alliances  
and Rivalries ................................ 15
Conclusion: Keeping  
the TTP at Bay ............................. 19

2 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
The views expressed in this report are those of the author alone. They do not necessarily reflect the views of  
the United States Institute of Peace. An online edition of this and related reports can be found on our website 
(www.usip.org), together with additional information on the subject.
© 2021 by the United States Institute of Peace
United States Institute of Peace 
2301 Constitution Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20037
Phone: (202) 457-1700 
Fax: (202) 429-6063  
E-mail: usip_requests@usip.org  
Web: www.USIP.org
Special Report No. 494. First published 2021.
ISBN: 978-1-60127-852-4  
NO. 494 | M Ay  2021
SPECIAL REPORT
ABOUT THE REPORT
Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), once one of Pakistan’s most deadly militant 
groups, experienced a steady decline due to sustained counterterrorism 
pressure and internal fragmentation. This report, supported by the Asia 
Center at the United States Institute of Peace and drawing on datasets of 
militant violence and the TTP’s own statements, traces the evolution of TTP 
thus far and assesses factors that could shape the group’s future trajectory.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Amira Jadoon is an assistant professor at the Combating Terrorism Center 
and the Department of Social Sciences at the US Military Academy at West 
Point. She specializes in international security, economic statecraft, political 
violence, and terrorism. The views expressed in this article are the author’s 
and do not necessarily reflect those of the Combating Terrorism Center, the 
US Military Academy, the US Department of Defense, or the US government.
VIOLENT 
EXTREMISM

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 3
Introduction
In the years following its formation in 2007, the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) emerged as one 
of Pakistan’s deadliest militant organizations. Maintaining close ties with al-Qaeda, the Afghan 
Taliban, and a host of other militant groups, the TTP marked the Pakistani landscape with some 
of the bloodiest terrorist attacks in the country’s history. Among its most notorious attacks were 
an assault on the Pakistani navy’s largest airbase in 2011; an attack on Karachi’s international 
airport in 2014; and, also in 2014, a massacre at the Army Public School in Peshawar that killed 
150 people, almost all of them students. 
However, sustained efforts by the Pakistani government—most notably, the military’s Operation 
Zarb-e-Azb, begun in 2014—and a US drone campaign, together with factors intrinsic to the or-
ganization, precipitated the TTP’s steep decline, and by 2016 it was barely functioning when it 
came to conducting attacks. Today, the TTP is largely a fragmented and exhausted militant or-
ganization, dispersed throughout Pakistan and in bordering Afghanistan. But this may be about 
to change. A recent uptick in the TTP’s activity suggests that the group is eager to consolidate 
its base and reinvigorate its violent campaign. In the first two months of 2021 alone, the group 
claimed at least thirty-two attacks—and while that number is surely exaggerated, more reliable 
sources do show a rise in TTP attacks in the past two years. Reports of TTP militants intimidating 
civilians and of splinter groups rejoining the TTP have also prompted concern. Although the 
TTP threat remains limited at present, early signs of an attempted comeback warrant a closer 
A group of students paint “no more extremism” on a wall in the park in Lahore, Pakistan, where a suicide bombing linked to the Tehrik-i-
Taliban Pakistan killed dozens of people on April 3, 2016. (Photo by K. M. Chaudary/AP)

4 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
examination of the various factors that could enable the group to rebuild itself— in particular, its 
relationship with an ascendant Afghan Taliban, links with deadly militant groups, and ongoing 
governance gaps in northwest Pakistan. 
This report asks whether the TTP is capable of regaining sufficient strength and capacity to 
significantly intensify its violent campaign within Pakistan and exacerbate conflict in the wider 
region. T o this end, the report addresses three key questions:
• How has the nature, intensity, and geographical focus of the TTP’s organizational activ-
ity evolved over the years?
• How are the TTP’s relationships with prominent regional militant groups likely to create 
opportunities and challenges for the group in the future?
• How are evolving sociopolitical dynamics likely to impact the future trajectory of the 
TTP, in particular, the political developments in Afghanistan, governance issues in north-
west Pakistan, and the regional militant infrastructure? 
Drawing on the TTP’s own publications and statements, conflict datasets recording the TTP’s 
violent activity, and secondary sources, the report charts the rise and decline of the TTP from 
2007 through 2018, focusing on the organization’s origins, goals, and leadership; the targets 
and trajectory of its violence; and its eventual degradation and decapitation. It then examines 
the evidence for the TTP’s possible resurgence since 2018—including a rise in the number of its 
attacks, a revitalized propaganda campaign, and a tighter embrace of transnational jihadism—
and how its resurgence might be influenced by its evolving relationship with other militant or-
ganizations in the region, particularly the Afghan Taliban, al-Qaeda, and Islamic State Khorasan 
(ISK). The report spotlights factors (such as the impact of the ongoing Afghan peace process) 
that could help the TTP reassert itself as a major threat to the Pakistani state, and presents 
recommendations for ways the Pakistani state, with cooperation and support from the United 
States, might stifle its resurgence: expanding efforts to counter violent extremism; addressing 
the TTP’s links to other militant groups in the region; and tackling popular grievances in TTP 
strongholds by improving governance and economic conditions.
The Rise and Decline 
of the TTP , 2007–18
The emergence of the TTP is closely associated with the fall of the Afghan Taliban’s regime in 
Afghanistan in 2001 and the subsequent development of an insurgency. After the US invasion 
of Afghanistan, thousands of Afghan Taliban and al-Qaeda members crossed over into Pakistan 
looking for safe havens in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), as well in parts of the 
provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) and Balochistan. The resulting “Talibanization” of these 
areas saw Afghan Taliban leaders working with local tribal leaders to recruit Pakistani tribesmen 
and madrassa students to fight US and NATO forces.1 Prior to the TTP’s official formation in 2007, 
many of its members supported the Afghan Taliban’s fight in Afghanistan by providing logistical 
support and facilitating recruitment.2

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 5
Military operations by the Pakistan Army in North and South Waziristan in 2002 acted 
as a catalyst for widespread militancy in FATA and coordination among a diverse range of 
armed groups, which emerged around tribes, territories, and commanders. 3 The Taliban filled 
the power vacuum that was created in these areas by Pakistani military operations against  
al-Qaeda–linked operatives. Those operations brought seventy to eighty thousand soldiers 
to the region. 4 During this period, the nascent Pakistani Taliban, a decentralized network of 
various militant chapters in FATA, began to assert their own leadership, targeting local tribal 
elders, instituting their own version of Islamic governance, and clashing with the existing sys-
tem of local political structures. 5 
It was in this environment that the TTP emerged in December 2007 as a loosely tied umbrella 
organization under the leadership of Baitullah Mehsud, a militant leader from South Waziristan. 
A shura (consultative committee) made up of forty senior local militant leaders—many with links 
to local criminal networks—came together to represent FATA’s tribal regions and KP districts. 6 
Unlike the Afghan Taliban leaders, Baitullah and other TTP leaders tended to be poorly educat-
ed in Islamic studies despite employing a religious vocabulary. 
Pakistan Army soldiers cordon off the area of a suicide bombing near Peshawar, Pakistan. The February 15, 2017 attack, claimed by the 
Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, targeted a government vehicle transporting court judges. (Photo by Mohammad Sajjad/AP)

6 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
Espousing a Deobandi ideology—a revivalist move-
ment originating in India that seeks to purify Islamic prac-
tices—the group’s key goals included implementing sha-
ria law, fighting US and NATO forces in Afghanistan, and 
engaging in jihad against the Pakistan Army (especially in 
Swat District and North Waziristan). 7 Indeed, a statement 
by Baitullah’s spokesman, Maulvi Omar, in December 
2007 made clear that a key reason for the creation of the TTP was to present a united front 
against the Pakistan Army’s operations.8 The decentralized nature of the TTP, however, meant 
that local commanders’ decisions were influenced not just by the overarching goals of the 
TTP, but also by local political developments and tribal concerns. These differing and some-
times competing agendas eventually led to significant levels of internal dissension. The TTP’s 
aggressive stance toward the Pakistani state contrasted with that of other local militants, such 
as Hafiz Gul Bahadur and Mullah Nazir, who diverged with Baitullah over the issue of protect-
ing foreign fighters and targeting the Pakistani state.
The TTP operated in a highly decentralized fashion, with factions across tribal regions con-
ducting their own violent, intelligence, and logistical operations. While the “Mehsud Group” 
formed the core of the TTP, the groups led by Bahadur and Nazir were not officially a part of the 
TTP.9 In 2008, Nazir joined forces with Bahadur to create the Muqami Tehrik-e-Taliban (Local 
Taliban Movement), which was distinct from Baitullah’s TTP and which opposed attacks on the 
Pakistani state. Both Nazir and Bahadur had strong ties with al-Qaeda, the Afghan Taliban, and 
members of the Haqqani Network (a prominent insurgent group, which operates in both eastern 
Afghanistan and northwest Pakistan and which is considered to be a semiautonomous compo-
nent of the Afghan Taliban).
In February 2009, Baitullah, Nazir, and Bahadur formed an alliance known as the Council of 
United Mujahideen, which pledged to refocus efforts on international forces in Afghanistan. 10 
yet, as the United States intensified its drone warfare in the tribal regions of Pakistan and the 
Pakistani military continued its operations there, Bahadur aligned with Baitullah and claimed 
responsibility for a deadly attack in mid-2009 on a Pakistani military convoy.11 Sustained military 
action provided the various Pakistani Taliban factions with incentives not only to cooperate with 
one another, but also to link up with Punjabi militants and foreign militants. 
When Hakimullah Mehsud was appointed the TTP’s new leader after Baitullah’s death in 
a 2009 missile strike, he reinforced links with al-Qaeda and other foreign fighters. Under 
Hakimullah, there was increased cooperation with Sipahe Sahaba and Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, 
which led to the TTP becoming more engaged in sectarian attacks against Shiites. 12 The TTP’s 
links with other militant groups brought both material and reputational benefits; in exchange 
for safe havens and training camps in FATA, al-Qaeda offered financing and technical assis-
tance, while Punjabi militants provided access to their infrastructure that enabled the TTP to 
carry out attacks in urban areas. 13 
In 2013, the TTP’s leadership shifted outside the Mehsud clan, to Mullah Fazlullah from the 
Swat District. The Mehsud tribe make up about 60 percent of the population in South Waziristan, 
and given the critical importance of tribal loyalties in FATA and the rivalries among tribes, the 
The TTP’s aggressive stance toward the 
Pakistani state contrasted with that of 
other local militants . . . who diverged with 
Baitullah over the issue of protecting foreign 
fighters and targeting the Pakistani state.

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 7
leadership’s Mehsud identity had 
helped cement loyalty to the TTP 
in South Waziristan. Fazlullah, 
who led the Swat and Malakand 
chapters, was considered an out-
sider by many of the tribal-based 
Taliban, which made it difficult 
for them to accept him as their 
leader.14 Fazlullah’s leadership 
not only undermined the cohe-
sion of the TTP but also triggered 
more extreme attacks. Fazlullah presided over the TTP when the group attacked the Army 
Public School in 2014 and the Bacha Khan University in 2016. He died in June 2018 in Kunar, 
Afghanistan, and was replaced by Mufti Noor Wali, a member of the Mehsud tribe and a native 
of South Waziristan who was heavily involved in the TTP’s operations in Karachi.15
With the heavy losses inflicted on the TTP during Operation Zarb-e-Azb (described below), 
its members’ relocation to Afghanistan, and the death of Fazlullah, it was widely believed that 
the TTP’s complete dissolution was near. However, two notable developments at this point 
may have laid the foundations for a possible resurgence. One was the return of the TTP lead-
ership to the Mehsud tribe. The second was the release of a new “Code of Conduct” for TTP 
members.16 The code showcased the TTP’s new goals of uniting the differing factions under 
the group’s central leadership and instilling more structure and discipline through laying out 
clear lines of authority and responsibilities, introducing a process for identifying legitimate 
targets, and providing guidelines for martyrdom operations. 17 Under Noor Wali’s leadership, 
in addition to targeting security personnel, the TTP renewed its attacks against state politi-
cians, such as its attack on Awami National Party (ANP) leader Haroon Bilour in July 2018, and 
on Tehreek-e-Insaf’s Ikram Ullah Gandapur two weeks later. The ANP, which governed KP 
between 2008 and 2013, has long opposed the Taliban and supported military operations. 
Gandapur, who belongs to a politically powerful family, was elected to the administrative divi-
sion (Kulachi Tehsil) of Dera Ismail Khan located near the border of South Waziristan. 18
THE TTP’S TARGETS AND TRAJECTORY OF VIOLENCE
Data for TTP’s operational activity before 2010 are limited, but according to the Global Terrorism 
Database, the group was involved in 269 attacks between 2007 and 2009, primarily in FATA 
and KP. From 2010 on, data are available from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data 
Project (ACLED), which has compiled comprehensive records of various kinds of violent events 
AFGHANISTAN
IRAN
INDIA
CHINA
Sindh
108 attacks
Balochistan
98 attacks
Punjab
42 attacks
Gilgit-
    Baltistan
        1 attack
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
727 attacks
Federal Capital Territory
4 attacks
PAKISTAN
TURKMENISTAN
Islamabad
Azad Jammu
and Kashmir
Aksai Chin
Jammu
and Kashmir
Area 
enlarged
Area 
enlarged
Arabian Sea 200 miles
200 km
Federally Administered Tribal Areas
800 attacks
MAP 1. NUMBER OF  
TTP-LINKED ATTACKS 
BY ADMINISTRATIVE 
UNIT (2010–20)
Adapted from artwork by Rainer 
Lesniewski/Shutterstock.

8 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
Lakki Marwat 20
Peshawar 232
Shangla 6
Karak 7
Lahore 10
Tank 22 
Mardan 26
Nowshera 29
Dera Ismail Khan 33
Swabi 31
Kohat 58
Lower and Upper Dir 37
Swat 40
Charsadda 42
Hangu 54
Bannu 60
Khyber 197
Kurram 81
Orakzai 61
North Waziristan 134
South Waziristan 93
Quetta 43
Killa Abdullah 13
Karachi City 101
Mohmand 134
Bajaur 110
FIGURE 1. NUMBER OF TTP-LINKED ATTACKS  
BY DISTRICT AND AGENCY (2010–20)
Map adapted from artwork by Rainer Lesniewski/Shutterstock.
Districts and agencies with five or fewer attacks
Balochistan
Khuzdar 5
Loralai 5
Dera Bugti 4
Kalat 4
Mastung 4
Zhob 4
Sheerani 3
Killa Saifullah 2
Sibi 2
Ziarat 2
Awaran 1
Chagai 1
Gwadar 1
Kech 1
Nasirabad 1
Panjgur 1
Pishin 1
Punjab
Chakwal 5
Faisalabad 5
Rawalpindi 5
Sheikhupura 4
Attock 2
Dera Ghazi  
Khan 2
Gujranwala 2
Khanewal 2
Bahawalpur 1
Gujrat 1
Kasur 1
Khushab 1
Multan 1
Sindh
Shikarpur 5 Hyderabad 1 Larkana 1
Federal Capital Territory
Islamabad 4
Gilgit-Baltistan
Diamir 1
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Mansehra 5
Buner 4
Chitral 4
Malakand PA 4
Batagram 2
Kohistan 1

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 9
involving the TTP.19 For the purposes of this report, that data were re-coded for analysis. Event 
summaries were used to extract events where, according to media reports, the TTP had claimed 
an attack or local authorities suspected that the TTP was the perpetrator.20 
The data reveal clear geographical and chronological patterns (see map 1). At the provincial 
level, between 2010 and 2020, the vast majority of TTP-linked attacks occurred in FATA and 
KP—800 (45 percent) and 727 (41 percent), respectively, out of a total of 1,780—but a significant 
number of attacks were also recorded in Balochistan and Sindh (98 and 108, respectively) as 
TTP militants dispersed across Pakistan and expanded their links with Punjabi militants. Fatalities 
were also the highest in FATA and KP—1,851 (38 percent) and 2,241 (46 percent), respectively—
out of a total of 4,880 people killed by the TTP in these years. Peshawar, the capital of KP, ex-
perienced the highest level of TTP attacks, including the highest number of TTP-linked suicide 
attacks compared with other districts.21 
Much of the TTP’s reach outside of FATA and KP was concentrated in urban areas such as 
Quetta, Karachi, and Lahore. Operating in densely populated cities allowed the TTP to escape 
US drone strikes and Pakistani military operations in the northwest and to use urban areas to re-
group, recruit, and establish lucrative links with criminal gangs.22 Karachi witnessed some of the 
TTP’s most audacious attacks, such as the 2011 attack on the Mehran naval base, during which 
TTP militants fought a fifteen-hour battle with security forces that left thirteen people dead and 
maritime surveillance aircraft destroyed. 
As figure 1 shows, most TTP attacks have occurred in areas along the border with Afghanistan. 
The TTP has always had close ties to Afghanistan, but these became yet stronger in the wake 
of Operation Zarb-e-Azb, which forced many of the group’s members and leaders to cross over 
into Afghanistan.23 In recent years, Pakistan has often blamed Afghanistan for enabling terrorists 
to cross the border into Pakistan, attack Pakistani security personnel, and then return to their 
safe havens in Afghanistan.24
Figure 2 (on page 10) shows the pattern of the TTP’s activity from 2010 to 2020 across Pakistan’s 
main administrative units. In 2010, the TTP was already at what was to prove to be the peak of its 
activity in terms of numbers of attacks (402), but after a significant drop to 202 the following year, 
the 392 attacks in 2012 nearly matched their earlier peak. The next two years saw steady and 
significant declines, but that drop-off became precipitous in 2015, during which the TTP launched 
only ninety-six attacks, its operational capacity clearly damaged by Operation Zarb-e-Azb, which 
had been announced in June 2014. By 2016, TTP was profoundly weakened as an operational 
force, and it hit its lowest point in 2018, when it carried out just twenty-one attacks. As discussed 
later, the last two years have seen a modest but nonetheless worrying increase in TTP attacks.
Between 2010 and 2014, a large number of the TTP’s attacks focused on the military, as well 
as civilians. However, after 2014, the TTP appeared to make the police its main target. An exam-
ination of state-led operations against the TTP suggests that this reorientation may be linked to 
a change in the tactics of the security forces: between 2010 and 2015, drone strikes made up 
a sizable portion of efforts against the group, whereas after 2015 most operations consisted of 
armed clashes between the police and TTP militants. In 2017 and 2018, for example, about 40 
percent of all security operations against the TTP involved raids by police personnel. The TTP’s 
decision to increasingly target the police may therefore be retaliation for these raids.

10 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
LEADERSHIP DECAPITATION, INTERNAL  
STRUGGLES, AND SPLINTERING 
Many of the early military operations against the TTP yielded limited success, which allowed 
the TTP to consolidate its strength. Actions taken against militants between 2004 and 2007 
consisted of Pakistani military raids on the towns of Mir Ali, Miramshah, Razmak, and Shawal 
in North Waziristan, plus a limited number of US drone strikes. 25 yet in the aftermath of these 
raids, the military often failed to hold the territory it had secured and ensure protection for 
civilians. The lack of a coherent long-term strategy was underscored in 2007–09 by the fact 
that while it was conducting raids on TTP militants, the Pakistan Army was also negotiating 
with TTP leaders. 26 In February 2009, the military capitulated after failing to regain control 
of Swat and sought to cut a deal with militants, specifically with Sufi Mohammad of Tehrik-i-
Nifaz-i-Shariat-i-Mohammadi, a militant group that has long advocated for the implementation 
of sharia law in Pakistan’s Malakand Division. The result was the Malakand accord, a peace 
agreement that was intended to end military and militant operations and permit sharia law 
in the Pakistan’s northwestern districts of Malakand, Swat, Shangla, Buner, Dir, Chitral, and 
Kohistan.27 However, in April 2009, militants began to occupy government buildings, moved 
into neighboring areas such as Buner, and launched attacks on police stations and the Frontier 
Constabulary.28 The TTP’s attacks peaked in 2010, underscoring the failure of the military’s di-
vide-and-conquer approach. 
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FIGURE 2. NUMBER OF TTP-LINKED ATTACKS PER YEAR (2010–20)
400
300
200
100
0
Administrative Units
 Balochistan
 FATA
 Federal Capital Territory
 Gilgit-Baltistan
 Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
 Punjab
 Sindh

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 11
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
These violations of the agreement, along with consistent pressure from the United States, 
triggered a series of military operations. In October 2009, the Pakistani military initiated ground 
operations in South Waziristan focused on clearing TTP strongholds, while negotiating with 
Nazir and Bahadur. While these operations likely accounted for the dip in TTP’s attacks in 2011, 
they also displaced many people from their homes, fueling resentment that the TTP is believed 
to have exploited for recruitment purposes.29
Meanwhile, the US counterterrorism campaign against the TTP and al-Qaeda operatives, 
largely in North Waziristan, was undermining the TTP’s leadership and internal cohesion. After 
2008, the United States ramped up its aerial surveillance and analysis capacity via Predator and 
Reaper drones and enhanced cooperation with Pakistan through a renegotiated pact between 
the Central Intelligence Agency and Pakistan’s Inter-services Intelligence agency.30 This cooper-
ation, combined with permission from the Pakistani government for the CIA to undertake drone 
strikes against al-Qaeda leaders and other suspects within FATA, ushered in the decline of the 
TTP. That decline was hastened by Operation Zarb-e-Azb, which ran from mid-2014 until early 
2017 and saw the Pakistan Army target TTP militants in North Waziristan as well as other groups 
such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and al-Qaeda.
Past research indicates that in situations in which militant groups are able to maintain financial 
networks and the state is unable to provide adequate law enforcement, military operations may 
lead not to the elimination of militants but to their dispersal to low-threat areas within the same 
country or to neighboring countries.31 This seems to have occurred in the case of the TTP. Although 
intense targeting of TTP’s members and leaders undermined the group’s strength, Pakistani and 
US operations also resulted in the dispersion of its members to other tribal areas and across the 
border into Afghanistan.32 Another unintended consequence of pressure from security forces was 
that the TTP initiated an intense campaign of suicide attacks in Pakistan’s urban centers.33 
However, even as the TTP sought to respond to the increased pressure against its forces, 
leadership decapitation and combat deaths began to degrade its cohesion. Following Baitullah 
Mehsud’s death in an August 2009 drone strike, his successor, Hakimullah Mehsud, relocated 
many of his personnel to Karachi and other urban areas in Pakistan. 34 Further power strug-
gles developed after Hakimullah’s death in late 2013 in a US drone strike in North Waziristan.35 
Internal succession disputes eventually resulted in the splintering of the TTP into three main 
groups: the Shahryar Mehsud group, the Khalid Sajna group, and the Asmat Muawiya group. 
Research is inconclusive about the effects of leadership decapitation on a militant group’s life, 
but in the case of the TTP the death of successive leaders appears to have amplified decentraliza-
tion of an already loosely tied organization and exacerbated internecine conflict.36 Internal rivalries 
and external pressures also resulted in a significant fall in the number of TTP fighters over time. In 
mid-2009, the TTP was estimated to have between sixteen and twenty thousand members, and 
that number was estimated to have risen to between twenty and twenty-five thousand members 
in 2012.37 By late 2019, however, the US Department of Defense estimated the number of TTP 
fighters in Afghanistan to be a mere three to five thousand, and a UN report in 2020 put this figure 
only a little higher, at around six thousand.38 However, the dispersion of the TTP outside of FATA 
and KP means that the current strength of dormant TTP cells in urban centers remains unknown. 

12 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
Signs of a Resurgent 
TPP , 2019–Early 2021 
In an interview with Al Jazeera in April 2020, the former spokesman of the TTP, Ehsanullah 
Ehsan, remarked, “We cannot say that the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan, Jamaat-ul-Ahrar [a TTP 
splinter group], or other anti-Pakistan groups are completely finished. . . . They definitely have 
a set-up and perhaps they have gone silent as part of a plan.” 39 This assessment seems accu-
rate. Although the TTP has lost significant operational capacity in the past five or six years and 
has been plagued with internal disputes, breakaway factions, and defections to ISK, the group 
has continued to wage a sporadic jihad against the Pakistani state. For example, during the 
2018 national elections in Pakistan, the TTP conducted a series of attacks against politicians 
and was suspected to have deployed a female suicide attacker in KP in July 2019.40 Clearly the 
United States still sees the TTP as posing an operational threat, hence its designation of Noor 
Wali Mehsud as a “Global Terrorist” in 2019 and the killing of two prominent TTP members in 
Afghanistan in 2020 by Afghan security forces.
The ACLED data support this view of the TTP as a greatly diminished force but not a tooth-
less one. Indeed, there are signs of modest growth in its operational capacity. The data show 
increases in 2019 and 2020 in the TTP’s attacks in FATA and KP (combined), though the overall 
number has remained low. TTP’s total attacks in FATA and KP increased to twenty-one and 
twenty-eight in 2019 and 2020, respectively, compared to a low of only twelve attacks in 2018. 
(A UN report released in early 2021 stated that in the last six months of 2020, the TTP was re-
sponsible for more than one hundred cross-border attacks from Afghanistan into Pakistan. The 
significant difference between this number and the tally of twenty-eight for all of 2020 based 
on ACLED data reflects, among other things, reliance on different sources and using different 
criteria to define attacks.) Most of these attacks have targeted Pakistani security personnel, the 
police especially, although the number of fatalities has been generally low. 41 Additionally, the 
TTP has maintained its campaign against the polio drive in Pakistan, which it labels a Western 
conspiracy, frequently targeting health workers and accompanying police officers and at times 
disrupting government efforts. For example, in April 2019, attacks on health-care workers were 
reported across the Bannu and Buner districts in KP, and in Quetta, Balochistan, leading to a 
suspension of the government’s national polio drive.42 In December 2019, TTP militants shot two 
police officers who were protecting a vaccination team in KP in Lower Dir District.43
Since the start of 2021, TTP’s activity has increased significantly, at least in terms of attacks 
claimed by the group. In the first two months of 2021 alone, the group claimed at least thirty-two 
attacks, the majority of which occurred in former TTP strongholds or in Pakistan’s western bor-
der regions, while a few occurred in urban areas. For example, four female development work-
ers were killed in an attack in North Waziristan in February 2021; and the deaths of two police 
officers killed in Islamabad and Rawalpindi in March 2021 were suspected to be linked to the 
TTP.44 In April 2021, the TTP claimed a suicide attack on a luxury hotel in Quetta, Balochistan, 
indicating the group’s intentions to expand operations beyond northwestern Pakistan.45 

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 13
Beyond violent operations, the TTP has remained active in propagating its ideology and goals 
via its media wing, Umar Media, launching its first official magazine in 2016 and a new website in 
January 2020. Increasingly, within its publications, the TTP has embraced the “globalization of jihad” 
and sought to extend its fight to Kashmir and India. The TTP’s venture into global jihad is likely influ-
enced by its close relationship (discussed below) with al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS) 
and its competition with ISK, the local affiliates of al-Qaeda and Islamic State, respectively, both of 
which have attempted to tap into the Kashmiri jihad. The TTP’s efforts to infuse its propaganda with a 
transnational narrative appear to be an attempt to remain competitive with other militant groups and 
exploit a larger recruitment base. The TTP has also renewed efforts to exploit preexisting grievances 
against the state. For example, a TTP propaganda video released in December 2019 features in-
terviews with civilians complaining about the actions—including extrajudicial killings and forced dis-
placement because of military operations—of Pakistani military and intelligence service officials.46 
In assessing the threat posed by the TTP, it is important not to overlook its splinter groups, such 
as Jamaat-ul-Ahrar and Hizbul Ahrar, and the TTP’s attempts to reintegrate those factions back into 
the core group. Jamaat-ul-Ahrar was formed in August 2014 under the leadership of Omar Khalid 
Khorasani and is believed to operate from the border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan.47 When 
Ambulances park near the site of a bomb blast detonated in the parking lot of the luxury Serena Hotel in Quetta, Pakistan, on April 21, 2021. 
The Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan claimed responsibility for the attack. (Photo by Arshad Butt/AP)

14 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
Khorasani died in a US drone strike in 2017, commander 
Mukarram Khan broke away to form Hizbul Ahrar, with a fo-
cus on targeting Pakistani security personnel.48 Hizbul Ahrar 
publicly announced the launch of Operation Shamzai, a ji-
had against Pakistani security personnel.49 Both Jamaat-ul-
Ahrar and Hizbul Ahrar have been responsible for highly 
deadly attacks within Pakistan, surpassing the TTP’s level of 
activity in recent years. For example, Jamaat-ul-Ahrar coop-
erated with ISK in at least nine attacks between 2015 and 
2018 that killed 219 people and injured 490. 50 Between mid-2018 and mid-2020, Hizbul Ahrar 
was involved in at least thirteen deadly attacks across the country, including two suicide attacks.51 
Recent notable attacks by Hizbul Ahrar include a suicide attack on a well-known Sufi shrine in 
Lahore in May 2019 and an explosion in a mosque in Quetta in January 2020.52 
In August 2020, Umar Media announced that Jamaat-ul-Ahrar and Hizbul Ahrar had formally 
rejoined the TTP in an effort to consolidate their efforts against Pakistani security personnel, with 
Noor Wali retaining leadership of the group.53 This announcement came on the heels of other TTP 
announcements in July 2020 regarding mergers. In early July, the TTP had announced that the 
Hakimullah Mehsud Group under Mukhlis yar had rejoined the TTP. Later in the month, the group 
announced that the Amjad Farouqi group (affiliated with al-Qaeda) had joined the TTP; this state-
ment was shortly followed by the announcement that the Usman Saifullah Kurd group of Lashkar-
e-Jhangvi, under Maulvi Khush Muhammad Sindhi, had pledged allegiance to Noor Wali.54
These developments have reinforced concerns about a potential TTP resurgence, as the group 
seems intent on rebuilding its operational capacity by consolidating various factions and groups. 
While it is too early to determine the durability and security implications of these mergers, they 
should not be ignored; cooperation between groups can often enhance groups’ longevity and their 
ability to plan and execute deadly operations. These mergers may well result in an uptick in the 
TTP’s activity—including extortion, intimidation, and targeted attacks—in areas near the border.55 
Targeting of TTP leaders by the Pakistani security services has continued, suggesting that 
leadership decapitation of the TTP remains an important goal. For example, in February 2020, 
Pakistani security forces killed five TTP militants near Peshawar and another two commanders 
in Tank District in South Waziristan.56 In addition, several senior members of the TTP were killed 
in Afghanistan, including Sheikh Khalid Haqqani, one of the higher-ranking members of the 
TTP. Soon after the killing of Haqqani, TTP leader Sheharyar Mehsud was targeted in a blast in 
Afghanistan’s Kunar Province.57 Although it remains unclear who was responsible for the attacks, 
members of the TTP linked them to Pakistani intelligence services.58
Another sign of the TTP’s revival has been its renewed use of intimidation. After years of 
subdued activity, in August 2019 reports began to emerge that TTP militants were threatening 
the residents of Miranshah, North Waziristan, warning them against playing music or women 
leaving their homes without a male guardian. 59 In nearby Wana, South Waziristan, the TTP was 
reported to have warned the Pakistani police, via pamphlets, to leave the area. 60 In an appar-
ent attempt to remain relevant in the public political discourse and engage in intimidation, the 
TTP boldly made a public statement against the “Aurat March” (Women’s March) —a nonviolent 
The TTP’s protracted (albeit low-level) jihad 
against the Pakistani state, its frequent 
propaganda releases, its reintegration 
of former splinter groups, and its efforts 
to intimidate local communities are signs 
of an organization that appears to be 
committed to reinvigorating itself.

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 15
demonstration advocating women’s rights—held across Pakistan in early March 2021, accusing 
women activists of blasphemy and obscenity.61
Taken together, the TTP’s protracted (albeit low-level) jihad against the Pakistani state, its fre-
quent propaganda releases, its reintegration of former splinter groups, and its efforts to intimidate 
local communities are signs of an organization that appears to be committed to reinvigorating itself. 
Regional Alliances and Rivalries
The TTP’s prospects of accomplishing its goal of reenergizing itself are likely to be significantly 
influenced by its evolving relationships with other militant organizations in the region. Historical 
bonds between TTP members and other groups, and their role in facilitating intergroup opera-
tional and logistical activities, have meant that membership in these organizations is often fluid 
and hard to distinguish. At an organizational level, the TTP’s relationships with other militant 
groups—particularly the Afghan Taliban, al-Qaeda, and ISK—have been critical in providing the 
group with material benefits, as well as legitimizing its ideology.
AFGHAN TALIBAN
Negotiations between the Afghan Taliban and the United States led to the February 2020 
“Doha Agreement” on conditions for a US troop withdrawal from Afghanistan and paved the 
way for the ongoing political negotiations between the Afghan Taliban and the government in 
Kabul. These negotiations have caused much speculation regarding the implications for the 
Pakistani Taliban. In general, the TTP views the Doha Agreement as a major win for all jihadists 
and their ideology.62 The group’s video released in April 2020, Abtal-ul-Amat (“Heroes of the 
Nation”), commemorating Hakimullah Mehsud, highlights the TTP’s relationship with and rever-
ence for the Afghan Taliban. The video includes footage of various TTP Taliban leaders, includ-
ing Hakimullah and Noor Wali, in meetings with Mullah Sangeen Zadran, a key Haqqani Taliban 
commander. One interpretation of this video is that the TTP was eager to advertise its close 
relationship with the Afghan Taliban, as well as its unflagging support for the group. 
Despite the well-known ideological and operational linkages between the Afghan Taliban 
and the Pakistani Taliban, a source of friction and a stark distinction between the two is that the 
former do not attack the Pakistani state. Indeed, far from targeting the Pakistani state, the Afghan 
Taliban receive support from Islamabad.63 Both Afghan Taliban and Haqqani Network leaders, 
such as Mullah Omar and Sirajuddin Haqqani, have repeatedly attempted to convince the TTP to 
focus its jihad in Afghanistan.64 These efforts have always been fruitless, because waging jihad 
against the Pakistani state forms the basis of the TTP’s separate identity.65 In 2009, the Afghan 
Taliban openly denied their affiliation with the TTP through their spokesman Zabiullah Mujahid, 
stating that their support for the TTP only went as far as “sympathy for them as Muslims.” 66 In 
2014, the Afghan Taliban openly condemned the TTP’s attack on the Army Public School.67 
Despite such discord in their goals, both groups have maintained a mutually beneficial relation-
ship, and the Afghan Taliban have not spoken directly about the TTP recently.68 The cooperation 
between the two groups has been rooted in their individual pragmatic goals. In the past, TTP lead-
ers have given the Afghan Taliban valuable logistical and operational support, including providing 

16 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
suicide bombers.69 Although it is difficult to measure the impact of their cooperative relationship, 
for the Afghan Taliban, links with the TTP have boosted their membership and enhanced their 
ability to recruit from Pakistan’s tribal areas. For the TTP, remaining aligned with the Afghan Taliban 
allows it to capitalize on the widespread support among Pashtun tribesmen for the Afghan jihad, 
which in turn boosts the TTP’s own resources and legitimacy.70 In addition, a working relationship 
with the Afghan Taliban has allowed the TTP to escape US drone strikes and military operations in 
Pakistan’s tribal regions by fleeing to Afghanistan. Viewed through this lens, the TTP’s future will 
depend in part on the extent to which the Afghan Taliban see the TTP as a liability going forward 
and their willingness to distance themselves from the group.
Although an Afghan political settlement would obviate the need for the TTP’s support for the 
Afghan jihad, it would also reduce the Afghan Taliban’s need to rely on the Pakistani state. The 
future relationship between the TTP and the Afghan Taliban could unfold in several ways. It is 
possible that the Afghan Taliban might attempt to use their influence to persuade the TTP to 
curtail its attacks and become amenable to negotiations with the Pakistani state, especially if the 
Afghan Taliban wish to maintain a healthy relationship with Pakistan. Were the TTP to adopt that 
course, however, it would likely trigger the formation of more extreme TTP splinter groups that 
would continue to target the Pakistani state and cooperate with groups such as ISK. This pattern 
has been observed in the past, as when groups such as Jamaat-ul-Ahrar cooperated with ISK at 
an operational level.71 However, if TTP leaders refuse to give up arms against the Pakistani state, 
the Afghan Taliban might seek to distance themselves from the TTP in order to preserve their 
cooperative, albeit strained, relationship with Pakistan. 
Another possible and perhaps more likely outcome is that the Afghan Taliban avoid becoming 
entangled in the TTP-Pakistan conflict, preferring to stay neutral and maintaining their historic 
ties with the TTP as well as the Pakistani state. If so, the TTP may continue to enjoy safe ha-
vens within Afghanistan in the near future and be able to focus all its resources on its fight in 
Pakistan. The Afghan Taliban have shown themselves keen to become more independent of 
the Pakistani state, especially since 2010 as they gained strength within Afghanistan; as Tricia 
Bacon highlights, the Afghan Taliban have already sought new patrons, acquired independent 
sources of support, and gained extensive territorial control.72 As such, dissuading the TTP from 
targeting the Pakistani state is likely to be a lower priority for the Afghan Taliban than before.
AL-QAEDA
Al-Qaeda’s relationship with the TTP is rooted in the US invasion of Afghanistan in 2001 and 
proved to be pivotal in the TTP’s early growth. US operations against the Afghan Taliban and 
al-Qaeda operatives in Afghanistan resulted in an influx into Pakistan’s tribal areas of their sen-
ior leadership, including Mullah Omar, Mullah Dadullah, Mullah Obeidullah, Jalaluddin Haqqani, 
Osama bin Laden, and Ayman al-Zawahiri. 73 Most of these figures found refuge in South 
Waziristan, along with other Afghan, Arab, and Central Asian fighters. 
Al-Qaeda played an important role in providing money to local militants to rent space for train-
ing camps, recruit local tribesmen, and take other steps that allowed for the later emergence of 
the TTP.74 In addition to material benefits, the TTP, especially its senior leadership, received ide-
ological support from al-Qaeda, which supported the TTP through various media outlets and, in 

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 17
contrast to the Afghan Taliban, encouraged its jihad against 
the Pakistani state.75 Leaders of al-Qaeda and other Islamist 
groups such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan recog-
nized the TTP as ansar (“local protectors”), which bolstered 
the TTP’s legitimacy.76 Al-Qaeda benefited from access to 
safe havens and local hospitality, rebuilding itself in South 
and North Waziristan and, by 2007, setting up bases in Data 
Khel, Dosali, Mir Ali, and Miramshah.77
The TTP became an ally of al-Qaeda, organizationally independent of it but liaising with 
al-Qaeda operatives for the purpose of conducting attacks. A suicide attack on the Marriott 
Hotel in Islamabad in September 2008, for instance, was suspected to involve both al-Qaeda 
and TTP militants. 78 Even after bin Laden’s death on May 2, 2011, TTP leaders declared that 
they would continue to provide sanctuary to al-Qaeda and to support the organization. 79 The 
TTP’s attack on the Mehran naval base in Karachi on May 22 was conducted, the TTP stated, 
to avenge the death of bin Laden. 80 
The presence of al-Qaeda in the region morphed into al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent in 
2014, fulfilling bin Laden’s ambition to have an al-Qaeda affiliate in South Asia. Asim Umar (now 
deceased), a Pakistani native and a former commander of the TTP, was named as AQIS’s emir in 
September 2014.81 Like the TTP, AQIS has launched major attacks within Pakistan. For example, 
in September 2014, AQIS was linked to the assassination of Brigadier General Zahoor Fazal 
Qadri, which was followed by the attempted hijacking of the Pakistan Navy frigate Zulfiqar in 
October 2014.82 In 2016, security officials suspected the involvement of AQIS militants in a gre-
nade attack on a police complex in North Nazimabad in Karachi.83
There are signs that AQIS’s relationship with the TTP remains strong, even though AQIS 
seems to have limited operational capacity at present. In July 2018, AQIS publicly demonstrated 
solidarity with the TTP by releasing a statement expressing condolences over Fazlullah’s death, 
followed by the posting of a video eulogy from Ayman al-Zawahiri. More recently, in July 2019, 
officials of the National Counter Terrorism Authority exchanged fire with six suspected al-Qaeda 
and TTP militants during an operation in Punjab Province, indicating continued links between 
the two groups.84 AQIS lost its emir, Asim Umar, and six other senior members in Afghanistan’s 
Helmand Province in September 2019, in an attack by US and Afghan security forces. 85 Given 
AQIS’s leadership losses and its limited activity in the region apart from its propaganda efforts, 
TTP’s relationship with AQIS is unlikely to provide the TTP with any substantial material benefits, 
although it may enhance the group’s legitimacy.
ISLAMIC STATE KHORASAN
Setting aside the TTP’s relationship with al-Qaeda and the Afghan Taliban, both of which are ISK’s 
rivals, the TTP would seem a natural ally of ISK. Emerging in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region in 
2014–15, ISK unleashed a wave of propaganda and violence that was characterized by Islamic 
State’s trademark takfiri (deeming other Muslims as apostates or nonbelievers) and antinationalist 
agenda. Like the TTP, ISK seeks the implementation of sharia law and is opposed to nationalist 
movements and groups that are actively or passively supported by the Pakistani state.
Al-Qaeda’s relationship with the TTP is rooted 
in the US invasion of Afghanistan in 2001. . . . 
US operations against the Afghan Taliban 
and al-Qaeda operatives in Afghanistan 
resulted in an influx into Pakistan’s tribal 
areas of their senior leadership.

18 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
Initially, there seemed to be a possibility of a wholesale alignment between the TTP and ISK: 
a series of pledges of allegiance (bay’a) were made by six TTP leaders, who publicly expressed 
their commitment to Islamic State’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, in October 2014.86 However, it 
soon became apparent that there was a split within the TTP about aligning with the Islamic State 
affiliate, largely driven by the TTP’s preexisting alliances with the Afghan Taliban and al-Qaeda. 
Internal disputes within a floundering organization, combined with an unremitting anti-Pakistan 
agenda, resulted in key TTP leaders defecting to ISK. 
Although the core of the TTP has not aligned with ISK, the two groups do not seem to have 
clashed directly. This is probably because the TTP perceives some tactical utility in ISK’s cam-
paign against the Pakistani state, and because ISK has a history of cooperating with local mili-
tant groups. However, the fact remains that ISK has actively and consistently bolstered its own 
resource base with former members of the TTP, eroding the TTP’s strength. The vast majority 
of ISK’s emirs have prior affiliations with the TTP, including the first emir, Hafiz Saeed Khan, who 
was a native of Orakzai District in KP and a former TTP commander.
At the organizational level, if TTP leaders are able to leverage the Afghan Taliban’s growing 
influence in Afghanistan, TTP loyalists are likely to strengthen their relationship with the Taliban 
Members of Pakistani civil society take part in a candlelight vigil on December 16, 2014, for victims of the attack by Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan 
on the Army Public School in Peshawar that killed 150 people, almost all of them students. (Photo by Anjum Naveed/AP)

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 19
rather than associate with ISK. However, if the Afghan Taliban seek to distance themselves from 
the TTP’s jihad against the Pakistani state, this may generate space for cooperation between the 
TTP and ISK, at least in the operational realm for tactical gains. The TTP’s pragmatic future needs 
are likely to trump any ideological differences, as has been the case with the Haqqani Network 
and ISK, which were reported in 2019 to be cooperating operationally within Afghanistan.87
● ● ●
Much of the TTP’s strength in the past has been derived from its network of relationships with 
the Afghan Taliban, the Haqqani Network, al-Qaeda, and other Punjab-based groups. As long as 
these relationships are sustained, the TTP is likely to exist in one form or another. A particularly 
worrisome development is the recent merger of splinter groups Jamaat-ul-Ahrar and Hizbul 
Ahrar with the TTP. Not only do these groups contribute to the TTP’s operational capacity, they 
also bring with them their links to other deadly groups in the region, such as ISK. Additionally, 
one of the most dangerous features of the TTP is that it provides a deep pool of experienced 
jihadists who are regularly recruited by other organizations, such as AQIS and ISK. While this 
does not bolster the strength of the TTP as an organization, it does play an important role in the 
indirect amplification of violence and terrorism across the region. 
Conclusion: 
Keeping the TTP at Bay
At present, four key characteristics of the TTP stand out as its most dangerous attributes: its 
evolving nature, its resolve to revive itself, the potential appeal of its message to aggrieved 
populations, and its immersion within the broader militant landscape. In order to undermine the 
appeal of the TTP’s ideology, constrain its propaganda and recruitment, and disrupt its collabo-
ration with other deadly groups, the Pakistani state needs to adopt measures that go far beyond 
kinetic approaches. Pakistan has already undertaken some notable initiatives in this realm, such 
as establishing the Saboon Centre, which focuses on the deradicalization of teenagers, and the 
Mashal Centre, which works with the families of Islamist militants. Such efforts should be careful-
ly evaluated for continuous improvements and prioritized for funding.88
The Pakistani government would be unwise, however, to devote significant effort to attempt-
ing to negotiate with the TTP. Aside from the fact that the government has little reason to nego-
tiate with a terrorist group that has not posed a major threat to the state for five years or more, 
negotiations are likely to be unproductive because the core TTP group has shown no indication 
of wanting to seek a peaceful resolution or of renouncing violence. The difficulties of negotiat-
ing a settlement with the TTP include not only its checkered history of violating previous agree-
ments, such as the Malakand accord, but also its fragmented nature. Peace negotiations often 
fail to work with a fragmented organization, because competing groups will feel threatened if 
any political deal empowers their rivals. 89 The TTP is not internally cohesive like the Afghan 
Taliban, and power struggles within groups can result in heightened and prolonged violence 

20 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
as factions engage in outbidding and fratricidal violence.90 
Internal competition can also result in defections, and in 
the TTP’s case, ISK has been and may continue to be an 
attractive alternative home for TTP members.91 
While the negotiating track is effectively closed, several 
other more promising avenues are open to the Pakistani 
state if it wants to stifle the possibility of the TTP reviving. 
In the first place, much effort and many resources need to be poured into countering violent ex-
tremism (CVE) measures, deradicalization efforts, and the potential reintegration of combatants in 
TTP-affected regions. The Pakistani government (with US financial support) should proactively fa-
cilitate the activities of existing grassroots organizations engaged in CVE, including by providing 
security, and possibly supplement that effort with government-led organizations. Additionally, the 
Pakistani government could support research efforts that focus on uncovering the local dynamics 
shaping radicalization and recruitment to develop carefully targeted CVE programs.
Relatedly, the government and local communities need to be willing to integrate former com-
batants who may be willing to give up arms. Winning over communities, however, is not an easy 
task as it requires governments to build trust and legitimacy through sustained socioeconomic 
initiatives. One of the key obstacles for such government-sponsored programs is the Pakistani 
state’s long record of nurturing jihadist groups, either actively or passively, in support of its 
strategic goals on both its eastern and western borders. In other words, the Pakistani state has 
indirectly played a significant role in the diffusion of extreme ideologies.92 Shielding vulnerable 
populations of Pakistan from violent extremist ideologies must be prioritized, which would in-
clude revising state security strategies that exploit and inadvertently normalize jihadist activity. 
This is especially important because the networked infrastructure of militancy in Pakistan and 
Afghanistan tends to generate militant cooperation at both the individual and organizational 
levels, often blurring the lines between groups’ distinct agendas.
Moreover, the TTP’s efforts to incorporate a transnational jihadist agenda must not be dis-
regarded. While the TTP’s official magazine generally discusses the group’s Deobandi ideol-
ogy, Islamic theology, and the group’s targets, those publications also feature articles about a 
globalized jihad, with specific references to Kashmir and India. This suggests that the TTP is 
seeking to follow AQIS and ISK in exploiting grievances of the Kashmiri population. Although 
the TTP is unlikely to break the hold of the groups that dominate the Kashmiri jihad, such as the 
Lashkar-e-Taiba, it may seek to recruit individuals disillusioned by these groups. Given AQIS’s 
close ties with the Mehsud tribe, there is a risk of the TTP forming closer links with AQIS to 
appeal to a wider audience. This indicates that tackling the TTP adequately requires employ-
ing intelligence-driven operations to identify, monitor, and disrupt interlinked militant networks. 
Such an approach is likely to be the most productive when there is collaboration between law 
enforcement, intelligence, and the military across provinces. 
Political actions by the state should include concerted efforts to improve governance in areas 
where the TTP has maintained strongholds and where it seeks to retain political relevance and 
boost recruitment by tapping into local grievances. The roots of many of these grievances can 
be traced back to the Frontier Crimes Regulation, a colonial-era law applied to the five million 
The biggest challenge now lies in making 
sure the appeal of TTP’s narrative and 
ideology do not rebound from the decline 
they experienced following the group’s 
attacks on schools and universities.

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 21
residents of FATA, that denied them basic constitutional rights, including political representation, 
judicial appeal, and freedom from collective punishment.93 FATA was merged with KP in 2018, but it 
remains one of the poorest regions of Pakistan, with limited access to health care, education, em-
ployment, and other public services. By some estimates, two-thirds of the population of the former 
FATA live in poverty.94 Residents have also complained about rampant human rights violations and 
being caught in the cross fire between militant groups and the Pakistani military.95 One manifesta-
tion of this frustration has been the growing popularity of the Pashtun Tahafuz Movement, whose 
leader, Manzoor Pashteen, has spoken up for victims of abductions and extrajudicial killings and 
demanded that the Pakistani military vacate the tribal districts. The merger of FATA and Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa Province through a constitutional amendment in May 2018 was intended, in part, to 
help alleviate issues of insecurity and underdevelopment, but how expediently these challenges 
can be tackled remains highly uncertain. The dangerous combination of a pervasive perception 
of injustice and suppression of any nonviolent protest movements provides fertile ground for the 
TTP to attempt to capitalize on grievances against the state. 
Given this risk, limiting the appeal of the TTP and rendering its message irrelevant within 
Pakistan depends on securing the tribal regions through nonmilitary means. The TTP’s opera-
tional capacity has been considerably degraded by military means; the biggest challenge now 
lies in making sure the appeal of TTP’s narrative and ideology do not rebound from the decline 
they experienced following the group’s attacks on schools and universities.
Specifically, there is a need for poverty alleviation through employment, education, and health-
care provisions, in addition to enhancing policing capacity. The government also needs to provide 
venues and a transparent process through which civilians can voice legitimate grievances and 
to work with or co-opt, rather than repress, peaceful protest movements. Repressing them will 
only alienate the population and increase the appeal of violent movements. Therefore, making 
long-term investments in socioeconomic development projects and in building the competencies 
of law enforcement units in TTP-affected areas that are frequent targets of the TTP is crucial. 
Moreover, efforts in northwest Pakistan need to move beyond local political empowerment and 
focus on the rule of law, the delivery of justice, and the provision of essential public goods to 
reinforce human security. Such measures are ever more critical in a period when states are bur-
dened with the COVID-19 pandemic and gaps in governance may be exploited by violent actors. 
Although the merger of FATA and KP is a step in the right direction, the government needs to ded-
icate significant resources to correct decades of neglect and help keep the TTP’s influence at bay.
If it takes such steps, the government of Pakistan should receive support from the US govern-
ment. The two countries share an interest in ensuring that the TTP does not stage a revival, and 
US-Pakistani cooperation on this front would benefit both sides. From the Pakistani perspective, 
the TTP, even with its diminished capacity, will continue to pose a threat to the Pakistani state 
and its civilians as long as it propagates its extremist ideology and continues to recruit and con-
duct attacks within the country.
From the US side, although the TTP may not pose a direct threat to the US homeland, the 
group’s evolving goals and increasing targeting of state officials rather than civilians could be-
come a source of instability in the region and be detrimental to US interests and dangerous 
to US personnel there. The TTP is widely known to have provided sanctuary to al-Qaeda and 

22 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
facilitated its operations in the past, and the TTP appears unlikely to sever these ties. In this con-
text, the United States and Pakistan could leverage their overlapping interests in constraining 
militant groups such as the TTP through nonkinetic approaches that may also improve the over-
all US-Pakistan relationship. Key areas where Pakistan’s fight against extremism and militancy 
could be bolstered through US support are enhanced CVE measures, educational and econom-
ic initiatives, and governance reforms in conflict-affected regions. Such assistance could take 
the form of sharing knowledge and expertise in the area of CVE. The United States is already 
Pakistan’s biggest bilateral aid donor and should redirect some development assistance to sup-
port such initiatives.

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 23
Notes
1. Mona Kanwal Sheikh, Guardians of God: Inside the Religious Mind of the Pakistani Taliban (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2016).
2. Hassan Abbas, “A Profile of Tehrik-i-Taliban,” CTC Sentinel 1, no. 2 (2008), https://ctc.usma.edu/a-profile-of-tehrik-i-taliban-pakistan.
3. Michael Semple, “The Pakistan Taliban Movement: An Appraisal,” Institute for the Study of Conflict Transformation and Social 
Justice, Queen’s University, Belfast, November 2014, www.cidob.org/en/publications/publication_series/project_papers/stap_rp 
/policy_research_papers/the_pakistan_taliban_movement_an_appraisal.
4. Daud Khattak, “Evaluating Pakistan’s Offensives in Swat and FATA,” CTC Sentinel 4, no. 10 (2011), https://ctc.usma.edu/evaluating 
-pakistans-offensives-in-swat-and-fata; and Zahid Ali Khan, “Military Preparations in FATA and PATA: Implications for Pakistan,” 
Strategic Studies 31–32 (2011–12).
5. Abbas, “A Profile of Tehrik-i-Taliban.”
6. Sheikh, Guardians of God, 31.
7. Abbas, “A Profile of Tehrik-i-Taliban.”
8. Paul Staniland, Asfandyar Mir, and Sameer Lalwani, “Politics and Threat Perception: Explaining Pakistani Military Strategy on the 
North West Frontier,” Security Studies 27, no. 4 (2018): 535–74.
9. Daud Khattak, “The Complicated Relationship between the Afghan and Pakistani Taliban,” CTC Sentinel 5, no. 2 (2012), 
https://ctc.usma.edu/the-complicated-relationship-between-the-afghan-and-pakistani-taliban.
10. Sheikh, Guardians of God.
11. Caroline Wadhams and Colin Cookman, “Faces of Pakistan’s Militant Leaders,” Center for American Progress, July 22, 2009, 
www.americanprogress.org/issues/security/news/2009/07/22/6316/faces-of-pakistans-militant-leaders.
12. Sheikh, Guardians of God, 38.
13. Hassan Abbas, “Defining the Punjabi Taliban Network,” CTC Sentinel 2, no. 4 (2009), https://ctc.usma.edu/defining-the-punjabi 
-taliban-network.
14. Sheikh, Guardians of God, 80.
15. Amira Jadoon and Sara Mahmood, “Fixing the Cracks in the Pakistani Taliban’s Foundation: TTP’s Leadership Returns to the Mehsud 
Tribe,” CTC Sentinel 11, no. 11 (2018), https://ctc.usma.edu/fixing-cracks-pakistani-talibans-foundation-ttps-leadership-returns-mehsud-tribe.
16. Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, “Code of Conduct,” Umar Media, September 16, 2018.
17. Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, “Code of Conduct.”
18. “PTI Candidate Ikramullah Gandapur Killed in Suicide Attack in DI Khan,” Dawn, July 22, 2018, www.dawn.com/news/1421753.
19. Clionadh Raleigh et al., “Introducing ACLED-Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research 47, no. 5 
(2010): 651–60. The ACLED dataset records various types of violent events including their date, location, and agents involved, 
including nonstate actors and state actors.
20. It should be noted the events included violent interactions between TTP and government actors. While ACLED does not always 
identify a perpetrator, the author reviewed the summaries of each event to assess whether media reports linked an attack to TTP. 
21. Following the merger of FATA and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province in May 2018, TTP’s attacks in FATA from mid-May 2018 to 
2020 are counted as attacks in KP.
22. Huma yusuf, “Conflict Dynamics in Karachi,” Peaceworks no. 82, United States Institute of Peace, October 2012, 
www.usip.org/publications/2012/10/conflict-dynamics-karachi.
23. Sachchal Ahmad, “After Zarb-e-Azb: Now What?,” Stimson Center, www.stimson.org/2015/after-zarb-e-azb-now-what.
24. “Pakistan Blames Afghanistan for a Spate of T errorist Attacks,” The Economist, February 23, 2017, www.economist.com/asia/2017 
/02/23/pakistan-blames-afghanistan-for-a-spate-of-terrorist-attacks.
25. Asfandyar Mir, “What Explains Counterterrorism Effectiveness? Evidence from the U.S. Drone War in Pakistan,” International 
Security 43, no. 2 (2018): 45–83.
26. Amira Jadoon, “Playing Dirty to Survive: The Vulnerability of Civilian Targets within U.S. Military Aid Recipient States,” Small Wars 
& Insurgencies 30, no. 3 (2019): 587–614.
27. Bill Roggio, “Pakistani Army to ‘Eliminate’ the Taliban in Swat: Prime Minister Gilani,” FDD’s Long War Journal, May 7, 2009, 
www.longwarjournal.org/archives/2009/05/pakistan_army_to_eli.php.
28. Seth G. Jones and C. Christine Fair, Counterinsurgency in Pakistan (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2010), 66–67, 
www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG982.html.
29. Jones and Fair, Counterinsurgency in Pakistan, 74–75. 

24 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
30. Mir, “What Explains Counterterrorism Effectiveness?” 
31. Amira Jadoon, “Conflict Aggravation or Alleviation? A Cross-National Examination of U.S. Military Aid’s Effect on Conflict 
Dynamics with Insights from Pakistan,” Political Science Quarterly 135, no. 4 (2020): 665–95.
32. Mir, “What Explains Counterterrorism Effectiveness?” 
33. “Pakistan Security Report 2009,” Pak Institute for Peace Studies, January 2010, www.pakpips.com/article/book/pakistan-security 
-report-2009.
34. Ahmed Wali Mujeeb, “How the Taliban Gripped Karachi,” BBC News, March 21, 2013, www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-21343397.
35. “Hakimullah Mehsud Killed by Drone, Pakistan Taliban Say,” BBC News, November 2, 2013, www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-24776363.
36. Daniel Byman, “Do Targeted Killings Work?,” Foreign Affairs 85, no. 2 (2006): 95–111.
37. These estimates were compiled from various sources by the Center for International Security and Cooperation’s Mapping 
Militants Project. See Mapping Militant Organizations, “T ehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan,” Stanford University, https://cisac.fsi.stanford.edu 
/mappingmilitants/profiles/tehrik-i-taliban-pakistan.
38. “Operational Freedom’s Sentinel: Lead Inspector General Report to the United States Congress, January 1, 2019–March 31, 
2019,” 25, table 2, https://media.defense.gov/2019/Aug/05/2002166644/-1/-1/1/Q2Fy2019_LEADIG_OFS_REPORT.PDF.
39. Asad Hashim, “Exclusive: Pakistani Taliban Down but Not Out, Says Ex-spokesman,” Al Jazeera, April 3, 2020, 
www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/04/exclusive-ehsanullah-ehsan-pakistan-taliban-spokesman-200403075526508.html.
40. See Javed Aziz Khan, “14 Days Before Elections. . . : ANP’s Haroon Bilour Killed in Blast,” The News International, July 11, 2018, 
www.thenews.com.pk/print/340248-14-days-before-elections-anp-s-haroon-bilour-killed-in-blast; and “Female Suicide Bomber 
Kills Eight in Northwest Pakistan,” Reuters, July 21, 2019, www.reuters.com/article/us-pakistan-attack/female-suicide-bomber-kills 
-eight-in-northwest-pakistan-idUSKCN1UG08J.
41. Ben Farmer and Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud, “Pakistan Builds Border Fence, Limiting Militants and Families Alike,” New Y ork Times, 
March 15, 2020, www.nytimes.com/2020/03/15/world/asia/pakistan-afghanistan-border-fence.html.
42. Shamil Shams, “Pakistan Suspends Polio Vaccine Drive after Health Worker Attacks,” Deutsche Welle, April 27, 2019, 
www.dw.com/en/pakistan-suspends-polio-vaccine-drive-after-health-worker-attacks/a-48510718.
43. “Taliban Gunmen Kill Two Pakistani Police Escorting Polio Team,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, December 18, 2019, 
www.rferl.org/a/taliban-gunmen-kill-two-pakistani-police-escorting-polio-team/30332121.html.
44. Asad Hashim, “Pakistani Female Aid Workers Shot Dead by Assailants,” Al Jazeera, February 22, 2021, www.aljazeera.com 
/news/2021/2/22/pakistan-women-aid-workers-shot-dead-by-assailants; and Roohan Ahmed, “Is TTP Staging a Comeback in 
Pakistan?,” Samaa TV, March 17, 2021, www.samaa.tv/news/2021/03/is-ttp-staging-a-comeback-in-pakistan.
45. “Pakistan Hotel Bomb: Deadly Blast Hits Luxury Venue in Quetta,” BBC News, April 22, 2021, www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-56834937.
46. The video was produced by the TTP’s media arm, Umar Media, and released via its channel on the messaging app Telegram on 
December 30, 2019.
47. United Nations Security Council, “Security Council ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee Adds One Name to Its Sanctions 
List,” press release, July 6, 2017, www.un.org/press/en/2017/sc12904.doc.htm.
48. Animesh Roul, “Hizb ul-Ahrar: Pakistan’s Cross-border Taliban Problem Remains Critical,” Terrorism Monitor 17, no. 23 (December 
2019), www.jamestown.org/program/hizb-ul-ahrar-pakistans-cross-border-taliban-problem-remains-critical.
49. “Terrorist Group Hizbul Ahrar Announces New Operation Shamzai in a Statement That Also Threatens Pakistani Cricket League,” 
Islamic Theology of Counter T errorism, February 13, 2019, www.itct.org.uk/archives/itct_news/exclusive-terrorist-group-hizbul 
-ahrar-announces-new-operation-shamzai-in-a-statement-that-also-threatens-pakistani-cricket-league.
50. Amira Jadoon, “Allied and Lethal: Islamic State Khorasan’s Network and Organizational Capacity in Afghanistan and Pakistan,” Combating 
Terrorism Center, United States Military Academy, December 2018, https://ctc.usma.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Allied-Lethal-final.pdf.
51. Raleigh et al., “Introducing ACLED-Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset.”
52. “Pakistan Data Darbar: Bomber Kills Nine outside Sufi Shrine in Lahore,” BBC News, May 8, 2019, www.bbc.com/news/world-asia 
-48197260; and Abdul Satar, “At Least 14 Killed in Explosion at Pakistan Mosque,” Global News, January 10, 2020, www.globalnews 
.ca/news/6394130/pakistan-mosque-explosion.
53. Associated Press, “Splintered Militants Rejoin Pakistani Taliban, Vow Holy War,” Washington Post, August 17, 2020, 
www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/splintered-militants-rejoin-pakistani-taliban-vow-holy-war/2020/08/17/bf6d46a6 
-e082-11ea-82d8-5e55d47e90ca_story.html.
54. Daud Khattak, “Whither the Pakistani Taliban: An Assessment of Recent Trends,” New America, August 31, 2020, 
www.newamerica.org/international-security/blog/whither-pakistani-taliban-assessment-recent-trends.

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 25
55. Niala Mohammad and Roshan Noorzai, “Experts: T ehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan Merger with Splinter Groups ‘Bad News’ for 
Pakistan,” Voice of America, September 3, 2020, www.voanews.com/extremism-watch/experts-tehreek-e-taliban-pakistan 
-merger-splinter-groups-bad-news-pakistan.
56. Associated Press, “Pakistan Says 5 Militants Killed in Shootout; 2 Arrested,” February 22, 2020, www.apnews.com/article 
/a72716049d7b38899fd75880e08424fc.
57. Agence France-Presse, “Blast Kills Another Taliban Leader in Afghanistan,” The News International, February 14, 2020, 
www.thenews.com.pk/print/613634-blast-kills-another-taliban-leader-in-afghanistan.
58. Secunder Kermani and Ishtiaq Mehsud, “Crackdown on Militants as US and Afghan Taliban Seek Deal,” BBC News, February 15, 
2020, www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-51495137.
59. Pazir Gul, “TTP Warns against Playing Music, Women Going Out Alone in Miramshah,” Dawn, August 1, 2019, www.dawn.com 
/news/1497395/ttp-warns-against-playing-music-women-going-out-alone-in-miramshah.
60. Dilawar Wazir, “Pamphlet Warns Police to Leave S. Waziristan in Three Days,” Dawn, April 23, 2019, www.dawn.com/news 
/1477791/pamphlet-warns-police-to-leave-s-waziristan-in-three-days.
61. Umar Farooq, “Pakistani Taliban Threaten Organizers of Women’s Day March,” Reuters, March 12, 2021, www.reuters.com/article 
/us-pakistan-womensday-backlash/pakistani-taliban-threaten-organisers-of-womens-day-march-idUSKBN2B42JL.
62. Abdul Sayed, “US Afghan Peace Accord Victory for Fighters” [in Urdu], BBC News, April 18, 2020, www.bbc.com/urdu/regional-52320106.
63. Tricia Bacon, “Slipping the Leash? Pakistan’s Relationship with the Afghan Taliban,” Survival 60, no. 5 (2018): 159–80.
64. Jeffrey Dressler, “The Haqqani Network: From Pakistan to Afghanistan,” Afghanistan Report no. 6, Institute for the Study of War, 
October 2010, www.understandingwar.org/sites/default/files/Haqqani_Network_0.pdf.
65. Carlotta Gall, “Pakistan and Afghan Taliban Close Ranks,” New Y ork Times, March 26, 2009, www.nytimes.com/2009/03/27 
/world/asia/27taliban.html.
66. Gall, “Pakistan and Afghan Taliban Close Ranks.”
67. Alasdair Sandford, “Afghan Taliban Condemn Pakistani Taliban Attack on Peshawar School,” Euronews, December 17, 2014, 
www.euronews.com/2014/12/17/afghan-taliban-condemn-pakistani-taliban-attack-on-peshawar-school.
68. Craig Nelson, “Taliban Assures U.S. It Opposes Use of Afghanistan as Platform for Terrorists,” Wall Street Journal, January 24, 
2019, www.wsj.com/articles/taliban-agrees-to-bar-al-qaeda-and-islamic-state-from-afghanistan-11548330242.
69. Carlotta Gall, Declan Walsh, and Douglas Schorzman, “How the Pakistani Taliban Became a Deadly Force,” New Y ork Times, 
December 16, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/12/17/world/asia/how-the-pakistani-taliban-became-a-deadly-force.html.
70. Khattak, “The Complicated Relationship between the Afghan and Pakistani Taliban.”
71. Jadoon, “Allied and Lethal.”
72. Bacon, “Slipping the Leash?”
73. Shehzad H. Qazi, “Rebels of the Frontier: Origins, Organization, and Recruitment of the Pakistani Taliban,” Small Wars & 
Insurgencies 22, no. 4 (2011): 574–602.
74. Zahid Hussain, Frontline Pakistan: The Struggle with Militant Islam (New york: Columbia University Press, 2008). 
75. Greg Smith, “The Tangled Web of Taliban and Associated Movements,” Journal of Strategic Security 2, no. 4 (2010): 31–38.
76. Semple, “The Pakistan Taliban Movement.” 
77. Mir, “What Explains Counterterrorism Effectiveness?”
78. Carlotta Gall, “Bombing at Hotel in Pakistan Kills at Least 40,” New Y ork Times, September 21, 2008, www.nytimes.com/2008 
/09/21/world/asia/21islamabad.html.
79. Seth G. Jones, “The T errorist Threat from Pakistan,” Survival 53, no.4 (2011): 69–94.
80. Salman Masood and David E. Sanger, “Militants Attack Pakistani Naval Base in Karachi,” New Y ork Times, May 22, 2011, 
www.nytimes.com/2011/05/23/world/asia/23pakistan.html.
81. Abdul Basit, “Asim Umar—‘New Kid on the Block’?,” Counter T errorist Trends and Analyses 6, no. 10 (2014): 8–12.
82. Farhan Zahid, “Death of AQIS Emir Asim Umar has Serious Implications for Al-Qaeda,” Terrorism Monitor 17, no. 20 (October 
2019), www.jamestown.org/program/death-of-aqis-emir-asim-umar-has-serious-implications-for-al-qaeda.
83. Imtiaz Ali, “AQIS Involvement Feared in North Nazimabad Gun and Grenade Attacks,” Dawn, January 8, 2017, www.dawn.com 
/news/1307010.
84. Raleigh et al., “Introducing ACLED-Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset.”
85. Zahid, “Death of AQIS Emir Asim Umar.” 
86. Amira Jadoon, Nakissa Jahanbani, and Charmaine Willis, “Challenging the ISK Brand in Afghanistan-Pakistan: Rivalries and Divided 
Loyalties,” CTC Sentinel 11, no. 4 (2018), https://ctc.usma.edu/challenging-isk-brand-afghanistan-pakistan-rivalries-divided-loyalties.

26 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
87. United Nations Security Council, Eleventh Report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, S/2020/415, May 27, 
2020, www.undocs.org/S/2020/415.
88. Farhan Zahid, “Pakistan’s CVE Programme: An Overview of Achievements and Challenges,” Counter Terrorist Trends and 
Analyses 9, no. 6 (2017): 11–16.
89. Kristin M. Bakke, Kathleen Gallagher Cunningham, and Lee J. M. Seymour, “The Problem with Fragmented Insurgencies,” Washington 
Post, May 13, 2015, www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2015/05/13/the-problem-with-fragmented-insurgencies.
90. As pointed out in Bakke, Cunningham, and Seymour, “The Problem with Fragmented Insurgencies”; and Paul Staniland, 
“Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Insurgent Fratricide, Ethnic Defection, and the Rise of Pro-state Paramilitaries,” Journal of 
Conflict Resolution 56, no. 1 (2012). 
91. Sabine Otto, “The Grass Is Always Greener? Armed Group Side Switching in Civil Wars,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 62, no. 7 
(2018): 1459–488.
92. For a detailed discussion on how the Pakistani army has used Islamic ideology for strategic security goals, see C. Christine 
Fair, Fighting to the End: The Pakistan Army’s Way of War (New york: Oxford University Press, 2014).
93. Zaid Haider, “Mainstreaming Pakistan’s Tribal Belt: A Human Rights and Security Imperative,” Discussion Paper no. 09-01, Belfer 
Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, January 2009, www.belfercenter.org/publication 
/mainstreaming-pakistans-tribal-belt-human-rights-and-security-imperative.
94. Amin Ahmed, “39pc of Pakistanis Live in Poverty; Fata, Balochistan Worst Hit,” Dawn, June 21, 2016, www.dawn.com/news/1266171.
95. Ben Farmer, “Pakistan’s Tribal Areas Are Still Waiting for Justice as Army Tightens Grip,” New Y ork Times, June 11, 2019, 
www.nytimes.com/2019/06/11/world/asia/pakistan-tribal-pashtun-justice-army.html.

SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG 27
The United States Institute of Peace is a national, 
nonpartisan, independent institute, founded by Congress 
and dedicated to the proposition that a world without 
violent conflict is possible, practical, and essential for US 
and global security. In conflict zones abroad, the Institute 
works with local partners to prevent, mitigate, and resolve 
violent conflict. To reduce future crises and the need 
for costly interventions, USIP works with governments 
and civil societies to help their countries solve their own 
problems peacefully. The Institute provides expertise, 
training, analysis, and support to those who are working 
to build a more peaceful, inclusive world.
ABOUT THE INSTITUTE
Stephen J. Hadley (Chair), Principal, Rice, Hadley, Gates & Manuel LLC, Washington, DC • 
George E. Moose (Vice Chair), Adjunct Professor of Practice, The George Washington 
University, Washington, DC • Judy Ansley, Former Assistant to the President and Deputy 
National Security Advisor under George W. Bush, Washington, DC • Eric Edelman, Roger 
Hertog Practitioner in Residence, Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International 
Studies, Washington, DC • Joseph Eldridge, Distinguished Practitioner, School of International 
Service, American University, Washington, DC • Kerry Kennedy, President, Robert F. Kennedy 
Human Rights, Washington, DC • Ikram U. Khan, President, Quality Care Consultants, LLC, 
Las Vegas, NV • Stephen D. Krasner, Graham H. Stuart Professor of International Relations, 
Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA • John A. Lancaster, Former Executive Director, National 
Council on Independent Living, Potsdam, Ny • Jeremy A. Rabkin, Professor of Law, Antonin 
Scalia Law School, George Mason University, Arlington, VA • J. Robinson West, Former 
Chairman, PFC Energy, Washington, DC • Nancy Zirkin, Executive Vice President, Leadership 
Conference on Civil and Human Rights, Washington, DC 
Members Ex Officio
Antony J. Blinken, Secretary of State • Lloyd J. Austin III, Secretary of Defense • Michael T. Plehn, 
Lieutenant General, US Air Force; President, National Defense University • Lise Grande, President 
and CEO, United States Institute of Peace (nonvoting)
BOARD OF DIRECTORS


28 SPECIAL REPORT 494
US I P.O RG
2301 Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20037
(202) 457-1700
www.USIP.org
Since its inception in 1991, the United States Institute of Peace Press has published 
hundreds of influential books, reports, and briefs on the prevention, management, and 
peaceful resolution of international conflicts. All our books and reports arise from research 
and fieldwork sponsored by the Institute’s many programs, and the Press is committed to 
expanding the reach of the Institute’s work by continuing to publish significant and sustainable 
publications for practitioners, scholars, diplomats, and students. Each work undergoes 
thorough peer review by external subject experts to ensure that the research and conclusions 
are balanced, relevant, and sound.
OTHER USIP PUBLICATIONS
THE UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE PRESS
• Enhancing US-China Strategic Stability in an Era of Strategic Competition: US and 
Chinese Perspectives Edited by Patricia M. Kim (Peaceworks, April 2021)
• Conflict and Crisis in South Sudan’s Equatoria by Alan Boswell (Special Report, April 2021)
• Extending Constitutional Rights to Pakistan’s Tribal Areas by Umar Mahmood Khan, Rana 
Hamza Ijaz, and Sevim Saadat (Special Report, April 2021)
• “No Going Backward”: Afghanistan’s Post–Peace Accord Security Sector by Annie 
Pforzheimer, Andrew Hyde, and Jason Criss Howk (Peaceworks, March 2021)
• Mobilization, Negotiation, and Transition in Burkina Faso by Eloïse Bertrand (Special 
Report, March 2021)