(589)
CHAPTER 4
TAIWAN
Abstract
In 2022, China adopted a significantly more aggressive stance 
toward Taiwan, ramping up displays of military force in addition 
to diplomatic and economic coercion. Beijing has also carefully ob-
served Russia’s war on Ukraine, presumably drawing lessons that 
would inform its approach if Chinese leaders ultimately decide to 
force unification with Taiwan. While the lessons being learned are 
not yet clear, Chinese leaders may conclude that managing infor -
mation, mitigating the potential impact of sanctions, and examining 
the Russian military’s combat performance are paramount. For their 
part, Taiwan’s leaders may conclude on the basis of Ukraine’s ex-
perience that they must adopt an asymmetric warfighting strategy, 
involve the populace in resistance to a Chinese military operation, 
and build stockpiles of critical materials.
Key Findings
 • Russia’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine in 2022 provided a 
contemporary case study of the potential challenges and oppor -
tunities the People’s Republic of China (PRC) might face if its 
leadership decides to attempt unification with Taiwan through 
the use of force. The war in Ukraine also injected urgency into 
ongoing discussions in Washington and Taipei about how to en-
hance the island’s self-defense capabilities amid the People’s 
Liberation Army’s (PLA) massive military buildup as well as 
current and future challenges and disruptions to the global sup-
ply chains vital for weapons production.
 • Beijing continued its multifaceted coercion campaign against 
Taiwan this year to isolate its people from the world. Chinese 
officials leveraged their power in international institutions to 
propagate falsehoods about a global consensus underpinning 
their “One China” principle and to prevent Taiwan from shar -
ing its valuable expertise on issues ranging from global health 
to oceanic science. The PLA continued its intimidating and fre-
quent operations in the air and waters around Taiwan, conduct-
ing large-scale live-fire exercises in August after Speaker of the 
U.S. House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan.
 • Taiwan and the United States are pursuing closer economic 
and trade collaboration. In June 2022, the U.S.-Taiwan Initia-
tive on 21st-Century Trade was launched as the two economies 
agreed to pursue deeper integration. The U.S.-Taiwan Initiative 
will also address shared concerns related to China’s nonmarket 

590
practices, including discussions on state-owned enterprise and 
nonmarket economy-related issues.
 • China’s economic coercion of Taiwan targets export industries 
that are both relatively small and highly dependent on China’s 
consumer market, attempting to send a political message and 
inflict pain on Taiwan while avoiding fallout on China’s own 
economy. The Chinese government used the pretext of Speaker 
Pelosi’s trip to increase its economic coercion of Taiwan, imple-
menting a variety of import bans on food products that in partic-
ular originate from areas supportive of Taiwan’s President Tsai-
Ing Wen. Beijing’s decision to leave the far more consequential 
trade in semiconductors untouched demonstrates its approach 
to economic targeting of Taiwan industries that are relatively 
small and highly dependent on China’s consumer market.
 • Beijing’s messaging to foreign and domestic audiences evolved in 
new and concerning ways. Chinese officials’ international mes-
saging asserted China’s ownership of the entire Taiwan Strait 
and conveyed their disdain for international norms. Speaking to 
its own members, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) unveiled 
and credited to General Secretary of the CCP Xi Jinping a new 
“overall strategy for resolving the Taiwan question in the new 
era.” While much of the strategy repeats longstanding tenets of 
China’s policy toward Taiwan, certain phrases raise questions 
about whether the CCP could announce significant changes to 
Taiwan policy at its 20th Party Congress in late 2022.
 • Taiwan’s effective containment of the novel coronavirus 
(COVID-19) pandemic and strong demand for Taiwan exports 
led to robust economic growth through the first quarter of 2022. 
In contrast to the extended lockdowns that have shuttered sub-
stantial swaths of China’s economy, Taipei has shifted to a less 
stringent set of COVID-19 management policies, allowing for 
greater economic openness. However, China’s lockdowns and 
inflationary concerns in advanced economies have slowed Tai-
wan’s growth relative to 2021.
 • Taipei is accelerating efforts to respond to risks related to Chi-
na-centric supply chains, including through cooperation with 
the United States. Domestically, development and investment 
initiatives continue to seek to draw Taiwan firms back from the 
Mainland, recalibrating cross-Strait supply chains.
Recommendations
The Commission recommends:
 • Congress enact legislation creating a permanent interagency 
committee in the executive branch charged with developing op-
tions and creating plans for the imposition of sanctions or other 
economic measures in a range of possible scenarios, including 
(but not limited to) a Chinese attack, blockade, or other hostile 
action against Taiwan. This committee would evaluate the po-
tential economic and political consequences of various options, 
coordinate their implementation, and advise Congress of any 
amendments to statutory authorities or mandates required to 

591
enhance their effectiveness. The committee should coordinate 
and seek to devise joint plans with the relevant agencies of oth-
er governments that may be contemplating similar measures. 
The committee should include participants from the U.S. De-
partments of State, Treasury, Commerce, Defense, and Home-
land Security.
 • Congress direct the U.S. Department of Defense to produce a 
classified report on current and future military posture, logis-
tics, maintenance, and sustainment requirements to bolster the 
United States’ “capacity to resist force” in the event of a Chi-
nese attack and attempted invasion of Taiwan. The report shall 
assess the requirements for all scenarios, including protracted 
combat in a contested environment (e.g., anti-access, area de-
nial), and evaluate how to best enable a dispersed, distributed 
force in the Indo-Pacific.
 • Congress should make available significant additional multiyear 
defense funds in conjunction with: (i) a joint planning mecha-
nism made up of Taiwan and U.S. defense officials identifying 
sets of interoperable and complementary capabilities required 
for the defense of Taiwan; and (ii) Taiwan legislatively commit-
ting significant additional funds to procure its share of those 
capabilities for its military.
Introduction
Speaker Pelosi and a delegation of five Members of the House of 
Representatives visited Taiwan on August 2–3, 2022. The day after 
Speaker Pelosi departed Taiwan, the PLA began a series of live-fire 
exercises that some observers described as unprecedented in scale and 
proximity to the island.1 Scores of Chinese military aircraft and naval 
vessels crossed the median line, long an informal buffer between the 
Chinese and Taiwan militaries, while Eastern Theater Command forc-
es conducted a variety of firepower strike and combat drills that could 
facilitate a blockade or invasion in six zones encircling the island.2 The 
PLA’s test-firing of missiles into Taiwan’s eastern waters, some of which 
reportedly overflew the island and five of which landed in Japan’s ex-
clusive economic zone, shattered convention and appeared intended to 
intimidate the people of Taiwan and U.S. allies that might oppose a 
Chinese military operation against Taiwan.3 The United States and its 
Group of 7 allies both released statements condemning China’s mili-
tary response as extreme, disproportionate, and needlessly escalatory.4 
The most noteworthy aspect of the August 2022 exercises, however, 
was arguably the fact that they were entirely consistent with Beijing’s 
longstanding strategy to isolate Taiwan through coercion and changes 
to the status quo. This strategy played out across the military, diplo-
matic, and economic realms in 2022 as the top CCP leadership geared 
up for its Party Congress in the fall. This section analyzes develop-
ments in Taiwan’s security, external relations, and economy between 
late 2021 and late 2022. It is based on the Commission’s consultations 
with experts, open source research, and its August 2022 hearing on 
“Challenges from Chinese Policy in 2022: Zero-COVID, Ukraine, and 
Pacific Diplomacy.”

592
Cross-Strait Politics and Military Relations
China employed harsh rhetoric toward Taiwan in 2022 while 
provocatively operating in the air and waters near the island. The 
PLA also continued to train its force for a wartime campaign against 
Taiwan, though U.S. officials assessed there were no indications of 
an imminent attack. 5 The CCP’s domestic propaganda apparatus 
unveiled General Secretary Xi’s “overall strategy for resolving the 
Taiwan question in the new era” at the Sixth Plenum in November 
2021 and elaborated on its contents in a series of official and me-
dia commentaries in the months afterward, prompting speculation 
that the CCP may announce more changes in Taiwan policy after 
the 20th Party Congress in the fall of 2022. 6 Meanwhile, Taiwan’s 
government sought to improve military readiness by examining a 
potential extension of compulsory military service, piloting a new 
training program for the reserve forces, and increasing defense 
spending. Alarmed by the war in Ukraine, Taiwan citizens began 
to prepare for a potential invasion through grassroots civil defense 
seminars, and public polling appeared to show more public support 
for traditionally unpopular military reforms than before.
Beijing Publicly Threatens War to Deter “Separatism” while 
Internally Promoting Its New “Overall Strategy” for 
Resolving the Taiwan Question
Chinese officials adopted a bellicose and uncompromising stance 
on Taiwan in remarks aimed at the United States and the interna-
tional community in 2022, sparking concerns Beijing might use force 
to resolve its territorial disputes and constrain freedom of naviga-
tion to lay the groundwork for forcible unification with the island. 
The CCP’s messaging to politicians on Taiwan adopted a similar 
tone, suggesting Beijing would not engage constructively with the 
island’s democratically elected leadership for the foreseeable future. 
Chinese officials’ efforts to deter what they characterize as destabi-
lizing moves by the United States and Taiwan were consistent with 
the much-touted “overall strategy for resolving the Taiwan issue in 
the new era,” which largely restates China’s longstanding policy of 
encouraging “peaceful reunification” through economic and cultural 
integration while forestalling a declaration of independence through 
threats of force.
China Aggressively Claims Ownership over Taiwan and the 
Taiwan Strait
In remarks aimed at the international community in 2022, Chi-
nese officials claimed ownership of Taiwan and threatened to re-
spond violently to moves facilitating Taiwan’s independence. In an 
interview with National Public Radio in January 2022, Chinese 
Ambassador to the United States Qin Gang described Taiwan as 
the “biggest tinderbox between the United States and China” and 
warned, “If the Taiwanese authorities, emboldened by the United 
States, keep going down the road for independence, it most likely 
will involve China and the United States, the two big countries, in 
a military conflict.” 7 He repeated China’s longstanding position that 
Chinese leaders would not rule out the use of force to achieve uni-
fication because doing so would undermine their ability to deter a 

593
declaration of independence.8 At the annual Shangri-La Dialogue in 
June 2022, Chinese Minister of National Defense General Wei Feng-
he emphasized that “Taiwan is first and foremost China’s Taiwan” 
and vowed that Beijing would resolutely “crush” efforts to pursue 
independence through the use of force. 9 “If anyone dares to secede 
Taiwan from China, we will not hesitate to fight,” he said.10 “We will 
fight at all costs and we will fight to the very end.”  11 Both sets of 
remarks signaled Beijing’s resolve to prevent the formal separation 
of Taiwan from the Mainland, something its officials describe as a 
“core interest.” 12
Chinese officials have also recently departed from precedent by 
asserting ownership of the entire Taiwan Strait, challenging in-
ternationally recognized principles of freedom of navigation in the 
Indo-Pacific region.13 According to Bloomberg, Chinese military of-
ficials in multiple meetings at various levels this year have told 
their U.S. counterparts that the Taiwan Strait is not within interna-
tional waters, generating concern in Washington.14 Instead, Chinese 
officials assert that the Taiwan Strait is part of China’s exclusive 
economic zone (EEZ) and believe there are limits to the activities 
of foreign military vessels in those waters.* 15 Chinese Foreign Min-
istry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin said publicly in mid-June that 
“China has sovereignty, sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the 
Taiwan Strait” and alleged that “certain countries call the Taiwan 
Strait ‘international waters’ in order to find a pretext for manipu-
lating issues related to Taiwan.”  16 The U.S. government responded 
to Spokesperson Wang’s remark by stating that “the Taiwan Strait 
is an international waterway . . . where high seas freedoms, includ-
ing freedom of navigation, [and] overflight, are guaranteed under 
international law” and reasserting that the U.S. military will oper -
ate wherever international law allows. 17 Similarly, Taiwan’s foreign 
ministry spokesperson stated that most of the Taiwan Strait consti-
tutes international waters and the U.S. and allied naval presence 
served to “promote peace and stability in the region.”  18 In mid-Au-
gust, Ambassador Qin issued a veiled warning that China could re-
spond militarily to any future routine transits of the Taiwan Strait 
by U.S. naval vessels. 19 China’s statements may aim to establish a 
legal basis on which to attempt to deny U.S. and foreign military 
vessels access to the Taiwan Strait. 20
Beijing Continues to Freeze Out Taipei and Chastises Both 
Major Parties
Cross-Strait political relations remained frigid this year as Bei-
jing continued to refuse to engage the Tsai Administration construc-
* An exclusive economic zone, or EEZ, lies beyond a country’s 12-nautical-mile territorial wa-
ters. The 1989 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) establishes that an EEZ gives 
a country certain rights, including the right to exploit the natural resources there, and it also 
guarantees freedom of navigation through the EEZ. The implications of UNCLOS’s provisions 
for warships are debated, however. “Many Western countries interpret UNCLOS as permitting 
external states to conduct military exercises within another country’s EEZ under the principle of 
‘navigational freedom,’ ” James Brown, a professor at Temple University’s Japan campus, told the 
newspaper Stars and Stripes in an email. “However, this interpretation is not shared by Beijing. 
China takes the view that military exercises are harmful to national security and thus should 
not be permitted within its EEZ,” Dr. Brown stated. The United States and other nations regard 
the Taiwan Strait as international waters where their warships are free to transit. Alex Wilson, 
“China Asserts Jurisdiction over Taiwan Strait, Shuns ‘International Waters’ Stance by US,” Star 
and Stripes, June 14, 2022.

594
tively and insisted on Taipei’s acceptance of the “1992 Consensus” as 
a precondition for dialogue.* Instead, Chinese officials continued to 
endorse “one country, two systems” † as a viable framework for uni-
fication despite the framework’s failure in Hong Kong and unpopu-
larity in Taiwan, emphasizing their willingness to use force against 
the island if necessary. 21 The CCP’s domineering public statements 
contrasted sharply with overtures by President Tsai and Premier 
Su Tseng-chang, who both expressed Taipei’s willingness to engage 
with Beijing in the spirit of goodwill on the basis of equality and 
reciprocity.22
Chinese officials also criticized both mainstream political parties 
in Taiwan for their stance on cross-Strait relations in 2022. Chinese 
officials and media repeated their longstanding accusations that the 
ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) is planning to achieve 
independence and alleged the party is conducting a “green terror”  ‡ 
to harass Taiwan people friendly to the Mainland. 23 China’s Taiwan 
Affairs Office also departed from its traditionally friendly treatment 
of the Kuomintang (KMT) by lashing out at KMT Chairman Eric 
Chu § after he called the 1992 Consensus a “non-consensus consen-
sus” during a visit to the United States in June 2022. 24 The office’s 
spokesperson warned that “the 1992 Consensus cannot be willfully 
* The “1992 Consensus” refers to a tacit understanding that the Kuomintang (KMT) under 
then President Ma Ying-jeou and Beijing said was reached between representatives of Taiwan 
and China in 1992 regarding the idea that there is only one state called “China” and that both 
mainland China and Taiwan belong to that state. The KMT defined the consensus as “one China, 
respective interpretations,” interpreting “one China” as the Republic of China, the formal name 
of Taiwan’s government. By contrast, Beijing accepts only the definition embodied in its “one 
China” principle: mainland China and Taiwan are part of one and the same China, the PRC, and 
Taiwan is a subnational region. Although in official documents and statements Beijing has never 
acknowledged that the consensus allows different interpretations of “one China,” in practice it 
has at times officially ignored, but grudgingly tolerated, the KMT’s definition of the consensus. 
By contrast, the ruling Democratic Progressive Party and current Taiwan Administration have 
consistently refused to recognize the 1992 Consensus or the “one China” principle. For more, see 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Chapter 5, “Taiwan,” in 2019 Annual 
Report to Congress, November 2019, 459.
† “One country, two systems” is the Chinese government’s proposed political framework for 
unification with Taiwan. Under “one country, two systems,” Chinese officials claim Taiwan can 
enjoy a high degree of autonomy in exchange for recognizing the existence of and its role as a 
constituent part of only “one China.” China’s crackdown on the rights and freedoms of people in 
Hong Kong has shown that its promises of autonomy under the framework are empty, however. 
In 2019, General Secretary Xi equated “one country, two systems” to the 1992 Consensus, leading 
President Tsai to emphatically reject the framework. For more, see Derek Grossman, “Where 
Does China’s ‘One Country, Two Systems’ Stand in 2020?” Diplomat, February 13, 2020.
‡ Ahead of Taiwan’s 2020 presidential election, the KMT and mainland officials accused the 
DPP of carrying out a “green terror” campaign to suppress pro-Beijing political dissent, charging 
that the passage of the Anti-Infiltration Act and other political measures would enable the DPP 
to suppress its political opponents. The Anti-Infiltration Act increased penalties for those ac-
cepting money or guidance from mainland China to lobby Taiwan politicians or participate in 
election campaigns. The term “green terror” is a variation on “white terror,” a political term 
used in Taiwan to describe the campaign of political repression carried out by the KMT during 
the period of martial law from 1949 to the late 1980s. During the “white terror” period, at least 
140,000 people were convicted of political crimes in military courts, and 4,000–5,000 people were 
executed between 1950 and 1954 alone. Green is the official color of the DPP. Oiwam Lam, “Ahead 
of Taiwan’s Presidential Election, KMT Accuses DPP of ‘Green Terror’ and Beijing Echoes,” Global 
Voices, January 8, 2020; Nick Aspinwall, “Taiwan Passes Anti-Infiltration Act ahead of Election 
amid Opposition Protests,” Diplomat, January 3, 2020.
§ Chu won the election for KMT chairmanship in September 2021, defeating incumbent Chair -
man Johnny Chiang. Chu previously served as KMT chairman and met with General Secretary 
Xi in Beijing in 2015. The CCP did not send a congratulatory letter to Chiang after his election, 
departing from its usual practice of congratulating the new KMT chairman through party-to-par -
ty communication, signaling its disapproval of Chiang’s desire to potentially abandon the 1992 
Consensus to make the KMT more electable. It did, however, send congratulations to Chu upon 
his election. Chu made his remark about the non-consensus consensus nine months after his 
election. Xinhua, “Xi Focus: Xi Congratulates Eric Chu on Election as KMT Chief,” September 26, 
2021; Keoni Everington, “Beijing Fails to Congratulate Taiwan KMT’s New Chairman,” Taiwan 
News, March 9, 2020.

595
distorted” and urged the KMT to “stay on the correct path.”  25 De-
spite this criticism of Chairman Chu, the KMT still participated 
virtually in the Mainland’s 14th annual Straits Forum, which Tai-
wan’s Mainland Affairs Council has described as a major venue by 
which China carries out “United Front” work,* over several days in 
July.† 26 The KMT’s vice chairman also went through with a pre-
planned trip to the Mainland in early August after the PLA began 
military exercises in response to Speaker Pelosi’s visit. 27
How Will the “China Factor” Impact Taiwan’s 2024 
Presidential Election?
Taiwan’s relationship with China is among the most import-
ant political issues in any Taiwan national election, and the 
2024 presidential election is no exception.‡ 28 President Tsai is 
approaching the end of her second consecutive term and is ineli-
gible to run again due to term limits. 29 Pollsters in Taiwan have 
already identified likely contenders from each of the island’s ma-
jor parties, and media outlets on and off the island have begun 
scrutinizing the candidates’ words and actions for insight into 
their stance on China. 30 The November 2022 “nine-in-one” local 
elections § may foreshadow the 2024 race insofar as the results 
reflect continuing public support for the reigning DPP or precip-
itate an internal party revolt against current KMT Chairman 
Chu, who is seeking to make the KMT more electable by shift-
ing its unpopular positions on issues like the 1992 Consensus 
and its image as a “pro-China” party.¶ 31 Media sources speculate 
that the DPP will likely choose current Vice President William 
Lai, who was President Tsai’s running mate in the 2020 election 
and has described himself as a “political worker advocating for 
Taiwan independence.” 32 The KMT may field current New Taipei 
Mayor Hou Youyi, who has recently signaled his independence 
from the party line and is among the most popular politicians in 
Taiwan, or Chairman Chu, who is facing significant challenges 
* China uses “United Front” work to co-opt and neutralize sources of potential opposition to the 
CCP’s policies and authority. The CCP’s United Front Work Department—the agency responsible 
for coordinating these kinds of influence operations—carries out global influence operations and 
manages potential opposition groups inside China, such as ethnic minorities, religious groups, 
and intellectuals outside of the CCP. The United Front Work Department’s operations toward 
Taiwan aim to suppress the Taiwan independence movement, undermine local identity, and pro-
mote support for “one country, two systems.” For more on the United Front Work Department, 
see Alexander Bowe, “China’s Overseas United Front Work: Background and Implications for 
the United States,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, August 24, 2018, 3.
† By contrast, the KMT under Chiang boycotted the 12th Straits Forum in 2020 after a talk 
show on Chinese state-run central television ran a headline during the show describing the 
forthcoming visit of the KMT delegation as Wang Jin-pyng “coming to the Mainland to plead for 
peace.” Nick Aspinwall, “Taiwan’s KMT Skips Key Cross-Strait Forum over Comment by Chinese 
Talk Show Host,” Diplomat, September 21, 2020.
‡ Taiwan-based scholar Nathan Batto calls this single dominant political fault line over Tai-
wan’s national identity “the China cleavage.” Nathan Batto, “The NPP’s Internal Divisions, Ko’s 
New Party, and the China Cleavage,” Frozen Garlic, 2019.
§ Nine categories of elected office, ranging from mayors and heads of large counties to chiefs of 
small villages, are up for grabs in these local elections, which occur every four years.
¶ Chairman Chu has sought to portray the KMT as “pro-United States” by visiting the United 
States, attending the reopening of the KMT’s office in Washington, and emphasizing the KMT’s 
long history of ties with the United States. Even so, a June 2022 poll conducted by the Taiwanese 
Public Opinion Foundation found that 65 percent of respondents view the KMT as a “pro-China” 
political party. Courtney Donovan Smith, “Is the New KMT Pro-US Shift Actually for Real?” 
Taiwan News, June 22, 2022; Taiwan Public Opinion Foundation, “June 2022 National Polls Sum-
mary Report” (2022 年 6 月全國性民意調查摘要報告), June 21, 2022. Translation.

596
from so-called “deep blue” * members of the party favoring closer 
ties—or even unification—with China. 33 The recently established 
Taiwan People’s Party, which some polls have shown is more pop-
ular than the KMT, may put forward Taipei City Major Ko Wen-
je, who has stated that China and Taiwan are “one family across 
the Strait” and supported a proposed bridge linking Taiwan’s out-
lying islands with the Mainland. 34
China Hardens Its Position on Taiwan ahead of 20th Party 
Congress
While the Chinese government continued to accuse the United 
States of changing the “status quo” in the Taiwan Strait, several 
signs emerged that its own position toward Taiwan is hardening 
ahead of the 20th Party Congress. 35 These signs include the de-
but of the CCP’s new “overall strategy” for managing cross-Strait 
relations and the publication of an official white paper on Taiwan 
that omits some of the assurances China has previously made that 
Taiwan would enjoy a high degree of autonomy under “one country, 
two systems.”
CCP Touts “Overall Strategy” for Resolving the Taiwan Question 
ahead of the 20th Party Congress
Since November 2021, CCP officials and media have promoted 
the Party’s “overall strategy for resolving the Taiwan question in 
the new era” as a novel, comprehensive, and theoretically profound 
framework for achieving Taiwan’s unification with the Mainland. 36 
Most of the strategy is consistent with the policy of “peaceful reunifi-
cation” that China has pursued toward Taiwan since the late 1970s, 
however.37 According to a July commentary by Taiwan Affairs Office 
Director Liu Jieyi in People’s Daily, the strategy encompasses five 
lines of effort. 38 First, China views “reunification” as an “inevitable 
requirement” of national rejuvenation and will promote both aims 
at the same time, aiming to “create a favorable environment in the 
Taiwan Strait” and rely on “our growing comprehensive strength 
and significant institutional advantages.”  39 Second, China contin-
ues to view “peaceful reunification and one country, two systems” 
as the best policy option but still reserves the option to use force as 
required.40 Third, China maintains that the “One China principle” † 
and 1992 Consensus are the political foundation of cross-Strait re-
lations and the precondition for any official dialogue with Taipei. 41 
Fourth, China will continue to promote cross-Strait integration and 
development, namely through economic initiatives and cultural ex-
changes.42 Finally, China will continue its efforts to deter Taiwan 
* Political parties in Taiwan are affiliated with different colors: green stands for the DPP and 
blue stands for the KMT, for example.
† The “One China principle” refers to the Chinese government’s position that Taiwan is an 
inalienable part of the state called “China” ruled by the PRC. By contrast, the “one China policy” 
refers to the U.S. government position that the PRC—rather than the Republic of China govern-
ment on Taiwan—is the sole legal government of China and acknowledges the Chinese position 
that Taiwan is part of China.
How Will the “China Factor” Impact Taiwan’s 2024 
Presidential Election?—Continued

597
politicians from declaring independence and foreign countries from 
“interfering” in any matter China regards as its internal affairs. 43 
Director Liu described the strategy as “a theoretical crystallization 
of epoch-making significance for Taiwan work” and credited Xi with 
most of the theoretical innovation behind the strategy. 44 Like oth-
er officials before him, Director Liu called on CCP members at all 
levels to “thoroughly study and implement” the new guidance on 
Taiwan work.45
Despite this continuity, the CCP’s use of certain phrases in connec-
tion with the strategy raises questions about whether it foreshadows 
a significant change in Taiwan policy at the upcoming 20th Party 
Congress.46 The strategy’s inclusion of the words “resolving” and “in 
the new era” could imply that China seeks a definitive solution to 
the ongoing dispute over Taiwan’s political status during Xi’s tenure 
instead of postponing unification indefinitely.47 Chinese officials dis-
cussing the need to implement Xi’s guidance on Taiwan work have 
also asserted that China possesses “the initiative” in cross-Strait re-
lations, suggesting Beijing believes it controls the direction and pace 
of cross-Strait relations. 48 According to John Dotson, deputy direc-
tor at the Global Taiwan Institute, China’s narratives surrounding 
its “initiative” to resolve Taiwan’s political status show that Beijing 
seeks to deny Taiwan’s people legitimacy or agency over their own 
affairs.49 Instead, Beijing seeks a position of dominance in cross-
Strait relations, believes there is an “inevitable historical trend” of 
unification with Taiwan, and insists that Taiwan’s populace bow to 
China’s superior power and authority, Mr. Dotson argued in a May 
analysis.50
Official White Paper Suggests “One Country, Two Systems” for 
Taiwan Will Be Less Autonomous
China also published a white paper in August 2022 that discusses 
“one country, two systems” in a post-unification Taiwan in ways that 
suggest Beijing intends to exert more control over Taiwan than it 
has promised in the past or than it has in Hong Kong. The 2022 
white paper emphasizes that Beijing remains committed to peace-
ful unification and “one country, two systems,” remaining consistent 
with the 1993 and 2000 white papers in its expression of Beijing’s 
preferences (see Appendix for a detailed comparison of the three 
white papers).51 The white paper states that China’s national devel-
opment and growing influence “set the direction of cross-Strait rela-
tions,” providing China with “a more solid foundation for resolving 
the Taiwan question and greater ability to do so.”  52 It also repeats 
the call of previous white papers * to deepen cross-Strait engage-
ment and clarifies that the “use of force would be the last resort 
taken under compelling circumstances.” 53
At the same time, the white paper makes clear “one country, two 
systems” as previously conceived is too lax to account for challenges 
to its authority that Beijing anticipates in a post-unification Tai-
wan. Unlike its 1993 version, the 2022 white paper does not contain 
assurances of the specific rights Taiwan could enjoy after unifica-
tion that would allow the island to keep its democratic political sys-
tem.54 These missing assurances include Taiwan’s right to “its own 
* China published white papers laying out its position on Taiwan in 1993 and 2000.

598
administrative and legislative powers”; “an independent judiciary 
and the right of adjudication on the island”; the ability to “run its 
own party, political, military, economic, and financial affairs”; the 
right to “keep its military forces” and corollary promise that “the 
Mainland will not dispatch troops or administrative personnel to 
the island” (also repeated in the 2000 version); and the prospect 
that “representatives of the government of the special administra-
tive region and those from different circles of Taiwan may be ap-
pointed to senior posts in the central government and participate 
in the running of national affairs.”  55 The omission of the promise 
not to dispatch mainland troops leaves open the possibility that the 
PLA might occupy Taiwan for an extended period of time as Beijing 
roots out those it deems separatists who cannot be brought into the 
fold of a unified society. Moreover, the 2022 white paper’s language 
contradicts the 2000 white paper’s promise that “after peaceful re-
unification, [the Mainland] is prepared to apply a looser form of 
the ‘one country, two systems’ policy in Taiwan than in Hong Kong 
and Macao.” 56 Instead, the 2022 white paper notes that “Hong Kong 
faced a period of damaging social unrest caused by anti-China agi-
tators both inside and outside the region,” leading the CCP to make 
“appropriate improvements” to “one country, two systems” similar to 
those applied in Hong Kong that presumably would be implemented 
in Taiwan after unification.57
Some Mainland Voices Advocate for More Repression in a 
Unified Taiwan ahead of 20th Party Congress
Some Chinese academics and diplomats have gone farther than 
official policy in their calls for greater restrictions on politics and 
society in a post-unification Taiwan, potentially reflecting currents 
of thinking that may influence adjustments in Taiwan policy an-
nounced after the 20th Party Congress in the fall. Tian Feilong, a 
leading hardline intellectual and staunch advocate for Hong Kong’s 
2020 National Security Law, published an article in July 2021 as-
sessing that the difficulty of bringing Hong Kong under mainland 
control had proven “the ‘one country, two systems’ system design 
that simply delegates power and benefits is not an ideal and sound 
solution, and effective institutional arrangements for state authority 
must be made at the beginning.” 58 He argued that ensuring stability 
in Taiwan after unification would require governance by “patriots” 
only; a new “national unification law” as well as updates to the An-
ti-Secession Law, the Hong Kong National Security Law, and the 
Anti-Foreign Sanctions Law; the incorporation of pro-CCP content 
into the curriculum for all Taiwan students; and Taiwan’s participa-
tion in Chinese global initiatives like the Belt and Road Initiative 
(BRI), among other things.59 More recently, China’s Ambassador to 
France, Lu Shaye, told the French press repeatedly in August 2022 
that China would need to “reeducate” Taiwan’s population after uni-
fication to counteract popular support for independence and culti-
vate acceptance of the CCP’s rule.60 His remarks about reeducation 
echoed Beijing’s language surrounding its treatment of Uyghurs in 
Xinjiang, who are forcibly interned in “reeducation” camps for polit-
ical indoctrination.61

599
Beijing Intensifies Coercion while Taipei Mulls Military 
Reform
PLA Escalates Frequent and Intimidating Operations around 
Taiwan
The PLA escalated its provocative operations around Taiwan in 
2022, violating the island’s air defense identification zone (ADIZ) 
on an almost daily basis to attempt to normalize its presence in 
the area (see Figure 1). 62 According to a database maintained by 
Systems Planning and Analysis, Inc. analyst Gerald Brown that 
compiles data published by Taiwan’s Ministry of National Defense, 
PLA aircraft made approximately 1,286 sorties into Taiwan’s ADIZ 
between January and October 6, 2022, exceeding the 972 sorties 
that occurred over the entirety of 2021 by 32 percent. 63 About 26 
percent of these, or 339 sorties, occurred over the first three weeks 
of August as the PLA conducted military exercises in response to 
Speaker Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan.64 U.S. officials have repeatedly con-
demned China’s violations of Taiwan’s ADIZ in 2022, including U.S. 
Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin in his recent speech at the annu-
al Shangri-La Dialogue. 65
The PLA also practiced a variety of military operations in 2022 
relevant to a Taiwan conflict, all of which likely aimed to deter in-
tervention by outside parties, enhance military readiness, and make 
routine its presence in the Strait and around Taiwan. 66 The most 
significant of these exercises occurred between August 4 and 10* 
following Speaker Pelosi’s trip to Taiwan, though the PLA carried 
out a number of small-scale training events during the first half of 
the year and flew a joint strategic bomber patrol with Russia near 
Japan in June.67 The August exercises reportedly involved:
 • Live-fire drills and military operations carried out in six zones 
encircling the island of Taiwan, which allowed the PLA to target 
the island from the north, south, east, and west.68 Previous PLA 
exercises and the live-fire exercises targeting Taiwan during the 
1996 crisis had been held along the coasts of Fujian and Zheji-
ang provinces.69 Several of the zones appeared to extend within 
12 kilometers (6.5 nautical miles) of Taiwan’s coast, an area 
regarded as territorial seas under the UN Law of the Sea. 70
 • Test-firing of long-range rockets and conventional missiles from 
four regions in China into multiple exercise zones. 71 Japan’s 
Ministry of National Defense reported that China fired nine 
short-range ballistic missiles into four exercise zones, assessing 
that five had landed in Japan’s EEZ and that four had likely 
flown over Taiwan. 72 By contrast, China and Taiwan both re-
ported that 11 missiles had been fired. 73 Taiwan’s Ministry of 
Defense did not issue air raid warnings and said that the mis-
* On August 1, China announced it would conduct military exercises in the South China Sea 
between August 2 and 6 as well as military exercises including live-fire drills around Taiwan 
between August 4 and 7. Though the military exercises around Taiwan were slated to end on 
August 7, China announced new military operations around Taiwan on August 8 and 9 to prac-
tice “joint anti-submarine and sea assault” and “joint containment and joint support.” The PLA’s 
Eastern Theater Command announced the end to the military exercises on August 10, but PLA 
aircraft and vessels continued to operate around Taiwan in the weeks afterward. China Power 
Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated August 19),” Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, August 19, 2022.

600
Figure 1: PLA Incursions in Taiwan’s ADIZ, October 2021 to 
October 6, 2022
TAIWAN
MIYAKO
STRAIT
BASHI
CHANNEL
CHINA
TAIWAN STRAIT
0
100
200
300
400
500
OctSepAugJul JunMayApr MarFebJan DecNovOct
196
86
143
168
70 64 75
119
70
192
23
84
446
PLA INCURSIONS INTO TAIWAN’S ADIZ, OCTOBER 2021 TO OCTOBER 6, 2022
Sorties
Taiwan Strait Median Line
Taiwan’ s Air Defense Identiﬁcation Zone (ADIZ)*
Median Line Incursions**
ADIZ Incursions**
* Taiwan’s declared ADIZ covers parts of territory 
administrated by China and Japan.
** Flight paths are approximated and inferred 
from reporting; exact locations are unknown.
Source: Taiwan’s Ministry of National Defense, compiled by Gerald C. Brown. See Gerald C. 
Brown, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations,” last updated October 10, 2022.

601
siles had flown high above the atmosphere, posing no threat to 
people on the island. 74
 • Large numbers of Chinese military aircraft operating in Tai-
wan’s ADIZ and crossing the median line * (see Figure 2), 
though there were no credible reports that any aircraft had en-
tered Taiwan’s territorial airspace.75 Unmanned aerial vehicles 
(UAVs) also flew over Taiwan’s Kinmen Islands and Matsu Is-
lands.76
 • Large numbers of Chinese naval vessels operated in the waters 
around Taiwan, with some crossing the median line, though Tai-
wan’s Ministry of National Defense confirmed that none had 
come within 24 nautical miles of the coast. 77 During the exer -
cises, Chinese and Taiwan warships reportedly played a game 
of “cat and mouse,” sailing at close quarters as the Taiwan ves-
sels monitored or at times attempted to prevent Chinese vessels 
from crossing the median line. 78
 • The PLA Eastern Theater Command carried out what Chinese 
state media described as training focusing on “practical subjects” 
such as “joint containment and control”—its euphemism for op-
erations supporting a blockade—simulated firepower strikes on 
land and maritime targets, air superiority operations, joint an-
ti-submarine warfare, and joint support. 79 The PLA Navy, Air 
Force, Rocket Force, Strategic Support Force, and Joint Logistic 
Support Force all reportedly participated, suggesting that the 
PLA also tested new command and control structures imple-
mented after the 2015 military reorganization. 80
 • Disruptions to civilian sea and air traffic as marine shippers 
and airlines rerouted to avoid the areas the PLA had declared 
off-limits during the exercise. 81
While certain aspects of the PLA’s August exercises were novel, 
others seemed consistent with the CCP’s previous coercive activ-
ities toward Taiwan and intended mainly to achieve deterrent ef-
fects. Some U.S. media outlets and experts described the exercises 
as “unprecedented” in terms of scale and proximity to Taiwan, em-
phasizing the high tempo of aircraft flights the PLA sustained over 
the exercises and the fact that the PLA had apparently shattered 
previous norms against shooting missiles over the main island of 
Taiwan or into the EEZs of U.S. allies like Japan.† 82 At the same 
time, the PLA’s dispatch of large numbers of military aircraft into 
* The median line, also known as the center line, is an informal demarcation extending down 
the middle of the Taiwan Strait. The line was drawn in 1955 by General Benjamin O. Davis, 
then commander of the U.S. Air Force’s Taiwan-based 13th Air Force. While the Chinese govern-
ment never formally agreed to the establishment of the median line, both the PLA and Taiwan’s 
military observed the line in practice. In the decades immediately following the drawing of the 
median line, Taiwan’s military superiority made it too dangerous for PLA aircraft to cross the 
line. In fact, the Taiwan military also never publicly acknowledged the median line until 1999, 
when the PLA’s first deliberate crossing occurred, because it could control the airspace over the 
entire Taiwan Strait. With the shift in the cross-Strait military balance in China’s favor over the 
last two decades, Taiwan is no longer able to prevent PLA planes from crossing the line. While 
China’s foreign ministry said in September 2020 that the median line did not exist, Taiwan’s 
defense ministry described its existence as a “fact” in August 2022. For more, see U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and Security Review Commission, Chapter 5, “Taiwan,” in 2019 Annual Report to Congress, 
November 2019, 449.
† Some analysts also assessed that the UAV flights over Taiwan’s offshore islands were an 
historical first. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Tai-

602
Figure 2: Crossings of the Median Line in August 2022
TAIWAN
SOUTH CHINA SEA
EAST
CHINA
SEA
PHILIPPINE SEA
CHINA TAIWAN STRAIT
Taipei
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03
Dates in August
22
30
14
12
14
16 17
11
6
8
10
12
7
4
19
8
4 5 4 55
7 7
15
12
2 2
22
Aircraft
CROSSINGS OF THE MEDIAN LINE IN AUGUST 2022
Taiwan Strait Median Line
Taiwan’ s Air Defense Identiﬁcation Zone (ADIZ)*
Internal Waters
Territorial Waters
1996 Live Fire Exercises
2022 Live Fire Exercises
* Taiwan’s declared ADIZ covers parts of territory 
administrated by China and Japan.
Note: Prior to the August 2022 exercises, PLA aircraft had crossed the median line twice in 
September 2021 and once in May 2022.
Source: Taiwan’s Ministry of National Defense, compiled by Gerald C. Brown. See Gerald C. 
Brown, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations,” last updated August 30, 2022.

603
Taiwan’s ADIZ mirrored some of the air activities it has conducted 
in the Taiwan Strait over the past two years, and neither its mis-
siles nor its ships actually entered Taiwan’s territorial waters, align-
ing with past PLA practice when operating around Taiwan.* 83 No-
tably, some of the missiles China launched into the waters around 
Taiwan appeared to be DF-15B short-range ballistic missiles, which 
are optimized for land targets, rather than antiship missiles, which 
would have been more appropriate for simulating precision strikes 
on enemy ships. 84 According to public reporting, the exercises also 
did not appear to integrate amphibious operations; include vis-
it, board, search, and seizure activities that would be required to 
inspect vessels attempting to transit a blockaded area; or feature 
enough ships, aircraft, submarines, and surface-to-air missile units 
working in concert to repel intervening forces. 85
Gray Zone Activities Lay the Groundwork for Enforcement of 
China’s Claims over Taiwan
China also continued to conduct gray zone activities † around 
Taiwan, normalizing its presence near the island and potentially 
creating a pretext for future enforcement of its territorial claims. 
In November 2021, members of Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council 
expressed concern that the Chinese Coast Guard ‡ constituted a de 
facto “second navy” and that it might attempt to interdict the Tai-
wan Coast Guard Administration’s regular maritime law enforce-
ment duties, such as disrupting illegal fishing or checking merchant 
vessels for stowaways.86 In July 2022, Chinese media also reported 
that a large patrol and rescue ship known as Haixun 06 had been 
commissioned and assigned to the Fujian Maritime Safety Admin-
istration.§ 87 Haixun 06 will reportedly patrol the Taiwan Strait 
to conduct emergency rescues of mainland and Taiwan vessels in-
volved in maritime traffic accidents.88 The commissioning of Haixun 
06 came just weeks after Chinese officials claimed sovereignty over 
the entire Taiwan Strait, leading some analysts to assess that the 
ship’s patrol activities will create a pretext for the potential enforce-
ment of Chinese maritime laws in the Taiwan Strait. 89
Chinese Disinformation and Propaganda Flood Taiwan’s 
Information Environment
In 2022, China continued to target Taiwan with coordinated disin-
formation campaigns to subvert public trust in its institutions and ep-
idemic response. Disinformation campaigns have been carried out by 
wan Strait Crisis (Updated August 19),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 
19, 2022.
* For example, PLA aircraft conducted 149 sorties into Taiwan’s ADIZ over the first four days of 
October 2021 during China’s National day celebrations. Adrian Ang U-Jin and Olli Pekka Suorsa, 
“Explaining the PLA’s Record-Setting Air Incursions into Taiwan’s ADIZ,” Diplomat, October 14, 
2021.
† Gray zone activities are coercive actions to change the status quo that remain below the 
threshold justifying a kinetic military response. Lyle J. Morris et al., “Gaining Competitive Ad-
vantage in the Gray Zone: Response Options for Coercive Aggression below the Threshold of 
Major War,” RAND Corporation, 2019, iii.
‡ The Chinese Coast Guard is subordinate to the People’s Armed Police force, which in turn 
answers to the Central Military Commission. This operating structure mirrors that of the PLA 
and effectively puts Chinese maritime law enforcement activities under the control of its military. 
Shigeki Sakamoto, “China’s New Coast Guard Law and Implications for Maritime Security in the 
East and South China Seas,” Lawfare, February 16, 2021.
§ Unlike the Chinese Coast Guard, the Maritime Safety Administration is not directly subordi-
nate to the Central Military Commission.

604
China’s central government, China’s local governments, Chinese com-
panies acting as content farms, or Taiwan-based public figures who 
wittingly or unwittingly propagate fake news.* 90 In January, the In-
vestigation Bureau of Taiwan’s Ministry of Justice said China is cur-
rently using more than 400 fake accounts † to spread disinformation 
on Taiwan’s most popular social media and internet forums to divide 
society and interfere with the upcoming elections.‡ 91 In May, National 
Security Bureau Director-General Chen Ming-tong stated publicly that 
China pays and trains Taiwan social media celebrities (or “influencers”) 
to produce fake content in what he termed “cognitive warfare.” 92 Direc-
tor-General Chen pointed to the example of a Taiwan TikTok celebrity 
based in Hangzhou who circulated false claims after Russia’s invasion 
of Ukraine and claimed the Chinese government was assisting with 
the evacuation of Taiwan citizens from Ukraine, but Taiwan’s govern-
ment was not. 93 Taiwan’s government agencies are now considering 
measures to counter China’s use of Taiwan influencers to spread dis-
information, including through fines or other punishments.94 For ex-
ample, a man from Taiwan’s Hualien county and his wife were sen-
tenced in May to several months in prison for using the two Facebook 
groups they administered to spread disinformation about COVID-19 
and domestic politics in the runup to Taiwan’s 2020 election.§ 95 More 
broadly, Chinese-language pro-Russian fake news of probable Chinese 
origin has flooded Taiwan’s online environment since the start of Rus-
sia’s invasion into Ukraine, amplifying Kremlin and CCP narratives 
about the origin of the crisis.96
China also continued leveraging Taiwan celebrities to manufacture 
grassroots support for unification.97 In January 2022, Chinese media 
company CMG Cross-Strait Radio and the TV program Looking at the 
Taiwan Strait released the music video for the ballad “We’re Singing 
a Song Together” featuring major Taiwan pop stars Jam Hsiao and 
Nana Ouyang.98 Alternating between Mandarin, Hokkien, and South-
ern Min—all languages spoken in Taiwan—the ballad’s lyrics convey 
pro-unification messages such as likening Taiwan’s people to “fallen 
leaves return[ing] to their roots in China” and emphasizing that “the 
two sides [of the Taiwan Strait] have always been one family.”  99 In 
May, several Taiwan YouTube celebrities based in China attended the 
fifth Cross-Strait Youth Development Forum in Hangzhou, where they 
discussed their professional success in the Mainland and urged other 
young people in Taiwan to join them.100 Such activities aim to facilitate 
unification by encouraging Taiwan youths to view their identities and 
futures as deeply intertwined with the Mainland.
* In February, the Taiwan FactCheck Center found that 90 percent of those polled in a recent 
survey reported having encountered disinformation at some point in the past, and 93 percent 
said disinformation is having a “serious impact” on Taiwan’s society. Yang Mien-chieh and William 
Hetherington, “Most Taiwanese Encounter Media Disinformation: Poll,” Taipei Times, February 
20, 2022.
† The Investigation Bureau said it investigated 2,773 cases of fake accounts propagating such 
information in 2021 alone, tracing them back to content farms in mainland China. Chien Li-
chung, “PRC Targets Taiwan with New Disinformation Ploy,” Taipei Times, January 24, 2022.
‡ China launched a major but ultimately unsuccessful campaign to influence the results of Tai-
wan’s 2020 presidential election. For more, see Nick Monaco, Melanie Smith, and Amy Studdart, 
“Detecting Digital Fingerprints: Tracing Chinese Disinformation in Taiwan,” joint report by the 
Institute for the Future’s Digital Intelligence Lab, Graphika, and the International Republican 
Institute, August 2020.
§ Both had traveled to China in August 2019 to receive propaganda training and spread the 
disinformation upon their return. Wang Chin-i and Liu Tzu-hsuan, “Hualien Man Sentenced to 
Three Months for Spreading COVID-19 Rumors Online,” Taipei Times, May 9, 2022.

605
Taiwan Debates New Steps to Resist Beijing’s Military 
Pressure
Taiwan Explores Ways to Enhance Military Readiness
Taiwan’s government has explored, though not yet implement-
ed, several ways to enhance military readiness this year. Taiwan’s 
regular military is in the midst of a transition to an all-volunteer 
force and suffers from a shortage of active-duty personnel, with 
some front-line combat units reportedly at only 60 percent of their 
required manpower.101 Some critics have panned training for both 
active-duty army personnel and the reserve forces as scripted and 
unrealistic.102 Problems of military readiness are particularly acute 
in Taiwan’s reserve force. Taiwan’s Ministry of National Defense has 
assessed that only one-third of its 2.3 million reservists were demo-
bilized recently enough to be effective if they were to be mobilized 
for conflict.103 Of that fraction, over 40 percent have completed only 
basic training and another 45 percent were conscripts who served 
for no more than four months. 104 Taiwan’s Ministry of National 
Defense can mobilize only 260,000 reservists quickly enough to re-
spond to a crisis.105 Some analysts have also expressed concern that 
the Ministry of National Defense is not consistently implementing 
the asymmetric warfighting strategy known as the Overall Defense 
Concept that it adopted just a few years ago. 106 Taiwan’s military 
also struggles to recruit soldiers from a society in which military 
service is often regarded with disdain and military careers are often 
seen as a last resort. 107 President Tsai has called for sweeping re-
forms to address these longstanding deficits during both her terms, 
but progress has been slow (for more, see Chapter 4, “A Dangerous 
Period for Cross-Strait Deterrence: Chinese Military Capabilities 
and Decision-Making for a War over Taiwan” in the Commission’s 
2021 Annual Report).
Top Taiwan government and defense officials proposed several 
solutions to ameliorate these problems in 2022. The All-Out De-
fense Mobilization Agency was launched in January 2022 to improve 
Taiwan’s capacity to mobilize its reserves and signal Taiwan’s will-
ingness to resist a Chinese invasion. 108 In March, Taiwan’s defense 
minister proposed extending compulsory military service from four 
months to one year, a change that one poll found nearly 76 percent 
of respondents favored.* 109 The Ministry of Defense has also set up 
a task force to research extending mandatory military training to 
women, a move that one poll found 56 percent of respondents fa-
vored.110 A new pilot program featuring extended training for about 
15,000 reservists also began in March 2022. 111 Reservists partici-
pating in the program receive two weeks of training instead of the 
standard five to seven days, and they spend more time on combat 
training instead of support tasks.†  112 The Ministry of Defense also 
released a civil defense handbook in April 2022 to help civilians 
survive an invasion, though it announced that a forthcoming revi-
sion would be released in September 2022 after receiving withering 
public comments that its content was impractical. 113
* The decision on whether to extend conscription will not be made for about a year.
† The program will be reviewed in the fourth quarter of 2022 before a final decision is made 
about whether to adopt it.

606
Taipei also increased its defense spending to fund capabilities 
that would counter a PLA invasion. In January 2022, Taiwan’s Leg-
islative Yuan passed a special budget of $8.6 billion to procure pre-
cision missiles, UAVs, missile corvettes, and naval weapons systems 
for the Taiwan Coast Guard’s patrol vessels during wartime. 114 Yet 
Taiwan’s defense budget today still only constitutes 1.5 percent of 
gross domestic product (GDP) (see Figure 3). 115 While Taiwan’s de-
fense budget has been increasing on an absolute basis each year 
since 2017, it has nonetheless continuously declined as a percentage 
of GDP over the last decade. 116 This is likely to change in 2023, 
however, as Taiwan responds to Beijing’s growing hostility with a 
proposed defense budget that is set to increase at a greater rate 
than GDP for the first time in a decade. 117
Figure 3: Taiwan’s Defense Budget vs. GDP , 2009–2023
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
13.0
14.0
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
Budget (in US$ billions)
Budget/GDP
Budget Budget / GDP
Note: GDP and budget estimates for 2023 are projections.
Source: Various.118
Taiwan’s Civilians Take Defense Matters into Their Own 
Hands
Concerned by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, some Taiwan citizens 
have signed up for first aid and weapons training courses to pre-
pare themselves for a potential Chinese invasion. 119 Taipei-based 
Forward Alliance, a nongovernmental organization that trains civil-
ians in medical skills relevant for emergencies and disasters, told 
Newsweek in June 2022 that its workshops have been fully booked 
for weeks. 120 While instructors are holding 15 classes a month, 
the waiting list is more than 1,000 people long, and Forward Alli-
ance’s founder acknowledged that the organization was “completely 
overwhelmed by demand.” 121 Others have flocked to airsoft train-
ing classes, where they can practice shooting low-powered air guns 
without metallic projectiles to safely replicate realistic training. 122 
The chief executive of one airsoft company, Polar Light Training, 
said the numbers of attendees in his classes had “tripled or quadru-
pled” since the start of the Ukraine conflict. 123 Recent polling has 
shown a growing majority of Taiwan’s population is willing to fight 
in the event of a Chinese invasion. 124

607
Taiwan’s External Relations
The year 2022 saw a continued struggle between Beijing and Tai-
pei over Taiwan’s status in the world. Chinese officials continued 
to manipulate international institutions and bilateral relationships 
alike to exclude Taiwan’s experts from important global discussions 
and consolidate support for Beijing’s position that Taiwan is a part 
of China. Meanwhile, Taiwan officials decried China’s efforts to mar-
ginalize the island and modeled good global citizenship by donating 
food, supplies, and money to Ukrainian hospitals and refugees.* 125 
Taiwan officials also offered to send emergency responders to aid 
rescue efforts in China after a 6.8 magnitude earthquake struck 
Sichuan Province in September 2022. 126 For their part, the United 
States and its allies resisted Beijing’s moves to isolate Taiwan by 
deepening their relations with Taiwan and signaling their unwill-
ingness to tolerate an unprovoked attack on the island.
Beijing Aims to Isolate Taipei from the World
In 2022, Beijing continued its longstanding campaign to suppress 
Taiwan’s participation in the international community and promote 
a narrative of Chinese sovereignty over the island. Elements of this 
campaign include Chinese diplomats’ efforts to exclude Taiwan from 
international organizations, entice its remaining diplomatic allies 
to switch recognition to China, and dissuade other countries from 
deepening ties with Taiwan. 127 Chinese leaders apparently believe 
that isolating Taiwan from the international community will demor -
alize its populace, thereby weakening public support in Taiwan for a 
declaration of independence in the near term and cultivating public 
acquiescence to Taiwan’s absorption by the Mainland in the long 
term.128 Beijing has refused to engage constructively with President 
Tsai Ing-wen and members of the DPP since 2016 despite their le-
gitimate election and reelection. 129
Shut Out of Most International Organizations, Taiwan Faces 
New Obstacles
In 2022, Taiwan again faced exclusion at the World Health Or -
ganization’s (WHO) annual assembly, moves by China to block its 
experts from attending the 2022 UN Oceans Conference, and efforts 
to label Taiwan citizens attending the World Cup as Chinese citi-
zens. All three episodes underscored the degree to which Beijing has 
largely succeeded in isolating Taipei from important international 
institutions over the past 50 years. Taiwan currently has no official 
representation in the UN General Assembly † or in the UN’s special-
ized agencies.‡ 130 While Taiwan’s government has sought “meaning-
* A Taiwan government campaign held from March 2 to April 1 raised $33 million in humani-
tarian aid and supplies to help Ukraine. By contrast, in March China announced it would provide 
$15 million in aid to Ukraine. John Feng, “As China’s Xi Jinping Shuns Volodymyr Zelensky, 
Taiwan Engages with Ukraine,” Newsweek, June 21, 2022.
† On October 25, 1971, the UN General Assembly voted to expel the Republic of China (Taiwan) 
and admit the PRC as a member of the body. United Nations General Assembly, “2758 (XXVI) 
Restoration of the Lawful Rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations,” 1971.
‡ The 15 specialized agencies are the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO); the Interna-
tional Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO); the International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD); the International Labor Organization (ILO); the International Monetary Fund (IMF); the 
International Maritime Organization (IMO); the International Telecommunication Union (ITU); 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); the United Na-
tions Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO); the World Tourism Organization (UNWTO); 

608
ful participation” in the UN system and other organizations requir -
ing statehood as a prerequisite for membership since 2008, Chinese 
diplomats have used their influence as a full member and other 
tactics to stymie initiatives that would grant the island observer 
status or any other substantive role.* 131 As research fellow Jacob 
Stokes and his colleagues at the Center for a New American Secu-
rity observed, “China uses existing institutional authorities (such 
as its permanent seat on the UN Security Council) and external 
coalition-building (through BRI and other foreign policy initiatives) 
in a mutually reinforcing fashion to shape and shove international 
institutions in its preferred directions.” 132
WHO Denies Taiwan Observer Status at 2022 World Health Assembly
The WHO rejected a proposal by 13 of its member states † to allow 
Taiwan to observe the 75th annual World Health Assembly (WHA) 
in May 2022, apparently in response to pressure from Chinese diplo-
mats.‡ 133 WHA President Ahmed Robleh Abdilleh § announced that 
the proposal would be omitted from the agenda at the recommen-
dation of the WHA General Committee—which had discussed the 
proposal in a closed-door session the previous day—after a perfunc-
tory “debate” on the assembly floor.134 Representatives from China 
and Pakistan made statements in favor of the General Committee’s 
recommendation to exclude Taiwan, falsely asserting that UN Gen-
eral Assembly Resolution 2758¶ and WHA Resolution 25.1** had 
the Universal Postal Union (UPU); the World Health Organization (WHO); the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO); the World Meteorological Organization (WMO); and the World 
Bank Group. United Nations, “What Are UN Specialized Agencies, and How Many Are There?”
* In the decades after its expulsion from the UN, Taiwan developed informal means of partic-
ipating in some UN specialized agencies, such as sending its civil servants to these bodies as 
part of delegations of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Since President Tsai’s election, 
however, China has sought to choke off these forms of participation. For example, in 2017 Chi-
nese officials prevented the head of Taiwan’s Environmental Protection Agency from entering 
a meeting of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) as part of an NGO 
delegation, even though he had valid credentials and Taiwan civil servants had participated in 
the UNFCC’s general assembly meetings between 1996 and 2015. Taiwan, however, is a member 
or observer in some international organizations that allow participation by subnational units; 
these organizations include the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-
operation (APEC), and the Asian Development Bank. Alexander Gray, Russell Hsiao, and Robert 
Wang, “US-Taiwan Relations in the 21st Century: Building the Foundation for a Global Partner -
ship,” Global Taiwan Institute, June 2022, 20–21; Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary 
Durkee, “Global Island: Sustaining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” 
Center for a New American Security, April 2022, 7; Jess Macy Yu, “Taiwan Says Shut Out of U.N. 
Climate Talks Due to China Pressure,” Reuters, November 14, 2017.
† The member states that sponsored the proposal were all Taiwan’s diplomatic partners: Belize, 
Eswatini, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Paraguay, Saint Kitts 
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tuvalu. Separately, the Czech 
Republic’s Senate passed a resolution calling for Taiwan’s admission to the WHA as an observer, 
and the World Medical Association published an open letter calling for the same. Brian Hioe, 
“Taiwan’s Quest to Attend the World Health Assembly,” Diplomat, May 18, 2022; World Health 
Organization, “Proposal for Supplementary Agenda Item,” May 3, 2022.
‡ Taiwan participated in the WHA’s annual assembly as an observer from 2009 to 2016, when 
the KMT’s Ma Ying-jeou was president and ties between Taipei and Beijing were warm. Since 
President Tsai and her DPP Administration took power, however, the WHA has not allowed Tai-
wan to participate. Brian Hioe, “Taiwan’s Quest to Attend the World Health Assembly,” Diplomat, 
May 18, 2022.
§ Mr. Abdilleh concurrently serves as Djibouti’s Minister of Health.
¶ UN General Assembly Resolution 2758 recognized the PRC as “the only legitimate represen-
tative of China to the United Nations,” but it did not recognize Taiwan as a part of China. Jessica 
Drun and Bonnie Glaser, “The Distortion of UN Resolution 2758 and Limits on Taiwan’s Access 
to the United Nations,” German Marshall Fund, March 2022, 7–8.
** WHA Resolution 25.1 stated that the WHO would “restore all its rights to the People’s Re-
public of China and to recognize the representatives of its Government as the only legitimate 
representatives of China to the World Health Organization,” but it did not recognize Taiwan as a 
part of China. World Health Assembly, “WHA25.1 Representation of China in the World Health 
Organization,” May 10, 1972, at the 25th World Health Assembly in Geneva, May 9–26, 1972, 1.

609
laid the legal foundation for the WHO’s adherence to the One China 
principle in dealing with proposals involving Taiwan, though neither 
document makes any statement or determination regarding Tai-
wan.135 Representatives from Eswatini and Tuvalu then rebutted 
the Chinese and Pakistani statements, arguing that the question 
of Taiwan’s participation in the WHA as an observer should be re-
garded as a public health issue, not a political issue. 136 After cutting 
off Tuvalu’s representative as she was speaking, President Abdilleh 
stated to the assembly, “I take it that the [World] Health Assem-
bly accepts the recommendation of the General Committee not to 
include the proposed supplementary item on the agenda.”  137 He 
waited less than ten seconds before announcing that the WHA had 
approved the General Committee’s recommendation to omit from 
the agenda the proposal regarding Taiwan’s observer status. 138 No 
additional time was allotted for any review, vote, or discussion of the 
matter during the assembly, suggesting the real decision had been 
made beforehand by the WHA General Committee, a decision-mak-
ing body over which China appears to wield undue influence.
Tuvalu and Palau Protest after China Blocks Taiwan Delegates from 
Attending UN Ocean Conference
In June 2022, China reportedly prevented the issuance of cre-
dentials to several Taiwan nationals participating in Tuvalu and 
Palau’s delegations to the 2022 UN Ocean Conference in Lisbon, 
Portugal.139 According to a U.S. delegate at the conference, the UN’s 
credentialing committee violated a longstanding practice whereby 
each member state is free to decide the membership of its own del-
egation.140 In response to the news that Chinese delegates had suc-
cessfully challenged the accreditation of the Taiwan-based experts 
serving in the Tuvaluan and Palauan delegations, Tuvalu’s foreign 
minister boycotted the conference and one of Palau’s delegates made 
a public statement condemning the decision. “They were not given 
badges and were not allowed to be part of our delegation simply be-
cause they hold Taiwanese passports,” the Palauan delegate said.141 
“We view this as a violation of our sovereign rights . . . ocean issues 
are global issues and we call on all of us to work together without 
discrimination.” 142 After the Palauan delegate’s remark, the Chi-
nese representative called the mention of Taiwan “regrettable” and 
added, “Taiwan is part of China and cannot possibly attend a UN 
conference.” 143
World Cup ID Card Flip-Flops on Description of Taiwan Citizens’ 
Nationality
The same month, organizers of the upcoming World Cup in Qatar 
provoked a public outcry by repeatedly changing the reference to 
Taiwan visitors’ nationality on the application for an identification 
card that doubles as an entry visa to the country. 144 The drop-down 
menu of the online system for the identification card initially omitted 
an option for Taiwan altogether, leading Taiwan-based soccer fans to 
complain that they could not proceed through the application with-
out picking “China” as their nationality and listing a China-based 
phone number.145 Following a senior Qatari official’s announcement 
that the online system would likely list Taiwan-based attendees as 

610
Chinese, the drop-down menu option changed to “Taiwan, Province 
of China” drawing fierce protests from Taiwan’s government.146 The 
menu option was updated briefly to display “Taiwan” before final-
ly being changed to “Chinese Taipei,” a name used for Taiwan in 
most international sports events to sidestep political problems. 147 
Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs expressed its disappointment 
about the change of Taiwan’s name to “Chinese Taipei” and con-
demned “the Chinese government’s bullying . . . and its political ma-
nipulation of international sports events.”  148 By contrast, China’s 
foreign ministry expressed appreciation for the Qatari government’s 
“commitment to the one-China principle and its handling of the 
issue in line with the established practice of international sports 
events.” * 149
After Nicaragua’s Switch, Taiwan Has 14 Diplomatic Partners
Nicaragua broke official ties with Taipei and established dip-
lomatic relations with Beijing in December 2021, reducing Tai-
wan’s diplomatic partners to 13 countries and the Holy See. 150 
The Nicaraguan foreign ministry’s statement went further than 
other countries that had broken ties with Taipei by declaring that 
“Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory.”  151 The switch 
came after months of growing tensions between Nicaragua and 
the United States over Nicaragua’s sham presidential election 
and the U.S. decision to sanction a number of officials appointed 
by President Daniel Ortega. 152 China’s foreign ministry described 
the switch as “a political decision without any economic precondi-
tion,” but analysts observed that Nicaragua—the second-poorest 
country in the Western hemisphere—was likely incentivized by 
promises of Chinese aid, trade, and investment. 153 Nicaragua is 
the eighth country to sever ties with Taipei since 2016,† when 
Beijing responded to President Tsai’s election by reviving its cam-
paign to pick off the island’s diplomatic partners through a mix-
ture of carrots and sticks. 154
Countries that switch recognition to Beijing have not always 
enjoyed the prosperity promised by China. Though China signed 
a deal with El Salvador pledging $500 million in infrastructure 
projects shortly after it switched recognition in 2018, Center for 
Strategic and International Studies senior associate Evan Ellis 
confirmed that as of June 2022, few of these projects had been 
realized. 155 The Solomon Islands, which switched recognition in 
2019 amid allegations China bribed its senior officials, has ex-
perienced high unemployment and corruption over the past two 
years and was rocked by riots in December 2021, which were 
partly inflamed by lingering public anger over the decision to 
break ties with Taipei. 156 After surviving a no-confidence vote in 
* Taiwan has for decades been compelled to compete in international sports events as 
“Chinese Taipei” rather than as Taiwan or under its formal name, Republic of China. The 
International Olympic Committee’s rules prohibit delegations from Taiwan from using alter -
nate names or any symbols suggesting the island is a sovereign nation. Amy Chang Chien, 
“Chinese Taipei? Republic of China? For Taiwan, There’s a Lot in a Name,” New York Times, 
February 4, 2022.
† These include Sao Tome and Principe (December 2016), Panama (June 2017), the Dominican 
Republic (May 2018), Burkina Faso (May 2018), El Salvador (August 2019), the Solomon Islands 
(September 2019), and Kiribati (September 2019). Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary 
Durkee, “Global Island: Sustaining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” 
Center for a New American Security, April 2022, 4.

611
parliament, Solomon Islands Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare 
deflected criticism of his government’s policies by accusing “Tai-
wan’s agents” of instigating the unrest. 157
Taiwan’s remaining 14 diplomatic relationships are “in various 
states of duress,” as Global Taiwan Institute senior nonresident fel-
low Alexander Gray observes, with China “often actively campaign-
ing, overtly or covertly or both, to secure a switch in recognition.”  158 
Such campaigns may take the form of courting an opposition party 
that is likely to come to power through national elections or promis-
ing foreign assistance to governments in exchange for switching rec-
ognition.159 For example, current Honduran President Xiomara Cas-
tro garnered public support as an opposition candidate during the 
2021 election by promising to switch recognition to China, though 
her officials walked back this stance after winning the election in 
December (see Chapter 3, Section 1, “Year in Review: Security and 
Foreign Affairs” for more). 160 The leaders of Paraguay and Guate-
mala similarly reaffirmed their support for the relationship with 
Taiwan at the end of 2021, though the 2023 Paraguayan election 
and the deterioration of Guatemalan President Alejandro Giam-
mattei’s relationship with the Biden Administration over corruption 
concerns raises questions about whether a switch of recognition 
could occur in the near future. 161
Beijing Leverages Coercion, Threats to Veto Taiwan’s Ties 
with Nondiplomatic Partners
China continues to punish countries that deepen ties with Tai-
wan, even when countries describe these ties as nondiplomatic or 
unofficial. In late 2021, for example, Lithuania opened its “Taiwan-
ese Representative Office” in Vilnius, departing from the usual no-
menclature for Taiwan’s de facto embassies abroad that uses “Taipei 
Representative Office” or “Taipei Economic and Cultural Office” to 
avoid implying statehood. 162 China responded to the office opening 
by recalling its ambassador to Lithuania, imposing a trade embargo, 
and levying informal secondary sanctions against European firms 
that source products from Lithuania. 163 China’s heavy-handed and 
disproportionate response appeared to give Lithuanian officials 
pause in the first quarter of 2022. 164 Reuters reported that in Jan-
uary 2022, a broader debate was occurring within the Lithuanian 
government about whether to ask Taiwan to alter the Chinese trans-
lation of the name. 165 Lithuanian President Gitanas Nauseda said 
in April 2022 that the decision to allow “Taiwan” in the title of the 
representative office was “a mistake,” but as of July 2022 the office’s 
website retained Taiwan in the title. 166 Condemning China’s naked 
coercion, in January 2022 the EU filed a complaint with the WTO 
regarding Chinese restrictions on trade with Lithuania. 167 Later in 
the year, the European Commission will decide whether to move 
beyond the consultation phase of the dispute-settlement process to 
seek an adjudication by panel. 168
At other times, Chinese threats of retaliation have proved empty. 
Before Taiwan Foreign Minister Joseph Wu’s trip to Slovakia and 
the Czech Republic in October 2021, for example, China’s foreign 
ministry accused the two countries of “promoting secessionism” and 
warned that China would take all “necessary measures” to defend 

612
its sovereignty.169 China also threatened to retaliate before mem-
bers of the European Parliament delegation made their planned trip 
to Taiwan at the beginning of November 2021 to discuss the island’s 
experience fighting disinformation and foreign interference. 170 In 
neither case did China follow up the threats with action.
U.S. Allies and Partners Send Deterrent Signals to Beijing
Over the past year, U.S. allies and partners have publicly expressed 
concern about China’s unilateral efforts to change the status quo in the 
Taiwan Strait and made statements intended to deter Chinese leaders 
from a use of force. In November 2021, Australian Defense Minister Pe-
ter Dutton said the “price of inaction” if China attacked Taiwan would 
be greater than the alternative, and it was “inconceivable” his country 
would not help the United States defend Taiwan.171 Japanese Prime 
Minister Kishida Fumio said in September 2021 that Washington and 
Tokyo should conduct joint military simulations for a Taiwan scenar-
io.172 Three months later, media outlets citing Japanese government 
sources reported that the U.S. and Japanese militaries had drawn up 
plans for a joint operation in the event of a Taiwan contingency. 173 
In April 2022, then British Foreign Secretary Liz Truss said NATO 
should consider protecting Taiwan as part of its efforts “to tackle global 
threats” amid reports that the United States and the United King-
dom have held talks about responding to a Taiwan contingency.174 In 
May, a joint statement issued after the summit between U.S. President 
Joe Biden and South Korean President Yoon Suk-yeol reiterated “the 
importance of preserving peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait as 
an essential element in security and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific re-
gion.” 175 On the sidelines of the annual Shangri-La Dialogue in June, 
Japanese and Australian defense ministers joined Defense Secretary 
Austin in a similar statement underscoring their mutual concern for 
stability in the Taiwan Strait.176
The G7 nations have also publicly called for stability in the Tai-
wan Strait this year. In June, the G7 nations released a communi-
qué underscoring “the importance of peace and stability across the 
Taiwan Strait and . . . a peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues,” 
signaling that its members would likely oppose a Chinese attack on 
Taiwan.177 The G7 followed this communiqué with an unprecedent-
ed statement in August condemning China’s destabilizing activities 
in the Taiwan Strait after Speaker Pelosi’s visit. “We are concerned 
by recent and announced threatening actions by the People’s Re-
public of China (PRC), particularly live-fire exercises and economic 
coercion, which risk unnecessary escalation,” the statement said. 178 
“There is no justification to use a visit as pretext for aggressive mil-
itary activity in the Taiwan Strait.” 179
U.S.-Taiwan Political and Security Relations
In 2022, the United States continued its long-running efforts to 
expand Taiwan’s participation in the international community, deep-
en technical cooperation, and bolster the island’s self-defense capac-
ity. The policy debate in Washington took on new urgency as U.S. 
officials and lawmakers assessed Beijing’s heavy-handed response to 
Speaker Pelosi’s visit and the implications of Russia’s war against 

613
Ukraine for a potential Chinese attack on Taiwan (see “The Impact 
of the Crisis in Ukraine” later in this section for more).
U.S. Government Supports Taiwan Domestically and Globally
Various branches of the U.S. government praised Taiwan’s democ-
racy and advocated for its participation in the international commu-
nity this year. The Biden Administration included Taiwan officials in 
its first-ever Summit for Democracy in December 2021 and signed 
into law a bipartisan bill in May 2022 that directed U.S. Secretary 
of State Antony Blinken to develop a strategy to regain observer 
status for Taiwan in the WHO. 180 Meanwhile, members of the U.S. 
Congress introduced legislation to counter Chinese economic coer -
cion of countries supporting Taiwan, facilitate Taiwan’s participation 
in international organizations, and combat Beijing’s false claim that 
UN General Assembly Resolution 2758 committed the UN to its One 
China principle, among other things. 181
The executive branch expressed political support for Taiwan by 
dispatching a delegation of high-ranking former officials to the is-
land, and a number of congressional delegations also visited. In 
March, the Biden Administration sent a group of former senior de-
fense officials to Taipei to underscore U.S. commitment just days 
after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.* 182 In April, a high-profile bi-
partisan congressional delegation led by Senator Lindsay Graham 
(R-SC) touched down in Taiwan for a surprise one-day visit, meeting 
with President Tsai and other senior officials. 183 In May, a delega-
tion led by Senator Tammy Duckworth (D-IL) spent two days meet-
ing with Taiwan leaders to discuss cooperation on regional security, 
economics, and trade. 184 Senator Rick Scott (R-FL) visited Taiwan 
in July as part of a larger trip to the Indo-Pacific region to discuss 
U.S.-Taiwan relations, regional security, trade and investment, and 
global supply chains, among other things. 185 Speaker Pelosi led a 
delegation to Taipei in early August, marking the first visit by a sit-
ting speaker to the island in 25 years. 186 A delegation led by Sena-
tor Ed Markey (D-MA) touched down in Taipei for a day-long visit in 
mid-August, while Senator Marsha Blackburn (R-TN) visited Taipei 
for three days in late August. 187
China Retaliates for Pelosi Visit by Suspending Bilateral 
Cooperation, Levying Sanctions
Following Speaker Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan, Beijing announced 
it would cut off or suspend bilateral cooperation in a number of 
policy areas. 188 According to China’s foreign ministry, “counter -
measures in response” to the visit included the cancelation of sev-
eral military dialogues † and the suspension of talks on returning 
illegal immigrants, criminal matters, illegal drugs, and climate 
change.189 Notably, the foreign ministry statement spared bilat-
* The delegation was led by former Joint Chief of Staff Mike Mullen and included former Dep-
uty National Security Adviser Meghan O’Sullivan, former Undersecretary of Defense for Policy 
Michele Flournoy, and former National Security Council Senior Directors for Asia Mike Green 
and Evan Medeiros. Reuters, “Biden Sends Former Top Defense Officials to Taiwan in Show of 
Support,” Taipei Times, March 1, 2022.
† China’s Foreign Ministry specified that the U.S.-China Theater Commanders talks, U.S.-Chi-
na Defense Policy Coordination Talks (DPCT), and U.S.-China Military Maritime Consultative 
Agreement (MMCA) meetings would be canceled.

614
eral engagement on economic and trade issues, provoking spec-
ulation that it limited the measures to areas representing the 
Biden Administration’s priorities.190 U.S. National Security Coun-
cil Coordinator for Strategic Communications John Kirby con-
demned Beijing’s decision to cancel military dialogues with the 
United States as “irresponsible” but said that some channels of 
communication remain open between military officials in the two 
countries.191 China’s unilateral cancelation of military-to-military 
contacts with the United States is not unprecedented; in 2010, it 
canceled all military-to-military contacts, including a planned trip 
to China by then Defense Secretary Robert Gates, in response to 
the Obama Administration’s first arms sale to Taiwan.192
Beijing also imposed sanctions on Speaker Pelosi and a num-
ber of Taiwan political figures shortly after the visit. China’s for -
eign ministry announced the sanctions on Speaker Pelosi and her 
immediate family on August 5, though it did not specify what 
the sanctions entailed. 193 China also issued a more specific set 
of sanctions on Taiwan political figures it views as “diehard ele-
ments” supporting Taiwan’s independence.194 The sanctioned fig-
ures included Taiwan’s de facto ambassador to the United States, 
Hsiao Bi-khim; legislators Ker Chien-ming, Koo Li-hsiung, Tsai 
Chi-chang, Chen Jiau-hua, and Wang Ting-yu; and activist Lin 
Fei-fan.195 The Taiwan Affairs Office said these individuals would 
be prohibited from traveling to mainland China, Hong Kong, and 
Macau and from having financial or personal connections with 
people in those places. 196
The U.S. government also highlighted Taiwan’s valuable expertise 
in science, technology, and civil affairs by deepening technical co-
operation across multilateral and bilateral formats. The Global Co-
operation and Training Framework * entered its seventh year, with 
the United States, Taiwan, Japan, and Australia holding workshops 
on eliminating hepatitis C, ending gender-based violence, and com-
bating digital crimes. 197 In March, the United States and Taiwan 
signed a memorandum of understanding to continue bilateral sci-
entific and technological cooperation on the Formosat-7/COSMIC-2 
satellites, a constellation of weather observation satellites.† 198 Sep-
arately, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Assistant 
Secretary for Global Affairs Loyce Pace met with Taiwan Deputy 
* The Global Cooperation and Training Framework (GCTF) is a platform for Taiwan to share 
its expertise with partners around the world. Established in 2015, the GCTF is administered 
jointly by the American Institute in Taiwan (AIT), the Japan-Taiwan Exchange Association, the 
Australian Office in Taipei, and Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Under the GCTF, the United 
States, Taiwan, Japan, and Australia jointly train experts from the Asia Pacific in areas such as 
public health, energy, the digital economy, the empowerment of women, and humanitarian and 
disaster relief.
† As of December 2021, there were more than 270 memorandums of understanding and bilat-
eral agreements on science and technology between the United States and Taiwan. U.S.-Taiwan 
science and technology cooperation includes basic and advanced research across many fields, such 
as physics, atmospheric science, meteorology, nuclear energy, environmental conservation, space 
science, medicine, and the life sciences. Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the 
United States, “Taiwan-US Cooperation in Science and Technology,” April 20, 2022.
China Retaliates for Pelosi Visit by Suspending Bilateral 
Cooperation, Levying Sanctions—Continued

615
Minister of Health and Welfare Li-Feng Lee on the sidelines of the 
WHA in June and committed to continue technical health collabo-
ration.199
U.S. Bolsters Cross-Strait Deterrence through Signaling, Arms 
Sales, and Training
The U.S. government took a number of steps to enhance Taiwan’s 
defensive capabilities between late 2021 and the first half of 2022 in 
line with the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA) and other cornerstones of 
longstanding U.S. policy toward China and Taiwan. President Biden 
and other top Administration officials issued statements regarding 
an attack on Taiwan, and Congress proposed and passed legislation 
to deter such an attack. The Administration also implemented more 
explicit conditionality in arms sales to Taiwan and continued its 
engagement with Taiwan’s military.
Key Elements of U.S. Policy toward Taiwan
Important elements of U.S. policy toward Taiwan include the 
three communiqués, the Taiwan Relations Act, and the Six As-
surances.
 • The three communiqués are a series of joint statements made 
by the governments of the United States and the PRC in 1972, 
1979, and 1982 that established the foundation for the nor -
malization of diplomatic relations. In these communiqués, the 
United States acknowledged—though did not accept—Beijing’s 
position that “all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait 
maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of 
China” and recognized the government of the PRC as the sole 
legal government of China.200 These statements became the ba-
sis for the United States’ One China policy, which differs from 
China’s One China principle in that it does not take a position 
on the sovereignty of Taiwan. 201 The communiqués also de-
clared that U.S. willingness to reduce arms sales to Taiwan is 
conditioned upon the continued commitment of the PRC to the 
peaceful resolution of cross-Strait differences.202
 • The 1979 TRA laid the legal foundation for continued ties 
between the United States and Taiwan after Washington 
switched diplomatic recognition to Beijing in 1979. In addi-
tion to creating a nonprofit corporation called the American 
Institute in Taiwan, through which U.S.-Taiwan relations are 
conducted, the TRA states that it is U.S. policy to: “consider 
any effort to determine the future of Taiwan by other than 
peaceful means, including by boycotts or embargoes, a threat 
to the peace and security of the Western Pacific area and 
of grave concern to the United States”; “make available to 
Taiwan such defense articles and defense services in such 
quantity as may be necessary to enable Taiwan to maintain 
a sufficient self-defense capability”; and “maintain the capac-
ity . . . to resist any resort to force or other forms of coercion 
that would jeopardize the security, or the social or economic 
system, of the people on Taiwan.” 203

616
 • The Six Assurances are a series of promises first issued by 
the U.S. government to Taiwan in 1982 regarding the future 
conduct of U.S. foreign policy toward China and Taiwan. The 
assurances were and remain that the United States: has not 
set an end date for arms sales, has not agreed to consult 
with China on arms sales, would not mediate between Taipei 
and Beijing, had not agreed to revise the Taiwan Relations 
Act, had not altered its position on the question of Taiwan’s 
sovereignty, and would not pressure Taipei to negotiate with 
Beijing.204
Biden Administration and U.S. Congress Back Taiwan and Condemn 
Beijing’s Aggression
Executive branch officials repeatedly affirmed the U.S. commit-
ment to Taiwan and expressed their concern about a potential Chi-
nese use of force against the island in late 2021 and 2022. President 
Biden said on four separate occasions that the United States would 
come to Taiwan’s defense in the event of a Chinese attack, though 
his aides stressed afterward that the remarks occurred within the 
context of existing U.S. policy toward Taiwan. 205 At the Shangri-La 
Dialogue in June 2022, Defense Secretary Austin reiterated that 
the United States would uphold its commitments under the TRA 
and condemned the PLA’s “provocative and destabilizing military 
activity near Taiwan.” 206 More broadly, the Biden Administration’s 
2022 Indo-Pacific Strategy explicitly stated that “the United States 
will defend our interests, deter military aggression against our own 
country and our allies and partners—including across the Taiwan 
Strait—and promote regional security by developing new capabili-
ties, concepts of operation, military activities, defense industrial ini-
tiatives, and a more resilient force.” 207
Meanwhile, Congress has actively explored new laws that would 
better enable the United States to defend Taiwan or deter a Chinese 
attack. Congress mandated an annual report on Taiwan’s asymmet-
ric defensive capabilities and a briefing on the potential to enhance 
cooperation between Taiwan and the U.S. National Guard in the 
2022 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). 208 A number of 
bills introduced by members during the 117th Congress have also 
investigated ways to better deter a Chinese use of force against Tai-
wan, including by accelerating Taiwan’s procurement of weapons, 
imposing sanctions on China in response to aggression, and unam-
biguously stating a U.S. intention to intervene. 209
Snarled by Ukraine and Supply Chain Issues, U.S. Arms Sales 
Emphasize Counterinvasion Capabilities
The U.S. government continued to sell arms to Taiwan in 2022 
amid reporting that the Biden Administration is now explicitly con-
ditioning the sale of weapons on whether the systems in question 
are optimized to defend against a Chinese invasion. 210 As of Sep-
tember, the U.S. Department of State has approved seven poten-
tial sales of military equipment and technical assistance to Taiwan 
Key Elements of U.S. Policy Toward Taiwan—Continued

617
totaling $1.5 billion in 2022, including Harpoon anti-ship missiles, 
Sidewinder air-to-air missiles, and an engineering and maintenance 
agreement for the island’s existing Patriot Air Defense System. 211 
At the same time, major media outlets report that the Biden Admin-
istration has privately withdrawn, redirected, or denied several of 
Taiwan’s requests for weapons systems it does not deem sufficiently 
current or “asymmetric,” * which the U.S. Department of State has 
defined as “capabilities that are credible, resilient, mobile, distrib-
uted, and cost-effective.” 212 Officials from the U.S. Army sent Tai-
wan a letter in March suggesting it buy an upgraded version of 
the M109A6 Paladin self-propelled howitzer † Taipei had previously 
requested.213 That same month, the State Department indicated it 
would not process a request for MH-60R Seahawk helicopters ‡ on 
the grounds that the helicopters do not “enhance Taiwan’s ability 
to deter [China’s] aggressive actions and defend itself.”  214 A State 
Department official told Politico that “continuing to pursue systems 
that will not meaningfully contribute to an effective defense strat-
egy is inconsistent with the evolving security threat that Taiwan 
faces.” 215 The Administration has also reportedly told U.S. weapons 
manufacturers to refrain from asking the U.S. government to ap-
prove Taiwan’s requests for weapons.216
The adjustment in U.S. arms sales policy has occurred in tandem 
with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which Biden Administration of-
ficials say proves that Taiwan should adopt an asymmetric warfare 
strategy against the PLA. U.S. officials have highlighted Ukraine’s 
resolute civilian volunteers as well as its successful use of small, 
shoulder-fired missiles like the Stinger anti-aircraft and Javelin 
antitank missiles to attrite Russia’s numerically superior force as 
testaments to the efficacy of an asymmetric warfare strategy. 217 
Lieutenant General Scott D. Berrier, director of the U.S. Defense 
Intelligence Agency, said at a Senate hearing in March that the U.S. 
Department of Defense (DOD) could further study the Ukraine war 
for suggestions for Taiwan and “help them understand what this 
conflict has been about, what lessons they can learn and where they 
* “Asymmetric warfare” refers to war fought between belligerents whose relative military power 
differs so significantly that their strategies and tactics also differ significantly. For instance, guer-
rilla warfare waged by partisans armed with rifles against a conventional army is an example 
of asymmetric warfare. While definitions of “symmetric” and “asymmetric” weapons vary and 
often depend on one’s perspective, “symmetric” weapons are those that are similar to the enemy’s 
weapons and attempt to outmatch and overpower them. By contrast, “asymmetric” weapons en-
gage the enemy in ways that maximize one’s own advantages while minimizing the advantages 
conferred by the enemy’s superior size or technology. For example, when fighting an enemy tank, 
a symmetric weapons system is a tank, while an asymmetric system is an antitank weapon, such 
as the Javelin man-portable anti-armor weapons system. Examples of platforms often described 
as “asymmetric” in the context of a Taiwan scenario include coastal defense cruise missiles, short-
range mobile air defenses, naval mines, and drones. Noah Sylvia, “Asymmetric Weapons: The 
Most Bang for Your Buck (Literally),” University of Pennsylvania Perry World House, May 13, 
2022; E. Sexton, “Asymmetrical Warfare,” Encyclopedia Britannica, November 17, 2016.
† In a March 22 letter, the Army indicated that it was retiring the M109A6 Paladin self-pro-
pelled howitzers and warned of likely delivery delays until 2026 due to supply chain problems 
and “known obsolescence issues.” Instead, it urged Taiwan to purchase the newer M109A7 Pala-
din, which would cost about $250,000 less than the A6 to operate annually, or the M142 High Mo-
bility Artillery Rocket System, which offers “a similar capability with a faster delivery schedule.” 
Taiwan ultimately decided to cancel its planned purchase of 40 M109A6 Paladins, which were 
originally scheduled to be delivered between 2023 and 2025. Lara Seligman, Alexander Ward, 
and Nahal Toosi, “In Letters, U.S. Tries to Reshape Taiwan’s Weapons Requests,” Politico, May 10, 
2022; Yu Nakamura, “Taiwan Faces Delays in U.S. Arms Deliveries Due to Ukraine War,” Nikkei 
Asia, May 4, 2022; Christian Shepherd and Vic Chiang, “Howitzer Delivery to Taiwan Delayed by 
Strained U.S. Supply Chain,” Washington Post, May 3, 2022.
‡ The MH-60R Seahawk is among the world’s most advanced maritime helicopters and is de-
signed to hunt submarines. Lockheed Martin, “MH-60R.”

618
should be focusing their dollars on their defense and their train-
ing.” 218 Similarly, Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military 
Affairs Jessica Lewis told a Senate hearing in May that “we must 
not just consider, but act upon, the implications of this conflict for 
the defense of Taiwan.”  219 Speaking on condition of anonymity to 
Politico the same month, a DOD official argued that “the Ukraine 
situation validated some long-standing steps we’ve been taking in 
Taiwan.” 220
The diversion of existing stocks of weapons and munitions to 
Ukraine and pandemic-related supply chain issues has exacerbat-
ed a sizeable backlog in the delivery of weapons already approved 
for sale to Taiwan, undermining the island’s readiness. 221 In April 
2022, Deputy Secretary of State Wendy Sherman testified before 
members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee that there were 
more than 400 pending cases of foreign military sales of U.S. equip-
ment or technical assistance to Taiwan, though it was not clear from 
her remarks how many of these cases dated from purchases agreed 
to within the last few years. 222 F-16 fighter jets, Stinger missiles, 
and Paladin self-propelled howitzers are reportedly among the sys-
tems whose deliveries have been delayed. 223 Mr. Dotson observed 
that many of the systems Taiwan has purchased are the same ones 
now being shipped to Ukraine. 224 “With many of these systems on 
long, multi-year timetables for delivery—and with production ca-
pacity limited by parts shortages and other constraints—the war in 
Ukraine is likely having a significant impact on Taiwan’s own de-
fense planning,” he wrote.225 U.S. defense industry sources also at-
tribute the delays to increased demand resulting from the Ukraine 
conflict, the worldwide shortage of semiconductors, and other supply 
chain issues caused by COVID-19. 226
Delayed Stinger Delivery Exemplifies Challenges to 
Taiwan’s Defense Planning
The delayed delivery of Stinger missiles to Taiwan demonstrates 
how demand related to the war in Ukraine and supply chain is-
sues have snarled the island’s defense acquisitions. In 2019, the 
State Department approved a potential sale of 250 Block I-92F 
MANPAD Stinger missiles and related equipment worth $223 
million to Taiwan. 227 Taiwan subsequently signed the contract 
and paid for the missiles, which were initially scheduled to be de-
livered in batches between 2022 and 2026. 228 In late April 2022, 
however, Raytheon Technologies CEO Greg Hayes said during a 
quarterly earnings call that the company would not be able to 
ramp up production of Stinger missiles needed to replenish the 
stocks U.S. allies had donated to Ukraine until 2023 due to a lack 
of parts and materials.* 229 Mr. Hayes stated that Raytheon’s pro-
duction line is capable of building only a limited number of Sting-
ers at a time and argued that the U.S. government would need to 
fund and sustain a higher rate of production in order to replenish 
global stocks of the system. 230 The following week, Taiwan’s de-
* In March 2022, Ukraine reportedly told the United States it needed about 500 Stinger an-
ti-aircraft missiles and 500 Javelin antitank missiles per day to sustain the fight. Zachary Cohen 
and Oren Lierbmann, “Ukraine Tells the US It Needs 500 Javelins and 500 Stingers Per Day,” 
CNN, March 24, 2022.

619
fense minister confirmed that the first batch of Stinger missiles 
originally slated to begin delivery this year had been delayed. 231 
In late May, a Tucson, Arizona-based Raytheon unit won a $624.6 
million U.S. Army contract to produce approximately 1,300 Sting-
er anti-aircraft missiles to replenish supplies sent by the United 
States and its allies to Ukraine, but delivery could take up to 30 
months and it is unclear which of the donor countries will receive 
priority or how long Taiwan will have to wait for its Stingers.* 232
United States Engages Taiwan through Military Training and 
Dialogue
The United States continues to engage with Taiwan through 
military training and dialogues. In October 2021, the Wall Street 
Journal reported that a U.S. special operations unit had been 
operating in Taiwan training Taiwan’s ground forces. 233 In No-
vember 2021, a platoon of Taiwan’s marines traveled to Guam to 
participate in exercises led by their U.S. counterparts simulating 
amphibious and airborne assault, urban warfare, and joint oper -
ations.234 In May 2022, President Tsai said publicly that the U.S. 
National Guard would cooperate with Taiwan’s military, though 
she did not provide details. 235 In June 2022, military officials from 
Taiwan attended the Pacific Amphibious Leaders Symposium † se-
curity forum, hosted jointly by the Japan Ground Self-Defense 
Force and the U.S. Marine Corps, as observers to discuss regional 
security issues. 236 The same month, U.S. and Taiwan officials also 
met under the auspices of a recurring strategic dialogue known 
as the “Monterey Talks” to discuss arms sales and training. 237 
In line with a longstanding training agreement from the 1990s,‡ 
in June six of the Taiwan Air Force’s F-16V fighters also flew to 
Luke Air Force Base, where they joined a training squadron used 
to train Taiwan pilots. 238
Taiwan’s Economics and Trade
A combination of effective COVID-19 containment measures and 
strong external demand for Taiwan’s exports, most importantly 
semiconductors, has allowed Taiwan’s economy to maintain robust 
growth during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, emerging domes-
tic and external issues are challenging Taiwan’s economy. Domes-
tically, Taiwan’s transition to coexist with COVID-19 has entailed 
weakened domestic consumption. Externally, intermittent lockdowns 
in mainland industrial hubs have led to varying demand for Taiwan 
* Thirty countries allied with the United States use the Stinger. David Wichner, “Tucson-Based 
Raytheon Unit Gets $625M Deal for Stinger Missiles,” Tucson.com, May 29, 2022.
† The Pacific Amphibious Leaders Symposium (PALS) is intended to contribute to peace and 
stability in the Indo-Pacific by enabling discussions about crisis response, interoperability, and 
maritime capability development. Nearly 70 military personnel from 18 countries attended the 
2022 PALS forum. Yang Ming-chu and Teng Pei-ju, “Taiwan Military Officers Attend U.S.-Japan 
Security Forum in Tokyo,” Focus Taiwan, June 16, 2022.
‡ Under the agreement, Taiwan pilots train at Luke Air Force base, AZ, using Taiwan-owned 
aircraft. The program allows Taiwan pilots to fly more often and train under more realistic con-
ditions than they would be able to do at home.
Delayed Stinger Delivery Exemplifies Challenges to 
Taiwan’s Defense Planning—Continued

620
inputs from China’s manufacturing sector. At the same time, Rus-
sia’s invasion of Ukraine has sent energy prices soaring and further 
disrupted global supply chains, sharply increasing production costs 
as Taiwan’s energy mix relies heavily on imported sources.
The United States and Taiwan are enhancing cooperation through 
new trade and supply chain initiatives in response to these challeng-
es from Beijing and out of mutual desire to protect shared values 
and bolster their market-based economies. The Tsai Administration 
is also building on ongoing policies to maintain robust and sustain-
able growth, emphasizing stimulus measures to support services im-
pacted by the pandemic, increasing efforts to draw businesses back 
to Taiwan and diversify away from the Mainland, and accelerating 
initiatives to improve innovation and move up the value chain.
Headwinds Loom after Two Years of Strong Economic Growth
Taiwan’s successful response to the COVID-19 pandemic has 
buttressed its economy. Quick and strict border controls coupled 
with contact tracing and home quarantine measures assured that 
Taiwan’s economy has been able to operate normally and perform 
favorably in comparison to most industrialized nations. 239 In late 
December 2021, Taiwan reported its 850th death from just under 
17,000 confirmed cases, or roughly 700 cases per million, one of the 
world’s lowest rates.240 By the time Taiwan’s health minister effec-
tively announced the end of Taiwan’s Zero-COVID strategy on April 
7, 2022, roughly 80 percent of the population had been complete-
ly vaccinated. 241 Taiwan’s choice to relax its pandemic policies in 
April represents yet another marked divergence with the Mainland, 
which once again began sending large cities into harsh, extended 
lockdowns just weeks prior. 242
In conjunction with Taiwan’s effective COVID-19 containment poli-
cies, a continuing global demand spike for semiconductor-enabled elec-
tronic products has bolstered Taiwan’s GDP growth. In 2021, Taiwan’s 
economy grew at an impressive 6.6 percent year-on-year, up from 3.4 
percent growth in 2020 and 3.1 percent in 2019.243 Although decelerat-
ing relative to 2021, robust growth continued into 2022, with Taiwan’s 
GDP expanding 3.1 percent year-on-year in the second quarter.244 Of-
ficial government estimates forecast 3.8 percent growth for the year, 
while a lower estimate of 3.2 percent growth from the International 
Monetary Fund reflects its more pessimistic view of the global economy 
following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.245
Strong external demand also enabled record growth in Taiwan’s 
export values and export orders. The overall value of Taiwan’s ex-
ports rose 29.4 percent in 2021, reaching a record $446.6 billion, up 
from $345.2 billion in 2020.* 246 Taiwan’s electronics exports contin-
ued to drive trade, with electronic components constituting 38.5 per -
cent of exports and audiovisual products accounting for an addition-
al 13.7 percent.247 Strong external demand has continued into 2022, 
with Taiwan’s exports totaling $330.3 billion in January through 
August, up 16.1 percent from the first eight months of 2021.248 April 
2022, however, saw the first decline in export orders since the start 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, an indicator that headwinds may be 
* The exchange rate used in this section is 1 USD = 29.6 New Taiwan Dollars (NTD) unless 
otherwise stated.

621
arriving.249 Further, the unprecedented rise in import costs, led by 
energy, is narrowing Taiwan’s trade surplus, which is down 12.1 per-
cent through the first eight months of 2022 compared to the same 
period in 2021. 250 Taiwan’s producer price inflation has also been 
soaring since late 2021, reaching its highest year-over-year growth 
in 40 years. 251 Producer price inflation in August 2022 remained 
high at 8.6 percent year-over-year, although on a downward trajec-
tory relative to May’s peak of 14.2 percent. 252
Taiwan’s economic performance during the pandemic has thus 
far kept consumer inflation manageable and employment and 
wages stable. Taiwan’s year-over-year inflation rate has risen from 
2.3 percent in August 2021 to 2.7 percent as of August 2022, but 
it remains substantially lower than most other advanced econo-
mies.* 253 From January to July 2022, Taiwan’s unemployment 
rate averaged 3.7 percent, continuing a strong recovery from a 
moderate unemployment spike in mid-2021. 254 Unemployment 
among younger workers—although high—is also stable. In the 
first seven months of 2022, unemployment among workers be-
tween the ages of 20 and 24 was 12.4 percent, slightly lower than 
2021’s average.255 Average regular earnings of full time employ-
ees (excluding foreigners) in June 2022, meanwhile, increased 4.6 
percent year-on-year. 256
Supply Chain Challenges, Energy Costs, and Weak 
Consumption Dampen Outlook
Supply chain issues are increasing production costs across much 
of the developed world. High government spending and pent-up con-
sumer demand from savings accrued throughout the pandemic have 
simultaneously led to high consumer inflation in many advanced 
economies. In response, central banks in these economies, most 
prominently the Federal Reserve, are tightening credit conditions, 
which will likely reduce demand for Taiwan’s consumer electronics 
exports.257 Most significantly, however, the Mainland’s lockdowns 
have undermined a key source of demand for Taiwan contract man-
ufacturers and other exporters, exposing the extent to which Taiwan 
remains highly interconnected and dependent on the Mainland for 
both end demand and production. 258 In April, during the height of 
the Shanghai lockdown, Taiwan’s Economic Affairs Ministry report-
ed that export orders for telecommunications products dropped 21.5 
percent from the previous year. 259
A rise in domestic COVID-19 cases is also dampening the is-
land’s domestic consumption. 260 The government’s decision to 
“coexist” with the virus has led to what the Executive Yuan de-
scribes as a “predicted and inevitable” rise in cases. 261 Though 
serious cases and deaths remain low due to high vaccination 
rates, consumers are wary of dining out and shopping, leading to 
contraction in business for the restaurant, recreation, tourist, and 
transportation industries. 262 Despite consumer wariness, real pri-
vate consumption growth still grew in the second quarter by 2.89 
percent year-over-year, improving on the first quarter’s 0.46 per -
* In Europe and the United States, year-over-year consumer price inflation in August 2022 was 
an estimated 9.1 and 8.3 percent, respectively. European Central Bank, “Measuring Inflation—
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP),” September 16, 2022; U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, Consumer Price Index Summary, September 13, 2022.

622
cent growth. 263 To bolster the services sector, Taiwan’s govern-
ment has announced a continuation of its COVID-19 stimulus 
measures directed principally at supporting service industries via 
subsidies, tax exemptions, and loan programs throughout 2022 
and into 2023. 264
Pandemic Bolsters Taiwan’s Role as Global Semiconductor 
Foundry, Challenging Energy Supply
Amid a massive global demand spike for electronics brought on 
by the COVID-19 pandemic and the increase in telework arrange-
ments, Taiwan’s economy has shown a remarkable ability to expand 
production of semiconductors. In 2021, exports of integrated circuits 
grew 20.9 percent year-on-year, accounting for 36.1 percent of all of 
Taiwan’s exports.265 Alicia García-Herrero, chief economist for Asia 
Pacific at Natixis, notes that investment in new facilities by both 
mainland Chinese and Taiwan foundries could lead to a glut in low-
er-end chips by 2023. 266 Through 2022, however, demand for semi-
conductors is likely to remain elevated as global consumers contin-
ue to require additional digital devices. 267 Taiwan Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Company (TSMC), the world’s largest semiconductor 
foundry, is drastically expanding production in Taiwan through 2022 
and 2023 with a plan to establish 11 fabrication facilities through 
that period.268 It has increased production of 7-nanometer chips and 
other advanced processors by 70 percent per year since 2018 and is 
on track for a record $40–44 billion capital expenditure in 2022.* 269 
TSMC and MediaTek, a fabless semiconductor design company in 
Taiwan, are at the same time planning to hire over 10,000 engineers 
throughout 2022.270
One consequence of the surge in demand for semiconductors 
is increasing energy use. Due to fallout from Russia’s invasion 
of Ukraine, energy costs are soaring, offsetting some of Taiwan’s 
trade surplus and causing difficulties for an economy highly re-
liant on imported fossil fuels. Taiwan Power Co., Taiwan’s state-
owned energy company, is increasing energy costs by 15 percent 
for large industrial users of electricity, the first such price hike 
in four years. 271 The price increase comes as Taiwan’s energy 
use hits new records amid a large industrial rebound and strong 
external demand for energy-intensive technology products. 272 
TSMC is expected to be impacted, which may cause the price of 
integrated circuits to rise. 273 TSMC, which alone consumes 7.2 
percent of Taiwan’s power, more than all of Taipei, is utilizing 
vastly more energy to meet growing global semiconductor de-
mand.274 The energy demands of semiconductor fabrication show 
Taiwan’s domestic production is pushing the limits of the island’s 
capacity, even as demand for chips continues to increase. 275 Ener-
gy shortages and blackouts, which had already been occurring in 
2021 due to increased demand and tight supply, have continued 
apace in 2022. 276 Energy concerns are now top of mind for many 
in Taiwan as fears of an energy crisis loom. 277
* Fabrication of cutting-edge 5 nanometer chips reached mass production in 2020. Tu Chih-
hao, “TSMC Builds 11 Factories in Taimeng” (台積電 在台猛蓋11座廠), China Times, July 4, 2022. 
Translation.

623
Taiwan’s Troubling Energy Situation
In 2021, according to data from Taiwan’s Bureau of Energy, Tai-
wan’s energy supply consisted of 92.3 percent fossil fuels (30.8 
percent coal, 43.4 percent crude oil and petroleum products, 18.1 
percent natural gas), 5.6 percent nuclear, 1.2 percent biomass, and 
just under 1 percent for all other renewables. According to the bu-
reau’s statistics, Taiwan imported 97.7 percent of its energy sup-
ply in 2021.* 278 Taiwan’s energy import dependence is a growing 
concern in light of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which has sent 
oil and gas prices skyrocketing as substantial amounts of supply 
have gone offline. The island’s heavy reliance on energy imports 
could also make it vulnerable in the event of a blockade or war 
with China. Taiwan also faces domestic political constraints to 
increasing the share of nuclear in its energy mix. Following her 
victory in 2016, President Tsai committed to phasing out nuclear 
by 2025.† 279 Increased demand met tightening supply in 2021, 
leading to energy shortages and major blackouts throughout that 
year.280 Shortages have continued apace in 2022, aggravated by 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.281
In addition to phasing out nuclear, Taiwan’s government is also 
committed to transitioning away from coal and toward natural gas 
and renewable energy. This planned transition, however, is far be-
hind schedule on both counts. In 2016, the Tsai administration set a 
goal of utilizing 50 percent natural gas and 20 percent renewables for 
Taiwan’s electricity generation by 2025.282 The proportions in 2021, 
however, at 37.2 percent and 5.7 percent, respectively, are on track 
to fall short of the plan.283 Taiwan lacks sufficient liquified natural 
gas (LNG) terminals to import the required gas, and environmental 
reviews and final decisions remain for proposed additions.284 Mean-
while, Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan revised projections for renewable 
use down to 15 percent in 2021, with growth in Taiwan’s elecrity 
use outpacing projections from 2016 and the island facing challenges 
integrating power generated from renewable sources.285 To address 
Taiwan’s delayed renewable development, meanwhile, Taiwan’s 
National Development Council in March 2022 announced plans to 
spend roughly $32 billion between 2022 and 2030 on renewable 
technologies, grid infrastructure, and energy storage to try and has-
ten the transition.286
Taiwan Remains Dependent on Cross-Strait Trade despite 
Diversification Initiatives
Taiwan companies remain firmly embedded in the Mainland de-
spite a number of domestic development programs designed to bring 
production back from the Mainland. Indeed, China remains by far 
* However, Taiwan includes nuclear under “Imported Energy,” likely due to its importation of 
uranium. Subtracting nuclear, Taiwan’s energy import dependence in 2021 was 92.1 percent, a 
slight increase from 2011, when Taiwan’s nonnuclear energy import dependence stood at 89.2 
percent.
† A referendum in 2018 repealed a legal commitment to phasing out all nuclear plants by 
2025, but the phaseout remains on schedule for 2025 nonetheless. Similarly, in December 2021 
voters rejected a referendum to restart construction on what would be Taiwan’s fourth nuclear 
power plant. Lin Chia-nan, “Resumption of Fourth Nuclear Power Plant Rejected,” Taipei Times, 
December 19, 2021.

624
Taiwan’s largest and most consequential economic and trade part-
ner. Taiwan’s companies and its economy more broadly continue to 
be highly reliant on China for manufacturing and end consumption. 
Importantly, this means Taiwan remains highly exposed to potential 
economic coercion by China.
Cross-Strait Trade Ties Deepen, but Direct Investment Declines
Taiwan’s trade ties with the Mainland and Hong Kong deepened 
in 2021 into 2022, led by tight integration of cross-Strait consumer 
electronics production networks. Goods trade between Taiwan and 
the Mainland and Hong Kong totaled $273.1 billion in 2021, up 
26.3 percent from $216.2 billion in 2020. 287 Taiwan’s goods exports 
to China and Hong Kong totaled $188.9 billion in 2021, up 24.8 
percent from $151.4 billion in 2020, accounting for 42.3 percent of 
Taiwan’s total exports.288 Taiwan’s imports from China and Hong 
Kong in 2021 totaled $84.2 billion, up 29.9 percent from $64.8 bil-
lion in 2020.289 The increase in Taiwan’s exports to mainland China 
and Hong Kong during 2021 was matched or surpassed by increases 
in its exports to other major trading partners, including the EU, 
the United States, ASEAN, and Japan. 290 Through August 2022, 
largely as a result of lockdowns in China and Hong Kong, Taiwan’s 
growth in exports to China and Hong Kong (10.2 percent) lagged 
well behind overall export growth (16.2 percent) as well as exports 
to New Southbound countries * (27.1 percent). 291 China and Hong 
Kong, however, still accounted for an overwhelming combined 38.8 
percent share of Taiwan’s exports through the first eight months of 
2022, and it is unclear to what degree trade will rebound once China 
fully emerges from lockdown. 292
Foreign direct investment (FDI) between Taiwan and mainland 
China has not experienced the same upward trend as trade. At 
its peak in 2013, mainland direct investment into Taiwan totaled 
$349.5 million, but it has declined steadily since then, dropping to 
$116.2 million in 2021. 293 Through the first eight months of 2022, 
China’s approved investment into Taiwan collapsed to a mere $18.9 
million.294 In contrast, and excluding China, Taiwan’s total inbound 
FDI has increased robustly from $4.9 billion in 2013 to $7.5 billion 
in 2021.295 Through August 2022, Taiwan received overall inbound 
direct investment of $10.4 billion, representing a 178.6 percent in-
crease in FDI value compared to the same period in 2021. 296 Of that 
$10.4 billion of inbound investment into Taiwan, 43.3 percent came 
from Europe †, 22.3 percent from Asia, 17.4 percent from South and 
Central America, 13.2 percent from Oceania, and 3.0 percent from 
North America.‡ 297 Outbound direct investment from Taiwan to the 
* There are 18 New Southbound countries, including Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei, 
Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, 
the Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam. Taiwan Today, “Promotion Plan 
Announced for New Southbound Policy,” September 5, 2016.
† $3.3 billion of Europe’s $4.4 billion of FDI through August 2022 is listed as coming from 
“others” under European origin investment into Taiwan, with most of the remainder ($766 mil-
lion) coming from the Netherlands. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, 
Overseas Chinese & Foreign Investment Monthly Report (August 2022).
‡ Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs officially lists the flow of U.S. FDI into Taiwan from 
January through August 2022 as totaling $294.7 million. However, out of Central and South 
America origin investment, $1.7 billion of the $1.8 billion in FDI into Taiwan through August 
2022 came from “British Overseas Territories in the Caribbean.” Comparing Taiwan’s FDI data 
with U.S. data is difficult, as Taiwan’s inward FDI data is available monthly and tabulated as 
a gross flow, whereas the closest comparable U.S. data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis is 

625
Mainland has also slowed considerably, peaking in 2010 at $14.6 
billion, or 83.8 of Taiwan’s outward direct investment that year, and 
declining to $5.9 billion in 2021, or just 31.8 percent of Taiwan’s 
total that year. 298 From January to August 2022, Taiwan’s direct 
investment into the Mainland stood at $2.6 billion, a slight increase 
to 32.4 percent of outward direct investment in 2022. 299 Excluding 
the Mainland, Taiwan’s outward investment has increased sizably, 
growing from $2.8 billion in 2010 to $12.6 billion in 2021. 300
Tsai Administration Continues Efforts to Draw Taiwan Firms 
Home and Diversify Trade Partners
Taiwan continues to encourage businesses with operations in the 
Mainland to return to the island, incentivize domestic investment, 
and build out domestic infrastructure. In December 2021, the gov-
ernment reauthorized its “Three Major Programs for Investing in 
Taiwan” for another three years. 301 These programs include the 
Action Plan for Welcoming Overseas Taiwanese Businesses to Re-
turn to Invest in Taiwan, Action Plan for Accelerated Investment by 
Domestic Corporations, and Action Plan for Accelerated Investment 
by Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises. 302 According to the Ex-
ecutive Yuan, by year’s end 2021 these three programs had creat-
ed 128,000 jobs and brought $57.1 billion of investment from 1,144 
companies.303 Meanwhile, Taiwan’s Forward-Looking Infrastructure 
Program, which was unveiled in July 2017, has entered planning 
for its fourth phase. 304 The program seeks to enhance the efficiency 
of resource allocation, spur innovation, and create a more competi-
tive business environment.305 In February 2022, the National Devel-
opment Council, Taiwan’s top economic planning body, stated that 
$6.47 billion is being allocated to the program for 2023–2024. 306
Aside from reducing dependence on China, these policies aim to 
address a number of socioeconomic challenges Taiwan faces, includ-
ing mitigating the impact of climate change, declining birth rates, 
and urban-rural inequality.307 The urban-rural divide is of particu-
lar importance as globalization accrues disproportionate benefit to 
Taiwan’s metropolitan areas, leading to demographic concentration 
and rural decay. Taiwan’s Regional Revitalization Policy draws in-
spiration from Japan’s efforts to develop rural economies, reform ag-
ricultural practices, and encourage tourism and urban resettlement 
in rural areas. 308 In 2018, the Executive Yuan established the Re-
gional Revitalization Board, which comprised central and local gov-
ernments as well as private stakeholders to work together to bridge 
Taiwan’s growing urban-rural divide.309 The government published 
its national strategic plan for regional revitalization in 2019, the 
first stage of which is intended to be completed in 2022. 310
In addition to bringing Taiwan businesses back from the Main-
land, the Tsai Administration is trying to encourage diversification 
away from China. The New Southbound Policy, first announced by 
President Tsai in 2016, serves as the principal initiative in this re-
calculated only an annual basis as a stock. The Bureau of Economic Analysis’ most recent data, 
for example, indicates that the stock of U.S. investment in Taiwan, on a historical cost basis, fell 
to $16.8 billion in 2021, a decline of 5.6 percent from $17.9 billion in 2020. Taiwan’s Ministry of 
Economic Affairs, meanwhile, tabulated that the gross flow of U.S. FDI into Taiwan throughout 
2021 totaled $704.6 million. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Over-
seas Chinese & Foreign Investment Monthly Report (August 2022); U.S. Department of Commerce 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Direct Investment by Country and Industry, 2021,” July 2022.

626
gard, seeking to expand economic, trade, tourism, and investment 
ties with 18 countries across South and Southeast Asia and Ocea-
nia. Taiwan’s trade with these 18 countries increased from $59.2 bil-
lion in 2016 to $82.6 billion in 2021, though their share of Taiwan’s 
exports has fallen slightly over the period from 21.3 percent to 18.5 
percent.311 Taiwan’s outbound investment to the 18 countries has 
seen notable progress, moving from a 10.5 percent share of all out-
ward investment (including China) in 2016 to a 30.9 percent share 
in 2021. 312 In 2021, $5.7 billion flowed from Taiwan to the coun-
tries targeted by the policy versus $5.9 billion into the Mainland. 313 
During the first eight months of 2022, investment into the 18 South 
and Southeast Asian and Oceania countries reached $2.4 billion 
(29.3 percent) compared to $2.6 billion (32.4 percent) into China. 314
The New Southbound Policy efforts are not just limited to trade 
and investment flows. From 2016 to 2019, for example, students 
from New Southbound Policy countries increasingly came to Taiwan 
to study, growing in number from 32,000 to 60,000 in that period, 
or from roughly one-third of the total overseas students to nearly 
half.315 Taiwan has also been increasing healthcare and medical co-
operation with countries in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
with Vice Minister of Health and Welfare Chung-Liang Shih even 
calling for a “New Southbound policy 2.0” focused on these issues.316 
Overall, Taiwan has signed nearly 70 agreements with the 18 coun-
tries across trade, education, health, culture, agriculture, and other 
dimensions.317
China’s Economic Coercion of Taiwan
China is targeting democracies, with a particular emphasis on 
Taiwan, through its economically coercive threats and actions. The 
German Marshall Fund’s Asia Program Director Bonnie Glaser 
notes that “the PRC has used economic coercion against over a doz-
en countries. In virtually every case, the targets have been compa-
nies and industries in democratic states.” 318 Taiwan receives partic-
ular attention, with Beijing’s coercion extending to those countries, 
such as Lithuania, that increase their ties to Taiwan (for more on 
the Lithuania case, see Chapter 2, Section 2, “Challenging China’s 
Trade Practices”). Analysts at the German Marshall Fund’s Alliance 
for Securing Democracy note that since China’s Going Global Strat-
egy initiated in 1999, “the Chinese government’s economic leverage 
over its neighbors and further abroad has grown so significantly 
that economic coercion has become China’s go-to geopolitical tool 
of influence.” 319 Ms. Glaser explains that the objectives of China’s 
economic coercion are fundamentally about conditioning targets and 
observers’ future behavior in such a way as to induce them toward 
self-censorship, preemptive avoidance of certain actions, and greater 
reflexive compliance with Beijing’s desires.320
China’s economic coercion of Taiwan targets export industries that 
are both relatively small and highly dependent on China’s consumer 
market, attempting to inflict pain on Taiwan while avoiding fallout 
on China’s own economy. Beijing’s imposition of economically coer -
cive trade restrictions in reaction to Speaker Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan 
in August of 2022 demonstrated this approach. Upon confirmation of 
Speaker Pelosi’s visit, Beijing announced import bans on two types 

627
of fish exports from Taiwan that have an export value of roughly $22 
million, which comes on top of a June 2022 ban on groupers valued 
at nearly twice as much. 321 Beijing also banned a variety of fruits, 
again following a pattern from previous bans on pineapples and ap-
ples, and in a novel move placed export restrictions on natural sand, 
which is the base material for the silicon wafers used to produce 
semiconductors.* 322 As with previous restrictions, these sanctions 
on relatively small industries were tailored to regions wherein Pres-
ident Tsai’s DPP has strong support.323 It is noteworthy that China 
did not target Taiwan’s information and communications technology 
exports to China, by far the largest export category and an area that 
would likely also exact a major toll on China’s own economy if tar -
geted. As former Taiwan government trade negotiator Chiao Chun 
stated, “[t]he political message” intended by Beijing’s response “is 
greater than the economic hit.” 324
Some of Beijing’s previous coercive efforts have backfired.† In 
March 2021, for example, China announced it would suspend im-
ports of pineapples from Taiwan. This spurred massive publicity and 
popular movements—not just in Taiwan but also globally—to raise 
awareness of Taiwan’s plight and buy Taiwan pineapples. As a re-
sult, Taiwan’s Council of Agriculture recorded an increase in pineap-
ple demand shortly after the ban. 325 Over a year later, China’s ban 
on imports of Taiwan’s pineapples remains in place, yet Taiwan’s 
pineapple sales were still up 12 percent year-on-year in the first 
quarter of 2022. 326 In addition to pineapples, China also banned 
imports of Taiwan groupers in June 2022, depriving Taiwan fishers 
and farmers of a market that accounted for 91 percent of exports 
in 2021. 327 Whether or not global consumers will rally again for 
Taiwan groupers and the more recently targeted fish and agricul-
tural products remains an open question, highlighting the threat of 
China’s economic coercion.
China’s economic coercion is often also targeted at Taiwan compa-
nies with operations in the Mainland. In late 2021, it was reported 
that Taiwan-based Far Eastern Group was being fined $74.2 million 
for alleged regulatory violations. 328 A statement from China’s Tai-
wan Affairs Office suggests the fine was a penalty for Far Eastern 
Group’s political donations, with the Taiwan Affairs Office spokes-
person saying that “Taiwanese companies that have investments 
in the Mainland . . . have a clear understanding of whether or not 
to donate to obstinate ‘Taiwan independence’ elements.” 329 Beijing 
may be increasingly targeting companies that make donations to 
Taiwan’s DPP.330 Nonetheless, Kung Ming-hsin, Taiwan’s National 
Development Council minister, expressed confidence during a June 
2022 trip to Washington that Taiwan’s strong position in technology 
* Beijing’s ban on natural sand exports is not likely to be particularly harmful, as data from 
Taiwan’s Bureau of Mines indicates. Taiwan produces most of its natural sand domestically, with 
the 540,000 metric tons of natural sand imports in 2021 accounting for only 0.75 percent of Tai-
wan’s domestic demand that year. China accounted for 170,000 metric tons of Taiwan’s imports, 
or 31.5 percent, meaning China’s natural sand exports only accounted for 0.25 percent of Taiwan’s 
demand. Taiwan Bureau of Mines, The Dredging Progress of the Water Resources Department Is 
Ahead of Schedule. The Bureau of Mines Keeps Track of the Stock and Can Respond to the Supply 
and Demand of the Domestic Sand and Gravel Market (水利署疏濬進度超前 礦務局隨時掌握存量 可
因應國內砂石市場供需), August 3, 2022. Translation.
† For more analysis on this theme, see U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Chapter 1, Section 1, “U.S.-China Global Competition,” in 2021 Annual Report to Congress, De -
cember 2021, 53–54.

628
supply chains would deter China from taking more aggressive steps, 
saying that China would pay a very high price if it intensifies its 
coercive activities.331
Taiwan Responds to China’s Exploitation of Its Technolo-
gy Ecosystem
China is undertaking economic espionage as well as systematic 
poaching of Taiwan’s tech talent, particularly in the semiconduc-
tor industry.* By 2019, 3,000 semiconductor engineers had left 
Taiwan for the Mainland. 332 Meng Chih-cheng, associate profes-
sor of political science at Taiwan’s National Cheng Kung Univer -
sity, believes the Chinese government’s “goal is to bring Taiwan-
ese talent to the Mainland and hollow out Taiwan.”  333 Taiwan’s 
government has launched multiple initiatives to combat Chinese 
attempts to steal top talent. In December 2020, Taiwan’s Ministry 
of Justice set up a working group within its Bureau of Investi-
gation specifically to address the issue of tech talent poaching. 334 
Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan then amended the country’s National 
Security Act in May 2022 to both prohibit Taiwan workers in key 
industries from traveling to the Mainland without prior permis-
sion as well as stiffen penalties for those who cooperate in tech-
nology theft, including the potential for up to 12 years in pris-
on.335 Throughout 2022, the Taiwan Bureau of Investigation has 
launched a number of raids on Chinese companies operating in 
Taipei and Hsinchu, Taiwan’s hub for semiconductors. The bureau 
told Reuters that as of April 2022, more than 100 Chinese firms 
were under investigation. 336
U.S.-Taiwan Economic and Trade Relations
U.S.-Taiwan economic relations remain robust and are on an up-
ward trajectory as the two democracies seek greater collaboration on 
trade and supply chain issues in the face of shared challenges from 
China’s aggression and nonmarket practices. While Taiwan was the 
United States’ 12th-largest trading partner in 2013, it now ranks 
as the United States’ eighth-largest trading partner. 337 The United 
States was Taiwan’s second-largest export market after mainland 
China in 2021, receiving 14.7 percent of Taiwan’s exports. 338 The 
United States was the third-largest exporter to Taiwan, following 
China and Japan, as U.S. goods constituted 10.3 percent of all of Tai-
wan’s imports.339 Through August 2022, the United States received 
15.5 percent of Taiwan’s goods exports, while U.S. goods constituted 
10.4 percent of Taiwan’s imports, growing at 18.4 percent relative to 
the previous period. 340
A new trade initiative between the United States and Taiwan 
speaks to mutual interest in greater collaboration and economic 
ties. On June 1, 2022, the United States and Taiwan, through the 
American Institute in Taiwan and the Taipei Economic and Cultural 
Representative Office, respectively, announced the U.S.-Taiwan Ini-
* For more analysis of China’s exploitation of Taiwan’s technology ecosystem, see U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, 2019 Annual Report to Congress, November 2019, 
467–468.

629
tiative on 21st-Century Trade. The announcement stated that the 
initiative intends to “develop concrete ways to deepen the trade re-
lationship between the United States and Taiwan” and will see both 
sides attempt to “develop a roadmap for negotiations for reaching 
agreements in several specified trade areas.”  341 Eleven trade areas 
were identified in the announcement, including work on standards, 
state-owned enterprises, nonmarket practices, climate, digital trade, 
agriculture, and support for small- and medium-sized enterprises, 
among others.* 342 The first meeting occurred in late June 2022 be-
tween Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Sarah Bianchi and Tai-
wan Minister-without-Portfolio John Deng, who is responsible for 
trade.343 According to the readout, the two sides “reiterated their 
shared interest to develop concrete ways to deepen the U.S.-Taiwan 
economic and trade relationship, advance mutual trade priorities 
based on shared values, and promote innovation and inclusive eco-
nomic growth for workers and businesses.” 344 Given the nascency of 
the initiative, however, much remains to be clarified about the role 
this agreement will fill. Several Taiwan analysts are skeptical as to 
whether this new initiative offers additional substance relative to 
the three existing U.S.-Taiwan initiatives, the Trade and Investment 
Framework Agreement dialogue, the Economic Prosperity Partner -
ship Dialogue, and the Technology Trade and Investment Collabo-
ration.345
U.S.-Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade
The U.S.-Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade is in key as-
pects a bilateral version of the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework 
(IPEF), of which Taiwan is not a member as of October 2022. 346 
Similar to IPEF, the U.S.-Taiwan initiative contains no market 
access commitments and would not need to be approved by Con-
gress (for more on IPEF, see Chapter 2, Section 2, “Challenging 
China’s Trade Practices”). Unlike IPEF, the U.S.-Taiwan initiative 
is more narrowly tailored to negotiations on trade. Additionally, 
some areas in the U.S.-Taiwan initiative that were not included in 
IPEF indicate U.S.-Taiwan alignment on a set of market-oriented 
reform issues that establish a notable contrast with China’s re-
invigorated nonmarket practices, namely state-owned enterprise 
and nonmarket economy-related policies and practices. 347 Riley 
Walters, a senior nonresident fellow at the Global Taiwan Insti-
tute, offers an optimistic assessment of the initiative, saying the 
“US-Taiwan trade initiative will likely move faster and have more 
meaningful outcomes than the IPEF.” 348 Beijing was quick to an-
nounce its opposition to the initiative, with a spokesman from 
China’s Taiwan Affairs Office accusing the DPP of sacrificing the 
interests of Taiwan people to “collude with external forces” and 
seek “independent” self-interest.349
* The 11 trade areas include: trade facilitation, regulatory practices, agriculture, anticorrup-
tion, supporting small- and medium-sized enterprises in trade, harnessing the benefits of digital 
trade, promoting worker-centric trade, supporting the environment and climate action, standards, 
state-owned enterprises, and nonmarket policies and practices. Office of the United States Trade 
Representative, United States and Taiwan Hold Inaugural Meeting of the U.S.-Taiwan Initiative 
on 21st-Century Trade, June 27, 2022.

630
United States and Taiwan Enhance Technology Supply Chain 
Partnership to Reduce Reliance on China
As cooperative initiatives on trade progress, greater concern over 
supply chain dependence on China is also driving increased part-
nership between the United States and Taiwan. 350 On December 
6, 2021, the American Institute in Taiwan and the Taipei Econom-
ic and Cultural Representative Office, in conjunction with the U.S. 
Department of Commerce and the Taiwan Ministry of Economic Af-
fairs, launched the U.S.-Taiwan Trade and Investment Collaboration 
(TTIC). This collaboration is specifically intended to boost joint work 
on enhancing security of crucial supply chains, with initial focus on 
semiconductors, 5G, electric vehicles, sustainable energy, and cyber -
security.351 Partnership via the TTIC is in large part a testament 
to the important role Taiwan plays in several critical global supply 
chains as well as the utility the two sides stand to gain from jointly 
“strengthening supply-chain resilience.” 352 The TTIC held its first 
meeting in early October 2022. 353 (For more on supply chain con-
cerns, see Chapter 2, Section 4, “U.S. Supply Chain Vulnerabilities 
and Resilience.”)
Taiwan firms have also been key partners in advancing U.S. glob-
al security objectives, including U.S. reshoring efforts. Given Tai-
wan’s key role in electronics supply chains, its cooperation with 
U.S. trade restrictions on both Russia and certain Chinese entities 
has been key to successful enforcement. TSMC has been complying 
with the United States’ foreign direct product rule limiting sales of 
semiconductors to Chinese Military-Industrial Complex companies, 
including Huawei.* Taiwan companies have also been working with 
the United States to increase their manufacturing footprint on U.S. 
soil. TSMC is leading the way, with its $12 billion fabrication facil-
ity under construction in Arizona slated for completion in 2024 and 
with ostensible plans for five additional facilities in the state. 354 
GlobalWafers, a Taiwan-based design and manufacturing company, 
announced plans to build a $5 billion silicon wafer fabrication facili-
ty in the United States, the first of its kind to be built in the United 
States in more than two decades. 355 Arun Venkataraman, assistant 
secretary for global markets at the Commerce Department, called 
GlobalWafers’ investment an “early harvest” of the TTIC frame-
work.356
The Impact of the Crisis in Ukraine on Cross-Strait 
Relations
Russia’s war against Ukraine has galvanized the international 
community and heightened concerns over a potential Chinese in-
vasion of Taiwan. “I myself have a strong sense of urgency that 
‘Ukraine today may be East Asia tomorrow,’ ” Japanese Prime Min-
ister Kishida told attendees at the Shangri-La Dialogue, voicing this 
collective anxiety as he affirmed the “extreme importance” of peace 
* Taiwan-produced artificial intelligence chips with U.S. designs are still being sold to Chinese 
military companies via Chinese intermediaries, but this owes more to limitations of current ex-
port control regimes. Ryan Fedasiuk, Karson Elmgren, and Ellen Lu, “Silicon Twist: Managing 
the Chinese Military’s Access to AI Chips,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, June 
2022, 4–5, 16; Kathrine Hill and Kiran Stacey, “TSMC Falls into Line with US Export Controls 
on Huawei,” Financial Times, June 9, 2020.

631
in the Taiwan Strait.357 Meanwhile, in Washington, the ongoing war 
in Ukraine has sparked vigorous debate in policy and think tank 
circles over the extent to which parallels can be drawn with Tai-
wan.358
There are several compelling similarities between Ukraine and 
Taiwan. Both Ukraine and Taiwan have autonomous democrat-
ic governments that are threatened by much larger authoritarian 
neighbors wishing to annex them. 359 Russian President Vladimir 
Putin and General Secretary Xi have each appealed to romanticized 
versions of their national histories and framed their contemporary 
territorial claims within the context of a quest for national rejuve-
nation.360 Both leaders have issued frequent threats and demands 
to Ukraine and Taiwan, respectively. 361 Some analysts have also 
described Ukraine and Taiwan as “critical test cases” of the United 
States’ willingness to uphold global norms against the use of force 
to seize territory.362
There are arguably more crucial differences than similarities. 
Ukraine’s extensive land borders enabled Russia’s ground forces 
to invade with ease but also allowed NATO countries to resupply 
Ukrainian forces with weapons with little interference. 363 By con-
trast, the 100 miles of sea between mainland China and Taiwan, 
dearth of beaches suitable for landing operations, and rugged ter -
rain will make a PLA invasion more complex and perilous but will 
also afford the PLA opportunities to prevent the resupply of war 
materials through a blockade of the island. 364 U.S. security support 
for Ukraine is recent and limited, whereas the United States has 
been Taiwan’s main security partner and source of military aid, 
training, and arms sales since the 1950s. 365 The Taiwan Relations 
Act defines “any effort to determine the future of Taiwan by other 
than peaceful means . . . a grave concern to the United States.”  366 
Taiwan also occupies a strategic position between major sea routes 
and key U.S. allies, is the United States’ eighth-largest trading part-
ner, and is home to TSMC, which accounts for more than half of 
global foundry revenues. 367 Ukraine is not a member of NATO and 
President Biden explicitly ruled out the possibility of sending U.S. 
troops to Ukraine, facts that undoubtedly influenced President Pu-
tin’s decision to invade. 368 By contrast, Taiwan enjoys a close se-
curity relationship with the United States on the basis of U.S. law, 
and President Biden has said on multiple occasions that the United 
States would defend Taiwan from a Chinese attack. 369 The PLA’s 
leaders have in fact assumed for decades that the U.S. military will 
respond decisively to an invasion of Taiwan and that China invests 
substantially in capabilities to counter such an intervention. 370
The governments of both China and Taiwan have rejected explicit 
comparisons to Ukraine, highlighting different points that reinforce 
their positions. In a March 2022 op-ed in the Washington Post, Am-
bassador Qin insisted that the Ukraine crisis and the cross-Strait 
dynamic “are totally different things.” 371 He and other Chinese of-
ficials emphasize that China regards Taiwan as an inalienable part 
of Chinese territory and that any contestation over Taiwan’s polit-
ical status is strictly an internal affair, while the crisis in Ukraine 
arose from contention between two sovereign countries, Russia and 
Ukraine.372 President Tsai and several of her top officials have also 

632
repeatedly argued that the situations in Ukraine and Taiwan are 
fundamentally different, pointing to the natural geographic barri-
er provided by the Taiwan Strait, Taiwan’s geostrategic importance, 
and the willingness of its global partners to uphold regional stabil-
ity.373 Taiwan officials have tried to downplay the comparison out 
of concerns about fearmongering and the possibility that pro-China 
groups will exploit public alarm to push for better ties with Beijing, 
ostensibly to avoid Ukraine’s fate.374
Beijing’s Lessons
Without direct insight into Chinese leaders’ decision-making pro-
cesses, it is difficult to discern what lessons Beijing may be drawing 
from the Ukraine crisis and how these will inform its approach to 
Taiwan. U.S. government officials have stated that Beijing’s inter -
pretation of the crisis may remain unclear for some time, but they 
believe Chinese leaders are studying the war closely. 375 “I don’t 
think for a minute it’s eroded [Xi’s] determination over time to gain 
control over Taiwan,” U.S. Central Intelligence Agency Director Wil-
liam Burns said in May 2022, “but I think it’s something that’s af-
fecting their calculation about how and when they go about doing 
that.” 376 In fact, the PLA has a long tradition of studying “other 
people’s wars” for insights to incorporate into its doctrine, and the 
CCP leadership reportedly discussed the Ukraine crisis at one Po-
litburo Standing Committee meeting, according to the Wall Street 
Journal.377 Foreign observers speculate that Beijing may eventually 
reach several conclusions about geopolitics and warfighting that it 
could apply to a Taiwan scenario, summarized below.
Lesson 1: Shape the Information Environment to Your 
Advantage
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has likely reinforced Chinese lead-
ers’ view that they will need to shape the information environment 
in their favor before and during an attack on Taiwan. Ms. Glaser 
testified before the Commission in August 2022 that Chinese lead-
ers may believe they can leverage certain advantages Russia did 
not have before or during a Taiwan conflict to dominate the infor -
mation environment. “These include the PRC’s significant control 
over Taiwan’s media, its ability to spread disinformation on social 
media, and its ability to limit or even cut off internet access,” she 
observed.378
More broadly, Chinese officials have emulated their Russian coun-
terparts by refusing to describe the conflict in Ukraine as a “war” 
and blaming the United States as the “culprit of current tensions 
surrounding Ukraine.” 379 As long-time proponents of “discourse 
power,” * Chinese officials may be propagating Russian narratives 
about the origins and impact of the war in order to neutralize ef-
* “Discourse power” is the ability to actively shape the discourse of others so that international 
narratives both praise the CCP and refrain from threatening it, just as domestic Chinese narra-
tives do. Crucially, Beijing is not advocating simply for its perspective to be more influential but 
rather for it to be effectively the only perspective that matters, as is the case within China. The 
CCP’s discourse power depends on its ability to make international narratives converge with its 
own, drowning out or silencing dissenting narratives. For example, Chinese officials frequently 
urge other countries to refrain from criticizing China and to adopt the “correct” or “proper” view 
of China and their relationship with it. For more on discourse power, see the Chapter 1, Section 
2: “The China Model: Return of the Middle Kingdom,” in the Commission’s 2020 Annual Report.

633
forts by the United States to marshal a coalition of states against 
Russia, much as it would likely attempt to do if the United States 
were to organize a coalition opposed to a PLA invasion of Taiwan. 380 
Responding to recent remarks by Secretary Blinken, a Chinese for -
eign ministry spokesperson said in April 2022 that China could not 
“invade” Taiwan because Taiwan is a part of China, offering an ex-
ample of one way China could seek to distort reality with its own 
propaganda if it ultimately decides to attack the island. 381
Lesson 2: Decrease China’s Vulnerability to Sanctions
Beijing has been closely observing the array of export controls 
that have effectively blocked Russia off from core technologies, 
forcing it to cannibalize its own planes for needed technology in-
puts. Beijing is thus hastening an already frenzied move toward 
technological self-reliance.382 Yet, even prior to Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine, Beijing had been experimenting with methods to decrease 
its vulnerability to U.S. and allied economic and financial sanctions. 
In a 2018 speech published last year in Qiushi, the Party’s leading 
theory journal, Xi expressed particular concern about technological 
vulnerability, saying, “Only by mastering key core technologies in 
our own hands can we fundamentally guarantee national economic 
security, national defense security and other security.” 383 In 2021, Xi 
referred to China’s ability to develop indigenous technology capacity, 
for example, as a “question of survival.” 384 Russia’s invasion and the 
strong U.S. and allied response have merely steeled Beijing’s resolve 
for technological self-reliance.
More broadly, the drastic financial sanctions levied against Russia 
have hastened Beijing’s own preparations. Most shocking to Beijing, 
in addition to transaction restrictions via SWIFT, are the blocking 
sanctions the United States, Canada, the EU, and the UK jointly 
levied against the Central Bank of Russia in a move that effective-
ly rendered a substantial portion of Russia’s $630 billion reserves 
useless.385 China, according to the Atlantic Council, has about $3.4 
trillion in international assets vulnerable to similar blocking sanc-
tions, including $1.1 trillion worth of U.S. Treasuries, hundreds of 
billions in other U.S. dollar-denominated assets, and sizable reserves 
in major currencies, including the yen and the euro. 386 Although 
such sanctions on China would have far greater repercussions on 
the U.S. economy than those on Russia, it is clear China remains 
highly vulnerable.
Policymakers in Beijing are attempting to reduce their vulner -
abilities in the event of a full-on decoupling. 387 Zongyuan Liu, a 
fellow for international political economy at the Council on For -
eign Relations, highlights a number of ongoing plans, including 
China’s longstanding endeavor to diversify away from U.S. re-
serves and decrease its overall dependence on the U.S. financial 
system via renminbi (RMB) internationalization and development 
of an interbank payment platform, the Cross-Border Interbank 
Payment System. China has made limited progress toward reduc-
ing its dependence on the dollar and the U.S. financial system, 
given its continual investment of the Chinese trade surplus in 
U.S. dollar-denominated assets and its perennial refusal to fully 
open its capital account. 388 Dr. Liu, however, identifies that Chi-

634
na may be considering offensive measures as well, which could 
include intentional supply chain disruptions via geopolitically 
tinged enforcement of the antisanctions regulatory framework as 
well as export controls on critical minerals and products.* 389 (For 
more on China’s dependence on SWIFT, see Chapter 2, Section 1, 
“Year in Review: Economics and Trade.”)
Beijing is also seeking greater self-reliance across a variety 
of critical inputs, including most prominently food, raw materi-
als, and energy. 390 Beijing has been instituting policies to build 
self-sufficiency in agricultural products in which China is import 
dependent, particularly grains, corn, and soybeans. 391 China, 
however, has only become more reliant on imports to meet its 
food demand over time, with net imports of food products more 
than doubling from $36.2 billion in 2017 to $89 billion in 2020.† 
In raw materials, China’s 14th Five-Year Plan for the Develop-
ment of the Raw Materials Industry, released in December 2021, 
is framed in large part around “urgently resolving the critical 
problem of weak capacity in key strategic resources” and specif-
ically aims to increase self-reliance and “strengthen the explo-
ration of iron ore, copper, potassium and other scarce mineral 
resources.” 392 Iron ore imports, China’s third-largest import cat-
egory after oil and semiconductors, are a particular vulnerability, 
constituting roughly 80 percent of domestic iron ore demand and 
overwhelmingly sourced from just two countries (Australia and 
Brazil). 393 Finally, China is heavily reliant on oil imports, which 
in 2020 stood at $150 billion, represented 70 percent of China’s 
domestic oil consumption, and supplied roughly 14 percent of 
China’s overall energy.‡ 394 Four countries—Saudi Arabia, Russia, 
Iraq, and Angola—accounted for 51.7 percent of China’s oil im-
ports in 2020.§ Although Beijing strives for self-reliance in food, 
raw materials, and energy, it remains exposed and vulnerable.
Lesson 3: Ensure the PLA Avoids the Russian Military’s 
Mistakes
Chinese leaders were reportedly surprised by the Russian mil-
itary’s poor performance in Ukraine and will seek to ensure that 
* As Dr. Liu identifies, “China has passed five major pieces of legislation aimed at blocking 
the impact of U.S. sanctions since 2018: the International Criminal Judicial Assistance Law, the 
Provisions of the Unreliable Entity List, the Extraterritorial Rules, the Anti-Foreign Sanctions 
Law, and the Export Control Law (ECL), the first Chinese law that establishes a comprehensive 
and integrated export control regulatory regime, as well as the State Council’s white paper on 
China’s export control.” Zongyuan Zoe Liu, “China Is Hardening Itself for Economic War,” Foreign 
Policy, June 16, 2022.
† Calculations based on Observatory of Economic Complexity food categories: “vegetable prod-
ucts,” “animal products,” “foodstuffs,” and “animal and vegetable byproducts.” Alex Simoes and 
Cesar A. Hidalgo, “The Economic Complexity Observatory: An Analytical Tool for Understanding 
the Dynamics of Economic Development,” Workshops at the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, 2011.
‡ The figure of 14 percent derives from the fact that oil represents 20 percent of China’s energy 
mix, while 70 percent of China’s oil is imported. Alex Simoes and Cesar A. Hidalgo, “The Eco-
nomic Complexity Observatory: An Analytical Tool for Understanding the Dynamics of Economic 
Development,” Workshops at the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011; 
Michal Meidan, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on U.S.-China Competition in Supply Chains, May 31, 2022.
§ The next five largest suppliers of oil to China are Brazil, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, 
Kuwait, and the United States. The top nine suppliers of oil to China represented 82.2 percent 
of China’s oil imports in 2020. Alex Simoes and Cesar A. Hidalgo, “The Economic Complexity 
Observatory: An Analytical Tool for Understanding the Dynamics of Economic Development,” 
Workshops at the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011.

635
the PLA does not repeat its blunders in a potential invasion of 
Taiwan.395 At the operational level, Chinese military analysts may 
conclude that Russia’s underestimation of the Ukrainian forces, dis-
jointed operations, problems with logistics, inability to assassinate 
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, and failure to preserve 
the element of surprise all prevented it from achieving a decisive 
victory.* 396 “For the PLA, this vindicates the difficult military re-
forms it began in 2015, which focused on joint operations and lo-
gistics and incorporate lessons learned from watching the United 
States conduct complex joint operations,” Council on Foreign Rela-
tions fellow David Sacks observed. 397 At the strategic level, Chinese 
military analysts may be studying how Russia’s threat to use nu-
clear weapons apparently influenced the United States and NATO’s 
early decision not to intervene in the Ukraine crisis. 398 A collective 
judgment that nuclear coercion works may validate Chinese leaders’ 
earlier decision to modernize and expand their nuclear arsenal, but 
it also raises complicated questions about how to engage in nuclear 
signaling and whether China should abandon its longstanding “no 
first use policy.” 399
Chinese military analysts will also likely study reporting about 
Russian troops’ morale and protest activity by ordinary citizens in 
Russia to inform the PLA’s political work. “At the same time, PLA 
political officers and others will likely marvel at how well Ukrainian 
President Volodymyr Zelensky has wielded information warfare and 
strategic communications as a force multiplier,” CNA Vice President 
and Director of China and Indo-Pacific Security Affairs Division Da-
vid Finkelstein observes.400 “Reading these stories will undoubtedly 
vindicate for the PLA their continuing emphasis on ‘political work’ 
among the troops and the local populace and will justify the PLA’s 
new joint doctrine addressing both political work and national mo-
bilization,” he wrote.401
Taiwan’s Lessons
Taiwan’s government is also closely observing the Ukraine crisis. 
In late January 2022, President Tsai created a task force to study 
the implications of the war in Ukraine for cross-Strait relations and 
Taiwan’s defense against a Chinese invasion. 402 She told a gather -
ing of her national security advisors at the time that Taiwan had 
faced threats from China in recent years and that “we empathize 
with Ukraine’s situation.” 403 In the months since, several of Tai-
wan’s officials have openly discussed the lessons they are learning 
about warfighting, civil defense, and resiliency. 404
* Chinese military analysts have also taken notice of how SpaceX’s provision of high-speed in-
ternet service to Ukraine through its Starlink satellite network frustrated the Russian military’s 
efforts to cut off Ukraine’s access to the world. An April 2022 paper authored by Ren Yuanzhen, 
a researcher with the Beijing Institute of Tracking and Telecommunications under the PLA’s 
Strategic Support Force, called on his country to develop antisatellite capabilities sufficient to 
destroy the Starlink network because of the ubiquity of its satellites and the potential that the 
U.S. government could leverage them in a conflict with China. “This is a national security issue 
for the Chinese, they’re looking at Taiwan, if something happens, this system could be important 
for the Defense Department,” Space Law and Policy Solutions think tank founder Michael List-
ner told Bloomberg. Jamie Tarabay and Sarah Zheng, “Chinese Military Analyst Floats Idea to 
Hack Musk’s Starlink,” Bloomberg, June 22, 2022; Stephen Chen, “China Military Must Be Able 
to Destroy Elon Musk’s Starlink Satellites if They Threaten National Security: Scientists,” South 
China Morning Post, May 25, 2022.

636
Lesson 1: Take on the PLA with the Right Weapons and 
Strategies
Taiwan Foreign Minister Wu told CNN in May 2022 that the first 
lesson Taiwan learned from the Ukraine crisis is the importance of 
asymmetric capabilities. “Look at the Ukrainians, they use small 
personal weapons to go against a large enemy,” he said. 405 “I think 
that is something we can learn from. In fact, we have been pre-
paring for that, but we need to make more investment in this re-
gard.” 406 To combat the wartime threat, Taiwan’s military will need 
to stockpile or procure large numbers of asymmetric capabilities in 
peacetime.407 Priority capabilities for stockpiling and procurement 
include sea mines and anti-ship cruise missiles to degrade the inva-
sion force arriving by sea; portable air defense systems and drones 
to prevent the PLA from establishing air superiority; and antitank 
missiles to destroy small landing craft near shore and the armored 
vehicles that do successfully land on the island. 408 Taiwan’s military 
may also need to decentralize command and control and develop 
systems that allow smaller military units to adapt to rapidly evolv-
ing local circumstances. 409
Lesson 2: Prepare for a Prolonged, Whole-of-Society Struggle
In the same interview, Foreign Minister Wu said the Ukraine cri-
sis demonstrated the importance of robust civil defense. “Look at the 
Ukrainian people,” he said. 410 “They want to serve in the military. 
They want to go to the war zones to fight against Russia. That kind 
of spirit is enviable for the Taiwanese people.”  411 To mount a civil 
resistance that would slow the PLA’s advances, U.S. analysts assess 
that Taiwan needs to improve the readiness of its reserve force, es-
tablish a territorial defense force, and develop plans for the total 
mobilization of Taiwan’s society.412 It may first need to surmount 
the public’s lack of experience with firearms and an absence of ro-
bust grassroots structures that would enable rapid mobilization. 413
Lesson 3: Mitigate Dependencies on Critical Imports
Taiwan is highly dependent on imports of energy, food, and mili-
tary supplies that would be necessary to sustain resistance against 
a Chinese assault. Taiwan’s 2021 National Defense Report noted 
that the island is extremely vulnerable to a blockade by China. 414 
Analysts at RAND Corporation assess that China may rather seek 
to establish a “quarantine” of Taiwan, selectively controlling deliv-
eries rather than fully blockading the island, as a show of de facto 
sovereignty.415 There are ten major ports that Taiwan relies on for 
the vast majority of its trade and commerce. 416 Four major ports 
among these ten, however, handle over half of Taiwan’s internation-
al maritime trade, while the island has only two LNG-receiving ter -
minals. Optimistic projections indicate Taiwan’s LNG, oil, and food 
stockpiles could last one week, four months, and six months, respec-
tively.417 However, previous research by University of Notre Dame 
assistant professor of political science Rosemary Kelanic indicates 
that Taiwan’s current reserves may be used up even more quickly 
during a conflict scenario, based on estimates of average consump-
tion during peacetime. 418 China could also seek to erode Taiwan’s 
defensive capacity by blocking the inflow of defense equipment such 

637
as anti-air and antiship missiles. 419 Taiwan’s island geography will 
also make potential resupply much more difficult than in the case 
of Ukraine.420 In brief, China would only need to enact a blockade 
on a select few areas to cause extreme disruptions to Taiwan’s trade 
and energy supplies, while Taiwan’s limited stockpiles of critical re-
sources could incentivize it to capitulate quickly.
Implications for the United States
The ongoing war in Ukraine offers a contemporary case study of 
what a Chinese bid to annex Taiwan—and the international reaction 
to such aggression—could look like. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine 
has proven that some countries are still able and willing to use force 
to seize territory from others in the 21st century. China, Taiwan, 
and the United States are all studying the Ukraine crisis for lessons 
to apply to their own operations if war over Taiwan breaks out, a 
fact that makes a potential conflict feel more real to each party 
and, therefore, potentially more viable. At the same time, the halt-
ing advances of the Russian military, widespread civilian casualties, 
international financial turmoil, and crippling sanctions that will set 
back the Russian economy for years all offer sobering testaments to 
the destructive nature of war.
For the United States, the war in Ukraine underscores the im-
portance of cross-Strait deterrence and the urgency of doing every-
thing possible to strengthen it in the near term. If the 20th Party 
Congress later this year unveils a new, more aggressive CCP poli-
cy toward Taiwan, U.S. and Taiwan leaders will be under greater 
pressure to manage the PLA’s daily provocations in the ADIZ and 
vigilantly assess any indications of potential wartime mobilization. 
They will also need to more closely scrutinize how the activities of 
China’s coast guard or maritime agencies could create a pretext for 
China to control access to the Taiwan Strait under the guise of “law 
enforcement.” Taiwan’s presidential election in 2024 may also serve 
as a flashpoint for conflict if a candidate Beijing dislikes is ultimate-
ly elected. More broadly, U.S. policymakers must constantly assess 
whether ongoing efforts to procure capabilities for a potential war 
over Taiwan are on track. This is crucial because over the next five 
years the United States’ plans to retire older platforms in anticipa-
tion of a smaller, more modern force may appear to Chinese leaders 
as a “window of opportunity” during which the U.S. military’s ability 
to intervene is at its weakest.*
Growing U.S.-Taiwan economic integration efforts highlight the 
importance both economies place on bolstering shared democratic 
and market principles, particularly in the face of Beijing’s increas-
ing economic coercion and predatory nonmarket practices. With both 
the United States and Taiwan sharing a set of overlapping concerns 
about Beijing’s willingness to weaponize global supply chains, strong 
U.S.-Taiwan economic ties can amplify both countries’ ongoing efforts 
to diversify economic dependence away from China. More broadly, in 
the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Taiwan can leverage its 
* The United States has scheduled a mass retirement of 48 active-duty ships and 256 aircraft 
by 2026, including one aircraft carrier, 11 cruisers, and 13 submarines. Sam LaGrone, “$715B 
FY22 Defense Budget Cuts $2.8B in ‘Legacy’ Systems, Reduces Troop Strength,” USNI News, 
June 1, 2021; Richard R. Burgess, “Navy Plans to Retire 48 Ships during 2022–2026,” Seapower, 
December 11, 2020.

638
position as a transparent democracy to play an important role in 
a deepening global supply chain restructuring process. Continued 
cooperation with the United States can facilitate Taiwan’s efforts to 
diversify away from overreliance on the Mainland, ensuring Taiwan 
retains strategic and economic autonomy. The United States is also 
poised to provide support to Taiwan in the face of Beijing’s contin-
ued economic pressure.

639
Appendix: Comparison of China’s White Papers on Taiwan from 1993, 2000, and 2022
Stance by Topic 1993 White Paper 2000 White Paper 2022 White Paper
Proposed unification 
framework
Peaceful “reunification”; “one coun-
try, two systems”
Peaceful “reunification”; “one coun-
try, two systems”
Peaceful “reunification”; “one coun-
try, two systems”
Use of force Reserves China’s right to “use any 
means it deems necessary, includ-
ing military ones, to uphold its sov-
ereignty and territorial integrity.”
Asserts that China “will not commit 
itself to ruling out the use of force,” 
but stresses that it “would only be 
the last choice made under compel-
ling circumstances.” These circum-
stances include “a grave turn of 
events [that] occurs leading to the 
separation of Taiwan from China 
in any name,” “if Taiwan is invaded 
and occupied by foreign coun-
tries,” or if “the Taiwan authorities 
refuse . . . the peaceful settlement of 
cross-Straits reunification through 
negotiations.”
Asserts that the use of force “would 
be the last resort taken under com-
pelling circumstances” in response 
to “the provocation of separatist 
elements or external forces should 
they ever cross our red lines.” The 
document leaves Beijing’s redlines 
unstated, however.
Preconditions for political 
dialogue
Calls for immediate and wide-rang-
ing negotiations on unification, 
premised on Taiwan’s recognition of 
the One China principle.*
Calls for immediate and wide-rang-
ing negotiations on unification 
on the basis of equality and the 
One-China Principle, but warns 
that “if Taiwan denies the One-Chi-
na Principle and tries to separate 
Taiwan from the territory of China, 
the premise and basis for peaceful 
reunification will cease to exist.”
Calls for negotiations on the basis 
of the One China principle and 
the 1992 Consensus.† Asserts the 
two sides will engage in dialogue 
as “equals” but signals impatience 
with the pace of cross-Strait en-
gagement by warning that Beijing 
“should not allow this problem to 
be passed down from one genera-
tion to the next.”
* The “One China principle” refers to the Chinese government’s position that Taiwan is an inalienable part of the state called “China” ruled by the PRC.
† The “1992 Consensus” refers to a tacit understanding that the KMT under then President Ma Ying-jeou and Beijing said was reached between representatives of 
Taiwan and China in 1992 regarding the idea that there is only one state called “China” and that both mainland China and Taiwan belong to that state. The KMT 
defined the consensus as “one China, respective interpretations,” interpreting “one China” as the Republic of China, the formal name of Taiwan’s government. By 
contrast, Beijing accepts only the definition embodied in its “one China” principle: mainland China and Taiwan are part of one and the same China, the PRC, and 
Taiwan is a subnational region. Although in official documents and statements Beijing has never acknowledged that the consensus allows different interpretations 
of “one China,” in practice it has at times officially ignored, but grudgingly tolerated, the KMT’s definition of the consensus. Recently, the KMT has sought to dis-

640
Appendix: Comparison of China’s White Papers on Taiwan from 1993, 2000, and 2022—Continued
Stance by Topic 1993 White Paper 2000 White Paper 2022 White Paper
View of Taiwan’s elected 
leaders and opposition 
party
Acknowledges that the “Taiwan au-
thorities” have taken positive steps 
to expand economic and cultural 
exchange with mainland China 
but faults Taiwan’s government for 
allegedly reinforcing the “fallacy” of 
Taiwan independence through its 
own actions and abetting support-
ers of Taiwan independence.
Faults then Taiwan President Lee 
Teng-hui and the “Taiwan authori-
ties” for threatening the stability of 
cross-Strait relations by pursuing 
expanded engagement with inter -
national institutions, buying arms 
from foreign countries, attempting 
to join the Theater Missile Defense 
system, and facilitating an indepen-
dent sense of Taiwan identity.
Faults the DPP for casting asper -
sions on one country, two systems 
and asserts that “the DPP author -
ities have adopted a separatist 
stance, and colluded with external 
forces in successive provocative 
actions designed to divide the coun-
try.” The white paper blames the 
DPP for cross-Strait tensions and 
lists the ways it has undermined 
exchange and cultural affinities 
between China and Taiwan.
Level of Taiwan’s autono-
my after unification
After reunification, Taiwan will 
enjoy a high degree of autonomy 
as a special administrative region. 
The white paper promises Taiwan 
will have “its own administrative 
and legislative powers, an inde-
pendent judiciary and the right of 
adjudication on the island”; “run 
its own party, political, military, 
economic and financial affairs”; 
“conclude commercial and cultural 
agreements with foreign countries 
and enjoy certain rights in foreign 
affairs”; “keep its military forces”; 
and that the Mainland “will not 
dispatch troops or administrative
After reunification, Taiwan will en-
joy a high degree of autonomy, in-
cluding the ability to retain its cap-
italist system “for a long period of 
time to come,” and China’s central 
government “will not send troops or 
administrative personnel to be sta-
tioned in Taiwan.” The white paper 
affirms that China’s policies “fully 
respect Taiwan compatriots’ wish to 
govern and administer Taiwan by 
themselves.”
“Provided that China’s sovereignty, 
security and development interests 
are guaranteed, after reunification 
Taiwan will enjoy a high degree of 
autonomy as a special administra-
tive region.” The white paper clari-
fies that Taiwan’s social system and 
way of life “will be fully respected” 
and “the private property, religious 
beliefs, and lawful rights and 
interests of the people in Taiwan 
will be fully protected.” Previous 
assurances that Taiwan will be able 
to keep its own military forces and 
that China “will not send troops or 
administrative personnel to be
tance itself from Beijing’s calls to precondition talks on the 1992 Consensus, calling it a “non-consensus consensus.” By contrast, the ruling DPP and current Tsai 
Administration have consistently refused to recognize the 1992 Consensus or the “one China” principle. For more, see U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Chapter 5, “Taiwan,” in 2019 Annual Report to Congress, November 2019, 459.

641
Appendix: Comparison of China’s White Papers on Taiwan from 1993, 2000, and 2022—Continued
Stance by Topic 1993 White Paper 2000 White Paper 2022 White Paper
Level of Taiwan’s auton-
omy after unification—
Continued
personnel to the island.” The white 
paper also allows for participation 
by a wide range of Taiwan officials 
and society in China’s national pol-
itics by stating these parties may 
be “appointed to senior posts in the 
central government and participate 
in the running of national affairs.” 
More generally, the white paper 
acknowledges that “that the desire 
of Taiwan compatriots to run the 
affairs of the island as masters of 
their own house is reasonable and 
justified.”
stationed in Taiwan” are conspic-
uously absent, however. The white 
paper also suggests that only 
those Beijing regards as patriots 
will have a role in governance by 
stating that “all Taiwan compatri-
ots who support reunification of 
the country and rejuvenation of the 
nation will be the masters of the 
region.”
Comparison to the prac-
tice of One Country, Two 
Systems in Hong Kong 
and Macau
Taiwan “will be distinguished from 
the other provinces or regions of 
China by its high degree of auton-
omy.”
“The Chinese government acknowl-
edges the differences between 
Taiwan on the one hand and Hong 
Kong and Macao on the other and, 
after peaceful reunification, is pre-
pared to apply a looser form of the 
‘one country, two systems’ policy 
in Taiwan than in Hong Kong and 
Macao.”
Claims that “Hong Kong faced a 
period of damaging social unrest 
caused by anti-China agitators both 
inside and outside the region” and 
that China “made some appropri-
ate improvements” to the practice 
of one country, two systems in the 
territory that “addressed both the 
symptoms and root causes of the 
unrest.”
Benefits of unification States that peaceful “reunification” 
will “facilitate Taiwan’s socioeco-
nomic stability and development 
and promote the resurgence and 
prosperity of China as a whole.”
Citing previous instances in which 
China regained lost territory, the 
white paper suggests that achiev-
ing national unity through the 
absorption of Taiwan will lead to 
“rapid political, economic, cultural, 
scientific and technological devel-
opment.”
Asserts that “the wellbeing of the 
people in Taiwan hinges on the re-
juvenation of the Chinese nation,” 
and articulates a number of types 
of cross-Strait economic and cul-
tural exchange to advance peaceful 
“reunification.”

642
Appendix: Comparison of China’s White Papers on Taiwan from 1993, 2000, and 2022—Continued
Stance by Topic 1993 White Paper 2000 White Paper 2022 White Paper
Taiwan’s foreign relations Rules out any official ties between 
Taiwan and foreign countries after 
unification but allows for bilateral 
economic and cultural exchanges. 
Rules out Taiwan’s membership 
in any international organizations 
requiring sovereign statehood as 
a prerequisite for membership but 
allows for the possibility of Tai-
wan’s participation in some types 
of international organizations that 
do not require statehood and some 
nongovernmental organizations.
Rules out any official political ties 
between Taiwan and foreign coun-
tries on the basis of the One China 
principle but says that China has 
“no objection” to economic and 
cultural exchanges. States Taiwan 
is ineligible for membership in 
the UN and other international 
organizations whose membership 
is confined to sovereign states but 
says China arranged for Taiwan’s 
regional membership in certain 
intergovernmental organizations. 
Decries arms sales to Taiwan by 
countries that maintain diplomatic 
relations with China.
Rules out any official political ties 
between Taiwan and foreign coun-
tries after unification but allows for 
economic and cultural exchanges. 
“With the approval of the central 
government of China, [foreign 
countries] may set up consulates or 
other official and quasi-official in-
stitutions in Taiwan, international 
organizations and agencies may es-
tablish offices, relevant internation-
al conventions can be applied, and 
relevant international conferences 
can be held there,” the white paper 
says. Repeats false claims that UN 
resolutions adopted in the 1970s 
recognized Taiwan is a province 
of China and criticizes the United 
States for opposing these claims.
Source: Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, 
August 2022; Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, White Paper--The One-China Principle and the Taiwan Issue, 
February 2000; Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, White Paper--The Taiwan Question and Reunification of China, 
August 1993.

643
ENDNOTES FOR CHAPTER 4
1. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; China Power Project, “Tracking the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated August 15),” Center for Strategic and Interna-
tional Studies, August 15, 2022.
2. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; China Power Project, “Tracking the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated August 15),” Center for Strategic and Interna-
tional Studies, August 15, 2022.
3. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022.
4. U.S. Department of State, Secretary Antony J. Blinken at a Press Availability: 
Remarks, August 5, 2022; U.S. Department of State, G7 Foreign Ministers’ Statement 
on Preserving Peace and Stability across the Taiwan Strait, August 3, 2022.
5. BBC, “Taiwan: China Attack Not Imminent, but US Watching Closely, Says Gen 
Milley,” July 3, 2022; John A. Tirpak, “Top Intel: China Not Ready to Invade Taiwan; 
Ukraine War in Stalemate,” Air Force Magazine, May 10, 2022.
6. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland 
in the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism 
with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进
程（深入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. 
Translation; Qiushi, “The Great Practice of ‘One Country, Two Systems’ in the New 
Era” (新时代“一国两制”的伟大实践), July 1, 2022. Translation; China-Taiwan Net, 
“Wang Yingjin: On the Party’s Overall Strategy for Solving the Taiwan Issue in the 
New Era” (王英津：论新时代党解决台湾问题的总体方略), March 11, 2022. Translation; 
Huaxia, “Li Yihu: The Overall Strategy for Solving the Taiwan Issue in the New 
Era Is to Get Rid of the Island Mentality” (李义虎：新时代解决台湾问题总体方略要破
除孤岛思维), March 10, 2022. Translation; Eva Dou and Pei Lin Wu, “China Says It 
Seeks to ‘Resolve’ Taiwan Question, amid Comparisons to Ukraine,” Washington Post, 
March 5, 2022; Li Keqiang, “Report on the Work of the Government,” China’s State 
Council, March 5, 2022; Fujian Provincial People’s Government, The Province’s Work 
Meeting on Taiwan Was Held (全省对台工作会议召开), February 19, 2022. Translation; 
Xinhua, “Wang Yang Attends and Delivers a Speech at the 2022 Work Conference on 
Taiwan” (汪洋出席2022年对台工作会议并讲话), January 25, 2022. Translation; Xinhua, 
“Five Groups of Keywords to Understand the Overall Strategy to Solve the Taiwan 
Question in the New Era” (五组关键词读懂新时代党解决台湾问题总体方略), January 
19, 2022. Translation; Xinhua, “Authoritative Experts Talk about the Party’s Overall 
Strategy for Solving the Taiwan Issue in the New Era” (权威专家谈新时代党解决台湾
问题的总体方略), December 22, 2021. Translation; Xinhua, “Taiwan Affairs Office of 
the State Council: Resolutely Implement the Party’s Overall Strategy for Solving the 
Taiwan Issue in the New Era” (国台办：坚决贯彻落实新时代党解决台湾问题的总体方
略), November 24, 2021. Translation; Xinhua, “Full Text: Resolution of the CPC Cen-
tral Committee on the Major Achievements and Historical Experience of the Party 
over the Past Century,” November 16, 2021.
7. Steve Inskeep, “China’s Ambassador to the U.S. Warns of ‘Military Conflict’ over 
Taiwan,” NPR, January 28, 2022.
8. Steve Inskeep, “China’s Ambassador to the U.S. Warns of ‘Military Conflict’ over 
Taiwan,” NPR, January 28, 2022.
9. Wei Fenghe, “Fifth Plenary Session: China’s Vision for Regional Order,” speech 
delivered at the 19th Regional Security Summit at the Shangri-La Dialogue, Inter -
national Institute for Strategic Studies, June 12, 2022, 6–7.
10. Wei Fenghe, “Fifth Plenary Session: China’s Vision for Regional Order,” speech 
delivered at the 19th Regional Security Summit at the Shangri-La Dialogue, Inter -
national Institute for Strategic Studies, June 12, 2022, 7.
11. Wei Fenghe, “Fifth Plenary Session: China’s Vision for Regional Order,” speech 
delivered at the 19th Regional Security Summit at the Shangri-La Dialogue, Inter -
national Institute for Strategic Studies, June 12, 2022, 7.
12. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wen-
bin’s Regular Press Conference on May 23, 2022, May 23, 2022.
13. John Dotson, “Beijing Ramps Up Its Rhetoric over Taiwan and Maritime Sov-
ereignty,” Global Taiwan Brief 7:13 (June 29, 2022).
14. Peter Martin, “China Alarms US with Private Warnings to Avoid Taiwan 
Strait,” Bloomberg, June 12, 2022.
15. Alex Wilson, “China Asserts Jurisdiction over Taiwan Strait, Shuns ‘Interna-
tional Waters’ Stance by US,” Star and Stripes, June 14, 2022; Peter Martin, “China 
Alarms US with Private Warnings to Avoid Taiwan Strait,” Bloomberg, June 12, 2022.

644
16. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wen-
bin’s Regular Press Conference on June 13, 2022, June 13, 2022.
17. Ned Price, “Department Press Briefing—June 21, 2022,” U.S. Department of 
State, June 21, 2022.
18. Central News Agency, “Taiwan Rejects China’s Claims over Taiwan Strait,” Tai-
pei Times, June 15, 2022.
19. Iain Marlow and Rebecca Choong Wilson, “China Warns the U.S. against Sail-
ing Warships through the Taiwan Strait,” Time, August 17, 2022.
20. Alex Wilson, “China Asserts Jurisdiction over Taiwan Strait, Shuns ‘Interna-
tional Waters’ Stance by US,” Star and Stripes, June 14, 2022; Peter Martin, “China 
Alarms US with Private Warnings to Avoid Taiwan Strait,” Bloomberg, June 12, 2022.
21. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation; Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council/Taiwan Work Office of the CPC 
Central Committee, Director’s Welcome (主任欢迎词). Translation; Global Times, “No 
Reason to Change ‘One Country, Two Systems’; Such a Good System Must Be Up-
held over Long Run: Xi,” July 1, 2022; Dylan Loh, “China’s Wei Slams U.S. ‘Smears,’ 
Taiwan Independence ‘Delusion,’ ” Nikkei Asia, June 10, 2022; China Military Online, 
“China Will Not Tolerate Any Provocation by DPP Authorities for Seeking ‘Indepen-
dence’: Defense Spokesperson,” April 28, 2022; Overseas Network, “The Taiwan Affairs 
Office of the State Council Warned the DPP Authorities: ‘Taiwan Independence’ Is a 
Dead End and Must Be Reined In” (国台办正告民进党当局：“台独”是绝路，必须悬
崖勒马), CCTV, December 29, 2021. Translation.
22. Australian Broadcasting Corporation News, “Chinese Defense Minister Says 
Nuclear Arsenal ‘For Self-Defence,’ in Warning to Taiwan,” June 12, 2022.
23. China Military Online, “China Will Not Tolerate Any Provocation by DPP Au-
thorities for Seeking ‘Independence’: Defense Spokesperson,” April 28, 2022; Huang 
Lanlan and Lin Xioayi, “GT Investigates: A ‘Green Terror’: Separatist DPP Authority 
Tries to Silence Pro-Reunification and Mainland-Friendly Taiwan Citizens with Pun-
ishment, Threats,” Global Times, February 7, 2022; Overseas Network, “The Taiwan 
Affairs Office of the State Council Warned the DPP Authorities: ‘Taiwan Indepen-
dence’ Is a Dead End and Must Be Reined In” (国台办正告民进党当局：“台独”是绝
路，必须悬崖勒马), CCTV, December 29, 2021. Translation.
24. Bloomberg, “China Lashes Out at Key Taiwan Ally over US-Friendly Remarks,” 
June 9, 2022.
25. Xinhua, “The Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council Commented on Zhu 
Lilun’s Visit to the United States: ‘The 1992 Consensus’ Cannot Be Willfully Distort-
ed” (国台办评朱立伦访美言论：“九二共识”不容任意扭曲), June 9, 2022. Translation.
26. Flor Wang and Wang Cheng-chung, “KMT to Participate Remotely in Straits 
Forum in China: Vice Chairman,” Focus Taiwan, July 7, 2022; Taipei Times, “MAC 
Warns against Going to Straits Forum in China,” July 2, 2022; Taiwan’s Mainland 
Affairs Council, Explanation of Policy Position on the CCP’s Straits Forum, Septem-
ber 3, 2020.
27. Su Yung-yao and Jason Pan, “KMT Vice Chair’s China Trip Draws Fire,” Taipei 
Times, August 11, 2022; Liu Kuan-ting, Wang Cheng-chung, and Evelyn Kao, “KMT 
Vice Chairman Makes Controversial Visit to China,” Focus Taiwan, August 10, 2022.
28. Lev Nachman and Ryan Haas, “Examining the Role of Cross-Strait Relations 
in Taiwan’s Politics,” Brookings Institution, July 30, 2021; Nathan F. Batto, “Cleavage 
Structure and the Demise of a Dominant Party: The Role of National Identity in the 
Fall of the KMT in Taiwan,” Asian Journal of Comparative Politics 4:1 (2019): 81–101.
29. Reuters, “Factbox: How Does a Taiwan Election Work?” January 7, 2020.
30. TVBS, “Interested in Running for the 2024 Presidential Election? Chen Jian-
ren: Election Is Not My Favorite” (有意出戰2024總統大選？ 陳建仁：選舉不是我的最
愛), June 29, 2022. Translation; My Formosa, “My Formosa Poll: June 2022 National 
Political Survey” (美麗島民調：2022年6月國政民調), June 27, 2022. Translation; Xu 
Haoting, “Polls: 2014 Presidential Election Fight! William Lai Won and ‘He’ Was the 
Bottom King” (民調／2024總統大選廝殺！賴清德奪冠 「他」淪墊底王), Sanli News Net-
work, June 13, 2022. Translation; Taihai Net, “Politicians on the Island Plan Ahead 
of the 2024 Taiwan Leadership Election, Ke Wenzhe Will Announce the Blueprint 
for Cross-Strait Policy, and Zhu Lilun Will Visit the United States in May” (岛内政治
人物提前布局2024台湾地区领导人选举 柯文哲将公布两岸政策蓝图、朱立伦确定5月访美), 
March 21, 2022. Translation; Russell Hsiao, “Signpost for 2024: Poll on Satisfaction 
Ratings for Taiwan’s National Political Figures,” Global Taiwan Brief 7:3, February 
2022.

645
31. Courtney Donovan Smith, “The KMT’s Radical Plan to Win Taiwan-Centric 
Voters from the DPP,” Taiwan News, July 5, 2022; Courtney Donovan Smith, “What’s 
at Stake in This Year’s Pivotal Taiwan Elections?” Taiwan News, April 23, 2022.
32. Xu Haoting, “Polls: 2014 Presidential Election Fight! William Lai Won and ‘He’ 
Was the Bottom King” (民調／2024總統大選廝殺！賴清德奪冠 「他」淪墊底王), Sanli 
News Network, June 13, 2022. Translation; Russell Hsiao, “Signpost for 2024: Poll on 
Satisfaction Ratings for Taiwan’s National Political Figures,” Global Taiwan Brief 7:3, 
February 2022; Derek Grossman and Brandon Alexander Millan, “Taiwan’s KMT May 
Have a Serious ‘1992 Consensus’ Problem,” Diplomat, September 25, 2020; Frank 
Chen, “Names Emerge for 2024 as Tsai Clinches Second Term,” Asia Times, January 
13, 2020; Keoni Everington, “Lai Says Taiwan Already Independent, China Warns of 
‘Disaster,’ ” Taiwan News, November 22, 2019; Voice of America, “William Lai: I Am a 
Political Worker Advocating for Taiwan Independence,” September 27, 2017.
33. Courtney Donovan Smith, “Eric Chu’s Weak Position in KMT Threatens Plan to 
Radically Reboot Party,” Taiwan News, July 10, 2022; Courtney Donovan Smith, “Will 
Hou Yu-ih Be Taiwan’s President in 2024?” Taiwan News, March 25, 2022; Courtney 
Donovan Smith, “Hou Yu-ih’s Manifesto for Future of Taiwan Politics,” Taiwan News, 
January 1, 2022.
34. Brian Hioe, “With Kinmen Comments, Ko Wen-je Dives into Cross-Strait De-
bate,” Diplomat, July 1, 2022; Lee I-chia, “Two Sides, One Family, Ko Says Again,” 
Taipei Times, July 5, 2019.
35. People’s Daily, “When All Is Said and Done, Who Is Changing the Status Quo 
in the Taiwan Strait? [Zhong Sheng] The Recent Fallacies of the U.S. Side Are Full 
of Robber Logic” (究竟是谁在改变台海现状（钟声）——美方近期种种谬论充满强盗逻辑), 
August 17, 2022. Translation.
36. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland 
in the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism 
with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进
程（深入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. 
Translation; Qiushi, “The Great Practice of ‘One Country, Two Systems’ in the New 
Era” (新时代“一国两制”的伟大实践), July 1, 2022. Translation; China-Taiwan Net, 
“Wang Yingjin: On the Party’s Overall Strategy for Solving the Taiwan Issue in the 
New Era” (王英津：论新时代党解决台湾问题的总体方略), March 11, 2022. Translation; 
Huaxia, “Li Yihu: The Overall Strategy for Solving the Taiwan Issue in the New 
Era Is to Get Rid of the Island Mentality” (李义虎：新时代解决台湾问题总体方略要破
除孤岛思维), March 10, 2022. Translation; Eva Dou and Pei Lin Wu, “China Says It 
Seeks to ‘Resolve’ Taiwan Question, amid Comparisons to Ukraine,” Washington Post, 
March 5, 2022; Li Keqiang, “Report on the Work of the Government,” China’s State 
Council, March 5, 2022; Fujian Provincial People’s Government, The Province’s Work 
Meeting on Taiwan Was Held (全省对台工作会议召开), February 19, 2022. Translation; 
Xinhua, “Wang Yang Attends and Delivers a Speech at the 2022 Work Conference on 
Taiwan” (汪洋出席2022年对台工作会议并讲话), January 25, 2022. Translation; Xinhua, 
“Five Groups of Keywords to Understand the Overall Strategy to Solve the Taiwan 
Question in the New Era” (五组关键词读懂新时代党解决台湾问题总体方略), January 
19, 2022. Translation; Xinhua, “Authoritative Experts Talk about the Party’s Overall 
Strategy for Solving the Taiwan Issue in the New Era” (权威专家谈新时代党解决台湾
问题的总体方略), December 22, 2021. Translation; Xinhua, “Taiwan Affairs Office of 
the State Council: Resolutely Implement the Party’s Overall Strategy for Solving the 
Taiwan Issue in the New Era” (国台办：坚决贯彻落实新时代党解决台湾问题的总体方
略), November 24, 2021. Translation; Xinhua, “Full Text: Resolution of the CPC Cen-
tral Committee on the Major Achievements and Historical Experience of the Party 
over the Past Century,” November 16, 2021.
37. Hsiao-chuan Liao, “An Interpretation of Xi’s Taiwan Policy—and Taiwan’s Re-
sponse,” Air Force Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs, March 2021, 25.
38. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
39. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
40. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深

646
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
41. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
42. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
43. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
44. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
45. Liu Jieyi, “Strive to Advance the Process of Reunification of the Motherland in 
the New Era (Deeply Study and Implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era)” (在新时代新征程上奋力推进祖国统一进程（深
入学习贯彻习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想）), People’s Daily, July 7, 2022. Trans-
lation.
46. John Dotson, “What Is the CCP’s ‘Comprehensive Plan for Resolving the Tai-
wan Problem’?” Global Taiwan Institute 7:3, February 9, 2022.
47. Huaxia, “Li Yihu: The Overall Strategy for Solving the Taiwan Issue in the 
New Era Is to Get Rid of the Island Mentality” (李义虎：新时代解决台湾问题总体方略
要破除孤岛思维), March 10, 2022. Translation; Eva Dou and Pei Lin Wu, “China Says 
It Seeks to ‘Resolve’ Taiwan Question, amid Comparisons to Ukraine,” Washington 
Post, March 5, 2022.
48. People’s Daily, “Taking New Steps, Achieving New Results, and Showing a New 
Atmosphere (Two Sessions, Voice 2022)” (迈出新步伐 取得新成效 展现新气象（两会声
音2022）), March 11, 2022. Translation; Xinhua, “The 2022 Work Conference on Tai-
wan Was Held in Beijing: Wang Yang Attended and Delivered a Speech” (2022年对台
工作会议在京召开 汪洋出席并讲话), January 26, 2022. Translation.
49. John Dotson, “What Does Beijing Mean by Its “Initiative in Resolving the Tai-
wan Problem”?” Global Taiwan Brief 7:9, May 4, 2022.
50. John Dotson, “What Does Beijing Mean by Its “Initiative in Resolving the Tai-
wan Problem”?” Global Taiwan Brief 7:9, May 4, 2022.
51. Shannon Tiezzi, “China’s New White Paper Lays Out Vision for Post ‘Reunifica-
tion’ Taiwan,” Diplomat, August 11, 2022; Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council 
and the State Council Information Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunifi-
cation in the New Era, August 2022; Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and 
the State Council Information Office, White Paper--The One-China Principle and the 
Taiwan Issue, February 2000; Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the 
State Council Information Office, White Paper--The Taiwan Question and Reunifica-
tion of China, August 1993.
52. Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information 
Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, August 2022.
53. Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information 
Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, August 2022.
54. Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information 
Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, August 2022; 
Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, 
White Paper--The One-China Principle and the Taiwan Issue, February 2000; Taiwan 
Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, White 
Paper--The Taiwan Question and Reunification of China, August 1993.
55. Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information 
Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, August 2022; 
Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, 
White Paper--The One-China Principle and the Taiwan Issue, February 2000; Taiwan 
Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, White 
Paper--The Taiwan Question and Reunification of China, August 1993.

647
56. Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information 
Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, August 2022; 
Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information Office, 
White Paper--The One-China Principle and the Taiwan Issue, February 2000.
57. Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council and the State Council Information 
Office, The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, August 2022.
58. Tian Feilong, “Exploring Institutional Preparations and Mentality Building 
for the ‘One Country, Two Systems’ Taiwan Formula” (探索“一国两制”台湾方案的
制度准备与心理建设), Modern Taiwan Studies, July 1, 2021. Translation; Chris Buck-
ley, “ ‘Clean Up This Mess’: The Chinese Thinkers behind Xi’s Hard Line,” New York 
Times, August 2, 2020.
59. Tian Feilong, “Exploring Institutional Preparations and Mentality Building for 
the ‘One Country, Two Systems’ Taiwan Formula” (探索“一国两制”台湾方案的制度准
备与心理建设), Modern Taiwan Studies, July 1, 2021. Translation.
60. Jimmy Quinn, “Chinese Envoy Doubles Down on Taiwan ‘Reeducation’ Threat, 
Says Population ‘Intoxicated,’ ” National Review, August 8, 2022.
61. Giulia Carbonara, “China Would Re-Educate Taiwan in Event of Reunification, 
Ambassador Says,” Newsweek, August 5, 2022.
62. Gerald C. Brown, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations,” last updated October 10, 2022; 
Lloyd J. Austin, “Remarks at the Shangri-La Dialogue by Secretary of Defense Lloyd 
J. Austin III (As Delivered),” U.S. Department of Defense, June 11, 2022.
63. Gerald C. Brown, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations,” last updated October 10, 2022.
64. Gerald C. Brown, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations,” last updated October 10, 2022; 
Rhoda Kwan and Jennifer Jett, “Pelosi Departs Taiwan as Furious China Holds Mil-
itary Drills,” CNBC, August 3, 2022.
65. Lloyd J. Austin, “Remarks at the Shangri-La Dialogue by Secretary of Defense 
Lloyd J. Austin III (As Delivered),” U.S. Department of Defense, June 11, 2022.
66. China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated Au-
gust 15),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 15, 2022.
67. Commission staff interview with independent analyst Kevin McCauley, June 
29, 2022; China Military Online, “A Brigade of the Army Conducts Joint Land-Sea 
Training to Hone the Troops’ Amphibious Combat Capability” (陆军某旅开展陆海联合
训练锤炼部队两栖作战能力), June 21, 2022. Translation; Kathrin Hille and Demetri 
Sevastopulo, “Taiwan: Preparing for a Potential Invasion,” Financial Times, June 6, 
2022; People’s Liberation Army Daily, “ ‘Sky Blue’ PK ‘Splash White,’ This Joint Con-
frontation Drill Is Not to Be Missed!” (“空天蓝”PK“浪花白”，这场联合对抗演练不容
错过！), June 2, 2022. Translation; People’ Liberation Army Daily, “Multi-Point Syn-
chronization of Maritime Delivery Training” (海上投送训练多点同步), June 1, 2022. 
Translation; China Military Online, “Army and Navy Units Conduct Collaboration 
Exercise,” June 5, 2022; China’s Ministry of National Defense, PLA’s Eastern The-
ater Command Organizes Joint Combat-Readiness Alert Patrol Surrounding Taiwan 
Island, April 15, 2022; Liu Xuanzun, “PLA Holds Landing Drills in E. China Sea 
with New Landing Craft,” Global Times, February 24, 2022; China Military Online, 
Air-Cushioned Landing Crafts Conduct Beach Landing Training, January 1, 2022.
68. Xinhua, “Xinhua News Agency Authorized Announcement” (新华社受权公告), 
August 2, 2022.
69. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of 
the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; Kathrin Hille, “China’s Military 
Response to Pelosi Visit Raises Escalation Fears,” Financial Times, August 2, 2022.
70. Cindy Wang, “China Stayed 24 Nautical Miles Away from Taiwan During 
Drills,” Bloomberg, August 24, 2022.
71. China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated Au-
gust 19),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 19, 2022; Xinhua, 
“PLA Eastern Theater Command Launches Unprecedented Live-Fire Joint Exercises 
around Taiwan Island,” August 5, 2022.
72. China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated Au-
gust 19),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 19, 2022; Kyodo 
News, “Chinese-Fired Ballistic Missiles Fall into Japan’s EEZ: Gov’t,” August 5, 2022; 
Cindy Wang and Isabel Reynolds, “China Likely Fired Missiles over Taiwan in High-
Risk Milestone,” Bloomberg, August 3, 2022.
73. China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated Au-
gust 15),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 15, 2022; Interna-
tional Online, “On the 4th, the People’s Liberation Army Fired 11 Dongfeng Missiles 
and 22 Military Planes Approached the Island of Taiwan” (台媒：4日解放军实射11枚东
风导弹 22架军机逼近台湾岛), August 5, 2022. Translation; Wen Kuei-hsiang, Matt Yu, 
and Teng Pei-ju, “China Fires 11 Dongfeng Ballistic Missiles into Waters off Taiwan: 
MND,” Focus Taiwan, August 4, 2022.

648
74. China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated Au-
gust 15),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 15, 2022; Matt Yu, 
Novia Huang, and Sean Lin, “Taiwan’s Silence on China Missile Paths Draws Mixed 
Views,” Focus Taiwan, August 5, 2022; Cindy Wang and Isabel Reynolds, “China Like-
ly Fired Missiles over Taiwan in High-Risk Milestone,” Bloomberg, August 3, 2022.
75. China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated Au-
gust 19),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 19, 2022.
76. China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated Au-
gust 19),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 19, 2022; Matt Yu 
and Teng Pei-ju, “4 Drones Spotted over Taiwan’s Kinmen Islands,” August 6, 2022; 
Reuters, “Taiwan Fires Flares to Warn Drones Flying over Outlying Islands,” August 
5, 2022.
77. Cindy Wang, “China Stayed 24 Nautical Miles away from Taiwan During 
Drills,” Bloomberg, August 24, 2022; China Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Tai-
wan Strait Crisis (Updated August 19),” Center for Strategic and International Stud-
ies, August 19, 2022; Keoni Everington, “10 PLA Warships Cross Taiwan’s Median 
Line,” Taiwan News, August 5, 2022.
78. Reuters, “Chinese, Taiwanese Warships Eye Each Other as Drills Due to End,” 
August 7, 2022.
79. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; Fan Bin and Chen Li, “Joint Military 
Operations Organized by the Eastern Theater Command in the Sea and Airspace 
around Taiwan Island Successfully Completed Various Tasks” (东部战区在台岛周边海
空域组织的联合军事行动成功完成各项任务), People’s Liberation Army Daily, August 10, 
2022. Translation; Li Bingxuan and Han Xueyang, “The Eastern Theater Continues 
to Carry out Joint Exercises and Training to Organize Joint Containment and Joint 
Support Operations” (东部战区接续开展联合演训组织联合封控和联合保障行动), August 
9, 2022. Translation.
80. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; Fan Bin and Chen Li, “Joint Military 
Operations Organized by the Eastern Theater Command in the Sea and Airspace 
around Taiwan Island Successfully Completed Various Tasks” (东部战区在台岛周边海
空域组织的联合军事行动成功完成各项任务), People’s Liberation Army Daily, August 10, 
2022. Translation.
81. Reuters, “Airlines Cancel, Reroute Flights during Chinese Military Drills near 
Taiwan,” August 5, 2022; Joe Brock, “China’s Military Drills near Taiwan Disrupt Key 
Shipping Lanes,” Reuters, August 5, 2022; Stephen Stapczynski, Ann Koh, and Sha-
ron Cho, “Taiwan Turmoil Prompts Detours, Delays for Global Shipping,” Bloomberg, 
August 2, 2022.
82. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of the 
Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; Karen Hao, “China Tries to Find Right 
Tone on Taiwan after Latest U.S. Visit,” Wall Street Journal, August 16, 2022; China 
Power Project, “Tracking the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis (Updated August 15),” Cen-
ter for Strategic and International Studies, August 15, 2022; Martin Quinn Pollard 
and Yimou Lee, “China Military ‘Completes Tasks’ around Taiwan, Plans Regular 
Patrols,” Reuters, August 10, 2022; Cindy Wang and Isabel Reynolds, “China Likely 
Fired Missiles over Taiwan in High-Risk Milestone,” Bloomberg, August 3, 2022.
83. Cindy Wang, “China Stayed 24 Nautical Miles From Taiwan During Drills,” 
Bloomberg, August 24, 2022; Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Mil-
itary Dimensions of the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; Chris Buckley 
et al., “How China Could Choke Taiwan,” New York Times, August 22, 2022.
84. Chris Buckley et al., “How China Could Choke Taiwan,” New York Times, Au-
gust 22, 2022; Missile Defense Project, “DF-15,” Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, January 11, 2017, last modified August 5, 2021; Keoni Everington, “11 Chi-
nese Dongfeng Missiles Strike near Taiwan,” Taiwan News, August 4, 2022.
85. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “The Military Dimensions of 
the Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis,” August 23, 2022; Chris Buckley et al., “How China 
Could Choke Taiwan,” New York Times, August 22, 2022.
86. Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council, The 30th MAC Advisory Committee Meet-
ing: Highlights of Discussion by Advisory Members, November 9, 2021.
87. Zhao Lei and Hu Meidong, “Largest Maritime Patrol Ship in Taiwan Straits 
Commissioned,” China Daily, July 12, 2022; Jack Lau, “Largest Chinese Patrol Ship 
in Taiwan Strait Opens Up Diplomatic Route to Law Enforcement: Analysts,” South 
China Morning Post, July 12, 2022; Wan Hengyi, “China’s First Large-Scale Patrol 
Vessel in Taiwan Straits Commissioned, ‘Enhances Emergency Response to Accidents 
in Region,’ ” Global Times, July 11, 2022.

649
88. Zhao Lei and Hu Meidong, “Largest Maritime Patrol Ship in Taiwan Straits 
Commissioned,” China Daily, July 12, 2022; Jack Lau, “Largest Chinese Patrol Ship 
in Taiwan Strait Opens Up Diplomatic Route to Law Enforcement: Analysts,” South 
China Morning Post, July 12, 2022; Wan Hengyi, “China’s First Large-Scale Patrol 
Vessel in Taiwan Straits Commissioned, ‘Enhances Emergency Response to Accidents 
in Region,’ ” Global Times, July 11, 2022.
89. Jack Lau, “Largest Chinese Patrol Ship in Taiwan Strait Opens Up Diplomatic 
Route to Law Enforcement: Analysts,” South China Morning Post, July 12, 2022.
90. Doublethink Lab, Full Report Launch: Deafening Whispers: China’s Informa-
tion Operation and Taiwan’s 2020 Election, October 24, 2020.
91. Chien Li-chung, “PRC Targets Taiwan with New Disinformation Ploy,” Taipei 
Times, January 24, 2022.
92. Brian Hioe, “Concerns on the Rise over Taiwanese Trained by China to Spread 
Disinformation,” New Bloom Magazine, May 16, 2022; Taipei Times, “Taiwan Internet 
Celebrities Being Paid by CCP: NSB,” May 17, 2022.
93. Brian Hioe, “Concerns on the Rise over Taiwanese Trained by China to Spread 
Disinformation,” New Bloom Magazine, May 16, 2022; Taipei Times, “Taiwan Internet 
Celebrities Being Paid by CCP: NSB,” May 17, 2022.
94. Chen Yu-fu and William Hetherington, “Agencies Aim to Counter China Web 
Propaganda,” Taipei Times, May 16, 2022.
95. Wang Chin-i and Liu Tzu-hsuan, “Hualien Man Sentenced to Three Months for 
Spreading COVID-19 Rumors Online,” Taipei Times, May 9, 2022.
96. Kung Teh-lien, “How Russia’s Disinformation on Ukraine Is Spreading to Dem-
ocratic Taiwan, via China,” Radio Free Asia, April 1, 2022; Lin Pu et al., “China’s 
Latest Disinformation Campaign against Taiwan Backfires amid the Russia-Ukraine 
War,” Diplomat, March 6, 2022.
97. Jian Xu, “Pleasing the Mainland or Island: The Politicization of Taiwanese 
Stars during On-Going Cross-Strait Turbulence,” Taiwan Insight, November 30, 2021.
98. Kelvin Chen, “DPP Lawmakers Criticize China’s Use of Taiwan Pop Stars in 
Pro-Unification Music Video,” Taiwan News, January 13, 2022; Forever Jam Peace, 
“We’re Singing a Song Together” (我們同唱一首歌), YouTube, January 2, 2022.
99. Kelvin Chen, “DPP Lawmakers Criticize China’s Use of Taiwan Pop Stars in 
Pro-Unification Music Video,” Taiwan News, January 13, 2022; Forever Jam Peace, 
“We’re Singing a Song Together” (我們同唱一首歌), YouTube, January 2, 2022.
100. Taipei Times, “Taiwan Internet Celebrities Being Paid by CCP: NSB,” May 
17, 2022.
101. Paul Huang, “Taiwan’s Military Is a Hollow Shell,” Foreign Policy, February 
15, 2020.
102. Rachel Oswald, “Taiwan’s Military Needs Overhaul Amid China Threat, Crit-
ics Say,” Roll Call, September 28, 2022; Michael A. Hunzeker, written testimony for 
the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Deterring 
PRC Aggression toward Taiwan, February 18, 2021, 6.
103. Kathrin Hille, “Taiwan Strives to Bolster Forces in Response to Beijing Sa-
bre-Rattling,” Financial Times, July 11, 2020.
104. Kathrin Hille, “Taiwan Strives to Bolster Forces in Response to Beijing Sa-
bre-Rattling,” Financial Times, July 11, 2020.
105. Taiwan News, “Taiwan Can Mobilize 450,000 Soldiers upon President’s Or -
der,” October 22, 2020.
106. Derek Grossman, “Ukraine War Is Motivating Taiwan to Better Secure Its 
Own Future,” Nikkei Asia, May 13, 2022; Michael A. Hunzeker, “Taiwan’s Defense 
Plans Are Going Off the Rails,” War on the Rocks, November 18, 2021.
107. Michael A. Hunzeker, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on Deterring PRC Aggression toward Taiwan, 
February 18, 2021, 7.
108. Focus Taiwan, “New Mobilization Agency Formed to Show Taiwan’s Resolute 
All-Out Defense: Tsai,” December 30, 2021.
109. Itamar Waksman, “What’s Behind Taiwan’s Willingness to Extend Compulso-
ry Military Service?” Sup China, April 1, 2022; Reuters, “Taiwan Weighs Extending 
Compulsory Military Service beyond 4 Months,” March 23, 2022; Taiwanese Public 
Opinion Foundation, “Russia-Ukraine Conflict, Cross-Strait Crisis, and Democracy in 
Taiwan,” March 22, 2022, slide 27. Translation.
110. Liam Gibson, “Majority of Taiwanese Support Women Joining Mandatory Mil-
itary Training: Poll,” Taiwan News, March 9, 2022; Wu Shuwei, “Polls Support the 
Extension of the Service Period; Qiu Guozheng [Says] Already under Discussion” (民
調支持役期延長 邱國正：已在研議), Liberty Times, March 9, 2022. Translation.
111. Nikkei Asia, “Taiwan’s Tsai Says Ukraine War Shows Need for Unity in De-
fense,” March 13, 2022.

650
112. Nikkei Asia, “Taiwan’s Tsai Says Ukraine War Shows Need for Unity in De-
fense,” March 13, 2022.
113. Huang Tzu-ti, “Taiwan to Revise War Survival Handbook after Backlash,” Tai-
wan News, May 4, 2022.
114. Tso-Juei Hsu, “Taiwan Approves Extra $8 Bln Budget for Weapons Procure-
ment,” Naval News, January 18, 2022.
115. CEIC Data, Central Govt: Budget: Expenditures: Nation Defense; National 
Statistics, Republic of China, Statistical Tables: Principal Figures.
116. CEIC Data, Central Govt: Budget: Expenditures: Nation Defense; National 
Statistics, Republic of China, Statistical Tables: Principal Figures.
117. Samson Ellis and Cindy Wang, “Taiwan Plans 14% Boost in Defense Spending 
to Counter China,” Bloomberg, August 25, 2022.
118. CEIC Data, Central Govt: Budget: Expenditures: Nation Defense; Nation-
al Statistics, Republic of China, Statistical Tables: Principal Figures; Samson Ellis 
and Cindy Wang, “Taiwan Plans 14% Boost in Defense Spending to Counter China,” 
Bloomberg, August 25, 2022.
119. John Feng, “Inspired by Ukraine, Taiwanese People Prepare for a China Inva-
sion,” Newsweek, June 24, 2022; Stephanie Yang, “Fears of a Chinese Invasion Have 
Taiwanese Civilians Taking Up Target Practice,” Los Angeles Times, May 26, 2022.
120. John Feng, “Inspired by Ukraine, Taiwanese People Prepare for a China Inva-
sion,” Newsweek, June 24, 2022.
121. John Feng, “Inspired by Ukraine, Taiwanese People Prepare for a China Inva-
sion,” Newsweek, June 24, 2022.
122. Stephanie Yang, “Fears of a Chinese Invasion Have Taiwanese Civilians Tak-
ing Up Target Practice,” Los Angeles Times, May 26, 2022.
123. Ann Wang and Fabian Hamacher, “More Seek Gun Training in Taiwan as 
Ukraine War Drives Home China Threat,” Reuters, June 1, 2022.
124. Central News Agency, “Sixty Percent are Willing to Fight if China Invades: 
Poll,” Taipei Times, May 22, 2022; Keoni Everington, “30% More Taiwanese Willing to 
Fight for Country after Russian Invasion of Ukraine,” Taiwan News, March 17, 2022.
125. Chung Yu-chen, Emersom Lim, and James Lo, “Taiwan Donations Help Fund 
Ukrainian Hospitals, Refugees,” Focus Taiwan, June 9, 2022; Joseph Yeh, “Taiwan 
Ships Public Donations to Slovakia for Ukrainian Refugees,” Focus Taiwan, March 
17, 2022.
126. Central News Agency and Reuters, “President Offers Condolences to Quake 
Victims,” September 7, 2022.
127. Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary Durkee, “Global Island: Sus-
taining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” Center for a 
New American Security, April 2022, 4–8; Thomas J. Shattuck, “Taiwan and the Fu-
ture of Its International Participation Efforts,” Foreign Policy Research Institute, May 
25, 2021; Thomas J. Shattuck, “The Race to Zero?: China’s Poaching of Taiwan’s Dip-
lomatic Allies,” Foreign Policy Research Institute, February 2020, 334–352.
128. Ryan Hass, “A Broad View Provides the Best Insight on Taiwan’s Strengths 
and Vulnerabilities,” Brookings Institution, March 22, 2021.
129. Thomas J. Shattuck, “Taiwan and the Future of Its International Participation 
Efforts,” Foreign Policy Research Institute, May 25, 2021.
130. Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary Durkee, “Global Island: Sus-
taining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” Center for a 
New American Security, April 2022, 7; Sigrid Winkler, “Taiwan’s UN Dilemma: To Be 
or Not to Be,” Brookings Institution, June 20, 2012.
131. Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary Durkee, “Global Island: Sus-
taining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” Center for a 
New American Security, April 2022, 7; Chris Horton, “50 Years after China’s Admis-
sion, Taiwan Remains Shut Out of UN,” Nikkei Asia, October 25, 2021; Sigrid Winkler, 
“Taiwan’s UN Dilemma: To Be or Not to Be,” Brookings Institution, June 20, 2012.
132. Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary Durkee, “Global Island: Sus-
taining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” Center for a 
New American Security April 2022, 7.
133. Reuters, “Taiwan Fails in Bid to Join WHO Assembly after China Pressure,” 
May 23, 2022; Agence France-Presse, “WHO’s World Health Assembly Refuses to Ad-
mit Taiwan amid China Pressure,” NDTV, May 23, 2022.
134. Reuters, “Taiwan Fails in Bid to Join WHO Assembly after China Pressure,” 
May 23, 2022; Agence France-Presse, “WHO’s World Health Assembly Refuses to Ad-
mit Taiwan amid China Pressure,” NDTV, May 23, 2022.
135. Video recording of the Second Plenary Session of the Seventy-Fifth World 
Health Assembly, “Item 1.4—Adoption of the Agenda and Allocation of Items to the 
Main Committees,” World Health Organization, May 23, 2022, minutes 17:40 and 

651
24:30; World Health Assembly, “WHA25.1 Representation of China in the World 
Health Organization,” May 10, 1972, at the 25th World Health Assembly in Geneva, 
May 9–26, 1972, 1; United Nations General Assembly, “2758 (XXVI) Restoration of 
the Lawful Rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations,” 1971.
136. Video recording of the Second Plenary Session of the Seventy-Fifth World 
Health Assembly, “Item 1.4—Adoption of the Agenda and Allocation of Items to the 
Main Committees,” World Health Organization, May 23, 2022, minutes 22:25 and 
26:20.
137. Video recording of the Second Plenary Session of the Seventy-Fifth World 
Health Assembly, “Item 1.4—Adoption of the Agenda and Allocation of Items to the 
Main Committees,” World Health Organization, May 23, 2022, minute 30:14.
138. Video recording of the Second Plenary Session of the Seventy-Fifth World 
Health Assembly, “Item 1.4—Adoption of the Agenda and Allocation of Items to the 
Main Committees,” World Health Organization, May 23, 2022; minute 30:26.
139. Catarina Demony, “Palau Slams U.N. for Blocking Taiwan Delegates from At-
tending Ocean Conference,” Reuters, July 1, 2022; Lucy Craymer, “Tuvalu Minister 
Pulls Out of U.N. Ocean Conference after China Blocks Its Taiwanese Delegates,” 
Reuters, June 27, 2022; Jimmy Quinn, “China Blocks Taiwanese Delegates from U.N. 
Conference, Prompting Boycott by Tuvalu,” National Review, June 27, 2022.
140. Catarina Demony, “Palau Slams U.N. for Blocking Taiwan Delegates from At-
tending Ocean Conference,” Reuters, July 1, 2022.
141. Catarina Demony, “Palau Slams U.N. for Blocking Taiwan Delegates from At-
tending Ocean Conference,” Reuters, July 1, 2022.
142. Catarina Demony, “Palau Slams U.N. for Blocking Taiwan Delegates from At-
tending Ocean Conference,” Reuters, July 1, 2022.
143. Catarina Demony, “Palau Slams U.N. for Blocking Taiwan Delegates from At-
tending Ocean Conference,” Reuters, July 1, 2022.
144. Ben Blanchard, “Taiwan Condemns Qatar for ‘Politicising’ World Cup amid 
China Spat,” Reuters, June 15, 2022.
145. Ralph Jennings, “Taiwan Is Back on Application for World Cup Entry after 
Protests,” Voice of America, June 16, 2022.
146. Reuters, “World Cup: Taiwan Sees Red over China ‘Bullying’ Qatar into Use of 
‘Chinese Taipei,’ ” Guardian, June 20, 2022; Ben Blanchard, “Taiwan Condemns Qatar 
for ‘Politicising’ World Cup amid China Spat,” Reuters, June 15, 2022.
147. Central News Agency, “MOFA Regrets Qatar Name Change,” Taipei Times, 
June 29, 2022; Reuters, “World Cup: Taiwan Sees Red over China ‘Bullying’ Qatar 
into Use of ‘Chinese Taipei,’ ” Guardian, June 20, 2022.
148. Central News Agency, “MOFA Regrets Qatar Name Change,” Taipei Times, 
June 29, 2022.
149. Joseph Yeh, “Taiwan Blasts China as Qatar Changes Country’s Designation 
Again,” Focus Taiwan, June 21, 2022.
150. Alexander Gray, Russell Hsiao, and Robert Wang, “US-Taiwan Relations in 
the 21st Century: Building the Foundation for a Global Partnership,” Global Taiwan 
Institute, June 2022, 8; Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary Durkee, “Glob-
al Island: Sustaining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” 
Center for a New American Security, April 2022, 4; Lily Kuo, “Taiwan Loses Another 
Diplomatic Partner as Nicaragua Recognizes China,” Washington Post, December 10, 
2021; Ben Blanchard, “Nicaragua Breaks Ties with Taiwan, Switches Allegiance to 
Beijing,” Reuters, December 9, 2021.
151. Huizhong Wu, “Political Breakup: Nicaragua Allies with China, Ices Out Tai-
wan,” Associated Press, December 10, 2021; Ben Blanchard, “Nicaragua Breaks Ties 
with Taiwan, Switches Allegiance to Beijing,” Reuters, December 9, 2021.
152. Lily Kuo, “Taiwan Loses Another Diplomatic Partner as Nicaragua Recognizes 
China,” Washington Post, December 10, 2021; Ben Blanchard, “Nicaragua Breaks Ties 
with Taiwan, Switches Allegiance to Beijing,” Reuters, December 9, 2021; Antony J. 
Blinken, “New Sanctions Following Sham Elections in Nicaragua,” U.S. Department 
of State, November 15, 2021; White House, Statement by President Joseph R. Biden, 
Jr. on Nicaragua’s Sham Elections, November 7, 2021.
153. Adam Ni and Yun Jiang, “Brief #100: Nicaragua, Democracy, Press Freedom,” 
Neican, December 14, 2021; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Wang Wenbin Hosted a Regular Press Conference on December 10, 2021 
(2021年12月10日外交部发言人汪文斌主持例行记者会), December 10, 2021. Translation; 
U.S. Agency for International Development, About Nicaragua.
154. Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary Durkee, “Global Island: Sus-
taining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” Center for a 
New American Security, April 2022, 4.

652
155. R. Evan Ellis, Research Professor at the U.S. Army War College, interview 
with Commission staff, June 30, 2022; Evan Ellis, “China and El Salvador: An Up-
date,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 22, 2021.
156. Agence-France Presse, “Pro-Beijing Solomon Islands PM Survives Confidence 
Vote, Blames Crisis on ‘Taiwan Agents,’ ” France24, December 6, 2021; Agence-France 
Presse, “Riots Rock Solomon Islands Capital for Third Day Despite Peacekeepers,” 
France24, November 11, 2021; Edward Cavanough, “When China Came Calling: In-
side the Solomon Islands Switch,” Guardian, December 7, 2019.
157. France24, “Pro-Beijing Solomon Islands PM Survives Confidence Vote, Blames 
Crisis on ‘Taiwan Agents,’ ” December 6, 2021; David Rising and Rod McGuirk, “Solo-
mon Islands Leader Blames Foreign Powers for Unrest,” Los Angeles Times, Novem-
ber 25, 2021.
158. Alexander Gray, Russell Hsiao, and Robert Wang, “US-Taiwan Relations in 
the 21st Century: Building the Foundation for a Global Partnership,” Global Taiwan 
Institute, June 2022, 9.
159. Alexander Gray, Russell Hsiao, and Robert Wang, “US-Taiwan Relations in 
the 21st Century: Building the Foundation for a Global Partnership,” Global Taiwan 
Institute, June 2022, 9; Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Zachary Durkee, “Glob-
al Island: Sustaining Taiwan’s Participation amid Mounting Pressure from China,” 
Center for a New American Security, April 2022, 5.
160. Al Jazeera, “Incoming Honduras Gov’t to Keep Taiwan Ties for Now: Officials,” 
December 10, 2021.
161. Wazim Mowla and Isabel Bernhard, “Why Might Taiwan’s Allies in Latin 
America and the Caribbean Soon Look to China?” Global Americans, January 6, 2022.
162. Republic of China (Taiwan’s) Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Links to Embassies 
and Missions; Republic of China (Taiwan)’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Bureau of 
Consular Affairs, ROC Embassies and Missions Abroad; China’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, Statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, November 21, 2021; Euronews, 
“Lithuania: China Condemns ‘Extremely Egregious Act’ as Taiwan Opens Vilnius Of-
fice,” November 19, 2021.
163. Matthew Reynolds and Matthew P. Goodman, “China’s Economic Coercion: 
Lessons from Lithuania,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 6, 2022.
164. Matthew Reynolds and Matthew P. Goodman, “China’s Economic Coercion: 
Lessons from Lithuania,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 6, 2022.
165. Ben Blanchard and Michael Martina, “Taiwan Has Not Been Asked to Change 
Name of Lithuania Office,” Reuters, January 26, 2022; Andrius Sytas, “Lithuania Con-
siders Modifying Taiwan Representation Name to Defuse Row with China,” Reuters, 
January 26, 2022.
166. Euronews, “Opening a Taiwan Representative Office Was ‘Mistake,’ Says Lith-
uanian President,” April 1, 2022; Ben Blanchard and Michael Martina, “Taiwan Has 
Not Been Asked to Change Name of Lithuania Office,” Reuters, January 26, 2022; 
Andrius Sytas, “Lithuania Considers Modifying Taiwan Representation Name to De-
fuse Row with China,” Reuters, January 26, 2022.
167. World Trade Organization, “EU Initiates WTO Dispute Complaint Regarding 
Chinese Restrictions on Trade with Lithuania,” January 31, 2022.
168. Noah Barkin, “Watching China in Europe - June 2022,” German Marshall 
Fund, June 1, 2022; World Trade Organization, “The Process—Stages in a Typical 
WTO Dispute Settlement Case.”
169. Stuart Lau and Leonie Kijewski, “Taiwanese Minister’s Covert Trip to Brus-
sels Adds to EU-China Tensions,” Politico, October 27, 2021; Reuters, “China Warns 
Slovaks, Czechs of Retaliation for Taiwan Minister Visit,” October 22, 2021.
170. European Parliament, “European Parliament Delegation Ends Visit to Tai-
wan,” November 5, 2021; John Feng, “China Warns European Lawmakers over 
Planned Visit to Taiwan,” Newsweek, October 27, 2021.
171. Peter Dutton, “National Press Club Address, Canberra, ACT,” Australia’s Min-
istry of Defense, November 26, 2021; Reuters, “ ‘Inconceivable’ Australia Would Not 
Join U.S. to Defend Taiwan - Australian Defense Minister,” November 12, 2021.
172. David J. Keegan and Kyle Churchman, “Taiwan Gains Ground International-
ly, but Will China Retaliate?” Comparative Connections 23:3 (January 2022): 79–90.
173. Ellen Mitchell, “US, Japan Draw Up Joint Military Plan for Possible Taiwan 
Emergency: Report,” Hill, December 23, 2021.
174. Nikkei Asia, “U.S. Holds High-Level Talks with U.K. over Threat to Taiwan: 
FT,” May 1, 2022; Cristina Gallardo, “UK’s Liz Truss: NATO Should Protect Taiwan 
Too,” Politico, April 27, 2022.
175. Shih Hsiu-chuan, “U.S., South Korea Reaffirm Importance of Peace in Taiwan 
Strait,” Focus Taiwan, May 21, 2022.

653
176. U.S. Department of Defense, United States-Japan-Australia Trilateral Defense 
Ministers Meeting (TDMM 2022 Joint Vision Statement), June 11, 2022.
177. Group of Seven, “G7 Leaders’ Communiqué,” June 28, 2022, 18.
178. U.S. Department of State, G7 Foreign Ministers’ Statement on Preserving 
Peace and Stability across the Taiwan Strait, August 3, 2022.
179. U.S. Department of State, G7 Foreign Ministers’ Statement on Preserving 
Peace and Stability across the Taiwan Strait, August 3, 2022.
180. A Bill to Direct the Secretary of State to Develop a Strategy to Regain Ob-
server Status for Taiwan in the World Health Organization, and for Other Purposes, 
Public Law No: 117–124, 2022.
181. Taiwan Policy Act of 2022, S.4428, June 16, 2022; Economic Statecraft for the 
Twenty-First Century Act, S.4112, introduced April 28, 2022; Taiwan Representative 
Office Act, H.R.6578, February 3, 2022.
182. Reuters, “Biden Sends Former Top Defense Officials to Taiwan in Show of 
Support,” March 1, 2022; Kyodo News, “U.S. Delegation Arrives in Taiwan, Angers 
China,” March 1, 2022; Michael Martina and David Brunnstrom, “Exclusive: Biden 
Sends Former Top Defense Officials to Taiwan in Show of Support,” Reuters, February 
28, 2022.
183. American Institute in Taiwan, “Senator Graham Leads Senior Congressional 
Delegation to Taiwan,” April 14, 2022.
184. Wayne Chang, Eric Cheung, and Clare Foran, “U.S. Congressional Delegation 
Makes Surprise Visit to Taiwan,” CNN, May 30, 2022.
185. American Institute in Taiwan, “Senator Scott Visit to Taiwan,” July 7, 2022.
186. New York Times, “As Pelosi Departs Taiwan, China Gears Up for Military 
Drills,” August 2, 2022.
187. Eva Dou and Christian Shepherd, “Sen. Blackburn Calls Taiwan a ‘Country’ 
during Meeting with Tsai,” Washington Post, August 26, 2022; Johnson Lai, “China 
Announces New Drills as US Delegation Visits Taiwan,” Associated Press, August 
15, 2022.
188. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Ministry of Foreign Affairs Announces 
Countermeasures in Response to Nancy Pelosi’s Visit to Taiwan, August 5, 2022.
189. Kelly Hooper, “China Cancels Talks with U.S. on Military Issues, Climate 
Change over Pelosi’s Taiwan Visit,” Politico, August 5, 2022; China’s Ministry of For-
eign Affairs, The Ministry of Foreign Affairs Announces Countermeasures in Response 
to Nancy Pelosi’s Visit to Taiwan, August 5, 2022.
190. Shannon Tiezzi, “China Suspends Military Dialogues, Climate Change Talks 
with US,” Diplomat, August 5, 2022.
191. Ellen Knickmeyer, Zeke Miller, and David Rising, “China Cuts Off Vital US 
Contacts over Pelosi Taiwan Visit,” Associated Press, August 5, 2022.
192. Shannon Tiezzi, “China Suspends Military Dialogues, Climate Change Talks 
with US,” Diplomat, August 5, 2022.
193. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Announces 
China’s Sanctions on U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, August 5, 2022.
194. Associated Press, “China Sets Bans, Sanctions on Taiwan Political Leaders to 
Punish U.S., Island,” PBS Newshour, August 16, 2022.
195. Associated Press, “China Sets Bans, Sanctions on Taiwan Political Leaders to 
Punish U.S., Island,” PBS Newshour, August 16, 2022.
196. Associated Press, “China Sets Bans, Sanctions on Taiwan Political Leaders 
to Punish U.S., Island,” PBS Newshour, August 16, 2022; Yew Lun Tian and Ben 
Blanchard, “China Sanctions Seven Taiwanese ‘Independence Diehard’ Officials,” Re-
uters, August 16, 2022.
197. Global Cooperation and Training Framework, “2022 Global Cooperation and 
Training Framework (GCTF) Virtual Workshop on Efforts and Development on Elim-
inating Hepatitis C,” June 21, 2022; Global Cooperation and Training Framework, 
“2022 Global Cooperation and Training Framework (GCTF) Workshop on Combat-
ting Digital Crimes,” March 22, 2022; Global Cooperation and Training Framework, 
“2022 Global Cooperation and Training Framework (GCTF) Conference on Ending 
Gender-Based Violence,” May 25, 2022.
198. Erik M. Jacobs, “Taiwan-US Science and Technology Cooperation Continues 
with Satellite Program,” Global Taiwan Brief 7:8, April 7, 2022; Lu Yi-hsuan and 
Jonathan Chin, “Taiwan, US Sign MOU on Satellite Collaboration,” Taipei Times, 
March 24, 2022.
199. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Readout of HHS Assistant 
Secretary for Global Affairs Loyce Pace’s Bilateral Meeting with Deputy Minister of 
Health of Taiwan, May 25, 2022.
200. American Institute in Taiwan, “Three Communiqués,” 1972, 1978, and 1982.

654
201. Richard C. Bush, “A One-China Policy Primer,” Brookings Center for East Asia 
Policy Studies, East Asia Policy Paper 10, March 2017, 4.
202. American Institute in Taiwan, “Three Communiqués,” 1972, 1978, and 1982.
203. Taiwan Relations Act, Pub. L. No. 96–8, 1979.
204. Congressional Research Service, “President Reagan’s Six Assurances to Tai-
wan,” October 8, 2022; American Institute in Taiwan, “Declassified Cables: Taiwan 
Arms Sales & Six Assurances (1982),” March 30, 2022.
205. David Brunnstrom and Trevor Hunnicutt “Biden Says U.S. Forces Would De-
fend Taiwan in the Event of a Chinese Invasion” Reuters, September 19, 2022; Aaron 
Blake, “Biden’s Starkest Comments Yet on Defending Taiwan from China,” Washing-
ton Post, May 23, 2022; NPR, “President Biden Says the U.S. Will Defend Taiwan 
if China Invades,” May 23, 2022; Kevin Liptiak, “Biden Vows to Protect Taiwan in 
Event of Chinese Attack,” CNN, October 22, 2021; Reuters, “U.S. Position on Taiwan 
Remains Unchanged despite Biden Comment, Official says,” CNBC, August 20, 2021.
206. Lloyd J. Austin, “Remarks at the Shangri-La Dialogue by Secretary of Defense 
Lloyd J. Austin III (As Delivered),” U.S. Department of Defense, June 11, 2022.
207. White House, Indo-Pacific Strategy of the United States, February 2022, 15.
208. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022, Pub. L. No: 117–81, 
2021.
209. Deterring Communist Chinese Aggression against Taiwan through Financial 
Sanctions Act of 2022, S.3735, introduced March 2, 2022; Taiwan Deterrence Act, 
S.3192, introduced November 4, 2021; Taiwan Invasion Prevention Act, S.332, intro-
duced February 22, 2021; Strategic Competition Act of 2021, S.1169, introduced April 
21, 2021.
210. Lara Seligman, Alexander Ward, and Nahal Toosi, “In Letters, U.S. Tries to 
Reshape Taiwan’s Weapons Requests,” Politico, May 10, 2022; Edward Wong and Amy 
Qin, “U.S. Presses Taiwan to Buy Weapons More Suited to Win against China,” New 
York Times, May 7, 2022.
211. U.S. Defense Security and Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural 
Representative Office in the United States (TECRO) –AGM-84L-1 HARPOON BLOCK 
II MISSILES, September 2, 2022; U.S. Defense Security and Cooperation Agency, 
Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States (TECRO)—
AIM-9X BLOCK II SIDEWINDER MISSILES, September 2, 2022; U.S. Defense Secu-
rity and Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in 
the United States (TECRO)—CONTRACT LOGISTICS SUPPORT FOR SURVEIL-
LANCE RADAR PROGRAM (SRP), September 2, 2022; U.S. Defense Security and 
Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the Unit-
ed States (TECRO)—Blanket Order Contractor Technical Assistance Support, July 15, 
2022; U.S. Defense Security and Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural 
Representative Office in the United States—Ship Spare Parts and Ship System Spare 
Parts, June 8, 2022; U.S. Defense Security and Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic 
and Cultural Representative Office in the United States—Contractor Technical Assis-
tance, April 5, 2022; U.S. Defense Security and Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic 
and Cultural Representative Office in the United States—International Engineering 
Services Program (IESP) and Field Surveillance Program (FSP) Support, February 
7, 2022.
212. Lara Seligman, Alexander Ward, and Nahal Toosi, “In Letters, U.S. Tries to 
Reshape Taiwan’s Weapons Requests,” Politico, May 10, 2022.
213. Lara Seligman, Alexander Ward, and Nahal Toosi, “In Letters, U.S. Tries to 
Reshape Taiwan’s Weapons Requests,” Politico, May 10, 2022.
214. Lara Seligman, Alexander Ward, and Nahal Toosi, “In Letters, U.S. Tries to 
Reshape Taiwan’s Weapons Requests,” Politico, May 10, 2022; Reuters, “Taiwan Says 
It Cannot Afford New U.S. Anti-Submarine Helicopters,” May 5, 2022.
215. Lara Seligman, Alexander Ward, and Nahal Toosi, “In Letters, U.S. Tries to 
Reshape Taiwan’s Weapons Requests,” Politico, May 10, 2022; Reuters, “Taiwan Says 
It Cannot Afford New U.S. Anti-Submarine Helicopters,” May 5, 2022.
216. Edward Wong and Amy Qin, “U.S. Presses Taiwan to Buy Weapons More Suit-
ed to Win against China,” New York Times, May 7, 2022.
217. Lara Seligman, “ ‘Deadly Serious’: U.S. Quietly Urging Taiwan to Follow 
Ukraine Playbook for Countering China,” Politico, May 19, 2022.
218. Edward Wong and Amy Qin, “U.S. Presses Taiwan to Buy Weapons More Suit-
ed to Win against China,” New York Times, May 7, 2022.
219. Jessica Lewis, “Opening Statement to Senate Foreign Relations Committee: 
‘U.S. Efforts to Support Ukraine against Russian Aggression,’ ” U.S. Department of 
State, May 12, 2022.
220. Lara Seligman, “ ‘Deadly Serious’: U.S. Quietly Urging Taiwan to Follow 
Ukraine Playbook for Countering China,” Politico, May 19, 2022.

655
221. Yu Nakamura, “Taiwan Faces Delays in U.S. Arms Deliveries Due to Ukraine 
War,” Nikkei Asia, May 4, 2022; Christian Shepherd and Vic Chiang, “Howitzer De-
livery to Taiwan Delayed by Strained U.S. Supply Chain,” Washington Post, May 3, 
2022; Bryant Harris, “Document Reveals $14 Billion Backlog of US Defense Transfers 
to Taiwan,” Defense News, April 14, 2022; Wendy Sherman, oral testimony for U.S. 
House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs, Restoring American Leader -
ship in the Indo-Pacific, April 6, 2022.
222. Wendy Sherman, oral testimony for U.S. House of Representatives Committee 
on Foreign Affairs, Restoring American Leadership in the Indo-Pacific, April 6, 2022, 
25.
223. Yu Nakamura, “Taiwan Faces Delays in U.S. Arms Deliveries Due to Ukraine 
War,” Nikkei Asia, May 4, 2022; Christian Shepherd and Vic Chiang, “Howitzer De-
livery to Taiwan Delayed by Strained U.S. Supply Chain,” Washington Post, May 3, 
2022; Bryant Harris, “Document Reveals $14 Billion Backlog of US Defense Transfers 
to Taiwan,” Defense News, April 14, 2022.
224. John Dotson, “The Implications of Delivery Delays in Purchased Arms for 
Taiwan’s Defense Planning,” Global Taiwan Brief 7:10, May 18, 2022.
225. John Dotson, “The Implications of Delivery Delays in Purchased Arms for 
Taiwan’s Defense Planning,” Global Taiwan Brief 7:10, May 18, 2022.
226. John Dotson, “The Implications of Delivery Delays in Purchased Arms for Tai-
wan’s Defense Planning,” Global Taiwan Brief 7:10, May 18, 2022; Justin Sink, Tony 
Capaccio, and Jennifer Jacobs, “Javelin Anti-Tank Missiles Get Biden Nod as Ukraine 
Depletes U.S. Stash,” Bloomberg, May 3, 2022; Paul McLeary, “Raytheon Chief Warns 
of Delays in Replenishing Stinger Missile Stocks,” Politico, April 26, 2022; Bryant 
Harris, “Document Reveals $14 Billion Backlog of US Defense Transfers to Taiwan,” 
Defense News, April 14, 2022;
227. U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural 
Representative Office in the United States (TECRO)—Stinger Missiles and Related 
Equipment and Support, July 8, 2019.
228. Edward Wong and Amy Qin, “U.S. Presses Taiwan to Buy Weapons More Suit-
ed to Win against China,” New York Times, May 7, 2022.
229. Paul McLeary, “Raytheon Chief Warns of Delays in Replenishing Stinger Mis-
sile Stocks,” Politico, April 26, 2022.
230. Paul McLeary, “Raytheon Chief Warns of Delays in Replenishing Stinger Mis-
sile Stocks,” Politico, April 26, 2022.
231. Edward Wong and Amy Qin, “U.S. Presses Taiwan to Buy Weapons More Suit-
ed to Win against China,” New York Times, May 7, 2022.
232. David Wichner, “Tucson-Based Raytheon Unit Gets $625M Deal for Stinger 
Missiles,” Tucson.com, May 29, 2022; Mike Stone, “U.S. Buys More Stingers after 
Missiles’ Success in Ukraine,” Reuters, May 27, 2022; Jen Judson and Joe Gould, “US 
Army Signs Deal to Backfill Stingers Sent to Ukraine,” Defense News, May 27, 2022.
233. Gordon Lubold, “U.S. Troops Have Been Deployed in Taiwan for at Least a 
Year,” Wall Street Journal, October 7, 2021.
234. John Feng, “U.S. Marines Training Taiwan Elite Troops in Guam,” Newsweek, 
November 21, 2021.
235. Ben Blanchard, “Tsai Says U.S. National Guard Planning ‘Cooperation’ with 
Taiwan Military,” Reuters, May 31, 2022; Erin Doherty, “Taiwan Says U.S. National 
Guard ‘Planning Cooperation’ with Its Military,” Axios, May 31, 2022.
236. Alex Wilson, “Taiwan Makes ‘Significant’ Appearance at Multinational Mil-
itary Conference in Japan,” Stars and Stripes, June 17, 2022; Yang Ming-chu and 
Teng Pei-ju, “Taiwan Military Officers Attend U.S.-Japan Security Forum in Tokyo,” 
Focus Taiwan, June 16, 2022.
237. Su Yung-yao and Kayleigh Madjar, “Taiwan-US Security Talks to Cover Drills, 
Arms Sales,” Taipei Times, June 14, 2022.
238. Central News Agency, “Six F-16Vs Depart Taiwan for Pilot Training in U.S.: 
Source,” Overseas Community Affairs Council, Republic of China (Taiwan), June 17, 
2022.
239. Tsung-Mei Cheng, “Taiwan’s Triumph Beating Back COVID,” Milken Institute 
Review, January 12, 2022.
240. Tsung-Mei Cheng, “Taiwan’s Triumph Beating Back COVID,” Milken Institute 
Review, January 12, 2022.
241. Clarissa Wei, “The Topsy-Turvy End of Zero COVID in Taiwan,” New Yorker, 
May 23, 2022.
242. David Kirton, “Shanghai to Extend Lockdown of 26 Million People as It Re-
views COVID Test Results,” Reuters, April 4, 2022.
243. National Statistics, Republic of China, The Latest Statistical Indicators (最新
統計指標). Translated.

656
244. National Statistics, Republic of China, GDP: Preliminary Estimate for 2022Q2, 
and Outlook for 2022–23; National Statistics, Republic of China, The Latest Statisti-
cal Indicators. (最新統計指標). Translation.
245. National Statistics, Republic of China, GDP: Preliminary Estimate for 2022Q2, 
and Outlook for 2022–23; Eric Chang, “IMF Lowers Taiwan GDP Forecast for 2022,” 
Taiwan News, April 20, 2022; Republic of China National Statistics, The Latest Sta-
tistical Indicators (最新統計指標). Translation; International Monetary Fund, “War 
Sets Back the Global Recovery,” April 2022.
246. Betty Hou and Cindy Wang, “Taiwan’s 2021 Exports Soar to Record $446 Bil-
lion on Tech Demand,” Bloomberg, January 7, 2022.
247. Statistics Department of Taiwan’s Ministry of Finance, Annual External Trade 
Report in 2021, February 25, 2021, 1–2.
248. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
249. Jill Elaine Disis, Chien-Hua Wan, and Samson Ellis. “Taiwan Cuts 2022 
Growth Forecast amid Covid, Surging Costs,” Bloomberg, May 27, 2022.
250. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics; Chang Ai and Frances Huang, “Exports Up for 23rd Straight Month in May,” 
Focus Taiwan, June 8, 2022.
251. Taiwan’s Producer Price Index via CEIC Database.
252. National Statistics, Republic of China, Producer Price Indices: Annual Change 
of Producer Price Indices in Taiwan Area.
253. National Statistics, Republic of China, Latest Indicators: CPI, July 2022.
254. National Statistics, Republic of China, Manpower Survey Results in July 2022.
255. National Statistics, Republic of China, “Table 10. Unemployment Rate by 
Age,” Manpower Survey Results in July 2022.
256. National Statistics, Republic of China, Earnings and Productivity Statistics 
in June 2022
257. Jeanna Smialek and Eshe Nelson, “Global Central Banks Ramp Up Inflation 
Fight,” New York Times, July 17, 2022.
258. Jenny Kao, Yimou Lee, and Emily Chan, “Taiwan Export Orders Fall for First 
Time in 2 Years, Hurt by China Lockdowns, Global Weakness,” Reuters, May 20, 2022.
259. Jenny Kao, Yimou Lee, and Emily Chan, “Taiwan Export Orders Fall for First 
Time in 2 Years, Hurt by China Lockdowns, Global Weakness,” Reuters, May 20, 2022.
260. Yimou Lee and Jeanny Kao, “Taiwan Lowers 2022 GDP Growth Forecast, Hit 
by COVID and Inflation,” Reuters, May 27, 2022.
261. Taiwan Department of Information Services, Executive Yuan, Newest Round 
of Stimulus Measures Passed to Assuage COVID-19’s Economic Impact, May 26, 2022.
262. Taiwan Department of Information Services, Executive Yuan, Newest Round 
of Stimulus Measures Passed to Assuage COVID-19’s Economic Impact, May 26, 2022.
263. National Statistics, Republic of China, GDP: Preliminary Estimate for 2022Q2, 
and Outlook for 2022–23; National Statistics, Republic of China, GDP: Preliminary 
Estimate for 2022Q1, and Outlook for 2022; National Statistics, Republic of China, 
Gross Domestic Product by Expenditures.
264. Taiwan Department of Information Services, Executive Yuan, COVID-19 Stim-
ulus Measures for 2022, June 2, 2022.
265. Iris Pang, “Revising Taiwan’s GDP Forecast Due to Export Growth and Strong 
Global Demand for Semiconductors,” ING, February 11, 2022.
266. Alicia Garcia-Herrero, “Global Chip Shortage May Soon Turn into an Over -
supply Crisis,” Nikkei Asia, February 24, 2022.
267. Alicia Garcia-Herrero, “Global Chip Shortage May Soon Turn into an Over -
supply Crisis,” Nikkei Asia, February 24, 2022; Iris Pang, “Revising Taiwan’s GDP 
Forecast Due to Export Growth and Strong Global Demand for Semiconductors,” ING, 
February 11, 2022.
268. Sohu, “From 2022 to 2023, TSMC Will Build 11 12-Inch Fabs in Taiwan, Two 
Generations ahead of Overseas Fabs,” (2022～2023年台积电在台湾兴建11座12吋晶圆
厂，工艺领先海外厂两代), July 4, 2022. Translation.
269. Tu Chih-hao, “TSMC Builds 11 Factories in Taimeng” (台積電 在台猛蓋11座廠), 
China Times, July 4, 2022. Translation.
270. Cheng Ting-Fang and Lauly Li, “TSMC, MediaTek to Hire More than 10,000 
Staff in 2022,” Nikkei Asia, January 14, 2022.
271. Ben Blanchard and Jeanny Kao, “Taiwan to Raise Electricity Prices by Aver -
age of 8.4%,” Nasdaq, June 27, 2022.
272. Cindy Wang and Dan Murtaugh, “Global Chip Hub Taiwan to Raise Power 
Rates on Pricey Fuel,” Bloomberg, June 27, 2022.
273. Cindy Wang and Dan Murtaugh, “Global Chip Hub Taiwan to Raise Power 
Rates on Pricey Fuel,” Bloomberg, June 27, 2022.

657
274. Manuel Widmann, “Taiwan’s Energy Security: Liquefied Natural Gas, Renew-
ables, and the EU,” European Institute for Asian Studies, June 16, 2021; Alynne Tsai, 
“TSMC’s Push toward Green Energy,” Taipei Times, July 17, 2020.
275. Angelica Oung, “How Can Taiwan Avoid an Energy Crisis?” American Cham-
ber of Commerce in Taiwan, May 12, 2022.
276. Hilton Yip, “Taiwan’s Governmental Overconfidence Keeps Creating Crises,” 
Foreign Policy, June 4, 2021; Angelica Oung, “How Can Taiwan Avoid an Energy Cri-
sis?” American Chamber of Commerce in Taiwan, May 12, 2022.
277. Angelica Oung, “How Can Taiwan Avoid an Energy Crisis?” American Cham-
ber of Commerce in Taiwan, May 12, 2022.
278. Taiwan Bureau of Energy, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Energy Statistics 
Handbooks Energy Supply and Demand Situation in Taiwan, R.O.C., July 21, 2022.
279. World Nuclear, “Nuclear Power in Taiwan,” July 2022.
280. Hilton Yip, “Taiwan’s Governmental Overconfidence Keeps Creating Crises,” 
Foreign Policy, June 4, 2021.
281. Angelica Oung, “How Can Taiwan Avoid an Energy Crisis?” American Cham-
ber of Commerce in Taiwan, May 12, 2022.
282. Angelica Oung, “How Can Taiwan Avoid an Energy Crisis?” American Cham-
ber of Commerce in Taiwan, May 12, 2022.
283. Taiwan Bureau of Energy, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Energy Statistics 
Handbooks Energy Supply and Demand Situation in Taiwan, R.O.C., July 21, 2022.
284. Angelica Oung, “How Can Taiwan Avoid an Energy Crisis?” American Cham-
ber of Commerce in Taiwan, May 12, 2022.
285. Tsai Hu-hsun, “The Snap Back of the 2025 Renewable Energy Target is Not 
Just Because ‘the Denominator Became Larger’ Like Wang Mei-hua Said” (2025年再
生能源目標跳票，絕不只是王美花說的「分母變大」而已), The News Lens, January 13, 
2022. Translation; “Chapter 17: The Development Progress of Renewable Energy on 
Track and the Lack of Grid-Connected Capacity in Some Areas Affects the Timetable, 
So It Is Advisable to Strengthen Management and Seek Effective Countermeasures,” 
(一七、再生能源發展進度未如預期，且部分地區因系統併網容量不足，影響設置時程，允
宜加強辦理並研謀有效對策) in Taiwan Legislative Yuan Budget Center, Annual Over -
all Evaluation Report of the Central Government’s General Budget in 2022, Septem-
ber 2021. Translation.
286. Cindy Wang, “Taiwan Vows $32 Billion Clean Energy Spree as It Lags on 
Targets,” Bloomberg, March 30, 2022.
287. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
288. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
289. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
290. Statistics Department of Taiwan’s Ministry of Finance, Annual External Trade 
Report in 2021, February 25, 2022, 4.
291. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
292. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
293. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Investment 
from Mainland China (up to August 2022).
294. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Investment 
from Mainland China (up to August 2022).
295. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Overseas Chi-
nese & Foreign Investment (up to August 2022).
296. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs, Taiwan FDI Statistics Summary Anal-
ysis (August 2022).
297. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Overseas Chi-
nese & Foreign Investment Monthly Report (August 2022).
298. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Investment to 
Mainland China (up to August 2022).
299. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Investment to 
Mainland China (up to August 2022).
300. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Outward In-
vestment (up to August 2022).
301. Taiwan Department of Information Services, Executive Yuan, Three Major 
Programs for Investing in Taiwan for Three More Years, January 27, 2021.
302. Taiwan Department of Information Services, Executive Yuan, Three Major 
Programs for Investing in Taiwan, January 7, 2022.

658
303. Taiwan Department of Information Services, Executive Yuan, Three Major 
Programs for Investing in Taiwan, January 7, 2022.
304. Pan Tzu-yu and Frances Huang, “NT$180 Billion Proposed for Forward-Look-
ing Infrastructure Plan Phase 4,” Focus Taiwan, February 8, 2022.
305. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2019 Annual Report 
to Congress, November 2019, 468.
306. Pan Tzu-yu and Frances Huang, “NT$180 Billion Proposed for Forward-Look-
ing Infrastructure Plan Phase 4,” Focus Taiwan, February 8, 2022.
307. Taiwan National Development Council, Forward-Looking Infrastructure De-
velopment Program.
308. Taiwan Department of Information Services, Executive Yuan, Promoting Re-
gional Revitalization to Balance Development across Taiwan, October 18, 2018.
309. Taiwan National Development Council, Promoting the Regional Revitalization 
Policy.
310. Taiwan National Development Council, National Strategic Plan for Regional 
Revitalization, January 3, 2019, 12.
311. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
312. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Overseas Chi-
nese & Foreign Investment (up to August 2022).
313. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Overseas Chi-
nese & Foreign Investment (up to August 2022); Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs 
Investment Commission, Investment to Mainland China (up to May 2022).
314. Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, Outward In-
vestment (up to August 2022); Ministry of Economic Affairs Investment Commission, 
Investment to Mainland China (up to August 2022).
315. Ministry of Education Republic of China, International Students Come Togeth-
er to Taiwan, Where the One-Hundred Thirty Thousand Overseas Student Mark Has 
Been Passed, January 28, 2021.
316. Alyssa Nicole O. Tan, “Taiwan to Launch New ‘Southbound’ Trade Push Fo-
cused on Healthcare,” BusinessWorld, October 8, 2021.
317. Raian Hossain, “Taiwan’s New South Bound Policy 2.0: Fine-Tuning in 2022,” 
Taiwan Insight, February 7, 2022.
318. Bonnie S. Glaser, “How China Uses Economic Coercion to Silence Critics and 
Achieve Its Political Aims Globally,” statement before the Congressional-Executive 
Commission on China, December 7, 2021.
319. Bryce Barros and Mary Ogbuehi, “What the United States Can Learn from 
Chinese Economic Coercion in South Korea, Australia, and Taiwan,” Alliance for Se-
curing Democracy at the German Marshall Fund, April 19, 2022.
320. Bonnie S. Glaser, “How China Uses Economic Coercion to Silence Critics and 
Achieve Its Political Aims Globally,” statement before the Congressional-Executive 
Commission on China, December 7, 2021, 7–8.
321. Mikes Ives and Zixu Wang, “Mostly Bluster: Why China Went Easy on Tai-
wan’s Economy,” New York Times, August 12, 2022.
322. Mikes Ives and Zixu Wang, “Mostly Bluster: Why China Went Easy on Tai-
wan’s Economy,” New York Times, August 12, 2022.
323. Daria Impiombato, Yvonne Lau, and Fergus Hunter, “China’s Escalating Coer-
cion of Taiwan Holds Lessons for the International Community,” Australian Strategic 
Policy Institute, August 10, 2022.
324. Mikes Ives and Zixu Wang, “Mostly Bluster: Why China Went Easy on Tai-
wan’s Economy,” New York Times, August 12, 2022.
325. John Feng, “Taiwan and Allies Rally to Defy China’s Economic Coercion on 
Pineapples,” Newsweek, March 2, 2021.
326. Natalie Tso, “Taiwan Q1 Pineapple Exports Up 12% Despite Chinese Ban,” 
Radio Taiwan International, April 6, 2022.
327. Amy Chang Chien, “First Pineapples, Now Fish: To Pressure Taiwan, China 
Flexes Economic Muscle,” New York Times, June 22, 2022.
328. Russell Hsiao, “Beijing Ratchets Up Economic Coercion against Taiwan with 
Selective Regulatory Enforcements,” Global Taiwan Institute, June 23, 2021, 1.
329. Russell Hsiao, “Beijing Ratchets Up Economic Coercion against Taiwan with 
Selective Regulatory Enforcements,” Global Taiwan Institute, June 23, 2021, 1.
330. Lucas Niewenhuis, “Beijing Is Targeting Taiwanese Companies with Links to 
Tsai’s Democratic Progressive Party,” SupChina, November 23, 2021.
331. Zhao Weilan, “Gong Mingxin: If China Intensifies Economic Coercion against 
Taiwan, the Price Will Be Very High” (若中國對台灣強化經濟脅迫 龔明鑫：代價非常大), 
Central News Agency, June 28, 2022. Translation.

659
332. Kensaku Ihara, “Taiwan Loses 3,000 Chip Engineers to ‘Made in China 
2025,’ ” Nikkei Asia, December 3, 2019.
333. Kensaku Ihara, “Taiwan Loses 3,000 Chip Engineers to ‘Made in China 
2025,’ ” Nikkei Asia, December 3, 2019.
334. Deutsche Welle, “Taiwan Investigates Nearly 100 Technology Companies to 
Crack Down on Mainland-Funded ‘Poaching’ ” (打擊陸資「挖角」台灣調查近百家科技
公司), Yahoo, April 8, 2022. Translation.
335. Hsieh Chun-lin and Liu Tzu-hsuan, “Penalties Set for Economic Espionage,” 
Taipei Times, May 21, 2022.
336. Yimou Lee, “Taiwan Raids Chinese Firms in Latest Crackdown on Chip Engi-
neer-Poaching,” Reuters, May 26, 2022.
337. Josh Zumbrun and Stephanie Yang, “Chinese Tariffs Fuel Boom in U.S. Trade 
with Tech Exporter Taiwan,” Wall Street Journal, December 5, 2021.
338. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
339. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
340. Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Trade Statis-
tics.
341. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, United States and Taiwan Announce 
the Launch of the U.S.-Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade, June 1, 2022.
342. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, United States and Taiwan Announce 
the Launch of the U.S.-Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade, June 1, 2022.
343. Inside Trade, “U.S., Taiwan Hold First ‘Initiative on 21-Century Trade’ Meet-
ings,” June 27, 2022.
344. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, United States and Taiwan Hold In-
augural Meeting of the U.S.-Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade, June 27, 2022.
345. Riley Walters, “U.S. and Taiwan Launch the ‘Initiative on 21st-Century 
Trade,’ ” Global Taiwan Institute, July 12, 2022, 11; Tori Smith, “White House’s New 
Initiative with Taiwan Falls Short of a Free Trade Agreement,” American Action Fo-
rum, June 8, 2022.
346. Tori Smith, “White House’s New Initiative with Taiwan Falls Short of a Free 
Trade Agreement,” American Action Forum, June 8, 2022; Anna Ashton, “ASPI Note: 
What to Expect from the U.S.-Taiwan 21st Century Trade Initiative,” Asia Society 
Policy Institute, June 8, 2022; Inside Trade, “Taiwan, Left Out of IPEF, Agrees to a 
New Trade Initiative with U.S.,” June 1, 2022.
347. Tori Smith, “White House’s New Initiative with Taiwan Falls Short of a Free 
Trade Agreement,” American Action Forum, June 8, 2022.
348. Riley Walters, “U.S. and Taiwan Launch the ‘Initiative on 21st-Century 
Trade,’ ” Global Taiwan Institute, July 12, 2022, 12.
349. Xinhua, “Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council: Resolutely Oppose the 
Signing of Agreements with Sovereign Connotations or of an Official Nature between 
the United States and China’s Taiwan Region” (国台办：坚决反对美国与中国台湾地区
商签具有主权意涵或官方性质的协议), June 2, 2022. Translation.
350. Julia Bergstrom, “Taiwan’s Supply Chain Role in Transition,” American 
Chamber of Commerce in Taiwan, April 21, 2022.
351. American Institute in Taiwan, “Technology, Trade and Investment Collabora-
tion (TTIC).”
352. Ben Blanchard, “U.S., Taiwan Discuss Chips, to Cooperate under New Frame-
work,” Reuters, December 6, 2021.
353. Cheng Hung-ta and Frances Huang, “Economics Minister to Visit U.S. for 
TTIC Meeting,” Focus Taiwan, October 7, 2022.
354. Yimou Lee and Ben Blanchard, “Chipmaker TSMC Eyeing Expansion of 
Planned Arizona Plant: Sources,” Yahoo! Finance, May 4, 2021.
355. Yuka Hayishi and John D. McKinnon, “Taiwan Company Plans Texas Chip 
Wafer Factory—If Congress Approves Incentives,” Wall Street Journal, June 27, 2022.
356. Zhong Chenfang, “Another Taiwanese Wafer Fab Invests in the US-Taiwan 
“Friendshoring” Model to Strengthen Supply Chain Cooperation” (又一台灣晶圓大廠
投資美國 美台“友岸外包”模式加強供應鏈合作), Voice of America, June 30, 2022. Trans-
lation.
357. Nikkei Asia, “Transcript: Japan PM Kishida’s Speech at Shangri-La Dialogue,” 
June 11, 2022.
358. David Sachs, “What Is China Learning from Russia’s War in Ukraine?” For -
eign Affairs, May 16, 2022; Elliot Abrams, “The Ukraine War, China, and Taiwan,” 
Council on Foreign Relations, May 3, 2022; Center for Strategic and Internation-
al Studies, “Ukraine and Taiwan: Parallels and Early Lessons Learned,” March 22, 

660
2022; Andrew Scobell and Lucy Stevenson-Yang, “China Is Not Russia. Taiwan Is Not 
Ukraine,” United States Institute of Peace, March 4, 2022.
359. Amy Qin, “Taiwan, Eyeing Parallels to Ukraine, Condemns Russian Invasion,” 
New York Times, February 23, 2022; Joseph Bosco, “To Advance Democracy, Defend 
Taiwan and Ukraine,” Hill, December 7, 2021.
360. Amy Qin, “Taiwan, Eyeing Parallels to Ukraine, Condemns Russian Invasion,” 
New York Times, February 23, 2022.
361. Amy Qin, “Taiwan, Eyeing Parallels to Ukraine, Condemns Russian Invasion,” 
New York Times, February 23, 2022.
362. Kharis Templeman, “Taiwan Is Not Ukraine: Stop Linking Their Fates To-
gether,” War on the Rocks, January 27, 2022; Danielle Plentka, “The Case for Defend-
ing the Little Guy,” Foreign Policy, December 2, 2021.
363. Elliott Abrams, “The Ukraine War, China, and Taiwan,” Council on Foreign 
Relations, May 3, 2022.
364. Elliott Abrams, “The Ukraine War, China, and Taiwan,” Council on Foreign 
Relations, May 3, 2022; Liam Gibson, “Taiwan’s Taichung Harbor May Be Target in 
Chinese Invasion Plans: US Think Tank,” Taiwan News, August 4, 2021.
365. Kharis Templeman, “Taiwan Is Not Ukraine: Stop Linking Their Fates To-
gether,” War on the Rocks, January 27, 2022.
366. Taiwan Relations Act, Pub. L. No. 96–8, 1979.
367. Kharis Templeman, “Taiwan Is Not Ukraine: Stop Linking Their Fates To-
gether,” War on the Rocks, January 27, 2022.
368. Andrew Scobell and Lucy Stevenson-Yang, “China Is Not Russia. Taiwan Is 
Not Ukraine,” United States Institute of Peace, March 4, 2022.
369. Aaron Blake, “Biden’s Starkest Comments Yet on Defending Taiwan from 
China,” Washington Post, May 23, 2022; NPR, “President Biden Says the U.S. Will 
Defend Taiwan if China Invades,” May 23, 2022; Andrew Scobell and Lucy Steven-
son-Yang, “China Is Not Russia. Taiwan Is Not Ukraine,” United States Institute of 
Peace, March 4, 2022; Kevin Liptiak, “Biden Vows to Protect Taiwan in Event of 
Chinese Attack,” CNN, October 22, 2021; Reuters, “U.S. Position on Taiwan Remains 
Unchanged despite Biden Comment, Official says,” CNBC, August 20, 2021.
370. Andrew Scobell and Lucy Stevenson-Yang, “China Is Not Russia. Taiwan Is 
Not Ukraine,” United States Institute of Peace, March 4, 2022.
371. Qin Gang, “Chinese Ambassador: Where We Stand on Ukraine,” Washington 
Post, March 15, 2022.
372. Qin Gang, “Chinese Ambassador: Where We Stand on Ukraine,” Washington 
Post, March 15, 2022; Minnie Chan, “Why Beijing Thinks Taiwan Is Different from 
Ukraine,” South China Morning Post, March 10, 2022; Business Standard, “China 
Says Taiwan, Ukraine Issues Not Comparable,” March 7, 2022.
373. Lily Kuo, Vic Chiang, and Pei-Lin Wu, “Taiwan’s Leaders Try to Calm Fears 
over Ukraine Invasion, but Citizens Worry Their Island Will Be Next,” Washington 
Post, March 4, 2022; Reuters, “Taiwan Says Inappropriate to Link Its Situation to 
Ukraine’s,” February 28, 2022; Office of the President of the Republic of China (Tai-
wan), President Tsai Responds to Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine, Attends Groundbreak-
ing of Expanded Shipbuilding Facility, February 25, 2022; Reuters, “China Says Tai-
wan Is ‘Not Ukraine’ as Island Raises Alert Level,” February 23, 2022.
374. Lily Kuo, Vic Chiang, and Pei-Lin Wu, “Taiwan’s Leaders Try to Calm Fears 
over Ukraine Invasion, but Citizens Worry Their Island Will Be Next,” Washington 
Post, March 4, 2022; Voice of America, “Taiwan Sees Itself as Different from Ukraine,” 
February 28, 2022.
375. Katie Bo Lillis et al., “US Intelligence Officials Warn China Is ‘Working Hard’ 
to Be Able to Take Over Taiwan Militarily,” CNN, May 10, 2022.
376. Katie Bo Lillis et al., “US Intelligence Officials Warn China Is ‘Working Hard’ 
to Be Able to Take Over Taiwan Militarily,” CNN, May 10, 2022.
377. Lingling Wei, “Beijing Weighs How Far to Go in Backing Putin on Ukraine,” 
Wall Street Journal, February 16, 2022; Andrew Scobell, David Lai, and Roy Kam-
phausen, eds., Chinese Lessons from Other People’s Wars, U.S. Army War College, 
November 2011.
378. Bonnie Glaser, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on Challenges from Chinese Policy in 2022: Zero-Covid, 
Ukraine, and Pacific Diplomacy, August 3, 2022, 4.
379. People’s Daily, “Pursuing Absolute Security Will Only Worsen the Security Di-
lemma” (追求绝对安全只会强化安全困境（钟声）), April 10, 2022. Translation; China’s 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Vice Foreign Minister Le Yucheng Attends and Addresses 
the Fourth International Forum on Security and Strategy, March 19, 2022; China’s 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying’s Regular 
Press Conference on February 23, 2022, February 23, 2022.

661
380. Li Yuan, “How China Embraces Russian Propaganda and Its Version of the 
War,” New York Times, March 4, 2022.
381. John Feng, “China Suggests Attack on Taiwan Can’t Be Called ‘Invasion,’ ” 
Newsweek, April 27, 2022.
382. Mark Dallas, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on U.S.-China Competition in Supply Chains, May 31, 2022.
383. Xi Jinping, “Strive to Become the World’s Leading Scientific Center and Inno-
vation Highland,” Qiushi, June 2021. (努力成为世界主要科学中心和创新高地). Trans-
lation.
384. Han Xin, “Let More “Little Giants” Support “Big Innovation’ ” (让更多“小巨
人”撑起“大创新”), People’s Daily, November 29, 2021. Translation.
385. Claire Jones and Joseph Cotterill, “Russia’s FX Reserves Slip from Its Grasp,” 
Financial Times, February 28, 2022; White House, Joint Statement on Further Re-
strictive Economic Measures, February 26, 2022.
386. Hung Tran, “Wargaming a Western Freeze of China’s Foreign Reserves,” At-
lantic Council, April 29, 2022.
387. Zongyuan Zoe Liu, “China Is Hardening Itself for Economic War,” Foreign Pol-
icy, June 16, 2022.
388. Michael Pettis, “Changing the Top Global Currency Means Changing the Pat-
terns of Global Trade,” China Financial Markets, April 12, 2022.
389. Zongyuan Zoe Liu, “China Is Hardening Itself for Economic War,” Foreign Pol-
icy, June 16, 2022.
390. Orange Wang, “Xi Jinping Says China Must Be ‘Self-Sufficient’ in Energy, 
Food and Minerals amid Global Challenges,” South China Morning Post, December 
13, 2021.
391. Lauren Greenwood, “China’s Interest in U.S. Agriculture,” U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and Security Review Commission, May 26, 2022.
392. China Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Notice of the Three 
Ministries and Commissions on Printing and Distributing the “14th Five-Year” Raw 
Material Industry Development Plan, ( 三部委关于印发“十四五”原材料工业发展规划
的通知), December 21, 2021. Translation.
393. Zheng Xin, “Iron Ore Imports Hit Record in 2020,” China Daily, February 23, 
2021.
394. Alex Simoes and Cesar A. Hidalgo, “The Economic Complexity Observato-
ry: An Analytical Tool for Understanding the Dynamics of Economic Development.” 
Workshops at the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011; Mi-
chal Meidan, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Com-
mission, Hearing on U.S.-China Competition in Supply Chains, May 31, 2022.
395. David Sacks, “What Is China Learning from Russia’s War in Ukraine?” For -
eign Affairs, May 16, 2022; Agence France-Presse, “China ‘Carefully’ Studying Ukraine 
War as It Eyes Taiwan: CIA Chief,” Barron’s, May 7, 2022; Paul Dibbs, “China Will Be 
Watching and Learning from Russia’s Poor Performance in Ukraine,” ASPI Strategist, 
May 3, 2022; David Finkelstein, “Beijing’s Ukrainian Battle Lab,” War on the Rocks, 
May 2, 2022.
396. David Finkelstein, “Beijing’s Ukrainian Battle Lab,” War on the Rocks, May 
2, 2022.
397. David Sacks, “What Is China Learning from Russia’s War in Ukraine?” For -
eign Affairs, May 16, 2022.
398. Bonny Lin, “Implications of the Ukraine Crisis for U.S. Policy in the Indo Pa-
cific,” testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, 
Central Asia, and Nonproliferation, May 19, 2022, 5; David Sacks, “What Is China 
Learning from Russia’s War in Ukraine?” Foreign Affairs, May 16, 2022; David Fin-
kelstein, “Beijing’s Ukrainian Battle Lab,” War on the Rocks, May 2, 2022.
399. Bonny Lin, “Implications of the Ukraine Crisis for U.S. Policy in the Indo Pa-
cific,” testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, 
Central Asia, and Nonproliferation, May 19, 2022, 5; David Finkelstein, “Beijing’s 
Ukrainian Battle Lab,” War on the Rocks, May 2, 2022.
400. David Finkelstein, “Beijing’s Ukrainian Battle Lab,” War on the Rocks, May 
2, 2022.
401. David Finkelstein, “Beijing’s Ukrainian Battle Lab,” War on the Rocks, May 
2, 2022.
402. Steven Kee Myers and Amy Qin, “Both Sides of Taiwan Strait Are Closely 
Watching Ukraine’s Crisis,” New York Times, February 7, 202.
403. Steven Kee Myers and Amy Qin, “Both Sides of Taiwan Strait Are Closely 
Watching Ukraine’s Crisis,” New York Times, February 7, 202.

662
404. David Cohen, “Taiwan Learning Lessons from Ukraine’s Stout Resistance, 
Foreign Minister Says,” Politico, May 1, 2022; Bi-khim Hsiao, “Ukraine Has Inspired 
Taiwan. We Must Stand against Authoritarianism,” Washington Post, March 24, 2022.
405. David Cohen, “Taiwan Learning Lessons from Ukraine’s Stout Resistance, 
Foreign Minister Says,” Politico, May 1, 2022.
406. David Cohen, “Taiwan Learning Lessons from Ukraine’s Stout Resistance, 
Foreign Minister Says,” Politico, May 1, 2022.
407. Jeffrey W. Hornung, “Ukraine’s Lessons for Taiwan,” War on the Rocks, March 
17, 2022.
408. Jeffrey W. Hornung, “Ukraine’s Lessons for Taiwan,” War on the Rocks, March 
17, 2022.
409. David Sacks, “What Is China Learning from Russia’s War in Ukraine?” For -
eign Affairs, May 16, 2022.
410. David Cohen, “Taiwan Learning Lessons from Ukraine’s Stout Resistance, 
Foreign Minister Says,” Politico, May 1, 2022.
411. David Cohen, “Taiwan Learning Lessons from Ukraine’s Stout Resistance, 
Foreign Minister Says,” Politico, May 1, 2022.
412. David Sacks, “What Is China Learning from Russia’s War in Ukraine?” For -
eign Affairs, May 16, 2022; Jeffrey W. Hornung, “Ukraine’s Lessons for Taiwan,” War 
on the Rocks, March 17, 2022; Admiral (Ret.) Lee His-min and Michael Hunzeker, 
“The View of Ukraine from Taiwan: Get Real about Territorial Defense,” War on the 
Rocks, March 15, 2022.
413. James Barron, “Why Taiwan Can’t Copy Ukraine’s Civil Defense Blueprint,” 
Diplomat, May 17, 2022; David Spencer, “Taiwan Must Prioritize Civil Defense Prepa-
rations Now,” Taiwan News, March 11, 2022.
414. Taiwan Ministry of National Defense, Republic of China National Defense Re-
port 2021.
415. Bradley Martin et al., “Implications of a Coercive Quarantine of Taiwan by 
the People’s Republic of China,” RAND Corporation, 2022.
416. Ian Easton, “Hostile Harbors: Taiwan’s Ports and PLA Invasion Plans,” Project 
2049 Institute, July 22, 2021.
417. Jack Lau, “What Would Happen if Mainland China Cut Off Taiwan’s Energy 
Supplies?” South China Morning Post, April 10, 2022; Taiwan Bureau of Energy, Sta-
ble Supply of Natural Gas; Taiwan Bureau of Energy, Monthly Data on Domestic Oil 
Safety Stock (國內石油安全存量月資料). Translation.
418. Rosemary A. Kelanic, “Oil Security and Conventional War,” Council on Foreign 
Relations, October 2013.
419. Evan Montgomery and Toshi Yoshiara, “Leaderless, Cut Off, and Alone: The 
Risks to Taiwan in the Wake of Ukraine,” War on the Rocks, April 5, 2022.
420. Lara Seligman, “ ‘Deadly Serious’: U.S. Quietly Urging Taiwan to Follow 
Ukraine Playbook for Countering China,” Politico, May 19, 2022.