(601)
PART V
TAIWAN AND HONG KONG
CHAPTER 11: TAIWAN
Executive Summary
We have entered a crucial phase in Beijing’s longstanding 
efforts to impose sovereignty over Taiwan. China is rapidly ad -
vancing toward its goal of being prepared to take Taiwan by 
force—while Taiwan and the United States strive to maintain 
the capacity to deter a Chinese invasion. China’s persistent 
military activities near Taiwan, combined with new capabili -
ties such as large amphibious assault ships and mobile piers, 
have enhanced China’s capacity to blockade or launch an in -
vasion of Taiwan with little advance warning. Beijing has also 
continued to escalate its multifaceted pressure campaign tar -
geting Taiwan through military threats, economic coercion, and 
malign influence activities. Over the past year, Beijing has fo -
cused much of its information warfare activities on exacerbat -
ing domestic political divisions in Taiwan and driving a wedge 
between Taiwan and the United States. Moreover, China has 
continued its efforts to isolate Taiwan in the international are -
na by pressuring other countries to adopt Beijing’s preferred 
positions and language regarding Taiwan.
In response to China’s escalating pressure campaign, Taiwan 
has made progress enhancing its military deterrence and social 
resilience through larger and more realistic military exercises, 
efforts to accelerate the acquisition of new asymmetric defense 
capabilities, and new measures to counter Chinese malign influ -
ence. Taiwan has also continued to leverage its crucial role in 
technology supply chains—particularly its dominant position in 
advanced semiconductor manufacturing—to hasten economic di -
versification away from China. The United States has continued 
to support Taiwan through weapons sales and security assistance 
while working with Taiwan to enhance economic ties and build 
secure supply chains.
Key Findings
 • Beijing is attempting to exploit domestic divisions in Taiwan 
by continuing its two-pronged approach to cross-Strait re -
lations. On the one hand, Beijing has issued harsh threats 
against Taiwan’s Democratic Progressive Party (DPP)-led 
government, which it accuses of promoting Taiwan indepen -

602
dence. On the other hand, Beijing has also stepped up efforts 
to court opposition leaders, business interests, and youth in 
Taiwan through promises of economic benefits and cross-
Strait exchange programs.
 • In light of China’s near-constant military training activities 
and maneuvers near Taiwan, as well as the People’s Liber -
ation Army’s (PLA) improved military hardware and oper -
ational readiness, U.S. and Taiwan military officials have 
warned that the PLA could implement a blockade within “a 
matter of hours” and would potentially need only “minimal 
conversion time” prior to an attack on Taiwan. 1
 • In addition to intensifying its military pressure on Taiwan, 
Beijing has also expanded a multifaceted campaign to weak -
en Taiwan’s will to resist through economic coercion and 
inducements, espionage, information warfare, and undersea 
cable sabotage. Chinese propaganda has focused especially 
on attempting to sow doubt about the U.S. commitment to 
Taiwan by fomenting uncertainty surrounding U.S. policies 
on Ukraine, tariffs, and semiconductors.
 • Taiwan has made progress improving military readiness, 
enhancing societal resilience, and diversifying its economy. 
Nevertheless, bureaucratic inertia in the military as well 
as political gridlock between the DPP-controlled executive 
branch and the Kuomintang (KMT)-controlled legislature 
have cast uncertainty around efforts to speed up the mod -
ernization of Taiwan’s defenses.
 • Despite rising tensions with China, Taiwan’s economy con -
tinued to perform strongly, driven by insatiable global de -
mand for semiconductors and electronics. Taiwan’s continued 
leadership in technology manufacturing processes coupled 
with efforts to diversify its trade and investment partners 
have begun to shift dependence away from China, limiting 
the sting of Beijing’s economic pressure campaign.
 • Taiwan is now among the United States’ top ten trading 
partners, with goods exported to the United States overtak -
ing those to China for the first time in over two decades. 
Taiwan’s chip manufacturers have pledged record levels of 
foreign direct investment (FDI) to build semiconductor man -
ufacturing facilities in the United States. As China pursues 
a strategy of technological and manufacturing dominance, 
Taiwan’s companies will be important partners to prevent 
over-reliance on Chinese supply chains.
Introduction
The daily drumbeat of news surrounding tensions in the Taiwan 
Strait can create the illusion that China is only slowly ratcheting 
up the pressure on Taiwan. Yet a broader perspective illustrates the 
remarkable rapidity with which Beijing has escalated its multidi -
mensional pressure campaign against Taiwan:

603
 • Over the past five years, PLA incursions into Taiwan’s air de -
fense identification zone (ADIZ) have increased dramatically—
from only 20 in 2019 to 3,075 in 2024. 2
 • Over the past four years, PLA aircraft crossing the de facto me -
dian line in the Taiwan Strait have increased 6,591 percent—
from only 22 instances in 2020 to 1,472 in 2024. 3
 • Over the past four years, the number of people charged with 
espionage against Taiwan on behalf of China has increased 967 
percent, from six cases in 2020 to 64 in 2024. 4
 • Over the past two years, the number of countries that have 
signed on to statements endorsing Beijing’s “One China princi -
ple” has increased by 133 percent—from 51 countries in Febru -
ary 2023 to 119 countries as of January 2025. 5
These stark statistics show that China’s pressure campaign 
against Taiwan has transitioned to a new phase, and the window of 
opportunity to ensure the continued effectiveness of deterrence from 
Taiwan and the United States is shrinking. * 6
Beijing Continues to Escalate Its Pressure 
Campaign against Taiwan
On April 2, 2025, Chinese officials hosted the vice chair of Tai -
wan’s main opposition party for a meeting in China and promised 
to “strengthen cross-Strait exchange and cooperation” to “bring 
benefits” to the people of Taiwan. 7 The meeting overlapped with 
the second day of the PLA’s Strait Thunder-2025A military exer -
cises, large-scale drills encircling Taiwan that Beijing framed as 
a “stern warning” to Taiwan “separatist” forces. 8 The split screen 
of Chinese officials making friendly overtures to opposition lead -
ers while simultaneously carrying out aggressive military drills 
encapsulates the two-track strategy of inducements and threats 
that has been a hallmark of Beijing’s Taiwan policy in recent 
years.
Taiwan’s Domestic Political Divisions Have Deepened, but 
Large Majorities Continue to Oppose Unification with 
China
The two main political parties in Taiwan—the DPP and KMT—
have very different visions for how to manage cross-Strait relations. 
The DPP has been more forceful than the KMT in criticizing Chi -
na’s pressure campaigns against Taiwan. 9 The DPP’s overarching 
strategy for countering Chinese pressure has focused on increasing 
defense spending and improving asymmetric defense capabilities to 
deter a Chinese invasion, enacting stringent new measures to count-
er Chinese malign influence activities, and leveraging Taiwan’s key 
role in technology supply chains to reduce its economic dependence 
on China. 10 In contrast, the KMT has advocated for maintaining 
productive cross-Strait dialogue to reduce tensions and lower the 
possibility of a miscalculation. 11 The KMT has defined its approach 
* This chapter’s findings are based on meetings with the Taiwan Economic and Cultural Repre-
sentative Office; the KMT Representative to the United States; the American Institute in Taiwan; 
and the Research Institute for Democracy, Society, and Emerging Technology as well as open 
source research.

604
to managing cross-Strait relations as a “2D Strategy” (defense and 
dialogue) of enhancing Taiwan’s defense capabilities while also 
maintaining communication channels with Beijing. 12
Taiwan’s domestic politics in 2025 have been defined by division 
and gridlock between the two major parties. Since Taiwan’s Jan -
uary 2024 elections, the DPP has controlled the executive branch 
under President Lai Ching-te, while the KMT has held control 
over the legislature. In January 2025, the opposition-controlled 
legislature imposed significant cuts and froze a portion of the Lai 
Administration’s budget request, including cutting approximately 
$280 million (1.3 percent) of the defense budget and freezing an 
additional $3 billion (14 percent). 13 DPP leaders have criticized 
the KMT for hampering efforts to improve Taiwan’s defense ca -
pabilities, while the KMT has criticized the Lai Administration 
for recklessly provoking Beijing and using Chinese infiltration as 
a pretext to violate the civil liberties of people who disagree with 
DPP policies. Civil society groups aligned with the DPP filed doz -
ens of recall petitions targeting KMT legislators in an attempt to 
reestablish a DPP majority and smooth the way for implementing 
President Lai’s desired policies on defense and national security. 
However, recall elections held on July 26 and August 23, 2025, 
failed to unseat any opposition lawmakers, likely ensuring that 
Taiwan’s government will remain divided until the next presiden -
tial and legislative elections in 2028. 14
Yet despite Taiwan’s political divisions and Beijing’s relentless 
propaganda and pressure campaigns, opinion polling suggests the 
majority of people in Taiwan continue to reject China’s positions 
and remain willing to fight to defend Taiwan against a potential 
Chinese invasion. According to polling from June 2025, only about 
6.4 percent of Taiwan’s population supported eventual unification 
with China. 15 An opinion survey conducted on behalf of Taiwan’s 
Mainland Affairs Council in April 2025 showed that 84.4 percent 
of respondents opposed “one country, two systems,” 82.5 percent op -
posed the statement “Taiwan is a part of China’s territory, and Tai-
wan has never been a country,” and 80.6 percent opposed China’s 
“One China principle.” 16 The March 2025 results of a long-running 
survey found that 63 percent of respondents said they were willing 
to resist a Chinese invasion “at all costs.”  17
Beijing’s Rhetoric Aims to Exacerbate Domestic Divisions in 
Taiwan and Justify a Potential Future Invasion
Beijing’s recent official statements have sought to exacerbate 
political divisions within Taiwan by reiterating violent threats 
against the DPP-led government (which Beijing accuses of pro -
moting “Taiwan independence”) while also promising to confer 
benefits on opposition political leaders, the business communi -
ty, and Taiwan’s youth. Recent speeches by top Chinese officials 
have repeated China’s calls for “resolutely striking” Taiwan in -
dependence forces and proclaimed that “Taiwan independence 
separatists who play with fire will only burn themselves.”  18 On 
March 13, Chen Binhua, the spokesperson for Beijing’s Taiwan 
Affairs Office, declared that Taiwan separatists would have their 
“bodies smashed to pieces and their bones ground to powder.”  19 

605
Yet the most noticeable shift in Beijing’s rhetoric on Taiwan over 
the past year has been a greater emphasis on courting elements 
of Taiwan’s society by promising material benefits to people and 
groups in Taiwan perceived as friendly toward Beijing. At the 
February 2025 Taiwan Work Conference, Wang Huning, Beijing’s 
top official in charge of Taiwan policy, introduced the new concept 
of “shaping the inevitable reunification of the motherland,” refer -
ring to actions China can take to create the conditions for unifi -
cation with Taiwan. In his speech, Wang called for “letting Taiwan 
compatriots share in the opportunities and fruits of Chinese-style 
modernization and development” by supporting Taiwan business -
people in China and creating opportunities for youth from Tai -
wan to “pursue and fulfill their dreams” in China. 20 Likewise, the 
only significant new language on Taiwan in Chinese Premier Li 
Qiang’s 2025 Government Work Report  called for “improving sys -
tems and policies to promote cross-Strait economic and cultural 
exchanges and cooperation.”  21
While Chinese statements aimed at international audiences 
have denied any imminent plans to invade Taiwan and reiterated 
Beijing’s preference for “peaceful unification,” Beijing’s messaging 
directed at its own citizens has struck a more urgent tone and 
articulated potential justifications for invasion. 22 In English-lan -
guage publications, leading Chinese scholars with close ties to 
Beijing have claimed that China does not have a timetable for 
unification with Taiwan and remains optimistic about the pros -
pects for peaceful unification. 23 For example, in a December 2024 
article in Foreign Affairs , Yan Xuetong, one of China’s most influ -
ential foreign policy thinkers, wrote that China and the United 
States were “unlikely to go to war” over Taiwan in the next four 
years and that “China is not about to draw up a timetable for 
reunification with Taiwan when it is concerned primarily with its 
own GDP [gross domestic product] growth.”  24 However, China’s 
Taiwan Affairs Office referred to Dr. Yan’s article as only “the 
personal opinion of an academic” and later said that China would 
take “decisive measures” if Taiwan’s “provocations” “crossed the 
red line.”  25 In contrast, when writing for domestic audiences, 
Chinese academics have stated that “the unification of the moth -
erland cannot keep being postponed” and have called for instill -
ing Chinese society with the notion that “unification could hap -
pen at any time.”  26 Recent commentaries published in Chinese 
state-run media have employed some of Beijing’s most aggressive 
rhetoric to date, referring to Taiwan’s President Lai as an “utterly 
evil creator of war.”  27 For example, an April 2025 commentary in 
the People’s Daily accused President Lai of promoting “Taiwan in -
dependence” and stated that “Taiwan independence means war,” 
articulating a potential justification for invading Taiwan and 
blaming it on Lai. 28 In August 2025, a People’s Daily editorial 
accused the DPP of a “dangerous inclination toward increasing 
Nazification”—echoing the rhetoric Russia’s President Vladimir 
Putin used to justify his invasion of Ukraine. 29

606
Does Beijing Have a Timeline for Taking Taiwan?
In discussions regarding whether Beijing has a timeline for 
taking Taiwan, analysts have most frequently pointed to three 
dates for a potential Chinese invasion: 2027, 2035, and 2049. 30 
These dates are based on public reports about U.S. intelligence as-
sessments as well as Beijing’s own statements regarding Taiwan 
and the PLA’s military modernization ambitions.31 Nevertheless, 
Beijing has never publicly acknowledged a specific deadline for 
taking Taiwan, and General Secretary of the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP) Xi Jinping reportedly denied having plans to invade 
Taiwan in 2027 or 2035 during his November 2023 meeting with 
then–U.S. President Joe Biden. 32 Xi has said on two occasions, 
however, that the Taiwan issue “should not be passed down gen -
eration after generation,” which has been interpreted by some to 
indicate Xi’s intent to “solve” the issue during his lifetime.33
2027: Beijing’s date for being prepared to invade Taiwan
According to public reports about U.S. intelligence assessments, 
Xi instructed the PLA to be capable of conducting a successful in -
vasion of Taiwan by 2027—a deadline intended to accelerate the 
development of the PLA’s capabilities, but not necessarily a target 
invasion date.34 The year 2027 is significant in that it will mark 
the 100th anniversary of the founding of China’s PLA, and Xi has 
announced the goal of accelerating the “mechanization, informati-
zation, and intelligentization” of China’s military by that date.35
2035: Beijing’s date for complete military modernization 
and constructing a high-speed railway to Taiwan
Analysts have also pointed to 2035 as a potential deadline for 
China to take Taiwan. 36 Beijing has stated its aim to “basically 
complete the modernization of national defense and the military 
by 2035.” 37 Moreover, China has also announced plans to complete 
a high-speed railway connecting Taiwan to China by that date. In 
2023, China opened a high-speed rail line along the Taiwan Strait 
in Fujian Province and announced that it had built an “integrated 
multidimensional transportation network” that would make it “tech-
nically possible” to create a high-speed transport passage linking 
the province with Taiwan.38 However, as officials in Taiwan have 
dismissed the high-speed rail project, it is likely Beijing could only 
achieve this goal if it had already gained control over Taiwan.39
2049: Beijing’s date for realizing “the great rejuvenation of 
the Chinese nation”
Beijing has clearly indicated its goal to “unify” with Taiwan 
prior to the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Re -
public of China (PRC) in 2049. Xi has long called for completing 
the “rejuvenation of the Chinese nation” by 2049, and in his re -
port to the CCP’s 20th National Party Congress in 2022, Xi stated 
that “solving the Taiwan question” is an “inevitable requirement 
for realizing the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.”  40 Xi 
has also set the goal of making the PLA a “world-class” military 
by mid-century.41

607
Beijing Has Escalated Military Pressure on Taiwan and 
Enhanced Its Capabilities for an Invasion
In addition to its harsh rhetoric and economic pressure campaign 
against Taiwan’s government, Beijing has continued to escalate mil-
itary pressure on Taiwan both through near-daily military opera -
tions near Taiwan and large-scale exercises designed to rehearse in -
vasion and blockade scenarios. On April 9, 2025, Commander of the 
U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM) Admiral Samuel Pap-
aro testified to the House Armed Services Committee that “the PLA 
escalated military pressure against Taiwan by 300 percent in 2024, 
through activities such as Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ) 
entries and centerline crossings.”  42 As of October 10, 2025, there 
have been 3,056 PLA incursions into Taiwan’s ADIZ this year, up 
33 percent from 2,301 incursions during the same period in 2024. 43 
In addition to the near-daily menace of PLA aircraft crossing into 
Taiwan’s ADIZ, the PLA has also continued to stage large-scale mil-
itary drills encircling Taiwan, framing them as punishment for the 
supposed provocations of Taiwan’s government. In his April 2025 
testimony, Admiral Paparo stated that these “aggressive maneuvers 
around Taiwan are not just exercises—they are dress rehearsals for 
forced unification.” 44 On April 1–2, 2025, the PLA conducted the 
Strait Thunder-2025A military exercises encircling Taiwan, which 
were similar in scope to the Joint Sword drills conducted in 2023 
and 2024. Over the course of the two-day exercise, the PLA deployed 
135 aircraft, 38 naval vessels, and 12 other official vessels in the 
areas surrounding Taiwan. 45 Like previous large-scale military ex -
ercises around Taiwan, the Strait Thunder-2025A drills involved the 
PLA’s Shandong aircraft carrier group as well as participation by 
coast guard vessels. 46 PLA military experts stated that the April 
2025 drills focused on occupying key maritime chokepoints to si -
multaneously cut off Taiwan’s energy imports, the support lines of 
foreign militaries, and Taiwan’s exit routes to the outside world. 47
Besides highly publicized named military exercises, Beijing has 
also conducted increasingly large-scale unannounced exercises de -
signed to normalize PLA activity near Taiwan, making it more dif -
ficult to detect if China is preparing for an actual blockade or in -
vasion and potentially dramatically reducing the time Taiwan and 
the United States would have to respond. In December 2024, the 
PLA deployed nearly 90 ships in waters stretching from the East 
China Sea to the South China Sea in its largest military drills near 
Taiwan in almost 30 years. 48 Unlike other exercises focused on en -
circling Taiwan, the December 2024 exercises focused on anti-access/
area denial across the entire first island chain. 49 Beijing did not 
announce the exercises in advance, and China’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs declined to answer questions pertaining to the drills. 50 On 
February 26, 2025, the PLA launched additional drills off the coast 
of Taiwan without prior warning, which China’s Ministry of Nation-
al Defense later called “routine exercises.”  51 China also conducted 
unannounced military exercises near Taiwan on March 17, 2025, 
which China’s Foreign Ministry later framed as punishment for the 
U.S. decision to remove language that the United States “does not 
support Taiwan independence” from its factsheet on U.S.-Taiwan re-
lations.52

608
Beijing Has Enhanced Its Military Capabilities for a Potential 
Invasion of Taiwan
In addition to China’s near-constant military activities near Tai -
wan, the PLA has also made progress toward improving its military 
hardware and operational readiness for a potential amphibious in -
vasion of Taiwan.
 • In January 2025, reports emerged that China had developed 
new self-propelled landing barges that could enable the PLA 
to overcome many of the logistical challenges to an amphib -
ious invasion of Taiwan by allowing it to transport large 
volumes of heavy combat equipment quickly over difficult 
terrain along Taiwan’s western coastline. 53 In March 2025, 
China conducted practice maneuvers in which three of the 
new barges linked together via extendable bridges, creating a 
2,700-foot mobile pier that could reportedly be used to unload 
hundreds of armored vehicles in a day. 54 Military analysts 
have concluded that the barges “significantly improve the 
PLA’s ability to conduct over-the-shore logistics in a Taiwan 
invasion scenario.”  55
 • On December 27, 2024, the PLA unveiled its new Type 076 
warship, which analysts have described as “the world’s largest 
amphibious assault ship” and “the world’s first drone aircraft 
carrier.” 56 The Type 076 warship can launch manned fighter 
jets and drones in addition to helicopters, which Chinese mili -
tary analysts have claimed could facilitate a faster amphibious 
invasion of Taiwan.57
 • At a September 3, 2025, military parade in Beijing commem -
orating China’s WWII victory, the PLA unveiled new weap -
ons that could be used to support an invasion of Taiwan, in -
cluding hypersonic anti-ship missiles that could target U.S. 
warships, new combat drones to help navigate mountainous 
terrain, and lighter tanks designed to better survive drone 
strikes.58
 • China unveiled its J-35A fifth-generation stealth fighter jet in 
November 2024, which analysts have argued would likely fly 
over Taiwan’s eastern coast to assist with an amphibious inva -
sion or help enforce a no-fly zone if Beijing attempted to impose 
a blockade or quarantine of Taiwan. 59
 • In January 2025, Fujian Province announced reforms aimed at 
professionalizing its militia forces, which would likely play a 
key role in a military conflict with Taiwan. 60 While in the past, 
the militia unit has been poorly trained and compensated, the 
new reforms enhanced the financial and reputational rewards 
for those serving in the militia—and particularly its most elite 
members.61

609
China-Linked Vessels Suspected of Sabotaging Taiwan’s 
Undersea Cables as a Form of Gray Zone Pressure
Military analysts have long warned that China could attempt 
to sever Taiwan’s undersea cables to cut off its communications 
during an invasion. 62 Taiwan is highly vulnerable to undersea 
cable sabotage, as it relies on 24 undersea cables to handle more 
than 99 percent of its internet traffic and external communica -
tions.63 In 2021, researchers gained access to a Chinese database 
of strategic “points of interest” in Taiwan, which included numer-
ous undersea cable landing stations. 64 Moreover, for at least the 
past 15 years, Chinese scientists at research institutions with 
ties to the PLA have actively researched new techniques for cut -
ting undersea cables, acquiring numerous patents for technol -
ogies designed to cut deep-sea cables cheaply and efficiently. 65 
In February 2025, Chinese scientists affiliated with the China 
Ship Scientific Research Center—which is under U.S. sanctions 
for supporting the PLA—published a new design for an “electric 
cutting device for deep-sea cables” reportedly capable of severing 
armored cables at depths of more than 13,000 feet. 66 If China 
successfully severed all of the undersea cables serving Taiwan, 
it would have devastating consequences, paralyzing government 
and military communications and costing Taiwan’s economy an 
estimated $55.6 million per day. 67
China has already deployed undersea cable sabotage as a gray 
zone tactic to intimidate Taiwan. Taiwan has suffered cable dis -
ruptions with particularly high frequency in recent years—at 
least 27 incidents between 2019 and 2023—some of which the 
Taiwan government has attributed to sabotage by China-linked 
vessels.68 In many cases, Taiwan’s cables have been damaged by a 
“shadow fleet” of dilapidated Chinese-owned vessels that conduct 
little legitimate business and typically operate under flags of con -
venience.69 There have already been multiple such incidents in 
2025. On January 3, a Chinese-owned, Cameroon-flagged vessel 
damaged an undersea cable near Taiwan’s port of Keelung while 
engaging in highly irregular movement patterns. 70 The ship ap -
pears to have been operating under a fake name linked to a sep -
arate automatic identification system (AIS) transponder at the 
time it damaged the cable. 71 In a suspiciously similar case the 
following month, a Chinese-owned, Togo-flagged ship damaged 
an undersea cable connecting Taiwan and its outlying island of 
Penghu after loitering near Taiwan for several days while ignor -
ing radio messages from the Taiwan Coast Guard asking it to 
leave. The vessel was carrying the AIS transponder for a ship 
on Taiwan’s shadow fleet blacklist, but the ship identified itself 
to Taiwan’s Coast Guard under a different name and was using 
an International Maritime Organization (IMO) identifier number 
linked to yet another vessel. 72

610
China-Linked Vessels Suspected of Sabotaging Taiwan’s 
Undersea Cables as a Form of Gray Zone Pressure—  
Continued
Figure 1: Incidents of Chinese Vessels Sabotaging Undersea Cables near 
Taiwan in 2025
SOUTH CHINA SEA
EAST CHINA SEA
CHINA
TAIWANSTRAIT
TAIWAN
Kinmen
(Taiwan)
Matsu
Islands
(Taiwan)
Fuzhou
Taipei
2/25/2025
1/3/2025
Tainan
HONGTAI58
SHUNXING39
Kaohsiung
!
!
12/5/2024 to 1/3/2025
1/16/2025 to 2/25/2025
Location of 
Cable Break
Recorded Routes of Chinese-
Owned Vessels Engaged in 
Cable Sabotage*
Undersea Cables
Chinese-Owned Vessels 
Suspected of Cable Cutting!
50 mi0 25
* Breaks in the line indicate the ship turned off AIS transponder   
   transmitting position data
Source: Various.73
Beijing Seeks to Weaken the Taiwan People’s Will to 
Resist through a Multifaceted Campaign to Infiltrate, 
Destabilize, and Isolate Taiwan
In addition to escalating its military pressure against Taiwan, 
Beijing has also continued to increase efforts to intimidate Taiwan 
and exacerbate its internal divisions through gray zone pressure 

611
that has included a wide range of malign influence activities and 
coercive tactics.
Efforts to Intimidate and Infiltrate Taiwan’s Government and 
Society
Taiwan government reports have indicated that Beijing has con -
tinued to increase malign influence activities aimed at infiltrating 
and destabilizing Taiwan’s society. According to an April 2025 report 
by Taiwan’s National Security Bureau, cases of Taiwan citizens con-
ducting espionage for China have increased sharply over the past 
several years. In 2024, Taiwan charged 64 people with spying for 
China—a very significant increase from an average of about 11 cas -
es per year in 2020–2022. 74 In total, prosecutors have charged 159 
people with spying for China since 2020, about 60 percent of whom 
were active-duty or retired military personnel.75 A separate January 
2025 analysis by Taiwan’s National Security Bureau found that Chi-
na has focused in particular on targeting military personnel with 
large personal debts and used the promise of financial assistance to 
pressure them to turn over sensitive information and participate in 
united front work. 76
In addition to espionage, China has continued to expand its use of 
cyberattacks and information warfare targeted at Taiwan’s govern -
ment and society. Since the beginning of 2024, Taiwan government 
websites have suffered an average of approximately 2.2 million cy -
berattacks per day, the vast majority of them from China. 77 As of 
April 2025, Taiwan intelligence agents had already collected 510,000 
examples of propaganda disseminated this year by Chinese agents 
via Facebook, TikTok, Dcard, and other social media platforms pop -
ular in Taiwan. 78 Taiwan’s intelligence agents have concluded that 
China has been using internet trolls, bots, and generative artificial 
intelligence (AI) tools to shape online discourse on controversial top -
ics like Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company’s (TSMC) 
investments in the United States as part of a coordinated cognitive 
warfare campaign designed to stoke social divisions. 79 Chinese unit-
ed front organizations have also offered financial rewards for social 
media influencers in Taiwan to integrate pro-CCP messaging into 
their content.80
Beijing has also stepped up efforts to intimidate people it labels 
“Taiwan separatists.” In at least one instance, Beijing has threat -
ened the safety of a high-level Taiwan official traveling overseas. In 
June 2025, Czech military intelligence officials revealed that when 
Taiwan’s then–Vice President-elect Bi-Khim Hsiao (whom Beijing 
has labeled a “separatist”) visited the country the previous year, 
Chinese officials plotted to cause a car crash involving her vehicle. 81 
Beijing has also threatened to enforce its laws criminalizing support 
for Taiwan independence extraterritorially. In 2024, Beijing revised 
its Anti-Secession Law to make promoting Taiwan independence a 
crime punishable by up to death. 82 As the law does not specify that 
it is only applicable to citizens of Taiwan, it could theoretically ap -
ply to anyone regardless of citizenship. 83 According to intelligence 
gathered by Taiwan, during China’s February 2025 Taiwan Work 
Conference, a senior Chinese official provided instructions to state 
security units to “implement” these new guidelines overseas in coun-

612
tries friendly to China, raising fears that someone could be arrested 
on vague charges of promoting Taiwan independence while traveling 
in countries such as Cambodia and Laos that maintain close secu -
rity ties with China. 84 In April 2025, Cambodia complied with a 
request by Beijing to deport 180 Taiwan citizens to China who had 
been detained in Cambodia for allegedly engaging in cyber crime. 
Under pressure from the Chinese government, Cambodia refused 
even to provide Taiwan with the names of its citizens who were 
sent to China. 85 While it is unclear how Beijing will enforce these 
measures, China has already set up the legal mechanisms to arrest 
someone in a third country on charges of promoting Taiwan inde -
pendence, extradite them to China, and punish them with up to the 
death penalty.
At the same time, Beijing has sought to strengthen pro-China 
sentiment in Taiwan by continuing to invite opposition political 
leaders to visit China and organizing highly politicized cross-Strait 
exchange programs targeted at youth groups in Taiwan.
 • In April 2025, KMT Vice Chair Andrew Hsia led a delegation to 
China to meet with the Director of China’s Taiwan Affairs Office 
Song Tao and visit Henan Province to worship the legendary 
Yellow Emperor, a symbol of Chinese cultural identity. 86
 • Former President Ma Ying-jeou visited China in June (his 
fourth trip to China over the past several years) to attend the 
Straits Forum, an annual meeting devoted to cross-Strait ex -
change, alongside top CCP leaders including Wang Huning. 87
 • A former chairperson of the KMT, Hung Hsiu-chu, as well as 
KMT veterans of WWII, attended a September 3 military pa -
rade in Beijing commemorating China’s WWII victory at the 
invitation of the Chinese government. 88 In the leadup to the 
parade, Chinese state media asserted that Taiwan’s “return” to 
China was among the “fruits of victory in WWII” and an “im -
portant component of the postwar international order.”  89
 • In addition to courting opposition political leaders, China has 
continued to promote heavily subsidized trips aimed at incul -
cating youth in Taiwan with Beijing’s preferred narratives. In 
December 2024, the Xinjiang Provincial Federation of Taiwan 
Compatriots, a Xinjiang-based united front organization, adver -
tised a heavily subsidized nine-day tour to Xinjiang for Taiwan 
youth, which critics have called an attempt to distract Taiwan’s 
young people from large-scale human rights abuses in the prov -
ince.90
 • The Ma Ying-jeou Foundation has also supported several youth 
trips to China during the past year. In December 2024, the 
Foundation led a group of Taiwan youth on a tour of China 
that attempted to inculcate shared historical memory by vis -
iting sites associated with Japanese atrocities against China 
during WWII.91 In February 2025, the foundation led another 
youth group on a trip to Beijing to visit cultural sites like the 
Forbidden City and locations such as a Xiaomi electric car fac -
tory intended to create an impression of China as a high-tech 
land of opportunity.92

613
Beijing Has Convinced Numerous Countries to Adopt Its 
Preferred Language on Taiwan
Beijing has made extraordinary progress over the past two years 
in convincing countries to adopt positions and make statements 
containing its preferred language on Taiwan. As of February 2023, 
only 51 countries had adopted statements explicitly recognizing Bei -
jing’s position that the PRC is the legitimate government of all of 
China and that Taiwan is a part of China. 93 As of January 2025, 
119 countries (62 percent of UN member states) had signed on to 
statements endorsing Beijing’s “One China principle” and PRC sov-
ereignty over Taiwan—an additional 68 countries in just the past 
two years alone. 94 According to an analysis by the Economist, 70 
countries have adopted statements supporting “all” measures by 
China to achieve national unification. While it remains unknown 
how different countries understand the meaning of such statements, 
Beijing would likely claim that they constitute support for its right 
to take Taiwan by force. 95
Beijing Expanded Its Sophisticated and Well-Resourced 
Propaganda Campaign to Sow Uncertainty about the U.S. 
Commitment to Taiwan
In the context of its broader global campaign to isolate Taiwan, 
Beijing has attempted to drive a wedge between Taiwan and the 
United States by promoting propaganda encouraging people in Tai -
wan to be skeptical of U.S. support. Authoritative Chinese scholars 
with close ties to Beijing have claimed that the Trump Administra -
tion is less committed to Taiwan’s defense and more likely to “make 
a deal” over Taiwan than previous U.S. administrations. 96 In June 
2025, Xiamen University Professor Wei Leijie argued that the Trump 
Administration’s “transactional approach” to great power relations 
presented Beijing with a “once-in-a-century opportunity” to strike a 
deal over Taiwan. 97 Chinese academics have also argued that per -
ceptions of U.S. President Donald Trump as being less committed to 
Taiwan will help fuel skepticism toward the United States within 
Taiwan. A recent report by the Shanghai Institute for International 
Studies evaluating the influence of the 2024 U.S. presidential elec -
tion on Taiwan argued that President Trump’s past statements on 
Taiwan provide evidence for “America skepticism” in Taiwan and the 
notion that the United States might “abandon” Taiwan.98
Beijing has also actively sought to foment “America skepticism” in 
Taiwan through state-produced propaganda regarding TSMC’s in -
vestments in the United States, U.S. tariffs, and U.S. policy toward 
Ukraine. In February 2025, China’s Taiwan Affairs Office claimed 
that Taiwan’s DPP government was “selling out the interests and 
well-being of Taiwan’s people and businesses” by “giving away Tai -
wan’s semiconductor industry as a souvenir” to the United States.99 
After TSMC announced an additional $100 billion investment in 
the United States, China’s Taiwan Affairs Office claimed the Unit -
ed States was “squeezing Taiwan dry” and that people in Taiwan 
should fear “Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company” would 
become “America Semiconductor Manufacturing Company.” 100
In outreach to Taiwan’s business community, Beijing has attempt-
ed to exploit uncertainty about U.S. tariffs to present itself as a 

614
more reliable economic partner. On April 18, 2025, Song Tao, head 
of China’s Taiwan Affairs Office, participated in a meeting with Tai-
wan businesspeople in Nanjing in which he denounced the “tariff 
war launched by the United States,” vowed that China would “in -
crease its support” for Taiwan businesses, and called for both sides 
of the Taiwan Strait to “join hands in resisting external risks and 
challenges.” 101 As part of China’s broader wedge strategy to sow 
discord between the United States and Taiwan, Chinese state media 
has also amplified criticisms of the DPP’s response to U.S. tariffs by 
local media and academics in Taiwan. 102
Chinese state media has also referenced U.S. policy toward 
Ukraine in propaganda about Taiwan. A March 14, 2025, Xinhua 
article stated: “U.S.-Russia negotiations and Zelensky being humil -
iated in the White House have given people in Taiwan an acute 
and shocking lesson: once the United States and the West had fin -
ished using Ukraine as a ‘vanguard of resistance against Russia and 
frontline of democracy,’ they abandoned it.” 103 Chinese officials and 
state media have begun regularly stating that Taiwan is likewise 
fated to become an “abandoned chess piece.” 104
Since Beijing has increased its propaganda efforts aimed at de -
stabilizing U.S.-Taiwan ties, public opinion polling in Taiwan has 
shown significant decreases in the percentage of respondents that 
viewed the United States as a trustworthy partner. 105 According to 
a poll conducted in February–April 2025, only 37 percent of respon -
dents thought it was likely the United States would help “if China 
and Taiwan go to war” (down from 45 percent in 2024).106 Moreover, 
only 33.5 percent of respondents stated that they had a “positive” 
perception of the United States—a decline of more than 20 per -
centage points from the year prior. 107 A separate poll conducted in 
April 2025 found that 82 percent of respondents believed the United 
States’ “new tariff policies” were “unreasonable.” 108
China Uses Carrots and Sticks to Pressure Taiwan Economically
Beijing’s use of economic pressure against Taiwan intensified in 
the lead up to the 2024 presidential election and continued during 
the first year of the Lai Administration. Yet actual punitive mea -
sures have fallen far short of threatened action, signaling China’s 
caution and concerns about hurting its own industries. As in other 
domains, China has sought to use economic levers to both entice and 
pressure Taiwan’s leadership and populace to integrate with China.
China’s Long Campaign to Attract Investment and Talent from 
Taiwan Fizzles
Chinese authorities continue to roll out incentives to attract in -
vestment and workers from Taiwan in the face of a steady exodus 
of Taiwan’s companies and citizens from China. In early 2025, the 
Provincial Government of Fujian, located directly across the Strait 
from Taiwan, announced the latest round of policies seeking to at -
tract workers from Taiwan. 109 They included a special residence 
permit, annual cash subsidies of 50,000 renminbi (RMB) ($6,900) 
for those with a bachelor’s degree or above, housing subsidies up to 
50 percent, and additional incentives for skilled workers in certain 
high-tech industries.110 Uptake from the people of Taiwan has been 

615
limited, however, with those who do relocate reporting a difficult 
business environment amid China’s ongoing economic slump and 
stiff competition from Chinese companies. 111 The latest figures from 
2022 show 177,000 Taiwan passport holders resided in China, down 
from 404,000 in 2018. 112
According to reporting in January 2025, Taiwan’s authorities are 
increasingly concerned about a special residence permit that China 
has been promoting to Taiwan’s public that grants access to finan -
cial services and social benefits in China. 113 Taiwan authorities be -
lieve Beijing hopes to use the program to convince Taiwan citizens 
to apply for China’s national citizen identification card and to swap 
their passports for those issued by Beijing. Taiwan authorities fear 
that, after those individuals return to Taiwan, China could justify 
a future intervention as necessary to “protect Chinese citizens” in 
Taiwan.114
Punitive Trade Measures Have Thus Far Been Targeted and Limited
Beijing has utilized both threatened and actual punitive economic 
measures to punish and coerce Taiwan by inflicting economic harm 
on exporters reliant on the Chinese market. Beijing’s favored tool in 
recent years has been the imposition of tariffs. In December 2023, 
less than a month before Taiwan’s presidential election, China raised 
tariff rates on 12 petrochemical products from Taiwan. 115 In 2024, 
China raised tariffs on wider sets of products. * On May 31, 2024, 
China announced it would suspend preferential tariff rates on 134 
products, raising the effective tariff rate on some textile, bicycle, and 
chemical items anywhere from 1 to 12 percent. 116 China’s Taiwan 
Affairs Office said the move came in response to President Lai’s re -
fusal to recognize the “1992 Consensus” in his inaugural address.117 
Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs downplayed the actual eco -
nomic impact of these tariffs, stating the value of exports subject to 
them ($9.8 billion) made up only 2 percent of Taiwan’s total exports 
in 2023. 118 Most recently, in September 2024, China announced it 
would raise tariffs on 34 agriculture and aquaculture products from 
Taiwan.119
China’s unwillingness to target semiconductors or information 
communication technology (ICT) supply chains demonstrates its 
limitations in taking actions that would truly damage Taiwan’s 
economy. China is reliant on ICT inputs from Taiwan for finished 
products and is home to downstream semiconductor processes like 
assembly, packaging, and testing. 120 Therefore, Beijing has likely 
* Cross-Strait economic and trade ties peaked during the last KMT administration under Ma 
Ying-jeou (2008–2016), with the signing of a preferential trade agreement, the Economic Coop -
eration Framework Agreement (ECFA). A follow-on proposed investment deal—the Cross-Strait 
Services Trade Agreement (CSSTA)—sparked the Sunflower Movement mass protests in 2014 
by those who feared that further cross-Strait economic integration would lead to unacceptable 
leverage. The backlash in Taiwan culminated with the election of Tsai Ing-Wen and the DPP’s 
return to power a year later and a breakdown of formal communications with the CCP. The KMT 
still advocates for increased economic integration with China as a way to promote stability across 
the Strait. The KMT’s 2024 presidential candidate Hou Yu-ih said on the campaign trail that he 
would revive the CSSTA, and former President Ma Ying-jeou has repeatedly called for further 
economic and people-to-people ties during visits to China. (For more on the ECFA and Sunflower 
Movement, see U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Chapter 5, Section 2, 
“Taiwan,” in 2023 Annual Report to Congress , November 2023, 612–616.) Zichen Wang, “Ma Ying-
jeou’s Speech at 17th Straits Forum in the Mainland,” Pekingnology, June 15, 2025; Xiaoqing Bu, 
YuXuan Jia, and Zichen Wang, “Ma Ying-jeou’s Latest Speech on Cross-Taiwan Strait Relations,” 
Pekingnology, August 23, 2024; David Sacks, “Taiwan’s 2024 Presidential Election: Analyzing Hou 
Yu-ih’s Foreign Policy Positions,” Council on Foreign Relations , December 26, 2023. 

616
assessed that tariffs on Taiwan’s core industries will probably hurt 
China as much as—if not more than—Taiwan.
Limited Benefit for China in Capturing Taiwan’s 
Semiconductor Facilities
Taiwan’s indispensable semiconductor industry also factors into 
CCP decision-making around the use of military force, though 
the enormous economic cost of an invasion is unlikely to be the 
deciding factor. Estimates indicate that military action in the 
Taiwan Strait—whether in the form of a limited blockade or a 
full-scale invasion—would wipe out trillions of dollars from the 
global economy, on par with the 2008 financial crisis. 121 Some ar-
gue that the PRC might accrue economic benefit through seizing 
semiconductor manufacturing facilities in Taiwan, accelerating 
China’s high-tech development and gaining a key leverage point 
in the global economy. 122 In all likelihood, however, China would 
not be able to continue production at TSMC facilities—even if 
they were captured intact—due to their reliance on production 
processes involving numerous highly specialized inputs made by 
sole suppliers in the United States, Japan, and other presum -
ably uncooperative countries. 123 Furthermore, reporting from 
May 2024 indicated that TSMC and ASML—the Dutch maker of 
extreme ultraviolet lithography machines necessary to produce 
the most advanced semiconductors—maintain the capability to 
remotely disable manufacturing equipment used in Taiwan fabs 
in the event of an invasion. 124 Accordingly, CCP calculations as 
to whether to take military action against Taiwan must factor in 
economic costs and the extent to which China’s domestic semicon-
ductor industry can provide adequate substitutes for lost produc -
tion from Taiwan, the United States, and allies. 125
Taiwan Has Made Efforts to Enhance Deterrence 
and Resilience despite Political Gridlock
While China has raced forward with its multifaceted pressure 
campaign against Taiwan, Taiwan has also continued to make 
progress toward increasing both military deterrence and social re -
silience. The Lai Administration has sought to enhance deterrence 
both by improving military preparedness and by accelerating efforts 
to build the capabilities necessary for an asymmetric defense pos -
ture—which involves acquiring large quantities of small, mobile, 
and inexpensive systems to counter an airborne or amphibious in -
vasion.126 The Lai Administration has also expanded efforts to build 
“whole-of-society-resilience,” which it conceptualizes as increasing 
society’s ability to resist and withstand Chinese aggression by in -
troducing new measures to counter Chinese infiltration and gray 
zone pressure and continuing to diversify Taiwan’s economy away 
from dependence on China. 127
Taiwan Accelerates Efforts to Enhance Military Preparedness
The Lai Administration’s approach to deterrence has focused on 
increasing defense spending and enhancing asymmetric capabilities 

617
to ensure Taiwan could inflict significant damage on a Chinese in -
vasion force. 128 In a speech on February 14, 2025, President Lai 
vowed to use special budgets to increase Taiwan’s defense spend -
ing to 3 percent of GDP—approximately $27 billion. 129 In an opin -
ion essay published by Bloomberg, President Lai reminded readers 
that Taiwan had secured $18 billion in arms deals with the United 
States during President Trump’s first term and stated that Taiwan 
would continue to “pursue additional arms procurements that are 
vital to our self-defense.”  130 Taiwan’s Quadrennial Defense Review , 
published in March 2025, specifically called for developing greater 
asymmetric capabilities by acquiring defense items such as porta -
ble anti-armor weapons and drones capable of conducting precision 
strikes.131 In July 2025, Taiwan’s government announced plans to 
purchase nearly 50,000 locally produced drones over the next two 
years, which it specified must not include any components made in 
China.132
However, disputes between the Lai Administration and the op -
position-controlled legislature have created uncertainty around 
some of the government’s plans for bolstering Taiwan’s defenses. 
While the government requested a defense budget of 647 billion 
New Taiwan Dollars (NTD) * ($19.7 billion) for 2025, Taiwan’s op -
position-controlled legislature cut approximately $280 million (1.3 
percent) from the defense budget request and froze about $3 billion 
(14 percent).133 The spending freezes included half of the proposed 
funding for an indigenous submarine program as well as 30 percent 
of funding for an industrial park aimed at creating a drone supply 
chain free of Chinese inputs. 134 KMT representatives have pointed 
out that even after the cuts, the 2025 defense budget is still the 
largest in Taiwan’s history and a 5.2 percent increase over the pre -
vious year.135 KMT officials have stated that they would unfreeze 
defense funds and offer “unwavering support” for a larger defense 
budget as soon as the government provided an “effective spending 
plan.” 136
Taiwan has also taken new steps to continue improving mili -
tary preparedness. The 2025  Quadrennial Defense Review  artic -
ulated numerous steps for enhancing military readiness, includ -
ing bolstering reserve forces, optimizing logistical support, and 
improving morale. 137 In March 2025, President Lai announced 
increases in allowances for military personnel designed to bol -
ster the desire of young people to serve in the military. 138 After 
extending mandatory military service from four months to one 
year in 2024, Taiwan’s military announced that the number of 
conscripts performing the full year of service would increase by 
41 percent in 2025—albeit from a relatively small base of 6,956 
to 9,839. 139 Taiwan’s most recent military exercises have focused 
on preparing to respond to a sudden Chinese invasion. In March 
2025, Taiwan held its first-ever “immediate combat readiness 
drills” designed to simulate Taiwan’s response if China were to 
pivot quickly from gray zone pressure to an actual invasion. 140 
In April 2025, Taiwan conducted the first phase of its annu -
al Han Kuang military exercises, which consisted of 14 days of 
* Taiwan’s currency is the New Taiwan Dollar (NTD). The exchange rate used throughout this 
chapter is $1 = 30 NTD, unless stated otherwise.

618
computerized wargames, up from eight days in the previous year. 
As with the immediate combat response drills, this year’s Han 
Kuang wargames simulated a scenario in which the PLA unex -
pectedly shifted from a military exercise into an actual attack on 
Taiwan.141 The second phase of the Han Kuang exercises, held 
from July 9 to 18, involved ten days of live-fire drills—double the 
five days conducted in previous years. Designed to test the armed 
forces’ “joint operation planning and execution” and “emergency 
response capabilities,” the unscripted exercises integrated newly 
acquired weapons systems from the United States, including M1 
Abrams tanks, High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS) 
rocket launchers, and Harpoon anti-ship missiles. 142 Neverthe -
less, military analysts have argued that “deeply ingrained bu -
reaucratic inertia” in Taiwan’s military remains a significant im -
pediment to improving readiness. 143
New Measures to Build Whole-of-Society Resilience
In addition to efforts to deter a Chinese invasion by improving 
military capabilities, Taiwan has taken steps to improve societal re -
silience to combat China’s gray zone pressure and malign influence 
activities.
Recent Efforts to Develop Resilience against China’s Sabotage 
of Undersea Cables
In light of repeated incidents of undersea cable sabotage, Taiwan 
has taken numerous steps to enhance its digital resilience. For ex -
ample, over the past two years, Taiwan’s government and its larg -
est telecommunications operator, Chunghwa Telecom, have invested 
in microwave bandwidth and satellite systems as backup sources 
of connectivity on Taiwan’s outlying Matsu Islands, which have 
a history of cables being disrupted by Chinese vessels. 144 After a 
February 2023 outage, the islands were almost entirely without in -
ternet service for several weeks while waiting for the cables to be 
repaired.145 When the two cables connecting Matsu were damaged 
again in January 2025, the newly installed microwave and satellite 
systems enabled most public services and businesses to continue 
functioning while the cables were repaired. 146
Taiwan has also adopted several new measures to deter cable sab -
otage and further increase digital resilience. In 2024, the Ministry 
of Digital Affairs designated ten undersea cables as “critical infra -
structure” and implemented increased security measures.147 In Jan-
uary 2025, Taiwan drew up a blacklist of 52 Chinese-owned “shadow 
fleet” ships that it will proactively monitor in an effort to prevent 
future incidents of cable sabotage. 148 On June 12, 2025, a Taiwan 
court sentenced the Chinese captain of the Togo-registered Hong Tai 
58 ship—the vessel that severed an undersea cable linking Taiwan 
and Penghu in February 2025—to three years in prison for deliber -
ately sabotaging the cable. 149 Taiwan legislators have also proposed 
further measures, including greater investments in low Earth or -
bit satellites that can provide internet service, adding redundancy 
to undersea cable systems, and empowering the coast guard to use 
drones and planes to monitor ships detected on an abnormal path 
near undersea cables. 150

619
The Lai Administration’s Proposed Measures to Counter 
Chinese Infiltration Have Encountered Criticisms for 
Government Overreach, but Most Have Public Support
The Lai Administration has proposed a raft of more stringent 
measures to counter Chinese infiltration and united front activities. 
On March 13, 2025, President Lai declared that China qualifies as 
an “external adversarial force” under Taiwan’s Anti-Infiltration Act 
and proposed 17 new strategies for responding to the threat China 
poses to Taiwan’s security.151 These strategies included:
 • Restoring the military tribunal system for active-duty military 
personnel accused of treason. 152
 • Requiring public disclosure and government approval of all trips 
to China by elected officials, imposing restrictions on Chinese 
individuals with ties to united front work coming to Taiwan, 
and ensuring that people-to-people exchanges are not subject to 
“Chinese political interference.” 153
 • Requiring greater inspection of Taiwan citizens applying for 
identification documents in China. 154
 • Enhancing scrutiny of individuals from China applying for res -
idency in Taiwan.155
Two days after President Lai introduced the 17 proposals for 
countering Chinese infiltration, KMT lawmakers accused the DPP 
of using “national security” as an excuse to impose “authoritarian -
ism” and “quasi-martial law.” 156
Public opinion polls conducted by the National Chengchi Univer -
sity Election Study Center and the Taiwan Public Opinion Founda -
tion show that while Taiwan’s society is divided on labeling China 
an “external adversarial force,” large majorities support measures 
to combat Chinese malign influence. According to polling conduct -
ed in April 2025, 49 percent of respondents agreed with President 
Lai’s characterization of China as an adversary, compared with 43 
percent who disagreed. 157 The same poll found that 65.3 percent 
supported the proposal to bring back military tribunals. 158 Another 
April 2025 poll showed that 73.7 percent believed “Chinese Com -
munist infiltration of Taiwan has worsened in recent years,” and 
70.9 percent would favor requiring government approval for elected 
officials to travel to China. 159
Taiwan’s Economic Diversification Progresses with AI Boom
Despite China’s harsh rhetoric and escalating pressure campaign, 
Taiwan’s economy has outperformed those of most countries across 
various metrics over the past five years. The engine of its export-ori -
ented economy is a highly developed technology manufacturing sec -
tor with unparalleled capacity in fabrication of advanced semicon -
ductors. Thus, Taiwan has been a major beneficiary of the AI boom, 
as seen in the staggering revenue and valuation growth of national 
champion TSMC.* The accrued national wealth and influence from 
* TSMC’s market capitalization closed above $1 trillion for the first time in October 2024, and 
in doing so it joined the ranks of only nine other companies globally. As a percentage of Taiwan’s 
total stock exchange, TSMC has risen from 15 percent in 2015 to 38 percent in 2024, with the 
second highest, Hon Hai (aka Foxconn), accounting for 3 percent. For comparison, the combined 
market capitalization of the “magnificent seven” (Apple, Microsoft, Nvidia, Alphabet, Amazon, 

620
being an ever more important technology hub serve as a counter -
weight to pressure from China.
Taiwan’s Overall Economic Picture Remains Strong with 
Continued Growth
Taiwan’s economy remains relatively healthy and, barring an ex -
ogenous shock, is poised to continue recent trends of growth, ex -
panding investment, and low inflation and unemployment through 
2025. Overall growth has closely tracked global demand for ICT and 
electronics over the past five years. In 2024, real GDP grew 4.6 per -
cent year-over-year to NTD 25.6 trillion ($795.6 billion) and accord -
ing to official projections is set to grow 3.1 percent in 2025. 160 As of 
September 2025, unemployment has continued to tick downward to 
3.5 percent, and inflation remained relatively low with the consum -
er price index (CPI) and producer price index (PPI) at 1.3 percent 
and -3.7 percent change year-over-year, respectively.161
Even though Taiwan maintains a vibrant and well-balanced do -
mestic economy, trade with the rest of the world continues to be a 
significant driver of prosperity, especially the export of high-value 
manufactured goods. In 2024, the total value of exports equated to 
63.3 percent of GDP, placing it well above the global average (29 
percent) and far ahead of other East Asian economies with signif -
icant export sectors in their own right, such as South Korea (44 
percent), Japan (21.9 percent), and China (20 percent). 162 Even on 
a net export basis, Taiwan relies heavily on global trade, accounting 
for 13.1 percent of GDP. 163 Consumption accounted for 60.2 percent 
of GDP by expenditure in 2024, and investment accounted for the 
remaining 26.7 percent. * 164
Rapid Currency Moves Rattle the Financial Industry
Over a two-day period in May 2025, Taiwan’s historically stable 
currency appreciated 8 percent against the dollar, presenting a po -
tential drag on exports and raising concern about systemic risk from 
overexposure to dollar-denominated holdings. 165 Currency traders 
have bet that the appreciation of NTD relative to the dollar will 
continue because an overall global capital rotation away from U.S. 
assets observed in early 2025 boosted Asian currencies. 166 Also, 
traders suspect Taiwan’s government may favor currency appreci -
ation as a means to redress the trade imbalance with the United 
States.167 However, there is a real downside risk from continued ap -
preciation in the short term for Taiwan’s economy. A stronger NTD 
would make Taiwan’s exports more expensive, a dynamic that—if 
persistent—could impede economic performance in the latter half 
of 2025.168 Taiwan’s central bank maintains some of the largest for-
eign exchange reserves in the world ($593 billion), over 80 percent 
of which is held in U.S. Treasury bonds.169 Perhaps most concerning, 
life insurers on the island hold over $700 billion in U.S. Treasuries, 
Meta, and Tesla) made up 35 percent of the S&P 500 at the end of 2024. TSMC’s total revenue 
in 2024 was $88.3 billion, equivalent to 11.1 percent of Taiwan’s GDP. Derek Saul, “ ‘Just the 
Beginning’ for AI Demand Surge as Big Chip Stocks Gain $250 Billion,” Forbes, October 17, 2024; 
“Taiwan Stock Exchange 2025 Fact Book,” Taiwan Stock Exchange Corporation , 2024; “S&P 500 
Market Cap (I:SP500MC),” YCharts.
* Consumption includes that by both the private and public sectors. Private consumption’s 
share of GDP was 46.9 percent, while public consumption accounted for 13.3 percent. Taiwan’s 
Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics via Haver database.

621
leaving an industry valued at 1.5 times Taiwan’s GDP open to large 
losses if there is a sustained drop in the dollar’s value. 170
Taiwan Continues to Diversify Its Trade and Investment 
Partners
While China remains Taiwan’s largest trade partner, cross-Strait 
trade and investment trends appear to have peaked as Taiwan di -
versifies to reduce dependence on China. China grew to become Tai -
wan’s top trading and investment partner soon after cross-Strait 
commerce was reestablished in 2001, given proximity, complemen -
tary industries, and business and family relations that span the 
Strait.171 Trade with China (including Hong Kong) as a percentage 
of Taiwan’s total hit a high-water mark in 2020 at 34.3 percent of 
total trade turnover, regressing to 26.6 percent in 2024. 172 In abso -
lute terms, total trade with China grew 3.1 percent year-over-year 
to $231 billion in 2024 but is still 15.4 percent below the 2021 high 
of $273 billion (see Figure 2). 173
Figure 2: Taiwan’s Total Trade with Top Trading Partners, 2016– 
September 2025
 $-
 $50
 $100
 $150
 $200
 $250
 $300
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
(Jan-Sep)
US$ billions
China + HK and Macau New Southbound Policy USA Japan EU
Source: Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, International Trade Administration, Trade Sta-
tistics.
Note: The New Southbound Policy countries are Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei, Burma 
(Myanmar), Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philip -
pines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Taiwan’s trade with the United States has grown significantly over 
the past five years despite a slight reduction in 2023, driven by high 
demand for consumer electronics and advanced semiconductors. To -
tal two-way trade rose from $83.1 billion in 2020 to $158.1 billion 
in 2024, an over 90 percent increase. 174 The United States overtook 
China in 2024 as the top market for Taiwan’s exports—the first time 
this has occurred in over 20 years. 175 Last year, Taiwan’s exports to 
the United States surged 46.2 percent year-over-year, growing from 
$76.2 billion in 2023 to $111.4 billion in 2024, in large part due to 
U.S. demand for advanced AI chips from TSMC. 176

622
On the investment side, as Taiwan’s FDI has expanded global -
ly, China’s portion of new FDI has been reduced dramatically (see 
Figure 3). Taiwan’s FDI expansion is largely attributable to TSMC, 
which has registered tremendous growth and is now by far one of 
the most important firms to both Taiwan’s economy and global tech-
nology supply chains.177 TSMC has announced planned investments 
to build production facilities in the United States, Japan, Germany, 
and across Southeast Asia. (For more on Taiwan’s investments in 
the United States, see “United States Expands Defense and Eco -
nomic Cooperation with Taiwan” later in this chapter.) Further, the 
Lai Administration has adopted and expanded upon the New South -
bound Policy (NSP), a cornerstone program of his predecessor’s for -
eign policy initiated in 2016. 178 The NSP seeks to build economic, 
cultural, and people-to-people ties with 18 countries in the Indo-Pa -
cific region. Taiwan’s companies are increasingly looking to increase 
investment in NSP countries like India and Vietnam as they dial 
back investment in China. 179
Figure 3: Taiwan’s Approved Outbound Investment by Region, 2016– 
August 2025
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 (Jan-
Aug)
US$ billions
China United States Europe NSP ROW
Source: Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs.
Note: NSP stands for New Southbound Policy; ROW stands for rest of world.
Though shifts in Taiwan’s trade and investment patterns have 
become more discernable in the data, Taiwan remains heavily inter -
twined economically with China. Taiwan-headquartered firms like 
Foxconn, Acer, and others have sizable fixed capital stock in China 
after years of investment. This, combined with the vast network of 
suppliers and business relationships built upon shared language 
and cultural ties, means China will continue to have a magnetic 
pull for Taiwan’s companies beyond even the forces inhibiting the 
drawdown of other multinational companies with substantial oper -
ations in China. 180

623
United States Expands Defense and Economic 
Cooperation with Taiwan
The United States Continues to Support Taiwan’s Self-
Defense Capabilities while Working to Build International 
Support for Taiwan
The United States maintained its support for the development 
of Taiwan’s defense capabilities in 2025 despite brief interrup -
tions to funding streams. In February, the Trump Administration 
temporarily suspended all foreign assistance for review but ul -
timately exempted $870 million in security assistance for Tai -
wan.181 The United States has continued to carry out defense 
sales and deliveries to Taiwan, including the finalization of the 
sale of three National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile Systems 
(NASAMS) in February 2025. 182 U.S. officials have indicated that 
the Trump Administration will continue increasing weapons sales 
to Taiwan and that U.S. arms sales to Taiwan will likely exceed 
the $18.3 billion approved during the first Trump Administra -
tion.183 Taiwan’s military reportedly planned to increase pro -
curement of U.S.-made Switchblade 300 and Altius-600M drone 
systems while also developing four types of its own indigenous 
drones, aligning with the United States’ strategy to prepare un -
manned aerial and amphibious vehicles as a defense mechanism 
in the Taiwan Strait. 184
The large backlog of arms Taiwan has purchased from the Unit -
ed States continues to be a significant issue, however. As of Sep -
tember 2025, Taiwan has paid $21.54 billion for U.S. weapons 
systems that have not yet been delivered, some ordered as far 
back as 2021. 185 While traditional systems such as F-16s and 
M1 Abrams tanks account for more than half of the value of the 
backlog, asymmetric capabilities—including Harpoon coastal de -
fense systems and HIMARS rocket launchers—account for nearly 
39 percent. 186 This backlog in weapons delivery is due to a num -
ber of factors. Limited production capacity and increased global 
demand for F-16s, Stinger missiles, and other exports partially 
account for the backlog. 187 The addition of new proposed defense 
procurements from Taiwan’s Ministry of Defense as part of bilat -
eral trade negotiations, along with the Trump Administration’s 
goal of increasing sales, will likely further add to the overall 
backlog unless efforts are made to speed production timelines or 
prioritize Taiwan’s needs over those of other regions. 188 In July 
2025, the Senate Appropriations Committee approved a defense 
spending bill that would allow the Trump Administration to pro -
vide $1 billion in military aid to Taiwan by using Presidential 
Drawdown Authority to transfer arms from existing stockpiles, 
bypassing the slower Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program. 189
The United States has also continued to collaborate with Taiwan 
to bolster its defense readiness and integrate whole-of-society resil -
ience into its defense architecture. 190
 • In July 2024 and February 2025, the United States sponsored 
exchanges between Taiwan and numerous countries to discuss 
best practices for bolstering whole-of-society resilience, includ -
ing lessons learned from the Ukraine War. 191

624
 • In accordance with the Taiwan Enhanced Resilience Act, which 
directed the U.S. Department of Defense to create training pro -
grams to improve Taiwan’s defenses, there were over 500 U.S. 
military personnel in Taiwan conducting training as of May 
2025.192
 • The United States has also collaborated with Taiwan to de -
velop tabletop exercises and live drills to identify gaps in its 
defense readiness, including playing an advisory role in the 
development of Taiwan’s July 2025 Han Kuang 41 military 
exercise. 193
The United States Continues to Enhance Its Capacity to Deter 
a Potential Chinese Military Action against Taiwan
The United States has also taken steps to enhance its own ca -
pacity to deter China from using force or coercion to unilaterally 
change the status quo in the Taiwan Strait as required by the Tai -
wan Relations Act. 194 An internal guidance memo signed by U.S. 
Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth in March 2025 called for the U.S. 
military to make deterring a potential Chinese invasion of Taiwan 
a top priority.195 The United States has continued to modernize its 
own capabilities in the Indo-Pacific, conduct freedom of navigation 
operations (FONOPs), and expand military exercises with Indo-Pa -
cific allies and partners.
 • The U.S. Department of Defense continues to advance its Rep -
licator Initiative, launched in 2023, which aims to work closely 
with the commercial autonomy sector to rapidly procure “large 
masses of uncrewed systems” to deter a Chinese invasion of 
Taiwan by—in the words of the Commander of the U.S. Indo-Pa -
cific Command, Admiral Paparo—demonstrating the capability 
to “turn the Taiwan Strait into an unmanned hellscape.”  196 In 
September 2024, the Department of Defense launched a second 
phase of the Replicator Initiative aimed at fast-tracking the de -
velopment of counter-drone capabilities. 197
 • The U.S. Pacific Fleet routinely conducts maritime air patrols 
and naval FONOPs in contested airspace and waters between 
China and Taiwan, asserting the right to access those regions 
under international law. 198 In the summer of 2025, the U.S. 
Navy deployed multiple aircraft carriers in the Indo-Pacific 
region as a response to China’s deployment of the Liaoning  
and Shandong  aircraft carriers into the Pacific’s First Is -
land Chain, which comprises Taiwan, Japan, and the Philip -
pines.199
 • The United States maintains regional military installations to 
enable rapid response capabilities and pre-position weapons 
and other supplies that could be deployed rapidly in a Taiwan 
contingency.200
 • The United States has also expanded joint exercises with re -
gional allies and partners focused on responding to a military 
contingency in the Taiwan Strait. From July 10 to August 8, 
2025, the U.S. Pacific Air Forces, along with multinational and 
joint partners, conducted Resolute Force Pacific (REFORPAC 

625
2025), the Air Force’s largest military exercise to date aimed 
at responding to a military contingency in the Pacific. 201 From 
July 13 to August 4, 2025, the United States and Australia held 
the largest-ever version of their biennial Talisman Sabre mili -
tary exercises, which involved more than 40,000 personnel from 
19 nations and included large-scale amphibious operations with 
forces from the United States, Australia, France, Japan, and Ko-
rea.202
U.S. Department of State Changed Official Language Relating 
to Taiwan
In February 2025, the U.S. Department of State changed its 
U.S.-Taiwan Relations Factsheet to remove the statement that the 
United States “does not support Taiwan independence,” but it re -
tained language that the United States “oppose[s] unilateral chang -
es to the status quo from either side.”  203 In an official statement, 
Taiwan’s Foreign Minister Lin Chia-lung “welcomed the support and 
positive stance” represented by the change in language. 204 China’s 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, on the other hand, urged the United 
States to “correct its mistakes” and abide by the “One China prin -
ciple.” 205 This attempt to change language on the U.S.-Taiwan fact -
sheet was not unprecedented. In May 2022, the State Department 
similarly removed the phrase “does not support Taiwan indepen -
dence.” 206 However, just a few weeks later, the Department rein -
stated the language after diplomatic complaints and pressure from 
China.207 As of June 2025, the State Department has removed the 
entire Taiwan factsheet from its website—along with virtually all 
other factsheets—for content review. However, the language on the 
“U.S.-Taiwan Relations” fact page on the American Institute in Tai -
wan’s website continues to omit the statement on Taiwan indepen -
dence, reflecting this change. 208
The United States has also coordinated increased support for Tai -
wan through official G7 statements. In March 2025, the G7 Foreign 
Ministers released a statement that “emphasized the importance of 
maintaining peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait,” “encour -
aged the peaceful resolution of cross-strait issues,” and explicitly 
stated “opposition to any unilateral attempts to change the status 
quo by force or coercion.” 209 This statement drew media attention 
for its omission of language reaffirming “One China” policies, such as 
the November 2024 statement that promised “no change in the basic 
position of the G7 members on Taiwan, including stated One-China 
policies.” 210
U.S. Lawmakers and Officials Show Continuity in Support for 
Taiwan
Despite Beijing’s escalating pressure campaign, U.S. lawmakers 
and officials continued to meet with Taiwan’s government to dis -
cuss measures to strengthen economic and security ties. In April 
2025, Senators Pete Ricketts, Ted Budd, and Chris Coons met with 
President Lai to underscore “the United States’ commitment to its 
partnership with Taiwan” and reaffirm “our shared commitment 
to strengthening a Free and Open Indo-Pacific.”  211 The following 
month, a House delegation and Senator Tammy Duckworth sepa -

626
rately visited Taiwan and met with President Lai to discuss criti -
cal areas of bilateral cooperation. 212 In July 2025, a bipartisan U.S. 
congressional delegation led by Chairman of the House Committee 
on Financial Services French Hill met with Taiwan’s Ambassador to 
Paraguay José Han to discuss shared economic interests. 213 Mem -
bers of Congress have also introduced various pieces of legislation 
to support Taiwan, including bills to assist Taiwan’s Latin American 
and Caribbean diplomatic partners and require the Department of 
Defense “to establish a formal partnership with Taiwan to enhance 
joint defense industrial capabilities and counter the rapidly grow -
ing threat of Chinese military tech.”  214 At the end of August, U.S. 
Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Indo-Pacific Jed Roy -
al and Taiwan’s Senior Advisor to the President at the National 
Security Council Hsu Szu-chien met in Alaska to discuss security 
concerns—a meeting that had originally been scheduled to be held 
at the ministerial level in Washington in June. 215 These high-level 
meetings and policy proposals signaled enduring bipartisan support 
for a strong U.S.-Taiwan relationship.216
The New Pope Balances Relations with  
Taiwan and China
The absence of Taiwan’s President Lai Ching-te from Pope 
Leo XIV’s inauguration in May 2025 called renewed attention 
to the delicate balancing act the Vatican maintains to preserve 
official diplomatic relations with Taiwan and continued access 
to the 12 million Catholics living in China. 217 Over the past 
several decades, Beijing has intensified its pressure on the 
Vatican to weaken or fully cut diplomatic ties with Taiwan. 218 
Although Taiwan’s government lobbied for President Lai to at -
tend Pope Leo XIV’s inauguration in May 2025, the Vatican 
instead invited Taiwan’s former Vice President Chen Chien-
jen, who had attended Pope Francis’s funeral earlier in the 
year.219 Beijing has also long pressured the Vatican to avoid 
criticizing China’s violations of religious freedom and to allow 
the CCP to control its domestic Catholic population’s leader -
ship and religious practices. 220 In 2018, the Vatican and China 
reached an agreement, most recently renewed in October 2024, 
in which the Vatican granted Beijing a role in the appointment 
of bishops in China and agreed to accept bishops previously 
appointed by Beijing without the pope’s consent. 221 Pope Leo 
XIV used his first public address as Pope to call for the unity of 
the Chinese Catholic Church and made his first appointment of 
a Chinese bishop in consultation with Chinese authorities. 222 
Based on these early actions, it is likely that Beijing will con -
tinue to pressure the Vatican to cut ties with Taiwan as part 
of its larger strategy for isolating Taiwan on the world stage. 
(For more on the Papacy, Taiwan, and China, see Chapter 2, 
“U.S.-China Security and Foreign Affairs (Year in Review).”)

627
Taiwan’s Indispensable Position in Semiconductor Supply 
Chains
Taiwan continues to be the single most important producer of 
semiconductors and is instrumental in ensuring continued access to 
non-Chinese supply chains for both leading-edge and foundational 
semiconductors.
U.S.-Taiwan Cooperation in Leading-Edge Semiconductor 
Production Accelerates
Taiwan has maintained the largest share of fabrication capac -
ity of leading-edge semiconductors used in state-of-the-art tech -
nology such as iPhones and processors to train AI models. As 
of 2022, the only manufacturing facilities capable of producing 
sub-10 nanometer (nm) chips were in Taiwan and South Korea, 
with 69 percent and 31 percent of fabrication capacity, respective -
ly.223 Much of the push to diversify and onshore manufacturing 
in the United States has focused on leading-edge logic chips, with 
industry estimates showing that 70 percent of all capital expen -
diture by the semiconductor industry globally from 2024 to 2032 
will go toward building advanced node facilities. 224 This is de -
spite the fact that, as of 2023, only 4 percent of global production 
was for cutting-edge chips below 5 nm, while 69 percent was for 
foundational chips * 28 nm and above. 225 According to projections 
by Boston Consulting Group, by 2032, Taiwan and South Korea’s 
shared production capacity for leading-edge semiconductors will 
drop to 56 percent, while 28 percent will be fabricated in the 
United States and 2 percent in China. 226
Investment by Taiwan’s leading semiconductor firms is central to 
U.S. efforts to reshore leading-edge chip production. In early 2025, 
TSMC announced an additional $100 billion investment in semicon -
ductor manufacturing facilities in Arizona on top of $65 billion in 
existing commitments made since May 2020. 227 Already the larg -
est foreign greenfield investment in U.S. history, the initial planned 
investment would construct three new fabrication facilities outside 
Phoenix that would produce advanced chips below 4 nm node. With 
the additional investment, TSMC plans to build three more fabs, 
two advanced packaging facilities, and a major research and devel -
opment (R&D) center to vertically integrate production at the in -
dustrial cluster.228 Production of 4 nm logic chips at the first facility 
began in late 2024. 229 Once production starts in the second facility 
in 2028 and the third before 2030, TSMC expects to manufacture 30 
percent of its most advanced chips in the United States. 230 In a re -
versal of previous policy, in January 2025, Taiwan’s Ministry of Eco-
nomic Affairs lifted restrictions on investing in state-of-the-art chip 
production in the United States, clearing the path for production 
of cutting-edge 2 nm and A16 † technology at the Phoenix fabs. 231 
* Often referred to as “legacy” or “mature node” chips, these are older generations of semicon -
ductors with higher node size (currently considered above 28 nm). However, the term “legacy” is 
misleading, given that older generation chips are continuously applied in novel ways and are key 
inputs in a vast number of products.
† A16 is TSMC’s next iteration below 2 nm node, which uses new power delivery methods to 
increase speed and efficiency. Production is expected to begin in late 2026 with the first customers 
likely to be AI chip companies rather than smartphone makers. “A16 Technology,” Taiwan Semi-
conductor Manufacturing Company; Stephen Nellis, “TSMC Says ‘A16’ Chipmaking Tech to Arrive 
in 2026, Setting Up Showdown with Intel,” Reuters, April 24, 2024.

628
Previously, Taiwan’s government had restricted overseas factories 
to production of semiconductors two generations behind the state of 
the art in Taiwan. 232
Early indicators from operations at the first fab have been posi -
tive despite a number of ongoing concerns about achieving cost-ef -
fective production. In October 2024, the president of TSMC’s U.S. 
division announced that early production yields were 4 percent 
higher than in comparable fabs in Taiwan. 233 This indicator of 
“success rate” is determinant in chip companies’ calculations 
about their ability to recoup upfront fixed capital investment. 234 
However, the cost of production may be elevated by supply chain 
gaps and labor costs that are higher than those in Taiwan. In 
January, TSMC CEO and Chairman C.C. Wei said construction 
at the Arizona sites faced delays from state and local regulation, 
a shortage of construction labor, and difficulty finding a skilled 
workforce. 235 Key factors in the long-term viability of semicon -
ductor production in the United States will be establishing an 
ecosystem of suppliers and ancillary companies as well as train -
ing and developing a skilled workforce of engineers and techni -
cians to staff these complex manufacturing facilities.
Taiwan’s Role in Preventing Chinese Dominance of 
Foundational Chips
While much of the policy discussion has focused on cutting-edge 
chips in recent years, much of the demand is still for less sophisti -
cated foundational chips that enable functions in a wide variety of 
products. For example, foundational chips account for 95 percent 
of semiconductors used by the U.S. auto industry. While advanced 
chips are imperative to maintaining an edge in state-of-the-art de -
fense applications like high-performance computing, foundational 
chips make up 99.5 percent of semiconductors the U.S. Department 
of Defense uses in mission-critical systems. 236
China’s rapid buildup of its foundational chip production ca -
pacity is already threatening revenue streams of Taiwan’s semi -
conductor firms. Taiwan maintained 40 percent of the global pro -
duction capacity for mature node logic chips in 2022 as well as 
20 percent of dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) chips. 237 
However, Chinese competitors have begun to undercut foreign 
foundries on price in these lower-margin product segments due to 
massive and sustained government subsidies. (For more on how 
China seeks to establish control over foundational semiconduc -
tors, see Chapter 9, “Supply Chain Leverage.”) While the Boston 
Consulting Group projects China’s global market share of foun -
dational chip production capacity above the 28 nm node size will 
reach 37 percent by 2032, other estimates project it will capture 
nearly 50 percent by 2030, potentially surpassing Taiwan’s pro -
duction as early as 2027. 238 According to the Research Institute 
for Democracy, Society, and Emerging Technology (DSET), a think 
tank in Taiwan, aggressive price suppression made possible by 
large government subsidies has already enabled China to capture 
80 percent of the market share of foundational semiconductors 
used in solar panels, 56 percent in mobile phones, 73 percent in 
electric vehicles, and 66 percent in display panels. 239 In response, 

629
many of Taiwan’s firms have elected to pivot away from foun -
dational chips or focus on niche specializations, reducing viable 
avenues for non-Chinese supply chains. 240
Taiwan Further Aligns Export Controls with the United States
Given the threat from China, Taiwan has taken steps to tight -
en export controls to prevent transfer of dual-use technology items. 
Though not a member of multilateral export control regimes, Tai -
wan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs maintains an export control list 
of Strategic High-Tech Commodities (SHTC) in line with guidelines 
of the Australia Group, Missile Technology Control Regime, Nucle -
ar Suppliers Group, and Wassenaar Arrangement. 241 On June 15, 
2025, Taiwan added Huawei and Semiconductor Manufacturing In -
ternational Corporation (SMIC) to the SHTC Entity List, requiring 
companies to obtain an export permit to sell to these companies. 242 
In September 2025, Taiwan subjected semiconductor shipments to 
South Africa to pre-approval requirements in response to South Af -
rica’s capitulation to Chinese pressure to move Taiwan’s represen -
tative office from the capital city of Pretoria to Johannesburg—the 
first time Taiwan has used export controls on semiconductors to 
push back against Chinese coercion. 243
Trade and Investment with the United States Hit Record 
Levels
Taiwan’s commercial ties with the United States expanded sub -
stantially in 2024 on the back of technology-driven trade and in -
vestment and the strong performance of both economies. Taiwan’s 
exports to the United States have continued to surge in 2025 as 
companies front-loaded orders to avoid potential tariffs in the sec -
ond half of the year. In March, TSMC announced $100 billion in 
additional investment in Arizona, the largest-ever single outlay by 
a foreign company in the United States. 244
U.S.-Taiwan Trade and Investment Continues to Climb
Taiwan climbed three spots to become the tenth-largest overall 
trading partner of the United States in 2024 and the seventh-larg -
est goods trade partner behind South Korea and ahead of Viet -
nam.245 The United States imported $116.3 billion worth of goods 
from Taiwan in 2024 and exported $42.3 billion, leaving a goods 
trade deficit of $73.9 billion. 246 By value, the top imports from Tai -
wan in 2024 were machinery and mechanical appliances (80 per -
cent of which were computers) and electrical equipment (mainly 
integrated circuits), while top U.S. exports to Taiwan were mineral 
products (natural gas), machinery and mechanical appliances (jet 
engines and semiconductor manufacturing equipment), and agri -
cultural products.247 The goods trade deficit has grown more than 
threefold since before the pandemic in 2019, when the merchandise 
trade deficit was $22.5 billion. 248 U.S. services exports to Taiwan in 
2024 totaled $13.4 billion, while services imports were nearly equiv -
alent at $13.2 billion. 249

630
Figure 4: U.S. Bilateral Goods Trade with Taiwan (Monthly), 2016–
September 2025
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20US$ billion
Exports Imports Trade Deficit
Source: Taiwan Ministry of Finance, Customs Administration.
According to the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Eco -
nomic Analysis, U.S. FDI stock in Taiwan was estimated to be $21.0 
billion in 2024, while Taiwan’s FDI stock in the United States was 
$14.8 billion.* 250 Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs reported re-
cord-breaking approved outbound investment to the United States 
of $9.7 billion in 2023, followed by $14.1 billion in 2024. 251
Taiwan’s Rebalanced Energy Mix Favors Natural Gas; Vulnerability 
to Import Disruption Continues
Taiwan is almost entirely reliant on imported energy, a point of 
concern both because of recent instances of strained power grids 
that support manufacturing and because of concerns over a poten -
tial future blockade or invasion scenario. Taiwan has set the goal of 
generating 50 percent of its energy from natural gas by 2030 and 
is in the process of building liquified natural gas (LNG) terminals, 
storage facilities, and pipelines necessary to increase from 42 per -
cent in 2024. 252 Taiwan expects to meet the other half of its energy 
needs in 2030 from coal (20 percent) and renewables (30 percent). 253 
In May 2025, Taiwan shut down its last nuclear power plant. 254 
Nuclear energy has been a point of contention on the island for 
years, with concerns over potential earthquake-related accidents 
(especially after the 2010 Fukushima disaster in Japan) outweigh -
ing nuclear’s value as a domestic power supply that can mitigate 
risk of disruptions to imports. 255 A referendum held in August 2025 
that posed the question of whether the last shuttered plant should 
be restarted failed to meet the threshold of eligible voters required 
for passage.256
* The Bureau of Economic Analysis figure for Taiwan’s direct investment stock in the United 
States does not include investment routed through Hong Kong or offshore tax havens. Karen M. 
Sutter, “U.S.-Taiwan Trade and Economic Relations,” Congressional Research Service  (Report No. 
IF10256), August 18, 2025.

631
On March 20, 2025, Taiwan’s government-owned oil company, 
CPC Corporation, signed a letter of intent to invest in a proposed 
Alaska LNG pipeline that would supply six million tons of LNG 
annually.257 Taiwan imported 20 million tons of LNG in 2023 with 
leading suppliers Australia (40.2 percent), Qatar (27.9 percent), and 
the United States (9.8 percent).258 The increased reliance on natural 
gas does not address the island’s vulnerability to a blockade scenar -
io, given that it only has storage capacity to hold 20 days’ worth of 
stockpiles.259 As Taiwan moves to phase out coal-fired power plants, 
it is reportedly increasing coal stockpiles and is exploring the via -
bility of keeping decommissioned plants ready to be turned back on 
in a crisis. 260 Coal stockpiles in early 2025 were estimated to last 
42 days at regular consumption, which could be extended dependent 
on rationing.261
Trade Negotiations Are Underway to Reduce the Trade 
Imbalance
As part of the April 2, 2025, “Liberation Day” rates, the Trump 
Administration announced a 32 percent reciprocal tariff rate on Tai -
wan, which was subsequently lowered to 20 percent in August. 262 
Semiconductors and other electronic goods that comprise 64 percent 
of Taiwan’s total exports to the United States were temporarily ex -
empted from all tariffs. 263 However, these products may be subject 
to tariffs that result from the ongoing Section 232 trade investi -
gation.264 Taiwan’s average most-favored-nation-applied tariff rate 
was 6.5 percent in 2023, and U.S. concerns persist around market 
access barriers in agriculture, digital services, biotechnology, medi -
cal devices, and energy.265
Taiwan has been proactive in trade negotiations with the Unit -
ed States since the April 2 reciprocal tariff announcement. Pres -
ident Lai was quick to proclaim his Administration’s intention 
to reduce the trade imbalance with the United States through 
increasing purchases of U.S. energy, agriculture products, and 
defense articles; reducing non-tariff trade barriers; and seeking 
further opportunities for investment by Taiwan companies in the 
United States. 266 Like other economies with high proposed recip -
rocal tariff rates, exports from Taiwan to the United States hit 
a record level in May ($15.5 billion), up a staggering 90 percent 
year-over-year as companies frontloaded orders to avoid potential 
future tariff hikes (see Figure 4). 267
In recent years, the United States and Taiwan have pursued closer 
trade and investment ties through a number of initiatives to reduce 
tariff and non-tariff barriers and that could lay the groundwork for 
a free trade agreement (FTA). In 2022, the United States and Tai -
wan began negotiations on the U.S.-Taiwan Initiative on 21st Cen -
tury Trade, a bilateral agreement meant to mirror the Indo-Pacific 
Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF) negotiations, which did 
not include Taiwan. In December 2024, the first agreement under 
the Initiative went into effect, covering issues pertaining to anti -
corruption, regulatory practices, and small and medium-sized enter -
prises.268 In June 2025, U.S. Trade Representative Jamieson Greer 
assessed that Taiwan had implemented the agreed-upon provisions 
and was thus far in full compliance with the agreement. 269 The 

632
United States and Taiwan have also engaged in negotiations for a 
second agreement focused on agriculture, environment, labor, and 
dispute settlement issues; it is not clear whether these negotiations 
will continue or be subsumed into the “reciprocal trade” negotia -
tions.270
Congress passed legislation approving the first agreement under 
the U.S.-Taiwan Initiative on 21st Century Trade in August 2023.271 
The law also requires various transparency measures for negotia -
tions over a further agreement with Taiwan and requires congres -
sional approval (via enacted legislation) before any further agree -
ment may go into effect. 272 It is unclear if this law applies to the 
“reciprocal trade” negotiations.
Legislation Pending to Resolve Double Taxation Issue
The lack of formal diplomatic relations precludes the United 
States from entering into an income tax treaty with Taiwan sim -
ilar to those it maintains with many countries. 273 As a result, 
business activity between the United States and Taiwan is sub -
ject to a more complicated tax situation, sometimes including 
double taxation. Companies in both jurisdictions advocate for a 
tax agreement similar to other U.S. tax treaties to alleviate this 
added burden, stating that such an agreement would spur further 
two-way investment.* 274
In January 2025, the U.S. House of Representatives passed 
H.R. 33 by a 423-1 vote, which takes a two-pronged approach 
to settling the issue by including two previously proposed piec -
es of legislation. First, the U.S.-Taiwan Expedited Double-Tax 
Relief Act would amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
to include new rules on taxation of certain Taiwan residents 
with income in the United States. 275 Amendments to the U.S. 
tax code would reflect treaty-like benefits the United States 
extends to other jurisdictions, with provisions such as reduc -
tions in withholding taxes, application of permanent estab -
lishment rules, and rules for determining eligibility for Tai -
wan businesses and persons. 276 Enactment is contingent upon 
reciprocity from Taiwan for U.S. businesses and persons. Also 
included was the U.S.-Taiwan Tax Agreement Authorization 
Act, which would empower the president to negotiate a tax 
agreement with Taiwan pending Senate approval. 277 Such a 
tax agreement would need to be in line with standard bilat -
eral tax agreements and follow provisions in the U.S. Model 
Tax Treaty.278 The accompanying Senate bill (S. 199) has been 
introduced by leadership of the Senate Foreign Relations Com -
mittee and the Senate Finance Committee. 279
* As flows of FDI from Taiwan to the United States have increased over the past year, so too 
have those from Taiwan to Caribbean tax havens. According to official data from Taiwan’s gov -
ernment, FDI to the British Virgin Islands shot up 2,283 percent from $344 million in 2023 to 
$8.2 billion in 2024. So far in 2025, another $10.3 billion has been recorded. Taiwan’s Ministry of 
Economic Affairs, 雙邊投資統計 [Bilateral Investment Statistics].

633
Implications for the United States
Taiwan remains the most significant potential flashpoint 
for military conflict between the United States and China.  
Beijing is continuing to rapidly modernize its military capabilities 
with the goal of being able to take Taiwan by force if necessary. The 
PLA’s around-the-clock military activities near Taiwan—along with 
its introduction of new platforms designed to support an amphibi -
ous attack—have enhanced China’s ability to launch a blockade or 
invasion of Taiwan with almost no advance warning. Moreover, the 
widening divergence between China’s international and domestic 
propaganda is concerning. While Beijing’s English-language rheto -
ric aimed at global audiences continues to downplay the possibility 
of an invasion, Chinese-language propaganda circulated domestical -
ly has suggested that Taiwan’s “provocations” could justify military 
action in the near future. While there is no indication that China 
is planning an imminent attack, the United States and its allies 
and partners can no longer assume that a Taiwan contingency is a 
distant possibility for which they would have ample time to prepare. 
The United States must enhance its own military capabili -
ties in the Indo-Pacific to ensure continued compliance with 
the Taiwan Relations Act, which requires the United States 
to “maintain the capacity” to “resist any resort to force or 
other forms of coercion” that would jeopardize the security 
of Taiwan.
In addition to enhancing its military capabilities, Beijing is oper -
ating a well-resourced and sophisticated pressure campaign aimed 
at exacerbating Taiwan’s domestic divisions and sowing doubt in 
Taiwan about the United States’ commitment to its defense and 
prosperity. The ultimate goal of Beijing’s pressure campaign is to 
convince Taiwan to surrender without a fight—both by eroding 
the Taiwan people’s will to resist and by convincing them that the 
United States is unlikely to come to their defense in the event of 
a war. In order to reinforce deterrence and neutralize the 
effectiveness of China’s propaganda and gray zone pressure 
tactics, the United States and Taiwan will need to continue 
deepening cooperation on issues like military procurement, 
building secure defense industrial supply chains, bolstering 
digital infrastructure, and enhancing civilian resilience.
Securing Taiwan’s undersea cables against Chinese sabotage 
should be an especially high priority for collaboration between Tai -
wan, the United States, and other like-minded partners in the In -
do-Pacific. If China successfully severed the undersea cables serving 
Taiwan, it could have devastating consequences, paralyzing govern -
ment and military communications and costing Taiwan’s economy 
an estimated $55.6 million per day. 280 In order to guard against 
Chinese vessels sabotaging undersea cables near Taiwan as 
a gray zone pressure tactic and potential tool of war, the 
United States and like-minded countries should work with 
Taiwan to improve the resiliency of its undersea cables, 
build the capacity to quickly repair damaged cables, and in -
crease access to backup sources of connectivity such as low 
Earth orbit satellites.

634
Taiwan continues to play a central role in advanced semiconduc -
tor manufacturing and global technology supply chains, making it a 
key partner in ensuring China does not gain a dominant technologi -
cal advantage in AI and advanced computing. Taiwan’s companies 
are also instrumental in foundational semiconductor pro -
duction and will remain important to U.S. efforts to ensure 
China does not come to dominate production of lower-end 
chips that have wide-ranging applications.
China is racing forward with its efforts to develop the capacity 
to take Taiwan by force or through coercion. A war over Taiwan 
would be cataclysmic for the global community. Taiwan’s role in the 
advanced technology ecosystem and the abrupt severing of broad -
er trade and supply chains in a conflict would cause severe eco -
nomic harm—wiping out as much as 10 percent of global GDP—
with ramifications on par with the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. A 
conflict would also trigger an acute risk of nuclear escalation and 
raise the threat of Chinese geographic expansion in the Indo-Pacific. 
The United States, Taiwan, and the global community must 
make it a priority to ensure continuing effective deterrence 
against Chinese aggression.
Recommendations
The Commission recommends:
 • Congress direct the U.S. Department of Defense, in coordination 
with the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM), to pro -
duce a report in both classified and unclassified form assessing 
its compliance with the legal requirement established by Con -
gress in the Taiwan Relations Act “to maintain the capacity of 
the United States to resist any resort to force or other forms 
of coercion that would jeopardize the security, or the social or 
economic system, of the people on Taiwan.” The report should 
include:
 ○ An assessment of U.S. capacity to respond to a Taiwan con -
tingency;
 ○ An assessment of U.S. capacity to respond to other forms of 
coercion being used by China to threaten the security of Tai -
wan (e.g., China’s gray zone tactics in and around Taiwan); 
and
 ○ An assessment of U.S. capacity to comply with the Taiwan 
Relations Act in scenarios where the United States is also 
engaged in responding to aggression by Russia, Iran, or North 
Korea in other regions.
In each case, the report should identify any gaps that currently 
exist or will exist based on likely trajectories of resources and 
capabilities.
 • Congress direct the U.S. Department of State to work with Tai -
wan to open a Foreign Military Sales (FMS) case for non-weap -
onry support services to advance regional U.S. posture initia -
tives that would enhance the U.S. deterrence capacity around 
Taiwan.

635
 ○ The case should specifically bolster existing U.S. initiatives, 
such as the U.S.-Philippines Enhanced Defense Cooperation 
Arrangements (EDCA) on the Luzon and Palawan Islands as 
well as efforts in the southwestern Japanese island chain and 
on the Pacific Islands that recognize Taiwan.
 ○ Under this program, Taiwan would fund projects in third 
countries, ultimately benefiting its own security.
 • Congress pass legislation affirming strong, bipartisan support 
for the Vatican-Taiwan diplomatic relationship. The legislation 
should:
 ○ Recognize that the Vatican is one of Taiwan’s most significant 
diplomatic partners, providing essential international legiti -
macy and support to the people of Taiwan;
 ○ Express opposition to Chinese government pressure on the 
Holy See to sever ties with Taipei;
 ○ Endorse the establishment of a trilateral mechanism with 
Taiwan and the Vatican to advance religious freedom and hu -
man rights globally; and
 ○ Encourage Members of Congress to underscore U.S. support 
for the Vatican-Taiwan diplomatic relationship in all engage -
ments with Vatican officials.

636
Appendix I: U.S. Military Sales to Taiwan,  
October 2024–October 2025
Date of State  
Department 
Approval * Content of Purchase Value
October 25, 2024 281 National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile 
System and related equipment
$1.16 
billion
October 25, 2024 282 AN/TPS-77 and AN/TPS-78 Radar Turnkey 
Systems and related equipment
$828 
million
November 29, 2024 283 Spare Parts and Support for F-16 Aircraft 
and Active Electronically Scanned Array 
Radars and related equipment
$320 
million
November 29, 2024 284 Improved Mobile Subscriber Equipment Fol -
low-On Support and related equipment
$65  
million
December 20, 2024 285 Command, Control, Communications, and 
Computers Modernization and related equip -
ment
$265 
million
December 20, 2024 286 MK 75 76 mm Gun Mounts and related 
equipment
$30 
million
* According to the U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, the FMS program is a form of 
security assistance authorized by the Arms Export Control Act (AECA), as amended by 22 U.S.C. 
2751, et. seq., and a fundamental tool of U.S. foreign policy. Under Section 3 of the AECA, the 
United States may sell defense articles and services to foreign governments and international 
organizations when the president formally finds that to do so will strengthen the security of the 
United States and promote world peace. Under the FMS program, the U.S. government and a 
foreign government enter into a government-to-government agreement called a Letter of Offer 
and Acceptance. The Secretary of State determines which governments will have programs. The 
Secretary of Defense executes the program. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Foreign Mili-
tary Sales (FMS) .

637
ENDNOTES FOR CHAPTER 11
1. Kathrin Hille and Demetri Sevastopulo, “China Improves Ability to Launch Sud-
den Attack on Taiwan, Officials Say,” Financial Times, May 25, 2025.
2. Gerald C. Brown and Ben Lewis, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations Database,” PLA 
Tracker, May 1, 2025; U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2024 
Annual Report to Congress , November 2024, 629.
3. Gerald C. Brown and Ben Lewis, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations Database,” PLA 
Tracker, May 1, 2025.
4. Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan Foreign and National Defense Committee, 國家情報
工作暨國家安全局業務報告 [National Intelligence Work and National Security Bureau 
Work Report], April 2025, 8.
5. Benjamin Herscovitch, “Five One-Chinas: The Contest to Define Taiwan,” Lowy 
Institute, January 2025; Chong Ja Ian, “The Many ‘One Chinas’: Multiple Approach-
es to Taiwan and China,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace , February 9, 
2023.
6. Noah Robertson, “How DC Became Obsessed with a Potential 2027 Chinese In -
vasion of Taiwan,” Defense News, May 7, 2024.
7. “宋涛会见夏立言一行” [Song Tao Meets with Andrew Hsia and Accompanying 
Delegation], Xinhua, April 2, 2025.
8. John Dotson, “The PLA’s ‘Strait-Thunder-2025A’ Exercise Presents Further Ef-
forts to Isolate Taiwan,” Global Taiwan Institute , April 16, 2025; China’s Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, 2025年4月2日外交部发言人郭嘉昆主持例行记者会 [Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Guo Jiakun Holds Regular Press Conference on April 2, 2025], April 
2, 2025.
9. Jennifer Staats and Naiyu Kuo, “Taiwan’s New President Faces Tensions with 
China and Domestic Division,” United States Institute of Peace , June 6, 2024; Tessa 
Wong, “Taiwan Election: Kuomintang Party Asks Voters to Choose between War and 
Peace,” BBC, January 8, 2024.
10. Mina Pollmann, “Taiwan’s Government Eyes Expanded Defense Budget at 
3.3% of GDP,” Diplomat, August 27, 2025; Meaghan Tobin, Amy Chang Chien, and 
Xinyun Wu, “Can Taiwan Really Disconnect Its Economy from China?” New York 
Times, July 7, 2025; Taiwan’s Office of the President, 總統發表「團結國家十講」第
四講　籲國人不分政黨朝野相挺國軍　支持國防預算　以實力達成真和平 [The President 
Delivers Fourth Speech in “Ten Speeches on National Unity,” Calls on Citizens to 
Support the National Armed Forces Regardless of Party and Support the National 
Defense Budget to Achieve True Peace through Strength], July 1, 2025; Taiwan’s Of -
fice of the President, 總統主持國安高層會議會後記者會　提五大國安統戰威脅及十七項
因應策略　籲請國人團結抵抗分化 [President Holds Press Conference after High-Level 
National Security Meeting, Raises Five Major National Security and United Front 
Threats and Seventeen Response Strategies, Calls on Citizens to Unite and Resist 
Division], March 13, 2025.
11. Ray Powell and Jim Carouso, “Why Should We Care about the Kuomintang, 
Taiwan’s Opposition Party,” Why Should We Care about the Indo-Pacific , November 
29, 2024.
12. Victor Chin, “KMT Bottom Lines Following the 2024 Election,” Jamestown 
Foundation, February 16, 2024.
13. Chung Yu-chen, Liu Kuang-ting, and Joseph Yeh, “American Senators Question 
Taiwan Opposition’s Defense Budget Stance,” Focus Taiwan, March 5, 2025.
14. Brian Hioe, “Taiwan’s Great Recall Movement Is Officially Over,” Diplomat, 
August 25, 2025; Jan Camenzind Broomby, “Taiwanese Political Gridlock Endures as 
China-Friendly Party Survives Recall Vote,” NPR, July 26, 2025.
15. “台灣民衆統獨立場趨勢分佈” (1994–2025.06) [Distribution of Taiwan Populace’s 
Stance on Unification/Independence (1994–2025.06)], National Chengchi University 
Election Study Center , June 2025.
16. Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council, 「民眾對當前兩岸關係之看法」民意調查結果
摘要 [“Popular Views on Current Cross-Strait Relations”: Summary of Public Opinion 
Survey Results], April 24, 2025.
17. Wen-Chin Wu and Hsin-Hsin Pan, “Taiwan’s Youth Are Not Defeatist—and the 
Data Proves It,” Diplomat, April 9, 2025.
18. China’s Foreign Ministry, 中共中央政治局委员、外交部长王毅就中国外交政策和
对外关系回答中外记者提问 [CCP Central Committee Politburo Member and Foreign 
Minister Wang Yi Answers Chinese and International Journalists’ Questions on Chi-
na’s Foreign Policy and External Relations], March 7, 2025; China’s State Council 
Taiwan Affairs Office, 2025 年对台工作会议在京召开 王沪宁出席并讲话  [2025 Taiwan 
Work Conference Convenes in Beijing: Wang Huning Attends and Delivers a Speech], 
February 26, 2025.

638
19. China’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 国台办发言人就赖清德“台独”分
裂言行发表谈话 [The Taiwan Affairs Office Spokesperson Delivers a Speech on Lai 
Ching-te’s ‘Taiwan Independence’ Separatism], March 13, 2025.
20. China’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 2025年对台工作会议在京召开 王
沪宁出席并讲话 [2025 Taiwan Work Conference Convenes in Beijing: Wang Huning 
Attends and Delivers a Speech], February 26, 2025.
21. China’s State Council, 政府工作报告 [Government Work Report], March 12, 
2025.
22. China’s State Council Information Office, 新时代的中国国家安全 [White Paper 
on China’s National Security in the New Era], May 12, 2025.
23. Amber Wang, “Beijing Advisor Yan Anlin on Why a Timetable for Taiwan Re -
unification Has Disadvantages,” South China Morning Post , April 21, 2025; Yan Xue-
tong, “Why China Isn’t Scared of Trump,” Foreign Affairs, December 20, 2024.
24. Yan Xuetong, “Why China Isn’t Scared of Trump,” Foreign Affairs, December 
20, 2024.
25. China’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 国务院台办新闻发布会辑录 [Tran -
script of State Council Taiwan Affairs Office Press Briefing], December 25, 2024; Chi -
na’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 国务院台办新闻发布会辑录 [Transcript of 
State Council Taiwan Affairs Office Press Briefing], March 12, 2025.
26. Wei Leijie, “台湾问题继续“拖”下去机率不大” [The Odds of the Taiwan Ques -
tion Continuing to “Drag” On Are Not High], China Review Monthly , June 22, 2025; 
“高志凯：没有人能阻拦我们进入自己的领土—— 中国台湾省” [Gao Zhikai: No One Can 
Stop Us from Entering Our Own Territory—China’s Taiwan Province], Observer, 
April 2, 2025.
27. Zhong Yiping, “赖清德：穷凶极恶的‘战争制造者’ ” [Lai Ching-te: An Utterly Evil 
Creator of War], People’s Daily, April 2, 2025.
28. Zhong Yiping, “赖清德：穷凶极恶的‘战争制造者’ ” [Lai Ching-te: An Utterly Evil 
Creator of War], People’s Daily, April 2, 2025.
29. Wang Yingjin, “ 民进党“大罢免”完败有其必然” [The Crushing Defeat of 
the DPP’s “Great Recall” Was Inevitable], People’s Daily, August 28, 2025; Anton 
Troianovski, “Why Vladimir Putin Invokes Nazis to Justify His Invasion of Ukraine,” 
New York Times, March 17, 2022.
30. Natto Team, “Does China Have a Timeline for Taking Over Taiwan,” Natto 
Thoughts, January 25, 2024.
31. Natto Team, “Does China Have a Timeline for Taking Over Taiwan,” Natto 
Thoughts, January 25, 2024.
32. “Keoni Everington, “Xi Denies 2027 Taiwan Invasion Plan, Lists Conditions for 
Attack,” Taiwan News, November 16, 2023.
33. Rupert Wingfield-Hayes, “Taiwan’s Steely Leader Rewrote the Book on How to 
Deal with China,” BBC, May 18, 2024; Richard C. Bush, “8 Key Things to Notice from 
Xi Jinping’s New Year Speech on Taiwan,” Brookings Institution , January 7, 2019; 
“习近平：在《告台湾同胞书》发表40周年纪念会上的讲话” [Xi Jinping Delivers Speech 
on the 40th Anniversary of the “Message to Taiwan Compatriots”], Xinhua, January 
2, 2019.
34. U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, Trainor Award Ceremony in Honor of William 
J. Burns, February 2, 2023.
35. “习近平提出，实现建军一百年奋斗目标，开创国防和军队现代化新局面” [Xi Jin -
ping Calls for Fighting to Achieve the Goals for the Centenary of the Founding of 
the PLA, Opening Up a New Phase in National Defense and the Modernization of 
the Armed Forces], Xinhua, October 16, 2022.
36. Natto Team, “Does China Have a Timeline for Taking Over Taiwan,” Natto 
Thoughts, January 25, 2024.
37. “以国防和军队现代化有力支撑中华民族伟大复兴——写在中国人民解放军建军96周
年之际” [Effectively Promoting the Great Rejuvenation of the Chinese Nation through 
the Modernization of National Defense and the Military—Written on the Eve of the 
96th Anniversary of the Founding of the PLA], Xinhua, July 31, 2023.
38. “China Launched First Cross-Sea Bullet Train Line near Taiwan Strait,” Reu-
ters, September 28, 2023.
39. Orange Wang, “Beijing Says It Now Has Capacity to Build Taiwan High-Speed 
Rail Link from Chinese Mainland,” South China Morning Post , September 14, 2023.
40. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 习近平：高举中国特色社会主义伟大旗帜 为
全面建设社会主义现代化国家而团结奋斗——在中国共产党第二十次全国代表大会上的报
告 [Xi Jinping: Hold High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese Characteris -
tics and Strive in Unity to Build a Modern Socialist Country in All Respects—Full 
Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of the Chinse Communist Party], 
October 25, 2022; “ 关于实现中国梦的时间节点” [On the Timepoint for Realizing the 
China Dream], Beijing Daily, July 7, 2015.

639
41. “以国防和军队现代化有力支撑中华民族伟大复兴——写在中国人民解放军建军96周
年之际” [Effectively Promoting the Great Rejuvenation of the Chinese Nation through 
the Modernization of National Defense and the Military—Written on the Eve of the 
96th Anniversary of the Founding of the PLA], Xinhua, July 31, 2023.
42. U.S. House of Representatives Armed Services Committee, Statement of Ad -
miral Samuel J. Paparo, Commander, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, U.S. Indo-Pacific 
Command Posture, April 2025.
43. Gerald C. Brown and Ben Lewis, “Taiwan ADIZ Violations Database,” PLA 
Tracker, October 14, 2025; Taiwan’s Ministry of National Defense, PLA Activities in 
the Waters and Airspace around Taiwan , October 4–11, 2025.
44. U.S. House of Representatives Armed Services Committee, Statement of Ad -
miral Samuel J. Paparo, Commander, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, U.S. Indo-Pacific 
Command Posture, April 2025.
45. Tai-yuan Yang and K. Tristan Tang, “ ‘Strait Thunder-2025A’ Drill Implies Fu-
ture Increase in PLA Pressure on Taiwan,” Jamestown Foundation, April 11, 2025.
46. John Dotson, “The PLA’s ‘Strait-Thunder-2025A’ Exercise Presents Further Ef-
forts to Isolate Taiwan,” Global Taiwan Institute, April 16, 2025.
47. Guo Yuandan, “ 东部战区证实山东舰航母编队参加演习 专家：有助于从军事上阻
断‘三条线’ ” [Eastern Theater Command Confirms Shandong Aircraft Carrier Group’s 
Participation in Drills, Experts: Helps Militarily Cut Off the “Three Lines”], Global 
Times, April 2, 2025.
48. David Pierson and Amy Chang Chien, “Taiwan Says China Has Deployed Larg-
est Fleet of Ships in Decades,” New York Times, December 10, 2024.
49. Alex Turek, “China-Taiwan Weekly Update,” Institute for the Study of War , De-
cember 12, 2024.
50. Alex Turek, “China-Taiwan Weekly Update,” Institute for the Study of War , 
December 12, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2024年12月10日外交部发言人
毛宁主持例行记者会 [Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning Holds Regular Press 
Conference on December 10, 2024], December 10, 2024.
51. China’s Ministry of National Defense, 2025年2月国防部例行记者会文字实录 
[Written Transcript of February 2025 Ministry of National Regular News Confer -
ence], February 27, 2025.
52. Keoni Everington, “China Holds Military Drills around Taiwan in Response to 
‘Separatism’ and US Fact Sheet,” Taiwan News, March 18, 2025; China’s Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, 2025年3月17日外交部发言人毛宁主持例行记者会 [Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Mao Ning Holds Regular Press Conference on March 17, 2025], March 
17, 2025.
53. Kathrin Hille, “China Building New Mobile Piers That Could Help Possible 
Taiwan Invasion,” Financial Times, February 13, 2025.
54. Chris Buckley, Christoph Koettl, and Agnes Chang, “China’s New Barges Could 
Make a Tough Task Easier: Invading Taiwan,” New York Times, April 1, 2025.
55. J. Michael Dahm and Thomas Shugart, “Bridges over Troubled Waters: 
Shuiqiao-Class Landing Barges in PLA Navy Amphibious Operations,” China Mari-
time Studies Institute Note , No. 14 (March 20, 2025): 2.
56. Amber Wang, “China Launches First Type 076 Warship Tipped to Become 
World’s First ‘Drone Carrier,’ ” South China Morning Post , December 27, 2024; Kath -
rin Hille, “China Launches Biggest Amphibious Assault Ship in Projection of Military 
Power,” Financial Times, December 27, 2024.
57. Amber Wang, “China Launches First Type 076 Warship Tipped to Become 
World’s First ‘Drone Carrier,’ ” South China Morning Post , December 27, 2024.
58. Yuanyue Dang and Amber Wang, “Latest China Weaponry in Parade Shows 
Beijing’s Sharp Focus on Sovereign Defence: Analysts,” South China Morning Post , 
September 3, 2025; David Pierson and Berry Wang, “Xi’s Parade to Showcase China’s 
Military Might and Circle of Autocrats,” New York Times, September 2, 2025.
59. Brent M. Eastwood, “J-35: China Might Have Its Very Own ‘F-35 Stealth Fight-
er,’” National Security Journal , June 5, 2025; Hyeon Choi, “Why the J-35 Gyrfalcon 
Is Crucial to China’s Power Projection on the High Seas,” South China Morning Post, 
November 14, 2024.
60. Ryan D. Martinson, “Fujian Unveils Incentives for Militia Training for a Cross-
Strait Campaign,” Jamestown Foundation, March 15, 2025.
61. Ryan D. Martinson, “Fujian Unveils Incentives for Militia Training for a Cross-
Strait Campaign,” Jamestown Foundation, March 15, 2025; Fujian Provincial Govern-
ment, 福建省民兵权益保障办法 [Fujian Province Measures for Protecting the Rights 
and Interests of Militia Members], January 26, 2025.
62. Christine McDaniel and Weifeng Zhong, “Submarine Cables and Container 
Shipments: Two Immediate Risks to the US Economy if China Invades Taiwan,” Mer-
catus Center, August 29, 2022.

640
63. Jaime Ocon, “China’s Undersea Cable Sabotage and Taiwan’s Digital Vulnera-
bilities,” Global Taiwan Institute, June 4, 2025; Sunny Lai, “Taiwan Urged to Stream-
line Undersea Cable Permits,” Focus Taiwan, April 23, 2025.
64. Christine McDaniel and Weifeng Zhong, “Submarine Cables and Container 
Shipments: Two Immediate Risks to the US Economy if China Invades Taiwan,” Mer-
catus Center, August 29, 2022.
65. Sunny Cheung and Cheryl Yu, “Creative Destruction: PRC Undersea Cable Tech-
nology,” Jamestown Foundation, January 16, 2025; He Honghui et al., “Ocean Towing 
Type Cutting Device,” Chinese Patent Application Publication No. CN101585192A, 
published November 25, 2009.
66. Stephen Chen, “China Unveils a Powerful Deep-Sea Cable Cutter That Could 
Reset the World Order,” South China Morning Post , March 22, 2025; Hu Haolong 
et al., “深海缆线电动切割装置设计” [Design of an Electric Cutting Device for Deep-
Sea Cables], Mechanical Engineer, No. 7 (2024): 1–4; U.S. Department of Commerce 
Bureau of Industry and Security, “Addition of Entities to the Entity List, Revision of 
Entry on the Entity List, and Removal of Entities From the Entity List,” 85 Fed. Reg. 
83416 (December 22, 2020).
67. Jaime Ocon, “China’s Undersea Cable Sabotage and Taiwan’s Digital Vulner -
abilities,” Global Taiwan Institute , June 4, 2025; Christine McDaniel and Weifeng 
Zhong, “Submarine Cables and Container Shipments: Two Immediate Risks to the 
US Economy if China Invades Taiwan,” Mercatus Center, August 29, 2022.
68. Sunny Lai, “Taiwan Urged to Streamline Undersea Cable Permits,” Focus Tai-
wan, April 23, 2025; Chen Yu-fu, “Foreign Vessels Repeatedly Damage Underwater 
Cables,” Taipei Times, August 5, 2024; Huizhong Wu and Johnson Lai, “Taiwan Sus -
pects Chinese Ships Cut Islands’ Internet Cables,” Associated Press, April 18, 2023.
69. Kathrin Hille and Haohsiang Ko, “Taiwan Blacklists Chinese-Owned ‘Shadow 
Fleet’ Ships,” Financial Times, January 26, 2025.
70. Kathrin Hille, “Taiwan Asks South Korea for Help over Chinese Ship after 
Subsea Cable Damaged,” Financial Times, January 5, 2025.
71. Meaghan Tobin, Muyi Xiao, and Amy Chang Chien, “Taiwan Says It Suspects 
a Chinese-Linked Ship Damaged an Undersea Internet Cable,” New York Times, Jan-
uary 7, 2025.
72. Kathrin Hille, “Taiwan Catches Chinese-Owned Ship in Act of Cutting Subsea 
Cable,” Financial Times, February 25, 2025; Taiwan’s Coast Guard Administration, 多
哥籍「宏泰」貨輪疑似拖斷臺澎第三海纜 海巡署超前部署押返安平港深入偵辦  [Togolese 
“Hong Tai” Cargo Ship Suspected of Dragging and Breaking Taiwan-Penghu No. 3 
Sea Cable—Coast Guard Advance Deployment Escorts Ship to Anping Harbor for 
Deeper Investigation], February 25, 2025.
73. Jaime Ocon, “China’s Undersea Cable Sabotage and Taiwan’s Digital Vulnera-
bilities,” Global Taiwan Institute, June 4, 2025; Kathrin Hille, “Taiwan Catches Chi -
nese-Owned Ship in Act of Cutting Subsea Cable,” Financial Times , February 25, 
2025; Kathrin Hille, “Taiwan Asks South Korea for Help over Chinese Ship after 
Subsea Cable Damaged,” Financial Times, January 5, 2025; “Taiwan Seeks Satellite 
Solutions after Undersea Cables Cut,” Agence France-Presse, April 13, 2023.
74. Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan Foreign and National Defense Committee, 國家情報
工作暨國家安全局業務報告 [National Intelligence Work and National Security Bureau 
Work Report], April 2025, 8.
75. Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan Foreign and National Defense Committee, 國家情報
工作暨國家安全局業務報告 [National Intelligence Work and National Security Bureau 
Work Report], April 2025, 8.
76. Taiwan’s National Security Bureau, 共諜案滲透手法分析 [Analysis of Infiltra -
tion Tactics in Chinese Communist Espionage Cases], January 12, 2025, 4.
77. Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan Foreign and National Defense Committee, 國家情報
工作暨國家安全局業務報告 [National Intelligence Work and National Security Bureau 
Work Report], April 2025, 9.
78. Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan Foreign and National Defense Committee, 國家情報
工作暨國家安全局業務報告 [National Intelligence Work and National Security Bureau 
Work Report], April 2025, 10–11.
79. Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan Foreign and National Defense Committee, 國家情報
工作暨國家安全局業務報告 [National Intelligence Work and National Security Bureau 
Work Report], April 2025, 11.
80. “China’s United Front Exposed: Officials’ Leaked Calls and Tactics to Buy Off 
Taiwanese Influencers,” Fun TV, December 6, 2024.
81. Brian Hioe, “China Car Crash Plan Targeting Hsiao Bi-khim Shocks Taiwan,” 
Diplomat, July 2, 2025.
82. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2024 Annual Report to 
Congress, November 2024, 622–624.

641
83. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2024 Annual Report to 
Congress, November 2024, 623.
84. Yimou Lee, “Taiwan Fears Beijing Is Taking Independence Crackdown Over -
seas,” Reuters, March 7, 2025.
85. Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 外交部對柬埔寨政府近日將涉及電信詐騙案
國人遣送中國表達嚴正抗議與關切 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs Expresses Solemn Pro -
test and Concern about the Cambodian Government Recently Deporting Citizens In -
volved with Telecom Fraud Cases to China], April 14, 2025.
86. Chen Yu-fu and Fion Khan, “KMT Delegation Visits China, Meets with Taiwan 
Affairs Office Head,” Taipei Times, April 3, 2025; Chen Yufu, “朱立倫稱「真正反共是國
民黨」 夏立言赴中參加「黃帝拜祖」統戰活動 ” [Chu Li-luan Says ‘Kuomintang Is the 
True Anti-Communist Party’—Andrew Hsia Goes to China and Attends United Front 
Event ‘Worshipping the Yellow Emperor’], Liberty Times, March 31, 2025.
87. Yuanyue Dang, “Former Taiwan Leader Ma Ying-jeou to Return to Mainland 
China despite Warnings,” South China Morning Post , June 11, 2025.
88. “纪念中国人民抗日战争暨世界反法西斯战争胜利80周年招待会在京隆重举行 习近平
发表重要讲话” [Reception Commemorating of the 80th Anniversary of Victory in the 
Chinese People’s War of Resistance against Japan and the World Anti-Fascist War 
Solemnly Held in Beijing—Xi Jinping Delivers Important Speech], Xinhua, Septem-
ber 3, 2025; “現身天安門城樓！洪秀柱出席中共九三閱兵畫面曝光” [Seen at the Tianan -
men Rostrum! Photograph of Hung Hsiu-chu Attending September Third Military 
Parade Revealed], Liberty Times, September 3, 2025.
89. Ren Zhongping, “正义必胜 和平必胜 人民必胜——写在中国人民抗日战争暨世界
反法西斯战争胜利80周年之际” [Justice Must Prevail, Peace Must Prevail, the People 
Must Prevail—Written on the Eve of the 80th Anniversary of Victory in the Chinese 
People’s War of Resistance against Japan and the World Anti-Fascist War], People’s 
Daily, September 2, 2025.
90. Ha Syut and Ray Chung, “China’s United Front Takes Taiwanese Youth on 
Xinjiang Trips,” Radio Free Asia, December 27, 2024.
91. Chen Zhenglu, “馬英九率團參訪前 中國開放侵華日軍731部隊本部舊址 ” [On the 
Eve of Ma Ying-jeou Leading a Group to Visit, China Opens Up the Site of the Head -
quarters of Unit 731 of the Japanese Army That Invaded China], World Journal, 
December 13, 2024.
92. Chen Zhenglu, “大九學堂今訪北京小米、兩岸科創中心 蕭旭岑未隨團 ” [Da Jeou 
Academy Visits Xiaomi, Cross-Strait Science and Technology Innovation Center in 
Beijing—Hsiao Hsu-tsen Does Not Accompany the Group], United Daily News , Feb-
ruary 13, 2025.
93. Chong Ja Ian, “The Many ‘One Chinas’: Multiple Approaches to Taiwan and 
China,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace , February 9, 2023.
94. Benjamin Herscovitch, “Five One-Chinas: The Contest to Define Taiwan,” Lowy 
Institute, January 2025.
95. “China’s New Campaign to Turn the World against Taiwan,” Economist, Feb-
ruary 9, 2025.
96. Thomas des Garets Geddes and Paddy Stephens, “Trump Is Back: Chinese 
Scholars React,” Sinification, January 20, 2025.
97. Wei Leijie, “台湾问题继续“拖”下去机率不大” [The Odds of the Taiwan Ques -
tion Continuing to “Drag” On Are Not High], China Review Monthly , June 22, 2025.
98. Shao Yuqun et al., “台湾问题影响因素的新变化——两场选举的视角” [New Chang-
es in Factors Influencing the Taiwan Question—A Perspective from Two Elections], 
Shanghai Institute for International Studies , October 2024, 12.
99. China’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 国务院台办新闻发布会辑录 [Tran -
script of State Council Taiwan Affairs Office Press Briefing], February 26, 2025.
100. China’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 国务院台办新闻发布会辑录 [Tran-
script of State Council Taiwan Affairs Office Press Briefing], March 12, 2025.
101. China’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 中共中央台办、国务院台办在南京
举办台商代表座谈会 [CCP Central Committee Taiwan Work Office and State Council 
Taiwan Affairs Office Hold Symposium for Taiwan Business Representatives in Nan -
jing], April 18, 2025.
102. Yang Xiaojing and Liu Fei, “民进党当局应对美关税策略饱受岛内各界批评” [DPP 
Authorities’ Strategy for Responding to U.S. Tariffs Subjected to Criticisms from Var-
ious Groups on the Island], Xinhua, April 11, 2025.
103. Liu Kuangyu, “量台湾之物力 结美国之欢心——台当局以天价军购向美投交保护
费” [Taking Stock of Taiwan’s Resources Brings the United States Joy—Taiwanese 
Authorities Purchase Arms at Sky-High Prices to Pay Protection Fees to the U.S.], 
Xinhua, March 14, 2025.
104. China’s State Council Taiwan Affairs Office, 国台办：赖清德当局“跪美卖台”
换来“棋子”变“弃子” [State Council Taiwan Affairs Office: Lai Ching-te Authori -

642
ties “Kowtow to U.S and Sellout Taiwan”—Going from “Chess Piece” to “Abandoned 
Chess Piece”], April 16, 2025.
105. Lev Nachman, Hannah June Kim, and Wei-Ting Yen, “The Trump Effect on 
Public Attitudes toward America in Taiwan and South Korea,” Brookings Institution, 
April 25, 2025.
106. Lev Nachman, Hannah June Kim, and Wei-Ting Yen, “The Trump Effect on 
Public Attitudes toward America in Taiwan and South Korea,” Brookings Institution, 
April 25, 2025.
107. Lev Nachman, Hannah June Kim, and Wei-Ting Yen, “The Trump Effect on 
Public Attitudes toward America in Taiwan and South Korea,” Brookings Institution, 
April 25, 2025.
108. “美中兩大强權衡擊下的台灣民意：2025年4月全國性民意調查摘要報告” [Taiwan 
Public Opinion under U.S.-China Great Power Collision: April 2025 National Public 
Opinion Survey Summary Report], Taiwanese Public Opinion Foundation , April 15, 
2025, i.
109. Vanessa Cai, “Mainland China Launches Latest Incentive Drive to Tempt Tai-
wanese to Work, Invest,” South China Morning Post , February 27, 2025.
110. Fujian Provincial Government, 直接采认台湾地区职业技能资格目录上新 [Direct 
Recognition of Taiwan’s Vocational Skills Qualification Catalog Updated], March 24, 
2025; Fujian Provincial Government, 福建發佈十七條惠臺利民新措施 [Fujian Releases 
17 New Measures to Benefit Taiwan and Its People], February 27, 2025; Vanessa 
Cai, “Mainland China Launches Latest Incentive Drive to Tempt Taiwanese to Work, 
Invest,” South China Morning Post , February 27, 2025.
111. Amber Wang, “Why Mainland China’s Taiwan Integration Experiment in Fu-
jian Is Starting to Fizzle,” South China Morning Post , January 2, 2025.
112. Rupert Wingfield-Hayes, “China’s Rhetoric Turns Dangerously Real for Tai -
wanese,” BBC, August 15, 2024; “這兩大因素影響 去年赴中國工作人數創近11年新低”  
[These Two Big Factors Caused the Number of People Going to China for Work to Hit 
a 11-Year Low Last Year], Central News Agency , December 17, 2019.
113. Yian Lee, “China Enticing Taiwanese to Live There Stirs Concern in Taipei,” 
Bloomberg, January 5, 2025.
114. Yian Lee, “China Enticing Taiwanese to Live There Stirs Concern in Taipei,” 
Bloomberg, January 5, 2025.
115. China’s State Council Information Office, Chinese Mainland to Suspend Pref -
erential Tariffs on Taiwan Chemicals in Response to Discriminatory Trade Measures , 
December 21, 2023; Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, China’s Termination of 
ECFA Tariff Reductions on Some Products Highlights Attempt to Use Economic Coer -
cion to Interfere in Taiwan’s Democratic Election, December 21, 2023.
116. “Tariff Cuts under ECFA Suspended as DPP ‘Kidnaps Well-Being of People in 
Taiwan for Political Interests,’ ” Global Times, July 3, 2024; Thompson Chau, “Taiwan 
Protests as China Strips Preferential Tariffs on 134 Products,” Nikkei Asia, May 31, 
2024.
117. “Taipei Slams China’s Changes to Tariffs,” Taipei Times, June 1, 2024.
118. “Taipei Slams China’s Changes to Tariffs,” Taipei Times, June 1, 2024.
119. Hanna Bilinski, “China to Suspend Tariff Exemption for 34 Taiwanese Agri -
cultural Products,” Radio Taiwan International, September 19, 2024.
120. Jeremy Mark and Niels Graham, “Relying on Old Enemies: The Challenge of 
Taiwan’s Economic Ties to China,” Atlantic Council, November 17, 2023.
121. Luke Patey, “A Taiwan Crisis Is a China Crisis,” Danish Institute for Interna -
tional Studies, December 2, 2024.
122. Gregory J. Moore, “Xi Jinping’s Taiwan Dashboard: Considering Xi’s Calculus 
for a Possible Move on Taiwan,” Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs , Spring 2025, 55–57; 
“Top Economist Urges China to Seize TSMC if US Ramps Up Sanctions,” Bloomberg, 
June 7, 2022.
123. David Sacks, “Will China’s Reliance on Taiwanese Chips Prevent a War?” 
Council on Foreign Relations , July 6, 2023; Kif Leswing, “Apple Chipmaker TSMC 
Warns Taiwan-China War Would Make Everybody Losers,” CNBC, August 2, 2022.
124. Diederik Baazil, Cagan Koc, and Jordan Robertson, “ASML and TSMC Can 
Disable Chip Machines if China Invades Taiwan,” Bloomberg, May 21, 2024.
125. David Sacks, “Threatening to Destroy TSMC Is Unnecessary and Counterpro -
ductive,” Council on Foreign Relations , May 9, 2023.
126. Jared McKinney and Peter Harris, “Understanding the Deterrence Gap in the 
Taiwan Strait,” War on the Rocks, February 13, 2024; James Timbie and James O. El-
lis Jr., “A Large Number of Small Things: A Porcupine Strategy for Taiwan,” Military 
Strategy 5, No. 1 (Winter 2021/2022): 83–93.
127. Drew Thompson, “Whole-of-Society Resilience: A New Deterrence Concept in 
Taipei,” Brookings Institution, December 6, 2024.

643
128. Scott Savitz, “How to Succeed in Deterring an Invasion of Taiwan without 
Really Trying (Hard),” RAND, December 20, 2024.
129. Liu Kuan-ting, “美方盼國防預算需占GDP10% 卓榮泰：現階段沒能力” [U.S. Hopes 
for Taiwan’s Defense Spending to Be 10% of GDP, Cho Jung-tai: Currently beyond 
Capacity], Central News Agency, March 12, 2025; “賴總統：台美互信緊密合作將會穩定
持續 國人可以放心 (談話全文) ” [Lai Ching-te: Mutual Trust and Close Cooperation 
between Taiwan and the United States Will Continue Stably—Citizens Can Rest 
Assured (Full Text of Speech)], Central News Agency , February 14, 2025.
130. Lai Ching-te, “Taiwan Has a Roadmap for Deeper US Trade Ties,” Bloomberg, 
April 9, 2025.
131. Taiwan’s Ministry of National Defense, 中華民國114年四年期國防總檢 [2025 
Quadrennial Defense Review], March 2025, 32.
132. Matt Yu and Sean Lin, “Taiwan Plans to Purchase Nearly 50,000 Indigenous 
Drones by 2027,” Focus Taiwan, July 23, 2025.
133. Chung Yu-chen, Liu Kuang-ting, and Joseph Yeh, “American Senators Ques -
tion Taiwan Opposition’s Defense Budget Stance,” Focus Taiwan, March 5, 2025.
134. Jane Rickards, “Awful Optics: Political Fighting in Taiwan Stalls Part of De -
fence Budget Rise,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , March 21, 2025; YouHao 
Lai and Gahon Chiang, “Taiwan’s Looming Budget Crisis: A Stress Test for Democ -
racy and National Security,” Taiwan Insight, March 17, 2025; “Opposition Lawmakers 
Freeze Part of Domestic Submarine Program Budget,” Focus Taiwan, January 20, 
2025.
135. Howard Shen, “KMT Committed to Strong Defense,” Taipei Times, March 11, 
2025.
136. Howard Shen, “KMT Committed to Strong Defense,” Taipei Times, March 11, 
2025.
137. Taiwan’s Ministry of National Defense, 中華民國114年四年期國防總檢 [2025 
Quadrennial Defense Review], March 2025, 35–37.
138. Su Yung-yao and Hollie Younger, “Military Allowances to Be Raised: William 
Lai,” Taipei Times, March 22, 2025.
139. Joseph Yeh, “Number of Conscripts in New Military Service Program Up 41% 
in 2025,” Focus Taiwan, March 26, 2025.
140. “Taiwan Practices to Mobilise Troops Fast if China Drills Turn into Attack,” 
Reuters, March 19, 2025; Fang Wei-li and Lery Hiciano, “Response Drills Prepping for 
Faster PLA Invasion Capability: Koo,” Taipei Times, March 19, 2025; Wu Shu-wei and 
Joseph Yeh, “Taiwan to Hold First ‘Immediate Response’ Drill Next Week: Source,” 
Focus Taiwan, March 12, 2025.
141. Joseph Yeh, “2025 Han Kuang Extended to 2 Weeks of Wargames, 10 Day 
Live-Fire Drills,” Focus Taiwan, April 2, 2025.
142. “Editorial: Defense Can’t Depend on US Funding,” Taipei Times , July 26, 
2025; Christian Shepherd and Rudy Lu, “Taiwan Extends Drills to Show China—and 
Trump—It’s Ready to Fight,” Washington Post, July 18, 2025; Greg Torode and Fabian 
Hamacher, “Taiwan Shows Off New US Tanks amid Annual War Games,” Reuters, 
July 10, 2025; Joseph Yeh, “2025 Han Kuang Extended to 2 Weeks of Wargames, 10 
Day Live-Fire Drills,” Focus Taiwan, April 2, 2025.
143. Yuster Yu and Michael A. Hunzeker, “Taiwan’s Biggest Problem in Steeling 
Itself for War with China Is Cultural,” War on the Rocks , April 16, 2025.
144. Elisabeth Braw, “Did China Try to Cut Off Taiwan’s Front-Line Residents 
Again?” Foreign Policy, January 23, 2025.
145. Elisabeth Braw, “Did China Try to Cut Off Taiwan’s Front-Line Residents 
Again?” Foreign Policy, January 23, 2025.
146. Elisabeth Braw, “Did China Try to Cut Off Taiwan’s Front-Line Residents 
Again?” Foreign Policy, January 23, 2025.
147. Gahon Chia-Hung Chiang, “Countering China’s Subsea Cable Sabotage,” 
Global Taiwan Institute, March 19, 2025.
148. Kathrin Hille and Haohsiang Ko, “Taiwan Blacklists Chinese-Owned ‘Shadow 
Fleet’ Ships,” Financial Times, January 26, 2025.
149. Chang Jung-hsiang, Ko Lin, and Evelyn Kao, “Chinese Ship Captain Handed 
3-Year Sentence over Severed Telecoms Cable,” Focus Taiwan, June 12, 2025.
150. Chen Zhengyu, “ 中國船破壞電纜》立委：發展低軌衛星 避免聯外斷 ” [Chinese 
Ship Damages Telecom Cable—Legislators: Develop Low Earth Orbit Satellites to 
Avoid Disruptions to External Communications], Liberty Times, January 12, 2025.
151. Taiwan’s Office of the President, 總統主持國安高層會議會後記者會　提五大國安
統戰威脅及十七項因應策略　籲請國人團結抵抗分化 [President Holds Press Conference 
after High-Level National Security Meeting, Raises Five Major National Security and 
United Front Threats and Seventeen Response Strategies, Calls on Citizens to Unite 
and Resist Division], March 13, 2025.

644
152. Taiwan’s Office of the President, 總統主持國安高層會議會後記者會　提五大國安
統戰威脅及十七項因應策略　籲請國人團結抵抗分化 [President Holds Press Conference 
after High-Level National Security Meeting, Raises Five Major National Security and 
United Front Threats and Seventeen Response Strategies, Calls on Citizens to Unite 
and Resist Division], March 13, 2025.
153. Taiwan’s Office of the President, 總統主持國安高層會議會後記者會　提五大國安
統戰威脅及十七項因應策略　籲請國人團結抵抗分化 [President Holds Press Conference 
after High-Level National Security Meeting, Raises Five Major National Security and 
United Front Threats and Seventeen Response Strategies, Calls on Citizens to Unite 
and Resist Division], March 13, 2025.
154. Taiwan’s Office of the President, 總統主持國安高層會議會後記者會　提五大國安
統戰威脅及十七項因應策略　籲請國人團結抵抗分化 [President Holds Press Conference 
after High-Level National Security Meeting, Raises Five Major National Security and 
United Front Threats and Seventeen Response Strategies, Calls on Citizens to Unite 
and Resist Division], March 13, 2025.
155. Taiwan’s Office of the President, 總統主持國安高層會議會後記者會　提五大國安
統戰威脅及十七項因應策略　籲請國人團結抵抗分化 [President Holds Press Conference 
after High-Level National Security Meeting, Raises Five Major National Security and 
United Front Threats and Seventeen Response Strategies, Calls on Citizens to Unite 
and Resist Division], March 13, 2025.
156. Wang Chengzhong, “總統提反制中國統戰策略 國民黨：假借反共行綠色恐” [Pres-
ident Proposes Countermeasures against China’s United Front Strategies—Kuomint -
ang: Using Opposition to CCP to Implement Green Terror], Central News Agency , 
March 15, 2025.
157. “美中兩大强權衡擊下的台灣民意：2025年4月全國性民意調查摘要報告” [Taiwan 
Public Opinion under U.S.-China Great Power Collision: April 2025 National Public 
Opinion Survey Summary Report ], Taiwanese Public Opinion Foundation , April 15, 
2025, 23.
158. “美中兩大强權衡擊下的台灣民意：2025年4月全國性民意調查摘要報告” [Taiwan 
Public Opinion under U.S.-China Great Power Collision: April 2025 National Public 
Opinion Survey Summary Report ], Taiwanese Public Opinion Foundation , April 15, 
2025, 25.
159. Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council, 「民眾對當前兩岸關係之看法」民意調查結
果摘要 [Popular Views on Current Cross-Strait Relations: Summary of Public Opin -
ion Survey Results], April 24, 2025.
160. Taiwan’s Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, GDP: Pre-
liminary Estimate for 2024Q4, and Outlook for 2025 , February 26, 2025.
161. Taiwan’s Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics,  CPI 
Change Rate, April 2025.
162. Taiwan’s Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics via Haver 
database; “Exports of Goods and Services (% of GDP),” World Bank, 2023.
163. Taiwan’s Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics via Haver 
database.
164. Taiwan’s Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics via Haver 
database.
165. Ankur Banerjee and Faith Hung, “Taiwan Dollar’s Record Rally Is a Trade-
War Tremor,” Reuters, May 5, 2025.
166. Rishav Chatterjee, “Bulls Pile Up on Taiwan Dollar Most since Late 2020, 
Trim Long Position on Rupee,” Reuters, May 15, 2025.
167. Rishav Chatterjee, “Bulls Pile Up on Taiwan Dollar Most since Late 2020, 
Trim Long Position on Rupee,” Reuters, May 15, 2025.
168. “Stronger Taiwan Dollar to Challenge IC, Auto Part Exporters,” Central News 
Agency, May 5, 2025.
169. “Taiwan Central Bank Says US Debt Rising Too Fast May Impact Trust in 
Treasuries,” Reuters, June 21, 2025.
170. Chien-Hua Wan, Cindy Wang, and Betty Hou, “Taiwan Life Insurers’ $700 
Billion Bet on the US Is Backfiring,” Bloomberg, June 10, 2025.
171. “It Is Time to Divert Taiwan’s Trade and Investment from China,” Economist, 
March 6, 2023; Mark Landler, “Taiwan Lifts Restrictions on Investment in China,” 
New York Times, November 8, 2001.
172. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, International Trade Administration, 
Trade Statistics.
173. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, International Trade Administration, 
Trade Statistics.
174. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, International Trade Administration, 
Trade Statistics.

645
175. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, International Trade Administration, 
Trade Statistics.
176. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, International Trade Administration, 
Trade Statistics.
177. Lionel Lim, “The AI Boom Sends TSMC, the World’s Most Important Chip -
maker, Up 60 Spots on the Global 500,” Fortune, July 30, 2025; “Outbound Invest -
ments Hit New High,” Taipei Times, February 24, 2025.
178. Hsin-Huang Michael Hsiao, “Taiwan’s Approach to Materialize the Indo-Pa -
cific Strategies: Building on the New Southbound Policy+,” Global Taiwan Institute , 
December 11, 2024.
179. Huynh Tam Sang, “What Might the Future Hold for Taiwan’s New South -
bound Policy?” Diplomat, April 13, 2024; “Approved Outbound Investment Hits New 
High in 2024,” Taipei Times, January 16, 2025.
180. Jeremy Mark and Niels Graham, “Relying on Old Enemies: The Challenge of 
Taiwan’s Economic Ties to China,” Atlantic Council, November 17, 2023.
181. Jonathan Landay and Simon Lewis, “Exclusive: U.S. Exempts Security Funds 
from Aid Freeze—but Little for Humanitarian Programs,” Reuters, February 21, 2025.
182. “Taiwan, U.S. Sign Contract on NASAMS Air Defense System Sale,” Focus 
Taiwan, February 10, 2025.
183. Michael Martina, Yimou Lee, and Ben Blanchard, “Exclusive: Trump Aims to 
Exceed First Term’s Weapons Sales to Taiwan, Officials Say,” Reuters, May 30, 2025.
184. Lo Tien-pin and Jonathan Chin, “Taiwan and the US Preparing a ‘Hellscape’ 
Strategy,” Taipei Times, April 14, 2025.
185. Eric Gomez and Joseph O’Connor, “Taiwan Arms Sale Backlog, September 
2025 Update: Partial Deliveries, Future Schedules and Co-Production News,” Taiwan 
Security Monitor, October 10, 2025.
186. Eric Gomez, “Taiwan Arms Sales Backlog, March 2025 Update: New SIPRI 
Data Sheds Light on Partial Deliveries,” Taiwan Security Monitor.
187. Jennifer Kavanagh and Jordan Cohen, “The Real Reasons for Taiwan’s Arms 
Backlog—and How to Help Fill It,” War on the Rocks , January 13, 2023; U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, Annual Report to Congress , November 
2022, 618.
188. Michael Martina, Yimou Lee, and Ben Blanchard, “Exclusive: Trump Aims to 
Exceed First Term’s Weapons Sales to Taiwan, Officials Say,” Reuters, May 30, 2025.
189. Keoni Everington, “US Senate Committee Grants NT$30 Billion for Military 
Aid to Taiwan,” Taiwan News, August 1, 2025.
190. Andrew Scobell and Naiyu Kuo, “Taiwan Stronger: Ramping Up Defense Re -
silience to Counter China,” United States Institute of Peace , March 10, 2025.
191. Yang Yaoru, “美國對烏克蘭政策改變惹憂 捷克專家：川普不會出賣台灣” [Change 
in U.S. Policy toward Ukraine Raises Concerns, Czech Expert: Trump Will Not Sell 
Out Taiwan], Central News Agency, February 26, 2025; American Institute in Taiwan, 
2024 GCTF International Workshop on Strengthening Civilian Training, July 1, 2024.
192. Keoni Everington, “500 US Military Trainers Reportedly in Taiwan,” Taiwan 
News, May 27, 2025.
193. Carter Johnston, “U.S. Marine Corps Major General Who Led Escalation 
Management Talks with China Participates in Taiwan’s Largest Military Exercise to 
Date,” Naval News, February 23, 2025.
194. Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, Pub. L. 96-8, 1979.
195. Lily Kuo and Pei-lin Wu, “Taiwan Reassured—and Surprised—by Pentagon 
Focus on Deterring China,” Washington Post, March 31, 2025.
196. Defense Innovation Unit, Replicator, accessed August 9, 2025; Carter John -
ston, “Breaking Down the U.S. Navy’s ‘Hellscape’ in Detail,” Naval News , June 16, 
2024.
197. Defense Innovation Unit, Replicator, accessed August 9, 2025.
198. United States Navy, 7th Fleet Destroyer Transits Taiwan Strait , January 24, 
2024; Steve Koehler, “6th International Maritime Security Symposium Speech 2025,” 
United States Navy , February 18, 2025.
199. Colin Clark, “Sending Two Carrier Groups through First Island Chain Shows 
China’s ‘Growing Capability’: Analysts,” Breaking Defense, June 12, 2025.
200. Rupert Schulenburg, “Reinforcement and Redistribution: Evolving US Posture 
in the Indo-Pacific,” International Institute for Strategic Studies , March 27, 2025.
201. U.S. Pacific Air Forces, REFORPAC 2025: High-Powered International Team 
Ready to Conduct Air Force’s Largest Pacific Contingency-Response Exercise , July 8, 
2025.
202. U.S. Navy, Exercise Talisman Sabre 2025 Concludes , August 4, 2025; Harper 
Ellis, “Inside the Biggest Exercise Talisman Sabre 2025: What to Expect?” Defense 
Feeds, July 15, 2025.

646
203. American Institute in Taiwan, U.S. Relations with Taiwan , accessed June 4, 
2025; Reuters, “US Drops Website Statement That It Does Not Support Taiwan Inde-
pendence,” Straits Times, February 16, 2025.
204. Reuters, “US Drops Website Statement That It Does Not Support Taiwan In -
dependence,” Straits Times, February 16, 2025; Yang Yaoru, “美國務院更新美台關係現
況 外交部：反映緊密夥伴關係” [U.S. State Department Updates Status of U.S.-Taiwan 
Relations, Foreign Ministry: Reflects Close Partnership], Central News Agency , Feb-
ruary 16, 2025.
205. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs,  Foreign Ministry Regular Press Confer -
ence February 17, 2025 , February 17, 2025.
206. American Institute in Taiwan, U.S. Relations with Taiwan , accessed June 4, 
2025; U.S. Department of State, U.S. Relations with Taiwan , May 28, 2022; Keoni 
Everington, “US State Department Site Deletes ‘Taiwan Is a Part of China,’ ” Taiwan 
News, May 9, 2022.
207. Stephanie Chiang, “US State Department Website Reintroduces Sentence De-
nying Support of Taiwan Independence,” Taiwan News, June 3, 2022.
208. American Institute in Taiwan, U.S. Relations with Taiwan , accessed June 4, 
2025.
209. U.S. Department of State, Statement of the G7 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in 
Charlevoix, March 14, 2025.
210. Daphne Psaledakis, “Tough G7 Statement Drops ‘One China’ Reference from 
Taiwan Language,” Reuters, March 14, 2025.
211. Ben Blanchard, “Three US Senators Visit Taiwan amid Tariff Talks,” Taipei 
Times, April 17, 2025; American Institute in Taiwan, U.S. Congressional Delegation 
Visits Taiwan, April 16, 2025.
212. Taiwan’s Office of the President, President Lai Meets US Delegation Led by 
Senator Tammy Duckworth, May 28, 2025.
213. U.S. House Financial Services Committee, Chairman Hill and Bipartisan Del -
egation Meet with Ambassador of Taiwan to Paraguay José Han , July 31, 2025.
214. U.S. House of Representatives Select Committee on the Strategic Competi -
tion between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party, Strength in the 
Indo-Pacific: Moolenaar, Nunn, Tokuda Introduce Bipartisan Legislation to Boost 
U.S.-Taiwan Defense Tech Partnership , August 1, 2025; Office of U.S. Senator Jeff 
Merkley, Merkley, Curtis, Kaine, Ricketts Announce Bipartisan Bill to Support Tai -
wan’s Diplomatic Partners in Latin America and Caribbean, August 1, 2025.
215. Demetri Sevastopulo and Kathrin Hille. “US and Taiwanese Defence Officials 
Held Secret Talks in Alaska,” Financial Times, September 4, 2025.
216. Lily LaMattina, “ ‘One Big Beautiful Bill’ Includes US Funding for Military 
Support to Taiwan,” Taiwan News, June 4, 2025.
217. Yip Wai Yee, “Taiwan’s Representation at Pope’s Inauguration a Delicate Bal-
ancing Act for the Holy See,” Straits Times, May 16, 2025.
218. Kelvin Chen, “Beijing Pressures Vatican to Break Relations with Taiwan,” 
Taiwan News, October 25, 2021.
219. Yip Wai Yee, “Taiwan’s Representation at Pope’s Inauguration a Delicate Bal-
ancing Act for the Holy See,” Straits Times, May 16, 2025.
220. Francis X. Rocca, “The Vatican’s Gamble with Beijing Is Costing China’s Cath-
olics,” Atlantic, May 14, 2024.
221. “China and the Vatican Agree to Extend an Agreement on Appointing Bish -
ops,” AP News, October 22, 2024.
222. Joel Guinto, “Pope Names Chinese Bishop as He Keeps Historic Vatican-Bei -
jing Accord,” BBC, June 12, 2025; Nicole Winfield, “Pope Prays for Chinese Catholics 
to Be in Communion with Rome in First Comments on Thorny Issues,” Associated 
Press, May 25, 2025.
223. Raj Varadarajan et al., “Emerging Resilience in the Semiconductor Supply 
Chain,” Boston Consulting Group and Semiconductor Industry Association, May 2024, 
10, 14.
224. Raj Varadarajan et al., “Emerging Resilience in the Semiconductor Supply 
Chain,” Boston Consulting Group and Semiconductor Industry Association, May 2024, 
13.
225. Colin Caines, Sharon Jeon, and Cheyenne Quijano, “Developments in Chinese 
Chipmaking,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , January 17, 2025.
226. Raj Varadarajan et al., “Emerging Resilience in the Semiconductor Supply 
Chain,” Boston Consulting Group and Semiconductor Industry Association, May 2024, 
14.
227. “TSMC Intends to Expand Its Investment in the United States to US$165 
Billion to Power the Future of AI,” Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company , 
March 4, 2025.

647
228. Jessica Boehm, “TSMC Says It Will Manufacture 30% of Most Advanced Chips 
in Arizona,” Axios, April 17, 2025; “TSMC Intends to Expand Its Investment in the 
United States to US$165 Billion to Power the Future of AI,” Taiwan Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Company, March 4, 2025.
229. National Institute for Science and Technology, TSMC Arizona; “TSMC Intends 
to Expand Its Investment in the United States to US$165 Billion to Power the Fu -
ture of AI,” Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company , March 4, 2025.
230. Jessica Boehm, “TSMC Says It Will Manufacture 30% of Most Advanced 
Chips in Arizona,” Axios, April 17, 2025; National Institute for Science and Technol -
ogy, TSMC Arizona.
231. Lisa Wang, “Ministry Lifts Overseas Limits on TSMC,” Taipei Times, January 
11, 2025.
232. Lisa Wang, “Ministry Lifts Overseas Limits on TSMC,” Taipei Times, January 
11, 2025.
233. “TSMC Arizona Fab’s Yield Surpasses Its Local Peers,’ ” Bloomberg, October 
26, 2024.
234. “TSMC Arizona Fab’s Yield Surpasses Its Local Peers,’ ” Bloomberg, October 
26, 2024.
235. Wen-Yee Lee, “TSMC’s US Plant Unlikely to Get Latest Chip Tech before Tai-
wan, CEO Says,” Reuters, January 16, 2025.
236. Jimmy Goodrich, “Don’t Be Fooled, Advanced Chips Are Important for Nation-
al Security,” RAND, February 10, 2025; Lindsey Allen and Ritika Sinha-Chaudhuri, 
“Event Summary | Looking Deeper: The Enduring Role of Legacy Semiconductors,” 
Wilson Center, December 22, 2023; Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas 
Howell, “The Strategic Importance of Legacy Chips,” Center for Strategic and Inter -
national Studies, March 3, 2023.
237. Raj Varadarajan et al., “Emerging Resilience in the Semiconductor Supply 
Chain,” Boston Consulting Group and Semiconductor Industry Association, May 2024, 
18.
238. Wen-Yee Lee, “Taiwan’s Legacy Chip Industry Contemplates Future as China 
Eats into Share  ,” Reuters, February 10, 2025; Jeremy Chih-Cheng Chang et al., “The 
Great Siege, the PRC’s Comprehensive Strategy to Dominate Foundational Chips,” 
Research Institute for Democracy, Society, and Emerging Technology, 2025, 11–12; Raj 
Varadarajan et al., “Emerging Resilience in the Semiconductor Supply Chain,” Boston 
Consulting Group and Semiconductor Industry Association , May 2024, 14.
239. Jeremy Chih-Cheng Chang et al., “The Great Siege, the PRC’s Comprehensive 
Strategy to Dominate Foundational Chips,” Research Institute for Democracy, Society, 
and Emerging Technology, 2025, 18.
240. Wen-Yee Lee, “Taiwan’s Legacy Chip Industry Contemplates Future as China 
Eats into Share  ,” Reuters, February 10, 2025.
241. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, International Trade Administration, 
SHTC Entity List ; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, 
Taiwan Export Control Information .
242. “Taiwan Adds China’s Huawei and SMIC to Export Control List,” Associated 
Press, June 15, 2025.
243. Debby Wu, Yian Lee, and Loni Prinsloo, “Taiwan Curbs Chip Exports to South 
Africa in Rare Power Move,” Bloomberg, September 23, 2025; Taiwan’s Ministry of 
Economic Affairs, 預告修正「自由貿易港區事業輸往國外應經核准之貨品」[Notice of Re-
visions to the “Goods Exported Overseas by Freee Trade Zone Enterprises Requiring 
Approval”], September 23, 2025.
244. David Sacks and Adam Segal, “Unpacking TSMC’s $100 Billion Investment in 
the United States,” Council on Foreign Relations , March 4, 2025.
245. U.S. Commerce Department, Bureau of Economic Analysis, International 
Trade in Goods and Services .
246. U.S. Commerce Department, Bureau of Economic Analysis, International 
Trade in Goods and Services .
247. Taiwan Ministry of Finance, Customs Administration.
248. U.S. Commerce Department, Bureau of Economic Analysis, International 
Trade in Goods and Services .
249. U.S. Commerce Department, Bureau of Economic Analysis, International 
Trade in Goods and Services .
250. U.S. Commerce Department, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Direct Investment 
by Country and Industry .
251. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs.
252. Jane Rickards, “Taiwan Worsens Its Vulnerability to a Chinese Energy Block-
ade,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , May 13, 2025; Ministry of Economic Anal -
ysis, Energy Administration, Stable Supply of Natural Gas , February 21, 2024.

648
253. “拚淨零轉型 卓榮泰：目標2030年綠電占比30%” [Cho Jungtai Strives for Net-Ze-
ro Transformation: Target for Green Electricity to Account for 30% by 2030], Central 
News Agency, October 29, 2024.
254. Sing Yee Ong and Cindy Wang, “Taiwan Shuts Last Nuclear Reactor as Ener-
gy Debate Heats Up,” Bloomberg, May 17, 2025.
255. Sing Yee Ong and Cindy Wang, “Taiwan Shuts Last Nuclear Reactor as Ener-
gy Debate Heats Up,” Bloomberg, May 17, 2025; Chermaine Lee, “In Taiwan, AI Boom 
Prompts Doubts about Ditching Nuclear Power,” Al Jazeera, May 15, 2025.
256. Linda Lew and Yian Lee, “Failed Nuclear Vote Leaves Taiwan in an Energy 
Conundrum,” Bloomberg, August 24, 2025.
257. Elizabeth Frost and Jia-Shen Tsai, “Taiwan and the US: A New Era of LNG 
Diplomacy,” Diplomat, June 12, 2025.
258. Elizabeth Frost and Jia-Shen Tsai, “Taiwan and the US: A New Era of LNG 
Diplomacy,” Diplomat, June 12, 2025.
259. Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs, Energy Administration, Stable Supply 
of Natural Gas .
260. Jane Rickards, “Taiwan Worsens Its Vulnerability to a Chinese Energy Block-
ade,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , May 13, 2025.
261. Jane Rickards, “Taiwan Worsens Its Vulnerability to a Chinese Energy Block-
ade,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , May 13, 2025.
262. Riley Walters, “The Implications of the Trump Administration’s New Tariffs 
on Imports from Taiwan,” Global Taiwan Institute, August 13, 2025; Simina Mistrea -
nu, “Taiwan’s President Downplays Tariff Tensions with the US as ‘Frictions between 
Friends,’ ” Associated Press, May 20, 2025.
263. Riley Walters, “The Implications of the Trump Administration’s New Tariffs 
on Imports from Taiwan,” Global Taiwan Institute, August 13, 2025; Tom Meinderts, 
“The Trump Tariffs, Semiconductors, and US-Taiwan Trade Relations,” University of 
Nottingham Taiwan Research Hub, May 9, 2025.
264. Hadriana Lowenkron and Kate Sullivan, “Trump Says Semiconductor Tariffs 
Coming Soon, Could Reach 300%,” Bloomberg, August 15, 2025.
265. Karen M. Sutter, “U.S.-Taiwan Trade and Economic Relations,” Congressional 
Research Service  (Report No. IF10256), April 10, 2025; Office of the United States 
Trade Representative, 2025 National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Bar -
riers, March 2025, 333.
266. Ben Blanchard, “Taiwan Eyes Zero Tariffs with US, Pledges More Invest -
ment,” Reuters, April 6, 2025.
267. “Trump Tariff Deadline Spurs Asia Export Surge, Wider Trade Gaps,” 
Bloomberg, June 23, 2025.
268. Office of the United States Trade Representative, Taiwan.
269. U.S. Trade Representative Office, Letter from Jamieson Greer to Mike Crapo 
and Ron Wyden, June 6, 2025.
270. Riley Walters, “Tough Trade Negotiations ahead for Taiwan,” Global Taiwan 
Institute, April 16, 2025; Office of the United States Trade Representative, 2025 Na-
tional Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers , March 2025, 333.
271. H.R.4004 - United States-Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade First 
Agreement Implementation Act.
272. Karen M. Sutter, “U.S.-Taiwan Trade and Economic Relations,” Congressional 
Research Service (Report No. IF10256), April 10, 2025.
273. U.S. Internal Revenue Service, United States Income Tax Treaties - A to Z .
274. “The US-Taiwan Business Council Welcomes U.S. House Letter Urging Congress 
to Address Taiwan Double Taxation,” U.S.-Taiwan Business Council, December 6, 2024.
275. Karen M. Sutter, “U.S.-Taiwan Trade and Economic Relations,” Congressional 
Research Service (Report No. IF10256), April 10, 2025.
276. Ramon Camacho and Mandy Kompanowski, “House Passes US-Taiwan Expe -
dited Double-Tax Relief Act with Bipartisan Support,” RSM US LLP, March 11, 2025.
277. Karen M. Sutter, “U.S.-Taiwan Trade and Economic Relations,” Congressional 
Research Service (Report No. IF10256), April 10, 2025.
278. Ramon Camacho and Mandy Kompanowski, “House Passes US-Taiwan Expe -
dited Double-Tax Relief Act with Bipartisan Support,” RSM US LLP, March 11, 2025.
279. Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Foreign Relations, Finance Committees 
Introduce U.S.-Taiwan Tax Legislation, January 23, 2025.
280. Christine McDaniel and Weifeng Zhong, “Submarine Cables and Container 
Shipments: Two Immediate Risks to the US Economy if China Invades Taiwan,” Mer-
catus Center, August 29, 2022.
281. U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural Rep-
resentative Office in the United States – National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile 
System, October 25, 2024.

649
282. U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural Rep-
resentative Office in the United States – AN/TPS-77 and AN/TPS-78 Radar Turnkey 
Systems, October 25, 2024.
283. U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural Rep-
resentative Office in the United States – Spare Parts and Support for F-16 Aircraft 
and Active Electronically Scanned Array Radars, November 29, 2024.
284. U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural 
Representative Office in the United States – Improved Mobile Subscriber Equipment 
Follow-On Support, November 29, 2024.
285. U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural Rep-
resentative Office in the United States – Command, Control, Communications, and 
Computers Modernization, December 20, 2024.
286. U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Taipei Economic and Cultural Rep-
resentative Office in the United States – MK 75 76 mm Gun Mounts , December 20, 
2024.