2019

This report is available online at www.dia.mil/Military-Power-Publications.
For media and public inquiries about this report, contact DIA-PAO@dodiis.mil.
For more information about the Defense Intelligence Agency, visit DIA's website at www.dia.mil.
Information cutoff date, November 2018.
Cover image, Navy frigate Yantai of the 11th Chinese naval escort flotilla. Source: Shutterstock.
DIA-02-1706-085

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

IV
PREFACE
In September 1981, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger asked the Defense Intelligence Agency to 
produce an unclassified overview of the Soviet Union’s military strength. The purpose was to provide 
America's leaders, the national security community, and the public a comprehensive and accurate view 
of the threat. The result: the first edition of Soviet Military Power. DIA produced over 250,000 copies, and 
it soon became an annual publication that was translated into eight languages and distributed around 
the world. In many cases, this report conveyed the scope and breadth of Soviet military strength to U.S. 
policymakers and the public for the first time.
In the spirit of Soviet Military Power, DIA began in 2017 to produce a series of unclassified Defense 
Intelligence overviews of major foreign military challenges we face. This volume provides details on 
China’s defense and military goals, strategy, plans, and intentions; the organization, structure, and 
capability of its military supporting those goals; and the enabling infrastructure and industrial base. 
This product and other reports in the series are intended to inform our public, our leaders, the national 
security community, and partner nations about the challenges we face in the 21st century.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
V
The Defense Intelligence Agency—indeed the broader U.S. Intelligence Community—is continually asked, "What 
do we need to know about China?" What is China’s vision of the world and its role in it? What are Beijing’s strategic 
intentions and what are the implications for Washington? How are the PLA’s roles and missions changing as it 
becomes a more capable military force? 
Since Mao Zedong’s Communist Revolution in October 1949 brought the Chinese Communist Party to power, China 
has struggled to identify and align itself with its desired place in the world. Early factional struggles for control of party 
leadership, decades of negotiations to define territorial boundaries, and continued claims to territories not yet recovered 
have at times seemed at odds with the self-described nature of the Chinese as peace-loving and oriented only toward 
their own defense. Chinese leaders historically have been willing to use military force against threats to their regime, 
whether foreign or domestic, at times preemptively. Lack of significant involvement in military operations during the 
last several decades has led to a sense of insecurity within the PLA as it seeks to modernize into a great power military. 
Still, the United States has at times found itself in direct conflict with China or Chinese forces. China supported two 
major conflicts in Asia after the Second World War, introducing Chinese volunteer forces in Korea and providing 
direct Chinese air and air defense support to Hanoi in Vietnam. In addition, China fought border skirmishes with 
the Soviet Union, India, and a unified Vietnam. In all three cases, military action was an integral part of Chinese 
diplomatic negotiations. Since then, China has concluded negotiations for most of its land borders (India and 
Bhutan being the outliers) but remains in contention with Japan, the Philippines, Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
and Vietnam over maritime borders, which may in part explain motivation for the PLA Navy’s impressive growth 
and the new emphasis on maritime law enforcement capabilities.
China’s double-digit economic growth has slowed recently, but it served to fund several successive defense 
modernization Five-Year Plans. As international concern over Beijing's human rights policies stymied the PLA’s 
search for ever more sophisticated technologies, China shifted funds and efforts to acquiring technology by any 
means available. Domestic laws forced foreign partners of Chinese-based joint ventures to release their technology 
in exchange for entry into China’s lucrative market, and China has used other means to secure needed technology 
and expertise. The result of this multifaceted approach to technology acquisition is a PLA on the verge of fielding 
some of the most modern weapon systems in the world. In some areas, it already leads the world.
Chinese leaders characterize China’s long-term military modernization program as essential to achieving great 
power status. Indeed, China is building a robust, lethal force with capabilities spanning the air, maritime, space and 
information domains which will enable China to impose its will in the region. As it continues to grow in strength and 
confidence, our nation’s leaders will face a China insistent on having a greater voice in global interactions, which at 
times may be antithetical to U.S. interests. With a deeper understanding of the military might behind Chinese economic 
and diplomatic efforts, we can provide our own national political, economic, and military leaders the widest range of 
options for choosing when to counter, when to encourage, and when to join with China in actions around the world.
This report offers insights into the modernization of Chinese military power as it reforms from a defensive, inflexible 
ground-based force charged with domestic and peripheral security responsibilities to a joint, highly agile, expeditionary, 
and power-projecting arm of Chinese foreign policy that engages in military diplomacy  and operations across the globe.
The 2015 Chinese white paper China’s Military Strategy, issued by China’s State Council Information Office, 
states: “It is a Chinese Dream to achieve the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. The Chinese Dream is to 
make the country strong….Without a strong military, a country can neither be safe nor strong.”
Robert P. Ashley, Jr.
Lieutenant General, U.S. Army 
Director
Defense Intelligence Agency

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
VII
CONTENTS
Introduction/Historical Overview.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
1978–Present: China’s Military Rise.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
National Military Overview .  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  7
Threat Perceptions .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
National Security Strategy.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
The PLA’s Role in National Security.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
Military Leadership.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
Stability Issues .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  17
External Defense Relations.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19
Defense Budget.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  20
Military Doctrine and Strategy .  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   23
Perceptions of Modern Conflict.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  24
National Military Command and Control.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 25
Core Elements of Command and Control Reform.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25
Modernizing Joint Command and Control .  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
Regional and Global Operations .  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  28
Core Chinese Military Capabilities.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   31
Power Projection and Expeditionary Operations.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  33
Nuclear Forces and Weapons.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  36
Biological and Chemical Warfare.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  39
Space/Counterspace.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  40
Satellites.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   41
Counterspace.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   43
Human Spaceflight and Space-Exploration Probes.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   43
Space Launch.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 44

VIII
Cyberspace.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 45
Denial and Deception.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  46
Logistics and Defense-Industrial Modernization.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  47
Logistics.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 47
Defense-Industrial Base.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   48
Underground Facilities.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  50
Missions Other Than War.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 50
Outlook: Developing a Robust Force.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  . 52
APPENDIX A: PLA Army.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 55
APPENDIX B: PLA Navy.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   63
APPENDIX C: PLA Air Force.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 83
APPENDIX D: PLA Rocket Force.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  . 91
APPENDIX E: PLA Strategic Support Force .  .  .   .  .   .  .  .  . 97
APPENDIX F: Chinese Intelligence Services .  .  .   .  .   .  .  .  . 99
APPENDIX G: Military Resources, 
Infrastructure, and Logistics .  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 101
APPENDIX H: Defense Industry.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  105
APPENDIX I: Arms Sales.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  107
APPENDIX J: Glossary of Acronyms.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 109

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
1
Introduction/Historical Overview
hina’s history dates back nearly five 
millennia. Historians credit the armies 
of numerous dynasties throughout 
those many centuries with unifying the early 
warring states, building the Great Wall, send­
ing the fleets of early Ming Dynasty maritime 
explorer Zheng He to far-off foreign lands, and 
defending against foreign incursions. However, 
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has existed 
for less than a century. Initially referred to as 
the “Red Army” under Mao Zedong, the PLA is 
not a national institution but rather the mil­
itary arm of the Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP). Established in 1927, the army spent 
much of its first two decades engaged in fight­
ing the Nationalists led by Chiang Kai-shek 
C
PLA honor guard.
Image Source: DIMOC
With more than 5,000 years of civilized history, the Chinese nation created a 
brilliant Chinese civilization, made outstanding contributions to mankind, and 
became a great nation of the world.
—Chinese President Xi Jinping1

2
during the intermittent Chinese Civil War as 
well as fighting against the Japanese during 
World War II (which China refers to as the 
War of Resistance Against Japan).
Mao’s Red Army declared victory over the 
Nationalists in October 1949, even as combat 
continued. That same year, the PLA expanded 
to include the PLA Navy and the PLA Air 
Force. The PLA remained technologically 
inferior to Western militaries during its early 
decades, but China’s leaders readily employed 
PLA forces against the United States in Korea 
and Vietnam. Beijing’s willingness to rely on 
the PLA as a tool of foreign policy strengthened 
the PLA’s position in China. Even as Mao led 
China through the upheaval of the Great Leap 
Forward and the Cultural Revolution, the PLA 
endured. Although the PLA emerged from the 
Cultural Revolution in the mid-1970s as one 
of the stronger pillars of CCP power, its com­
bat power was not commensurate with that of 
other large states’ armed forces.
1978–Present: China’s 
Military Rise
After Deng Xiaoping’s assumption of power in 
1978, the path to today’s PLA was set when 
national defense was included as the fourth of 
China’s four “modernizations” (the others being 
industry, science and technology, and agricul­
ture). National defense was accorded the low­
est priority, which carried implications for mil­
itary funding and development. The failure to 
achieve comprehensive modernization during 
Mao’s rule was brought home during the 1979 
conflict between China and Vietnam, when the 
PLA’s performance exposed grave weaknesses 
in operational planning, tactics, command 
and control (C2), logistics, and weaponry. The 
persistent exchanges of fire with Vietnamese 
forces during the 1980s highlighted the need 
for changes even as large numbers of PLA 
ground troops from around the country were 
rotated to the border to gain combat expe­
rience. Meanwhile, the PLA began to study 
contemporary foreign, particularly Western, 
military operations more closely, such as the 
Falklands War (1982) and the bombing of 
Libya (1986), for insights on how to modernize 
China’s combat forces.
In 1989, PLA units intervened with lethal 
force on behalf of the CCP to suppress political 
demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, which 
considerably damaged the PLA’s domestic and 
international image. World events in 1991 fur­
ther shook CCP leaders’ confidence in the PLA. 
The U.S. military’s performance in the Per­
sian Gulf War provided the PLA stark lessons 
regarding the lethal effectiveness of informa­
tion-enabled weapons and forces, particularly 
mobility and precision-strike capabilities, that 
had become the standard for effectively waging 
war in the modern era. As a result, in the early 
1990s Beijing altered its military doctrine, 
concluding that the most likely conflict that 
China would face would be a “local war under 
high-technology conditions” (later amended to 
“conditions of informatization,” referring to 
warfare in the digital age). This differed mark­
edly from the Mao-era mindset that the PLA

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
3
would need to be prepared to fight a war more 
akin to World War II. The PLA’s strategy also 
changed, moving away from the Maoist para­
digm of luring an enemy into China to fight a 
“people’s war” with regular troops, irregular 
(guerrilla) forces, and the general populace. 
Instead, the PLA began to emphasize a more 
offensive version of the PLA’s historical strate­
gic concept of “active defense”: take advantage 
of longer range, precision-guided munitions 
(primarily ballistic and cruise missiles) to keep 
a potential enemy as far as possible from the 
economically fast-developing Chinese coastal 
areas by fighting a “noncontact,” short, sharp 
conflict like the Persian Gulf War.
China’s changing strategic threat percep­
tions also shaped military doctrine and the 
direction of PLA development. Although the 
Soviet Union had loomed large as a potential 
military opponent, the threat of a Soviet inva­
sion diminished during the 1980s, shifting the 
focus away from preparing for a World War II–
style conflict. Furthermore, the U.S. 7th Fleet 
aircraft carrier intervention during the 1996 
China-Taiwan “missile crisis” and the acciden­
tal NATO strike against China’s Embassy in 
Serbia in 1999 led Beijing to focus on building 
capabilities to counter U.S. forces in addition 
to capabilities to dissuade Taiwan from any 
political activity Beijing deemed unacceptable.
Entering the 21st century, China’s leaders rec­
ognized the confluence of several factors that 
led them to expand the scope and quicken the 
pace of PLA development: China’s growing 
global economic and political interests, rapid 
technology-driven changes in modern warfare, 
and perceptions of increased strategic-level 
external threats, including to China’s mari­
time interests. At this time, Chinese leaders 
perceived a “period of strategic opportunity” 
wherein the country presumably would not 
be involved in a major military conflict before 
2020, allowing time for economic and military 
development. As a result, throughout the late 
1990s and early 2000s, China’s leaders initi­
ated several practical steps to modernize the 
PLA as a warfighting instrument.
To accelerate the PLA’s modernization and 
address capability shortfalls, Beijing increased 
the PLA’s budget by an average of 10 percent 
per year from 2000 to 2016. Beijing also estab­
lished a PLA General Armaments Depart­
ment in 1998 to rationalize equipment mod­
ernization and acquisition processes, and 
instituted several broad scientific and tech­
nical programs to improve the defense-in­
dustrial base and decrease the PLA’s depen­
dence on foreign weapon acquisitions. The 
PLA also revamped its training programs, 
with all services attempting to prepare more 
realistically for conflict by emphasizing mis­
sion-focused exercises, multiservice opera­
tions, mobility, better C2 and staff work, and 
enhanced logistic support, as well as achiev­
ing battlefield advantage by applying “infor­
matized” warfare (regional conflicts defined 
by real-time, data-networked C2) methods. 
[For more on “informatized” warfighting, please 
see Military Doctrine and Strategy, page 23].

4
Beijing also implemented personnel changes 
to professionalize the PLA. While Beijing was 
focused on economic development in the late 
1970s, the PLA had been allowed to operate 
nonmilitary businesses to offset limited invest­
ment and resources. This led to widespread cor­
ruption and drew attention away from training 
for actual military operations. In 1998, Chi­
nese leaders ordered the PLA to stop operat­
ing nonmilitary businesses and focus solely 
on professional military tasks. As a result, the 
PLA divested from a number of business ven­
tures but still remains to some extent involved 
in business schemes. The PLA developed a 
noncommissioned officer corps and began pro­
grams to recruit more technically competent 
university graduates to operate its modern 
weapons. PLA political officers assigned to all 
levels of the military acquired broader person­
nel management responsibilities in addition to 
their focus on keeping the PLA ideologically 
pure and loyal to the CCP.
In 2004, then-President Hu Jintao outlined 
for the PLA the “Historic Missions of the 
Armed Forces in the New Period of the New 
Century,” more commonly referred to as the 
“New Historic Missions of the PLA,” to aug­
ment the PLA’s role as a diplomatic and mil­
itary instrument and as a guardian of China’s 
global interests. These new missions included 
ensuring China’s sovereignty, territorial integ­
rity, and domestic security; preserving the 
“period of strategic opportunity” for China’s 
development; safeguarding China’s expanding 
national interests; and helping ensure world 
peace. Hu’s endowment of the PLA with these 
missions, at a time when economic interests 
had become substantial drivers of Beijing’s 
foreign policy, signified a critical inflection 
point in the PLA’s assumption of a global role 
and transition away from a force bound only 
to defending China’s immediate territorial and 
sovereignty interests.
Subsequent PLA activities, such as counter­
piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden since 
2009, international training and exercises, 
noncombatant evacuations in Libya and 
Yemen, and expanded peacekeeping opera­
tions in Africa under UN auspices, have all 
been part of China’s increasingly ambitious 
vision for expanding PLA activities to support 
its growing global clout. China’s establishment 
of its first overseas military base in Djibouti 
in 2017—overturning Beijing’s insistence from 
its first defense white paper issued in 1998 
that China “does not station troops or set up 
military bases in any foreign country”—is only 
the latest development in this progression.
The PLA’s evolution since President Xi Jinping’s 
transition to power in 2012 has built on the Hu 
era but also marked a shift, with Xi concurrently 
taking the helm of the party, military, and state, 
enabling him to shape the direction of the PLA 
earlier during his tenure. Xi has focused on 
strengthening the PLA as a force, underscor­
ing the themes of party rule over the military, 
improving military capabilities, and enhanc­
ing the military’s professionalism.2 Xi has also 
expanded the scope and ambition of PLA mod­
ernization, clearly affirming the PLA’s overseas 
role and providing the institutional framework 
to enable substantial military growth beyond the 
PLA’s traditional security threats.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
5
In late 2015, President Xi Jinping unveiled 
the most substantial PLA reforms in at least 
30 years. The reforms were designed in part 
to make the PLA a leaner, more lethal force 
capable of conducting the types of joint oper­
ations that it believes it must master to com­
pete with the U.S. military. Initial reforms 
established joint theater commands and a 
new Joint Staff Department while reorganiz­
ing the 4 general departments that previously 
ran the PLA into 15 Central Military Commis­
sion (CMC) departments and offices. These 
efforts aimed to clarify command authorities, 
integrate China’s military services for joint 
operations, and facilitate Beijing’s transition 
from peace to war.
The structural reforms also established a sep­
arate Army headquarters, elevated China’s 
missile force to a full service by establishing 
the PLA Rocket Force, unified China’s space 
and cyber capabilities under the Strategic Sup­
port Force, and created a Joint Logistics Sup­
port Force to direct precision support to PLA 
operations.3,4,5 The decision to place the Army, 
which has traditionally played a dominant 
role in PLA leadership, on equal footing with 
the PLA’s other services underscores a postre­
form emphasis on jointness. Overall reforms, 
which the CMC aims to complete by 2020, are 
expected to touch all levels of the PLA, includ­
ing cutting approximately 300,000 personnel 
and refining military doctrine and policies. 
Image Source: Shutterstock
PLA troops preparing for parade commemorating the 90th anniversary of the founding of the PLA
– September 2017.

6
[For a more detailed breakdown of PLA services 
and activities, please see Appendixes A–I.]
In October 2017, China’s leaders used the 
opportunity of its once-in-5-years Party Con­
gress to reduce the size of the CMC, shifting 
toward a more joint command structure and 
aligning the military’s highest body to its post­
reform C2. Reducing the size of the CMC will 
help Beijing streamline strategic decisionmak­
ing, bolster political oversight of the military, 
and build a more integrated and professional 
force. The move also highlights Xi’s focus on 
eliminating corruption, improving party loy­
alty, and incentivizing operational experi­
ence. The CMC now represents a capable and 
diverse generation of officers with operational 
experience, which as a whole has the most joint 
representation in the PLA’s history.
In his work report to the 19th Party Congress 
in October 2017, Xi Jinping called on the PLA 
to “prepare for military struggle in all strategic 
directions,” and said the military was integral 
to achieving China’s national rejuvenation. In 
his speech, Xi set three developmental bench­
marks for the PLA, including becoming a mech­
anized force with increased informatized and 
strategic capabilities by 2020, a fully modern­
ized force by 2035, and a worldwide first-class 
military by midcentury.6 The latter two goals 
build on the call in China’s 2013 defense white 
paper, also issued under Xi, for China’s armed 
forces to achieve a status “commensurate 
with China’s international standing.” Viewed 
in sum, Xi’s vision for the PLA constitutes a 
logical outgrowth of CCP instructions to the 
PLA since 2004 to protect China’s expanding 
“development interests” at home and abroad.
The extent to which the PLA can progress in 
its transformation into a world-class military 
depends on the favorable resolution of several 
key issues, some of which are longstanding 
institutional barriers. The PLA’s traditional 
identity as a party army with a military culture 
that is hierarchical and where decisionmak­
ing is top-down and centralized in some ways 
is incongruous with efforts to professionalize 
the PLA and imbue it with a culture that val­
ues individual decisionmaking and embraces 
mission delegation. The PLA also will need 
to refine newly established C2 structures to 
enable the execution of dynamic, fast-paced 
joint military operations and effectively inte­
grate new technologies and processes. Perhaps 
one of the most difficult challenges of the ongo­
ing reforms is that they represent the institu­
tionalization of a cultural shift within the PLA 
away from its traditional ground-force-centric, 
inward-facing model to one that lays the foun­
dation for coequal, professional services capable 
of joint operations across the globe.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
7
National Military Overview
Threat Perceptions
The party’s perception that China is facing 
unprecedented security risks is a driving fac­
tor in China’s approach to national security.7 
In May 2015, China’s State Council Informa­
tion Office published a white paper titled Chi­
na’s Military Strategy, which outlined how Bei­
jing views the global security environment, 
China’s role in that environment, and how 
the PLA supports that role. The document 
presented a vision for the PLA’s services and 
emerging security domains that would trans­
form the PLA from its legacy posture to one 
focused more on long-range mobility. Within 
the context of Beijing’s “period of strategic 
opportunity,” Beijing calculates in China’s 
Military Strategy that world war is unlikely 
in the immediate future, but China should be 
prepared for the possibility of local war.
Authoritative Chinese publications typically 
avoid explicitly listing direct threats, but these 
threats can be gleaned from several documents 
that point to Beijing’s security concerns.8 Bei­
jing’s primary threat perceptions include sov­
ereignty and domestic security issues that 
it believes could undermine the overriding 
strategic objective to perpetuate communist 
rule. These include longstanding concerns 
regarding Taiwan independence, Uighur and 
Tibetan separatism, and perceived challenges 
to China’s control of disputed areas in the 
East and South China Seas. Authoritative 
documents also highlight the Korean Penin­
sula as an area of instability and uncertainty, 
and express concern regarding unsettled ter­
The People’s Liberation Army at a Glance
Services: Army, Navy, Air Force, Rocket Force, Strategic Support Force.
Personnel: Approximately 2 million in regular forces.
Recruit base: Conscription, some volunteer.
Equipment profile: Primarily domestic systems heavily influenced by technology derived 
from other countries; modern weaponry in each service; some advanced weaponry.
Core strength: Long-range precision strike, information warfare, nuclear retaliatory capability.
Developing strengths: Maritime power projection, special operations.
Key vulnerabilities: Logistics, rigid command structure, joint warfare.

8
China’s Territorial Claims
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
9
ritorial disputes along China’s border with 
India, which periodically result in tense  stand­
offs like the one that occurred in the sum­
mer of 2017 in the disputed Doklam region.9 
Finally, while it calls for a peer-to-peer coop­
erative relationship with the United States, 
China also believes that U.S. military presence 
and U.S.-led security architecture in Asia seeks 
to constrain China’s rise and interfere with 
China’s sovereignty, particularly in a Taiwan 
conflict scenario and in the East and South 
China Seas. Since at least the 1990’s, Beijing 
has repeatedly communicated its preference to 
move away from the U.S.-led regional security 
system and has pursued its own regional secu­
rity initiatives in support of what it views as 
a natural transition to regional predominance.
China’s Military Strategy reflects Beijing’s 
drive to establish a coherent, unified approach 
to managing national security in a world where 
Beijing perceives that China’s expanding inter­
ests have made it more vulnerable at home and 
abroad. The following excerpt from the doc­
ument illustrates Beijing’s perception of this 
security environment:
In today’s world, the global trends toward multipolarity and economic globalization are 
intensifying, and an information society is rapidly coming into being. Countries are increas­
ingly bound together in a community of shared destiny. Peace, development, cooperation, 
and mutual benefit have become an irresistible tide of the times.
Profound changes are taking place in the international situation, as manifested in the his­
toric changes in the balance of power, global governance structure, Asia-Pacific geostrategic 
landscape, and international competition in the economic, scientific and technological, and 
military fields. The forces for world peace are on the rise; so are the factors against war. In 
the foreseeable future, a world war is unlikely, and the international situation is expected 
to remain generally peaceful. There are, however, new threats from hegemonism, power 
politics, and neointerventionism. International competition for the redistribution of power, 
rights, and interests is tending to intensify. Terrorist activities are growing increasingly 
worrisome. Hotspot issues, such as ethnic, religious, border, and territorial disputes, are 
complex and volatile. Small-scale wars, conflicts, and crises are recurrent in some regions. 
Therefore, the world still faces both immediate and potential threats of local wars.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, May 2015

10
China’s Military Strategy is directed primar­
ily at an internal audience. Thus, it is replete 
with party jargon, but it does contain the broad 
underpinnings of China’s military decision­
making calculus. For example, Beijing sees 
both threats and opportunities emerging from 
the evolution of the international community 
beyond the U.S.-led unipolar framework toward 
a more integrated global environment shaped 
by major-power dynamics. Furthermore, China 
sees itself as an emerging major power that will 
be able to gain influence as long as it can main­
tain a stable periphery. As it emerges, Beijing 
will use its growing power to shape the regional 
environment in the face of interconnected 
threats while trying to avoid conflict over core 
interests: sovereignty, development, and unifi­
cation. More specifically, China believes it must 
plan to address the many threats to regional 
stability because they are individually complex 
and at the same time contain a potential for 
external actors, most importantly the United 
States, to become involved. Nevertheless, China 
must also look to safeguard its international 
interests as they multiply and incur additional 
threats. Finally, as new threats emerge and as 
other militaries adjust their acquisition, strate­
gies, and structure, China knows the PLA must 
be prepared to fight in new realms and adapt to 
the modern, high-tech battlefield. 
With a generally favorable external environment, China will remain in an important period 
of strategic opportunities for its development, a period in which much can be achieved. Chi­
na’s comprehensive national strength, core competitiveness and risk-resistance capacity are 
notably increasing, and China enjoys growing international standing and influence. Domes­
tically, the Chinese people’s standard of living has remarkably improved, and Chinese soci­
ety remains stable. China, as a large developing country, still faces multiple and complex 
security threats, as well as increasing external impediments and challenges. Subsistence and 
development security concerns, as well as traditional and nontraditional security threats, 
are interwoven. Therefore, China has an arduous task to safeguard its national unification, 
territorial integrity and development interests.
As the world economic and strategic center of gravity is shifting ever more rapidly to the 
Asia-Pacific region, the U.S. carries on its ‘rebalancing’ strategy and enhances its military 
presence and its military alliances in this region. Japan is sparing no effort to dodge the 
postwar mechanism, overhauling its military and security policies. Such development has 
caused grave concerns among other countries in the region. On the issues concerning Chi­
na’s territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, some of its offshore neighbors 
take provocative actions and reinforce their military presence on China’s reefs and islands

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
11
that they have illegally occupied. Some external countries are also busy meddling in South 
China Sea affairs; a tiny few maintain constant close-in air and sea surveillance and recon­
naissance against China. It is thus a longstanding task for China to safeguard its maritime 
rights and interests. Certain disputes over land territory are still smoldering. The Korean 
Peninsula and Northeast Asia are shrouded in instability and uncertainty. Regional ter­
rorism, separatism, and extremism are rampant. All these have a negative impact on the 
security and stability along China’s periphery.
The Taiwan issue bears on China’s reunification and long-term development, and reunifi­
cation is an inevitable trend in the course of national rejuvenation. In recent years, cross–
Taiwan Strait relations have sustained a sound momentum of peaceful development, but 
the root cause of instability has not yet been removed, and the ‘Taiwan independence’ sep­
aratist forces and their activities are still the biggest threat to the peaceful development of 
cross-strait relations. Further, China faces a formidable task to maintain political security 
and social stability. Separatist forces for ‘East Turkistan independence’ and ‘Tibet indepen­
dence’ have inflicted serious damage, particularly with escalating violent terrorist activities 
by East Turkistan independence forces. Besides, anti-China forces have never given up their 
attempt to instigate a ‘color revolution’ in this country. Consequently, China faces more chal­
lenges in terms of national security and social stability. With the growth of China’s national 
interests, its national security is more vulnerable to international and regional turmoil, ter­
rorism, piracy, serious natural disasters, and epidemics, and the security of overseas inter­
ests concerning energy and resources, strategic sea lines of communication (SLOCs), as well 
as institutions, personnel, and assets abroad, has become an imminent issue.
The world revolution in military affairs (RMA) is proceeding to a new stage. Long-range, 
precise, smart, stealthy, and unmanned weapons and equipment are becoming increasingly 
sophisticated. Outer space and cyberspace have become new commanding heights in strate­
gic competition among all parties. The form of war is accelerating its evolution to informa­
tization. World major powers are actively adjusting their national security strategies and 
defense policies and speeding up their military transformation and force restructuring. The 
aforementioned revolutionary changes in military technologies and the form of war have not 
only had a significant impact on the international political and military landscapes but also 
posed new and severe challenges to China’s military security.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, May 2015

12
National Security Strategy
Making progress while maintaining stability.
—Xi Jinping in his address to the 19th Party Congress10
China’s leaders see China as a country that is 
“moving closer to center stage” to achieve the 
“great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.”11 
This ambition permeates China’s national 
security strategy and the PLA’s role in sup­
porting the party. Since the early 1980s, when 
China initiated its Reform and Opening pol­
icy, China’s economy has grown rapidly. The 
CCP remained focused primarily on economic 
growth throughout the 1980s and 1990s, and in 
the early 2000s it identified the initial decades 
of the 21st century as a “period of strategic 
opportunity” in the international environment 
that would allow China to focus on building 
“comprehensive national power.” The CCP’s 
contemporary strategic objectives are to:
• Perpetuate CCP rule.
• Maintain domestic stability.
• Sustain economic growth 
and development.
• Defend national sovereignty and 
territorial integrity.
• Secure China’s status as a great power.
China has taken deliberate steps to modern­
ize the CCP, its military, the government, and 
other institutions in an attempt to improve 
coherence. Before 2015, departments across 
the government formulated separate security 
strategies, but in early 2015, China’s leaders 
adopted China’s first publicly released national 
security strategy outline, a framework to guide 
China’s approach to addressing both domes­
tic and international security threats, and 
called for international engagement to address 
shared security problems.12
The strategy outlines Beijing’s aim to ensure 
security, promote modernization, as well as 
preserve China’s socialist system. In addition 
to the strategic objectives above, the docu­
ment emphasized the necessity of contrib­
uting to world peace and development and 
called for attention to promoting “rule of law” 
in support of national security.13 This led the 
National People’s Congress to pass a package 
of laws in 2015 and 2016 intended to address 
national security concerns, including harsher 
punishments for crimes involving terrorism 
and extremism, cybersecurity measures, and 
increased restrictions for foreign nongovern­
mental organizations.14,15
Although China’s national security strategy out­
line contained both inward- and outward-look­
ing elements, Beijing’s view of China’s role in 
the international community was further elab­
orated in an article on Xi Jinping’s thoughts 
on diplomacy published in mid-2017 by one of

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
13
China’s top diplomats, Yang Jiechi. Yang paints 
a picture of Chinese diplomacy that focuses on 
China’s ambition for national rejuvenation 
and becoming a world power. Yang describes a 
confident China that is ready to “shoulder its 
responsibility as a major country” and build a 
global network of partnerships, but one that is 
resolved and uncompromising as it upholds its 
sovereignty and security interests.16
The PLA’s Role in 
National Security
China’s Military Strategy built on a series of 
biennial defense reviews that Beijing published 
beginning in 1998 to mitigate international con­
cern about the lack of transparency of its mil­
itary modernization. What differentiated the 
document from its predecessors was that it, for 
the first time, publicly clarified the PLA’s role 
in protecting China’s evolving national security 
interests and shed light on policies, such as the 
PLA’s commitment to nuclear deterrence. The 
report affirmed many of China’s longstanding 
defense policies but also signaled a shift toward 
emerging security domains, such as cyber and 
space, and also emphasized the need to focus on 
global maritime operations.
The report outlined eight “strategic tasks,” 
or types of missions the PLA must be ready 
to execute:17
• Safeguard the sovereignty of 
China’s territory.
• Safeguard national unification.
• Safeguard China’s interests in new 
domains, such as space and cyberspace.
• Safeguard China’s overseas interests.
• Maintain strategic deterrence.
• Participate in international 
security cooperation.
• Maintain China’s political security 
and social stability.
• Conduct emergency rescue, disaster  relief, 
and “rights and interest protection” missions.
Beijing almost certainly views these missions 
as necessary national security tasks for China 
to claim great-power status. In 2017, Beijing 
emphasized several of these tasks in its “White 
Paper on China’s Policies on Asia Pacific Secu­
rity Cooperation,” stressing the need for a PLA 
that is able to conduct expeditionary operations 
and other activities to defend and secure grow­
ing Chinese national interests overseas from 
“destabilizing and uncertain factors.”18 The 
PLA coordinates with China’s law enforcement, 
Foreign Ministry, and other security entities as 
needed on military-related activities, particu­
larly operations beyond China’s borders.
Military Leadership
China’s military leaders are influential in 
defense and foreign policy. As the CCP’s armed 
wing, the PLA is organizationally part of the 
party apparatus. Career military officers for 
the most part are party members, and units at 
the company level and above have political offi­

14
cers responsible for personnel decisions, pro­
paganda, and counterintelligence. These polit­
ical officers also are responsible for ensuring 
that party orders are carried out throughout 
the PLA. CCP committees, led by the political 
officers and military commanders, make major 
decisions in units at all levels.19
The CMC, the PLA’s highest decisionmaking 
body, is technically both a party organ subor­
dinate to the CCP Central Committee and a 
governmental office appointed by the National 
People’s Congress, but it is staffed almost 
exclusively by military officers. The CMC 
chairman is a civilian who usually serves con­
currently as the CCP general secretary and 
China’s president. During the past decade, the 
CMC’s membership has included two military 
vice chairmen who serve concurrently on the 
politburo; the minister of national defense, 
who serves as the face of the military for for­
eign engagement; the service commanders; 
and the directors of the four general head­
quarters departments. This framework occa­
sionally shifts; it was revised during the 19th 
Party Congress in October 2017, at which 
Xi Jinping, CCP General Secretary, President and Central Military Commission Chairman.
Image Source: Shutterstock

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
15
People’s Liberation Army’s Organizational Structure  
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
point the service chiefs were removed from 
the body, leaving the chairman, vice chair­
men, minister of national defense, Joint Staff 
Department chief, Political Work Department 
director, and Discipline Inspection Commis­
sion secretary.20,21 These changes align the 
military’s top body to its postreform structure 
and underscore key themes of jointness, party 
loyalty, and anticorruption. 
22,23

16
Political Work in the PLA
The PLA has been a politicized “party army” since its inception and exists to guarantee the 
CCP regime’s survival above all else, serving the state as a secondary role, in contrast to 
most Western militaries, which are considered apolitical, professional forces that first and 
foremost serve the state.
Maintaining this party-military identity even as the PLA embarks on major structural 
reforms is the top priority for China’s leadership. PLA reforms include establishment of the 
Political Work Department, which appears to have assumed many responsibilities of the 
former General Political Department. The PLA’s political work system is the primary means 
through which the CCP “controls the gun” in accordance with Mao Zedong’s famous dictum 
that “political power grows out of the barrel of a gun.” Most PLA officers are party members, 
and in recent decades, PLA officers typically have constituted about 20 percent of the CCP’s 
Central Committee. Moreover, since 1997 the two uniformed vice chairmen of the CMC have 
served concurrently on the CCP Politburo.
• The tiers of political work in the PLA are interlocking, reinforcing systems that allow the 
CCP to penetrate the military from top to bottom. These tiers comprise the political com­
missar system, the party committee system, and the party discipline inspection system.
• Political commissars are responsible for personnel, education, security, discipline, and 
morale. The Political Work Department, the director of which serves on the CMC, manages 
the PLA’s political commissars and is the locus for day-to-day political work in the military.
• The party committee system is replicated in some fashion at each level of command. 
Party committees fall under the supervision of the CMC Political Work Department and 
are intended to ensure loyalty at all levels. They propagate the party positions, policies, 
and directives throughout the force.
• Party discipline inspection bodies monitor the performance of party members in the mil­
itary and ensure “upright” behavior. The PLA Central Discipline Inspection Commis­
sion (CDIC) was elevated to the CMC level during recent restructuring from its previous 
position as a subordinate office within the former General Political Department.24 These 
changes culminated with the CDIC head’s appointment as a member of the CMC during 
the 19th Party Congress. The CDIC has played a key role within the military in recent 
years, overseeing investigations to weed out graft and uproot politically powerful networks 
in the ranks as part of China’s ongoing anticorruption campaign. In November 2015, Xi 
also announced the creation of a new PLA Politics and Law Commission, mirroring a sim­
ilar party organization that oversees legal and judicial issues in the state bureaucracy.25

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
17
China’s leaders for decades have prioritized 
domestic stability and the continued rule of 
the CCP. Since the 1990s, however, China has 
confronted chronic social protest spurred by an 
often unresponsive and corrupt political and 
legal system, and a range of economic, social, 
and environmental problems. Under President 
Xi Jinping, Beijing has responded to these chal­
lenges with a mixture of increased repression 
and CCP-led efforts to address some of these 
underlying problems. Xi is using the CCP to 
assert control over all facets of the Chinese state, 
restricting the space for independent activity 
across social, political, and economic spheres. 
Stability Issues
We must do more to safeguard China’s sovereignty, security, and development 
interests, and staunchly oppose all attempts to split China or undermine its eth­
nic unity and social harmony and stability.
–Xi Jinping, speech at the 19th Party Congress
People’s Armed Police in formation during antiterrorism drill for the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
Image Source: AFP

18
This push includes a sweeping anticorruption 
campaign, a faithfully propagandistic media, a 
tightly constrained civil society, and an all-en­
compassing concept of national security.26
In ethnic minority regions such as Tibet and 
Xinjiang, the CCP has promulgated repres­
sive regulations against alleged extremism by 
tightening limits on peaceful religious expres­
sion and ethnic identity. Beginning in April 
2017, Xinjiang authorities detained hundreds 
of thousands, possibly millions, of Muslims 
in the region ostensibly for antiextremism 
reeducation. As part of the Xinjiang campaign, 
security officials greatly expanded their use of 
high-tech and big-data surveillance systems, 
which they are expected to extend countrywide 
in an effort to curb social unrest.27
China’s armed forces support the CCP’s 
domestic ambitions without question. In 2015, 
top military guidance reaffirmed this role as 
one of the force’s main strategic tasks: “main­
tain China’s political security and social sta­
bility.”28 China’s military and paramilitary 
leaders are actively developing doctrine and 
forces to backstop local police, respond to riots 
and natural disasters, and stop terrorism.
The People’s Armed Police (PAP) is at the fore­
front of this mission. The PAP is a paramili­
tary force of more than 500,000 troops that for 
decades has focused on domestic security and 
economic development tasks under the shared 
command of the CMC and State Council. In 
2018, Beijing moved the PAP entirely under 
CMC control and out of civilian channels, 
and announced additional reforms intended 
to modernize its force structure, streamline 
its command system, and increase its oper­
ational effectiveness.29 Changes to the PAP 
also reflect a shift toward a more operational 
mindset, trading legacy site-security missions 
for rapid-deployment counterterrorism and 
maritime patrols.30
In recent years, Beijing’s longstanding suspi­
cion that so-called “hostile foreign influences” 
constitute a significant threat to internal sta­
bility and CCP rule has led it to step up efforts 
to pursue political security-related goals over­
seas. In 2015, China passed a counterterror­
ism law that included a provision authorizing 
PLA, PAP, police, and intelligence operations 
abroad—evidence that party leaders are con­
sidering this possibility.31

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
19
The PLA engages with foreign militaries to 
demonstrate its growing capabilities; improve 
its tactics, techniques, and procedures; enhance 
China’s image and influence abroad, and fur­
ther China’s diplomatic objectives. Bilateral 
and multilateral exercises provide political 
benefits to China and opportunities for the PLA 
to improve capabilities in areas such as coun­
terterrorism, mobility operations, and logis­
tics. Senior-level visits and exchanges provide 
China with opportunities to increase military 
officers’ international exposure, communicate 
China’s positions to foreign audiences, under­
stand alternative worldviews, and advance for­
eign relations through interpersonal contacts 
and military assistance programs.
China advances its day-to-day overseas mili­
tary diplomacy using PLA officers assigned as 
military attachés in at least 110 countries.32 
China’s military attachés serve as military 
advisers to the ambassador, support Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and PLA foreign policy objec­
tives, and perform a variety of duties tied to 
PLA military and security cooperation, includ­
ing counterpart exchanges with host nation and 
third-country personnel. Expanded PLA travel 
abroad enables PLA officers to observe and 
study foreign military command structures, 
unit formations, and operational training.33
As China’s regional and international inter­
ests have grown, the PLA has substantially 
expanded 
its 
international 
engagement, 
especially in the areas of peacekeeping oper­
ations (PKOs), counterpiracy, humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief (HADR), coun­
terterrorism, and multinational combined 
exercises. For example, many Latin Ameri­
can and Caribbean countries send officers to 
In the spirit of neighborhood diplomacy of friendship, sincerity, reciprocity, and inclusive­
ness, China’s armed forces will further develop relations with their counterparts in neigh­
boring countries. Also, they will work to raise the level of military relations with European 
counterparts [and] continue the traditional friendly military ties with their African, Latin 
American, and Southern Pacific counterparts. China’s armed forces will work to further 
defense and security cooperation in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and continue to 
participate in multilateral dialogues and cooperation mechanisms, such as the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus, ASEAN Regional 
Forum, Shangri-La Dialogue, Jakarta International Defence Dialogue, and Western Pacific 
Naval Symposium. The Chinese military will continue to host multilateral events like the 
Xiangshan Forum, striving to establish a new framework for security and cooperation con­
ducive to peace, stability, and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, May 2015
External Defense Relations

20
the strategic-level College of Defense Studies 
at China’s National Defense University; some 
of these countries also send officers to other 
PLA schools. In addition to furthering PLA 
modernization, these engagements probably 
will remain focused on building China’s polit­
ical ties, explaining China’s rise, and building 
China’s international influence, particularly in 
Asia, Africa, and Latin America.34
Defense Budget
China’s approach to funding security require­
ments has been deliberate and substantial. 
China’s military spending increased by an aver­
age of 10 percent (inflation adjusted) per year 
from 2000 to 2016 and has gradually slowed to 
5- to 7-percent growth during the past 2 years. 
The official defense budget has remained at 1.2 
to 1.4 percent of gross domestic product for the 
past decade, allowing for steady, sustainable 
expenditure growth and qualitative improve­
ments throughout the PLA.
Estimating actual military expenses is difficult 
because of China’s poor accounting transpar­
ency and incomplete transition to a market 
economy. The formal defense budget process 
does not include funding for foreign weapons 
procurement, some research and development 
(R&D), and certain personnel benefits. Other 
government ministries distribute defense funds 
in addition to extrabudgetary funds that sup­
plement personnel living subsidies, equipment 
maintenance, and other budgetary items.35,36
PLA soldiers conduct individual movement training.
Image Source: DIMOC

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
21
However, using 2018 prices and exchange 
rates as an example, China’s total military-re­
lated spending for 2018 probably exceeded 
$200 billion, a threefold increase since 2002. 
Such spending has been on the rise since the 
1990s, when China formally began to empha­
size defense-related programs throughout the 
course of several “Five-Year Plans.”
Although the total dollar value of China’s 
defense budget remains significantly below 
that of the United States, China has benefited 
from “latecomer advantage.” In other words, 
China has not had to invest in costly R&D of 
new technologies to the same degree as the 
United States. Rather, China has routinely 
adopted the best and most effective platforms 
found in foreign militaries through direct pur­
chase, retrofits, or theft of intellectual prop­
erty. By doing so, China has been able to focus 
on expediting its military modernization at a 
small fraction of the original cost.
China's Official Defense Spending 2007-2018 (billions of 2018 dollars)
77.8
85.2
92.9
97.2
101.6
109.5
114.9
131.5
138.6
149.2
156.9
170.4
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2018
2017
Real defense expenditures 
(Billions 2018 USD, Adjusted for Inflation)
% of GDP
#
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
23
Military Doctrine and Strategy
hina’s military goal is to build a strong, 
combat-effective force capable of win­
ning regional conflicts and employing 
integrated, real-time C2 networks.37 The doc­
trine that supports this strategy is evolving 
with ongoing PLA reforms. For instance, in 
2017 the PLA began to implement revised mil­
itary training regulations that focused on real­
istic training for modern warfare and prepara­
tions for joint combat operations.38
China characterizes its military strategy as 
one of “active defense,” a concept it describes 
as strategically defensive but operationally 
offensive. The strategy is rooted in the con­
cept that once Beijing has determined that an 
adversary has damaged or intends to damage 
China’s interests at the strategic level, Beijing 
will be justified in responding “defensively” 
at the operational or tactical level, even if 
the adversary has not yet conducted offensive 
military operations. Beijing interprets active 
defense to include mandates for deescalating a 
conflict and seizing the initiative during a con­
flict, and has enshrined the concept in China’s 
National Security Law (2015) and in the PLA’s 
C
Jiangkai II class frigate Hengshui conducting gunnery exercise.
Image Source: DIMOC

24
major strategy documents.39 President Xi’s 
speech during the 90th anniversary parade of 
the PLA further highlighted that China would 
never conduct “invasion and expansion” but 
would never permit “any piece of Chinese ter­
ritory” to separate from China.40
China’s approach to its dispute with Japan 
over the Senkaku Islands partially illustrates 
this concept: China has employed both mili­
tary and law enforcement assets proactively 
to challenge Japan’s administration of the 
islands since Beijing determined that Japan’s 
purchase of the islands from a private owner 
in 2012 constituted a serious infringement on 
China’s sovereignty claims. Although the PLA 
has not yet carried out kinetic strikes on Jap­
anese forces around the islands, China’s active 
defense concept could potentially justify such 
attacks if Beijing perceived Japan to have fur­
ther escalated the dispute.
Perceptions of 
Modern Conflict
The PLA often uses the term “informatization” to 
describe the transformation process of becoming 
a modern military that can operate in the digi­
tal age. The concept figures prominently in PLA 
writings and is roughly analogous to the U.S. mil­
itary’s concept of net-centric capability: a force’s 
ability to use advanced information technology 
and communications systems to gain operational 
advantage over an adversary. The PLA uses 
the term “informatized warfare” to describe the 
process of acquiring, transmitting, processing, 
and using information to conduct joint military 
operations across the domains of land, sea, air, 
space, cyberspace, and the electromagnetic spec­
trum during a conflict. PLA writings highlight 
the benefit of near-real-time shared awareness 
of the battlefield in enabling quick, unified effort 
to seize tactical opportunities.41
In 2015, China’s leaders adjusted guidance on 
the type of war the PLA should be prepared 
to fight by directing the PLA to be capable of 
fighting and winning “informatized local wars,” 
with an emphasis on “maritime military strug­
gle.” Chinese military strategy documents also 
emphasize the growing importance of offensive 
air operations, long-distance mobility opera­
tions, and space and cyber operations. In other 
words, China expects that its future wars mostly 
will be fought outside its borders and will involve 
conflict in the maritime domain. China promul­
gated this through its most recent update to 
its “military strategic guidelines,” the top-level 
directives that China’s leaders use to define con­
cepts, assess threats, and set priorities for plan­
ning, force posture, and modernization.42
The PLA considers information the critical 
enabler for these maritime-focused digital-age 
operations, and as a result, China invests 
heavily in the development and proliferation of 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
equipment, force structure, and a universal 
network that processes information across 
all of its operational domains. These domains 
include C2, comprehensive support, multidi­
mensional protection, joint firepower strike, 
and battlefield maneuver.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
25
National Military 
Command and Control
A key driver of ongoing military reforms is 
Beijing’s desire to increase the PLA’s ability to 
carry out joint operations on a modern, high-tech 
battlefield.43 Prior to reforms, no permanent joint 
C2 mechanism existed. In fact, service head­
quarters had operational authority over their 
own forces during peacetime, and the former 
Army-centric military regions were responsible 
for conducting joint operations during wartime, 
although this was never attempted. This con­
struct was impractical because it would have 
forced the PLA to transition from a service-ori­
ented peacetime construct to a war-ready joint 
construct on a moment’s notice. Senior leaders 
recognized this flaw, and President Xi remarked 
in 2013 that “establishing a joint C2 system 
should be given primary importance, and estab­
lishing a CMC and theater command joint C2 
system should not be delayed.”44
Consequently, core elements of national- and 
regional-level military reforms since 2015 have 
focused on refining the PLA’s C2 structure, 
producing a joint operational command system 
with decisionmaking emanating from the CMC 
to theater commands and down to operational 
units.45,46 The reform plan aimed to establish two 
clear lines of authority under the CMC, giving 
the services authority over force management 
issues while empowering theater headquarters 
to command operations—a distinction that had 
been ambiguous.47 One aspect of the new struc­
ture that is different from previous Chinese 
military C2 is the permanence of operational 
C2, which eliminates the need to create ad hoc 
wartime commands. This system theoretically 
gives China the ability to quickly transition to 
a war footing. Speaking on behalf of the PLA, 
a Ministry of National Defense spokesman said 
reforms sought to improve “leadership admin­
istration and command of joint operations” so 
that the PLA would have a force structure able 
to fight and win modern conflicts.
Core Elements of Command 
and Control Reform
Theater Commands. The PLA transitioned 
from seven military regions to five “theaters of 
operations,” or joint commands.48 This struc­
ture is aligned toward Beijing’s perceived 
“strategic directions,” geographic areas of stra­
tegic importance along China’s periphery in 
which the PLA must be prepared to operate.
Joint Operations Command Centers. The 
cornerstone of the military’s new joint C2 sys­
tem is the PLA’s national- and theater-level 
joint operations command centers (JOCCs), 
staffed by personnel drawn from all services. 
The national-level joint operations command 
center, also known as the CMC JOCC, coordi­
nates the efforts of the five theater commands 
to achieve the PLA’s strategic objectives. The 
theater-level JOCCs are responsible for all 
tasks in their area of responsibility, including 
carrying out around-the-clock watch functions, 
maintaining situational awareness, managing 
joint exercises, and providing a communica­
tions hub linking theater commanders with 
service component commanders and forces.49

26
Joint Staff Department. During PLA 
reforms, the CMC dissolved the former Gen­
eral Staff Department, establishing a num­
ber of CMC-subordinate departments from 
the former organization. According to the 
Ministry of National Defense, the Joint Staff 
Department (JSD) is responsible for combat 
planning, C2 support, and formulating strat­
egy and requirements.50 The formation of the 
CMC JSD is likely to result in more stream­
lined and efficient operational planning 
because other former General Staff Depart­
According to China's Ministry of National Defense, the Theater of Operations construct will enhance 
combat effectiveness.
Theaters of Operation
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
27
ment functions, such as mobilization, train­
ing, and administration, have been assumed 
by separate departments. The JSD is pur­
ported to have greater representation from 
across the PLA’s services, potentially enhanc­
ing joint operational planning and execution.51
Modernizing Joint 
Command and Control
China continues to place a high priority on 
modernizing the PLA’s command, control, 
communications, computers, intelligence, sur­
veillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) sys­
tem as a response to trends in modern war­
fare that emphasize the importance of rapid 
decisionmaking and information sharing and 
processing. The PLA is seeking to improve its 
technological capabilities and organizational 
structure to command complex joint operations 
in near and distant battlefields with increas­
ingly sophisticated weapons.52
Supporting the reforms with technological 
improvements to C4ISR systems is essential 
to improving the speed and effectiveness of 
decisionmaking while providing secure, reli­
able communications to fixed and mobile com­
mand posts. The PLA is fielding advanced 
automated command systems, such as its 
Integrated Command Platform, with units at 
lower echelons across the force. The adoption 
of the Integrated Command Platform enables 
multiservice communications necessary for 
joint operations.
New technologies which are being introduced 
into the PLA enable sharing of information—
intelligence, battlefield information, logis­
tic information, and weather reports—on 
robust, redundant communication networks to 
improve commanders’ situational awareness. 
In particular, the transmission of intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) data in 
near-real time to commanders in the field could 
facilitate the commanders’ decisionmaking pro­
cesses and make operations more efficient.53
As these technical improvements are brought 
on line, they greatly enhance the PLA’s flexi­
bility and responsiveness. Informatized opera­
tions no longer require in-person meetings for 
command decisionmaking or labor-intensive 
processes for execution. Commanders can issue 
In the implementation of the military stra­
tegic guideline in the new situation, China’s 
armed forces must closely center around 
the CPC’s [Communist Party's] goal of 
building a strong military, respond to the 
state’s core security needs, aim at build­
ing an informatized military and winning 
informatized wars, deepen the reform of 
national defense and the armed forces in 
an all-round way, build a modern system of 
military forces with Chinese characteristics, 
and constantly enhance their capabilities 
for addressing various security threats and 
accomplishing diversified military tasks.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015

28
orders to multiple units at the same time while 
on the move, and units can rapidly adjust their 
actions through the use of digital databases 
and command automation tools.
The nature of these reform and modernization 
efforts in part resembles a Western-style joint 
C2 structure in which operational command­
ers develop force packages from units that are 
trained and equipped by the services. The cre­
ation of a permanent joint C2 structure that 
places more emphasis on naval and aerospace 
forces, along with a dedicated Strategic Sup­
port Force responsible for electronic warfare 
and operations in the space and cyberspace 
domains, reflects an emerging PLA capacity to 
more effectively execute joint operations.54
Regional and 
Global Operations
Even as PLA capabilities have improved and 
units have begun to operate farther from the 
Chinese mainland, Beijing has continued to 
emphasize what it perceives as a “period of stra­
tegic opportunity” during which it can pursue 
development without a major military conflict. 
In line with this perception, Beijing has imple­
mented an approach to external engagement 
that seeks to enhance China’s reach and power 
through activities calculated to fall below the 
threshold of alarming the international com­
munity about China’s rise or provoking the 
United States, its allies and partners, or others 
in the Asia-Pacific region into military conflict 
or an anti-China coalition. This is particularly 
evident in China’s pursuit of its territorial and 
maritime sovereignty claims in the South and 
East China Seas. In the South China Sea, China 
primarily uses maritime law enforcement ships, 
with its Navy ships in protective positions, to 
pressure other claimants and limit access to 
Chinese-occupied features. China’s expansion 
of disputed features and construction in the 
Spratly Islands using large-scale land reclama­
tion demonstrates China’s capacity—and a shift 
in willingness to exercise that capacity short of 
military conflict—to strengthen China’s control 
over disputed areas, enhance China’s presence, 
and challenge other claimants.55
PLA Navy sailors manning an Integrated Command 
Platform command post.
Image Source: DIMOC

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
29
China’s maritime emphasis and concern 
with protecting its overseas interests have 
increasingly drawn the PLA beyond Chi­
na’s borders and immediate periphery. The 
evolving focus of the PLA Navy (PLAN)—
from “offshore waters defense” to a mix of 
offshore waters defense and “open-seas pro­
tection”—reflects China’s desire for a wider 
operational reach. Since 2009, the PLA has 
incrementally expanded its global opera­
tions beyond the previously limited port 
calls and UN PKO missions. The PLAN 
has expanded the scope and frequency of 
extended-range naval deployments, military 
exercises, and engagements.
The establishment in Djibouti of the PLA’s first 
overseas military base with a deployed company 
of Marines and equipment, and probable fol­
low-on bases at other locations, signals a turn­
ing point in the expansion of PLA operations 
in the Indian Ocean region and beyond.56,57,58,59 
These bases, and other improvements to the 
PLA’s ability to project power during the next 
decade, will increase China’s ability to deter by 
military force and sustain operations abroad.
Luhai class destroyer Shenzhen.
Image Source: DIMOC

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
31
hereas the PLA of Mao’s era was 
ground-force-centric 
and 
lacked 
most modern capabilities such as 
mechanized troop transportation, investments 
in modernization have expanded China’s mil­
itary capabilities across all warfare domains. 
Today’s PLA is still far from being able to 
deploy large numbers of conventional forces 
globally, but China has developed nuclear, 
space, cyberspace, and other capabilities 
that can reach potential adversaries across 
the globe.
Core Chinese Military Capabilities
PLAN helicopter operating near the Jiangkai II class Hengshui.
Image Source: DIMOC
W

32
The First and Second Island Chains
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
33
Power Projection and 
Expeditionary Operations
Beijing’s longstanding interest to eventu­
ally compel Taiwan’s reunification with the 
mainland and deter any attempt by Taiwan 
to declare independence has served as the 
primary driver for China’s military modern­
ization. Beijing’s anticipation that foreign 
forces would intervene in a Taiwan scenario 
led the PLA to develop a range of systems to 
deter and deny foreign regional force projec­
tion. The implementation of Hu’s New His­
toric Missions in 2004 led to the incremental 
expansion of the military’s modernization pri­
orities to develop a PLA capable of operating 
in new domains and at increasing distances 
from the mainland. During this modernization 
process, PLA ground, air, naval, and missile 
forces have become increasingly able to proj­
ect power during peacetime and in the event 
of regional conflicts. Beijing almost certainly 
will use this growing ability to project power to 
bolster international perceptions of its role as 
a regional power and global stakeholder.
Although Beijing states that its intent is to 
serve as a stabilizing force regionally, in prac­
tice the PLA’s actions frequently result in 
increased tensions. Since 2012, Beijing has 
routinely challenged Tokyo’s Senkaku Island 
claims in the East China Sea. China’s Coast 
Guard frequently conducts incursions into the 
contiguous zone surrounding the islands to 
further China’s claims, while its Navy oper­
ates around the claims to enforce administra­
tion. The PLA has expanded and militarized 
China’s outposts in the South China Sea, and 
China’s Coast Guard, backed by the PLAN, 
commonly harasses Philippine and Vietnamese 
ships in the region.
Examples of incremental improvements to 
PLA power projection in the region are readily 
found in annual military exercises and opera­
tions.60 For instance, in 2015 the PLA Air Force 
(PLAAF) carried out four exercise training mis­
sions past the first island chain through the 
Bashi Channel, the northernmost passage of 
the Luzon Strait, and through the Miyako Strait 
closer to Japan. The Miyako Strait flights were 
1,500 kilometers from Guam, within range of 
the PLAAF’s CJ-20 air-launched land-attack 
cruise missile (LACM).61 Also in 2015, the 
PLAAF began flying the H-6K medium-range 
bomber, the PLAAF’s first aircraft capable of 
conducting strikes on Guam (with air-launched 
LACMs like the CJ-20), past the first island 
chain into the western Pacific.
China is also developing new capabilities that 
will enhance Beijing’s ability to project power. 
In September 2016, then-PLAAF Commander 
Gen Ma Xiaotian confirmed for the first 
time that the PLAAF was developing a new 
long-range bomber that would undoubtedly 
exceed the range and capabilities of the H-6K. 
Although the H-6K recently began flying with 
LACMs, this Chinese-built airframe is the 
10th design variant of the Soviet Tu-16, which 
began flying in 1952.62 In 2016, China and 
Ukraine agreed to restart production of the 
world’s largest transport aircraft, the An-225,

34
which is capable of carrying a world-record 
payload of nearly 254 tons. China expects the 
first An-225 to be delivered and operational by 
2019.63 If used by the military, this capability 
would facilitate the PLA’s global reach.
In addition to land-based aircraft, China 
is currently building its first domestically 
designed and produced aircraft carrier.64 The 
primary purpose of this first domestic aircraft 
carrier will be to serve a regional defense mis­
sion. Beijing probably also will use the carrier 
to project power throughout the South China 
Sea and possibly into the Indian Ocean.65 The 
carrier conducted initial sea trials in May 2018 
and is expected to enter into service by 2019.66 
[For more information on China’s aircraft car­
rier program, please see Appendix B.]
Other areas that reflect China’s growing mil­
itary presence abroad include China’s partici­
pation in UN peacekeeping operations.67 Sep­
arately, China routinely employs its modern 
hospital ship, Peace Ark, to support HADR 
missions worldwide. In 2015, the PLA con­
ducted its first permissive noncombatant 
evacuation operation, to extricate Chinese 
and other civilians from Yemen supported by 
Yemeni security forces.
China’s efforts to enhance its presence abroad, 
such as establishing its first foreign military 
base in Djibouti and boosting economic con­
nectivity by reinvigorating the New Silk Road 
Economic Belt and 21st Century Maritime 
Road under the “Belt and Road Initiative” 
(BRI), could enable the PLA to project power 
at even greater distances from the Chinese 
mainland.68,69,70 In 2017, China’s leaders said 
that the BRI, which at first included economic 
initiatives in Asia, South Asia, Africa, and 
Europe, now encompasses all regions of the 
world, including the Arctic and Latin America, 
demonstrating the scope of Beijing’s ambition.
Growing PLA mission areas and enhanced 
presence abroad may lead to an increase in 
demand for the PLA to protect China’s over­
seas interests and provide support to Chinese 
personnel. China’s increased presence also 
introduces the possibility that the PLA could 
play a more prominent role in delivering global 
public goods in the future.
PLAN Anwei class hospital ship Heping Fangzhou 
(Peace Ark).
Image Source: DIMOC

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
35
China’s Southern Theater Forces
China’s Southern Theater forces are arrayed to support multiple contingencies.
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

36
Separately, China’s modern naval platforms 
include advanced missile and technological capa­
bilities that will strengthen the force’s core war­
fighting competencies and enable credible com­
bat operations beyond the reaches of land-based 
defenses. The expansion of naval operations 
beyond China’s immediate vicinity will provide 
China with a diverse set of capabilities for strik­
ing targets across the Pacific and Indian Ocean 
regions, in addition to improving defensive capa­
bilities such as exercising control of SLOCs. 
Improving bluewater capabilities will extend 
China’s maritime security buffer to protect Chi­
na’s near- and far-seas interests more effectively.
China’s current aircraft carrier and planned 
follow-on carriers will extend air defense 
umbrellas beyond the range of coastal sys­
tems and help enable task group operations 
in far seas. Sea-based land attack probably is 
an emerging requirement for the PLAN. Chi­
nese military experts argue that to pursue a 
defensive strategy in far seas, the PLAN must 
improve its ability to control land from the sea 
through development of a long-range LACM.71
The PLA’s land-based missile and air forces 
enable other military assets to focus on con­
ducting offensive missions, such as blockades 
and sovereignty enforcement, as well as defen­
sive operations farther from China’s shores. 
China also focuses on enhancing the PLA’s ISR 
capabilities, which will enable improved target­
ing and timely responses to perceived threats.
Nuclear Forces and Weapons
China invests considerable resources to main­
tain a limited, survivable nuclear force that 
can guarantee a damaging retaliatory strike.72 
73 As part of this, China has long maintained 
a “no first use” (NFU) policy, stating it would 
use nuclear forces only in response to a 
nuclear strike against China.74,75,76 There is 
some ambiguity, however, over the conditions 
under which China’s NFU policy would apply. 
Some PLA officers have written publicly of the 
need to spell out conditions under which China 
might need to use nuclear weapons first; for 
example, if an enemy’s conventional attack 
threatened the survival of China’s nuclear 
force or of the regime itself.77 Nevertheless, 
there has been no indication that national 
leaders are willing to attach such nuances and 
caveats to China’s NFU doctrine.
The nuclear force is a strategic cornerstone for safeguarding national sovereignty and secu­
rity. China has always pursued the policy of no first use of nuclear weapons and adhered 
to a self-defensive nuclear strategy. China unconditionally will not use or threaten to use 
nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or in nuclear-weapons-free zones and 
will never enter into a nuclear arms race with any other country.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
37
China is developing a new generation of mobile 
missiles, with warheads consisting of multi­
ple independently targetable reentry vehicles 
(MIRVs) and penetration aids, intended to 
ensure the viability of its strategic deterrent 
in the face of continued advances in U.S. and, 
to a lesser extent, Russian strategic ISR, preci­
sion strike, and missile defense capabilities.78 
China is enhancing peacetime readiness levels 
for these nuclear forces to ensure responsive­
ness. China maintains nuclear-capable deliv­
ery systems in its Rocket Force and Navy. As 
of 2017, the Air Force had been reassigned a 
nuclear mission, probably with a developmen­
tal strategic bomber.79,80,81,82,83 The bomber’s 
deployment would provide China with its first 
credible nuclear triad of delivery systems dis­
persed across land, sea, and air—a posture 
considered since the Cold War to improve sur­
vivability and strategic deterrence.
PLA writings express the value of a “launch 
on warning” nuclear posture, an approach to 
deterrence that uses heightened readiness, 
improved surveillance, and streamlined deci­
sionmaking processes to enable a more rapid 
response to enemy attack. These writings 
highlight the posture’s consistency with Chi­
na’s NFU policy. China is working to develop 
a space-based early warning capability that 
could support this posture in the future.84
The PLA is developing a range of technologies 
to counter U.S. and other countries’ ballistic 
missile defense systems, including maneu­
verable reentry vehicles (MARVs), MIRVs, 
decoys, chaff, jamming, thermal shielding, and 
hypersonic glide vehicles.85,86,87 In addition, 
the PLA is likely to continue deploying more 
sophisticated C2 systems and refining C2 pro­
cesses as growing numbers of mobile intercon­
tinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and future 
nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine 
(SSBN) deterrence patrols require the PLA 
to safeguard the integrity of nuclear release 
authority for a larger, more dispersed force.
China maintains a stockpile of nuclear war­
heads and continues research on and develop­
ment and production of new nuclear weapons.88 
The PLA probably has multiple nuclear war­
head designs that are decades old and require 
routine observation, maintenance, or refur­
bishment to maintain effectiveness.89 China’s 
nuclear weapon design and production orga­
nization—the China Academy of Engineering 
Physics—is the key organization in developing 
and maintaining China’s nuclear force.90 It 
employs tens of thousands of personnel, and its 
scientists are capable of conducting all aspects 
of nuclear weapon design research, including 
nuclear physics, materials science, electronics, 
explosives, and computer modeling.91,92
China will optimize its nuclear force structure; improve strategic early warning, command 
and control, missile penetration, rapid reaction, and survivability and protection; and deter 
other countries from using or threatening to use nuclear weapons against China.
—Excerpts from China’s Military Strategy, May 2015

38
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
China Nuclear Weapon-Related Facilities
China's nuclear weapons program has been supported by a number of facilities that include production, 
processing, research and development, and testing.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
39
China has the required industrial capacity to 
enrich uranium and produce plutonium for mil­
itary needs. The China National Nuclear Cor­
poration operates several uranium enrichment 
facilities organized under three plants.93 China 
probably intends the bulk of its enrichment 
capacity to support its burgeoning nuclear 
power industry but could devote some enrich­
ment capacity to support military needs.94 Chi­
na’s plutonium production reactors probably 
ceased operation in the 1980s.95 However, Chi­
na’s reprocessing facilities can extract pluto­
nium from spent reactor fuel.96
Biological and 
Chemical Warfare
China has consistently claimed that it has 
never researched, produced, or possessed bio­
logical weapons and would never do so.97 Bei­
jing says China has researched only defensive 
biological technology necessary for China’s 
defense.98 China acceded to the Biological Weap­
ons Convention (BWC) in 1984.99 It declared 
the Academy of Military Science’s Institute of 
Microbiology and Epidemiology in Beijing as a 
biodefense research facility.100 China regularly 
and voluntarily submits to confidence-building 
measures under the BWC.101 Although China 
is not a member of the Australia Group, Chi­
na’s export control regulations have been in 
line with Australia Group guidelines and con­
trol lists since 2002.102, 103 China’s biotechnology 
infrastructure is sufficient to produce some bio­
logical agents or toxins on a large scale.104,105,106
The Australia Group (AG) is an informal 
forum of countries which, through the 
harmonisation of export controls, seeks to 
ensure that exports do not contribute to 
the development of chemical or biological 
weapons. Coordination of national export 
control measures assists Australia Group 
participants to fulfil their obligations 
under the Chemical Weapons Convention 
and the Biological and Toxin Weapons 
Convention to the fullest extent possible.
—Excerpt from the Australia Group’s website
China has declared that it once operated a 
small chemical weapons program for offensive 
purposes; however, Beijing has consistently 
maintained that the program was dismantled 
and all agents and munitions were used before 
China ratified the Chemical Weapons Conven­
tion (CWC) in 1997.107 Beijing also has declared 
two historical chemical warfare production 
facilities that may have produced mustard gas, 
phosgene, and lewisite.108,109 In 1998, Beijing 
published chemical export control regulations 
consistent with Organization for the Prohibi­
tion of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) standards. 
It also has consistently updated its chemical 
control list to reflect changes made to the Aus­
tralia Group chemical control list. China contin­
ues to reaffirm its compliance with the CWC as 
well as its support for the activities conducted 
by the OPCW.110,111,112 Since acceding to the 
CWC, China has declared hundreds of dual-
use facilities and has hosted hundreds of facil­
ity inspections and OPCW-led seminars.113,114

40
China’s chemical infrastructure is sufficient to 
research, develop, and produce some chemical 
agents on a large scale.115
China probably has the technical expertise 
to weaponize chemical and biological war­
fare (CBW) agents, and China’s robust arma­
ments industry and numerous conventional 
weapon systems, including missiles, rockets, 
and artillery, probably could be adapted to 
deliver CBW agents.116 China has the techni­
cal expertise, military units, and equipment 
necessary to detect CBW agents and to defend 
against a CBW attack.117
Entities and individuals in China continue to 
supply countries of concern with technologies, 
components, and raw materials applicable to 
weapons of mass destruction and missile pro­
grams. Such material and technology transfers 
could assist countries in developing their own 
production capabilities.118
Space/Counterspace
Outer space has become a commanding height in international strategic competition. Coun­
tries concerned are developing their space forces and instruments, and the first signs of wea­
ponization of outer space have appeared. China has all along advocated the peaceful use of 
outer space, opposed the weaponization of and arms race in outer space, and taken an active 
part in international space cooperation. China will keep abreast of the dynamics of outer 
space, deal with security threats and challenges in that domain, and secure its space assets 
to serve its national economic and social development, and maintain outer space security.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, May 2015
The PLA historically has managed China’s 
space program and continues to invest in 
improving China’s capabilities in space-based 
ISR, satellite communication, satellite naviga­
tion, and meteorology, as well as human space­
flight and robotic space exploration.119 China 
uses its on-orbit and ground-based assets to 
support national civil, economic, political, and 
military goals and objectives. Strategists in the 
PLA regard the ability to use space-based sys­
tems and deny them to adversaries as central 
to enabling modern informatized warfare. As a 
result, the PLA continues to strengthen its mil­
itary space capabilities despite its public stance 
against the militarization of space. Space oper­
ations probably will form an integral compo­
nent of other PLA campaigns and serve a key 
role in enabling actions to counter third-party 
intervention during military conflicts.
China continues to develop a variety of counter­
space capabilities designed to limit or prevent 
an adversary’s use of space-based assets during 
crisis or conflict. In addition to the research 
and possible development of satellite jammers 
and directed-energy weapons, China has prob­

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
41
ably made progress on kinetic energy weap­
ons, including the anti-satellite missile system 
tested in July 2014.120 China is employing more 
sophisticated satellite operations and probably 
is testing on-orbit dual-use technologies that 
could be applied to counterspace missions.
The PLA’s Strategic Support Force (SSF), 
established in December 2015, has an import­
ant role in the management of China’s aero­
space warfare capabilities.121 Consolidating 
the PLA’s space, cyber, and electronic warfare 
capabilities into the SSF enables cross-domain 
synergy in “strategic frontiers.” The SSF may 
also be responsible for research, development, 
testing, and fielding of certain “new concept” 
weapons, such as directed energy and kinetic 
energy weapons. The SSF’s space function is 
primarily focused on satellite launch and oper­
ation to support PLA reconnaissance, nav­
igation, and communication requirements. 
[For more on the SSF, please see Appendix E.]
Space and counterspace capabilities—like mis­
sile forces, advanced air and seapower, and cyber 
capabilities—are critical for China to fight and 
win modern military engagements. To support 
various requirements, China has built a vast 
ground and maritime infrastructure enabling 
spacecraft and space launch vehicle (SLV) man­
ufacture, launch, C2, and data downlink.
Satellites
China employs a robust space-based ISR capa­
bility designed to enhance its worldwide situ­
ational awareness. Used for civil and military 
remote sensing and mapping, terrestrial and 
maritime surveillance, and military intelligence 
collection, China’s ISR satellites are capable of 
providing electro-optical (EO) and synthetic 
aperture radar imagery, as well as electronic 
intelligence and signals intelligence data.122
China pursues parallel programs for military 
and commercial communications satellites 
(COMSATs), and owns and operates about 
30 COMSATs used for civil, commercial, and 
military satellite communications. The PLA 
operates a small number of dedicated military 
COMSATs.123 China’s civil COMSATs incorpo­
rate turnkey off-the-shelf commercially manu­
factured components, and China produces its 
military-dedicated satellites domestically.124 
China continues to launch new COMSATs to 
replace its aging satellites and increase its 
overall satellite communications bandwidth, 
capacity, availability, and reliability.
China uses its domestically produced Dong­
fanghong-4 (DFH-4) satellite bus—the struc­
ture that contains the components of the sat­
ellite—for its military COMSATs.125 Even 
though early satellites suffered mission-ending 
or mission-degrading failures, the DFH-4 has 
become a reliable satellite bus. The PLA and 
government continue to vigorously support the 
program and have signed numerous contracts 
with domestic and international customers 
for future DFH-4 COMSATs. The DFH-4 bus 
has also allowed China to position itself as 
a competitor in the international COMSAT 
market, orchestrating many contracts with 
foreign countries to supply on-orbit satellites, 
ground-control systems, and training.

42
In 2008, China launched the first Tianlian 
data-relay satellite of its China Tracking 
and Data Relay Satellite constellation. As 
of December 2017, China had four Tianlian 
data-relay satellites on orbit, allowing China 
to relay commands and data to and from its 
satellites even when those satellites were not 
over Chinese territory.
In 2000, China launched its first Beidou satel­
lites to test the development of a regional sat­
ellite navigation system. By 2012, China had 
established a regional satellite navigation con­
stellation consisting of 10 Beidou satellites and 
had initiated testing of a global constellation 
similar to the U.S. Global Positioning System 
(GPS).126 As Beidou satellites continue to be 
placed in orbit, by 2020 China will complete its 
global constellation of 27 Beidou satellites while 
maintaining a separate regional constellation 
providing redundant coverage over Asia.127
China owns and operates 10 domestically 
produced Fengyun and Yunhai meteorolog­
ical satellites.128 The China Meteorological 
Administration supports civilian and mili­
tary customers with the delivery of meteoro­
logical data and detailed weather forecasts. 
The newer satellites house almost a dozen 
all-weather sensors concerning atmospheric 
conditions as well as maritime terrain data 
for military and civilian customers. China’s 
Space operations control station.
Image Source: AFP

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
43
membership in the World Meteorological 
Organization grants it free access to global 
meteorological data from the international 
organization’s 191 members.129
Counterspace
The PLA is acquiring a range of technologies 
to improve China’s counterspace capabilities. 
China is developing antisatellite capabilities, 
including research and possible development 
of directed-energy weapons and satellite jam­
mers, and probably has made progress on the 
antisatellite missile system that it tested in 
July 2014. China is employing more sophisti­
cated satellite operations and probably is test­
ing dual-use technologies that could be applied 
to counterspace missions.130
China has not publicly acknowledged the exis­
tence of any new programs since it confirmed 
it used an antisatellite missile to destroy 
a weather satellite in 2007. PLA writings 
emphasize the necessity of “destroying, dam­
aging, and interfering with the enemy’s recon­
naissance…and communications satellites,” 
suggesting that such systems, as well as nav­
igation and early warning satellites, could be 
among the targets of attacks designed to “blind 
and deafen the enemy.”131,132
Human Spaceflight and 
Space-Exploration Probes
China became the third country to achieve 
independent human spaceflight in 2003, when 
it successfully orbited the crewed Shenzhou-5 
spacecraft, followed by space laboratory Tian­
gong-1 and -2 launches in 2011 and 2016, 
respectively. China intends to assemble and 
operate a permanently inhabited, modular 
space station capable of hosting foreign pay­
loads and astronauts by 2022.133
Long March-3B SLV in midlaunch.
Image Source: AFP

44
China operates four space launch sites: Jiuquan, Taiyuan, Xichang, and Wenchang.
Space Launch Sites
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
China is the third country to have soft-landed 
a rover on the Moon, deploying the rover Yutu 
as part of the Chang’e-3 mission in 2013. 
China’s Lunar Exploration Program plans to 
launch the first mission to land a rover on the 
lunar far side in 2018 (Chang’e-4), followed 
by its first lunar sample-return mission in 
2019 (Chang’e-5).134,135,136
Space Launch
China has a robust fleet of launch vehicles to 
support its requirements. The Chang Zheng, or 
Long March, and Kuaizhou SLVs can launch 
Chinese spacecraft to any orbit.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
45
Space Launch Fleet
System
Propellant
Generation
Outlook
LM-2, LM-3, LM-4 series
Liquid
Legacy
Phase out by 2025
LM-5 series
Liquid
Next
Heavy-lift for the proposed space 
station and other payloads
LM-6
Liquid
Next
Light-lift for low Earth and
sun-synchronous orbit
LM-7
Liquid
Next
Medium-lift for human spacefight and 
resupply to the future space station
LM-11 and Kuaizhou series
Solid
Next
Lift for emergency response
Cyberspace
Authoritative PLA writings identify con­
trolling the “information domain”—sometimes 
referred to as “information dominance”—as a 
prerequisite for achieving victory in a modern 
war and as essential for countering outside 
intervention in a conflict.140 The PLA’s broader 
concept of the information domain and of infor­
mation operations encompasses the network, 
electromagnetic, psychological, and intelli­
gence domains, with the “network domain” 
and corresponding “network warfare” roughly 
analogous to the current U.S. concept of the 
cyber domain and cyberwarfare.141
The PLA Strategic Support Force (SSF) may 
be the first step in the development of a cyber­
force by combining cyber reconnaissance, 
cyberattack, and cyberdefense capabilities into 
one organization to reduce bureaucratic hur­
dles and centralize command and control of 
PLA cyber units. Official pronouncements offer 
limited details on the organization’s makeup 
or mission. President Xi simply said during the 
SSF founding ceremony on 31 December 2015 
that the SSF is a “new-type combat force to 
maintain national security and [is] an import­
ant growth point for the PLA’s combat capa­
bilities.”142 The SSF probably was formed to 
consolidate cyber elements of the former PLA 
General Staff Third (Technical Reconnais­
sance) and Fourth (Electronic Countermea­
sures and Radar) Departments and Informati­
zation Department.143,144 [For more information 
on the SSF, please see Appendix E.]
137,138,139

46
The PLA could use its cyberwarfare capabili­
ties to support military operations in three key 
areas. First, cyber reconnaissance allows the 
PLA to collect technical and operational data for 
intelligence and potential operational planning 
for cyberattacks because the accesses and tac­
tics, techniques, and procedures for cyber recon­
naissance translate into those also necessary to 
conduct cyberattacks. Second, the PLA could 
employ its cyberattack capabilities to establish 
information dominance in the early stages of a 
conflict to constrain an adversary’s actions or 
slow mobilization and deployment by targeting 
network-based C2, C4ISR, logistics, and com­
mercial activities. Third, cyberwarfare capabili­
ties can serve as a force multiplier when coupled 
with conventional capabilities during a conflict.
PLA military writings detail the effectiveness 
of information operations and cyberwarfare 
in modern conflicts, and advocate targeting 
an adversary’s C2 and logistics networks to 
affect the adversary’s ability to operate during 
the early stages of conflict. One authoritative 
source identifies an adversary’s C2 system as 
“the heart of information collection, control, 
and application on the battlefield. It is also the 
nerve center of the entire battlefield.”145 Chi­
na’s cyberwarfare could also focus on targeting 
links and nodes in an adversary’s mobility sys­
tem and identifying operational vulnerabilities 
in the mobilization and deployment phase.
The PLA also plays a role in cyber theft. In May 
2014, the U.S. Department of Justice indicted 
five PLA officers on charges of hacking into the 
networks of U.S. companies for commercial 
gain. Beijing maintains that the Chinese gov­
ernment and military do not engage in cyberes­
pionage and that the United States fabricated 
the charges.146,147
Denial and Deception
The PLA uses military deception to reduce the 
effectiveness of adversaries’ reconnaissance 
and to deceive adversaries about the PLA’s 
warfighting intentions, actions, or major tar­
gets.148 PLA tradition emphasizes deception 
Cyberspace has become a new pillar of eco­
nomic and social development, and a new 
domain of national security. As interna­
tional strategic competition in cyberspace 
has been turning increasingly fiercer, quite 
a few countries are developing their cyber 
military forces. Being one of the major 
victims of hacker attacks, China is con­
fronted with grave security threats to its 
cyber infrastructure. As cyberspace weighs 
more in military security, China will expe­
dite the development of a cyberforce, and 
enhance its capabilities of cyberspace sit­
uation awareness, cyber defense, support 
for the country’s endeavors in cyberspace 
and participation in international cyber 
cooperation, so as to stem major cyber cri­
ses, ensure national network and informa­
tion security, and maintain national secu­
rity and social stability.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
47
and psychological manipulation to create 
asymmetric advantages and enable surprise. 
The PLA has a longstanding doctrine for 
deception, and claims that it regularly prac­
tices deception during training. PLA sources 
describe military deception as a form of com­
bat support, on par with ISR, meteorological 
support, missile calculation, engineering, and 
logistic support.
Denial and deception activities include: 149
• Concealing and camouflaging.
• Blending false or misleading military 
movements with actual deployments
and war preparations.
• Employing counterreconnaissance: 
understanding and evading, jamming, or 
destroying the whole spectrum of enemy 
reconnaissance activities against PLA 
units and facilities.
• Using deceptive maneuvers, psycholog­
ical ploys, and unorthodox schemes to 
deceive, confuse, or otherwise manipulate 
an adversary into a militarily disadvanta­
geous position.150
Skillfully employed, deception can paralyze 
an enemy force and achieve decisive results. 
Options range from no-warning strikes, vio­
lent multiaxis strikes, and envelopment to a 
less ambitious attempt to confuse the adver­
sary regarding the exact timing, nature, direc­
tion, or scope of a PLA operation.151,152
Logistics and Defense-
Industrial Modernization
[China’s armed forces will] develop new 
support means, augment war reserves, inte­
grate logistics information systems, improve 
rules and standards, and meticulously orga­
nize supply and support, so as to build a 
logistics system that can provide support 
for fighting and winning modern war, serve 
the modernization of the armed forces, and 
transform towards informatization.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015
The PLA’s increased focus on developing the 
capabilities required to conduct joint oper­
ations under “informatized” conditions that 
began in the 1990s has spurred efforts during 
the past two decades to develop the PLA’s 
capacity to supply and sustain its operations. 
Along these lines, the PLA has taken steps 
to modernize its defense-industrial base to 
ensure that the PLA is developing capabil­
ities to meet future mission requirements. 
Key areas of focus have included civil-military 
integration, support to joint combat opera­
tions, and high-tech weapons development.
Logistics
According to various military officials, the 
PLA’s logistics system historically has been 
plagued with inefficiencies that degrade com­
bat readiness and restrict its ability to sup­

48
port and sustain modern joint combat opera­
tions.153,154,155 Since the late 1990s, the PLA has 
invested in the modernization of its logistics 
system, force structure, and supporting infra­
structure to enable a transition from a rigid 
command-directed and manpower-dependent 
system, rife with corruption. The overarching 
objective of these reforms is to build a preci­
sion logistic support system that is capable of 
comprehensive, timely, and accurate logistic 
support to PLA joint operations.156,157
This transformation is dependent on building 
high-efficiency transportation and warehouse 
infrastructure, fielding new combat support 
equipment, integrating comprehensive infor­
mation systems, and developing a new breed of 
officer capable of leveraging these capabilities 
to support rapid mobilization and high-tempo 
combat operations.158,159 For China, logistics 
modernization also is heavily dependent on the 
PLA’s ability to leverage the full potential of 
China’s comprehensive national power to max­
imize combat capabilities, ensure peacetime 
efficiencies, and guarantee a constant state of 
combat readiness.160
The PLA has made great progress in logistics 
reform by improving logistics resources and 
procedures during the past two decades, and 
enhancing the PLA’s ability to mobilize rap­
idly and project support along internal lines 
of communication for large operations (mostly 
disaster responses and exercises).161,162,163,164 
Since 2016, the PLA has implemented struc­
tural reforms to improve command and con­
trol, procedural reforms to improve civil-mil­
itary integration, and oversight mechanisms 
to eliminate waste and inefficiencies that stem 
from longstanding corrupt practices within the 
logistics sector. The successful implementation 
of these measures remains to be seen, given 
the substantial cultural challenges of execut­
ing joint operations and reducing corruption.165 
The extent to which the PLA will be able to 
sustain external military force projection oper­
ations effectively also remains in question 
because the PLA’s experience is still nascent. 
Efforts to support the PLA’s first overseas mili­
tary base, in Djibouti, may provide insight into 
these capabilities. [Please see Appendix G for 
more information on PLA logistics.]
Defense-Industrial Base
China’s defense-industrial complex comprises 
both a military and a state sector governed 
by the CMC and State Council, respectively, 
under oversight of the Chinese Commu­
nist Party Central Committee.166 The CMC’s 
Equipment Development Department over­
sees weapons planning, research, develop­
ment, and acquisition (RDA) in conjunction 
with the military service armament organi­
zations for China’s Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Rocket Force, Strategic Support Force, Armed 
Police, and Coast Guard.
The State Council’s State Administration for 
Science, Technology, and Industry for National 
Defense (SASTIND) is the key organ respon­
sible for overseeing China’s state-owned 
defense-industrial corporations and enter­
prises.167,168 
Twelve 
SASTIND-subordinate

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
49
defense-industrial enterprises conduct RDA 
and production in six distinct scientific, engi­
neering, and technological domains:
• Aerospace/missile
• Naval/maritime
• Aviation
• Ground systems/ordnance
• Electronics
• Nuclear
During a speech at an equipment-quality work 
conference in 2015, CMC Vice Chairman Gen­
eral Xu Qiliang stressed the need to build a 
strong defense-industrial base to support mil­
itary development. Xu emphasized themes of 
quality, innovation, technology, and improving 
combat readiness, but also said it would be 
necessary to strengthen laws, regulations, and 
accountability within the defense industry to 
increase quality standards.169
The PLA initiated defense-industrial reforms 
in 2016 that aimed to reduce bureaucracy, 
develop a more structured RDA and produc­
tion decisionmaking apparatus, streamline 
developmental timelines, promote innovation, 
and institutionalize civil-military integration. 
Within an industrial context, the latter entails 
establishing a formal relationship between 
China’s defense and civilian industrial bases 
to develop a technologically advanced, domes­
tically reliant, and internationally relevant 
defense-industrial complex.170 Key components 
of the initiative include the establishment of 
widely distributed “science cities,” industrial 
parks, and high-tech zones—most near China’s 
defense-industrial corporations and commer­
cial industrial centers, large cities, and pro­
vincial capitals harboring significant RDA and 
manufacturing capabilities to facilitate effi­
cient logistics and supply.171,172 These reforms 
are expected to be implemented by 2020.
A key emphasis of defense-industrial reforms 
is developing an innovative military indus­
trial complex capable of delivering cutting-edge 
technologies to meet future PLA requirements. 
China’s research and development apparatus 
is designed to both identify and maximize the 
utility of emerging and potentially disruptive 
science and technology for military use. Scien­
tific and technological disciplines with military 
applications targeted for development include 
hypersonics; nanotechnology; high-performance 
computing; quantum communications; space 
systems; autonomous systems; artificial intel­
ligence; robotics; high-performance turbofan 
engine design; new, more efficient and power­
ful forms of propulsion; advanced manufac­
turing processes (including additive manufac­
turing/3-D printing); and advanced aerospace 
quality materials, just to name a few.173

50
Underground Facilities
The use of underground facilities for warfighting 
protection and concealment enhances China’s 
military capacity, with particular emphasis on 
protecting C4I functions and missile assets. The 
PLA maintains a robust, technologically advanced 
underground facility (UGF) program. Given its 
NFU nuclear policy, China assumes it might have 
to absorb an initial nuclear strike while ensuring 
that leadership and strategic assets survive.
China determined in the mid-to-late 1980s that 
it needed to update and expand its military UGF 
program. This modernization effort took on a 
renewed urgency after China observed U.S. and 
coalition air operations during the 1991 Persian 
Gulf War and in the Balkans in 1999. The resul­
tant emphasis on “winning high-tech battles” 
precipitated research into advanced tunneling 
and construction methods. These military cam­
paigns convinced China it needed to build more 
survivable, deeply buried facilities, resulting in 
the widespread UGF construction effort we have 
detected throughout China for the past decade.
Missions Other Than War
The PLA views “nonwar” missions as a compo­
nent of its readiness preparations, broader mil­
itary modernization efforts, and military diplo­
macy. These operations also reflect the PLA’s 
increasing role beyond China’s borders.174 In 
practice, the military shares many of these mis­
sions with the People’s Armed Police, China’s 
largely domestically oriented paramilitary force.
China has broadened its participation in UN 
PKOs since 2008 to support foreign policy and 
military objectives by improving China’s inter­
national image, providing the PLA with oper­
ational experience, and opening avenues for 
intelligence collection. China provides civilian 
police, military observers, engineers, logistic 
support specialists, and medical personnel to 
missions. In 2016, China had more than 3,000 
peacekeepers deployed in support of 10 UN 
missions around the globe—the largest contin­
gent of any permanent member nation of the 
UN Security Council—and separately com­
mitted to establish an additional 8,000-mem­
ber peacekeeping standby force. China has 
trained about 500 foreign peacekeepers and 
has pledged to increase this number to 2,500 
in the near future. In August 2017, Beijing 
announced that China’s first helicopter unit to 
be deployed to a UN mission area had arrived 
in Sudan to support the United Nations Afri­
can Union Mission in Darfur.175 As of 2018, 
China has more than 2,500 troops, police, and 
military observers committed to UN missions.
Medical team onboard Peace Ark.
Image Source: DIMOC

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
51
Beijing’s increased participation in UN PKO 
missions, particularly in terms of securing Chi­
na’s international image, has not come without 
costs.  For instance, in 2016, after three Chinese 
peacekeepers were killed in action and six were 
wounded in two high-profile attacks in Mali 
and South Sudan, some international media 
reports accused Chinese peacekeepers of failing 
to interdict attacks on civilian foreign aid work­
ers. These reports implicitly questioned China’s 
ability to perform as a responsible global actor.
In 2017, China sustained its contributions to 
counterpiracy operations in the Gulf of Aden 
through the deployment of its 28th naval escort 
task force to the region since 2008. During the 
same period, the PLAN continued to use sup­
port for counterpiracy to justify Chinese sub­
marine patrols to the Indian Ocean. In 2016, a 
nuclear-powered attack submarine conducted a 
port call in Karachi, Pakistan, during an official 
visit by the PLAN commander, marking Chi­
na’s first port call in South Asia by a nuclear 
submarine. In 2017, Chinese attack submarines 
conducted port calls in Seppangar, Malaysia, 
and Karachi, but Sri Lanka denied a port call 
request in Colombo.176 These submarine patrols 
demonstrate the PLAN’s emerging capability to 
protect China’s SLOCs and to increase China’s 
power projection into the Indian Ocean.
China continues to use humanitarian and disas­
ter relief and counterterrorism cooperation as 
low-threat avenues to advance military engage­
ment with many of its foreign partners. In March 
2016, Beijing also proposed the creation of a mar­
itime joint search and rescue hotline with the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, probably 
in part as a means of assuaging regional concerns 
over Chinese activities in the South China Sea.
Fulfilling international responsibilities and 
obligations. China’s armed forces will con­
tinue to participate in UN peacekeeping mis­
sions, strictly observe the mandates of the 
UN Security Council, maintain its commit­
ment to the peaceful settlement of conflicts, 
promote development and reconstruction, 
and safeguard regional peace and security. 
China’s armed forces will continue to take an 
active part in international disaster rescue 
and humanitarian assistance, dispatch pro­
fessional rescue teams to disaster-stricken 
areas for relief and disaster reduction, pro­
vide relief materials and medical aid, and 
strengthen international exchanges in the 
fields of rescue and disaster reduction. 
Through the aforementioned operations, 
the armed forces can also enhance their own 
capabilities and expertise.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015
PLA soldiers working on a school in Thailand.
Image Source: DIMOC

52
hina’s military modernization efforts 
have followed the broader growth 
and development of China as a 
whole. The PLA has made efforts toward 
reducing corruption, professionalizing train­
ing and education, developing a science and 
technology base for research and develop­
ment, and organizing the force for effective 
C2. With its economic and security interests 
reaching around the globe, Beijing perceives 
further modernization of the PLA as an imper­
ative for continued stability and security of its 
growing interests.
During the past decade alone, from counter­
piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden to an 
expanded military presence in the East and 
South China Seas, China has demonstrated a 
willingness to use the PLA as an instrument 
of national power in the execution of “historic 
missions” in the new century. Improvements 
in PLA equipment and capabilities that have 
focused on generating combat power across the 
PLA services present Beijing with additional 
response options as China faces increasing 
global security concerns. Expected advances 
in areas such as nuclear deterrence, power 
projection, cyberspace, space, and electromag­
netic spectrum operations will continue to be 
critical components of the PLA’s developing 
capabilities. China also continues to develop 
capabilities for “nonwar” missions, such as 
HADR and counterpiracy.
In the coming years, the PLA is likely to grow 
even more technologically advanced, with 
equipment comparable to that of other mod­
ern militaries. The PLA will acquire advanced 
fighter aircraft, naval vessels, missile systems, 
and space and cyberspace assets as it organizes 
and trains to address 21st century threats far­
ther from China’s shores.
Outlook: Developing a Robust Force
C

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
53
The world today is undergoing unprecedented changes, and China is at a critical stage of 
reform and development. In their endeavor to realize the Chinese Dream of great national 
rejuvenation, the Chinese people aspire to join hands with the rest of the world to maintain 
peace, pursue development, and share prosperity.
China’s destiny is vitally interrelated with that of the world as a whole. A prosperous and 
stable world would provide China with opportunities, while China’s peaceful development 
also offers an opportunity for the whole world. China will unswervingly follow the path of 
peaceful development, pursue an independent foreign policy of peace and a national defense 
policy that is defensive in nature, oppose hegemonism and power politics in all forms, and 
will never seek hegemony or expansion. China’s armed forces will remain a staunch force in 
maintaining world peace.
Building a strong national defense and powerful armed forces is a strategic task of China’s 
modernization drive and a security guarantee for China’s peaceful development. Subordi­
nate to and serving the national strategic goal, China’s military strategy is an overarching 
guidance for blueprinting and directing the building and employment of the country’s armed 
forces. At this new historical starting point, China’s armed forces will adapt themselves to 
new changes in the national security environment, firmly follow the goal of the Communist 
Party of China to build a strong military for the new situation, implement the military 
strategic guideline of active defense in the new situation, accelerate the modernization of 
national defense and armed forces, resolutely safeguard China’s sovereignty, security and 
development interests, and provide a strong guarantee for achieving the national strategic 
goal of the ‘two centenaries’ and for realizing the Chinese Dream of achieving the great reju­
venation of the Chinese nation.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, May 2015
Note: The “two centenaries” is a reference to the 2021 centenary of the 
CCP as well as the 2049 centenary of the People’s Republic of China.

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
55
APPENDIX A: PLA Army
The PLA Army (PLAA) is the world’s largest 
standing ground force, with approximately 
915,000 active-duty personnel in combat 
units.177 China’s military reforms since 2015 
have included creating a separate PLAA head­
quarters for the first time in the PLA’s his­
tory. In April 2017, the PLA announced the 
reduction of 5 of the PLAA’s 18 group armies 
(corps-sized units), and the restructuring to a 
corps-brigade-battalion force structure. This 
new design implemented more mobile, modu­
lar units and integrated maneuver elements 
into combined-arms brigades.178 The PLAA is 
also modernizing C4I systems to enhance its 
forces’ interoperability.
Roles and Missions
The PLAA’s role is to serve as the primary 
ground fighting force for the PLA. Accordingly, 
the PLAA’s mission falls into five areas with 
eight supporting capabilities.
Roles and Missions
PLAA Strategic Purpose
1
Respond to emergencies and military threats
2
Safeguard the sovereignty and security of China’s territory, China’s security interests in new 
domains, and overseas interests
3
Participate in security cooperation and maintain regional and world peace
4
Maintain China’s political security and social stability
5
Perform emergency rescue and disaster relief
Required Tactical and Operational Capabilities
1
Remote maneuver actions
5
Occupation and control actions
2
Information countermeasures
6
Regional guard actions
3
Firepower strike options
7
Special operations actions
4
Mobile assault actions
8
All-dimension defensive actions

56
Major Ground Units
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
57
PLAA-produced 
publications 
consistently 
discuss “new-type operations,” which are 
operations that emphasize an effects-based 
application of combat power to neutralize 
key nodes, diminish the enemy’s capability to 
effectively fight (systems confrontation), and 
achieve operational objectives quickly. At the 
tactical level, PLAA battalion training most 
likely includes use of precise, long-range fire 
to maximize protection and surprise; disper­
sion of formations of weapon platforms while 
relying on advanced communications technol­
ogies; and increasingly lethal munitions to 
enable PLAA commanders to produce mass 
effects on an enemy.
Units
The development of the PLAA’s “new-type” 
operational forces reflects China’s desire to plan 
and construct a force that is multifaceted, with 
capabilities for operations ranging from high-in­
tensity conflict to security-stability operations. 
These forces stress the importance of ISR and 
leveraging information to enable future com­
bat; they can conduct three-dimensional opera­
tions (Army aviation, air mobility, and airborne 
forces) and can operate in a severely degraded 
communications environment.
Operations emphasize engaging the enemy from 
much longer distances, place greater importance 
on protection and survivability, and emphasize 
the employment of cyberoperations. Future 
PLAA units will be smaller, more modular, and 
less dependent on headquarters for resources. 
This new construct envisions generating com­
bat power and effectiveness across warfighting 
functions, from smaller, more flexible units.179 
The PLAA is the world’s largest army.
Image Source: AFP
In line with the strategic requirement of 
mobile operations and multidimensional 
offense and defense, the PLAA will con­
tinue to reorient from theater defense to 
transtheater mobility. In the process of 
building small, multifunctional and mod­
ular units, the PLAA will adapt itself 
to tasks in different regions, develop the 
capacity of its combat forces for different 
purposes, and construct a combat force 
structure for joint operations. The PLAA 
will elevate its capabilities for precise, 
multidimensional, 
transtheater, 
multi­
functional, and sustainable operations.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015

58
Armor and Infantry. The majority of the 
PLAA’s armored and infantry units are orga­
nized as combined-arms brigades, but the PLAA 
maintains a few maneuver units organized into 
divisions. The combined-arms brigades vary in 
size and composition, containing up to 5,000 
troops. Infantry units include motorized infan­
try (those equipped with trucks for transpor­
tation) as well as mechanized infantry units, 
which can be equipped with either wheeled 
or tracked armored infantry fighting vehicles. 
Equipment in PLAA infantry units varies and 
may include a mix of obsolete platforms from 
the 1960s up to some of the region’s most mod­
ernized and capable platforms. PLAA armored 
units similarly comprise a wide range of legacy 
tanks and modernized third-generation main 
battle tanks.182
Artillery. Artillery is the key component of 
the PLAA’s strike capability.183 Its primary 
function is supporting ground assault mis­
sions, and artillery accounts for more than 
one-third of the Army’s operational unit 
strength.184 The current family of modernized 
systems emphasizes long-range deployment, 
firepower operations, and mobile warfare—
the key attributes that the PLAA requires in 
its newest artillery systems.185
Air Defense. PLAA air defense units comprise 
active-duty forces and reserve forces. Active-
duty units provide air defense for the mobile 
forces. These units are equipped with a mix of 
tactical antiaircraft missiles, antiaircraft artil­
lery, antiaircraft gun and missile systems, and 
man-portable antiaircraft missile systems. An 
extensive reserve antiaircraft artillery force, 
comprising divisions and separate brigades, 
provides primarily area antiaircraft artillery 
protection for China’s urban areas and critical 
economic areas.186,187
Electronic Countermeasures. Electronic 
countermeasure (ECM) units are equipped 
with a range of modern ground-based elec­
tronic warfare systems capable of targeting 
large portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. 
PLAA ECM units use HF/VHF/UHF, radar, 
and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-borne 
jamming systems to support maneuver forces.
Special Operations Forces. Consistent 
with the PLAA’s recent emphasis on infor­
mation- and intelligence-driven operations, 
the PLAA’s Special Operations Forces (SOF) 
have undergone substantial expansion. Accord­
ing to PLAA doctrine, SOF missions include 
“carrying out special reconnaissance, special 
sabotage, [and] harassment attacks; seizing 
and controlling key targets; guiding precision 
PLAA Units 
The table below highlights PLAA units by
type and size.
Type and Echelon 
Army Groups
13
Combined-Arms Brigades
78
Artillery Brigades
15
Army Aviation/Air Assault Brigades
13
Mechanized Infantry Division
1
180,181

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
59
attacks; conducting rescues behind enemy 
lines; and dealing with border armed con­
flicts and unexpected events.”188 PLAA SOF 
appears to focus primarily on special recon­
naissance and direct-action missions.189
Army Aviation. PLA Army Aviation comprises 
13 brigades. These units are subordinate to 
corps-level units in the five theater commands. 
The PLA considers PLA Army Aviation a “new-
type” operational force and a priority for mod­
ernization. Since 2010, PLA Army Aviation has 
transformed from an auxiliary transport role to 
that of a main combat force and has increased 
its regiments to brigade echelon. Newly fielded 
and forthcoming helicopters combined with 
structural and operational changes under way 
in the PLAA indicate a pattern of development 
designed to mold a three-dimensional, new-
type Army Aviation force with all-weather day-
or-night capability.190
Logistics and Support. PLAA logistics and 
equipment support elements exist in active and 
reserve units. They provide field forces with all 
classes of supply and maintenance support as 
well as medical and technical support. These 
forces normally form support groups under 
logistics and equipment command posts.191
The PLAA also relies heavily on civil-military 
integration to supplement services provided 
by military logistics units. Official publications 
note the importance of integrating civilian and 
military production during mobilizations, and 
the PLAA regularly uses a combination of mil­
itary and civilian materiel (rations and fuel), 
equipment (civilian transport vehicles, vessels, 
and aircraft), and facilities (ports, docks, and 
hospitals) during large-scale training exercises.
Equipment 192,193
Main Battle Tanks. The PLAA armored corps 
comprises a mix of older, obsolete tanks and a 
variety of more modern tanks. The PLAA is mod­
ernizing its armored units by fielding third-gen­
eration tanks with updated armor packages, 
larger-caliber cannons, improved fire-control 
systems, and advanced electronics and commu­
nications. The most capable of these tanks are 
the Type 96A and Type 99 main battle tank.194
Armored Infantry Fighting Vehicles 
(AIFVs) and Armored Personnel Carriers (APCs).
The PLAA has a large variety of wheeled and 
tracked AIFVs and APCs. Highlighted below 
are two of the PLAA’s most modern AIFVs.
• ZBD-04A. The ZBD-04A is one of China’s 
newest tracked AIFVs. It is well armed 
with a 100-mm gun, a coaxial 30-mm can­
A ZTZ99 (Type 99) main battle tank 
conducting training.
Image Source: AFP

60
non, and a 7.62-mm machinegun. It has a 
traditional layout, with the engine in the 
front right and the driver in the front left. 
The turret is in the middle, with the troop 
compartment in the rear. The ZBD-04A has 
a licensed copy of the Russian BMP 3 turret. 
It has a three-member crew and room for 
seven passengers. This IFV weighs about 
21 tons and has improved armor.
• ZBL-09. The ZBL-09, often referred to as 
a “wheeled light tank,” is the PLA’s newest 
wheeled armored vehicle. It has an 8x8 con­
figuration, a 105-mm gun, a 7.62-mm coax­
ial machinegun, a 12.7-mm machinegun on 
the right side of the turret, and six 76-mm 
grenade launchers on each side of the turret. 
The driver is in the front, the turret is in the 
middle, the power pack is in the rear, and 
passive armor is fitted to the hull and turret.
Artillery and Rockets. China continues to 
produce modern artillery systems aimed at 
advancing the mechanization of PLAA artil­
lery while integrating information systems to 
increase lethality and precision. The primary 
systems are the PHL03 300-mm self-propelled 
(SP) multiple rocket launcher, the PLZ05 155-
mm SP gun/howitzer, and two tracked and two 
wheeled 122-mm artillery systems. These new 
systems are likely to replace almost all towed 
artillery. The exception to this modernization 
trend is PLAA coastal defense artillery, which 
will continue using towed Type 59-1 130-mm 
guns and Type 66 152-mm howitzers.
Air Defense. China has been fielding medi­
um-range HQ-16 surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) 
with select air defense units in the PLAA as 
part of a comprehensive upgrade of its air 
defense capabilities. China manufactures its 
own variant of Russia’s SA-15 and is fielding 
the system with PLAA air defense units sup­
porting tracked armored forces.
China also manufactures a domestically 
designed variant of the French Crotale tacti­
cal SAM system. This wheeled SAM is being 
fielded with PLAA air defense units sup­
porting primarily wheeled fighting forces. 
China’s tactical SAMs have been replacing 
outdated large-caliber antiaircraft artillery in 
air defense units defending operational and 
large tactical-level units.
China is fielding a modern domestically pro­
duced SP antiaircraft gun system with select 
PLAA air defense units protecting larger 
maneuver units. The PGZ-07 will provide highly 
mobile coverage for headquarters areas, troop 
concentrations, and key logistic support areas.
PHL03 Multiple Rocket Launchers on parade 
in Beijing
Image Source: AFP

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
61
China’s domestically designed and produced 
PGZ-04 integrated missile-gun antiaircraft 
system is an upgraded version of the PGZ-95, 
equipped with more effective short-range SAMs. 
The system is fielded with many PLAA armored 
and mechanized units for close-range air defense 
protection of combat maneuver elements.
Training
In 2015, PLA leaders directed changes to ground 
forces training.195 These changes included a call 
for increased emphasis on problem solving, inno­
vation, and realistic combat training, replacing 
previously scripted training methods. Leaders 
stressed the performance of key tasks—such as 
conducting joint training, training in nighttime 
combat, and training under adverse weather 
and geographical conditions—as essential to 
winning wars. The PLAA makes use of a num­
ber of training locations available for its ground 
forces and maintains at least one sizable train­
ing area in each of China’s military theaters. 
These training areas offer a variety of terrain, 
from coastal and flat areas to moderately hilly, 
to high plateau and mountainous terrains. The 
major training bases provide units with venues 
featuring large areas for field maneuvers, artil­
lery fires, and force-on-force confrontations.
Professionalization. Since at least 2012, 
PLAA units (“red forces”) rotating through com­
bined-arms training centers have trained against 
a permanently established “blue force,” also 
known as an opposition force.196 The construction 
of a blue force was undertaken to ensure that the 
PLAA would become more sophisticated in con­
ducting realistic training scenarios. Increasingly, 
PLAA training emphasizes the need to empower 
lower-level leaders to conduct target-based, oppor­
tunistic, initiative-driven combat. The PLAA has 
decreased the emphasis on “saving face,” shifting 
toward a culture of understanding that command­
ers and subordinates should be allowed—and 
expected—to make mistakes in training.
Recruitment and Professional Military 
Education. Military service probably will 
remain a less attractive career option if Chi­
na’s economy stays healthy. Although Chinese 
youth remain interested in the career field, 
interest is not widespread.197 The PLAA relies 
on a 2-year conscription period along with 
a mix of volunteers (the ratio of conscripts to 
volunteers is unclear). Recruitment challenges 
notwithstanding, the PLA continues to pursue 
efforts to “cultivate new-type military person­
nel” to retain talent and develop personnel who 
PGZ-O7 self-propelled antiaircraft system on 
parade in Beijing.
Image Source: AFP

62
can meet the data demands of modern war­
fare.198 The Army also has changed military 
recruitment schedules and age limits in an 
effort to better attract educated and talented 
people.199 Basic training, where students learn 
fundamental military skills and receive polit­
ical indoctrination, continues to serve as the 
foundation for both conscripted and volunteer 
personnel entering the service. After complet­
ing the initial curriculum, trainees are sent to 
their respective units for additional on-the-job 
training. Some new soldiers will go on to dif­
ferent locations for technical training outside 
their assigned units.200
PLA cadets receive political instruction.
Image Source: DIMOC

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
63
APPENDIX B: PLA Navy
The PLA Navy (PLAN) is Asia’s largest navy, 
with an inventory of more than 300 surface 
combatants, submarines, amphibious ships, 
patrol craft, and specialized units.201 The 
PLAN is rapidly replacing obsolescent, gen­
erally single-purpose ships in favor of larger, 
multirole combatants with advanced antiship, 
antiair, and antisubmarine weapons and sen­
sors. This modernization aligns with China’s 
growing emphasis on the maritime domain, 
with increasing demands on the PLAN to con­
duct operational tasks at increasing distances 
from the Chinese mainland using multimis­
sion, long-range, sustainable naval platforms 
with robust self-defense capabilities.202,203
In the 1980s, China’s threat perceptions and 
growing economic interests drove a major 
shift in the strategic orientation and utility 
of naval forces. In particular, Chinese naval 
strategists sought to expand the bounds of 
their maritime capabilities beyond coastal 
defense. By 1987, PLAN Commander Adm Liu 
Huaqing had established a strategy referred 
to as “offshore defense.”204
Although Liu characterized offshore areas as 
east of Taiwan and the northern part of the 
Pacific Ocean, stretching beyond the first island 
chain, offshore defense was often associated 
with operations in the Yellow Sea, East China 
Sea, and South China Sea—China’s “near seas.” 
Development of offshore defense paralleled the 
CMC’s adoption of a new military strategy 
that focused on local wars on China’s periph­
ery rather than a major confrontation with 
the Soviet Union, and it focused on achieving 
regional goals and deterring a modern adver­
sary from intervening in a regional conflict.
Former President Hu and President Xi have 
repeatedly emphasized the importance of mari­
time power. In 2004, former President Hu’s out­
line of the PLA’s New Historic Missions encom­
passed new expectations for the PLAN. In his 
report to the 18th Party Congress in 2012, Hu 
declared, “We should enhance our capacity for 
exploiting marine resources, resolutely safe­
guard China’s maritime rights and interests, 
and build China into a maritime power.” Hu’s 
public emphasis on maritime power and the 
need to “resolutely safeguard” China’s mar­
itime rights and interests reflect a growing 
consensus in China that maritime power is 
In line with the strategic requirement of off­
shore waters defense and open-seas protec­
tion, the PLAN will gradually shift its focus 
from “offshore waters defense” to the com­
bination of “offshore waters defense” with 
“open-seas protection,” and build a com­
bined, multifunctional and efficient marine 
combat force structure. The PLAN will 
enhance its capabilities for strategic deter­
rence and counterattack, maritime maneu­
vers, joint operations at sea, comprehensive 
defense, and comprehensive support.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015

64
essential to advancing China’s interests. This 
trajectory was carried forward under Xi and is 
explicit in China’s 2015 military strategy:
In 2015, Beijing formally introduced a new 
naval strategy, known as Offshore Defense and 
Open Seas Protection. The new strategy con­
tains the primary elements of offshore defense 
but extends China’s maritime sphere of opera­
tions beyond the first and second island chains 
and into the high seas in support of China’s 
growing international interests and maritime 
missions. China relies heavily on maritime 
trade, access to overseas energy resources, and 
overseas employment of Chinese citizens to 
propel its domestic economy, spurring Beijing’s 
concern for ensuring that the PLAN is capable 
of pursuing open-seas protection missions. The 
PLAN’s acquisition patterns demonstrate a 
growing emphasis on ships that are multimis­
sion capable and large enough to sustain these 
types of operations.
Roles and Missions
Given China’s heavy reliance on maritime 
commerce, Beijing now has a vested interest 
in ensuring the security of international trade. 
Beijing also faces growing pressure to contrib­
ute to international security missions. As an 
increasingly modern and flexible force, the 
PLAN is at the forefront of addressing a num­
ber of enduring Chinese security challenges, 
from reunification with Taiwan to asserting 
China’s maritime claims in the East and South 
China Seas. Today the PLAN’s primary opera­
tional, training, and planning focus remains in 
the near seas, where China faces sovereignty 
disputes over various islands, maritime fea­
tures, territorial waters, and associated mar­
The traditional mentality that land out­
weighs sea must be abandoned, and 
great importance has to be attached to 
managing the seas and oceans and pro­
tecting maritime rights and interests. It 
is necessary for China to develop a mod­
ern maritime military force structure 
commensurate with its national security 
and development interests, safeguard its 
national sovereignty and maritime rights 
and interests, protect the security of stra­
tegic SLOCs (sea lines of communication) 
and overseas interests, and participate in 
international maritime cooperation so as 
to provide strategic support for building 
itself into a maritime power.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015
PLAN Jiangkai II class guided-missile frigate Linyi.
Image Source: DVIDS

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
65
itime rights. The growth of China’s diversified 
“nonwar” missions, including HADR, SLOC 
protection, and PKOs, has been a major driver 
of—and justification for—China’s expanded 
naval strategy and operations in the far seas. 
The following subsections highlight a few of 
these missions.
Countering 
Third-Party 
Intervention. 
Since the mid-1990s, Chinese planners and 
strategists have understood that the PLAN’s 
development of capabilities to deter, delay, and 
if necessary degrade third-party forces’ inter­
vention in a time of conflict is essential. Nearly 
two decades later, China has closed many of the 
gaps in key warfare areas, such as air defense 
and long-range strike, that would support coun­
tering third-party forces in regional campaigns. 
China has built or acquired a wide array of 
advanced platforms, including submarines, 
major surface combatants, missile patrol craft, 
maritime strike aircraft, and land-based sys­
tems that employ new, sophisticated antiship 
cruise missiles and SAMs. China also has devel­
oped the world’s first roadmobile, antiship bal­
listic missile, a system specifically designed to 
attack enemy aircraft carriers. China’s leaders 
hope that possessing these military capabilities 
will deter proindependence moves by Taiwan 
or, should deterrence fail, will permit a range 
of tailored military options against Taiwan and 
potential third-party military intervention.
Protecting Maritime Sovereignty. A key role 
for the PLAN is protecting China’s maritime sov­
ereignty. In the East and South China Seas, Bei­
jing faces longstanding disputes with its neigh­
bors regarding maritime boundaries, economic 
rights, and sovereignty over various geographic 
features. During the past few years, maritime 
disputes between China and rival claimants, 
including Japan, the Philippines, Vietnam, and 
Malaysia, have periodically intensified.
China’s Navy, Coast Guard, and Maritime 
Militia are increasingly visible throughout the 
region, and Beijing has employed increasingly 
coercive tactics to advance its regional inter­
ests. As China’s naval capabilities have grown, 
Beijing has taken steps to consolidate its mar­
itime forces and improve its ability to respond 
flexibly to contingencies, while avoiding esca­
lation to military conflict and maintaining a 
veneer of advancing peaceful global interests. 
China’s land reclamation and outpost expan­
sion in the Paracel and Spratly Islands include 
port facilities from which it can surge PLAN, 
The aircraft carrier Liaoning sailing in a formation of 
PLAN ships.
Image Source: AFP

66
China Coast Guard (CCG), and People’s Armed 
Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM) ships to 
better enforce maritime sovereignty claims, 
as well as airbases to support reconnaissance, 
fighter, and strike aircraft.
Under Chinese law, maritime sovereignty is a 
domestic law enforcement issue under the pur­
view of the CCG. Beijing also prefers to use CCG 
ships for assertive actions in disputed waters 
to reduce the risk of escalation and to portray 
itself more benignly to an international audi­
ence. For situations that Beijing perceives carry 
a heightened risk of escalation, it often deploys 
PLAN combatants in close proximity for rapid 
intervention if necessary. China also relies on 
the PAFMM – a paramilitary force of fishing 
boats – for sovereignty enforcement actions.
Sea Lane Protection. China increasingly 
sees a need for the PLAN to help protect its 
economic investments and political interests 
around the world. The security of oil import 
routes from the Middle East and Africa that 
pass through the Indian Ocean is particularly 
vital to China. Large portions of China’s crit­
ical mineral imports and trade in manufac­
tured products and components also use these 
routes. Since any disruption of China’s trade 
could undermine China’s economy, the PLAN 
is placing growing importance on developing 
long-range SLOC protection and general naval 
presence capabilities. For example, SLOC pro­
tection and naval presence missions are among 
the main drivers in China’s establishment of 
a naval logistics support base in Djibouti as 
well as Beijing’s pursuit of additional logis­
tics-port-access agreements. In addition, the 
PLAN’s participation in counterpiracy oper­
ations in the Gulf of Aden demonstrates Bei­
jing’s intention to protect important SLOCs.
Naval Diplomacy. Another growing PLAN 
mission is naval diplomacy. Since PLAN task 
groups began supporting counterpiracy opera­
tions in the Gulf of Aden in 2008, the returning 
units have often followed the deployment with 
port visits across the Indian Ocean and other 
regions. In 2017, the PLAN completed its lon­
gest goodwill deployment in October, visiting 
20 countries in 7 months, including several port 
calls in Europe. The PLAN also employs its hos­
pital ship, Peace Ark, to support HADR missions 
worldwide. These visits advance the Navy’s 
international profile, provide opportunities for 
bilateral cooperation, and build the PLAN’s 
experience in areas farther from China’s coast.
PLAN sailor participating in visit, board, search, and 
seizure (VBSS) training.
Image Source: DIMOC

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
67
Nontraditional Missions. In 2004, the PLAN 
was tasked with safeguarding China’s national 
development and playing an important role in 
ensuring world peace. This represented a sub­
stantial adjustment to China’s national defense 
strategy and broadened its definition of security 
to include new geographic and functional areas 
beyond the PLA’s traditional territorial security 
missions. Missions such as naval escort in the 
Gulf of Aden support China’s economic interests 
while enhancing China’s international image.
Units
The PLAN controls all of China’s naval and naval 
aviation forces as well as seven marine brigades 
and has deployed naval forces in three of Chi­
na’s five geographically oriented theaters that 
conduct day-to-day operations. The deputy com­
mander of each fleet commands its respective 
aviation force. The 2015 PLA-wide structural 
reforms formally separated operational control 
of the Navy from force-building aspects admin­
istered by PLAN headquarters, and additional 
changes to the PLAN’s structure, particularly at 
the fleet level and below, are expected in 2018.
PLAN Luyang II class destroyer Xian.
Image Source: DIMOC

68
Major Naval Units
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
69
North Sea Fleet. Headquartered in Qingdao, 
the North Sea Fleet is responsible for the Bo 
Hai, Yellow Sea, and northern portion of the 
East China Sea. It falls under the PLA North­
ern Theater Command’s area of operations.
East Sea Fleet. Headquartered in Ningbo, 
the East Sea Fleet covers the majority of the 
East China Sea and the Taiwan Strait. It falls 
under the PLA Eastern Theater Command’s 
area of operations.
South Sea Fleet. Headquartered in Zhanji­
ang, the South Sea Fleet is responsible for the 
South China Sea. It falls under the PLA South­
ern Theater Command’s area of operations.
Equipment: Building a Modern Navy
During the past 15 years, China’s naval mod­
ernization has produced a technologically 
advanced, flexible force structure. The PLAN 
has more than 300 surface combatants, sub­
marines, amphibious ships, and missile-armed 
patrol craft. Although the overall inventory 
has remained relatively constant, the PLAN is 
rapidly retiring older, single-mission warships 
in favor of larger, multimission ships equipped 
with advanced antiship, antiair, and antisub­
marine weapons and sensors and C2 facilities.
In the initial stages of its modernization, the 
PLAN successfully concentrated resources on 
improving its antisurface warfare (ASUW) 
capabilities, both in surface ship and subma­
rine development. Subsequent efforts have 
focused on improving antiair warfare capabil­
ities and providing modest improvements in 
antisubmarine warfare (ASW) capabilities.
Every major PLAN surface combatant under 
construction is capable of embarking a heli­
copter to support over-the-horizon targeting, 
ASW, and search and rescue. Meanwhile, the 
PLAN’s submarine force remains largely con­
centrated on ASUW, with Jin class SSBNs 
poised to contribute to China’s nuclear deter­
rent once they begin strategic patrols in the 
near future. Naval aviation is expanding its 
mission set by incorporating modern multirole 
combat aircraft along with modern special mis­
sion aircraft, carrier aviation, and UAVs. As a 
whole, the PLAN is becoming a force able to 
execute a wide variety of missions near home 
and far away.
Surface Force. In the late 1990s to early 
2000s, the PLAN transitioned from a “green­
water” (coastal) force to one capable of oper­
ating offshore with increasing regularity. 
During this period, China imported several 
major combatants, weapon systems, and sen­
Artist rendition of a PLAN Renhai class cruiser.
Image Source: Wikimedia Commons

70
sors from Russia while concurrently producing 
and developing its own designs and moderniz­
ing older ships to employ advanced weapons. 
By the second decade of the 2000s, the PLAN 
was using Chinese designs for surface ships 
primarily equipped with Chinese weapons 
and sensors (although some engineering com­
ponents and subsystems remained imported 
or license-produced in country at the time). 
Furthermore, the era of past designs has 
given way to production of modern multimis­
sion destroyer, frigate, and corvette classes as 
China’s technological advancement in naval 
design has begun to approach a level commen­
surate with, and in some cases exceeding, that 
of other modern navies. Once operational, the 
new Renhai class (Type 055) guided-missile 
cruiser, of which several are currently under 
construction, will be one of the most advanced 
and powerful ships in the world, boasting a 
large array of advanced-capability weapons 
and sensors developed domestically.205
Shipboard air defense and antisurface war­
fare capabilities are arguably the most notable 
areas of improvement on PLAN surface ships. 
China has retired several older destroyers and 
frigates that had at most a point air defense 
capability and a range of just several nauti­
cal miles. Newer ships entering the force are 
equipped with medium- to long-range area air 
defense missiles, including the Renhai, which 
has 112 vertical-launch cells for mixed muni­
tions. The PLAN received a total of six Luyang 
II (Type 052C) class guided-missile destroyers 
with the HHQ-9 SAM (55-NM range) and YJ-62 
antiship cruise missiles (ASCMs) (150-NM 
range), and six Luyang III (Type 052D) class 
guided-missile destroyers are now operational, 
with several more under construction. The 
Luyang III carries an extended-range variant 
of the HHQ-9 SAM and YJ-18 ASCM (290-NM 
range). In addition, more than 25 Jiangkai II 
(Type 054A) class guided-missile frigates are 
now operational, with the vertically launched 
HHQ-16 (20- to 40-NM range), and more are 
under construction.206
These newer ships use modern combat man­
agement systems and air surveillance sen­
sors, such as the Sea Eagle and Dragon Eye 
phased-array radars. These new units allow 
the PLAN surface force to operate outside 
shore-based air defense systems because one or 
two ships are equipped to provide air defense 
for the entire task group.
China’s amphibious ship force has slowly 
grown since a modernization program began 
in the early 2000s. Since 2005, China has built 
six large Yuzhao (Type 071) class amphibious 
transport docks, signaling China’s develop­
ment of an expeditionary warfare and over-
the-horizon amphibious assault capability 
as well as inherent HADR and counterpiracy 
capabilities. The Yuzhao can carry up to four of 
the new Yuyi air-cushion utility landing craft 
(similar to the U.S. landing craft air cushion, 
LCAC) as well as four or more helicopters, 
armored vehicles, and troops on long-distance 
deployments. Additional Yuzhao construction 
is expected in the near term, as is a follow-on 
amphibious assault ship (landing helicopter 
assault, LHA, which Chinese sources term the

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
71
“Type 075”) that not only is larger but incorpo­
rates a full flight deck for helicopters. Produc­
tion on the LHA is expected to begin soon, if it 
has not already begun.
An expanded set of missions farther into the 
western Pacific Ocean and Indian Ocean, such 
as counterpiracy deployments, HADR mis­
sions, survey voyages, and goodwill port vis­
its, has increased demands on and broadened 
the experience of the PLAN’s fleet of ocean­
going replenishment and service vessels. The 
PLAN recently launched two new Fuyi class 
fast combat support ships, intended to sup­
port aircraft carrier battle groups, as well 
as the smaller Fuchi class replenishment 
oilers, which support surface action groups 
and long-distance deployments. These ships 
constantly rotate in support of China’s Gulf 
of Aden counterpiracy deployments and reg­
ularly accompany surface groups operating 
beyond the first island chain. At present, 
China has at least 10 fleet replenishment ships 
operational, with more under construction.
The PLA Navy: Naval SAM Ranges
150
120
90
60
30
0
HHQ-7
HHQ-16
HHQ-9
HHQ-9 
Extended Range
Approximate Range (Kilometers)
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
PLAN ships conducting replenishment at sea.
Image Source: DVIDS

72
In addition, China has added a variety of 
oceangoing auxiliary ships in recent years, 
including submarine rescue ships, hospital 
ships, salvage and rescue ships, survey ships, 
intelligence collection ships, and various large 
transport ships.
Submarine Force. China’s modernizing force 
includes several types of submarines. For its 
diesel-electric force alone, between 2000 and 
2005 China constructed Ming diesel attack sub­
marines (SSs) and Song SSs and the first Yuan 
air-independent attack submarine (SSP), and 
purchased eight Kilo SSs from Russia. Although 
all of these classes remain in service, only the 
Yuan SSP is in production. Over time, reducing 
the number of classes in service helps stream­
line maintenance, training, and interoperabil­
ity. The submarine force comprises 6 nuclear 
attack submarines, 4 nuclear-powered ballistic 
missile submarines, and 50 diesel attack sub­
marines. By 2020 the submarine force probably 
will increase to about 70 submarines.
The Yuan SSP is China’s most modern conven­
tionally powered submarine. Seventeen are 
in service, with possibly three more slated for 
production. The Yuan SSP’s combat capabil­
ity is comparable to that of the Song; both can 
launch Chinese-built antiship cruise missiles, 
but the Yuan has the added benefit of an air-in­
dependent propulsion (AIP) system and may 
have incorporated quieting technology from 
the Russian-designed Kilo SS. The AIP system 
provides a submarine a source of power other 
than battery or diesel engines while still sub­
merged, increasing its underwater endurance 
and reducing its vulnerability to detection.
The remainder of the conventional submarine 
force is a mix of Song, Ming, and Russian-built 
Kilo SSs. Of these, only the Ming and four 
of the older Kilos lack an ability to launch 
ASCMs. Eight of China’s 12 Kilos are equipped 
with the SS-N-27 ASCM, which provides a 
long-range ASUW capability out to about 120 
nautical miles. China’s newest domestic sub­
marine-launched ASCM, the CH-SS-N-13, 
extends a similar capability to the Song, Yuan, 
and Shang classes.
China also continues to modernize its nucle­
ar-powered attack submarine force, although 
these make up a small percentage of the total 
number of submarines. Two Shang nucle­
ar-powered attack submarines (SSNs) have 
been launched, one each in 2002 and 2003. After 
nearly 10 years, China is continuing produc­
tion with four additional hulls of an improved 
Shang variant. These six submarines will 
replace the aging Han SSN on a nearly one-for-
PLAN sailors conduct VBSS training.
Image Source: DVIDS

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
73
one basis during the next several years. After 
the completion of the improved Shang SSN, 
the PLAN is expected to begin production on 
another modified variant of the Shang SSN 
class, the Type 093B.207 Thereafter, the PLAN 
probably will progress to the Type 095 nucle­
ar-powered cruise missile submarine (SSGN). 
This class of submarine may provide a gener­
ational improvement in many areas, such as 
quieting and weapons capacity.
The PLA Navy’s Jin class nuclear powered bal­
listic missile submarines, armed with the JL-2 
submarine launched ballistic missile, provide 
China its first viable sea-based nuclear deter­
rent and credible second-strike nuclear capa­
bility. The JL-2 submarine-launched ballistic 
missile (SLBM) has nearly three times the 
range of the Xia SSBN’s JL-1 SLBM, which was 
able to reach targets only in China’s immediate 
vicinity. The JL-2 SLBM underwent successful 
testing in 2012. The Jin/JL-2 weapon system 
will provide China with a capability to strike 
targets in the continental United States from 
some patrol areas. To maintain a continuous 
at-sea nuclear deterrent, the PLAN probably 
would require a minimum of five Jin SSBNs; 
four are in service.
Aviation. The role of PLAN aviation has 
evolved during the past decade. PLAN com­
batants can now reach farther from shore and 
are more capable of providing their own air 
defense. This has allowed the PLAN to con­
centrate on an expanded array of aerial mis­
sions, particularly maritime strike, as well as 
maritime patrol, ASW, airborne early warn­
ing (AEW), and logistics. China’s first aircraft 
carrier signaled a new age for PLAN aviation, 
which is now evolving from an almost exclu­
sively land-based force to one with a sea-
based component.
Fixed-Wing Aircraft. During the past two 
decades, the PLAN has replaced antiquated 
fixed-wing aircraft, such as the Q-5 Fantan 
and the H-5 Beagle, with an array of high-qual­
ity aircraft. The force is now equipped for a 
wide range of missions, including offshore air 
defense, maritime strike, maritime patrol/
ASW, and carrier-based operations. Just a 
decade ago, this air modernization relied very 
heavily on Russian imports. Following in the 
PLAAF’s footsteps, the PLAN is now benefit­
The JL-2/CSS-NX-14 SLBM in midlaunch.
Image Source: DIBMAC Report

74
ing from domestic combat aircraft production. 
Today, the PLAN is taking deliveries of mod­
ern, domestically produced fourth-generation 
fighter aircraft, such as the J-10A Vigorous 
Dragon and the domestically produced J-11B 
Flanker. Equipped with modern radars and 
glass cockpits and armed with PL-8 and PL-12 
air-to-air missiles, PLAN J-10As and J-11Bs 
are among the most modern aircraft in China’s 
inventory and are capable of extended fighter 
patrols beyond China’s coastal areas.
For maritime strike, the PLAN has relied on vari­
ants of the H-6 Badger bomber for decades. The 
H-6 is a licensed copy of the ex-Soviet Tu-16 Bad­
ger medium jet bomber, and maritime versions 
employ advanced ASCMs against surface targets. 
Despite the age of their design, the H-6s continue 
to receive electronics and payload upgrades, 
keeping the aircraft viable as a long-range strike 
platform. As many as 30 aircraft remain in ser­
vice. Noted improvements for the upgraded Bad­
ger include the ability to carry a maximum of four 
ASCMs (instead of the two previously seen on 
earlier H-6D variants). The PLAN also has modi­
fied a few H-6s to serve as tankers, increasing the 
range of PLAN fighter aircraft.
With at least five regiments fielded across the 
three fleets, the JH-7 Flounder augments the 
H-6 as the workhorse of the PLAN’s airborne 
maritime strike force. The JH-7 is a domesti­
cally produced tandem-seat fighter-bomber 
developed as a replacement for obsolete Q-5 
Fantan light attack aircraft and H-5 Beagle 
bombers. Updated versions of the JH-7 feature 
a more capable radar and additional weapons 
capacity, enhancing its maritime strike capa­
bilities. The JH-7 can carry up to four ASCMs 
and two PL-5 or PL-8 short-range air-to-air 
missiles, providing considerable payload for 
maritime strike missions, or the JH-7 can sac­
rifice two ASCMs for underwing fuel tanks, 
increasing the platform’s range.
In addition to combat aircraft, the PLAN is 
expanding its inventory of fixed-wing maritime 
patrol aircraft, AEW, and surveillance aircraft. 
China has achieved significant new capabilities 
by modifying several existing airframes. The 
Y-8, a Chinese license-produced version of the 
ex-Soviet An-12 Cub, forms the basic airframe 
for several PLAN special-mission variants. All 
of these aircraft play a key role in providing a 
clear picture of surface and air contacts in the 
maritime environment. As the PLAN pushes far­
ther from the coast, long-range aircraft capable 
of extended onstation times to act as the fleet’s 
eyes and ears become increasingly important.
The PLAN has also developed a Y-9 ASW 
variant. The new aircraft is equipped with 
a magnetic anomaly detector boom, simi­
lar to that of the U.S. Navy’s P-3. This Y-9 
ASW variant is equipped with surface-search 
radar mounted under the nose as well as mul­
tiple-blade antennas on the fuselage, proba­
bly for electronic surveillance. A small EO/
infrared turret is located just behind the nose 
wheel, and this variant is equipped with an 
internal weapons bay in front of the main 
landing gear. Recent pictures of the Y-9 ASW 
variant suggest at least some aircraft have 
entered operational service.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
75
In December 2017, the Aviation Industry Cor­
poration of China conducted the maiden flight 
of the AG-600 Kunlong, the world’s largest 
seaplane.208 The aircraft is still under develop­
ment, but once operational, the AG-600 proba­
bly will be used for both civilian and military 
roles, such as search and rescue operations or 
defense needs in the South China Sea. Chinese 
advertising depicts the aircraft as having an 
endurance of 12 hours and the capacity to res­
cue 50 people during a single flight.209
Aircraft Carrier Program. In September 
2012, China commissioned the Liaoning, join­
ing the small group of countries that have an 
aircraft carrier. Beijing acquired the Soviet 
ship, formerly the Varyag, from Ukraine in 
2002.210,211 Since that time, the PLAN has fol­
lowed the long and difficult path of learning to 
operate fixed-wing aircraft from a carrier. The 
first launches and recoveries of J-15 fighter 
aircraft occurred in November 2012, with 
additional testing and training in early July 
2013. With the first landing complete, China 
became only the fifth country in the world to 
have conventional takeoff and landing fighters 
aboard an aircraft carrier. In 2017, the Lia­
oning concluded its second deployment to the 
South China Sea for training—its first with 
embarked J-15 fighters—and conducted its 
first port visit to Hong Kong.212,213,214
The Aircraft Carrier Liaoning
Length
304.5 meters (999.0 ft)
Beam
70 meters (229.7 ft)
Draft
10.5 meters (34.4 ft)
Flight deck length
304.5 meters (999.0 ft)
Flight deck width
70 meters (229.7 ft)
Flight deck angle
7 degrees
Aircraft launch 
mechanism
Ski jump
Ski jump angle
14 degrees
Top speed
30 kn (55.6 km/h)
(34.5 mph)
Range
3,850 NM (7,130.2 km) 
(4,430.5 miles) at 29 kn 
(53.7 km/h) (33.4 mph)
8,500 NM (15,742.0 km) 
(9,781.6 miles) at 18 kn 
(33.3 km/h) (20.7 mph)
Crew
1,960
Machinery
8 boilers; 4 turbines; 
200,000 shp; 4 shafts
Aircraft
Up to 24 J-15 fighters
6 Z-8 helicopters and 4 
Ka-31 helicopters
Image Source: AFP

76
The Liaoning’s ski-jump configuration restricts 
aircraft takeoff weight, limiting maximum 
ordnance loads and overall combat power. The 
ski-jump design also means it cannot operate 
large, specialized support aircraft, such as an 
AEW aircraft.
China’s first carrier air regiment will com­
prise the Shenyang J-15 Flying Shark. The 
J-15 is externally similar to the Russian Su-33 
Flanker D but has many of the domestic avion­
ics and armament capabilities of the Chinese 
J-11B Flanker. The J-15 has folding wings, 
strengthened landing gear, a tailhook under a 
shortened tail stinger, two-piece slotted flaps, 
canards, and a retractable inflight-refueling 
probe on the left side of the nose.
China’s aircraft carrier program also includes 
efforts to develop domestic carriers. In 2017, 
China launched its first domestic aircraft car­
rier, which was a modified version of the Lia­
oning and is expected to enter into service by 
2019.215,216 Like the Liaoning, the ship lacks cat­
apult capabilities and has a smaller flight deck 
than U.S. carriers.217 The PLAN is expected 
to begin construction in 2018 on its first cat­
apult-capable carrier, which will enable addi­
tional fighter aircraft, fixed-wing early warning 
aircraft, and more rapid flight operations.218
Helicopters. The PLAN operates three main 
helicopter variants: the domestically produced 
Z-9 and Z-8/Z-18 and the Russian-built Helix. 
The primary helicopter operated by the PLAN 
is the Z-9C. In the early 1980s, China obtained 
a license from France’s Aerospatiale (now Air­
bus Helicopter) to produce the AS 365N Dau­
phin II helicopter and its engine. The AS 365s 
produced in China were labeled as the Z-9, 
with the naval variant designated Z-9C. The 
Z-9C is capable of operating from any helicop­
ter-capable PLAN combatant. The Z-9C can be 
fitted with the KLC-1 search radar and dip­
ping sonar and is usually observed with a sin­
gle lightweight torpedo. A new roof-mounted 
EO turret, unguided rockets, and 12.7-mm 
machinegun pods have been seen on several 
Z-9Cs during counterpiracy deployments. An 
upgraded naval version, designated the Z-9D, 
has been observed carrying small ASCMs.
The Z-8 is also a Chinese-produced helicopter 
based on a French design. In the late 1970s, 
the PLAN took delivery of the SA 321 Super 
Frelon. A reverse-engineered version was des­
ignated the Z-8, which reached initial opera­
tional capability by 1989. Low-rate production 
continued through the 1990s and into the early 
2000s. The Z-8’s size provides a greater cargo 
Chinese Marines attend an international fleet review.
Image Source: AFP

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
77
capacity compared with other PLAN helicop­
ters but limits its ability to deploy from most 
PLAN combatants.
A new PLAN helicopter labeled the Z-18 has 
operated with the Liaoning. The Z-18 comes 
in three variants: transport, antisubmarine 
(Z-18F), and AEW (Z-18J). As with the Z-8, the 
Z-18’s size limits its deployment options.
Variants of the Helix are the only imported 
helicopters operated by the PLAN. In 1999, 
the PLAN took delivery of an initial batch of 
eight Russian-built Helix helicopters. Five 
were Ka-28 Helix As, and three were Helix Ds. 
An additional 9 Helix As have been delivered, 
and all 18 Helix are operational. As with the 
Russian Ka-27s, the exported Ka-28s can per­
form several mission sets but are usually used 
for ASW, and the Ka-27PSs are optimized for 
SAR and logistic support missions. The Ka-28 
is fitted with search radar and dipping sonar 
and can employ sonobuoys, torpedoes, depth 
charges, or mines.
In 2010, China purchased nine Ka-31 AEW 
helicopters and its E-801 radar system. The 
Z-18J and Ka-31 provide the PLAN a service­
able sea-based AEW capability to help fill that 
critical gap until newer catapult-equipped air­
craft carriers capable of operating fixed-wing 
AEW aircraft enter service.
Training
During the past decade, the scope and frequency 
of naval training have gradually expanded, 
reflecting the growing capabilities of China’s 
navy. The PLAN conducts year-round multimis­
sion training, including robust antisurface and 
antiair warfare training.219 The PLAN now also 
participates in training exercises farther from 
China’s coasts, in areas such as the western 
Pacific and the Indian Ocean.
In 2015, China's Military Strategy called for 
the PLA to enhance realistic military train­
ing, particularly in complex electromagnetic 
environments, diverse terrains, and adverse 
weather conditions.220 The same year, the 
PLAN 
Headquarters 
Military 
Training 
Department directed the PLAN to enhance the 
complexity of training and exercises by:
• Making training more realistic.
• Strengthening command authority and 
relationships through realistic opposing 
force training.
• Deepening tactical innovation.
• Improving training in the actual use of 
weapons in an electromagnetic environment.
PLAN Z-9 helicopter.
Image Source: DVIDS

78
• Continuing “far seas” training.
• Improving training methods by avoiding 
formalism and scripting in exercises.
• Improving joint campaign-level training.221
PLAN participation in missions such as the 
antipiracy task groups in the Gulf of Aden pro­
vide opportunities to train in real-world situ­
ations to refine operational capabilities. The 
Navy also makes use of shore-based simula­
tors and vessel training centers to help main­
tain year-round readiness levels.222
Paramilitary Forces
China Coast Guard. The CCG is responsi­
ble for a wide range of missions, including the 
enforcement of China’s sovereignty claims, 
antismuggling, surveillance, protection of fish­
eries resources, and general law enforcement. 
Maritime law enforcement responsibilities 
before 2013 were scattered across a number 
of organizations but have since been consoli­
dated to establish more effective command and 
control. CCG ships are subordinate to the Peo­
ple's Armed Police and take part in Bejing's 
whole-of-govenrment approach to maritime 
disputes. China primarily uses civilian mar­
itime law enforcement agencies in maritime 
disputes, employing the PLAN in a protective 
capacity in case of escalation.223
The CCG has rapidly increased and modern­
ized its forces, improving China’s ability to 
enforce its maritime claims. Since 2010, the 
CCG’s large patrol ship fleet (more than 1,000 
tons) has more than doubled in size from about 
60 to more than 130 ships, making it by far 
the largest coast guard force in the world and 
increasing its capacity to conduct extended off­
shore operations in a number of disputed areas 
simultaneously. Furthermore, the newer ships 
are substantially larger and more capable than 
the older ships, and the majority are equipped 
with helicopter facilities, high-capacity water 
cannons, and guns ranging from 30-mm to 
76-mm. Among these ships, a number are 
capable of long-distance, long-endurance out-
of-area operations. In addition, the CCG oper­
ates more than 70 fast patrol combatants 
(more than 500 tons), which can be used for 
limited offshore operations, and more than 
400 coastal patrol craft (as well as about 1,000 
inshore and riverine patrol boats). By the end 
of the decade, the CCG is expected to add up to 
30 patrol ships and patrol combatants before 
the construction program levels off.224
Haixun class cutter conducting port visit to 
Honolulu, Hawaii – September 2012.
Image Source: DVIDS

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
79
People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia. 
The PAFMM is a subset of China’s national 
militia, an armed reserve force of civilians 
available for mobilization to perform basic 
support duties. Militia units organize around 
towns, villages, urban subdistricts, and enter­
prises, and they vary widely from one loca­
tion to another. The composition and mission 
of each unit reflects local conditions and per­
sonnel skills. In the South China Sea, the 
PAFMM plays a major role in coercive activ­
ities to achieve China’s political goals without 
fighting, part of broader Chinese military doc­
trine that states that confrontational opera­
tions short of war can be an effective means of 
accomplishing political objectives.225
A large number of PAFMM vessels train with 
and support the PLA and CCG in tasks such 
as safeguarding maritime claims, protecting 
fisheries, and providing logistic support, search 
and rescue (SAR), and surveillance and recon­
naissance. The Chinese government subsidizes 
local and provincial commercial organiza­
tions to operate militia ships to perform “offi­
cial” missions on an ad hoc basis outside their 
regular commercial roles. The PAFMM has 
played a noteworthy role in a number of mili­
tary campaigns and coercive incidents over the 
years, including the harassment of Vietnam­
ese survey ships in 2011, a standoff with the 
Philippines at Scarborough Reef in 2012, and 
a standoff involving a Chinese oil rig in 2014. 
In the past, the PAFMM rented fishing boats 
from companies or individual fisherman, but it 
appears that China is building a state-owned 
fishing fleet for its maritime militia force in the 
South China Sea. Hainan Province, adjacent to 
the South China Sea, ordered the construction 
of 84 large militia fishing boats with reinforced 
hulls and ammunition storage for Sansha City, 
and the militia took delivery by the end of 
2016.226
Amphibious Capabilities
The PLAN Marine Corps (PLANMC) is the 
PLAN’s land combat arm. Its primary mission 
is to conduct offensive and defensive amphibi­
ous assault in the South China Sea, including 
the Paracel Island and Spratly Island chains, 
and potentially the Senkaku Islands.227 The 
PLANMC is tasked with seizing and consol­
idating beachheads, destroying an opposing 
force at the beachhead and adjacent areas, 
organizing landing areas, and supporting 
landings by the PLAA. Other missions include 
conducting amphibious raids; seizing and 
occupying enemy naval bases, seaports, and 
islands; building beachhead protective zones; 
and covering the PLAA as it advances inland 
from the coast.228
The seas and oceans bear on the enduring 
peace, lasting stability, and sustainable 
development of China…The traditional 
mentality that land outweighs the sea 
must be abandoned.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015

80
Roles and Missions. The PLANMC’s mission 
appears to be evolving beyond amphibious 
operations and toward a more expeditionary 
mission beyond China’s borders. This is in line 
with the PLA’s evolving strategy as outlined in 
China’s Military Strategy.229,230 For the PLAN, 
the New Historic Missions mean an increased 
focus on “diversified missions” or noncombat 
missions. Many of the tasks assigned to the 
armed forces in the white paper are ideally 
suited to the PLANMC, including ensuring 
Chinese sovereignty claims, safeguarding Chi­
na’s security and interests “in new domains,” 
safeguarding the security of China’s interests 
overseas, and performing such tasks as emer­
gency rescue and disaster relief, rights and 
interest protection, and guard duty.231 The 
PLANMC already is designated a rapid-re­
action force for the PLA and has deployed on 
numerous occasions in response to natural 
disasters in China, including floods and earth­
quakes.232 The PLANMC is the natural land-
based force of choice for HADR efforts over­
seas. In 2017, the PLA also chose to deploy 
PLANMC troops to the PLA’s first overseas 
base, in Djibouti, reflecting the Marine Corps’ 
growing role in China’s military.
Elements of the PLANMC are consistently 
deployed as part of the PLAN’s counterpiracy 
task groups operating in the Gulf of Aden.233 The 
size of the embarked force is no larger than a 
platoon. These Marines may be regular infantry 
troops but more likely come from an amphibi­
ous reconnaissance group subordinate to the 
amphibious reconnaissance battalion. They are 
highly trained in the tactics, techniques, and 
procedures required for a counterpiracy mission, 
including VBSS, hostage rescue, and small-team 
assault. VBSS tactics include fast-roping or rap­
pelling from PLAN helicopters.234
Units. The PLANMC is subordinate to the 
PLAN and consists of seven brigades.235 Marine 
brigades are located in each of the North, 
East, and South Sea Fleets’ areas of respon­
sibility.236,237 Recent PLA reforms included 
the establishment of a PLANMC headquar­
ters, probably to oversee the administrative 
man, train, and equip functions of the growing 
Marine Corps, and also included the appoint­
ment of the PLANMC’s first commander.238,239 
Each brigade has a headquarters element, an 
armored regiment, at least two infantry bat­
talions, a howitzer battalion, a missile battal­
ion, a communications and guard battalion, 
an engineer and chemical defense battalion, 
a maintenance battalion, and an amphibi­
ous reconnaissance battalion (special oper­
ations).240 Estimates of the PLANMC’s troop 
strength differ widely and have been reported 
as high as 35,000, but the actual number is 
PLA marines conduct helicopter entry/exit training.
Image Source: DIMOC

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
81
PLANMC units conduct an amphibious assault during a training exercise.
Image Source: AFP
PLANMC Capabilities and Equipment
ZBD-05 AIFV
ZLT-05 AAG
PLZ-07B SP Howitzer
Weight
26.5 tons
28 tons
24.5 tons
Crew
3 + 8 infantry
4
5
Speed (in water)
~20 kn
~20 kn
UNK
Speed (on land)
+40 mph
+40 mph
+40 mph
Main armament
30-mm cannon
(4-km max range)
105-mm gun
122-mm cannon
(18-km max range)
Red Arrow antitank
guided missile (ATGM)(2x)
Red Arrow ATGM

82
probably between 28,000 and 35,000, evenly 
divided among the 7 brigades.241,242,243 The 
PLAN provides the PLANMC with both mar­
itime and air (helicopter) transport, a force 
enabler for PLANMC amphibious warfare 
operations.244 The PLANMC does not have 
an organic air assault element and probably 
would rely on PLAN ground-attack fixed-wing 
aircraft or PLAA helicopters in a close air sup­
port role. The PLANMC also has a limited 
logistics capability.
Equipment. The PLANMC is a fully amphib­
ious force capable of conducting amphibious 
assault operations using combined-arms tac­
tics and multiple avenues of approach. It is 
the most capable amphibious force of any 
South China Sea claimant. The PLANMC 
can simultaneously seize multiple islands in 
the Spratlys. It also is capable of rapidly rein­
forcing China’s outposts in the Paracels. The 
PLANMC still faces challenges and limitations 
in close air support/air assault and logistics 
sustainment for large-scale amphibious oper­
ations. The PLANMC is incapable of defeating 
near-peer or peer countries such as the United 
States, Japan, South Korea, and Russia in 
amphibious or ground warfare.
The PLANMC’s primary fighting vehicles are 
based on a single chassis and include the ZBD-
05 AIFV and the ZLT-05 amphibious assault 
gun.245,246 Noncombatant amphibious variants 
of the ZBD chassis include an armored recov­
ery vehicle and an armored ambulance.247 Addi­
tional combat equipment includes man-porta­
ble air defense systems, antipersonnel mortars, 
antitank rocket launchers, and flamethrowers. 
The PLANMC is also equipped with amphibi­
ous combat engineering equipment for obstacle 
removal, beach improvement, and construction 
of defenses once ashore.248

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
83
APPENDIX C: PLA Air Force
The PLAAF is the largest air force in the 
region and the third largest in the world, with 
more than 2,500 total aircraft (not including 
UAVs or trainers) and 1,700 combat aircraft 
(including fighters, strategic bombers, tactical 
bombers, and multimission tactical and attack 
aircraft). The PLAAF is closing the gap with 
Western air forces across a broad spectrum of 
capabilities, such as aircraft performance, C2, 
and electronic warfare.
In 2017, the PLAAF reorganized its force struc­
ture as part of broader PLA reforms. Changes 
included establishing at least six new airbases 
and restructuring the force’s previously subordi­
nate regiments into brigades under these newly 
established bases by disbanding fighter and 
fighter-bomber divisions. The PLAAF also relo­
cated or resubordinated some units to different 
theater commands and redesignated the 15th 
Airborne Corps as the PLA Airborne Corps. 249
Roles and Missions
The PLAAF’s role is to serve as a comprehen­
sive strategic air force capable of long-range 
airpower projection:250
The above excerpt illustrates the expanding 
roles and missions of the PLAAF. Whereas in 
the mid-1990s, the PLAAF’s primary responsi­
bilities were to protect China’s airfields, urban 
centers, transportation systems, and military 
facilities, the PLAAF is enhancing its ability to 
conduct both offensive and defensive air opera­
tions farther from China’s borders.251
In line with the strategic requirement of 
building air-space capabilities and conduct­
ing offensive and defensive operations, the 
PLA Air Force (PLAAF) will endeavor to 
shift its focus from territorial air defense to 
both defense and offense and build an air-
space defense force structure that can meet 
the requirements of informatized opera­
tions. The PLAAF will boost its capabilities 
for strategic early warning, air strike, air 
and missile defense, information counter­
measures, airborne operations, strategic 
projection, and comprehensive support.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015

84
Major Air Units
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
85
Equipment
Bombers. China’s bomber force comprises 
variants of the H-6 Badger bomber, and the 
PLAAF has worked to maintain and enhance 
the operational effectiveness of these aircraft. 
The H-6K variant, which China is fielding in 
greater numbers, integrates standoff weapons 
and features more efficient turbofan engines in 
redesigned wing roots.252 This extended-range 
aircraft can carry six LACMs, providing the 
PLA a long-range, standoff, precision-strike 
capability that can reach Guam.
The PLAAF is developing new medium- and 
long-range stealth bombers to strike regional 
and global targets. Stealth technology contin­
ues to play a key role in the development of 
these new bombers, which probably will reach 
initial operational capability no sooner than 
2025. These new bombers will have additional 
capabilities, with full-spectrum upgrades com­
pared with current operational bomber fleets, 
and will employ many fifth-generation fighter 
technologies in their design.
Early Warning. Airborne early warning and 
control (AEW&C) aircraft, such as China’s 
KJ-2000 Mainring, KJ-200 Moth, and KJ-500, 
are force multipliers, amplifying the capa­
bilities to detect, track, and target threats. 
These aircraft extend the range of a coun­
try’s integrated air defense system network. 
In particular, these systems are better suited 
to detecting low-altitude targets at greater 
standoff distances.
PLAAF AEW&C aircraft also incorporate state-
of-the-art radar technology, such as active 
electronically scanned array radars that offer 
instantaneous target updates, electronic beam 
steering, advanced/specialized radar modes, 
very large search volumes, and the ability to 
stare at a target or track thousands of targets 
simultaneously. These features combine to 
provide faster target acquisition time, more 
accurate target position data, and increased 
ability to detect low-observable targets.
Fighters. Although the PLAAF still operates 
a large number of older second- and third-gen­
eration fighters, it will probably become a 
majority fourth-generation force within the 
next several years. The PLAAF has fielded 
at least 600 fourth-generation fighters and is 
already developing fifth-generation fighters. 
[Note: what the U.S. and Western militaries 
refer to as fourth-generation fighters, China 
refers to as third-generation. This is because the 
PLA never had first-generation fighters—its first 
fighter aircraft were second-generation fighters 
acquired from Russia.]
PLAAF J-11BS multirole fighter aircraft.
Image Source: AFP

86
Fourth-generation fighter aircraft*—which include the Chinese J-10B/C, J-11B, and 
J-16—are generally characterized by the following:
• Electronically or mechanically scanned multimode radars, passive infrared search and 
track systems.
• “Glass” cockpits with multifunction displays (MFDs), improved heads-up display 
(HUD), and helmet-mounted sight (HMS).
• High-bandwidth communications and datalinks and identification, friend or foe (IFF).
• Advanced electronic warfare (EW) avionics, including digital jamming system, radar 
warning receiver, chaff/flare dispensers, and adaptive countermeasures.
• Engines with increased thrust and service life; advanced weapons, including long-
range air-to-air missiles (AAMs), off-boresight short-range AAMs, LACMs, ASCMs, 
and precision-guided munitions (PGMs).
• Passive electronically scanned array or active electronically scanned array (AESA) 
radars. These radars provide long-range radar detection and electronically scanned 
radar beams that enable automatic target acquisition, tracking of multiple targets, and 
highly accurate targeting data for air-to-air and precision air-to-ground engagements.
• Digital radiofrequency memory (DRFM) jammers enabling instantaneous smart jam­
ming responses by automatically selecting jamming waveforms to counter a specific 
radar threat—significantly improving fighter aircraft survivability.
Fifth-generation fighter aircraft*, including the developmental Chinese J-20 and 
FC-31/J-31, are commonly defined by the following state-of-the-art technologies:
• Stealthy aircraft designs with significantly reduced radar and infrared signatures.
• AESA radars.
• Long-range, multiband EO targeting systems.
• Sensor fusion.
• Advanced glass cockpits with large MFDs and HMSs.
• Advanced datalinks fusing data from air and ground networks.
• Internal carriage of off-boresight and long-range AAMs, LACMs, ASCMs, and PGMs.
• Sophisticated EW suites with advanced DRFM jammers and EO defensive systems.
• Super maneuverability and/or super cruise capability (ability to fly above Mach 1 with­
out use of afterburner).
• Designed with network-centric warfare technology; will have potent air-to-air lethality 
and standoff attack capabilities in sensor-to-shooter operations.
*U.S.- defined fourth and fifth generation fighter aircraft in China.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
87
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. During the 
past 2 years, the PLA has improved its UAV 
capabilities, unveiled new aircraft that com­
bine strike capability with aerial reconnais­
sance, and deployed select platforms to new 
areas, such as the South China Sea. Examples 
include China’s first turbine-powered armed 
reconnaissance UAV, the Yunying (Cloud 
Shadow), and the armed ISR UAV Gongji 1. 
China also has sold armed UAVs to customers 
such as Iraq. Marketing material for China’s 
armed UAVs cites speeds of 170 mph, endur­
ance of 20 hours, and payloads of two or more 
air-to-surface guided munitions.
Surface-to-Air Missiles. The PLAAF has 
one of the largest forces of advanced long-
range SAM systems in the world, made up 
of a combination of Russian-sourced SA-20 
(S-300PMU1/2) battalions and domestically 
produced CSA-9 (HQ-9) battalions. In early 
2018, Russia began delivering to China the 
S-400/Triumf SAM system, which Beijing will 
use to improve its strategic air defense systems 
as a follow-on to the SA-20.253 The PLAAF may 
simultaneously develop its domestically pro­
duced CSA-X-19 (HQ-19) to provide the basis 
for a ballistic missile defense capability.
Transport. China’s aviation industry contin­
ues to test its Y-20 large transport aircraft for 
introduction into the PLA’s operational inven­
tory to supplement and eventually replace 
China’s small fleet of strategic airlift assets, 
which includes a limited number of Rus­
sian-made Il-76 aircraft. The Y-20 conducted 
its maiden flight in early 2013 and reportedly 
uses the same Russian engines as the Il-76. 
The large transports are intended to support 
airborne C2, logistics, paradrop, aerial refuel­
ing, and strategic reconnaissance operations 
as well as HADR.
Effective use of information is critical to strength­
ening the PLAAF, and development and acqui­
sition of systems and platforms are trending in 
this direction. Information demand will necessi­
tate a tight synchronization of C4ISR with oper­
ations. By 2020, the PLAAF probably hopes to 
develop an ISR capability to effectively support 
traditional air missions, including ground sup­
port and air superiority, along with the PLA’s 
emerging military capabilities in space. From 
the PLAAF’s perspective, this essentially means 
seamlessly melding all of its air and space capa­
bilities, a significant challenge.
PLAAF KJ-2000 airborne early warning and control 
system aircraft.
Image Source: AFP

88
Aircraft Systems Characteristics
Chinese 
Manned 
Aircraft
U.S.  
Generation Mission/Role Status
AESA 
Radar
Long-Range 
A/A Missiles
Off-Bore-
sight A/A 
Missiles
Precision- 
Guided 
Munitions
Speed
J-7
2nd
Fighter
Operational
Mach 2 class
J-8
3rd
Fighter
Operational
X
Mach 2 class
Su-30
4th
Multirole Fighter
Operational
X
X
X
Mach 2 class
J-10A
4th
Multirole Fighter
Operational
X
Mach 1.8 class
J-11B
4th
Multirole Fighter
Operational
X
X
Mach 2 class
J-10B
4th+
Multirole Fighter
Operational
X
X
X
Mach 1.8 class
J-10C
4th+
Multirole Fighter
X
X
X
X
Mach 1.8 class
J-16
4th+
Multirole Fighter
X
X
X
X
Mach 2 class
Su-35S
4th+
Multirole Fighter
Buying from 
Russia
X
X
X
Mach 2 class
J-20
5th
Multirole Fighter
Development
X
X
X
X
Mach 2 class
FC-31/J-31
5th
Multirole Fighter
Development
X
X
X
X
Mach 1.8 class
JH-7
 N/A
Fighter-Bomber
Operational
X
Mach 1.7 class
H-6
N/A
Bomber
Operational
X
Subsonic
Tactical Bomber
Next Gen
Fighter-Bomber
Development
X
X
X
Strategic Bomber Next Gen
Long-Range Bomber Development
X
X
KJ-2000
N/A
AEW&C
Operational
X
Subsonic
KJ-200
N/A
AEW&C
Operational
X
Subsonic
KJ-500
N/A
AEW&C
Operational
X
Subsonic
+ Indicates a generation of aircraft has been partially upgraded with next-generation capabilities.
PLAAF literature paints a detailed picture of tomorrow’s air wars battlespace. It will be 
an uncertain, hotly contested environment where decisions will be made with extreme 
alacrity, requiring highly specialized equipment. The entire battlespace will be infor­
mation-driven, from command staff decisions and supporting C2 all the way to the very 
weapons the PLAAF desires.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
89
Airborne Corps. As part of ongoing military 
reforms, in 2017 the PLAAF reorganized its 
airborne units into a new corps—the PLA 
Airborne Corps—consisting of six airborne 
brigades, a special operations brigade, an avi­
ation brigade, and a support brigade. Previ­
ously, airborne forces fell under the PLAAF 
15th Airborne Corps and were organized 
into three airborne divisions, supported by 
a special operations group, with both fixed- 
and rotary-wing assets.254 The PLA Airborne 
Corps’ main purpose is to carry out operations 
including parachute, aircraft landing, and 
mixed parachute and aircraft landing. Accord­
ing to PLAA doctrine, the main advantage of 
airborne operations is to “cut across ground 
defense lines and topographical obstacles to 
unfold attacks directly inside the enemy dis­
position.”255 These operations are designed to 
support main-force operational efforts, seize 
and hold key targets and areas in the enemy’s 
depth (such as airfields and bridges), block 
an enemy’s retreat, block reinforcement by 
enemy reserve forces, and conduct raids on 
key targets in the enemy’s depth.256
Training and Exercises
Numerous professional articles and speeches 
by high-ranking Chinese officers indicate the 
PLAAF does not believe that its past training 
practices prepared its pilots and other per­
sonnel for actual combat. Unrealistic training 
manifested itself in multiple ways that hin­
dered the PLA’s air combat capabilities. The 
PLA recognizes that a gap exists between the 
skills of its pilots and those in “the air forces of 
powerful nations.” To address training weak­
nesses, the former PLAAF commander said 
that when the PLAAF trains, it must “train for 
battle” instead of “doing things for show…[or] 
going through the motions.”
During the past few years, the PLAAF has 
revamped its training program and now seeks 
to replicate real-world combat environments 
as closely as possible. Through its four “name-
brand exercises”—RED SWORD, GOLDEN 
HELMET, 
GOLDEN 
DART, 
and 
BLUE 
SHIELD—the PLAAF is making incremen­
tal improvements to its training regimen. The 
PLAAF continues to seek engagement with 
foreign air forces, such as by participating in 
the Russian-sponsored Aviadarts air-to-ground 
competition and the FALCON STRIKE exercise 
with the Royal Thai Air Force, to gain exposure 
to foreign operational concepts and tactics.
The effect of these training initiatives on oper­
ational capabilities remains to be seen; how­
ever, the PLAAF is beginning to codify funda­
mental changes to the training philosophy that 
are expected to improve the PLA’s air capa­
Two J-10 fighters refueling with an H-6U tanker.
Image Source: AFP

90
bilities during the coming years. A key factor 
in this development is the PLAAF’s use of 
advanced air combat maneuvering instrumen­
tation (ACMI) systems, which enable the force 
to train with more realism and learn more 
from each event while meeting safety require­
ments. The ACMI system allows the PLAAF 
to monitor air combat training in real time 
and to adjudicate interactions such as aircraft 
maneuvering, weapons employment, jamming, 
and use of chaff and flares. Coupled with for­
eign engagements, the use of ACMI in training 
offers the PLAAF the opportunity to accelerate 
its progress in training.
The PLAAF has also made advances in joint 
training. Traditionally Army-only exercises 
now incorporate PLAAF participation, and 
large-scale joint exercises have given the 
PLA opportunities to test its forces’ progress 
toward being able to operate in a true joint 
environment. Although more recent exercises 
suggest improvement and increased sophisti­
cation, systemic shortfalls identified in several 
PLA training events—difficulty in coordina­
tion, obstacles to information sharing, limited 
realism, and a continued reliance on script­
ing—persist as problems for PLA and PLAAF 
leaders, hampering key functions, such as air 
defense, targeting, battle damage assessment, 
and air support to ground forces.
Two fighter jets during a military drill over the South China Sea.
Image Source: AFP

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
91
APPENDIX D: PLA Rocket Force
As part of military reforms initiated in late 2015, 
the PLA Second Artillery Force was renamed 
the PLA Rocket Force (PLARF), and for the first 
time the force was elevated to a full service on 
equal footing with the PLA Army, Navy, and Air 
Force. PLARF weapons systems include dozens 
of ICBMs and hundreds of theater-range mis­
siles for precision strike against major adver­
sary military and civilian infrastructure.257
Roles and Missions
The PLARF operates China’s strategic land-
based nuclear and conventional missiles and is 
a critical component of China’s deterrence strat­
egy and efforts to counter third-party interven­
tion in regional conflicts. The PLARF also is 
charged with developing and testing several 
new classes and variants of long-range missiles, 
forming additional missile units, upgrading 
older missile systems, and developing methods 
to counter ballistic missile defenses.
Principal Weapon Systems
The PLARF has about 1,200 short-range bal­
listic missiles (SRBMs), and China is increas­
ing the lethality of its conventional missile 
force by fielding the CSS-11/DF-16 ballistic 
missile, with a range of 800 to 1,000 kilome­
ters. The CSS-11/DF-16, coupled with the 
already deployed conventional land-attack 
and antiship variants of the CSS-5/DF-21 
medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM), will 
improve China’s ability to strike not only Tai­
wan but other regional targets.
The Rocket Force is fielding conventional 
MRBMs to increase the range at which it can 
conduct precision strikes against land targets 
and naval ships (including aircraft carriers) 
operating from China’s shores out to the first 
island chain—the islands running from the 
Kurils, through Taiwan, to Borneo, roughly 
encompassing the Yellow Sea, East China 
Sea, and South China Sea. The CSS-5 Mod-5/
DF-21D has a range exceeding 1,500 kilome­
ters and has a maneuverable warhead. During 
the PLA’s 90th anniversary parade in 2017, 
China displayed a new MRBM designated 
the DF-16G, which China claims features 
high accuracy, short preparation time, and an 
improved maneuverable terminal stage that 
can better infiltrate missile defense systems.258
China unveiled the DF-26 intermediate-range 
ballistic missile (IRBM) during its September 
2015 military parade in Beijing. The DF-26 is 
capable of conducting precision strikes against 
ground targets and contributes to China’s 
counterintervention posture in the Asia-Pa­
cific region. During the parade, official public 
statements also referenced a nuclear version 
of the DF-26, which, if it has the same guid­
ance capabilities, would give China its first 
nuclear precision-strike capability against 
theater targets.

92
The PLARF also continues to enhance its 
nuclear 
deterrent, 
maintaining 
silo-based 
nuclear ICBMs and adding more survivable, 
mobile nuclear delivery systems. China cur­
rently has 75 to 100 ICBMs, including the silo-
based CSS-4 Mod 2/DF-5A and MIRV-equipped 
CSS-4 Mod 3/DF-5B; the solid-fueled, road-mo­
bile CSS-10 Mod 1/DF-31 and CSS-10 Mod 2/
DF-31A; and the shorter range CSS-3/DF-4. 
The CSS-10 Mod 2/DF-31A has a range of more 
than 11,200 kilometers and can reach most 
locations within the continental United States. 
China also is developing a new MIRV-capable 
road-mobile ICBM, the CSS-X-10/DF-41.
The CJ-10 ground-launched cruise missile 
(GLCM) has a range in excess of 1,500 kilo­
meters and offers flight profiles different from 
ballistic missiles, enhancing targeting options. 
Because of overlap in the kinds of targets 
China is likely to engage with either ballistic 
missiles or cruise missiles, GLCMs and air-
launched land-attack cruise missiles provide 
key operational and planning flexibility. These 
weapons are likely to reduce the burden on 
ballistic missile forces as well as create some­
what safer strike opportunities for Chinese 
aircrews, allowing them to engage from much 
greater distances and from more advantageous 
locations. This will complicate an adversary’s 
air and missile defense problem.
A CSS-5 Mod 5/DF-21D antiship ballistic missile (ASBM) system on parade.
Image Source: AFP

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
93
PLA Rocket Force Systems*
System
Type
Warheads
Propellant
Deployment 
Mode
Max
Range km
CSS-3/DF-4
ICBM
Nuclear
Liquid
ROTL**
5,500+
CSS-4/DF-5
ICBM
Nuclear
Liquid
Silo
12,000-13,000
CSS-7/DF-11
SRBM
Conventional
Solid
Mobile
300-600
CSS-6/DF-15
SRBM
Conventional
Solid
Mobile
600-850+
CSS-11/DF-16
SRBM
Conventional
Solid
Mobile
800-1,000
CSS-5/DF-21
MRBM
Nuclear and
Conventional
Variants
Solid
Mobile
1,500-1,750+
CSS-5 Mod-5/DF-21D
ASBM
Conventional
Solid
Mobile
1,500+
DF-26
IRBM
Nuclear and
Conventional
Variants
Solid
Mobile
4,000
CSS-10/DF-31
ICBM
Nuclear
Solid
Mobile
7,200-11,200
CJ-10
GLCM
Conventional
Solid
Mobile
1500+
*This chart does not include systems in development.
** Rollout to Launch

94
China’s Conventional and Nuclear Strike Range
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
95
Training
PLARF participation in joint force training has 
increased during the past few years, and all PLA 
joint training events probably now include at 
least some level of PLARF involvement, such as 
PLARF field operations in support of the exer­
cise. This development indicates an increased 
emphasis on joint firepower operations.
The PLARF is moving away from a dependence 
on conscripted personnel and is developing a 
technically qualified enlisted force. In addition, 
the force is modifying its annual training cycle 
to incorporate more complicated training earlier 
in the year, enabling PLARF units to better pre­
pare to participate in PLA joint training in the 
fall. The force also reportedly has implemented a 
rating system for unit training as well as accred­
itation criteria for personnel at critical posts.
The PLARF now regularly conducts train­
ing under extreme weather and geographical 
conditions and in complex electromagnetic 
and nuclear, biological, and chemical envi­
ronments. The PLARF’s goal is to train under 
actual combat conditions, which include con­
tending with enemy special forces, satellite 
reconnaissance, 
electromagnetic 
jamming, 
and air attacks. To that end, the PLARF has 
worked to improve its training against a mod­
ern (informatized) “blue force” that portrays a 
superior adversary.
PLARF training includes annual live missile 
launches that allow the missile brigades to 
practice all required procedures. Much like the 
increase in complexity for other PLA training 
events, recent Rocket Force guidance has called 
for the participating missile units to increase 
the difficulty and intensity of live launches.

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
97
APPENDIX E: PLA Strategic Support Force
In December 2015, Beijing established the 
Strategic Support Force (SSF) to provide the 
PLA with cyber, aerospace, and electronic war­
fare capabilities.259 The SSF forms the core of 
China’s information warfare force, supports 
the entire PLA, and reports directly to the 
CMC. The force’s formation appears to be the 
outcome of debate in the PLA since the 1980s 
regarding PLA needs in a potential conflict 
with peer nations. According to a Ministry of 
National Defense spokesman, “The SSF will 
integrate reconnaissance, early warning, com­
munications, command, control, [and] naviga­
tion … and will provide strong support for joint 
operations for each military service branch.”260
A key aspect of the SSF is that the new body 
unites previously dispersed elements, pro­
viding more centralized command and con­
trol of China’s cyber, space, and electronic 
warfare capabilities. Before the 2015 struc­
tural reforms, for example, responsibility for 
space, cyber, and electronic warfare missions 
rested with offices across the former General 
Armaments Department and the General 
Staff Department (GSD), including the GSD 
Technical Department and GSD Electronic 
Countermeasures and Radar Department.
The SSF constitutes the first steps in the devel­
opment of a cyberforce by combining cyber 
reconnaissance, cyberattack, and cyberde­
fense capabilities into one organization to 
reduce bureaucratic hurdles and centralize 
command and control. The SSF also appears 
to be in line with PLA efforts to support and 
execute modern informatized warfare.
The PLA’s 90th anniversary parade in July 
2017 included the participation of an SSF 
electronic reconnaissance formation, which 
reportedly provides highly mobile, integrated, 
flexible, multidomain information warfare 
capabilities. The unit’s mission reportedly is 
seizing and maintaining battlefield informa­
tion control. This focus on the SSF and one 
of its premier units suggests that the PLA is 
increasing the priority and prominence of the 
SSF and its assigned missions to tackle the 
military’s deficiencies in controlling complex 
electromagnetic environments.261
Strategic Support Force Insignia
Image Source: Wikicommons

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
99
APPENDIX F: Chinese Intelligence Services
In June 2017, China passed a National Intel­
ligence Law specifying that “state intelligence 
work” would fall under the “central national 
security leadership body,” and military intel­
ligence work would fall under the Central 
Military Commission.262 The central national 
security leadership body may refer to an intel­
ligence committee structure subordinate to 
China’s Central National Security Commis­
sion.263 The PLA’s national-level intelligence 
system is still undergoing changes as part of 
broader military reform efforts.
Civilian Intelligence. The Ministry of 
State Security (MSS) is China’s main civil­
ian intelligence and counterintelligence ser­
vice.264 MSS missions include protecting Chi­
na’s national security, securing political and 
social stability, implementing the updated 
State Security Law and related laws and 
regulations, protecting state secrets, and 
conducting counterintelligence.265
Domestic Security. The Ministry of Public 
Security (MPS) is China’s principal domestic 
security agency and is responsible for over­
seeing the country’s domestic policing and 
public security activities. Although the MPS 
is not directly involved in domestic intelli­
gence gathering, it has domestic intelligence 
functions, including investigating corruption 
cases, countering threats to political and 
social stability, countering terrorism, and 
policing the Internet.266,267
Political Work. The General Political Depart­
ment Liaison Department, which probably was 
renamed the Political Work Department Liai­
son Bureau (PWD/LB) during recent reforms, is 
the PLA’s principal organization responsible for 
political warfare and for collecting and analyzing 
intelligence information regarding senior-level 
officers from the United States, Taiwan, Japan, 
and other defense establishments of interest.268 
269 The PWD/LB functions as an interlocking 
directorate that operates at the nexus of politics, 
finance, military operations, and intelligence. 
The PWD/LB has few analogous counterparts in 
modern democratic societies. 270
Military Intelligence. The former PLA Sec­
ond Department (2PLA) was a subdepart­
ment of the GSD. Postreform, the 2PLA has 
been identified as the Intelligence Bureau of 
the Joint Staff Department under the Cen­
tral Military Commission.271 This bureau 
carries out the military’s overt reporting and 
clandestine human intelligence collection 
operations, provides indications and warning 
and other analysis to the CMC leadership, 
runs the defense attaché network, and man­
ages intelligence produced by dedicated PLA 
reconnaissance assets.272,273,274
Signals Intelligence. The former PLA Third 
Department (3PLA) was one of the GSD’s 
subdepartments but postreform has proba­
bly been renamed and subordinated under 
the SSF. This element controls a vast signals 
intelligence (SIGINT) and computer network

100
operations infrastructure. The PLA’s SIGINT 
and cyber assets target foreign satellite, line of 
sight, and over-the-horizon communications, 
as well as computer networks.275,276
Electronic Intelligence. The former PLA 
Fourth Department (4PLA) was a subde­
partment of the GSD, but postreform has 
probably been renamed and subordinated to 
the SSF. This element is primarily respon­
sible for offensive electronic warfare, but it 
is generally believed to maintain electronic 
intelligence capabilities.277,278

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
101
APPENDIX G: Military Resources, Infrastructure, and Logistics
The PLA’s centralized control supply sys­
tem uses a push-pull process for replenish­
ment. This means that supplies are pushed 
to the troops based on standard demand and 
use; individual units pull supplies when they 
require additional materiel. Shortfalls in logis­
tic support to PLA operations, even going back 
to China’s military conflict with Vietnam in the 
late 1970s, when troops were ill equipped and 
encountered replenishment problems, have 
prompted the PLA to modernize its logistic 
support to match the modern requirements of 
its forces.279 This incremental transformation 
began in 2002 but also has been a major focus 
of the PLA’s ongoing reform efforts.
The PLA has gradually integrated its military 
and civilian sectors by drawing on private (or 
civilian) companies to supplement its logistics 
resources. Before reforms, the PLA’s supply 
system was controlled at multiple levels. The 
former General Logistics Department (GLD) 
provided general purpose supplies, such as 
food, shelter, and fuel. Specific branches of 
each service maintained special materiel 
unique to the PLAN and PLAAF. Redundant 
service and joint supply processes created 
inefficiencies within the logistics system. Cor­
ruption, bribery, and misuse of funds further 
reduced the effectiveness of strategic logistic 
support. Reforms to the PLA logistics system 
combined with vigorous anticorruption mea­
sures are intended to both improve the effi­
ciency of logistic support and reduce waste 
within the system.280,281
As part of the 2015 reorganization, the CMC 
eliminated the GLD, replacing the organization 
with the Logistic Support Department (LSD). 
The new LSD’s strategic and administrative 
roles include establishing logistic policies and 
conducting inspections.282 The LSD also provides 
oversight for the general purpose supply chain, 
military facility construction, and equipment 
management. The head of the LSD does not have 
a seat on the CMC, unlike his predecessor in the 
GLD, probably in part to reduce corruption and 
streamline PLA command and control.
Separately, the PLA established the Joint 
Logistic Support Force (JLSF) in September 
2016, charged with planning and executing 
integrated joint logistic support for strategic 
campaign operations.283,284 The JLSF oversees 
theaterwide supply operations, while ser­
vice branches retain service-specific supply 
responsibilities.285 The force is headquartered 
at a joint logistic support base in Wuhan and 
PLAN Fusu class replenishment ship Qinghaihu.
Image Source: DVIDS

102
commands five subordinate support cen­
ters.286 The reorganization centralizes logis­
tics operations under one chain of command 
to more efficiently support theater and stra­
tegic logistics operations.
Much like structural changes that separated 
operational control of the PLA from force-build­
ing efforts among the PLA’s services, the 
establishment of the LSD and JLSF separated 
logistics management from logistic support to 
combat operations and probably was intended 
to shorten resource replenishment timelines 
across the PLA. These logistic reforms require 
testing to determine whether they will be 
effective in helping China overcome some of its 
combat inefficiencies and successfully support 
regional and national military operations.
The PLA also has continued its efforts to 
improve civil-military integration as a core 
function of logistic support to military oper­
ations under the LSD and JLSF constructs. 
This entails leveraging civilian sector capa­
bilities and technologies to support military 
logistics to improve efficiency and reduce costs. 
The PLA continues to increase its use of civil­
ian-controlled assets in military operations 
and exercises, most notably civilian ground 
transportation and ships supporting joint 
exercises and civilian firms providing supplies 
to mitigate logistic shortfalls.287,288,289
Military Transportation
China has a robust transportation infrastruc­
ture and is enlarging its transportation network 
to keep up with the country’s economic growth 
and increasing military demand. Although 
most of China’s rail lines, roads, and seaports 
are sufficient to support military transporta­
tion and mobilization, the variability of infra­
structure throughout the country is an ongoing 
challenge. For example, western China’s trans­
portation network is more limited than that 
of eastern China.290,291,292 Beijing is addressing 
this problem by initiating infrastructure proj­
ects and targeted funding allocations. Future 
transportation network improvements will 
bolster the PLA’s ability to mobilize by mov­
ing higher numbers of units more expediently 
across greater spans of the country.
The PLA primarily relies on rail transport 
to move large numbers of ground troops and 
large amounts of equipment.293 The Chinese 
rail network comprises about 100,000 kilome­
ters of rail, 10,000 kilometers of which is high-
speed track supporting trains running at up to 
250 kilometers per hour.294 The PLA also relies 
on the road network to transport troops and 
military equipment. Traffic congestion, tolls, 
and bottlenecks limit the capacity of eastern 
[The PLA will focus on] developing uni­
form military and civilian standards for 
infrastructure, key technical areas, and 
major industries, exploring methods for 
training military personnel in industries, 
and outsourcing logistics support to civil­
ian support systems.
—Excerpt from China’s Military Strategy, 
May 2015

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
103
China’s expressways in major cities.295 Road 
conditions vary from good to poorly main­
tained in rural areas, restricting capacity and 
increasing travel times.296,297 China expects to 
build about 1.3 million kilometers of roads and 
26,000 kilometers of expressways by 2020.298
China also is improving its existing domestic 
airfields to handle heavier payloads, construct­
ing airfields on islands and outposts in the 
South China Sea, and restructuring airfields 
to support military and civilian use.299 As of 
June 2016, about one-third of China’s airports 
supported military and civilian use.300 The PLA 
exercises control of China’s airspace, filling a 
role similar to that which the Federal Aviation 
Administration plays in controlling airspace 
in the United States. Although the Civil Avia­
tion Administration of China administers Chi­
nese civil aviation, PLA authority takes pre­
cedence over the airspace. Consequently, the 
PLA regularly adjusts civil aviation schedules 
and flightpaths to avoid PLA activities, such as 
exercises and other operations.
In mid-2016, China allocated $600 billion as 
part of a 3-year plan (2016-2018) to continue 
improving its transportation network and, 
later the same year, passed the Defense Trans­
portation Law (DTL) authorizing the manage­
ment, development, and production of dual-use 
facilities and equipment to support national 
and regional PLA operations.301 The DTL also 
regulates the planning, construction, manage­
ment, and use of transportation resources for 
national defense.302 Governments above the 
county level are required to include national 
defense transportation development in their 
socioeconomic development plan and to give the 
military basic information about civil transpor­
tation tools.303 The DTL grants the PLA author­
ity over civil transportation systems during 
wartime. Structuring the transportation infra­
structure and facilities as a dual-use system 
avoids the additional costs of building separate 
airports, railways, ports, and roads for the mil­
itary. The PLA’s efforts to obtain access to com­
mercial ports in Africa, the Middle East, and 
South Asia would align with its future over­
seas logistic needs and meet its evolving naval 
requirements. The PLAN is likely to use com­
mercial ports and civilian ships to support its 
international and domestic logistic operations, 
resupply, replenishment, and maintenance.
China’s territorial claims in the South China 
Sea are driving major logistic developments 
in the Spratly and Paracel Islands. China’s 
reclaimed territory in the South China Sea 
is equipped with harbors and berthing areas 
that are capable of accommodating large naval 
ships, increasing the PLAN’s ability to exercise 
control of critical SLOCs.304
China is expanding its access to foreign ports, 
such as in Gwadar, Pakistan, to pre-position 
the logistic framework necessary to support 
the PLA’s growing presence abroad, includ­
ing normalizing and sustaining deployments 
into and beyond the Indian Ocean. China’s 
announcement in 2015 of its intention to build 
military facilities in Djibouti cited aims “to help 
the Navy and Army further participate in UN 
peacekeeping operations, carry out escort mis­
sions in the waters near Somalia and the Gulf 
of Aden, and provide humanitarian assistance.”

104
Transportation is also at the heart of the Belt 
and Road Initiative (BRI), which consists of 
establishing roads, railways, and ports to 
connect to countries from Asia to Africa and 
Europe. Although the BRI is marketed as pri­
marily an effort to increase trade and develop­
ment, China’s improved domestic transporta­
tion infrastructure and access to transportation 
infrastructure abroad also would benefit the 
PLA by enhancing PLA access to transporta­
tion hubs and road systems.305,306,307
China’s Outposts in the Spratly Islands
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
China's claims in the Spratly Islands require constant resupply from the mainland.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
105
APPENDIX H: Defense Industry
Defense Industry Reform
China’s defense-industrial complex contin­
ues to adapt and reorganize in an effort to 
improve weapon system research, devel­
opment, and production to compensate for 
an estimated lag of one to two generations 
behind its main competitors in the global 
arms industry. Over the past 2 years, China 
has undertaken organizational and policy 
measures to reenergize the military’s work 
on defense research and innovation through 
cooperation with the market sector.
• In 2016, the CMC established the Science 
and Technology Commission, a high-level 
defense research body, as an independent 
organization under the high command. It 
also emphasized the importance of “civ­
il-military integration,” a phrase used in 
part to refer to the leveraging of dual-use 
technologies, policies, and organizations 
for military benefit.
• In March 2016, President Xi underscored 
this message by emphasizing defense 
innovation during a visit with the PLA’s 
delegation to the National People’s Con­
gress. He urged “great attention to the 
development of strategic, cutting-edge 
technologies” for the military, among 
other subjects.
China’s 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-2020) 
includes the establishment of focus areas 
for research, development, and innovation. 
Several of these have defense implications: 
aerospace engines—including turbofan tech­
nology—and gas turbines; quantum communi­
cations and computing; innovative electronics 
and software; automation and robotics; special 
materials and applications; nanotechnology; 
neuroscience, neural research, and artificial 
intelligence; and deep-space exploration and 
on-orbit servicing and maintenance systems. 
Other areas where China is concentrating sig­
nificant R&D resources include nuclear fusion, 
hypersonic technology, and the deployment 
and “hardening” of an expanding constellation 
of multipurpose satellites. China’s drive to 
expand civil-military integration and interna­
tional economic activity supports these goals.
The National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (NSFC), the China Academy of Sciences, 
and the Ministry of Science and Technology 
fund and promote basic and applied research, 
scientific innovation, and high-technology inte­
gration throughout China’s scientific, engineer­
ing, and civil-military industrial complex. The 
China Academy of Sciences, working closely 
with the NSFC, is the highest academic institu­
tion for comprehensive R&D in the natural and 
applied sciences in China and reports directly to 
the State Council in an advisory capacity, with 
much of its work ultimately funding disciplines 
and contributing to products for military use.

106
Major Production-Sector Snapshots
Missile and Space. China’s missile programs, 
including its ballistic and cruise missile sys­
tems, are comparable to those of other inter­
national top-tier producers. China’s production 
of a wide range of ballistic, cruise, air-to-air, 
and surface-to-air missiles for the PLA and for 
export has probably been enhanced by upgrades 
to primary assembly and solid rocket motor 
production facilities. China has also purchased 
Russia’s S-400 air defense system and received 
its first delivery in April 2018.308 China’s space 
launch vehicle industry is expanding to support 
commercial and rapid satellite launch services 
and the manned space program.
Naval/Shipbuilding. 
China 
is 
the 
top 
ship-producing nation in the world and has 
increased its shipbuilding capacity and capa­
bility for all types of naval projects, including 
submarines, surface combatants, naval avia­
tion, sealift, and amphibious assets. China’s 
two largest state-owned shipbuilders—the 
China State Shipbuilding Corporation and 
China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation—
collaborate in shared ship designs and con­
struction information to increase shipbuilding 
efficiency. China continues to invest in foreign 
suppliers for some propulsion units but is 
becoming increasingly self-sufficient.
Armaments. China’s production capacity 
continues to advance in almost every area 
of PLAA systems, including new versions 
of main battle tanks and new light tanks, 
armored personnel carriers, assault vehi­
cles, air defense artillery systems, and artil­
lery pieces.309 China is capable of producing 
ground weapon systems at or near world-
class standards; however, quality deficiencies 
persist with some export equipment.
Aviation. China’s aviation industry has 
advanced to produce a developmental large 
transport aircraft, modern fourth- to fifth-gen­
eration fighters incorporating low-observable 
technologies, modern reconnaissance and 
attack UAVs, and attack helicopters. China’s 
commercial aircraft industry has invested in 
high-precision and technologically advanced 
machine tooling and production processes, 
avionics, and other components applicable to 
the production of military aircraft; however, 
China’s aircraft industry remains reliant on 
foreign-sourced components for dependable, 
proven, high-performance aircraft engines. 
China’s infrastructure and experience related 
to the production of commercial and military 
aircraft are improving because of the country’s 
ongoing C919 commercial airliner and Y-20 
large transport programs.
China’s domestically produced WS-10 family of 
military turbofan engines, which power the J11-B, 
carrier-based J-15, and J-16 fighters.
Image Source: AFP

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
107
APPENDIX I: Arms Sales
From 2012 to 2016, China’s arms sales totaled 
about $20 billion, placing China among the 
world’s top five global arms suppliers.310 China 
primarily conducts arms sales in conjunction 
with economic aid and development assistance 
to support its broader foreign policy goals, such 
as securing access to natural resources and 
export markets, promoting its political influ­
ence among host country elites, and building 
support in international forums. To a lesser 
extent, arms sales also reflect the profit-seeking 
activities of individual arms trading companies 
in China and efforts to offset China’s defense-re­
lated research and development costs.
From the perspective of China’s arms custom­
ers, most of which are developing countries, Chi­
nese arms are less expensive than those offered 
by other top international arms suppliers. They 
also are generally considered to be of lower qual­
ity and reliability, but many still have advanced 
capabilities. Chinese arms also come with fewer 
political strings attached compared with alter­
native sources, which is attractive to customers 
who may not have access to other sources of 
arms for political or economic reasons.
The bulk of China’s sales from 2012 to 2016 
were to countries in the Asia-Pacific region, 
primarily Pakistan. China’s arms sales and 
defense-industrial cooperation with Paki­
stan include selling LY-80 SAMs, naval 
ships, main battle tanks, air-to-air missiles, 
and fighter aircraft.311,312,313 In 2015, China 
signed an agreement with Pakistan for the 
sale of eight submarines. Under the terms 
of this multibillion-dollar contract, the first 
four will be built in China and the remaining 
four in Pakistan.314,315
China is a niche supplier of armed UAVs and 
has sold these systems to several countries in 
the Middle East, including Iraq, Saudi Arabia, 
Egypt, and the United Arab Emirates. China 
faces little competition for sale of such systems 
because most countries that produce them 
are restricted from selling the technology as 
signatories of the Missile Technology Control 
Regime and or the Wassenaar Arrangement 
on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and 
Dual-Use Goods and Technologies.316

108
China’s Conventional Weapons and Missile-Related Customers, 2002–2017
Other Customers
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Belarus
Benin
Bolivia
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Chad
Congo, 
Democratic 
Republic of
Congo, Republic of
Cuba
Djibouti
Ecuador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ghana
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Libya
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
Peru
Qatar
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tanzania
Timor-Leste
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Image Source: DIA, D3 Design
Over 65 countries have been recipients of Chinese arms since 2002.
317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
109
APPENDIX J: Glossary of Acronyms
2PLA
PLA Second Department
3PLA
PLA Third Department
4PLA
PLA Fourth Department
ACMI
air combat maneuvering 
instrumentation
AEW
airborne early warning
AEW&C
airborne early warning 
and control
AG 
Australia Group
AIFV
armored infantry 
fighting vehicle
AIP
air-independent propulsion
APC
armored personnel carrier
ASBM
antiship ballistic missile
ASCM
antiship cruise missile
ASEAN
Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations
ASW
antisubmarine warfare
ASUW
antisurface warfare
BCW
Biological Weapons Convention
BRI
Belt and Road Initiative
CBW
chemical and biological warfare
CCG
China Coast Guard
CCP
Chinese Communist Party
CDIC
Central Discipline 
Inspection Commission
CMC
Central Military Commission
COMSAT
communications satellite
CWC
Chemical Weapons Convention
C2 
command and control
C4ISR
command, control, communica­
tions, computers, intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance
DTL
Defense Transportation Law
ECM
electronic countermeasures
EDD
Equipment Development 
Department
EO
electro-optical
ESF
East Sea Fleet
EW
electronic warfare
FFG
guided-missile frigate
GDP
gross domestic product
GLCM
ground-launched cruise missile
GLD
General Logistics Department
GPS
Global Positioning System
GSD
General Staff Department
HADR
humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief
HF
high frequency
ICBM
intercontinental ballistic missile
IO
information operations
IRBM
intermediate-range 
ballistic missile
ISR
intelligence, surveillance, 
and reconnaissance
JLSF
Joint Logistics Support Force

110
JOCC
Joint Operations 
Command Center
JSD
Joint Staff Department
LACM
land-attack cruise missile
LHA
landing helicopter assault
LSD
Logistics Support Department
MARV
maneuverable reentry vehicle
MIRV
multiple independently 
targetable reentry vehicle
MOOTW
military operations 
other than war
MND
Ministry of National Defense
MPS
Ministry of Public Security
MRBM
medium-range ballistic missile
MSS
Ministry of State Security
NFU
no first use
NSF
North Sea Fleet
OPCW
Organization for the Prohibition 
of Chemical Weapons
PAFMM
People’s Armed Forces
Maritime Militia
PKO
peacekeeping operations
PLA
People’s Liberation Army
PLAA
PLA Army
PLAAF
PLA Air Force
PLAN
PLA Navy
PLANMC
PLA Navy Marine Corps
PLARF
PLA Rocket Force
PWD/LB
Political Work Department 
Liaison Bureau
R&D
research and development
RDA
research, development, 
and acquisition
RMA
revolution in military affairs
SAM
surface-to-air missile
SAR
search and rescue
SASTIND
State Administration for Science, 
Technology, Development, and 
Industry for National Defense
SIGINT
signals intelligence
SLBM
submarine-launched 
ballistic missile
SLOC
sea line of communication
SLV
space launch vehicle
SOF
special operations forces
SP
self-propelled
SRBM
short-range ballistic missile
SSBN
nuclear-powered ballistic 
missile submarine
SSGN
nuclear-powered 
guided-missile submarine
SSF
Strategic Support Force
SSN
nuclear-powered 
attack submarine
SSP
air-independent attack 
submarine
UAV
unmanned aerial vehicle
UGF
underground facility
UHF
ultrahigh frequency
UN
United Nations
VBSS
visit, board, search, and seizure
VHF
very high frequency

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
113
1  “Full text of Xi Jinping’s report at 19th CPC National Con­
gress,” Xinhua, November 03, 2017, URL: www.xinhuanet.
com/english/special/2017-11/03/c_136725942.&#65279;htm.
2  “China Focus: ‘Be Ready to Win Wars’,” Xinhua in English, 
August 01, 2017, URL: http://www.xinhuanet.com/en­
glish/2017-08/01/c_136491455.&#65279;htm.
3  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
4  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
5  Joel Wuthnow and Phillip C. Saunders, “Chinese Military Re­
forms in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, Challenges, and Implica­
tions; Institute for National Strategic Studies (INSS); China Stra­
tegic Perspectives; National Defense University; NDU Press; 
March 2017; p 10; accessed at  https://books.google.com/
books?id=QXhBxcaomJIC&pg=PA36&lpg=PA36&dq=Chi­
na+and+the+Equipment+Development+DEpartment+EDD&­
source=bl&ots=rR7MjPCjt7&sig=2D4uWqsaMxL4teRPCilro10­
0d6c&hl=nl&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiInO_S6oDaAhXJ_ywKHT­
M7AzUQ6AEIQTAD#v=onepage&q=China%20and%20the%20
Equipment%20Development%20DEpartment%20EDD&f=false.
6  “Full text of Xi Jinping’s report at 19th CPC National Con­
gress,” Xinhua, November 03, 2017, URL: www.xinhuanet.
com/english/special/2017-11/03/c_136725942.&#65279;htm.
7  “China Needs Series of Laws on National Secu­
rity: NPC Spokesperson,” Xinhua, March 4, 2015, 
URL:  english.gov.cn/news/top_news/2015/03/04/con­
tent_281475065544302.&#65279;htm.
8  “Full text of Chinese state councilor’s article on Xi Jin­
ping’s Diplomacy Thought,” Xinhua, July 19, 2017, 
URL: http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-07/19/
c_136455986.&#65279;htm.
9  “1,000 Chinese soldiers reportedly still in Doklam a month 
after border stand-off ended,” South China Morning Post, Oc­
tober 06, 2017, URL: http://www.scmp.&#65279;com/news/
china/diplomacy-defence/article/2114265/1000-chinese-sol­
diers-reportedly-still-doklam-month.
10  “Full text of Xi Jinping’s report at 19th CPC National Con­
gress,” Xinhua, November 03, 2017, URL: www.xinhuanet.
com/english/special/2017-11/03/c_136725942.&#65279;htm.
11  “Full text of Xi Jinping’s report at 19th CPC National Con­
gress,” Xinhua, November 03, 2017, URL: www.xinhuanet.
com/english/special/2017-11/03/c_136725942.&#65279;htm.
12  Shannon Tiezzi, “China’s National Security Strategy,” 
The Diplomat, January 24, 2015, URL: https://thediplo­
mat.&#65279;com/2015/01/chinas-national-security-strategy/. 
13  “China: Xi Jinping Chairs Political Bureau Meeting on 
Outline for National Security Strategy,” Xinhua, January 24, 
2015, URL: http://politics.people.com.cn/n/2015/0124/
c1024-26441895.&#65279;html.
14 “China Needs Series of Laws on National Secu­
rity: NPC Spokesperson,” Xinhua, March 4, 2015, 
URL:  english.gov.cn/news/top_news/2015/03/04/con­
tent_281475065544302.&#65279;htm.
15  “Full Text: Work Report of NPC Standing Committee,” 
Xinhua, March 19, 2016, URL: www.xinhuanet.com/english/
china/2016-03/19/c_135204257.&#65279;htm.  
16  “Full text of Chinese state councilor’s article on Xi 
Jinping’s Diplomacy Thought,” Xinhua, July 19, 2017, 
URL: http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-07/19/
c_136455986.&#65279;htm.
17  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
18  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; 2018.
19  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
20  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.


REFERENCES

114
21  “Xi Jinping rolls out leaner top line-up for China’s military 
machine,” South China Morning Post, October 26, 2017, 
URL: http://www.scmp.&#65279;com/news/china/diploma­
cy-defence/article/2117004/xi-jinping-rolls-out-leaner-top-line-
chinas-military.
22  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Devel­
opements Involving the People's Republic of China 2017; 
Office of the Secretary of Defense; May 2017 
23  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Devel­
opements Involving the People's Republic of China 2018, 
Office of the Secretary of Defense, 2018 
24  “Xi Jinping rolls out leaner top line-up for China’s military 
machine,” South China Morning Post, October 26, 2017, 
URL: http://www.scmp.&#65279;com/news/china/diploma­
cy-defence/article/2117004/xi-jinping-rolls-out-leaner-top-line-
chinas-military.
25  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, April 2016.
26  “Full text of Xi Jinping’s report at 19th CPC National Con­
gress,” Xinhua, November 03, 2017, URL: www.xinhuanet.
com/english/special/2017-11/03/c_136725942.&#65279;htm.
27  Maya Wang, “China’s Dystopian Push to Revolutionize 
Surveillance,” Washington Post, 18 August 2017, URL: 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/democracy-post/
wp/2017/08/18/chinas-dystopian-push-to-revolutionize-sur­
veillance/?utm_term=.&#65279;aa85891a8c59.
28  China’s Military Strategy White Paper; The State Coun­
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China; 
May 2015, Beijing; http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/chi­
na/2015-05/26/c_134271001.htm.
29  Viola Zhou, “Why China’s Armed Police Will Now Only Take 
Orders From Xi And His Generals,” South China Morning Post, 
28 December 2017, URL:  http://www.scmp.&#65279;com/
news/china/policies-politics/article/2126039/reason-why-chi­
nas-armed-police-will-now-only-take.
30  Liu Zhen, “China’s military police given control of coastguard 
as Beijing boosts maritime security,” South China Morning 
Post, 21 March 2018, URL: http://www.scmp.&#65279;com/
news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2138257/chinas-mili­
tary-police-given-control-coastguard-beijing.
31  Timothy R. Heath, “China’s Pursuit of Overseas Security,” 
RAND, 2018; p 22; accessed at https://www.rand.org/con­
tent/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/.../RAND_RR2271.pdf.
32  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, 2017.
33  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
34  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
35  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
36  “The Dragon’s New Teeth,” The Economist, Bejing, 
April 7th, 2012, URL: https://www.economist.com/
node/21552193.&#65279.
37  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, 2018.
38  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, 2018.
39  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
40  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; 2018.
41  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
42  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
43  Joint Force Quarterly “China’s Goldwater-Nichols? Assess­
ing PLA’s Organizational Reforms” by Phillip Saunders and 
Joel Wuthnow; Jul 1, 2016.
44  People’s Daily “Xi Jinping: Build a Modern Military Power Sys­
tem with Chinese Characteristics”; Aug 31, 2014; http://news.
xinhuanet.com/politics/2014-08/31/c_1112295195_3.htm.
45  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
115
46  China’s Military Strategy White Paper; The State Coun­
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China; 
May 2015, Beijing; http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/chi­
na/2015-05/26/c_134271001.htm.
47  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
48  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
49  Xinhua “Starting with a New Style Under Fluttering Red 
Combat Banners – Observing the New Theater Com­
mands”; Feb 2, 2016; URL: http://news.xinhuanet.com/poli­
tics/2016-02/02/c_1117973365.htm.
50  China Military Online “Ministry of National Defense hold 
Press Conference on CMC Organ” by Yao Jianing; Jan 12, 
2016; http://english.chinamil.com.cn/news-channels/chi­
na-military-news/2016-01/12/content_6854444.htm.
51  Joint Force Quarterly “China’s Goldwater-Nichols? Assess­
ing PLA’s Organizational Reforms” by Phillip Saunders and 
Joel Wuthnow; Jul 1, 2016.
52  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
53 Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
54  Joint Force Quarterly “China’s Goldwater-Nichols? Assess­
ing PLA’s Organizational Reforms” by Phillip Saunders and 
Joel Wuthnow; Jul 1, 2016.
55  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
56  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
57 “Photos: Chinese Military Forces Hold Ceremony After Ar­
riving at Djibouti Support Base.” Tianjin Jinri Toutiao (Chinese 
language), August 1, 2017, URL: www.toutiao.com.
58  “Photos: Chinese Navy Holds Ceremony Establishing Dji­
bouti Support Base.” Tianjin Jinri Toutiao (Chinese language), 
July 13, 2017, URL: www.toutiao.com. 
59  “Photos: Chinese PLA Navy Ceremony for Troops Depart­
ing to Djibouti Support Base.” Beijing China Military Online 
(Chines language), July 11, 2017. URL: http://www.81.cn. 
60  PLA Southern Theater Command Air Force Enhances Mari­
time Combat Capabilities; 21 OCT 2016; http://eng.chinamil.
com.cn/view/2016-09/05/content_7242128.htm.
61  In Depth; Why the U.S. is Frequently Provocative in South 
China Sea – China’s Bombers Break the Islands Chains 8 
Times with Countermeasures; 02 DEC 15; http://mil.news.
Sina.com.cn/2015-12-02/1111845474.htm.
62  China Military Online: Three Solutions for China’s New-Gener­
ation Long-range Strategic Bomber; 05 SEP 2016; http://www.
chinadaily.com.cn/china/2016-10/21/content_27130415_7.htm.
63  “China and Ukraine agree deal to restart production of An-
225,” Jane’s; September 07, 2016, URL: http://www.janes.
com/article/63341/china-and-ukraine-agree-to-restart-an-225.
64  Indian TV Website Report Shows Images of China’s First 
Home-Grown Aircraft Carrier and new J-15A Fighter Jet; 
12 OCT 2016; http://www.ndtv.com/world-news/china-rac­
ing-ahead-of-india-in-aircraft-carrier-development-1472835.
65  Global Times: Flashpoints in Asian Waters; 27 OCT 2016; 
Global Times hosted the Japan Times article at: http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/1013393.shtml. 
66  Andrew Tate, “China’s second aircraft carrier begins sea trials,” 
HIS Jane’s Defence Weekly; May 14, 2018, URL: http://janes.com/
article/80064/china-s-second-aircraft-carrier-begins-sea-trials. 
67  China’s Troop Contributions to U.N. Peacekeeping; Oct 
2016; https://www.usip.org/publications/2016/07/chi­
nas-troop-contributions-un-peacekeeping.
68  People’s Daily Online: “Belt and Road” Initiative Points to 
Brighter Globalization; 26 OCT 2016; http://www.globaltimes.
cn/content/1013888.shtml.
69  Global Times Online: Ethiopia Djibouti Railway Signals New 
Era Of Chinese Aid In Infrastructure Construction; 27 OCT 
2016; http://eng.mod.gov.cn/TopNews/2016-10/09/con­
tent_4743532.htm.
70  China Military Online: ‘Djibouti Base Not for Military Power: 
PLA Daily’; 27 OCT 2016; http://news.xinhuanet.com/en­
glish/2016-10/25/c_135780276.htm.
71  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
72  Xiao Tianliang, Chief Editor, The Science of Strategy, Bei­
jing: NDU Press, April 2015, pp. 121.

116
73  “Senior Leader Perspective: China’s Perspective on Nuclear 
Deterrence,”Air & Space Power Journal, Spring 2010, pp 27-30.
74  “Position Paper of the People’s Republic of China for 
the 72nd Session of the United Nations General Assembly,” 
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the 
United Nations and Other International Organizations in Vien­
na, September 09, 2017, URL: http://www.chinesemission-vi­
enna.at/eng/zgbd/t1490124.&#65279;htm.
75  China’s Military Strategy White Paper; The State Coun­
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China; 
May 2015, Beijing; http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/chi­
na/2015-05/26/c_134271001.htm.
76  “Position Paper of the People’s Republic of China for 
the 72nd Session of the United Nations General Assembly,” 
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the 
United Nations and Other International Organizations in Vien­
na, September 09, 2017, URL: http://www.chinesemission-vi­
enna.at/eng/zgbd/t1490124.&#65279;htm.
77  Yu Jixun, ed., “The Science of Second Artillery Cam­
paigns,” Beijing: PLA Press, 2004, p. 238.
78  Xiao Tianliang, Chief Editor, The Science of Strategy, Bei­
jing: NDU Press, April 2015, pp. 364, 369.
79  “From tanks to carrier killers: 10 weapons unveiled at 
China’s military parade,” South China Morning Post, Septem­
ber 03, 2015, URL: http://www.scmp.&#65279;com/news/
china/diplomacy-defence/article/1854800/10-most-anticipat­
ed-weapons-military-parade.
80  “Chinese nuclear forces, 2013,” Bulletin of Atomic Scien­
tists; 1 November 2013.
81  “China confirms new generation nuclear-capable ICBM that 
can target US,” Sydney Morning Herald, August 01, 2014, 
URL: https://www.smh.com.&#65279;au/world/china-con­
firms-new-generation-nuclearcapable-icbm-that-can-tar­
get-us-20140801-zzj93.&#65279;html.
82  Ralph Cossa, Brad Glosserman, and David Santoro, “Con­
ference report of the 11th China-US Strategic Nuclear Dynam­
ics Dialogue,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
September, 2017, URL: https://www.csis.&#65279;org/anal­
ysis/issues-insights-vol-18-cr1-realistic-way-forward-us-chi­
na-strategic-nuclear-relationship.
83  Xinhua; Dec 07, 2016; “Rear Admiral: China’s Development 
of H-20 Bomber Just in Time;” http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2016-12/07/content_7396601.htm.
84  Science of Strategy, Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing: 
Military Science Press, 2013, pp. 175.
85  Xiao Tianliang, Chief Editor; The Science of Strategy, PLA 
National Defense University publication; Beijing: NDU Press, 
April 2015, pp. 364, 369.
86  “China hails first test of hypersonic nuclear missile carrier,” 
South China Morning Post, January 15, 2014, URL: http://
www.scmp.&#65279;com/news/china/article/1405784/chi­
na-hails-first-test-hypersonic-nuclear-missile-carrier.
87  “Hypersonic missiles Can Defeat US Missile Defenses,” 
Cankao Xiaoxi, February 23, 2014, URL: http://ihl.cankaoxia­
oxi.com/2014/0207/343864.shtml.
88  China Academy of Engineering Physics; 10JUN2015; 
2015 Chinese Academy of Engineering Physics Postdoctoral 
Careers; www.caep.ac.cn/rlzy/bsh/21443.shtml.
89  SinoDefense; Dong Feng-4 (CSS-3); www.sinodefense.
com/rocketry/df4.
90  NTI; 29 September 2011; Ninth Academy; Science City; 
Zitong Facility; Mianyang Facility; “The Los Alamos of China”; 
http://www.nti.org/learn/facilities/702/.
91  NTI; 29 September 2011; Ninth Academy; Science City; 
Zitong Facility; Mianyang Facility; “The Los Alamos of China”; 
http://www.nti.org/learn/facilities/702/.
92  China Academy of Engineering Physics; 10JUN2015; 
2015 Chinese Academy of Engineering Physics Postdoctoral 
Careers; www.caep.ac.cn/rlzy/bsh/21443.shtml.
93  Science & Global Security; ISSN: 0892-9882; 23OCT15; 
China’s Uranium Enrichment Complex.
94  Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists; 07DEC15; China’s rapidly 
expanding centrifuge enrichment capacity;, http://thebulletin.
org/china%E2%80%99s-rapidly-expanding-centrifuge-enrich­
ment-capacity8934.
95  Harvard University; China’s Stockpile of Military Plutonium: 
A New Estimate; July 2011; http://www.belfercenter.org/publi­
cation/chinas-stockpile-military-plutonium-new-estimate.
96  Telegraph; 4 January 2011; China Masters Nuclear Fuel 
Reprocessing Technology; http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/
worldnews/asia/china/8238032/china-masters-nuclear-fu­
el-reprocessing-technology.html.
97  NTI; Aug 2013; China Biological Chronology;
http://www.nti.org/country-profiles/china/biological.
98  NTI; Aug 2013; China Biological Profile; 
http://www.nti.org/country-profiles/china. 
99  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
117
100  US Department of State; Adherence to and Compliance 
with Arms Control, Nonproliferation and Disarmament Agree­
ments and Commitments; August 2005; https://www.state.
gov/documents/organization/52113.pdf.
101  US Department of State; Adherence to and Compliance 
with Arms Control, Nonproliferation and Disarmament Agree­
ments and Commitments; August 2005; https://www.state.
gov/documents/organization/52113.pdf.
102  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.
103  Shirley A. Kan; 03 January 2014; China and Proliferation 
of Weapons of Mass Destruction and Missiles: Policy Issues; 
Congressional Research Service (CRS) - Report # RL31555.
104  NTI; JUN 2013; China Country Profiles; China; 
http://www.nti.org/country-profiles/china.
105  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.
106  NTI; Aug 2013; China Biological Chronology; http://www.
nti.org/country-profiles/china/biological.
107  Janes; 30 Oct 2014; China Production Capability.
108  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.
109  Janes; 30 Oct 2014; China Production Capability.
110 Shirley A. Kan; 03 January 2014; China and Proliferation 
of Weapons of Mass Destruction and Missiles: Policy Issues; 
Congressional Research Service (CRS) - Report # RL31555.
111 Information Office, State Council of the People's Republic 
of China, "China's National Defense in 2010," Editor Wang 
Guanqun, March 2011, www.xinhuanet.com; China Arms 
Control and Disarmament Association, "Chinese Nonprolifera­
tion Policy and Export Control Policy," Li Hong, Vice President 
and Secretary General, 28 August 2013, http://csis.org; For­
eign and Commonwealth Office, "'Bridging the Gap: Analysis 
of China's export controls against international standards," 
Chin-Hao Huang, 25 May 2012, www.gov.uk. 
112  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china. 
113  Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, 
“Workshop on Assistance and Protection against Chemical 
Weapons held in China,” accessed online on 13 Feb 18, 
URL: https://www.opcw.org/news/browse/116/article/region­
al-workshop-on-assistance-and-protection-against-chemi­
cal-weapons-held-in-china/Regional. 
114  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.
115  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.
116  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.
117  NTI; OCT 2014; China Overview; http://www.nti.org/china.
118  Shirley A. Kan; Congressional Research Service (CRS) - 
Report # RL31555; 03 January 2014; China and Proliferation 
of Weapons of Mass Destruction and Missiles: Policy Issues.
119  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
120  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
121 Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
122  Harvey, Brian, China in Space: The Great Leap Forward; 
2013; Springer Science + Business Media; New York.
123  Report; Stokes, Mark A. and Dean Cheng; Project 2049 
Institute for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission; China’s Evolving Space Capabilities: Implications 
for U.S. Interests; 26 April 2012; http://project2049.net/docu­
ments/uscc_china-space-program-report_april-2012.pdf.
124  Report; Stokes, Mark A. and Dean Cheng; Project 2049 
Institute for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission; China’s Evolving Space Capabilities: Implications 
for U.S. Interests; 26 April 2012;; http://project2049.net/docu­
ments/uscc_china-space-program-report_april-2012.pdf.
125  White Paper; The State Council Information Office of 
the People’s Republic of China; China’s BeiDou Navigation 
Satellite System; June 2016; http://www.scio.gov.cn/zxbd/wz/
Document/1480433/1480433.htm.
126  White Paper; The State Council Information Office of 
the People’s Republic of China; China’s BeiDou Navigation 
Satellite System; June 2016; http://www.scio.gov.cn/zxbd/wz/
Document/1480433/1480433.htm.
127  Internet; Xinhua; China To Launch 30 Beidou Navigation 
Satellites In Next 5 Years; 19 May 2016; http://english.cas.cn/
newsroom/china_research/201605/t20160523_163363.shtml.
128  Report; Stokes, Mark A. and Dean Cheng; Project 2049 
Institute for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission; China’s Evolving Space Capabilities: Implications 
for U.S. Interests; 26 April 2012; http://project2049.net/docu­
ments/uscc_china-space-program-report_april-2012.pdf.
129  World Meteorological Organization; Satellite Status; 
accessed 17 October 2016; www.wmo.ing/pages/prog/sat/
satellitestatus.php.

118
130  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
131  Peng Guangqian, Yao Youzhi, eds; 2001; 
Science of Strategy.
132  Li Bingyan, 27 Jan 2016; Beijing Guangming Ribao: 
General Trend of the Worldwide Revolution in Military Affairs 
and the Form of Future War.
133  China Manned Space Engineering Office Website; 
Space Station Project Development Progress; 23 April 
2016; http://www.cmse.gov.cn/uploadfile/news/upload­
file/201604/20160427104809225.pdf.
134  Internet; Xinhua; Chang-E 5 To Launch Sometime in 2017 
-- China’s Latest Secret Lunar Exploration Project Uncov­
ered; 1 March 2014; http://news.xinhuanet.com/tech/2014-
03/01/c_119562037.htm. 
135  Xinhua: China To Land On Dark Side Of Moon In 
2018; 14 January 2016; http://news.xinhuanet.com/en­
glish/2016-01/15/c_135010577.htm.
136  Internet, NASASpaceFlight, Chang’e-5 Lunar Sample Re­
turn, CZ-5 - Wenchang - NET 2017, http://forum.nasaspace­
flight.com/index.php?action=dlattach;topic=33431.0;at­
tach=1440126, Accessed 28 July 2017.
137  Report; Stokes, Mark A. and Dean Cheng; Project 2049 
Institute for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission; China’s Evolving Space Capabilities: Implications 
for U.S. Interests; 26 April 2012; http://project2049.net/docu­
ments/uscc_china-space-program-report_april-2012.pdf.
138  Briefing; Zhou, Yuanying; China Great Wall Industry 
Corporation; China’s Space Industry: Achievement, Future 
Planning and International Cooperation; presented by Zhou 
Yuanying for China Great Wall Industry Corporation at the 4th 
International Space Conference, Vilnius, Lithuania 18 Sept. 
2012; updated 27 Sept. 2013.
139  China Space Flight; Chinese Rocket service time; 12 
March 2016; http://www.chinaspaceflight.com/rocket/Chi­
na-launchers-timeline.html.
140  Kevin Pollpeter and Kenneth Allen ed; 26 AUG 2015; DGI; 
The PLA as Organization: Reference Volume v2.0; pp 401.; 
http://www.andrewerickson.com/2015/12/a-classic-refer­
ence-with-renewed-relevance-download-the-pla-as-organiza­
tion-v2-0/.
141  Joe McReynolds; 17 APR 2016; Jamestown Founda­
tion China Brief; China’s Evolving Perspectives on Network 
Warfare: Lessons from the Science of Military Strategy; pp 
6; https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-evolving-perspec­
tives-on-network-warfare-lessons-from-the-science-of-mili­
tary-strategy/.
142  Lincoln Davidson; ‘China’s Strategic Support Force: 
The New Home of the PLA’s Cyber Operations?’; CFR.
org; Net Politics; January 20, 2016; http://blogs.cfr.org/
cyber/2016/01/20/chinas-strategic-support-force-the-new-
home-of-the-plas-cyber-operations/.
143  John Costello; ‘The Strategic Support Force: China’s Infor­
mation Warfare Service’; The Jamestown Foundation; China 
Brief Vol. 16 Issue 3; February 8, 2016; https://jamestown.
org/program/the-strategic-support-force-chinas-informa­
tion-warfare-service/.
144  John Costello; ‘China Finally Centralizes Its Space, Cyber, 
Information Forces’; TheDiplomat.com; January 20, 2016.
145  Peng Guangqian, Yao Youzhi, eds; 2001; Science of 
Strategy; pp 311.
146  Department of Justice, “U.S. Charges Five Chinese Mili­
tary Hackers for Cyber Espionage Against U.S. Corporations 
and a Labor Organization for Commercial Advantage;” May 
19, 2014; URL:  http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2014/May/14-
ag-528.html .
147  Lesley Wroughton, Michael Martina, “Cyber spying, 
maritime disputes loom large in U.S.-China talks,” Reuters, 
July 8, 2014, URL: https://www.reuters.&#65279;com/article/
china-usa/cyber-spying-maritime-disputes-loom-large-in-u-s-
china-talks-idUSL4N0PJ0MT20140708.
148  Zhang Yuliang (ed.), Science of Campaigns (National Defense 
University, Beijing, 2006; ISBN 7-5626-1407-0 ) p. 155-66.
149  Zhang Yuliang (ed.), Science of Campaigns (National Defense 
University, Beijing, 2006; ISBN 7-5626-1407-0 ) p. 155-66.
150  Zhang Xingye and Zhang Zhanli ed., Campaign Strata­
gems, (PLA National Defense University, Beijing, 2002), 
p. 1-2, 26-8.
151  Zhang Yuliang (ed.), Science of Campaigns (National De­
fense University, Beijing, 2006; ISBN 7-5626-1407-0 ) p. 96-7.
152  “Theories of the Initial Period of War” in Tiao Youzhi, ed., 
Theories of War and Strategy, PLA Press, Beijing, 2005 p. 564.
153  Wang Haibo, Gao Zhiwen, and Hua Xiao, Jiefangjun Bao 
Online,  “The Grand Program for Building Modern Logistics 
-- an Interview of Zhou Songhe, Chief of Staff of the General 
Logistics Department’s Headquarters Department on Issues 
Concerning the Logistic Work in the New Year,” accessed 
at http://news.mod.gov.cn/headlines/2014-02/12/con­
tent_4489582.htm.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
119
154  Zhang Liansong and Zhou Jing, “An Analysis of the Basic 
Contents of Hu Jintao’s Important Theses on Military Logistics 
Construction,” China Military Science, No. 5, 2007.
155  Liao Xilong, “Personally Experiencing Jinan The­
ater’s Major Joint Logistics Reform,” PLA Daily, Decem­
ber 16, 2008, accessed at http://military.people.com.cn/
GB/1076/52984/8527794.html.
156  Duan Chengliang and Zhou Rui, “Division of the 13th 
Group Army Improves Support Effectiveness Through Pre­
cision Delivery, Realizes Precision Support With the Flexible 
Grouping of Modules,” Jiefangjun Bao, November 15, 2016.
157  Wang Jixin and Sun Xingwei, “Practicing Logistical Opera­
tions by Closely Adhering to Actual Combat Operations, Devel­
oping Crack Troops by Aiming at Battlefield: Zhengzhou Joint 
Logistical Support Center Focuses on Improving Rapid, Precise 
Logistical Support Capability,” Jiefangjun Bao, January 26, 2018.
158  Wang Haibo, Gao Zhiwen, and Hua Xiao, Jiefangjun Bao 
Online,  “The Grand Program for Building Modern Logistics 
-- an Interview of Zhou Songhe, Chief of Staff of the General 
Logistics Department’s Headquarters Department on Issues 
Concerning the Logistic Work in the New Year,” accessed 
at http://news.mod.gov.cn/headlines/2014-02/12/con­
tent_4489582.htm.
159  Yang Yang, “Logistics Commanding Officers of Tomor­
row’s Battlefields -- No Longer the ‘Provision Officers’ of That 
Month and That Date,” Jiefangjun Bao, September 29, 2010.
http://www.chinamil.com.cn/.
160  Liao Xilong, “Comprehensively Develop Modern Lo­
gistics With Scientific Development Concept as Guide,” 
Quishi, July 16, 2006, accessed at http://www.qstheory.cn/
zxdk/2006/200614/200907/t20090708_8817.htm.
161  “(Lushan Quake) 2nd LD-Writethru: 192 dead, 23 
missing in China quake,” Xinhua, Beijing Xinhua in English, 
April 22, 2013, URL: https://trove.nla.gov.&#65279;au/
work/178999486?q&versionId=194850676.
162  “Air Force uses civil UAVs in joint logistics support drill,” 
PLA Daily in English, January 29, 2018; URL: eng.chinamil.
com.cn/view/2018-01/29/content_7924990.&#65279;htm.
163  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016.
164  Dennis J. Blasko, “Clarity of Intentions: People’s Liberation 
Army Transregional Exercises to Defend China’s Borders,” in 
the Strategic Studies Institute publication “Learning by Doing: 
The PLA Trains at Home and Abroad,” ed. Roy Kamphausen, 
David Lai, Travis Tanner, November 2012.
165  Greg Hallahan, “Collusion, Creative Bribery, & Subcon­
tracting,” FTI Consulting, October 30, 2014. URL: http://www.
fticonsulting-asia.com/~/media/Files/us-files/insights/articles/
collusion-creative-bribery-subcontracting.pdf. 
166  Franz-Stefan Gady, “China Wants to Reform its Defense 
Industry”; The Diplomat; Asia Defense; accessed 22 Mar 
2018; 10 June 2015; https://the dipl,omat.com/2015/06/chi­
na-wants-to-reform-its-defense-industry/.
167  Joel Wuthnow and Phillip C. Saunders, “Chi­
nese Military Reforms in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, 
Challenges, and Implications; Institute for Nation­
al Strategic Studies (INSS); China Strategic Perspec­
tives; National Defense University; NDU Press; March 
2017; p 36; accessed at  https://books.google.com/
books?id=QXhBxcaomJIC&pg=PA36&lpg=PA36&dq=Chi­
na+and+the+Equipment+Development+DEpartment+EDD&­
source=bl&ots=rR7MjPCjt7&sig=2D4uWqsaMxL4teRPCilro10­
0d6c&hl=nl&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiInO_S6oDaAhXJ_ywKHT­
M7AzUQ6AEIQTAD#v=onepage&q=China%20and%20
the%20Equipment%20Development%20DEpartment%20
EDD&f=false.
168  Yun Zhao, “National Space Law in China”; Brill Nijhoff; 
Leiden Boston; 2015; p 29; accessed at https://books.
google.com/books?id=jgVzBgAAQBAJ&pg=PA29&dq=SAS­
TIND&hl=nl&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjwpPqP74DaAhUJ8ywKHZ­
rjArkQ6AEINDAC#v=onepage&q=SASTIND&f=false.
169  “Xu Qiliang Stresses Quality and Innovation at Military 
Equipment Quality Work Meeting,” Xinhua, May 19, 2015, 
URL: http://politics.people.com.cn/n/2015/0515/c1024-
27008636.html.
170  Greg Levesque and Mark Stokes, “Blurred Lines: Mili­
tary-Civil Fusion and the “Going Out of China’s Defense Indus­
try, Pointe Bello, December 2016; accessed at https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/569925bfe0327c837e2e9a94/t/
593dad0320099e64e1ca92a5/1497214574912/062017_
Pointe+Bello_Military+Civil+Fusion+Report.pdf.
171  MIT News, Peter Dizikes; “Industrial “Edge Cities” 
Have Helped China Grow”; 17 August, 2017; accessed at 
http://news.nit.edu/2017/industrial-edge-cities-helped-chi­
na-grow-0818.
172  Yuecheng Yang; International Association of Science 
Parks and Areas of Innovation (IASP); Paper for the 30th IASP 
World Conference on Science & Technology Parks, 2013; 
“High-tech Zones (Science & Technology Parks) and China’s 
Urbanization; accessed at http://inhalt.com.br/portodigital/
Workshop2SpeakerYuecheng(Yang)CHI.pdf.

120
173  “Thirteenth Five-Year (2016-2020) Plan for National Eco­
nomic and Social Development People’s Republic of China,” 
Chinese language translated; Tone Box excerpts addressing 
major science and technology projects for 2030; March 2016, 
pp. 14, 40, 42, 46, 49, and 58; Accessed 28 July 2016, 
URL: http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2016-03/18/
nw.D110000renmrb_20160318_1-01.htm.
174  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
175  “China’s First Peacekeeping Helicopter Unit Arrives in 
Darfur,” Beijing Xinhua (New China News Agency) (English 
language). August 6, 2017. URL: http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/2017-08/06/c_136503341.htm. 
176  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
177  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
178  Dennis Blasko, “PLA Army ‘Below the Neck’ Reforms: 
Improving China’s Deterrence and Joint Warfighting Posture; 
2017; pp.1-21.
179  English translation of PLA manual “Science of Army Oper­
ations”; May 2011.
180 Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016. 
181  Dennis J Blasko; The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and 
Transformation for the 21st Century; ISBN: 
13:978-0-415-78322-4. 
182  Franz-Stefan Gady, “China Now Has the World’s Largest Ac­
tive Service Tank Force”; The Diplomat; Asia Defense; accessed 26 
July 2018; 15 February 2018; https://the dipl,omat.com/2018/02/
china-now-has-the-worlds-largest-active-service-tank-force/. 
183  Study on Joint Firepower Warfare Theory, Hu Limin, Ying 
Fucheng, Beijing: National  Defense University Press, 2004. 
184  PLA Publication; Science of Army Operations; June 2009.
185  PLA Publication; Science of Army Operations; p. 184, 
185; June 2009.
186  PLA Press publication; Air Defense Strategy and Study; 
November 1999.
187  PLA Publication; Science of Army Operations; p. 142, 
178-180; June 2009.
188  PLA Publication; Science of Army Operations; p. 95; 
June 2009.
189  Mastro, O.S., 2015,  A Global Expeditionary People’s 
Liberation Army: 2025-2030, In R. Kamphausen and D. Lai 
(Eds) The Chinese People’s Liberationa Army in 2025, (pp. 
207-234), Carlisle, PA: U.S. Army War College Press. 
190  Beijing Jiefangjun Bao Online; 15 May 2015 Online Edtion 
of Jiefangjun Bao; Subject: Army Aviation Official Discusses 
Military Modernization; http://www.chinamil.com.cn/.
191  PLA Publication; Science of Army Operations; p. 143; 
June 2009.
192 “Chinese Military Modernization and Force Development: 
Chinese and Outside Perspectives,” Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, July 2014, p.205.
193  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; April 2016. 
194  Center for Strategy and International Studies; July 2014; 
p. 212-216; Chinese Military Modernization and Force Devel­
opment: Chinese and Outside Perspectives.
195  Defense Ministry’s regular press conference on Jan. 29, 
2015; http://english.chinamil.com.cn/news-channels/chi­
na-military-news/2015-01/29/content_6332211.htm. 
196  Dennis Blasko; The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and 
Transformation for the 21st Century , Who is the PLA?, Vol­
ume 1, Edition 2; p. 182; January 2012; ISBN 13: 978-0-415-
78322-4.
197  The “People” in the PLA: Recruitment, Training, and Edu­
cation in China’s Military; p. 124-125; September 2008.
198  China’s Military Strategy White Paper; The State Coun­
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China; 
May 2015, Beijing; http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/chi­
na/2015-05/26/c_134271001.htm.
199  China Daily: China Changes Military Recruitment Period; 
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2013-06/15/con­
tent_16624114.htm.
200  Dennis Blasko; The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and 
Transformation for the 21st Century, Who is the PLA?, Vol­
ume1, Edition 2; p. 59-60; January 2001; ISBN 13: 978-0-
415-78322-4.
201  “China – Navy,” Jane’s; Jane’s World Navies; May 22, 
2017. URL: https://janes.intelink.ic.gov/docs/binder/jwna/
jwna20/jwna0034.htm.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
121
202  “Overview of All China’s White Papers on National De­
fense,” China Ministry of National Defense, May 27, 2015. 
URL: http://eng.mod.gov.cn/TopNews/2015-05/27/con­
tent_4587121.&#65279;htm.
203  “PLA Navy Party Standing Committee Holds Special 
Meeting to Deliberate Upon Issues of Military Operations, Mili­
tary Training, and Force Management,” Beijing Renmin Haijun 
- Report by staff reporters Liang Qingsong, Zhang Qingbao 
(Chinese language), July 17, 2015. 
204  The Chinese term “jinhai fangyu” (近海防御)is sometimes 
translated in English as “near seas defense,” rather than 
“offshore defense.” ONI uses “offshore defense” as do official 
English-language documents of the Chinese government, 
such as the most recent defense white paper, “China’s 
Military Strategy.”
205  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
206  “China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy 
Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress,” Con­
gressional Research Service. November 18, 2005 -- Decem­
ber 13, 2017. URL: https://www.everycrsreport.com/reports/
RL33153.&#65279;html.
207  Office of Naval Intelligence; China’s Navy 2007; Published 
2007; p. 19.
208  Jane’s, “China’s AG600 amphibious aircraft makes maiden 
flight,” January 04, 2018. URL:  https://janes.intelink.ic.gov/
docs/mags/jdw/jdw2018/fg_710922.htm.
209  “AG600 Seaplane Will Conduct Maiden Flight in China – 
May Become a Sharp Weapon to Protect Blue Sea Interests 
after Modifications,” Sina, December 22, 2017, URL: http://
slide.mil.news.sina.com.cn/h/slide_8_38692_59336.html#p=1. 
210  “China’s First Aircraft Carrier Could Be Named ‘Liaoning’ 
After Province,” South China Morning Post Online (English 
language), September 11, 2012. URL: http://www.scmp.
com/news/china/article/1033680/chinas-first-aircraft-carri­
er-could-be-named-liaoning-after-province. 
211  “Defense Ministry Says China’s First Aircraft Carrier Enters 
Service,” Associate Foreign Press, September 25, 2012. URL: 
www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china_19710040. 
212  “Carrier To Firmly Safeguard Nation’s Maritime Rights,” 
Global Times Online in English, December 28, 2016. URL: 
http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1026248.&#65279;shtml.

213  “J-15 Fighter Jets From China’s Liaoning Aircraft Carrier 
Make South China Sea Debut,” South China Morning Post On­
line in English, January 3,2017. URL: http://www.scmp.com/
news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2058888/j-15-fight­
er-jets-chinas-liaoning-aircraft-carrier-make. 
214  “Chinese aircraft carrier formation returns to Qingdao 
after Hong Kong Visit,” The Straits Times, July 16, 2017, 
URL: http://www.straitstimes.&#65279;com/asia/east-asia/
chinese-aircraft-carrier-formation-returns-to-qingdao-af­
ter-hong-kong-visit. 
215  “China launches first home-built aircraft carrier in latest 
display of growing naval power,” South China Morning Post, 
April 26, 2017. URL: http://www.scmp.&#65279;com/news/
china/policies-politics/article/2090723/china-launches-first-
home-built-aircraft-carrier-latest. 
216  “J-15 Fighter Jets From China’s Liaoning Aircraft Carrier 
Make South China Sea Debut,” South China Morning Post On­
line in English, January 3, 2017. URL: http://www.scmp.com/
news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2058888/j-15-fight­
er-jets-chinas-liaoning-aircraft-carrier-make. 
217  Dong, Winton, “China’s Odyssey to Aircraft Carrier,” Shen­
zhen Daily, May 9, 2017. URL: http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2017-05/09/content_7593538.&#65279;htm. 
218  Michael Martina, “China launches first home-built aircraft 
carrier amid South China Sea tension,” Reuters, April 25 
2017, https://www.reuters.&#65279;com/article/us-china-mil­
itary-carrier/china-launches-first-home-built-aircraft-carrier-
amid-south-china-sea-tension-idUSKBN17S06B.
219  “The PLA Navy: New Capabilities and Missions for the 
21st Century,” 2015, Office of Naval Intelligence.
220  China’s Military Strategy White Paper; The State Coun­
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China; 
May 2015, Beijing; http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/chi­
na/2015-05/26/c_134271001.htm.
221  “The PLA Navy: New Capabilities and Missions for the 
21st Century,” 2015, Office of Naval Intelligence.
222  “The PLA Navy: New Capabilities and Missions for the 
21st Century,” 2015, Office of Naval Intelligence.
223  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
224  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; 2018.

122
225  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
226  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
227  James Bussert; China Builds Modern Marine Corps Force; 
April 2016; http://www.afcea.org/content/?q=china-builds-
modern-marine-corps-force.
228  China Country Handbook – 2008, Marine Corps Intelli­
gence Activity, 2008.
229  Cortez Cooper; PLA’s “New Historic Missions:” Expanding 
Capabilities for a Re-emergent Maritime Power; June 2009; 
www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/CT332.html.
230  China’s Military Strategy White Paper; The State Coun­
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China; 
May 2015, Beijing; http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/chi­
na/2015-05/26/c_134271001.htm.
231  China’s Military Strategy White Paper; The State Coun­
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China; 
May 2015, Beijing; http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/chi­
na/2015-05/26/c_134271001.htm.
232  Li Faxin; The PLA Marines; China International Press; 
Published in 2013.
233  Li Faxin; The PLA Marines; China International Press; 
Published in 2013.
234  Li Faxin; The PLA Marines; China International Press; 
Published in 2013.
235  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
236  Blasko, Dennis. “What is Known and Unknown about 
Changes to the PLA’s Ground Units,” Jamestown Foundation, 11 
May 2017. 
237  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
238  Blasko, Dennis. “What is Known and Unknown about Changes 
to the PLA’s Ground Units,” Jamestown Foundation, 11 May 2017.
239  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
240  Li Faxin, The PLA Marines, China International Press; 
Published in 2013
241  China’s PLA Marines: An Emerging Force; www.
the-diplomat.com; The Diplomat; 17 November 2013 and 19 
November 2015.
242  Global Security.org; July 2013 and November 2015; www.
globalsecurity.org/military/world/plan-mc.html.
243  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
244  Office of Naval Intelligence; The PLA Navy: New Capabili­
ties and Missions for the 21st Century; p. 17.
245  Martin Andrew; ZBD05/ZLT05 Advanced Amphibious As­
sault Vehicles; Published September 2009; www.ausairpower.
net/APA-PLA-AAV.html.
246  Army-technology.com; ZBD-05 Amphibious Infantry 
Fighting Vehicle, China; www.army-technolog.com/projects/
zbd-05-amphibious-infantry-fighting-vehicle.
247  Li Faxin; The PLA Marines; China International Press; 
Published in 2013.
248  Li Faxin; The PLA Marines; China International Press; 
Published in 2013.
249 Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; 2018.
250  Mark R. Cozad, Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, “Peo­
ple’s Liberation Army Air Force Operations over Water: Main­
taining Relvance in China’s Changing Security Environment,” 
RAND, 2017.
251  Kevin Pollpeter and Kenneth Allen ed; 26 AUG 2015; DGI; 
The PLA as Organization: Reference Volume v2.0; pp 401.; 
http://www.andrewerickson.com/2015/12/a-classic-refer­
ence-with-renewed-relevance-download-the-pla-as-organiza­
tion-v2-0/.
252  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
253 Franz-Stefan Gady, “Russia Starts Delivery of S-400 
Missile Defense System to China;” The Diplomat; January 22, 
2018. Accessed online 14 Feb 2018: https://thediplomat.
com/2018/01/russia-starts-delivery-of-s-400-missile-defense-
systems-to-china/Russia Starts Delivery of S-400 Missile 
Defense Systems to China.
254  China Defence Today: PLA Reorganises Group Armies 
and Airborne Corps; 4 May 2017; p.1; https://sinode­
fence.&#65279;com/2017/05/04/pla-reorganises-group-
armies-and-airborne-corps.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
123
255  PLA Publication; Science of Army Operations; p. 171; 
June 2009.
256  PLA Publication; Science of Army Operations; p. 171-172; 
June 2009.
257  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; June 2017.
258  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
259  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
260  Jamestown Foundation “The Strategic Support Force: 
China’s Information Warfare Service” by John Costello; Feb 
8, 2016; https://jamestown.org/program/the-strategic-sup­
port-force-chinas-information-warfare-service/.
261  Annual Report to Congress; Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense; May 2017.
262  “National Intelligence Law of the People’s Republic of Chi­
na,” Xinhua, July 14 2017; URL: http://www.xinhuanet.com/
politics/2017-06/28/c_1121222418.&#65279;htm.
263  “Chinese legislation points to new intelligence co-ordinat­
ing system”, Jane’s Intelligence Review, 5 Sept, 2017. 
264  “How China’s Leader Is Building Team For Communist 
Party Congress,” South China Morning Post Online (English 
language), August 7, 2017. URL: http://www.scmp.com/
news/china/policies-politics/article/2104492/how-chinas-lead­
er-building-team-communist-party. 
265  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, April 2016.
266  “China and Northeast Asia.” Jane’s Sentinel Security 
Assessment, August 03, 2015. 
267  “Chinese Whispers – Chinese Intelligence Capabilities.” 
Jane’s Intelligence Review, July 03, 2013. 
268  John Costello, New America Foundation; 9 June 
2016; “Chinese Intelligence Agencies: Reform and Fu­
ture—Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission;” https://www.google.com/
url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=r­
ja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwifnbyJ-oLaAhUCTawKHY­
DXCSwQFggpMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.uscc.
gov%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2FJohn%2520Costel­
lo_Written%2520Testimony060916.&#65279;pdf&usg=AOv­
Vaw2FvqV9y_gvL702OxRktAsa.
269  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016; Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, April 2016.
270  Mark Stokes and Russell Hsiao, “The People’s Liberation 
Army General Political Department: Political Warfare with 
Chinese Characteristics,” Project 2049 Institute, October 14, 
2013. URL: http://project2049.net/publications.&#65279;html.
271  “China Observation Column: Xi Jinping’s Promotion of 
PLA Young Turks,” Tung Fang Jih Pao Online in Chinese, July 
19, 2017, URL: orientaldaily.com.hk.
272  Book, National Defense University Press; Mark A. Stokes; 
2015; The People’s Liberations Army and Contingency Plan­
ning in China; Ch. 6 Employment of National-Level PLA As­
sets in a Contingency: A Cross-Strait Conflict as Case Study. 
Pp 138-139; Compilation of paper writers out of a conference 
on “Contingency Planning, PLA Style”.
273  Joel Wuthnow and Phillip Saunders; Chinese Military 
Reform in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, Challenges, and Im­
plications; March 2017; Source is the Center for the Study of 
Chinese Military Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, 
National Defense University.
274  Peter Mattis, “China reorients strategic military intelli­
gence,” IHS Jane’s Intelligence Review; 2017.
275  Joel Wuthnow and Phillip Saunders; Chinese Military 
Reform in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, Challenges, and Im­
plications; March 2017; Source is the Center for the Study of 
Chinese Military Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, 
National Defense University.
276  Peter Mattis, “China reorients strategic military intelli­
gence,” IHS Jane’s Intelligence Review; 2017.
277  Joel Wuthnow and Phillip Saunders; Chinese Military 
Reform in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, Challenges, and Im­
plications; March 2017; Source is the Center for the Study of 
Chinese Military Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, 
National Defense University.
278  Peter Mattis, “China reorients strategic military intelli­
gence,” IHS Jane’s Intelligence Review; 2017.
279  Captain David A. Payne; Chinese Logistics Modernization; 
July-August 2008; www.alu.army.mil.
280  IBT Pulse Newsletter; China’s Military Researches Corrup­
tion Crackdown Helps, But The PLA’s Problem is Bigger Than 
That; 2015; http://www.ibtimes.com.

124
281  Wendell Minnick; Report: China’s Incomplete Transforma­
tion; 11 Feb 2015; http://www.defensenews.com.
282  CMC press conference on CMC organ reshuffle; http://
eng.mod.gov.cn/TopNews/2016-01/12/content_4636291.htm.
283  Association for Asian Research; Chinese Military Logistics, 
The GLD System; 4 Nov 2004; http://www.asianresearch.org/
articles/2354.html.
284  Zhang Tao, editor, “China established Joint Logistic 
Support Force,” China Military Online, September 13, 2016, 
URL: http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2016-09/13/con­
tent_7256651.&#65279;htm.
285  China Military Online: Defense Ministry’s News Confer­
ence on Joint Logistic Support System Reform; 14 SEP 
2016; http://english.chinamil.com.cn/view/2016-09/14/con­
tent_7258622.htm.
286  China Military Online; 13 SEP 2016; China Establishes 
Joint Logistics Support Force; http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2016-09/13/content_7256651.htm.
287  Kevin McCauley; 15 February 2018; “China’s Military 
Reforms and Modernization: Implications for the United States—
Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission;” https://www.uscc.gov/Hearings/chinas-mili­
tary-reforms-and-modernization-implications-united-states.
288  Sun Xingwei, Yan Shanpeng, “A Big Step in the Devel­
opment of PLA’s New Strategic Projection Force”, Zhongguo 
Guofang Bao,  August 15, 2017, URL: http://www.mod.gov.
cn/mobilization/2017-08/15/content_4788860.&#65279;htm.
289  Gao Zhiwen, “Civil-Military Integration Will Quickly Ad­
vance the Development of Strategic Projection Capability,” 
Jiefangjun Bao, September 06, 2016, URL: http://www.81.cn/
jfjbmap/content/2016‐09/05/content_155683.htm.
290  China Politics and Policy; China Routes Rmb5tn 
Into Transport Infrastructure; https://www.ft.com/con­
tent/14926948-172b-11e6-b197-a4af20d5575e.
291  Development Research Center of the State Council of 
the People’s Republic of China; Excerpt of Research On The 
Structure And Efficiency Of Traffic and Transportation Inter-cit­
ies in China; 23 Oct 2014; http://en.drc.gov.cn/2014-10/23/
content_18792589.htm.
292  The Economist; The Flow Of Things; 12 July 2014; http://
www.economist.com/news/china/21606899-export-superpow­
er-china-suffers-surprisingly-inefficient-logistics-flow-things.
293  Armored Infantrymen Conduct Training in Frigid Environ­
ment; 15 FEB 2016; http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/news-chan­
nels/2016-02/15/content_6909279.htm.
294  Railway Technology; The World’s 10 Longest Railway 
Networks; 2014; http://www.railway-technology.com/features/
featurethe-worlds-longest-railway-networks-4180878.
295  China looks to the future with major highway; Oct 2011; 
World Highways; China Looks to the Future with Major 
Highway Plans; http://www.worldhighways.com/sections/
world-reports/features/china-looks-to-the-future-with-major-
highway-plans.
296  DHL; Logistics in China; https://www.dhl-discoverlogis­
tics.com/cms/en/course/trends/asia/china.jsp.
297  Development Research Center of the State Council of 
the People’s Republic of China; Excerpt of Research On The 
Structure And Efficiency Of Traffic and Transportation Inter-cit­
ies in China; 23 Oct 2014; http://en.drc.gov.cn/2014-10/23/
content_18792589.htm.
298  China looks to the future with major highway; World 
Highways; China Looks to the Future with Major Highway 
Plans; Oct 2011; http://www.worldhighways.com/sections/
world-reports/features/china-looks-to-the-future-with-major-
highway-plans.
299  Global Times; China Passes New Law On National 
Defense Transport; 4 Sep 2016; http://www.globaltimes.cn/
content/4466.shtml.
300  Huffington Post; Excerpt of Here’s What You Need To 
Know About the South China Sea Disputes; 26 Feb 2016; 
www.huffingtonpost.com.
301  China Daily: China Spends 500 Mln Yuan to Support Pub­
lic Private Partnerships; 5 Oct 2016; http://www.chinadailya­
sia.com/business/2016-10/05/content_15506276.html china 
spends US$75 to support PPP.
302  China Military Online: China Passes New Law on National 
Defense Transport; 3 Sep 2016; http://english.chinamil.com.
cn/view/2016-09/03/content_7241207.htm.
303  China Military Online: China Passes New Law on National 
Defense Transport; 3 Sep 2016; http://english.chinamil.com.
cn/view/2016-09/03/content_7241207.htm.
304  Weifeng Zhou; China Growing Assertiveness In The South 
China Sea; 11 May 2015; http://www.realinstitutoelcano.
org/wps/portal/web/rielcano_en/contenido?WCM_GLOB­
AL_CONTEXT=/elcano/elcano_in/zonas_in/asia-pacific/ari60-
2015-chinas-growing-assertiveness-in-the-south-china-sea.
305  The Straits Times; Chinese Firms Pump $20B Into Silk 
Road Projects; 24 Jun 2016; http://www.straittimes.com/asia/
east-asia/chinese-firms-pump-20b-into-silk-road-projects.

CHINA MILITARY POWER
Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win
D E F E N S E  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A G E N C Y
125
306  Center for Security Studies in Security Policy, One Belt, 
One Road: China’s Vision of Connectivity; Sep 2016; www.
css.ethz.ch/en/center.
307  Puppet Masters; China’s One Belt, One Road: The Dawn 
Of A New Eurasian Country; 4 Oct 2016; https://www.sott.
net/article/330133-Chinas-One-Belt-One-Road-The-dawn-of-
a-New-Eurasian-Century.
308 “Russia Delivers First S-400 Missile Defense Regiment to 
China,” The Diplomat, April 3, 2018, URL: www.thediplomat.
com/2018/04/russia-delivers-1st-s-400-missile-defense-regi­
ment-to-china/; DOI 3 April 2018; Accessed 1 November 2018.
309  “China Confirms Deployment of New Light Tank,” The 
Diplomat, October 12, 2017, URL: https://thediplomat.
com/2017/06/china-confirms-deployment-of-new-light-tank/; 
Accessed 9 May 2018. 
310  Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Develop­
ments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, 2018.
311  “Pakistan Navy Fast Attack Craft (Missile Boat) Cere­
mony Held at Karachi Shipyard,” Times of Islamabad Online 
in English, December 29, 2016. URL: https://timesofislam­
abad.&#65279;com/29-Dec-2016/pakistan-navy-fast-attack-
craft-missile-boat-ceremony-held-at-karchi-shipyard. 
312  Qian Feng, “Sub Sales No Cause for Worry in India” Bei­
jing Global Times Online, October 15, 2015. URL: http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/947437.&#65279;shtml.
313  “Pakistan: PAF adds 16 more JF-17 Thunder jets,” Islam­
abad The News Online in English, February 16, 2017. URL: 
https://www.thenews.com.&#65279;pk/latest/186724-PAF-
adds-16-more-JF-17-Thunder-jets.
314  Qian Feng, “Sub Sales No Cause for Worry in India” Bei­
jing Global Times Online, October 15, 2015. URL: http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/947437.&#65279;shtml.
315  “Pakistan: China to Supply Pakistan with Eight New At­
tack Submarines,” The Express Tribune, Pakistan, August 31, 
2016. URL: https://tribune.com.&#65279;pk/story/1173324/
china-supply-pakistan-eight-new-attack-submarines/.
316  “China: A Rising Drone Weapons Dealer to the 
World,” CNBC, March 05, 2016, URL:  http://www.cnbc.
com/2016/03/03/china-a-rising-drone-weapons-dealer-to-
the-world.html.
317 Government document, U.S. Department of State; World­
wide Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers 2017; Table III; 
https://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/wmeat/2017/index.htm; 
Accessed 26 JUN 2018.
318 Government document, U.S. Department of State; 
Worldwide Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers 2016; Ta­
ble III; https://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/wmeat/2016/index.
htm; Accessed 26 JUN 2018.
319 Government document, U.S. Department of State; World­
wide Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers 2015; Table III; 
https://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/wmeat/2015/index.htm; 
Accessed 26 JUN 2018.
320 Government document, U.S. Department of State; World­
wide Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers 2014; Table III; 
https://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/wmeat/2014/index.htm; 
Accessed 26 JUN 2018.
321 Government document, U.S. Department of State; World­
wide Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers 2013; Table III; 
https://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/wmeat/2013/index.htm; 
Accessed 26 JUN 2018.
322 Government document, U.S. Department of State; World­
wide Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers 2012; Table III; 
https://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/wmeat/2012/index.htm; 
Accessed 26 JUN 2018.
323 Government document, U.S. Department of State; World­
wide Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers 2005; Table III; 
https://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/wmeat/2005/index.htm; 
Accessed 26 JUN 2018.
324 News Article, Jane’s World Air Forces; 05 SEP 2017; Uz­
bekistan - Air Force; https://janes.intelink.ic.gov/docs/binder/
jwaf/jwaf48/jwafa302.htm, Accessed28 JUN 2018.
325 News Article, Jane’s World Armies; 25 OCT 2017; Turk­
menistan - Army; https://janes.intelink.ic.gov/docs/binder/
jwar/jwar44/jwara254.htm, Accessed 28 JUN 2018.
326 News Article, Jane’s World Armies; 01 JUN 2018; Belarus 
- Army; https://janes.intelink.ic.gov/docs/binder/jwar/jwar44/
jwara113.htm, Accessed 28 JUN 2018.
327 News Article, Jane’s World Armies; 06 APR 2018; Senegal 
- Army; https://janes.intelink.ic.gov/docs/binder/jwar/jwar44/
jwara229.htm, Accessed 28 JUN 2018.
328 News Article, Jane’s World Air Forces; 04 DEC 2017; Ka­
zakhstan - Air Force; https://janes.intelink.ic.gov/docs/binder/
jwaf/jwaf48/jwafa148.htm, Accessed 28 JUN 2018.

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

WWW.DIA.MIL