





OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNUAL REPORT 
TO CONGRESS 
 
Military and Security Developments 
Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office of the Secretary of Defense 
 
 
 
Preparation of this report cost the Department of 
Defense a total of approximately $108,000 in 
Fiscal Years 2017-2018. This includes $13,000 in 
expenses and $95,000 in DoD labor. 
 
Generated on 2018 May 16 
RefID: 8-0F67E5F

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual Report to Congress: 
Military and Security Developments Involving 
the People’s Republic of China 2018 
A Report to Congress Pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2000 
 
 
Section 1261, “Annual Report on Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic 
of China,” of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, Public Law 115-91, which 
amends the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, Section 1202, Public Law 106- 
65, provides that the Secretary of Defense shall submit a report “in both classified and unclassified 
form, on military and security developments involving the People’s Republic of China. The report 
shall address the current and probable future course of military-technological development of the 
People’s Liberation Army and the tenets and probable development of Chinese security strategy and 
military strategy, and of the military organizations and operational concepts supporting such 
development over the next 20 years. The report shall also address United States-China engagement 
and cooperation on security matters during the period covered by the report, including through United 
States-China military-to-military contacts, and the United States strategy for such engagement and 
cooperation in the future.”

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
WHAT IS CHINA’S STRATEGY? 
Since 2002, Chinese leaders – including 
President Xi Jinping – have characterized the 
21st century’s initial two decades as a “period of 
strategic opportunity.” They assess that 
international conditions during this time will 
facilitate domestic development and the 
expansion of China’s “comprehensive national 
power.” The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) 
has distilled these objectives into President Xi’s 
“China Dream of national rejuvenation” to 
establish a powerful and prosperous China. 
GROWING REGIONAL AND 
GLOBAL PRESENCE 
China’s leaders increasingly seek to leverage 
China’s growing economic, diplomatic, and 
military clout to establish regional preeminence 
and expand the country’s international 
influence. “One Belt, One Road,” now 
renamed the “Belt and Road Initiative” (BRI), 
is intended to develop strong economic ties 
with other countries, shape their interests to 
align with China’s, and deter confrontation or 
criticism of China’s approach to sensitive 
issues. Countries participating in BRI could 
develop economic dependence on Chinese 
capital, which China could leverage to achieve 
its interests. For example, in July 2017, Sri 
Lanka and a Chinese state-owned enterprise 
(SOE) signed a 99-year lease for Hambantota 
Port, following similar deals in Piraeus, Greece, 
and Darwin, Australia. 
A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH 
TO MANAGING REGIONAL 
DISPUTES 
China seeks to secure its objectives without 
jeopardizing the regional stability that remains 
critical to the economic development that has 
helped the CCP maintain its monopoly on 
power. However, China is also willing to 
employ coercive measures – both military and 
non-military – to advance its interests and 
mitigate opposition from other countries. For 
example, in 2017, China used economic and 
diplomatic pressure, unsuccessfully, in an 
attempt to urge South Korea to reconsider the 
deployment of the Terminal High-Altitude 
Area Defense (THAAD) system. 
In its regional territorial and maritime disputes, 
China continued construction of outposts in 
the Spratly Islands, but also continued outreach 
to South China Sea claimants to further its goal 
of effectively controlling disputed areas. China 
also maintained a consistent coast guard 
presence in the Senkakus. In June 2017, India 
halted China’s efforts to extend a road in 
territory disputed with Bhutan near the India 
border, resulting in a protracted standoff lasting 
more than 70 days. In August, India and China 
agreed to withdraw their military forces from 
the vicinity of the standoff; however, both 
countries maintain a heightened military 
presence in the surrounding region. 
 
 
 
 
i

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
BUILDING A MORE CAPABLE 
PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY 
In support of the goal to establish a powerful 
and prosperous China, the “China Dream” 
includes a commitment to developing military 
power commensurate with that of a great 
power. Chinese military strategy documents 
highlight the requirement for a People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) able to secure Chinese 
national interests overseas, including a growing 
emphasis on the importance of the maritime 
and information domains, offensive air 
operations, long-distance mobility operations, 
and space and cyber operations. 
The 
PLA 
is 
undergoing 
the 
most 
comprehensive restructure in its history to 
become a force capable of conducting complex 
joint operations. The PLA strives to be capable 
of fighting and winning “informatized local 
wars” – regional conflicts defined by real-time, 
data-networked command and control, and 
precision strike. Reforms seek to streamline 
command and control structures and improve 
jointness at all levels. Personnel cuts likely 
targeted non-combat personnel and rebalanced 
the preponderance of forces away from the 
PLA Army (PLAA). 
Training continued to focus on executing 
large-scale, complex joint operations. This 
included increasing exercise realism by 
evaluating unit performance during force-on- 
force 
confrontations 
against 
dedicated 
opposing-force units, strengthening strategic 
campaign training, and executing 
long-distance 
maneuvers and mobility operations. The CCP 
also continued vigorous efforts to root out 
corruption in the armed forces. 
China’s leaders continued to advance an 
ambitious 
military 
modernization 
and 
organizational reform agenda to achieve those 
requirements. China’s military modernization 
targets capabilities with the potential to 
degrade 
core 
U.S. 
operational 
and 
technological advantages. To support this 
modernization, China uses a variety of 
methods to acquire foreign military and dual- 
use technologies, including targeted foreign 
direct investment, cyber theft, and 
exploitation 
of private Chinese nationals’ access to these 
technologies. 
Several 
recent 
cases 
and 
indictments 
illustrate 
China’s 
use 
of 
intelligence services, computer intrusions, and 
other illicit approaches to obtain national 
security and export-restricted technologies, 
controlled equipment, and other materials. 
Additionally, as China’s global footprint and 
international interests have grown, its military 
modernization program has become more 
focused on investments and infrastructure to 
support a range of missions beyond China’s 
periphery, including power projection, sea lane 
security, 
counterpiracy, 
peacekeeping, 
humanitarian 
assistance/disaster 
relief 
(HA/DR), and noncombatant evacuation 
operations. In August 2017, China officially 
opened its first overseas military base in 
Djibouti, deploying a company of marines and 
equipment to the base. China likely will seek to 
 
ii

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
establish additional military logistics facilities in 
countries with which it has longstanding, 
friendly relationships. 
CONTINUED POLITICAL AND 
SECURITY PREPARATIONS 
VIS-A-VIS TAIWAN 
China’s 
overall 
strategy 
continues 
to 
incorporate elements of both persuasion and 
coercion to hinder the development of political 
attitudes in Taiwan favoring independence. 
Taiwan lost an additional diplomatic partner 
in 
2017, 
and 
international 
fora 
denied 
participation or observership to representatives 
from Taiwan. While China advocates for 
peaceful reunification with Taiwan, China has 
never repudiated the use of military force, and 
continues to develop and deploy advanced 
military capabilities needed for a potential 
military campaign. Taiwan’s 2017 National 
Defense Report cited concerns that increased 
PLA military activity near Taiwan pose an 
“enormous threat to security in the Taiwan 
Strait.” 
THE U.S.-CHINA BILATERAL 
DEFENSE RELATIONSHIP IN 
CONTEXT 
The 2017 National Security Strategy, the 2018 
National Defense Strategy, and the 2018 Nuclear 
Posture Review  recognize  the  growing  trend  of 
military competition in a dynamic security 
environment. The United States will continue 
to seek areas of cooperation with competitors, 
while preserving the ability to compete 
successfully from a position of strength. The 
United States seeks a constructive and results- 
oriented relationship with China. U.S. defense 
contacts and exchanges conducted in 2017 
were designed to support overall U.S. policy 
and strategy toward China. They are carefully 
tailored to clarify and develop areas of 
cooperation where it is in our mutual interest 
and to manage and reduce risk; contacts are 
also conducted in accordance with the 
statutory limitations of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000. 
While the Department of Defense engages 
substantively with the People’s Liberation 
Army, DoD will also continue to monitor and 
adapt to China’s evolving military strategy, 
doctrine, 
and 
force 
development, 
and 
encourage China to be more transparent about 
its military modernization. The United States 
will adapt its forces, posture, investments, and 
operational concepts to ensure it retains the 
ability to defend the homeland, deter 
aggression, protect our allies and partners, and 
preserve regional peace, prosperity, and 
freedom. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
i 
Chapter 1: Annual Update 
1 
Chapter 2:  Understanding China’s Strategy 
43 
Chapter 3:  Force Modernization Goals and Trends 
59 
Chapter 4:  Resources for Force Modernization 
81 
Chapter 5:  Force Modernization for a Taiwan Contingency 
93 
Chapter 6:  U.S.-China Military-to-Military Contacts 
105 
SPECIAL TOPIC:  CHINA’S EXPANDING GLOBAL INFLUENCE 
111 
SPECIAL TOPIC:  CHINA’S APPROACH TO NORTH KOREA 
113 
SPECIAL TOPIC:  PLA PROGRESS IN BECOMING A JOINT FORCE 
115 
SPECIAL TOPIC:  OVERWATER BOMBER OPERATIONS 
118 
SPECIAL TOPIC:  XI JINPING’S INNOVATION-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 121 
Appendix I:  CHINA AND TAIWAN FORCES DATA 
123 
Appendix II: MILITARY-TO-MILITARY EXCHANGES 
126 
Appendix III: ACRONYMS 
128

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page left intentionally blank

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
1 
ANNUAL UPDATE

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
1 
 
 
 
This chapter highlights new features in this 
year’s report and summarizes significant 
developments in China’s military and security 
activities over the past year with an emphasis 
on developments highlighted in section 1246 
of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2010 (P.L. 111-84). 
NEW IN THE REPORT FOR 2017 
Key takeaways in each chapter summarize 
trends and provide snapshots of notable events 
in 2017. 
New special topics, located at the back of 
the 
report, address key developments that have 
military and security implications for the 
United States: 
> In Special Topic: China’s Expanding 
Global Influence, China intends to use the 
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) to develop 
strong economic ties with other countries, 
shape their interests to align with China’s, 
and deter confrontation or criticism of 
China’s approach to sensitive issues. Some 
countries participating in BRI could develop 
economic dependencies from over-relying 
on Chinese capital. Some BRI investments 
could advance potential military advantages 
for China. 
> In Special Topic: China’s Approach to 
North Korea, China’s relationship with 
North Korea has reached the lowest level   
in decades. China continues to advocate   
for a dual track approach towards North 
Korea   that   embraces   both   dialogue  and 
pressure, believing that pressure alone is 
insufficient to compel North Korea to 
change 
its 
behavior. 
The 
PLA 
is                 
also working to strengthen its ability to 
conduct 
joint 
operations 
near 
the       
Korean Peninsula, with particular emphasis 
on border defense. 
> In Special Topic: PLA Progress in 
Becoming a Joint Force, reforms seek to 
enhance the PLA’s ability to conduct joint 
operations; improve its ability to fight 
short-duration, 
high-intensity 
regional 
conflicts at greater distances from the 
Chinese mainland; and strengthen the 
CCP’s control over the military. 
> In Special Topic: Overwater Bomber 
Operations, the PLA has been developing 
strike capabilities to engage targets as far 
away from China as possible. Over the last 
three years, the PLA has rapidly expanded 
its overwater bomber operating areas, 
gaining experience in critical maritime 
regions and likely training for strikes against 
U.S. and allied targets. 
> In 
Special 
Topic: 
Xi 
Jinping’s  
Innovation-Driven 
Development 
Strategy, 
President 
Xi 
Jinping 
has 
emphasized the importance of science and 
technology (S&T) innovation, both for 
rejuvenating 
China 
and 
modernizing 
China’s military. S&T advances in the 
commercial 
sector 
are 
increasingly 
influencing     China’s     future     military

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
2 
 
 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

The PLA is undergoing the most 
comprehensive force restructuring in its 
history. 

Reforms intend to enable lower echelon 
units to more independently execute combat 
missions. 

Personnel cuts likely targeted non-combat 
personnel and rebalanced the preponderance 
of forces away from the PLA Army (PLAA). 
 
modernization as Xi pushes greater 
military-civilian collaboration. 
DEVELOPMENTS IN MILITARY 
STRUCTURE, DOCTRINE, AND 
TRAINING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STRUCTURAL REFORM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
PLA 
is 
undergoing 
the 
most 
comprehensive restructuring of forces in its 
history   to   fundamentally   change   the  way 
Chinese forces fight. Reforms seek to reinforce 
the CCP’s control of the military, improve the 
PLA’s ability to perform joint operations, 
increase combat effectiveness, and curb 
corruption. 
In late 2015, President Xi kicked off reforms 
with a series of changes to improve 
leadership, 
administration, 
and 
command 
of 
joint 
operations across the PLA by 2020. In 2017, 
additional 
reforms 
emphasized 
the 
restructuring of PLA forces and included: 
> Streamlining the Central Military Commission 
(CMC). 
In 
October 
2017, 
China 
restructured 
the 
CMC, 
reducing 
its 
membership from 11 to 7. The changes 
further streamlined command and control 
through the Joint Staff Department (JSD), 
and further elevated anticorruption work, 
by adding the head of the Discipline 
Inspection Commission to the CMC. 
> Cultivating 
Theater 
Commands. 
After 
establishing five theater commands in  
2016, the PLA continues to enhance  
theater command roles and operations. 
Theater 
commands 
appear 
to 
have  
assumed more operational control from  
the services, and probably commanded the 
PLA’s responses to North Korea, India, 
and activities in the South China Sea. After 
unveiling the PLA’s newly established  
CMC Joint Operations Command Center 
(JOCC) in 2016, the PLA established 
theater JOCCs. Like the CMC JOCC, each 
theater  JOCC  is  probably  staffed by  the 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

China’s leaders continued to advance an 
ambitious agenda of military modernization 
and organizational reforms. 

The PLA seeks to transform itself into a 
force capable of conducting advanced joint 
operations and fighting and winning 
“informatized local wars” – regional conflicts 
defined by real-time, data-networked 
command and control, and precision strike.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
3 
 
 
 
Army, Navy, Air Force, and Rocket Force 
and equipped with a joint command system. 
The PLA also appointed its first Navy and 
Air Force theater commanders in the 
Southern and Central Theater, respectively. 
The appointment of Vice Admiral Yuan 
Yubai to the post of commander of the 
PLA’s 
Southern 
Theater 
and 
the 
appointment of General Yi Xiaoguang to 
the post of commander of the Central 
Theater – the first PLA Navy (PLAN), PLA 
Air Force (PLAAF), and non-PLAA 
officers to assume such a position – signals 
the PLA’s commitment to implementing 
genuine jointness as a central tenet of 
ongoing reforms. 
> Building the Joint  Logistics  Support  Force 
(JLSF). The creation of the JLSF represents 
a significant step towards China’s goal of 
developing a modern logistics structure. 
The integration of civilian-controlled assets 
for military operations and exercises 
increased, most notably with civilian ground 
transportation assets and civilian ships 
supporting joint exercises and civilian 
logistics firms providing supplies to mitigate 
logistics shortfalls. The JLSF also provided 
rapid supply support to HA/DR operations 
following 
the 
August 
2017 
Sichuan 
earthquake. 
> Flattening to Brigade Structure. In April 2017, 
the PLA began restructuring its corps-level 
and 
below 
units, 
renaming 
and  
restructuring   many  units  across  the  PLA. 
Most notably, the PLAA’s 18 group armies 
were reorganized into 13 renamed group 
armies, dissolving 5 group armies and 
transitioning most of the units subordinate 
to the group armies into brigades. The 
PLAAF is also converting its fighter and 
ground attack divisions into brigades 
subordinate to air bases, and the PLAN is 
creating brigade-level frigate flotillas. The 
PLA probably expects that a more 
consistent brigade structure across the 
force will improve joint combat capabilities. 
> Demobilizing Personnel. In 2017, the PLA 
largely completed cuts to reduce its force  
by 300,000 personnel. These cuts probably 
focused on non-combat personnel, such as 
those in arts and culture, administrative 
duties, or academic work, rather than the 
de-mobilization of combat personnel from 
dissolved group armies. China’s official 
media 
also 
reported 
the 
cuts 
are  
rebalancing the proportion of forces among 
the 
services, 
increasing 
the 
relative            
size of the PLAN and PLAAF and  
reducing PLAA personnel to less than half 
of the PLA. The number of active-duty 
personnel in non-combat units was likely 
cut in half, and almost one-third of officers 
were also cut. 
The PLA continues to build towards an 
expeditionary capability by increasing the 
number of army aviation and marine units. 
These changes will require significant revisions

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
4 
 
 
 
to PLA doctrine in the coming years to meet 
the PLA’s modernization goals for 2020. 
The People’s Armed Police (PAP) may also 
undergo a comprehensive restructuring of its 
forces, after coming under the sole authority of 
the CCP’s CMC at the end of 2017. The PAP 
previously  was  subject  to  the  dual authorities 
of the CMC and the People’s Republic of 
China’s (PRC) State Council.

5 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S MILITARY LEADERSHIP 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The PLA’s highest decision-making body, the CMC, is a CCP Central Committee department. 
 
 Following the 19th Party Congress, the Central Military Commission composition and membership 
changed. 
 
The military’s highest decision-making body, the CMC, is technically a department of the CCP Central 
Committee. The CMC Chairman is a civilian, usually serving concurrently as the General Secretary of the CCP 
and President of China. From 2004 until the PLA reforms initiated in 2015, the ex officio membership of the 
CMC included several vice chairs, the Minister of National Defense – a position functionally unlike the U.S. 
Secretary of Defense – the three service commanders, and the directors of the four general headquarters 
departments. Following 2017’s 19th Party Congress, the CCP’s leadership transition held every five years, the 
CMC underwent further changes. The new membership consists of two vice chairs, retains only two of the four 
previous departments represented, and adds the head of the Discipline Inspection Commission and the Minister 
of National Defense. 
Members of the CCP Central Military Commission 
 
Chairman Xi Jinping’s appointment as Party General Secretary and CMC Chairman in 2012, and his selection 
as President in the spring of 2013, represented the first simultaneous transfer of all three of China’s top 
positions to an incoming leader in recent decades. Xi was reappointed to his Party positions at the 19th Party 
Congress and is expected to be reappointed president in spring 2018. In 2016, Xi was announced as the 
commander-in-chief of the CMC’s Joint Operations Command Center and was named “core” leader of the 
CCP Central Committee. Prior to becoming CMC Chairman, Xi served as the CMC’s only civilian Vice 
Chairman under Hu Jintao. Xi’s father was an important military figure during China’s communist revolution 
and was a Politburo member in the 1980s. The younger Xi served as an aide to a defense minister early in his 
career and had regular interactions with the PLA as a provincial Party official. In meetings with U.S. officials, 
Xi has emphasized improving military-to-military relations between China and the United 
States. 
Vice Chairman Xu Qiliang is the first career air force officer to be appointed China’s top uniformed official. 
He is a public advocate for reform and guides the effort as a deputy secretary of the CMC’s reform leading 
group. Xu previously served on the CMC as PLAAF commander, where he oversaw rapid force modernization 
and expanded the PLAAF’s foreign engagement. He may have crossed paths with Xi Jinping earlier in their 
careers when both men served in Fujian Province. Xu was the first PLAAF officer to serve as deputy chief of 
the General Staff Department since the Cultural Revolution period, and – at 54 years of age at the time – the 
youngest in PLA history. Xu is serving a third term as a CMC member.

6 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vice Chairman Zhang Youxia is China’s second most senior officer and former head of the Equipment 
Development Department (EDD). He gained rare experience as a combat commander during China’s brief 
war with Vietnam in 1979. Zhang formerly commanded the Shenyang Military Region (MR), which shared a 
border with North Korea and Russia. Zhang is one of China’s military “princelings.” His father, a well-known 
military figure in China, served with Xi Jinping’s father at the close of China’s Civil War in 1949. Zhang is 
currently serving his second term on the CMC. 
Minister of National Defense Wei Fenghe was appointed Minister of National Defense at the National 
People’s Congress in March 2018. The Minister of National Defense is the PLA’s third most senior officer and 
manages its relationship with state bureaucracies and foreign militaries. Unlike the U.S. Secretary of Defense, 
he is not part of the chain of command and his primary policy influence is derived from membership in the 
CMC. Wei served in multiple missile bases across different military regions and held top posts in the 
headquarters of the former PLA Second Artillery Force, the PLA Rocket Force’s (PLARF) predecessor, before 
being promoted in late 2010 to Deputy Chief of the General Staff – the first officer from the Second Artillery 
to do so.  Wei most recently was the PLARF commander. Wei is serving a second term as a CMC 
member. 
JSD Chief Li Zuocheng oversees PLA operations, a narrowing of the wider responsibilities held by the former 
General Staff Department prior to reforms initiated in 2015. Li is one of few remaining active duty PLA officers 
with combat experience and is recognized as a combat hero for his service in China’s border war with Vietnam. 
He was also the first Army commander after the PLAA became a separate service in 2016. Li previously 
commanded the Chengdu MR, which was responsible for the sensitive area of Tibet. 
Political Work Department Director Miao Hua oversees the PLA’s political work including propaganda, 
organization, and education. Miao is a former PLAA officer who switched services to the PLAN in December 
2014 when he became political commissar of the PLAN. Miao may have ties to Xi from his time serving in the 
31st group army in Fujian Province, when his career overlapped with Xi’s. Miao also recently participated as 
the PLAN political commissar during the PLAN Belt and Road Initiative cruise conducted in mid-2017. 
Discipline Inspection Commission Secretary Zhang Shengmin oversees the highest-level organization 
responsible for investigating military violations of Party discipline. He is also a deputy secretary and third- 
ranking member on the standing committee of the Party’s Discipline Inspection Commission. Zhang’s 
appointments indicate that the anticorruption campaign will receive a higher profile in the military going 
forward. Shortly after his appointment to the CMC, Zhang was promoted to the rank of general, the highest 
rank in the Chinese military.

7 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
MILITARY STRATEGY AND 
DOCTRINE 
KEY TAKEAWAY 
 Recent military strategy documents highlight 
a requirement to secure expanding Chinese 
national interests overseas. 
China’s military strategy, as outlined in its 2015 
White Paper of the same name and further 
delineated in the latest iteration of the PLA 
National Defense University’s “Science of 
Strategy,” is to build strong, combat-effective 
armed forces capable of winning regional 
conflicts 
employing 
integrated, 
real-time 
command and control networks. In early 2017, 
China promulgated a “White Paper on China’s 
Policies on Asia Pacific Security 
Cooperation,” 
placing this strategy in the context of China’s 
development interests. It stresses the need for 
a PLA able to conduct expeditionary 
operations and other activities to defend and 
secure growing Chinese national interests 
overseas from “destabilizing and uncertain 
factors.” 
> The 2015 White Paper also echoed themes 
from previous publications, reflecting a 
growing emphasis on the importance of the 
maritime domain, the PLAAF’s shift 
towards more offensive operations, PLAA 
long-distance mobility operations, and the 
need for superiority in the information 
domain, including through space and cyber 
operations. 
> PLA  doctrine  for  implementing  this  
strategy is evolving with ongoing PLA 
reforms, and updated doctrine is likely in 
development and could be promulgated 
within the next few years. In 2017, the PLA 
began 
implementing 
revised 
Military 
Training Regulations and a new Outline of 
Military Training, focusing on realistic 
training 
for 
modern 
warfare 
and 
preparations for joint combat operations. 
MILITARY EXERCISES AND 
TRAINING 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The PLA trained to execute large-scale, 
complex joint operations by increasing 
realism and including dedicated opposition- 
force training, maneuver, and mobility. 
 The PLA conducted its largest exercise of 
the year at Zhurihe in conjunction with the 
military parade for the PLA’s 90th 
anniversary; Xi Jinping observed both. 
 Theater command exercises focused on 
multi-service command and control, while 
exercises STRIDE 2017 and FIREPOWER 
2017 tested brigade-level capabilities and 
readiness. 
In 2017, the PLA continued to focus training 
to 
execute 
large-scale, 
complex 
joint 
operations. This included increasing the 
realism of exercises by evaluating PLA unit 
performance 
during 
force-on-force 
confrontations   against   dedicated   opposing-

8 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
force units, strengthening strategic campaign 
training, 
and 
executing 
long-distance 
maneuvers and mobility operations. 
> The PLA conducted its largest exercise of 
the year at Zhurihe in conjunction with the 
military parade for the PLA’s 90th 
anniversary. President Xi Jinping observed 
large-scale war games involving land forces, 
aviation forces, the Rocket Force, and 
strategic support units, such as cyber and 
electronic warfare (EW) units. The PLAN 
also conducted a possibly related significant 
live-fire opposition-force exercise in late 
July in the Yellow Sea. 
> Since 2016, the PLA theater commands 
organized joint exercises to improve multi- 
service command and control over their 
subordinate forces. Exercises in 2017 
occurred between August to December, 
with 
the 
Southern 
Theater 
exercise 
emphasizing coordination of air and ground 
operations and the Eastern Theater training 
to incorporate ISR data from multiple 
services. In the Southern Theater exercise, 
PLAAF 
fighters 
and 
Army 
attack 
helicopters received targeting information 
from joint air firepower guidance teams. 
> STRIDE 2017 was unique as the PLA held 
only one iteration, rather than the five 
iterations held in 2016. STRIDE 2017 
featured a newly formed combined arms 
brigade participating for the first time and 
focused on testing the new brigade’s 
readiness,   combat   capabilities,   and   on 
developing subsequent training for other 
PLA combined arms brigades. 
> FIREPOWER 2017 continued the series’ 
focus on air defense and artillery skills. In 
two iterations, one air defense brigade and 
one 
artillery 
brigade 
trained 
against 
simulated opposition forces. The last 
iteration consisted of a special operations 
force 
(SOF) 
vs. 
SOF 
brigade-level 
confrontation        exercise. 
The 
FIREPOWER exercises also tested the 
brigades’ 
capabilities 
following 
organizational changes under PLA reforms 
and subsequent development of new 
training. 
> In early August 2017, the PLA held a large- 
scale, 
multi-fleet 
live-fire 
exercise 
simultaneously in the Yellow Sea and Bo 
Hai, with naval ships, submarines, aircraft 
and coastal defense units, as well as PLAAF 
participation. Both exercises were possibly 
tied to tensions on the Korean Peninsula. 
The PLA also conducted significant training 
events not tied to serialized annual exercises, 
including the following notable operations at 
sea: 
> In late 2016 and early 2017, the PLAN’s 
aircraft carrier Liaoning and escort ships 
deployed to the South China Sea where the 
carrier conducted flight operations and task 
force operations that included transits of 
the Taiwan Strait and through the 
Philippine Sea. In July 2017, Liaoning made

9 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
a highly publicized port visit to Hong Kong 
and was open for public tours along with 
carrying 
out 
flight 
operations 
while 
underway. These deployments represent key 
developments in the PLAN’s growing 
confidence 
in 
its 
sea-based 
aviation 
capabilities. 
> In February 2017, a task force from the 
PLAN’s South Sea Fleet conducted an 
extended deployment to the Indian Ocean 
and Western Pacific and engaged in 
opposing force exercises with forces from 
the East and North Sea Fleets. 
ANTICORRUPTION CAMPAIGN 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 PLA anticorruption investigations are a 
component of a Party-wide effort to 
safeguard CCP legitimacy, root out 
corruption and personal fiefdoms, improve 
governance, and strengthen central control 
of the military. 
 The CCP detained two senior-level PLA 
officers in September 2017. 
The CCP continued its vigorous efforts to root 
out corruption in the armed forces in 2017. In 
September 2017, two former CMC members, 
the previous JSD chief, Fang Fenghui, and 
previous Political Work Department director, 
Zhang Yang, were reportedly detained for 
questioning in an anti-graft probe, a first in 
decades for sitting CMC officers. Fang was 
detained  shortly  after  Chairman  of  the  Joint 
Chiefs of Staff General Dunford’s visit to 
China. In November 2017, Zhang committed 
suicide while under house arrest. 
Anticorruption investigations in the PLA are a 
component of a Party-wide effort that 
President Xi initiated shortly after taking office 
to safeguard the legitimacy of the CCP, root 
out corruption and personal fiefdoms, improve 
governance, and strengthen central control. 
Military discipline inspectors have targeted 
individual power networks and sectors 
historically prone to corruption, such as 
officers connected to disgraced Vice Chairmen 
Xu Caihou and Guo Boxiong and those in the 
Logistics Support Department. The PLA is 
also revising its regulations to more effectively 
prevent abuse. 
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SECURITY 
SITUATION IN THE TAIWAN STRAIT 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

Relations between China and Taiwan 
remained cool through 2017. 

Bowing to Chinese pressure, Panama cut 
diplomatic ties with Taiwan. 

International fora, such as the World Health 
Assembly, INTERPOL General Assembly, 
and the International Civil Aviation 
Organization denied participation or 
observership to representatives from Taiwan. 

The PLA continued Taiwan Strait 
contingency preparations.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
10 
 
 
 
Relations between China and Taiwan remained 
cool through 2017. In January 2016, Taiwan 
voters elected Democratic Progressive Party 
(DPP) Chairwoman Tsai Ing-wen as Taiwan’s 
president. 
China      halted      formal 
communication with Taiwan after Tsai’s 
election and has repeatedly stressed that 
Taiwan must accept the “1992 Consensus” to 
restart formal engagement. Since November 
2016, Chinese leaders have directly equated the 
“1992 Consensus” to “one China,” which was 
reaffirmed by President Xi in the 19th Party 
Congress work report. Tsai, for her part, has 
pledged to maintain the status quo in cross- 
Strait relations and called for talks with China 
without preconditions. At the same time, she 
has not endorsed the “1992 Consensus” and 
has said that she wants to decrease Taiwan’s 
economic reliance on China. 
In May 2016, China suspended consultations 
between its Taiwan Affairs Office and 
Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council that had 
begun in 2014. By the end of 2016, the number 
of Chinese tourists visiting Taiwan had also 
decreased by almost 20 percent from 2015 and 
visitor arrivals from China in the first eight 
months of 2017 were down 34 percent from 
the same period in 2016. In 2017, China 
continued to thwart Taiwan’s efforts to 
participate in international organizations. For 
example, in 2017, the World Health Assembly 
denied an invitation to Taiwan as an observer 
for the first time since 2009; in 2016, the 
INTERPOL     General     Assembly    denied 
Taiwan’s first formal application to 
participate; 
and in 2016 Taiwan was denied an invitation to 
the International Civil Aviation Organization’s 
triennial Assembly, despite being invited as an 
observer at the last Assembly meeting in 2013. 
Taiwan lost one more of its diplomatic partners 
when Panama switched recognition to the PRC 
in June 2017, an event that left Taipei with 
official recognition from 20 diplomatic 
partners at the close of the year. 
Despite the stalled government-to-government 
consultations, the CCP continues to engage 
with the opposition Kuomintang (KMT) Party, 
and China continues to hold lower-level cross- 
Strait exchanges such as the municipal 
Shanghai-Taipei Twin City Forum. 
The 
PLA 
continues 
to 
prepare 
for 
contingencies in the Taiwan Strait to deter and, 
if necessary, compel Taiwan to abandon moves 
toward independence. The PLA also is likely 
preparing for a contingency to unify Taiwan 
with China by force, while simultaneously 
deterring, delaying, or denying any third-party 
intervention on Taiwan’s behalf. Taiwan’s 
National Defense Report released in 2017 cited 
concern that increased PLA military activity 
near Taiwan pose an “enormous threat to 
security in the Taiwan Strait,” and that Taiwan 
requires a “multiple deterrence strategy,” 
including 
an 
emphasis 
on 
developing 
asymmetric warfare to counter PLA advances.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
11

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
12 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENTS IN CHINA’S 
TERRITORIAL AND MARITIME 
DISPUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China has resolved land border and maritime 
boundary disputes in the past, but several 
persist – including the ongoing territorial and 
maritime disputes in the East China Sea, South 
China Sea, and along the China-India border. 
Some of these disputes involve U.S. allies with 
whom there exist long-standing cooperation 
and security treaty commitments or strategic 
partners with whom there is a rapidly growing 
security relationship. China’s actions in the 
South China Sea in 2017 focused on political 
and economic overtures to diminish regional 
concern over China’s infrastructure buildup on 
and intention to control disputed areas in the 
South China Sea effectively. China ultimately 
wants to settle its claims with each claimant 
through bilateral frameworks to achieve the 
most favorable terms for China. 
SOUTH CHINA SEA 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 No substantial Chinese land reclamation 
occurred in the South China Sea in 2017, but 
infrastructure development on reclaimed 
features continued. 
 China continued outreach to South China 
Sea claimants to further its goal of effectively 
controlling disputed areas. 
In 2009, China enunciated an ambiguous 
maritime claim depicted in a map containing a 
nine-dash line that encompasses most of the 
waters in the South China Sea. China remains 
ambiguous about the coordinates, meaning, or 
legal basis for its claims. Brunei, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam all contest 
aspects of China’s territorial and maritime 
claims in the South China Sea. Indonesia does 
not view itself as a South China Sea claimant as 
it does not claim sovereignty over any 
contested outposts, although its exclusive 
economic zone (EEZ) overlaps with China’s 
nine-dash line. 
In 2017, China continued increased outreach to 
the Philippines, Vietnam, and Brunei to 
maintain momentum toward its goal of 
effectively controlling disputed areas in the 
South China Sea. These overtures follow the 
July 2016 arbitration ruling in the case brought 
by the Philippines against China under the 
1982 Law of the Sea Convention (LOSC). This 
ruling included findings that China violated the 
Philippines’    sovereign    rights    within   the 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

China remains ambiguous about the nature 
and scope of its territorial and maritime 
claims in the South China Sea. 

China maintains persistent coast guard 
presence near the Senkaku Islands in the 
East China Sea. 

Following a protracted border standoff near 
the Doka La Pass, China and India agreed to 
withdraw forces; however, both maintained a 
heightened military presence in the region.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
13 
 
 
 
Philippines’ EEZ; that China has no basis on 
which to claim historic rights within the nine- 
dash line to the extent that any claim exceeds 
maritime entitlements China could claim under 
the LOSC; and that Mischief Reef, Subi Reef, 
Second Thomas Shoal, and Reed Bank do not 
generate maritime entitlements. The tribunal 
did not rule on sovereignty claims to land 
features. In response to the ruling, China 
continued to claim historic rights in the South 
China Sea, and made a separate assertion of a 
right to “internal” waters within entire island 
groups (rather than from individual features as 
set out in the LOSC). This likely references 
China’s unlawful straight baseline claims 
around the Paracel Islands and potential 
drawing of similarly unlawful straight baselines 
around three other South China Sea island 
groups claimed by China. 
Since the arbitration ruling, China has managed 
tensions with regional claimants and largely 
continued its operations and activities in the 
region as it had prior to the ruling. In August 
2017, China and the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN) decided on a 
framework for a code of conduct after years of 
negotiations, and conducted a combined 
maritime exercise in November 2017 following 
the 11th ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting. 
China’s relationship with Philippines President 
Rodrigo Duterte continues to improve, likely 
facilitating the omission of China’s reclamation 
or militarization of features in the South China 
Sea from an official ASEAN statement in May 
2013. China has resumed senior-level meetings 
and  discussed  trade  integration  issues   with 
Vietnam after threatening Vietnam over 
drilling operations in contested maritime areas 
in July 2017. 
No substantial Chinese land reclamation 
occurred in the South China Sea in 2017, but 
infrastructure development on reclaimed 
features continued. Although China’s land 
reclamation and artificial islands do not 
strengthen China’s territorial claims as a legal 
matter, and artificial islands do not generate 
territorial sea entitlements, China will be able 
to use infrastructure on reclaimed features to 
enhance its presence in the South China Sea 
and improve the PLA’s ability to enforce 
China’s maritime claims. 
Both China and the Philippines – as well as 
Taiwan – claim sovereignty over Scarborough 
Reef, and tensions remain between China and 
the Philippines at Second Thomas Shoal. 
Throughout 2017, China Coast Guard (CCG) 
ships maintained a presence at Scarborough 
Reef, sustaining operations that began in 2012. 
Since April 2017, China has reportedly allowed 
access to the reef area for Philippines- 
registered fishing boats. China also maintains a 
continuous CCG presence at Second Thomas 
Shoal, and the Philippines stations military 
personnel aboard a tank landing ship (LST), the 
Sierra Madre, grounded there since 1999. 
Other disputed areas include the Luconia 
Shoals, Reed Bank, and the Paracel Islands. 
The Luconia Shoals are disputed by China, 
Taiwan, and Malaysia and may contain 
extensive oil and natural gas reserves, as well as

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
14 
 
 
 
productive fishing grounds. Reed Bank is 
claimed by China, Taiwan, and the Philippines. 
In the Paracel Islands, which are disputed with 
Vietnam and Taiwan, China in 2017 for the 
first time offered tourism cruises to the area 
and 
continued 
to 
develop 
civilian 
infrastructure to try to help bolster its claim to 
the islands. 
The United States does not take a position on 
sovereignty over disputed land features in the 
South China Sea, but recognizes that China's 
reclamation activities have far surpassed that of 
all other claimants. The United States opposes 
further militarization of disputed land features 
and calls for all claimants to avoid unilateral, 
coercive changes. 
EAST CHINA SEA 
of the U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty 
applies to them. In addition, the United States 
opposes any unilateral actions that seek to 
undermine Japan’s administration of the 
islands. China continues to use maritime law 
enforcement ships and aircraft to patrol near 
the islands. 
During 2017, China maintained a presence in 
the Senkaku Islands usually with 4 CCG ships, 
and entered within 12 nm of the islands an 
average of once every 10 days with multiple 
CCG ships. In late June 2017, China and Japan 
conducted the seventh iteration of a senior 
official discussion on maritime affairs requisite 
to establishing a line of communication to de- 
conflict air and maritime traffic in the East 
China Sea, and finally agreed to establish a 
hotline in December 2017. 
CHINA-INDIA-BHUTAN BORDER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China claims sovereignty over the Japan- 
administered Senkaku Islands in the East 
China Sea; this territory is also claimed by 
Taiwan. The United States does not take a 
position on sovereignty of the Senkaku Islands, 
but recognizes Japan’s administration of the 
islands and therefore  maintains  that  Article  5 
 
 
 
 
Tensions persist along disputed portions of the 
Sino-Indian border, where both countries 
patrol with armed forces.  In June 2017, India 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

China continues to use maritime law 
enforcement ships and aircraft to patrol near 
the Japan-administered Senkaku Islands, 
entering within 12 nm of the islands once 
every ten days, on average. 

China and Japan conducted the seventh 
senior official discussion on maritime affairs. 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

In June 2017, India halted China’s efforts to 
extend a road in territory administered by 
Bhutan near the Bhutan, China and India 
border, resulting in a standoff lasting more 
than 70 days. 

In August 2017, both China and India agreed 
to withdraw forces from the vicinity of the 
standoff, but both maintain a heightened 
military presence in the surrounding region.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
15 
 
 
 
halted China’s efforts to extend a road near the 
Doka 
La 
Pass 
in 
Doklam, 
territory 
administered by Bhutan, near the Bhutan, 
China, and India border, resulting in a 
protracted standoff lasting more than 70 days. 
In August 2017, India and China agreed to 
withdraw their military forces from the vicinity 
of the standoff; however, both countries 
maintain a heightened military presence in the 
surrounding region. In December, an Indian 
unmanned  aerial  vehicle  (UAV)  crashed   in 
Chinese territory along the Line of Actual 
Control in the Sikkim section of the Sino- 
Indian border, near the standoff location. 
China and India have resumed border 
personnel meetings, though India halted 
another Chinese road construction effort in 
disputed territory in Arunachal Pradesh in 
December 2017.

16 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S USE OF LOW-INTENSITY COERCION IN MARITIME DISPUTES 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The PLAN, CCG, and People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM) form the largest 
maritime force in the Indo-Pacific. 
 PLAN, CCG, and PAFMM sometimes conduct coordinated patrols. 
 
China continues to exercise low-intensity coercion to advance its claims in the East and South China 
Seas. During periods of tension, official statements and state media seek to portray China as reactive. 
China uses an opportunistically timed progression of incremental but intensifying steps to attempt to 
increase effective control over disputed areas and avoid escalation to military conflict. China also uses 
economic incentives and punitive trade policies to deter opposition to China’s actions in the region. 
In 2017, China extended economic cooperation to the Philippines in exchange for taking steps to 
shelve territorial and maritime disputes. Conversely, a Chinese survey ship lingered around Benham 
Rise in the spring after the Philippines refused several requests from China to survey the area. Later 
in the spring, CCG boats reportedly fired warning shots over Philippine fishing boats near Union 
Bank. In August 2017, China used PLAN, CCG, and PAFMM ships to patrol around Thitu Island 
and planted a flag on Sandy Cay, a sandbar within 12 nm of Subi Reef and Thitu Island, possibly in 
response to Manila’s reported plans to upgrade its runway on Thitu Island. China probably used 
coercion to pressure Vietnam to suspend joint Vietnam-Spain drilling operations in a disputed oil 
block in the South China Sea over the summer of 2017.

17 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SHORE-BASED INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION 
CONTINUES IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 China ceased substantial South China Sea land reclamation; however, it continued 
to build 
infrastructure at three outposts. 
 Outposts may be capable of supporting military operations, but no permanent large-scale air or 
naval presence has been observed in the Spratly 
Islands. 
 
China’s Spratly Islands outpost expansion effort is currently focused on building out the land-based 
capabilities of three large outposts – Fiery Cross, Subi, and Mischief Reefs – after completion of four 
smaller outposts early in 2016. No substantial land has been reclaimed at any of the outposts since 
China completed its artificial island creation in the Spratly Islands in late 2015 after adding over 3,200 
acres of land to the seven features it occupies in the Spratlys. Construction of aviation facilities, port 
facilities, fixed-weapons positions, barracks, administration buildings, and communication facilities at 
each of the three outposts was underway throughout 2017. The outposts may be capable of supporting 
military operation in the Spratly Islands and throughout the region, but no permanent large-scale air 
or naval presence has been observed. 
China has completed shore-based infrastructure on four small outposts in the Spratly Islands: Johnson, 
Gaven, Hughes, and Cuarteron Reefs. Administrative buildings, weapons stations, sensor 
emplacements, and other facilities remain under construction on the outposts. 
China has stated these projects are mainly for improving the living and working conditions of those 
stationed on the outposts, safety of navigation, and research. However, China could be attempting 
to 
bolster its de facto control by improving military and civilian infrastructure in the South China Sea. The 
airfields, berthing areas, and resupply facilities will allow China to maintain a more flexible and 
persistent coast guard and military presence in the area. This would improve China’s ability to detect 
and challenge activities by rival claimants or third parties, widen the range of capabilities available to 
China, and reduce the time required to deploy them. 
China’s plans to power these islands may add a nuclear element to the territorial dispute. In 2017, 
China indicated development plans may be underway to power islands and reefs in the typhoon-prone 
South China Sea with floating nuclear power stations; development reportedly is to begin prior to 
2020.

18 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENTS IN CHINA’S 
FOREIGN MILITARY 
ENGAGEMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China uses PLA engagements with foreign 
militaries to enhance its presence and influence 
abroad, bolster its image, shape shared 
responses to security issues, and assuage other 
countries’ concerns about its rise. These 
engagements also assist PLA modernization by 
facilitating the acquisition of advanced weapon 
systems and technologies, increasing its 
operational experience throughout and beyond 
the Indo-Pacific, and giving the PLA access to 
foreign military practices, operational doctrine, 
and training methods. Bilateral and multilateral 
exercises provide a political benefit to China 
and opportunities for the PLA to improve 
capabilities in areas such as counterterrorism, 
mobility operations, and logistics. 
MILITARY COOPERATION 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The PLA conducted at least twenty bilateral 
and multilateral exercises. 
 China continued to contribute more 
peacekeeping forces than any other UN 
Security Council permanent member, 
supporting national objectives of improving 
China’s image abroad, gaining PLA 
operational experience, and gathering 
intelligence. 
 China deployed four naval escort task forces 
in continuation of its Gulf of Aden 
counterpiracy operations, and sent 
submarines to the Indian Ocean, ostensibly 
in support of counterpiracy patrols. 
As China’s regional and international interests 
grow more complex, the PLA’s international 
engagement will continue to expand, especially 
in the areas of PKO, counterpiracy, HA/DR, 
counterterrorism, and joint exercises. In 
January 2017, Chinese peacekeeping troops in 
Mali carried out the first joint military medical 
exercise with troops from multiple countries in 
Joint Rescue 2017. 
Combined Exercises. The PLA’s participation in 
international military exercises continued to 
expand in 2017 as the PLA exercised with 
countries outside of the Indo-Pacific region. 
The PLA conducted at least twenty bilateral 
and 
multilateral 
exercises 
with 
foreign 
militaries  last  year.   Many  of  these exercises 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

PLA international engagement continues to 
expand, including combined exercises and 
peacekeeping operations (PKO). 

Senior PLA foreign official engagement and 
professional military education exchanges are 
also growing. 

China’s arms exports, which support its 
broader foreign policy goals, remain strong.

19 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
focused on counterterrorism, border security, 
PKO, and disaster relief; however, some 
included conventional ground, maritime, and 
air warfare training. 
> China  conducted  naval  exercises  with 
Russia in the Baltic Sea in July and in the   
Sea of Japan and the Sea of Okhotsk in 
September 2017. The two navies exercised 
submarine rescue, joint air defense, and  
anti-submarine operations. This was the 
PLA’s sixth naval exercise with Russia   
since 2012 and the first to occur in the  
Baltic Sea. 
> China hosted the sixth iteration of the 
SHAHEEN exercise series with Pakistan  
in September 2017. The exercise included 
live-fire target practice, night warfare, close 
air support training, and, for the first time, 
participation by PLAN aircraft. 
> Chinese military personnel participated in a 
bilateral exercise with Nepal for the first 
time in April 2017. The exercise focused   
on counterterrorism operations and was 
preceded by a visit by China’s Minister of 
Defense, the first visit by a Chinese defense 
minister to Nepal in 15 years.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
20 
 
 
Unnamed 
Peacekeeping 
 
 
SELECTED BILATERAL AND MULTILATERAL EXERCISES IN 2017 
 
Exercise Name 
Type of Exercise  
Participants 
Unnamed 
Counterterrorism Nepal 
 
Unnamed 
Maritime 
Cambodia  
International Army Games 
Miscellaneous 
Hosted by multiple countries 
(28 countries participated) 
SHAHEEN VI 
Air 
Pakistan 
FRIEND 2017 
Maritime 
Pakistan 
Unnamed 
Counterterrorism Vietnam 
Unnamed 
Maritime 
Vietnam 
FALCON STRIKE 2017 
Air 
Thailand 
JOINT SEA 2017 (MARITIME 
COOPERATION 2017) 
Maritime 
Russia 
 
COOPERATION 2017 
Counterterrorism Russia 
AIRSPACE SECURITY 2017 
Missile Defense 
Russia 
 
AMAN 2017 
Maritime 
Hosted by Pakistan 
 
 
 
 
KHAAN QUEST 2017 
Peacekeeping 
Hosted by Mongolia (26 countries 
participated) 
 
Thailand, the Philippines, Cambodia, 
Myanmar, Laos, and Brunei 
 
Hosted by China (Shanghai 
Unnamed 
Counterterrorism Cooperation Organization countries 
   
 
participated) 
 
Unnamed 
Disaster Relief 
United States 
 
IMMSAREX 
Maritime 
Hosted by Bangladesh 
(32 countries participated) 
 
Organized by African Union-United 
  
Nations Mission in Darfur 
 
Unnamed 
Maritime 
 
(37 countries participated) 
Unnamed 
Disaster Relief 
Malaysia 
Unnamed 
Border Security 
Tajikistan 
UNITED SHIELD 2017 
Counterterrorism Belarus 
Unnamed 
Maritime 
Burma 
Unnamed 
Maritime 
Iran 
Unnamed 
Counterterrorism Kyrgyzstan

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
21 
 
 
 
Peacekeeping Operations. In 2017, 
China continued to contribute the largest 
number of forces among the permanent 
members of the UN Security Council. China’s 
participation in United Nations PKO supports 
various 
national 
objectives 
– 
including 
improving 
China’s 
international 
image, 
obtaining operational experience for the PLA, 
and 
providing 
opportunities 
to 
gather 
intelligence. These operations also reflect the 
PLA’s expanding role beyond China’s borders. 
China 
provides 
civilian 
police, 
military 
observers, 
engineers, 
logistical 
support 
specialists, and medical personnel to UN PKO 
missions. 
> China 
maintains 
approximately 
2,654 
personnel in Africa and the Middle East in 
ten of the fifteen UN PKO missions. After 
the United States, which provides 28.47 
percent of UN PKO budget, China is the 
second 
largest 
financial 
contributor, 
pledging 10.25 percent of the total $6.8 
billion budget for the period from July   
2017 to June 2018. 
> In September 2017, China registered a 
standby peacekeeping force of 8,000 
personnel as part of the UN Peacekeeping 
Capability 
Readiness 
System. 
China’s 
standby force consists of infantry troops, 
helicopter 
pilots, 
logisticians, 
and 
intelligence, 
surveillance, 
and 
reconnaissance (ISR) personnel. 
> In June 2017, the PLA’s first peacekeeping 
helicopter  unit  began  arriving  in Sudan to 
join the UN African Union mission in 
Darfur. In October 2017, the PLA 
peacekeeping helicopter unit completed its 
UN 
equipment 
verification 
process, 
allowing it to operate in PKOs. 
Counterpiracy Efforts. In 2017, China 
continued counterpiracy operations in the Gulf 
of Aden by deploying its 25th, 26th, 27th, and 
28th naval escort task forces to the area since 
2008. In April 2017, Chinese special forces, 
under the cover of an Indian naval helicopter, 
boarded a hijacked cargo ship and rescued the 
crew. China also continued to send submarines 
to the Indian Ocean, ostensibly in support of 
its counterpiracy patrols. Chinese attack 
submarines conducted port calls in Seppangar, 
Malaysia and Karachi, Pakistan, but they were 
denied a port call in Colombo by Sri Lanka. 
These submarine patrols demonstrate the 
PLAN’s emerging capability both to interdict 
key sea lines of communication (SLOC) and to 
increase China’s power projection into the 
Indian Ocean. 
MILITARY DIPLOMACY 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

Expanded PLA travel abroad enables officers 
to study foreign military command 
structures, unit formations, and operational 
training. 

PLA senior leaders actively shape how China 
expresses its security concerns during PLA 
participation in multilateral coordination 
mechanisms.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
22 
 
 
 
Senior-level visits and exchanges provide 
China with opportunities to increase military 
officers’ international exposure, and to advance 
foreign relations through military assistance 
programs and the development of personal 
relationships. Expanded PLA travel abroad 
enables PLA officers to observe and study 
foreign military command structures, unit 
formations, 
and 
operational 
training. 
Furthermore, PLA senior leaders are beginning 
to actively shape the methods by which shared 
security concerns are addressed during their 
participation in multilateral coordination 
mechanisms. In August 2016, for example, 
then    Chief    of    the    JSD    Fang    Fenghui 
participated in the inaugural meeting of the 
Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination 
Mechanism, a military counterterrorism pact 
between Afghanistan, China, Pakistan, and 
Tajikistan. 
Professional military education exchanges are 
another tool of Chinese military diplomacy. 
For example, many Latin American and 
Caribbean countries send officers to the 
strategic-level College of Defense Studies at the 
National Defense University; some of these 
countries also send officers to the PLAA and 
PLAN command schools. 
 
MILITARY ATTACHÉ PRESENCE 
KEY TAKEAWAY 
 PLA officers serve as military attachés in more than 110 offices worldwide, advancing China’s 
overseas military diplomacy work. 
 
China advances its day-to-day overseas military diplomacy work using PLA officers assigned as military 
attachés in more than 110 offices worldwide. In recent years, China’s military attaché presence has 
grown around the world, reflecting China’s increasing global interests. China’s military attachés serve 
as military advisors to the ambassador, support Ministry of Foreign Affairs and PLA foreign policy 
objectives, and perform a variety of duties tied to PLA military and security cooperation, including 
counterpart exchanges with host-nation and third-country personnel. Military attachés also collect 
intelligence on their countries or areas of assignment. Although the general function of an attaché 
office is the same worldwide, some attaché offices probably prioritize specific missions or diplomatic 
priorities due to close bilateral relations or other factors. 
China’s military attaché offices vary in size, generally ranging from 2 to 10 PLA officers. Most offices 
consist of just a few accredited officers; however, offices in countries considered important to China’s 
strategic interests are often considerably larger, potentially including multiple assistant attachés, 
dedicated naval or air force attachés, and support staff.

23 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S ARMS EXPORTS 
KEY TAKEAWAY 
 Arms exports, 
which support China’s broader foreign policy goals, remain strong, particularly arms 
sales to Pakistan and demand for Chinese armed UAVs. 
 
From 2012 through 2016, China was the fifth largest arms supplier in the world, completing more 
than $20 billion in sales. Of these sales, military equipment worth $8 billion went to Indo-Pacific 
countries, primarily Pakistan. The Middle East and North Africa region was China’s second largest 
regional arms market, probably because of the demand for armed UAVs – a niche area where China 
is one of the few suppliers. China’s ability to remain among the world’s top five global arms suppliers 
largely hinges on continued strong sales to Pakistan and demand for its armed UAVs. 
>    In 2015, China signed an agreement with Pakistan for the sale of eight YUAN-class submarines; 
the first four submarines will be built in China and the remaining four in Pakistan. Other major 
Indo-Pacific customers of Chinese military equipment include Bangladesh and Burma. China 
delivered two MING-class diesel-powered attack submarines (SS) to Bangladesh in late 2016 and 
continues to market a variety of export submarine options at international trade shows. 
>     China has sold armed UAVs to several states in the Middle East and North Africa, including Iraq, 
Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the United Arab Emirates. China faces little competition for sale of such 
systems, as most countries who produce them are restricted in selling the technology as signatories 
of the Missile Technology Control Regime and/or the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export 
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies. 
China conducts arms sales via state-run export organizations that primarily seek to generate profits 
and offset defense-related research and development costs. Arms transfers are also a component of 
China foreign policy, used in conjunction with other types of military and economic aid and 
development assistance to support broader foreign policy goals. These include securing access to 
natural resources and export markets, promoting political influence among host country elites, and 
building support in international forums. 
Most of China’s arms recipients are developing countries that prefer Chinese arms because they are 
less expensive than those offered by the top international arms suppliers. Chinese arms are also of 
lower quality and reliability, but many still have advanced capabilities. These arms generally come with 
fewer end-use restrictions, which is attractive to those customers who may not have access to other 
sources of arms for political or economic reasons.

24 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
CURRENT CAPABILITIES OF THE 
PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY 
communicate internally the PLA’s transition 
into a forward-looking organization that has 
better integrated combat capabilities and can 
operate as a joint force for a range of future 
operations. 
The PLA also appointed new commanders of 
all its services in 2017. The new appointees 
probably reinforced improvements to joint 
command and other leadership goals that the 
PLA has been emphasizing since 2015, 
including the so-called the “five unable” 
problem – leaders who are unable to analyze a 
situation, understand the higher echelon’s 
intent, make a decision on a course of action, 
deploy forces, or handle unexpected situations. 
PLA ARMY 
 
 
 
In 2017, the PLA continued the most 
comprehensive restructuring in its history, as it 
began to transition its core operational unit 
from the division to the brigade. In April 2017, 
China announced changes to corps-level units 
across the PLA, which resulted in the 
reorganization and redesignation of units 
across the force. A number of PLAA group 
army headquarters were eliminated and much 
of the force was restructured into combined 
arms brigades, PLAAF divisions and regiments 
were realigned under corps-level bases, the 
Marine Corps tripled in size, and all PLARF 
bases were renamed. Redesignation of units 
across the force was likely intended  in  part  to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Starting in April 2017, the PLAA, the largest 
standing ground force in the world, undertook 
a massive transformation of operational and 
tactical units as part of its structural reforms. 
The  purpose  of  these  reforms is to  create  a 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

The PLA continued the most comprehensive 
restructuring in its history as it began to 
transition its core operational unit from the 
division to the brigade. 

PLAN and PLAAF force modernization and 
structural reforms continued, and the 
PLARF advanced plans to enhance its 
“strategic deterrence capability.” 

Increased public focus on the Strategic 
Support Force (SSF) indicates growing 
prominence for the SSF in the PLA and the 
priority of its assigned missions, which 
include controlling complex electromagnetic 
environments. 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

The PLAA dissolved 5 of its 18 group army 
headquarters. 

The PLAA is finalizing changing core 
operational units from divisions and 
regiments to brigades and battalions. 

The PLAA continued its two major exercise 
series in 2017 and introduced new, force 
multiplying systems that improve combat 
power.

25 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
more mobile, modular, lethal ground force 
capable of being the core of joint operations 
and able to meet Xi Jinping’s directive to “fight 
and win wars.” The PLAA dissolved the 
headquarters of 5 of its previous 18 group 
armies and re-numbered the remaining 13. The 
units subordinate to these reformed group 
armies consist almost entirely of brigades, 
finalizing the structural change of core 
operational units from the old divisions and 
regiments to brigades and battalions. The 
flattening of the corps-level command 
structure, in concert with 2016’s theater 
command reforms, should produce faster 
communications both horizontally among 
joint force elements and vertically up the 
command chain. 
Each group army now consists of multiple 
combined arms brigades, an artillery brigade, 
an air defense brigade, a SOF brigade, an 
army 
aviation brigade, an engineer and chemical 
defense brigade, and a service support brigade. 
The subordinate service support brigades 
provide group armies an integrated ability to 
set up a command network and organize 
battlefield transportation and equipment repair 
for their tactical units. 
In late August 2017, the commander of the 
Central Theater, General Han Weiguo, became 
PLAA commander. General Han was the 
youngest of the theater commanders and has 
risen quickly with three promotions since 2015. 
He commanded the PLA’s 90th Anniversary 
military parade.  Descriptions of General Han 
as a loyal, skilled, and well-rounded officer 
reflect the type of officer envisioned at all levels 
of the PLAA to advance the PLA’s reform 
program, especially as all 13 group armies 
received new commanding officers. The PLAA 
is also placing non-commissioned officers in 
positions traditionally held by officers or 
assigning civilians to take over some duties in 
an effort to alleviate the new command stresses 
created 
by 
the 
ongoing 
major 
force 
reorganization. 
Despite the major overhaul to the operational 
units, the PLAA still conducted its two major 
exercise series in 2017: STRIDE 2017 for the 
new 
combined 
arms 
brigades 
and 
FIREPOWER 2017 for air defense and 
artillery brigades. The organization of these 
exercises was shared between the army 
headquarters in each theater command and the 
service-level headquarters in Beijing. Although 
on a smaller scale than previous years, the 
exercises, which include a professional 
opposing force unit, were important to train 
the current crop of officers and soldiers to 
create a more joint PLAA. The STRIDE series 
in particular is a focal point for exercising air- 
to-ground firepower coordination between the 
PLAAF and the PLAA. 
The PLAA also continued to modernize in 
2017, emphasizing systems that act as force 
multipliers and improve combat power. The 
year saw increases and improvements in air 
defense, 
artillery, 
sustainment 
support, 
engineers,  and chemical defense systems at all

26 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
echelon levels. This selective modernization 
enables the shift to the brigade and battalion as 
the main operational echelons by giving their 
commanders critical organic force protection, 
firepower 
strike, 
reconnaissance, 
and 
sustainment capabilities. The elimination of 
five group army headquarters and the 
restructure and redistribution of their units and 
equipment should contribute to a modest 
overall improvement in modernization across 
the force, as only the most capable equipment 
and units from these disbanded corps will likely 
be integrated with the remaining group 
armies, 
reducing the amount of Soviet-era systems in 
the process.

27 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

28 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
PLA NAVY 
 
The PLAN is the region’s largest navy, with 
more than 300 surface combatants, submarines, 
amphibious ships, patrol craft, and specialized 
types. It is also an increasingly modern and 
flexible force. The PLAN is rapidly replacing 
obsolescent, 
generally 
 
single-purpose 
platforms in favor of larger, multi-role 
combatants featuring advanced anti-ship, anti- 
air, and anti-submarine weapons and sensors. 
This  modernization  aligns  with  China’s 
growing emphasis on the maritime domain, 
with increasing demands on the PLAN to 
conduct operational tasks at expanding 
distances from the Chinese mainland using 
multi-mission, long-range, sustainable naval 
platforms that have robust self-defense 
capabilities. 
In 2017, the PLAN continued to implement 
structural reforms that began in late 2015 and 
early 2016. The new arrangements focus the 
service more on organizing, manning, training, 
and equipping naval forces rather than 
conducting  operations.   In  2017,  the PLAN 
also appointed Vice Admiral Shen Jinlong as 
the new PLAN commander, and assigned new 
commanders for all three fleets. The PLAN 
also appears to be converting some of its units 
to a base-operational unit structure, similar to 
the Air Force. 
One of the most significant PLAN structural 
changes in 2017 was the expansion of the 
PLAN Marine Corps (PLANMC). The 
PLANMC previously consisted of 2 brigades, 
approximately 10,000 personnel, and was 
limited in geography and mission (amphibious 
assault and defense of South China Sea 
outposts). By 2020, the PLANMC will consist 
of 7 brigades, may have more than 30,000 
personnel, and will expand its mission to 
include expeditionary operations on foreign 
soil, as PLANMC forces are already operating 
out of the PLA’s base in Djibouti. A newly- 
established Marine Corps headquarters is 
responsible 
for 
manning, 
training, 
and 
equipping the expanded Marine Corps and, for 
the first time, the PLANMC has its own 
commander, although it is still subordinate to 
the 
PLAN. 
The 
PLANMC 
may 
also 
incorporate an aviation brigade, which could 
provide an organic helicopter transport and 
attack capability, increasing its amphibious and 
expeditionary warfare capabilities. 
Submarines. Modernization of China’s 
submarine force remains a high priority for the 
PLAN. It currently operates 4 nuclear- 
powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBN), 5 
nuclear-powered attack submarines (SSN), and 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

The PLAN is the largest navy in the region 
by number of ships (more than 300), and 
both force modernization and structural 
reforms continued. 

The PLANMC expanded; it will consist of 
seven brigades and will be capable of 
overseas expeditionary operations.

29 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
47 diesel-powered attack submarines. By 2020, 
this force will likely grow to between 69 and 78 
submarines. 
China continues to increase its inventory of 
advanced anti-ship cruise missile (ASCM)- 
capable conventional submarines. Since the 
mid-1990s, the PLAN has purchased 12 
Russian-built KILO-class SS units, 8 capable of 
launching ASCMs. During these years, Chinese 
shipyards have delivered 13 SONG- class SS 
units (Type 039) and 17 YUAN-class diesel-
electric 
air-independent 
power 
attack 
submarines (SSP) (Type 039A), with a total of 
20 YUANs projected for production by 2020. 
Over the past 15 years, the PLAN has 
constructed 10 nuclear submarines – 2 
SHANG I-class SSNs (Type 093), 4  SHANG 
II-class SSNs (Type 093A), and 4 JIN-class 
SSBNs (Type 094). Equipped with the 
CSS-N- 
14 (JL-2) submarine-launched ballistic missile 
(SLBM), China’s four operational JIN-class 
SSBNs represent China’s first credible, sea- 
based 
nuclear 
deterrent. 
China’s 
next- 
generation Type 096 SSBN, reportedly to be 
armed with the follow-on JL-3 SLBM, will 
likely begin construction in the early-2020s. 
By the mid-2020s, China likely will build the 
Type 093B guided-missile nuclear attack 
submarine. This new SHANG-class variant 
would enhance the PLAN’s anti-surface 
warfare capability and could also provide a 
more clandestine land-attack option. 
Surface Combatants. The PLAN also 
remains engaged in a robust surface combatant 
construction program, producing new guided- 
missile destroyers (DDG) and guided-missile 
frigates (FFG) that will provide a significant 
upgrade to the PLAN’s air defense, anti-ship, 
and anti-submarine capabilities. These assets 
will be critical as the PLAN expands operations 
into distant seas beyond the range of shore- 
based air defense systems. In 2017, three more 
LUYANG III-class DDGs (Type 052D) 
entered service, bringing the operational total to 
seven, with at least six more in various stages of 
construction or outfitting. The LUYANG III-
class DDG has a multipurpose vertical launch 
system capable of launching ASCMs, surface-
to-air missiles (SAMs), and anti-submarine 
missiles. China is also constructing the larger 
RENHAI-class guided-missile cruiser (CG), 
called the Type 055 by the PLAN. China 
continues to produce the JIANGKAI II-class 
FFG (Type 054A), with 24 or more ships 
currently in the fleet and several more in various 
stages 
of 
construction. 
The 
PLAN 
is 
augmenting its littoral warfare capabilities, 
especially in the South China Sea and East 
China Sea, with high-rate production of the 
JIANGDAO-class corvettes (FFL) (Type 056). 
More than 35 had entered service by the end of 
2017. The latest FFLs are anti-submarine 
warfare (ASW) variants with a towed-array 
sonar. China may build more than 60 of this 
class, ultimately replacing older PLAN frigates 
and missile-armed patrol combatants. China 
also   has   60   HOUBEI-class   wave-piercing

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
30 
 
 
 
catamaran  guided-missile  patrol  boats (Type 
022) built for operations in China’s “near seas.” 
 
The PLAN continues to emphasize anti- 
surface warfare. Frigates and corvettes, as well 
as some modernized older combatants carry 
variants of the YJ-83 ASCM (65 nm, 120 km), 
while newer surface combatants such as the 
LUYANG II-class DDG are fitted with the YJ-
62  (120  nm,  222  km).   The  LUYANG  III- 
class DDG and RENHAI-class CG will be 
fitted with a variant of China’s newest ASCM, 
the YJ-18 (290 nm, 537 km), while a few 
modernized destroyers have been fitted with 
the powerful and supersonic YJ-12 ASCM. 
Eight of China’s 12 KILO-class SS are 
equipped with the Russian-built SS-N-27 
ASCM (120 nm, 222 km). Chinese SONG- 
class SS, YUAN-class SSP, and SHANG-class 
SSN boats will field China’s newest indigenous 
submarine-launched YJ-18 and its variants, 
which constitute an improvement over the SS- 
N-27 ASCM. 
The PLAN recognizes that long-range 
ASCMs 
require a robust, over-the-horizon targeting 
capability to realize their full potential. China  is 
investing in reconnaissance, surveillance, 
command, control, and communications 
systems at the strategic, operational, and 
tactical levels to provide high-fidelity targeting 
information to surface and subsurface launch 
platforms. 
Amphibious Warfare Ships. China’s 
investments in its amphibious ship force signal 
its  intent  to  develop  expeditionary  warfare, 
HA/DR, and counterpiracy capabilities. The 
PLAN  has  four  large  YUZHAO-class (Type 
071) amphibious transport docks (LPD), with 
two more under construction during 2017. The 
YUZHAO LPD provides a greater and more 
flexible capability for long-range operations 
than the PLAN’s older landing ships. It can 
carry several of the new YUYI-class air-
cushion medium landing craft and four or 
more helicopters, as well as armored vehicles 
and 
PLAN 
Marines 
for 
long-distance 
deployments. The PLAN probably will 
continue YUZHAO LPD construction, even 
as it pursues development of a follow-on 
amphibious assault ship that is not only larger, 
but also incorporates a full flight deck for 
helicopters. During 2017, no landing ships 
were completed. 
Aircraft Carrier. In 2017, the PLAN’s first 
aircraft carrier, Liaoning, concluded its second 
training deployment to the South China Sea, its 
first with embarked J-15 fighter aircraft, and 
conducted its first port visit in Hong Kong. 
China continued operations with Liaoning, 
during 2017, with its first nighttime flight 
operations, incorporating additional J-15 
fighter aircraft and pilots joining the order of 
battle and operating off the ship. Though 
Liaoning has substantially less capability than a 
U.S. Navy carrier, it provides extended air 
defense coverage for at-sea task groups and is 
being used to develop further China’s carrier 
pilots, deck crews, and tactics. In addition, 
China’s first domestic aircraft carrier was 
launched in 2017 and will likely join the fleet by

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
31 
 
 
 
2019. The new carrier is a modified version of 
Liaoning, but is similarly limited in its  
capabilities due to its lack of catapult and a 
smaller flight deck than U.S. carriers. However, 
China is expected to begin construction on its 
first catapult-capable carrier in 2018, which will 
enable additional fighter aircraft, fixed-wing 
early-warning aircraft, and more rapid flight 
operations.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
32

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
33 
 
 
 
PLA AIR FORCE AND PLA NAVY 
AVIATION 
The PLAAF is the largest air force in the region 
and the third largest in the world, with more 
than 2,700 total aircraft (not including UAVs) 
and 2,000 combat aircraft (including fighters, 
strategic bombers, tactical bombers, and multi- 
mission tactical and attack aircraft). In 2017, 
Lieutenant General Ding Laihang assumed the 
post of PLAAF commander, and exhorted the 
service to build a truly “strategic” air force 
capable of projecting airpower at a long range. 
The PLAAF continues to modernize and is 
closing the gap with the U.S. Air Force across 
a broad spectrum of capabilities, gradually 
eroding the United States’ longstanding 
significant technical advantage. 
In 2017, PLA reorganization significantly 
affected  the  force  structure  of  the PLAAF. 
Changes include establishing at least six new air 
bases and restructuring their previously 
subordinate regiments into brigades under the 
newly established bases by disbanding its 
fighter and fighter-bomber divisions. Reform 
may have similarly affected PLAN Aviation, as 
some PLAN Aviation fighter units restructured 
to brigades. The PLAAF also relocated or re-
subordinated some units to different theater 
commands and completely reorganized the 
15th Airborne Corps, which was officially re-
designated as the “PLA Airborne Corps.” 
Fighters. The PLAAF continues to field 
fourth-generation aircraft (now about 600) and 
probably will become a majority fourth- 
generation force within the next several years. 
The PLAAF is still developing fifth-generation 
fighters, including the J-20 and FC-31, and in 
late 2016 began importing 24 Su-35 advanced 
fourth-generation fighters from Russia. In July 
2017 during the PLA’s 90th anniversary parade, 
the PLAAF publicly conducted high-profile 
flybys of its J-20 fifth-generation fighters and 
debuted its J-16 and J-10C advanced fourth- 
generation fighters armed with the latest 
weapons. 
Bombers.  China’s  bomber  force  is 
composed of variants of the H-6 BADGER 
bomber, and China has worked to maintain 
and enhance the operational effectiveness of 
these aircraft. The latest variant, the H-6K 
which China is fielding in greater numbers, 
integrates standoff weapons and features more 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

The PLAAF is the largest air force in the 
region and the third largest in the world. It is 
working to become a “strategic” air force 
capable of long-range power projection. 

The PLAAF is closing the gap with the U.S. 
Air Force across a spectrum of capabilities, 
gradually eroding longstanding U.S. technical 
advantages. 

The PLAAF continues to modernize with 
the delivery of indigenous manned aircraft 
and a wide range of UAVs.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
34 
 
 
 
efficient turbofan engines in redesigned wing 
roots. This extended-range aircraft has the 
capability to carry six land-attack cruise missiles 
(LACMs), giving the PLA a long-range standoff 
precision strike capability that can range Guam. 
PLAN Aviation fields the H-6G, with four 
weapons pylons for ASCMs to support 
maritime missions. In addition, the PLAAF is 
seeking to extend its reach with the 
development of a refuelable bomber and a new, 
stealth strategic bomber. Former PLAAF 
commander General Ma Xiaotian publicly 
announced the stealth bomber program in 
2016, and the new platform could debut 
sometime around 2025. The H-6 and future 
stealth bomber could both be nuclear capable. 
The PLA is also upgrading its aircraft with two 
new air-launched ballistic missiles, one of which 
may include a nuclear payload. 
Special Mission Aircraft. China uses a 
modified version of the H-6, known as the H- 
6U, as well as a small number of IL-78 MIDAS 
purchased from Ukraine, to conduct aerial 
refueling operations for some of its indigenous 
fighter aircraft, increasing their operational 
ranges. 
The service is also integrating airborne early 
warning and control aircraft (AEW&C) – such 
as KJ-2000 MAINRING, KJ-200 MOTH, and 
KJ-500 – to detect, track, and target threats in 
varying conditions, in larger volumes, and at 
greater distances. These aircraft help to extend 
the range of China’s integrated air defense 
system (IADS) network. 
China’s aviation industry continues to advance 
with the initial delivery of its domestic Y-20 
large transport aircraft and the first flight of the 
world’s largest seaplane, the AG-600. The new 
transports will supplement and eventually 
replace China’s small fleet of strategic airlift 
assets, which currently consists of a limited 
number of Russian-made IL-76 aircraft. The 
large transports are intended to support 
airborne command and control (C2), logistics, 
paradrop, 
aerial 
refueling, 
strategic 
reconnaissance 
operations, 
and 
HA/DR 
missions. 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. China’s 
development, production and deployment of 
domestically-developed reconnaissance and 
combat UAVs continues to expand. In 2017, 
Chinese defense industry representatives 
claimed to be developing long-range stealthy 
and near-space UAVs, and the PLA may soon 
begin receiving the long-range, high-altitude 
Xianglong UAV. In May 2017, military 
enthusiasts published purported photographs 
of the new Yunying reconnaissance/strike 
UAV undergoing flight tests in western China. 
Air and Missile Defense. The PLAAF 
possesses one of the largest forces of advanced 
long-range SAM systems in the world, 
consisting of a combination of Russian- 
sourced SA-20 (S-300PMU1/2) battalions and 
domestically produced CSA-9  battalions. 
China has contracted with Russia for the S- 
400/Triumf SAM system, as a follow-on to the 
SA-20  and  CSA-9,  to  improve  strategic long-

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
35 
 
 
 
range air defenses; delivery could take place by 
the end of the decade. China is also developing 
its indigenous HQ-19 to provide the basis for 
a ballistic missile defense capability.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
36 
 
 
 
PLA ROCKET FORCE (PLARF) 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The PLARF advanced plans to enhance its 
“strategic deterrence capability.” 
 China displayed new ballistic missiles during 
the PLA’s 90th anniversary parade. 
 ICBMs debuting or under development 
represent a significant improvement in 
China’s nuclear-capable missile forces. 
The PLARF trains, equips, and operates 
China’s land-based nuclear and conventional 
missiles. In 2017, it advanced long-term 
modernization plans to enhance its “strategic 
deterrence capability,” a theme President Xi 
echoed during a visit to PLARF headquarters 
in September 2016 where he called for 
accelerating the PLARF’s pace of development 
and “breakthroughs . . . in strategic deterrence 
capability.” The service is developing and 
testing several new variants of missiles and 
developing methods to counter ballistic missile 
defenses. In September 2017, LTG Zhou 
Yaning took command of the PLARF, 
replacing Wei Fenghe, who became Minister of 
Defense in March 2018. 
China’s conventional missile force includes the 
CSS-6 short-range ballistic missile (SRBM) 
with a range of 725-850 km; CSS-7 SRBM with 
a range of 300-600 km; CSS-11 SRBM with a 
range of over 700 km; land-attack and anti-ship 
variants of the CSS-5 medium-range ballistic 
missile (MRBM); the DF-26 intermediate- 
range  ballistic  missile (IRBM);  and  the CJ-10 
ground-launched cruise missile (GLCM). 
China’s conventionally-armed CSS-5 Mod 5 
anti-ship ballistic missile (ASBM) gives the 
PLA the capability to attack ships, including 
aircraft carriers, in the western Pacific Ocean. 
During the PLA’s 90th anniversary parade in 
July 2017, China displayed a new MRBM 
designated the DF-16G, which China claims 
features high accuracy, short preparation time, 
and an improved maneuverable terminal stage 
that can better infiltrate missile defense 
systems. China also displayed the DF-26 IRBM 
during the PLA’s 90th anniversary parade. First 
fielded in 2016, this system is capable of 
conducting conventional and nuclear precision 
strikes against ground targets and conventional 
strikes against naval targets in the western 
Pacific and Indian Oceans and the South China 
Sea. 
The PLARF also continues to enhance its silo- 
based 
intercontinental 
ballistic 
missiles 
(ICBMs) and is adding more survivable, mobile 
delivery systems. China’s ICBM arsenal to date 
consists of 75-100 ICBMs, including the silo- 
based CSS-4 Mod 2 (DF-5A) and multiple 
independently 
targeted 
reentry 
vehicles- 
(MIRV)-equipped Mod 3 (DF-5B); the solid- 
fueled, road-mobile CSS-10 Mod 1 and 2 (DF- 
31 and DF-31A); and the shorter range CSS-3 
(DF-4). The CSS-10 Mod 2, with a range in 
excess of 11,200 km, can reach most locations 
within the continental United States. During 
the 90th anniversary parade, China displayed 
the DF-31AG, described as an enhanced 
version of the DF-31A ICBM that also uses a 
transporter-erector-launcher    to    increase  its

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
37 
 
 
 
mobility and survivability. Development of 
the 
CSS-X-20 (DF-41), a new MIRV-capable and 
road-mobile ICBM, continued in 2017. China 
appears  to  be  considering  additional DF-41 
launch options, including rail-mobile and silo 
basing.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
38

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
39 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC SUPPORT FORCE (SSF) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The PLA likely established the SSF in 2015 to 
centralize the military’s space, cyber, and EW 
missions. Although details remain limited, the 
PLA’s 90th anniversary parade in July 2017 
featured an SSF electronic reconnaissance 
formation, which reportedly provides highly 
mobile, integrated, flexible, multi-domain 
information warfare capabilities. The unit’s 
mission reportedly is seizing and maintaining 
battlefield information control. This focus on 
the SSF and one of its premier units indicates 
the PLA is raising the priority and prominence 
of the SSF and its assigned missions to tackle 
its own deficiencies in controlling the complex 
electromagnetic environment. 
Space and Counterspace Capabilities. 
China’s space program continues to mature 
rapidly. The PLA, which has historically 
managed the effort, continues to invest in 
improving  its  capabilities  in  space-based  ISR, 
satellite communication, satellite navigation, 
and meteorology, as well as human spaceflight 
and robotic space exploration. China has built 
an expansive ground support infrastructure to 
support its growing on-orbit fleet and related 
functions including spacecraft and SLV 
manufacture, launch, command and control, 
and data downlink. Additionally, China is 
developing multiple counterspace capabilities 
to degrade and deny adversary use of space- 
based assets during a crisis or conflict. 
In 2017, China launched 18 SLVs, of which 16 
were successful, orbiting some 31 spacecraft, 
including communications, navigation, ISR, 
and test/engineering satellites. Other activities 
included: 
> Space Launch Failures. In 2017, China 
suffered two SLV failures within two 
weeks, creating significant delays in China’s 
national space program, according to key 
government officials. A Long March (LM)- 
3B partially failed due to faulty guidance, 
navigation, and control. A LM-5 launch 
then catastrophically failed due to a 
manufacturing defect. The LM-5 is to 
become China’s new heavy-lift SLV, 
launching up to 25,000 kg into low Earth 
orbit and will play an important role in the 
assembly of the Chinese Space Station 
starting around 2018. 
> Commercial Launch. In January 2017, 
China’s Expace Technology Co, Ltd. 
successfully launched its first Kuaizhou-1 
(KZ-1A) commercial SLV delivering three 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

The SSF centralizes the PLA’s space, cyber, 
and EW missions. 

Increased public focus on the SSF indicates 
its growing prominence in the PLA and the 
priority of its assigned missions. 

China successfully launched 16 of 18 space 
launch vehicles (SLVs), orbiting some 31 
spacecraft, including communications, 
navigation, ISR, and test/engineering 
satellites.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
40 
 
 
 
small satellites to sun synchronous orbit. 
Expace, a commercial launch company 
subsidized by the China Aerospace and 
Science Industry Corporation (CASIC), is 
the provider of the KZ-1A and is 
developing a larger version, the KZ-11. The 
KZ-1A is a light-lift quick response SLV 
owned and operated by Expace for 
commercial use, but it is often misidentified 
as the KZ-1, CASIC’s military version of 
SLV, as it shares many aspects of its design 
and concepts of operations. 
> Space Station. China launched its first 
resupply spacecraft, Tianzhou-1 (TZ-1), to 
dock with and transfer fuel to Tiangong-2, 
testing technologies necessary for long- 
term maintenance and operation of a future 
Chinese space station. China also used the 
TZ-1 to simulate rapid docking, similar to 
that of the Russian Soyuz docking with the 
International Space Station. 
China is 
expected to bring on orbit assembly of its 
own space station in 2019. 
The PLA is acquiring a range of technologies 
to improve China’s counterspace capabilities. 
In addition to the development of directed- 
energy weapons and satellite jammers, China is 
also developing direct-ascent and co-orbital 
kinetic kill capabilities and has probably made 
progress on the anti-satellite missile system it 
tested in July 2014. China is employing more 
sophisticated    satellite    operations    and   is 
probably testing dual-use technologies in space 
that could be applied to counterspace missions. 
Although China has not publicly acknowledged 
the existence of any new programs since it 
confirmed it used an anti-satellite missile to 
destroy a weather satellite in 2007, Chinese 
defense 
academics 
often 
publish 
on 
counterspace 
threat 
technologies. 
These 
scholars stress the necessity of “destroying, 
damaging, and interfering with the enemy’s 
reconnaissance . . . and communications 
satellites,” suggesting that such systems, as well 
as navigation and early warning satellites, could 
be among the targets of attacks designed to 
“blind and deafen the enemy.” 
Cyber Capabilities. The PLA in recent 
years has emphasized the importance of 
cyberspace as a new domain of national security 
and an arena for strategic competition. China’s 
2015 defense white paper identified cyberspace 
as one of four “critical security domains.” PLA 
scholars continue to explore new concepts, 
such as deterrence in cyberspace. 
PLA writings distinguish between peacetime 
and wartime cyber operations. In peacetime, 
PLA cyber missions include “defending 
electromagnetic 
space 
and 
cyberspace,” 
because of China’s increasing reliance on the 
information economy. These writings suggest 
that China is prepared to use cyber operations 
to manage the escalation of a conflict, as they 
view cyber operations as a low-cost deterrent 
and can demonstrate capabilities and resolve to 
an     adversary.     During     wartime,     cyber

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
41 
 
 
 
capabilities can “help the PLA understand the 
enemy’s trend, help the troops plan the combat 
operations, and ensure victory on the 
battlefield.” 
The establishment of the SSF may represent 
the first step in developing a cyber force that 
creates efficiencies by combining cyber 
reconnaissance, attack, and defense capabilities 
into 
one 
organization. 
PLA 
writings 
acknowledge 
the 
benefits 
of 
unifying 
leadership, 
centralizing 
cyber 
resource 
management, and combining offensive and 
defensive cyber capabilities in one military 
organization, and cite U.S. Cyber Command as 
accomplishing such a consolidation.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
42 
 
 
 
2 
UNDERSTANDING CHINA’S 
STRATEGY

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
43 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
Since 2002, China’s leaders – including 
President Xi Jinping – have characterized the 
initial two decades of the 21st century as a 
“period of strategic opportunity.” They assess 
that during this time international conditions 
will facilitate domestic development and the 
expansion of China’s “comprehensive national 
power,” which outside observers believe will 
serve what they assess to be the CCP’s 
overriding strategic objectives: 
>  Perpetuate CCP rule; 
>  Maintain domestic stability; 
 
>  Sustain economic growth and 
development; 
>  Defend national sovereignty and territorial 
integrity; 
>  Secure China’s status as a great power and, 
ultimately, reacquire regional preeminence; 
and 
>   Safeguard China’s interests abroad. 
 
The CCP has distilled these objectives into 
President Xi’s “China Dream of national 
rejuvenation.” The concept, first articulated by 
Xi shortly after the 2012 leadership transition, 
encapsulates 
a 
long-standing 
national 
aspiration of establishing a powerful and 
prosperous China. President Xi and other 
leaders also link the China Dream to two high- 
profile 
centenary 
goals: 
achieving 
a 
“moderately prosperous society” by the 100th 
anniversary of the CCP in 2021, and building a 
“prosperous, strong, democratic, civilized, 
harmonious, 
and 
beautiful 
modernized 
socialist strong country” by the 100th 
anniversary of the establishment of the PRC in 
2049. At the 19th Party Congress in October 
2017, President Xi also enumerated objectives 
for 
the 
“basic 
realization 
of 
socialist 
modernization” by 2035, which included China 
becoming one of the most “innovation- 
oriented” countries, significant enhancement 
of the country’s soft power, and continued 
economic prosperity. 
The China Dream also includes a 
commitment 
to develop military power commensurate with 
that of a great power. China’s leaders 
increasingly seek ways to leverage its growing 
economic, diplomatic, and military clout to 
establish regional preeminence and expand the 
country’s international influence.  China seeks 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

Chinese leaders view the 21st century’s 
first two decades as a “period of strategic 
opportunity.” 

President Xi’s “China Dream” encapsulates 
the long-standing national aspiration to 
establish a powerful and prosperous China. 

China increasingly seeks to leverage its 
growing economic, diplomatic, and military 
clout to advance national objectives and 
expand its international influence.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
44 
 
 
 
to secure these objectives without 
jeopardizing 
the regional stability that remains critical to the 
economic development that has helped the 
CCP maintain its monopoly on power. 
 
 
CHINA’S NATIONAL SECURITY MANAGEMENT 
China is modernizing CCP, military, and state institutions to ensure greater coherence in the conduct 
of China’s national security policy. These efforts address long-standing concerns that China’s legacy 
system of stove-piped organizations is ill-equipped to meet the growing challenges that China faces as 
its interests and capabilities expand. 
> Over the past three years, the National People’s Congress passed a suite of laws meant to 
address complex national security concerns, including counterterrorism, cybersecurity, and 
foreign non-government organization activities. In addition, an expansive 2015 National 
Security Law appeared to group these and other issues under a wide concept of national 
security and to strengthen the role of central authorities in its protection. 
> By 2015, the CCP had adopted China’s first national security strategy outline and established 
a new National Security Commission (NSC). Official media noted that the strategy is intended 
to unify efforts by various departments under the central leadership’s guidance. 
At the NSC’s first meeting, President Xi called on it to “establish a centralized and unified, highly 
authoritative state security system.” The NSC advises the Politburo, oversees the coordination of 
national security issues across the government, and manages crises, according to academics. The 
Commission’s purview appears to encompass domestic stability and external security, a much wider 
scope than the U.S. National Security Council. The NSC’s mission, sprawling definition of national 
security, and powerful leaders suggests that the NSC may claim broad authority over time. 
> The NSC is led by China’s top three Party leaders, currently Xi Jinping, Li Keqiang, and 
probably Li Zhanshu, who was named to replace National People’s Congress chairman, Zhang 
Dejiang, in October 2017. The head of its general office is likely Politburo member and CCP 
General Office Director Ding Xuexiang, who probably had little experience with international 
affairs during his decades-long career in provincial-level government and Party positions.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
45 
 
 
 
MILITARY STRATEGY 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 China’s leadership continues to direct the 
PLA to be capable of fighting and winning 
“informatized local wars” with an emphasis 
on “maritime military struggle.” 
 China also employs coercive tactics short of 
armed conflict to advance China’s interests. 
 China officially opened its first military base 
in Djibouti, highlighting the PLA’s growing 
overseas presence. 
The 
PLA 
is 
pursuing 
an 
ambitious 
modernization program that aligns with 
China’s two centenary goals. China’s military 
leaders want to achieve mechanization and to 
make “major progress” toward informatization 
by 2020, ahead of the first centenary goal. They 
also seek to reach a goal of “basic 
modernization” by 2035, and become a world- 
class military, which could be interpreted as 
“peer capability” with the U.S. military, by the 
second centenary goal in the middle of this 
century. 
Military Strategic Guidelines. In 2015, 
China’s leadership directed the PLA to be 
capable of fighting and winning “informatized 
local wars” with an emphasis on “maritime 
military struggle,” adjusting its guidance on the 
type of war the PLA should be prepared to 
fight. China promulgated this revision through 
its “military strategic guidelines,” the top-level 
directives   that   prescribe   concepts,    assess 
threats, and set priorities for planning, force 
posture, and modernization. This update 
indicates that China expects significant 
elements of a modern conflict to occur at sea. 
> China’s leadership has adjusted its national 
military strategic guidelines two other times 
since the fall of the Soviet Union. In 1993, 
Jiang Zemin directed the PLA to prepare 
for conflict under modern, high-tech 
conditions after observing U.S. military 
operations in the Gulf War. In 2004, Hu 
Jintao ordered the military to focus on 
winning “local war under informatized 
conditions.” 
> Taiwan remains the PLA’s main “strategic 
direction,” one of the geographic areas the 
leadership identifies as having strategic 
importance. Other focus areas include the 
East China Sea, the South China Sea, and 
China’s borders with India and North 
Korea. PLA reforms appear to have 
oriented each new theater command 
toward a specific set of contingencies. 
> In 2015, China outlined eight “strategic 
tasks,” or types of missions the PLA must 
be ready to execute: safeguard the 
sovereignty of China’s territory; safeguard 
national unification; safeguard China’s 
interests in new domains such as space and 
cyberspace; maintain strategic deterrence; 
participate 
in 
international 
security 
cooperation; maintain China’s political 
security  and  social  stability;  and  conduct

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
46 
 
 
 
emergency rescue, disaster relief, and “rights 
and interest protection” missions. 
> China’s  military  leaders  also  want  to 
achieve 
mechanization, 
make 
“major 
progress” toward informatization, and a 
“great rise” in strategic capability by 2020. 
The concept of “informatization” figures 
prominently in PLA writings and is roughly 
analogous to the U.S. military’s concept of 
“net-centric” capability: a force’s ability to 
use advanced information technology and 
communications 
systems 
to 
gain 
operational advantage over an adversary. 
PLA writings highlight the benefit of near 
real-time shared awareness of the battlefield 
in enabling quick and unified effort to seize 
tactical opportunities. 
Active Defense. China characterizes its 
military strategy as one of “active defense,” a 
concept it describes as strategically defensive 
but operationally offensive. It is rooted in a 
commitment not to launch a strategic offensive 
but to respond robustly if an adversary 
challenges China’s national unity, territorial 
sovereignty, or interests. According to this 
concept, defensive counterattacks can respond 
to an attack, or be launched to disrupt an 
adversary’s preparations to attack. The PLA 
interprets active defense to include both de- 
escalation and seizing the initiative. Active 
defense is enshrined in 2015’s National 
Security Law and is included in the PLA’s 
major strategy documents. President Xi’s 
speech during the 90th anniversary parade of 
the PLA further highlighted that China would 
never conduct “invasion and expansion,” but 
would never permit “any piece of Chinese 
territory” to separate from China. 
Coercive Approach. China’s leaders use 
tactics short of armed conflict to pursue 
China’s strategic objectives through activities 
calculated to fall below the threshold of 
provoking the United States, its allies and 
partners, or others in the Indo-Pacific region 
into open conflict. These tactics are particularly 
evident in China’s pursuit of its territorial and 
maritime sovereignty claims in the South and 
East China Seas, and most recently at Doka La 
Pass, near the tri-border region of Bhutan, 
India, and China. China’s construction in the 
Spratly Islands demonstrates China’s capacity – 
and a newfound willingness to exercise that 
capacity to strengthen China’s control over 
disputed areas, enhance China’s presence, and 
challenge other claimants. 
Growing Global Presence. China’s 
maritime emphasis and attention to missions 
guarding its overseas interests have increasingly 
propelled the PLA beyond China’s borders and 
its immediate periphery. The PLAN’s evolving 
focus – from “offshore waters defense” to a 
mix of “offshore waters defense” and “open 
seas protection” – reflects the high command’s 
expanding interest in a wider operational reach. 
China’s military strategy and ongoing PLA 
reform reflect the abandonment of its 
historically   land-centric   mentality. Similarly,

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
47 
 
 
 
doctrinal references to “forward edge defense” 
that would move potential conflicts far from 
China’s territory suggest PLA strategists 
envision an increasingly global role. In August 
2017, China officially opened its first military 
base in Djibouti. 
Military Operations Other Than War 
(MOOTW). In recent years, the PLA has 
embraced MOOTW, revising doctrine and 
teaching      materials,      and     incorporating 
MOOTW into its readiness and modernization 
plans. The PLA continues to prepare for 
MOOTW, including emergency response, 
counterterrorism, 
international 
rescue, 
HA/DR, PKO, and various other security 
tasks. In practice, the military shares many of 
these missions with the PAP, a domestically 
oriented paramilitary force.

48 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S INTERNAL SECURITY FORCES 
China’s national internal security forces consist primarily of the Ministry of Public Security (MPS), the 
Ministry of State Security (MSS), the PAP, and the PLA. China’s leaders rely on these forces to address 
challenges ranging from protests over political, social, environmental, or economic problems to 
suspected terrorist attacks. In recent years, China has focused increasingly on protests perceived as 
being linked to foreign influences and, separately, the Turkestan Islamic Party, which China’s leaders 
believe is a terrorist group connected to ethnic Uighur nationalists in the Xinjiang autonomous region. 
China blames Uighur “separatists” for terrorist attacks in China, and has imposed strict security in 
Xinjiang to curb potential attacks. 
Ministry of Public Security. The MPS leads China’s national police, which serves as the first-line 
force for public order. The key mission of the MPS is domestic law enforcement and the “maintenance 
of social security and order” with duties including anti-rioting and anti-terrorism. 
Ministry of State Security. The MSS is China’s main civilian intelligence/counterintelligence 
service. The missions of the MSS are: to protect China’s national security; to secure political and social 
stability; to implement the recently updated State Security Law and related laws and regulations; to 
protect state secrets; to conduct counterintelligence; and to investigate organizations or people inside 
China who carry out or direct, support, or aid other people in harming China’s national security. 
People’s Armed Police. The PAP is a paramilitary component of China’s armed forces whose 
primary mission is internal security and domestic stability. As part of PLA reforms, the PAP now falls 
solely under the authority of the CMC. Although the PAP has specialized units for a variety of 
functions, such as border security and firefighting, the most numerous are for internal security. PAP 
units are organized into contingents for each province, autonomous region, and centrally administered 
city, as well as a smaller number of mobile divisions available to deploy anywhere in the country in 
response to escalating internal crises. 
People’s Liberation Army. As the armed wing of the CCP, the PLA is the ultimate guarantor of 
the CCP’s rule, giving it a role in domestic security in addition to its national defense mission. For 
example, the PLA may provide transportation, logistics, and intelligence to assist local public security 
forces with internal security, and is authorized under the 1997 National Defense Law to “assist in 
maintaining public order” directly when CCP leaders consider it necessary.

49 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S TERRITORIAL DISPUTES IN CONTEXT 
China’s use of force in territorial disputes has varied widely throughout its history. Some disputes led 
to war, as in border conflicts with India in 1962 and Vietnam in 1979. A contested border with the 
former Soviet Union during the 1960s raised the possibility of nuclear war. In more recent cases 
involving land border disputes, China has sometimes been willing to compromise with and even offer 
concessions to its neighbors. Since 1998, China has settled 11 land-based territorial disputes with 6 of 
its neighbors. In recent years, China has adopted a coercive approach to deal with several disputes that 
continue over maritime features and ownership of potentially rich offshore oil and gas deposits. 
China and Japan have overlapping claims to both the continental shelves and the EEZs in the East 
China Sea. The East China Sea contains natural gas and oil, though hydrocarbon reserves are difficult 
to estimate. Japan maintains that an equidistant line from each country involved should separate the 
EEZs, while China claims an extended continental shelf beyond the equidistant line to the Okinawa 
Trench. Japan has accused China of breaching a principled consensus reached in 2008 that both sides 
would respect an equidistant median line in the East China Sea for resource development while 
conducting joint development of oil and natural gas field in a delineated area to the north spanning 
the line. Japan is concerned that China has conducted oil and gas drilling on the Chinese side of the 
median line of the East China Sea since 2013. China continues to contest Japan’s administration of 
the nearby Senkaku Islands. 
The South China Sea plays an important role in security considerations across East Asia because 
Northeast Asia relies heavily on the flow of oil and commerce through South China Sea shipping lanes, 
including more than 80 percent of the crude oil to Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. China claims 
sovereignty over the Spratly and Paracel Island groups and other land features within its self- 
proclaimed nine-dash line – claims disputed in whole or part by Brunei, the Philippines, Malaysia, and 
Vietnam. Taiwan, which occupies Itu Aba Island in the Spratly Islands, makes the same territorial 
assertions as China. In 2009, China protested extended continental shelf submissions in the South 
China Sea made by Malaysia and Vietnam. In its protest to the UN Commission on the Limits of the 
Continental Shelf, China included its ambiguous “nine-dash line” map. China also stated in a 2009 note 
verbale that it has “indisputable sovereignty over the islands in the South China Sea and the adjacent 
waters, and enjoys sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the relevant waters as well as the seabed and 
subsoil thereof.” In 2016, the arbitration ruling in the case brought by the Philippines against China 
under the LOSC determined that China has no legal basis to assert a maritime claim based on historic 
rights that would exceed entitlements it would enjoy under the LOSC. China did not participate in the 
arbitration and Chinese officials publicly voiced opposition to the ruling.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOREIGN POLICY 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 As China’s foreign interests and power have 
expanded, it has become a more prominent 
player in the international community. 
 China’s economic initiatives, including those 
under its “Belt and Road Initiative,” are 
designed to advance its interests and enhance 
its global role by integrating hard 
infrastructure development with trade and 
financial architecture. 
 China’s global trade and investment footprint 
is growing rapidly; Sri Lanka and a Chinese 
SOE signed a 99-year lease for the operation 
of Hambantota Port. 
Chinese military diplomacy efforts support 
China’s broader diplomatic goals. As China’s 
foreign interests and power have expanded, it 
has become a more prominent player in the 
international community. In his speech to the 
CCP’s 19th Party Congress in October 2017, 
President Xi advocated the construction of an 
international “community of common human 
destiny,” highlighting China’s willingness to 
work  with  the  people  of  all  countries  while 
stressing that China will defend its core 
interests and territorial sovereignty and is not 
afraid to respond to provocations. 
Xi’s remarks underscore a trend in China’s 
foreign policy in which it seeks a higher-profile 
role in existing regional and global institutions 
while selectively pursuing the establishment of 
new multilateral mechanisms and institutions. 
For instance, China launched the Asian 
Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) in 
January 2016, with 57 founding members, to 
promote infrastructure building in the region. 
China’s global trade and investment footprint 
is growing rapidly as Chinese state policy banks 
and Chinese firms have financed and 
implemented billions of dollars’ worth of major 
infrastructure projects throughout the Indo-
Pacific, Africa, Latin America, the Middle East, 
and parts of Europe since 2006. For example, 
in July 2017, Sri Lanka and a Chinese SOE 
signed a 99-year lease for the operation of 
Hambantota Port, following similar deals for 
ports in Piraeus, Greece, and Darwin, Australia. 
Beginning in 2013, China has attempted to 
reconceptualize its overseas infrastructure 
investment under its “One Belt, One Road,” 
now  renamed  the “Belt  and  Road  Initiative.” 
 
Tensions remain with India along the shared border over Arunachal Pradesh, which China asserts 
is part of Tibet and therefore part of China, and over the Aksai Chin region at the western end of the 
Tibetan Plateau. China and India continue to accuse each other of frequent incursions and military build-
ups along the disputed border. In the summer of 2017, India and Bhutan accused China of road 
construction in Doka La Pass, near the tri-border region of China, Bhutan, and India. When India 
responded by intervening in Chinese road construction and increasing its military posture in the region, 
China accused India of invading its territory.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
51 
 
 
 
These initiatives are indicative of China’s 
intentions to use economic means to advance 
its interests and enhance its global role by 
integrating hard infrastructure development 
with trade and financial architecture. China 
continues to regard stable relations with its 
neighbors, and the United States, as key to its 
development. China sees the United States as 
the dominant regional and global actor with the 
greatest potential to support or disrupt China’s 
rise. China seeks to depict itself as pursuing a 
peaceful development strategy in the region, 
conscious that if its neighbors view it primarily 
as a threat, they may try to more actively hedge 
against China’s growing power. At the same 
time, China portrays itself as resolute in 
defending its territorial interests. 
China’s increasingly assertive efforts to 
advance its sovereignty and territorial claims, 
and its forceful rhetoric, continue to cause 
concern among countries in the region and 
have caused some to enhance their ties to the 
United States. China’s simultaneous economic 
and diplomatic outreach to these countries 
complicates their willingness to directly 
challenge China. Nevertheless, concerns with 
China’s behavior are likely to intensify as the 
PLA continues to modernize, especially in the 
absence of greater transparency. 
DEVELOPMENTS IN CHINA’S 
ECONOMIC POLICY 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 China is non-compliant with some of its 
World Trade Organization (WTO) 
obligations. 
 China restricts inbound investment, limits 
other countries’ exports, and pursues state- 
guided investment overseas, including in 
strategic sectors. 
 China also employs economic tools 
coercively during periods of political tensions 
with its neighbors. 
The CCP places heavy emphasis on sustaining 
China’s economic growth as a strategic 
objective. Economic growth remains a key 
topic in China’s 13th Five-Year Plan, which 
was unveiled in 2016; China’s senior leaders 
recently reaffirmed their commitment to CCP 
control over the state-led economic apparatus, 
including through state-directed investment 
and innovation. China’s incomplete transition 
to a market economy has resulted in laws, 
regulations, and policies governing the tradable 
goods and services sectors, market access, and 
foreign direct investment that disadvantage 
foreign 
firms 
vis-à-vis 
their 
Chinese 
counterparts. On March 22, 2018, the Office 
of the U.S. Trade Representative released 
findings of an investigation under Section 301 
of the Trade Act of 1974 that determined that 
the acts, policies, and practices of the Chinese

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
52 
 
 
 
government related to technology transfer, 
intellectual property, and innovation are 
unreasonable or discriminatory and burden or 
restrict U.S. commerce, resulting in harm to the 
U.S. economy of at least $50 billion per year. 
 
China is non-compliant with some of its WTO 
obligations, and China does not adhere to 
some 
of 
the 
agreed-upon 
rules 
and 
fundamental principles that undergird WTO 
agreements. This shapes the country’s trade 
regime, which disadvantages foreign firms. 
Concerns include industrial policies that 
support domestic industries at the expense of 
foreign counterparts, subsidies to lower the 
cost of inputs, continued excess capacity in 
multiple industries, sector-specific limits on 
foreign direct investment, discriminatory 
cybersecurity 
and 
data 
transfer 
rules, 
insufficient 
intellectual 
property 
rights 
enforcement, inadequate transparency, and 
lack of market access particularly in the 
agriculture and service sectors. Market access 
remains challenging for foreign firms, as 
China’s restriction of inbound investment 
results in persistent underperformance in other 
countries’ services exports, particularly in the 
banking, 
insurance, 
Internet-related, 
professional, and retail services sectors. 
Some recent Chinese laws seek further 
restrictions on foreign firms: 
> National Security Law: Adopted in July 2015, 
the law limits foreign access to the 
information         and         communications 
technology (ICT) market in China on 
national security grounds. 
> Counterterrorism Law: Adopted in December 
2015, the law requires telecommunications 
operators and Internet service providers 
to 
provide information technical support 
assistance to public and state security 
organs 
“conducting 
prevention 
and 
investigation of terrorist activities.” 
> Cybersecurity  Law:  The  law,  which  went 
into effect in June 2017, promotes 
development of indigenous technologies 
and restricts sales of foreign ICT. The law 
also mandates that foreign companies 
submit ICT for government-administered 
national security reviews, store data in 
China, and seek government approval 
before transferring data outside of China. 
China additionally released an international 
cyberspace cooperation strategy in March 2017, 
which emphasizes the principle of state 
sovereignty in cyberspace and outlines China's 
approach to international engagement on global 
Internet governance. The strategy presents an 
alternative to the standing norms of Internet 
governance, emphasizing robust state control 
over the domestic Internet. The strategy also 
highlights the Chinese military’s important role 
in defending China's sovereignty in cyberspace, 
and calls for the expedited development of a 
military “cyber force” as an important aspect of 
China's active defense strategy.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
53 
 
 
 
As China restricts inbound investment and 
limits other countries’ exports to China, it also 
pursues state-directed investment overseas. 
Along with heavy investments in infrastructure 
and commodities to support its economic 
growth, China is investing in technologies that 
will be foundational for future innovations 
both for commercial and military applications. 
China obtains foreign technology through 
imports, foreign direct investment, industrial 
and cyberespionage, and establishment of 
foreign research and development (R&D) 
centers. 
Recent government policies to promote 
innovation focus on strengthening domestic 
industry while placing additional restrictions on 
foreign firms. 
> Made  in  China  2025:  Announced  in  May 
2015, the Made in China 2025 plan sets 
targets for higher levels of domestic 
manufacturing in strategic industries by 
2020 and 2025 with the goal of increasing 
indigenous innovation. China plans to 
award       subsidies       and       strengthened 
protection of domestic industries, while 
increasing pressure on foreign firms to 
transfer technology in order to do business 
in China. The plan also seeks to favor 
domestic enterprises at the expense of 
foreign participants in China’s markets. 
China has additionally employed economic 
tools coercively during periods of political 
tensions with its neighbors. Following the 
collision of a Chinese-flagged fishing boat with 
a Japanese Coast Guard vessel near the 
Senkaku Islands, China halted exports to Japan 
in 2010 of rare earth elements used in high-tech 
industries. In 2012, China blocked banana 
imports from the Philippines, a global leader in 
banana production, following a protracted 
standoff at Scarborough Reef. China only lifted 
the ban in 2016. In 2017, China used economic 
and diplomatic pressure, unsuccessfully, in an 
attempt to urge South Korea to reconsider the 
deployment of the THAAD system.

54 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S ENERGY STRATEGY 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 China’s interest in ensuring reliable, cost-effective, and diverse energy sources to support its 
economic growth drive its overseas energy investments. 
 China hopes to diversify energy suppliers and transport options. 
 
China’s engagement, investment, and foreign construction related to energy remained active in 2017. 
China invests in energy projects in more than 40 countries. This ambitious investment in energy assets 
is driven primarily by China’s interest in ensuring reliable, cost-effective, diverse energy sources to 
support its economic growth. This need heightens its interest in areas such as Central Asia and the 
Strait of Malacca that are critical to the transport of natural gas and oil. A number of Chinese 
companies, often working in concert with China’s economic development goals, are also interested 
in gaining access to advanced technologies to try to improve efficiency, obtain and deploy clean 
energy technologies, and increase profits. 
China hopes to diversify energy suppliers, types of energy, and transport options to ensure energy 
security. As a net importer of oil and natural gas (as it is the world’s second largest consumer of crude 
oil and the third largest country consumer of natural gas), China heavily relies on trade and seeks to 
maintain a supply chain that is less susceptible to external disruption. 
In 2017, China imported oil to meet approximately 67 percent of its need. This figure is projected 
to grow to approximately 80 percent by 2035, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). 
Also in 2017, 34 percent of China’s natural gas demand was met with imports, and is projected to 
grow to 46 percent by 2035, according to the IEA. China continues to look primarily to the Persian 
Gulf, Africa, and Russia/Central Asia to satisfy its growing oil and gas demand. 
China is particularly reliant on unimpeded SLOCs like the South China Sea and Strait of Malacca to 
ensure hydrocarbon deliveries. In 2017, approximately 80 percent of China’s oil imports and 13 
percent of natural gas imports transited the South China Sea and Strait of Malacca. Despite China’s 
efforts to diversify alternate supply routes, the sheer volume of oil and liquefied natural gas imported 
to China from the Middle East and Africa will continue to make strategic SLOCs important to China. 
Separate crude oil pipelines from Russia and Kazakhstan to China illustrate efforts to increase overland 
supply.  With completion of its expansion on January 1, 2018, China doubled the capacity of its 
pipeline to Russia from 300,000 to 600,000 barrels per day (b/d).   In April 2017,  the  440,000-b/d

55 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S TOP CRUDE SUPPLIERS 2017 
 
Country 
Volume (1,000 barrels/day) 
Percentage of Imported Crude Oil 
Russia 
1,198 
14 
Saudi Arabia 
1,045 
12 
Angola 
1,010 
12 
Iraq 
738 
9 
Iran 
624 
7 
Oman 
621 
7 
Brazil 
462 
5 
Venezuela 
436 
5 
Kuwait 
365 
4 
UAE 
203 
2 
Others 
1,776 
21 
 
Numbers may not equal 100 as figures have 
been rounded. 
Total 
8,478 
98 
 
Burma–China oil pipeline was commissioned. This pipeline bypasses the Strait of Malacca by 
transporting crude oil from Kyaukpyu, Burma to Kunming, China. In June 2017, the pipeline 
successfully transported crude oil to its end node, the Kunming Refinery. Saudi Arabia and other 
Middle Eastern and African countries will supply the crude oil for the pipeline. 
Approximately 40 percent of China’s natural gas imports (37.9 billion cubic meters (bcm)) came from 
Turkmenistan by pipeline via Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. This pipeline is designed to carry 55 bcm 
per year with plans to expand it to 80 bcm per year in 2020. A natural gas pipeline connecting China 
to Burma is designed to deliver 12 bcm per year, but only 3.4 bcm of gas shipped in 2017. The Russia- 
China natural gas pipeline is in the initial construction phase. The pipeline is expected to deliver up to 
38 bcm of gas per year by 2035; initial flows are to start by 2019.

56 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

57 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page left intentionally blank

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
FORCE MODERNIZATION GOALS 
AND TRENDS

59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China is advancing a comprehensive military 
modernization program aimed at making the 
PLA into a “world-class” military by 2049. This 
program includes improvements to military 
capabilities to conduct nuclear deterrence, anti-
access/area denial (A2/AD), and power 
projection 
operations. 
China’s 
military 
capabilities out to the first island chain are 
generally considered A2/AD; and as China 
expands its power projection capabilities 
beyond the first island chain into other regions, 
this concurrently enables expanding A2/AD 
capabilities out to the second island chain. The 
PLA also continues to develop capabilities to 
conduct cyberspace, space, and EW operations. 
PLA CAPABILITIES IN 
DEVELOPMENT 
ANTI-ACCESS/AREA DENIAL 
China continues to develop capabilities to 
dissuade, deter, or if ordered, defeat third-party 
intervention during a large-scale, theater 
campaign such as a Taiwan contingency. U.S. 
defense planners often term these collective 
PLA capabilities as A2/AD. China’s military 
modernization plan includes the development 
of capabilities to conduct long-range attacks 
against adversary forces that might deploy or 
operate within the western Pacific Ocean. 
These capabilities are currently most robust 
within the first island chain – the islands 
running from the Kurils, through Taiwan, to 
Borneo, roughly encompassing the Yellow Sea, 
East China Sea, and South China Sea – 
though 
China aims to strengthen its capabilities to 
extend further into the Pacific Ocean. These 
capabilities span the air, maritime, space, 
electromagnetic, and information domains. 
Long-Range Precision Strike. Military 
modernization has resulted in the rapid 
transformation of the PLA’s missile force. 
Today, China fields an array of conventionally 
armed short and medium-range ballistic 
missiles as well as ground- and air-launched 
land-attack cruise missiles. U.S. bases in Japan 
are in range of a growing number of Chinese 
MRBMs and LACMs. H-6K bomber flights 
into the Western Pacific Ocean demonstrate 
China’s ability to range Guam with air- 
launched LACMs. The DF-26, which debuted 
publicly in 2015 and was paraded again in 2017, 
is 
capable 
of 
conducting 
precision 
conventional or nuclear strikes against ground 
targets that could include U.S.  bases  on  Guam.  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

China continues to develop capabilities to 
dissuade, deter, or if ordered, defeat potential 
third-party intervention during a large-scale 
theater campaign. 

In addition to strike, air and missile defense, 
anti-surface, and anti-submarine capabilities 
improvements, China is focusing on 
information, cyber, and space and 
counterspace operations. 

China seeks enhanced joint operations 
command and control and a real-time 
surveillance, reconnaissance, and warning 
system to bolster its warfighting capability.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
60 
 
 
 
PLA writings see logistics and power 
projection assets as potential vulnerabilities in 
modern warfare – a judgment that accords with 
an expanding ability to target regional air bases, 
logistics and port facilities, communications, 
and other ground-based infrastructure. 
Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD). China is 
working to develop ballistic missile defenses 
consisting of kinetic-energy exo-atmospheric 
and endo-atmospheric interceptors. In 2016, 
official media confirmed China’s intent to 
move ahead with land- and sea-based mid- 
course missile defense capabilities.   The  HQ- 
19 mid-course interceptor was undergoing 
tests in 2016 to verify its capability against 
3,000 km-class ballistic missiles, and an HQ-19 
unit may have begun preliminary operations in 
western China. Indigenous radars including the 
JY-27A and JL-1A – the latter advertised as 
capable of the precision tracking of multiple 
ballistic missiles – reportedly provide target 
detection for the system. 
The PLA’s long-range SAM inventory also 
offers a limited capability against ballistic 
missiles. China’s domestic CSA-9 (HQ-9) long-
range SAM system is expected to have a limited 
capability to provide point defense against 
tactical ballistic missiles. China has fielded SA-
20 PMU2 SAMs and future S-400 SAMs may 
have some capability to engage ballistic missiles 
depending on the interceptors and supporting 
infrastructure. 
Surface   and   Undersea Operations. 
China   continues   to   construct   an   array   of 
offensive and defensive capabilities to enable 
the PLA to gain maritime superiority within the 
first island chain – the islands running from the 
Kurils, through Taiwan, to Borneo, roughly 
encompassing the Yellow Sea, East China Sea, 
and South China Sea – and grow toward 
projecting limited combat power at longer 
ranges. China’s broad range of ASCMs and 
launch platforms, as well as submarine- 
launched torpedoes and naval mines, allow the 
PLAN to create an increasingly lethal, multi- 
access threat against an adversary approaching 
Chinese 
waters 
and 
operating 
areas. 
Additionally, China has fielded CSS-5 ASBMs 
specifically designed to hold adversary aircraft 
carriers at risk 1,500 km off China’s coast, and 
has an ASBM variant of the longer-range DF- 
26 IRBM. The PLA is making gradual progress 
in the undersea domain as well but continues 
to lack a robust deep-water anti-submarine 
warfare capability. China is installing undersea 
monitoring systems that could improve 
China’s 
knowledge 
of 
the 
undersea 
environment. It is unclear whether the PLA 
can collect accurate targeting information and 
pass it to launch platforms in time for 
successful strikes in sea areas beyond the first 
island chain. 
Information Operations (IO). China 
assesses that controlling the information 
spectrum in the modern battlespace is a critical 
enabler, if not a fundamental prerequisite, of its 
ability to counter third-party intervention in a 
conflict. PLA authors often cite this capability 
–  sometimes  termed “information blockade”

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
61 
 
 
 
or “information dominance” – as necessary to 
seize the initiative and set the conditions to 
gain air and sea superiority. This “information 
blockade” concept likely envisions combining 
military capabilities across space and cyber 
domains with non-military instruments of state 
power. China’s investment in advanced EW 
systems, counterspace weapons, and cyber 
operations – combined with more traditional 
forms of information control such as 
propaganda and denial through opacity – 
reflect the priority the PLA places on 
information advantage. 
Space 
and 
Counterspace. 
PLA 
strategists regard the ability to use space-based 
systems – and to deny them to adversaries – 
as 
central to modern warfare. The PLA 
continues 
to strengthen its military space capabilities 
despite 
its 
public 
stance 
against 
the 
militarization of space. Space operations are 
viewed as a key enabler of PLA campaigns 
aimed at countering third-party intervention, 
although PLA doctrine has not elevated them 
to the level of a separate “campaign.” China 
seeks to enhance C2 in joint operations and 
establish 
a 
real-time 
surveillance, 
reconnaissance, and warning system and is 
increasing the number and capabilities of its 
space 
systems, 
including 
various 
communications and intelligence satellites and 
the Beidou navigation satellite system. China 
also continues to develop counterspace 
capabilities, including kinetic-kill missiles, 
ground-based lasers, and orbiting space robots, 
as   well   as   to   expand   space   surveillance 
capabilities that can monitor objects across the 
globe and in space and enable counterspace 
actions. 
Cyber 
Operations. 
PLA 
researchers 
believe that building strong cyber capabilities is 
necessary to protect Chinese networks and 
advocate seizing “cyberspace superiority” by 
using offensive cyber operations to deter or 
degrade an adversary’s ability to conduct 
military operations against China. Chinese 
writings suggest cyber operations allow China 
to manage the escalation of a conflict because 
they are a low-cost deterrent that demonstrate 
capabilities and resolve to an adversary. To 
support 
A2/AD, 
Chinese 
cyber 
attack 
operations aim to target critical military and 
civilian nodes to deter or disrupt adversary 
intervention, and retain the option to scale 
these attacks to achieve desired conditions with 
minimal strategic cost. China believes its cyber 
capabilities and personnel lag behind the 
United States and is working to improve 
training and bolster domestic innovation to 
overcome these perceived deficiencies and 
advance cyberspace operations. 
Integrated Air Defense System 
(IADS). 
China has a robust and redundant IADS 
architecture over land areas and within 300 nm 
(556 km) of its coast that relies on an extensive 
early warning radar network, fighter aircraft, 
and a variety of SAM systems. China is also 
placing radars and air defense weapons on 
outposts in the South China Sea, further 
extending its IADS. It also employs point 
defense  primarily  to  defend  strategic  targets

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
62 
 
 
 
against adversary long-range cruise missiles and 
airborne strike platforms. 
China has increasing numbers of advanced 
long-range SAMs, including its indigenous 
CSA-9, Russian SA-10 (S-300PMU), and   SA- 
20 (S-300PMU1/PMU2), all of which have 
the 
advertised capability to protect against both 
aircraft and low-flying cruise missiles. To 
improve its strategic air defenses, within the 
next few years China will take delivery of the 
Russian-built S-400 Triumf SAM system as a 
follow-on to the SA-20 and CSA-9. Compared 
to these other systems, the S-400s will feature 
a longer maximum range, improved missile 
seekers, and more sophisticated radars. China 
manufactures a variety of long-range air 
surveillance radars, including models claiming 
to support ballistic missile defense and others 
asserting the ability to detect stealth aircraft. 
Marketing materials also emphasize the 
systems’ ability to counter long-range airborne 
strike and combat support aircraft. PLAAF 
AEW&C aircraft such as the KJ-2000 and KJ- 
500 can further extend China’s radar coverage 
to well past the range of its ground-based 
radars. 
Air Operations. The PLA’s planned 
fielding 
of a fifth-generation fighter force will bolster 
its air-to-air capability, adding to the airpower 
of China’s fourth-generation Russian-built Su- 
27/Su-30 and J-11A, and the indigenous J- 
10A/B/C, J-11B, and more advanced J-16 
fighters. The J-20 and FC-31 feature high 
maneuverability, stealth characteristics, and an 
internal   weapons   bay,   as   well   as   advanced 
avionics and sensors providing enhanced 
situational awareness, advanced radar tracking 
and targeting capabilities, and integrated EW 
systems. A flight of J-20s performed a flyby at 
the July 2017 PLA 90th anniversary parade, and 
the J-20 may have begun active service in small 
numbers, possibly with a test and training unit. 
A modified FC-31 prototype made its first 
flight in late December 2016, although 
production may not begin until at least 2019. 
China is having difficulty with the engines and 
radars for these aircraft. 
> Chinese engineers report successful testing 
of a solid-fuel ramjet missile engine and 
suggest this will enable the J-20 to carry 
future Mach 5, 300 km-range air-to-air 
missiles. China’s continuing upgrades to its 
bomber fleet will give it the capability to 
carry new, longer-range cruise missiles, and 
China may add an aerial refueling capability 
to at least some H-6s, extending their range 
and loiter time. 
> The PLAAF employs the medium-range H-
6K bomber, which can carry up to six 
precision-guided CJ-20 air launched cruise 
missiles each, giving it the ability to engage 
U.S. forces as far away as Guam. Since 
2016, the PLAAF has steadily increased H- 
6K operating areas into the Western Pacific 
Ocean and the South China Sea. The 
acquisition of three IL-78 MIDAS aerial 
refueling tankers from Ukraine probably 
allowed the PLAAF to extend the range of 
Su-30 fighter aircraft beyond the first island 
chain to support H-6K bombers.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
63 
 
 
 
> Similarly, the acquisition and development 
of longer-range UAVs is increasing China’s 
ability to conduct long-range ISR and strike 
operations. The PLAAF was slated to take 
initial deliveries of the long-range, high- 
altitude Xianglong UAV during 2017, and 
developers 
stated 
design 
work 
was 
underway on near-space and long-range, 
stealthy UAVs. Multiple armed UAV types 
are  under  development,  in  testing,  or  in 
initial phases of deployment. In addition, 
China successfully tested the AT-200, 
which China claims is the “world’s first 
large cargo UAV.” The drone is designed 
to carry up to 1.5 tons of cargo, operate 
from unimproved runways as short as 200 
meters, and may be especially suited to 
provide logistic support to PLA forces in 
the South China Sea. 
 
 
CONVENTIONAL PRECISION STRIKE 
Short-Range Ballistic Missiles (300-1,000 km). The PLARF has approximately 1,200 SRBMs. 
The force fields advanced variants with improved ranges and accuracy in addition to more 
sophisticated payloads, and is phasing out earlier generations lacking true precision strike capability. 
Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles (1,000-3,000 km). The PLA is fielding approximately 200- 
300 conventional MRBMs to increase the range at which it can conduct precision strikes against land 
targets and naval ships operating out to the first island chain. 
Intermediate-Range Ballistic Missiles (3,000-5,500 km). The PLA has begun fielding a 
road-mobile, nuclear and conventional capable IRBM, expanding its near-precision strike capability as 
far as the second island chain. The PLAN also is expanding its network of sky wave and surface wave 
over-the-horizon (OTH) radars. In conjunction with reconnaissance satellites, these OTH systems 
provide targeting capabilities at extended distances from China to support long-range precision strikes, 
including employment of ASBMs. 
Land-Attack Cruise Missiles. The PLA continues to field approximately 200 to 300 air- and 
ground-launched LACMs for standoff precision strikes. Air-launched LACMs include the YJ-63, KD- 
88, and CJ-20 (the air-launched version of the CJ-10 GLCM). China may be adding an electro-optic 
or imaging infrared terminal guidance capability to the 1,500 km-range CJ-20. China recently adapted 
the KD-88 LACM, which has an advertised range of more than 100 km, and may be testing a longer-
range version.

64 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anti-Ship Cruise Missiles. China deploys a wide range of advanced ASCMs with the YJ-83 series 
as the most numerous, equipping the majority of China’s ships as well as multiple aircraft. China has 
also outfitted several ships with YJ-62 ASCMs. The YJ-18 is a long-range, torpedo tube launched 
ASCM with a supersonic terminal sprint. It has likely replaced the older YJ-82 on SONG, YUAN, and 
SHANG class submarines, and China claims that the new LUYANG III-class DDG and RENHAI 
CG are outfitted with a vertically launched variant of the YJ-18. China has also developed the long- 
range supersonic YJ-12 ASCM for the H-6 bomber. At China’s 90th anniversary parade in July, China 
displayed a ship-to-ship variant of the YJ-12 called the YJ-12A. China also carries the Russian SS-N-
22 SUNBURN on four Russian built SOVREMENNYY-class DDGs and the Russian SS-N-27b 
SIZZLER on eight Russian built KILO-class submarines. 
Ground Attack Munitions. The PLAAF has a small number of tactical air-to-surface missiles as 
well as precision munitions; guidance options include satellite positioning, laser, electro-optic, and 
imaging infrared. China is developing or adapting a range of smaller-sized ASMs and guided bombs 
for use on its increasing range of armed UAVs. 
Anti-Radiation Weapons. The PLA imported Israeli-made HARPY UAVs and Russian-made 
anti-radiation missiles during the 1990s. As of 2017, China is integrating the YJ-91, an indigenous 
version of the Russian Kh-31P (AS-17), into its fighter-bomber force, and advertising the ASN-301 
anti-radiation drone, an improved domestic variant of the HARPY. 
Artillery-Delivered High Precision Munitions. The PLA is fielding long-range rocket artillery 
systems with the range to strike targets within or even across the Taiwan Strait. The most common of 
these is the PHL-03 12x300 mm multiple-rocket launcher – similar to the Russian 9A52-2 SMERCH, 
with a 150 km range. Improved warheads for these rockets may include vertical penetrators and 
sensor-fuzed munitions.

65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLA POWER PROJECTION 
KEY TAKEAWAYS: 
 China has increased capabilities to address 
regional and global security objectives while 
continuing its emphasis on Taiwan 
contingencies. 
 The PLAN’s ability to perform missions 
beyond the first island chain is modest but 
growing as it gains experience operating in 
distant waters and acquires larger and more 
advanced platforms. 
 PLA aviation forces continue to improve 
offshore offensive and defensive capabilities 
such as strike, air and missile defense, 
strategic mobility, and early warning and 
reconnaissance missions. 
 The PLARF is increasingly capable of 
projecting power beyond the region, both 
with anti-ship and land-attack missiles. 
Over the last decade, China has increased its 
capability to address regional and global 
security objectives, beyond its continued 
emphasis 
on 
capabilities 
for 
Taiwan 
contingencies. PLA ground, naval, air, and 
missile forces are increasingly able to project 
power 
through 
peacetime 
operations, 
increasing the operating duration and distance 
from China, and are expanding capacity to 
contest U.S. military superiority in the event 
of 
a regional conflict. These forces may function 
in   an   A2/AD   role,   which   in   this   context 
 
comprises a subset of power projection 
activities. 
China’s continuing improvements of air- and 
ground-based missile strike capabilities within 
and, increasingly, beyond the first island chain 
enables other military assets to operate farther 
from China. These assets can conduct a variety 
of missions including presence and sovereignty 
enforcement, as well as offensive missions 
such as blockades, and A2/AD. China also 
focuses on enhancing the PLA’s ISR 
capabilities, extending the reach of the PLA’s 
situational awareness as well as enabling 
improved targeting and timely responses to 
perceived threats. 
PLA Navy. The PLAN continues to develop 
into a global force, gradually extending its 
operational reach beyond East Asia and the 
Indo-Pacific into a sustained ability to operate 
at increasingly longer ranges. The PLAN’s 
latest 
naval 
platforms 
enable 
combat 
operations beyond the reach of China’s land- 
based defenses. In particular, China’s aircraft 
carrier and planned follow-on carriers, once 
operational, will extend air defense coverage 
beyond the range of coastal and shipboard 
missile systems, and enable task group 
operations at increasingly longer ranges. The 
PLAN’s emerging requirement for sea-based 
land-attack will also enhance China’s ability to 
project power. Furthermore, the PLAN now 
has a sizable force of high-capability logistical 
replenishment ships to support long-distance, 
long-duration deployments, including two new

66 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
ships being built specifically to support 
aircraft 
carrier operations. The expansion of naval 
operations beyond China’s immediate region 
will also facilitate non-war uses of military 
force. 
> The PLAN’s force structure continues to 
evolve, incorporating more platforms with 
the versatility for both offshore and long- 
distance 
power 
projection. 
China 
is  
engaged in series production of the 
LUYANG  III-class  DDG,  the  JIANGKAI 
II-class FFG, and the JIANGDAO-class 
FFL. China 
also 
launched 
its first 
RENHAI-class (Type 055) CG in 2017, 
with commissioning expected by 2019. At 
least three additional units of this class are 
currently 
under 
construction. 
The 
RENHAI CG is a 10,000-ton design that 
can carry an array of long-range ASCMs and 
long-range SAMs, and will likely be able to 
launch ASBMs and LACMs once these 
weapons are available. The RENHAI CG 
will be China’s premiere carrier escort for 
blue-water operations. 
> The PLAN continues to extend its strike 
range with more ship-, submarine-, and 
aircraft-deployed 
ASCMs, 
a 
growing 
majority 
of 
which 
are 
of 
Chinese 
manufacture. 
> China continues to learn lessons from 
operating its first aircraft carrier, Liaoning. 
Its first domestically produced aircraft 
carrier was launched in 2017 and is  
expected  to  be  commissioned  in 2019 – the 
beginning of what the PLA states will be a 
multi-carrier force. China’s next generation 
of carriers will probably have greater 
endurance and be capable of launching 
more varied types of fixed-wing aircraft, 
including EW, early warning, and ASW 
aircraft. 
These 
improvements 
would 
increase the striking power of a potential 
carrier battle group in safeguarding China’s 
interests in areas beyond its immediate 
periphery. The carriers would most likely 
also perform such missions as patrolling 
economically 
important 
SLOCs 
and 
conducting naval diplomacy, regional 
deterrence, and HA/DR operations. 
> In 2017, the PLAN continued to build 
multiple new large ships that can support 
force projection operations, including 
LPDs, large logistical support ships, and 
specialized ocean-going auxiliary ships such 
as high-capability intelligence collection 
ships (AGIs). 
The PLAN’s ability to perform missions 
beyond the first island chain is modest but 
growing as it gains more experience operating 
in distant waters and acquires larger and more 
advanced platforms. China’s experience in 
extended range operations primarily comes 
from extended task group deployments and its 
ongoing counterpiracy mission in the Gulf of 
Aden. 
> In 2017, the PLAN continued to conduct 
deployments 
into 
the 
Western 
and 
Southern  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans,  and

67 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
for the second time in 2017, the Bering Sea. 
A trio of PLAN ships conducted the 
PLAN’s 
longest-ever 
goodwill 
deployment, visiting 20 countries in the 
Indo-Pacific, Europe, Africa, and Oceania. 
Three other PLAN ships sailed to the Baltic 
Sea to conduct a joint exercise with the 
Russian Navy, part of their JOINT SEA 
exercise series; the two navies exercised air 
defense and anti-submarine operations and 
submarine rescue operations. 
> China sustained its three-ship task group in 
the Gulf of Aden in 2017, continuing a nine-
year effort to protect Chinese merchant 
shipping from maritime piracy. This 
operation is China’s first enduring naval 
operation beyond the Indo-Pacific region. 
The PLAN also continued submarine 
deployments 
to 
the 
Indian 
Ocean, 
demonstrating its increasing familiarity with 
operating in that region and underscoring 
China’s interest in protecting SLOCs 
beyond the South China Sea. 
> Chinese AGIs operated well beyond the 
first island chain in 2017; one Type 815A 
DONGDIAO-class AGI deployed to the 
Coral Sea in July to collect against a joint 
Australian-U.S. naval exercise, while in the 
same month another DONGDIAO AGI 
sailed to a position off Alaska, likely to 
monitor a live test of the THAAD missile 
defense system. 
> Logistics  and  intelligence  support,  
however, remain key obstacles, despite 
ongoing 
naval 
ship 
construction, 
particularly in more distant areas from 
China. China’s first naval base in Djibouti 
may alleviate some logistics challenges for 
Indian Ocean operations, and China may 
establish additional logistics facilities over 
the next decade. The PLAN seeks to be able 
to operate across the greater Indo-Pacific 
region in high-intensity actions over a 
period of several months. 
Although China has long challenged foreign 
military activities in its maritime zones in a 
manner that is inconsistent with the rules of 
customary international law as reflected in the 
LOSC, 
the 
PLA 
has 
recently 
started 
conducting the very same types of military 
activities inside and outside the first island 
chain in the maritime zones of other countries. 
This 
contradiction 
highlights 
China’s 
continued lack of commitment to the rules of 
customary international law. 
Even though China is a state party to the 
LOSC, China’s domestic laws restrict military 
activities in its exclusive economic zone (EEZ), 
including intelligence collection and military 
surveys, contrary to LOSC. At the same time, 
the PLA is increasingly undertaking military 
operations in other countries’ EEZs. The map 
on the following page depicts new PLA 
operating areas in foreign EEZs since 2014. In 
2017, the PLAN conducted air and naval 
operations in Japan’s EEZ; employed an AGI 
ship,  likely  to  monitor  testing  of  a  THAAD

68 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
system in the U.S. EEZ near the Aleutian 
Islands; and employed an AGI ship to monitor 
a multi-national naval exercise in Australia's 
EEZ. PLA operations in foreign EEZs have 
taken place in Northeast and Southeast Asia, 
and a growing number of operations are also 
occurring farther from Chinese shores. The 
map focuses only on new, uninvited PLA 
operating areas in foreign EEZs, though the 
PLA routinely operates throughout the year in 
the East and South China Seas.

69 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
70 
 
 
 
PLA Air Force and PLA Navy Aviation. 
The PLAAF and PLAN Aviation continue to 
improve their capabilities to conduct offensive 
and defensive offshore operations such as 
strike, air and missile defense, strategic mobility, 
and early warning and reconnaissance missions. 
Although current capabilities are primarily in 
the A2/AD realm, with only a limited power 
projection role, both the PLAAF and PLAN 
Aviation are seeking to extend their reach. The 
PLAAF, in particular, has received repeated 
calls from its leadership to become a truly 
“strategic” air force, able to project power at 
long distances and support Chinese national 
interests wherever they extend. 
> Following  PLAAF  Commander  General 
Ma Xiaotian’s 2016 public statement that 
China was developing a new generation of 
long-range bomber, a number of reports 
suggest the new bomber, likely named the 
H-20, could debut sometime in the next 
decade with the following features: a 
stealthy design employing many fifth- 
generation technologies; a likely range of at 
least 8,500 km; a payload of at least 10  
metric tons; and a capability to employ   
both conventional and nuclear weaponry.   
A 
photograph 
of 
a 
possible 
H-20    
prototype depicted a flying wing airframe 
akin to the B-2 bomber and X-47B stealth 
unmanned combat aerial vehicle (UCAV). 
China may also be developing a refuelable 
bomber that could reach IOC before the 
long-range bomber,  expanding long-range 
offensive bomber capability beyond the 
second island chain. 
> The construction of new airfields and 
hangars on outposts in the South China Sea 
extend the possible operating areas of PLA 
aviation forces. Future deployed Chinese 
combat aircraft operating from Spratly 
Island outposts could extend their range 
and loiter time over the South China Sea or 
even reach into the Indian Ocean. China 
could also replicate its success establishing 
a naval base in Djibouti by establishing 
overseas logistics facilities that would 
further extend and sustain regional and 
global air operations. 
> China continues to produce the Y-20 heavy 
lift transport aircraft to correct a strategic 
airlift deficiency that holds back force 
projection  capabilities.  The  Y-20  could 
also acquire additional missions, such as 
serving as an airborne early warning and 
control system (AEW&C) and as an aerial 
refueling tanker. China also continues to 
develop the AG-600 large amphibious 
seaplane, with an anticipated range of 4,500 
km and the ability to take off from water to 
support operations far from the mainland. 
The AG-600 completed its first flight in 
December 
2017, 
and 
the 
Chinese 
Government has already ordered 17 
aircraft. 
PLA Rocket Force. The PLARF fields 
multiple missiles capable of projecting power 
beyond the region. Among these are the CSS-

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
71 
 
 
 
5 Mod-5 ASBM, which has a range of 1,500 km 
and a maneuverable reentry vehicle (MaRV) to 
challenge ballistic missile defenses. China also 
deploys the land-attack CSS-5 Mod 4, placing 
targets on Okinawa and the main Japanese 
islands at risk. The DF-26 IRBM has a 
maximum range of 4,000 km and is capable of 
conducting precision strikes against ground 
and ship targets, potentially threatening U.S. 
land and sea-based forces as far away as Guam. 
The PLARF has deployed shorter-ranged 
missile systems opposite Taiwan, including 
several types of SRBMs and the ground- 
launched CJ-10 LACM. 
In 2017, China also displayed the DF-16G 
MRBM for the first time. According to the 
PLARF, the system carries a conventional 
warhead and has high accuracy, strong 
destructive power, and a short preparation time. 
 
 
CHINA'S GROWING CIVILIAN AND PARAMILITARY MARITIME CAPABILITY 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The CCG is the world’s largest; the PAFMM is the only government-sanctioned maritime militia 
in 
the world. 
 The PAFMM has organizational ties to, and is sometimes directed by, China’s armed forces, and is 
active in the South and East China Seas. 
 PAFMM units enable low-intensity coercion activities to advance territorial and maritime claims, 
including a patrol with the PLAN and CCG in August 2017. 
 
China Coast Guard (CCG). The CCG is responsible for a wide range of missions, including 
enforcement of China’s sovereignty claims, surveillance, protection of fisheries, anti-smuggling, and 
general law enforcement. China primarily uses civilian maritime law enforcement agencies in maritime 
disputes, selectively using the PLAN to provide overwatch in case of escalation. 
The CCG’s rapid expansion and modernization has improved China’s ability to enforce its maritime 
claims. Since 2010, the CCG’s fleet of large patrol ships (more than 1,000 tons) has more than doubled 
from approximately 60 to more than 130 ships, making it by far the largest coast guard force in the 
world and increasing its capacity to conduct simultaneous, extended offshore operations in multiple 
disputed areas. Furthermore, the newer ships are substantially larger and more capable than the older 
ships, and the majority are equipped with helicopter facilities, high-capacity water cannons, and guns 
ranging from 30mm to 76mm.  A number of these ships are capable of long-endurance out-of-area

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
72 
 
 
 
operations. These characteristics give CCG vessels the ability to intimidate local, non-Chinese fishing 
boats, as occurred in an October 2016 incident near Scarborough Reef. 
In addition, the CCG operates more than 70 fast patrol combatants (more than 500 tons), which can 
be used for limited offshore operations, more than 400 coastal patrol craft, and approximately 1000 
inshore and riverine patrol boats. The CCG is likely to add another 25-30 patrol ships and patrol 
combatants by the end of the decade before the construction program levels off. 
People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM). The PAFMM is a subset of China’s 
national militia, an armed reserve force of civilians available for mobilization. The PAFMM is the only 
government-sanctioned maritime militia in the world. Militia units organize around towns, villages, 
urban sub-districts, and enterprises, and vary widely in composition and mission. In the South China 
Sea, the PAFMM plays a major role in coercive activities to achieve China’s political goals without 
fighting, part of broader PRC military doctrine stating confrontational operations short of war can be 
an effective means of accomplishing political objectives. The militia has played significant roles in a 
number of military campaigns and coercive incidents over the years, including the 2009 harassment of 
the USNS IMPECCABLE conducting normal operations, the 2012 Scarborough Reef standoff, the 
2014 Haiyang Shiyou-981 oil rig standoff, and a large surge of ships in waters near the Senkakus in 2016. 
A large number of PAFMM vessels train with and assist the PLAN and CCG in tasks such as 
safeguarding maritime claims, surveillance and reconnaissance, fishery protection, logistics support, 
and search and rescue. The government subsidizes various local and provincial commercial 
organizations to operate militia vessels to perform “official” missions on an ad hoc basis outside of 
their regular civilian commercial activities. In August 2017, China used PLAN, CCG, and PAFMM 
ships to patrol around Thitu Island and planted a flag on Sandy Cay, a sandbar within 12 nm of Subi 
Reef and Thitu Island, possibly in response to the Philippines’ reported plans to upgrade the runway 
on Thitu Island. 
In the past, the PAFMM rented fishing vessels from companies or individual fishermen, but China 
has built a state-owned fishing fleet for at least part of its maritime militia force in the South China 
Sea. The Hainan provincial government, adjacent to the South China Sea, ordered the building of 84 
large militia fishing vessels with reinforced hulls and ammunition storage, which the militia received 
by the end of 2016, along with extensive subsidies to encourage frequent operations in the Spratly 
Islands. This particular PAFMM unit is also China’s most professional, paid salaries independent of 
any clear commercial fishing responsibilities, and recruited from recently separated veterans.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
73 
 
 
 
 
 
ADVANCING TOWARD AN 
INFORMATIZED MILITARY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
President Xi’s speeches at the 19th Party 
Congress and the PLA’s 90th anniversary 
highlighted recent progress “accelerating 
toward informatization” that will provide the 
PLA with a “great rise in strategic capability.” 
Chinese military writings describe informatized 
warfare as the use of information technology 
to create an operational system-of-systems 
allowing the PLA to acquire, transmit, process, 
and use information to conduct joint military 
operations across the domains of land, sea, air, 
space, cyberspace and the electromagnetic 
spectrum during a conflict. Ongoing military 
reforms are aimed at accelerating the 
incorporation of information systems enabling 
forces and commanders to carry out missions 
and tasks more effectively to win informatized 
 
local wars. The PLA continues to expand the 
scope and regularity of military exercises 
simulating these operations and likely views 
conventional and cyber operations as means of 
achieving information dominance. 
Command, Control, Communications, 
Computers, 
 and  
Intelligence 
Modernization (C4I). China continues to 
prioritize C4I modernization as a response to 
trends in modern warfare that emphasize the 
importance of rapid information-sharing, 
processing, and decision-making. The PLA 
seeks to modernize itself both technologically 
and organizationally to command complex, 
joint operations in near and distant battlefields 
with increasingly sophisticated weapons. 
The PLA sees networked, technologically 
advanced C4I systems as essential to provide 
reliable, secure communications to fixed and 
mobile command posts, enabling rapid, 
effective, 
multi-echelon 
decision-making. 
These systems are designed to distribute data 
including intelligence, battlefield information, 
logistical information, and weather reports via 
redundant 
and 
robust 
communications 
networks to improve commanders’ situational 
awareness. The PLA views making near-real- 
time ISR data available to field commanders as 
especially valuable in streamlining their 
decision processes. China is fielding the ICP to 
units at multiple levels across the force to 
enable 
the 
lateral 
and 
cross-service 
communications required  for  joint operations. 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

President Xi’s speeches highlighted recent 
progress “accelerating toward 
informatization” that will provide the PLA 
with a “great rise in strategic capability.” 

China fields advanced automated command 
systems, such as the Integrated Command 
Platform (ICP), to enable joint operations. 

The PLA considers information operations 
(IO) – including cyber, electronic, and 
psychological warfare – integral to 
conducting modern warfare.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
74 
 
 
 
Through the use of digital databases and 
command automation tools, such systems 
allow commanders to issue orders to multiple 
units simultaneously while on the move and 
allow units to adapt their actions quickly to 
shifting conditions. 
These technical improvements are notably 
boosting PLA operational flexibility and 
responsiveness. As the PLA continues to focus 
on its ability to fight and win informatized 
wars, future information systems will likely 
implement emerging technologies such as big-
data, internet of things, and cloud computing 
to provide reliable, automated platforms that 
further increase process efficiencies. The PLA 
has already begun this process by embracing 
big-data analytics that fuse together a variety of 
data to improve automation, to create a 
comprehensive, real-time picture. 
Electronic Warfare. The PLA considers 
EW an integral component of modern warfare. 
Its 
EW 
doctrine 
emphasizes 
using 
electromagnetic spectrum weapons to suppress 
or to deceive enemy electronic equipment. 
Potential EW victims include adversary 
systems operating in radio, radar, microwave, 
infrared, and optical frequency ranges, as well 
as adversarial computer and information 
systems. China has fielded several types of 
UAVs with EW payloads, and showcased 
several of these during the PLA 90th 
Anniversary parade in July 2017. PLA EW 
units routinely conduct jamming and anti- 
jamming      operations      against      multiple 
communication and radar systems and GPS 
satellite systems in force-on-force exercises. 
These not only test operational units’ 
understanding of EW weapons, equipment, 
and performance, but also help improve 
confidence in their ability to operate effectively 
in a complex electromagnetic environment. In 
addition, the PLA tests and reportedly validates 
advances in EW weapons research in these 
exercises. 
Cyberwarfare. 
The 
development 
of 
cyberwarfare capabilities is consistent with 
authoritative  PLA  writings,  which  identify 
IO – comprising cyber, electronic, and 
psychological warfare – as integral to achieving 
information superiority and as an effective 
means for countering a stronger foe. China has 
publicly identified cyberspace as a critical 
domain for national security and declared its 
intent to expedite the development of its cyber 
forces. 
PLA writings note the effectiveness of cyber 
warfare in recent conflicts and advocate 
targeting an adversary’s C2 and logistics 
networks to affect its ability to operate during 
the early stages of conflict. They credit cyber 
attacks on an enemy’s C2 system with the 
potential to “completely disrupt” these systems, 
paralyzing the victim and thus gaining 
battlefield 
superiority 
for 
the 
attacker. 
Accordingly, the PLA may seek to use its 
cyberwarfare capabilities to collect data for 
intelligence and cyber attack purposes; to 
constrain an adversary’s actions by targeting 
network-based logistics,  communications,  and

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
75 
 
 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

China invests considerable resources to 
maintain and modernize a limited, but 
survivable, nuclear force. 

China has long maintained a “no first use” 
(NFU) policy, though ambiguity remains 
over the conditions under which China’s 
NFU policy would no longer apply. 
 
commercial activities; or to serve as a force- 
multiplier when coupled with kinetic attacks 
during times of crisis or conflict. 
The PLA’s ongoing structural reforms may 
further  change  how  the  PLA  organizes  and 
commands IO, particularly as the SSF evolves 
over time. In consolidating cyber and other IO-
related elements, the SSF is likely generating 
synergies through combining national-level 
cyber reconnaissance, attack, and defense 
capabilities under one roof. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NUCLEAR DETERRENCE 
 China has nuclear-capable delivery systems in 
the PLARF and PLAN, and the PLAAF has 
been newly re-assigned a nuclear mission, 
which would create a nuclear triad. 
China’s nuclear weapons policy prioritizes the 
maintenance of a nuclear force able to survive 
a first strike and to respond with sufficient 
strength to inflict unacceptable damage on an 
enemy. China insists that the new generation 
of mobile missiles, with warheads consisting of 
MIRVs and penetration aids,  are  intended to 
CYBER ACTIVITIES DIRECTED AGAINST THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
Computer systems around the world, including those owned by the U.S. Government, continued to 
be targeted by China-based intrusions through 2017. These and past intrusions focused on accessing 
networks and extracting information. China uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection 
against U.S. diplomatic, economic, academic, and defense industrial base sectors. China can use the 
information to benefit China’s defense high-technology industries, support China’s military 
modernization, provide the CCP insights into U.S. leadership perspectives, and enable diplomatic 
negotiations, such as those supporting China’s Belt and Road Initiative. Additionally, targeted 
information could enable PLA cyber forces to build an operational picture of U.S. defense networks, 
military disposition, logistics, and related military capabilities that could be exploited prior to or during 
a crisis. The accesses and skills required for these intrusions are similar to those necessary to conduct 
cyber operations in an attempt to deter, delay, disrupt, and degrade DoD operations prior to or during 
a conflict.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
76 
 
 
 
ensure the viability of its strategic deterrent in 
the face of continued advances in U.S. and, to 
a lesser extent, Russian strategic ISR, precision 
strike, and missile defense capabilities. 
China has long maintained a “no first use” 
(NFU) policy, stating it would use nuclear 
forces only in response to a nuclear strike 
against China. China’s NFU pledge consists of 
two stated commitments: China will never use 
nuclear weapons first at any time and under any 
circumstances, 
and 
it 
unconditionally 
undertakes not to use or threaten to use nuclear 
weapons against any non-nuclear-weapon state 
or in nuclear-weapon-free zones. 
There is some ambiguity, however, over the 
conditions under which China’s NFU policy 
would no longer apply. Some PLA officers 
have written publicly of the need to spell out 
conditions under which China might need to 
use nuclear weapons first; for example, if an 
enemy’s conventional attack threatened the 
survival of China’s nuclear force or of the 
regime itself. There has been no indication that 
national leaders are willing to attach such 
nuances and caveats to China’s NFU policy. 
China’s lack of transparency regarding the 
scope and scale of its nuclear modernization 
program raises questions regarding its future 
intent. 
China invests considerable resources to 
maintain a limited, but survivable, nuclear force 
to ensure that the PLA can deliver a damaging 
responsive  nuclear  strike.  China  is  enhancing 
peacetime readiness levels for these nuclear 
forces to ensure responsiveness. 
Land-Based Platforms. China’s nuclear 
arsenal currently consists of approximately 75- 
100 ICBMs, including the silo-based CSS-4 
Mod 2 (DF-5A) and Mod 3 (DF-5B); the solid- 
fueled, road-mobile CSS-10 Mod 1 and Mod 2 
(DF-31 and DF-31A); and the more limited 
range CSS-3 (DF-4). During the PLA’s 90th 
Anniversary parade, China displayed for the 
first time the DF-31AG, described as an 
enhanced version of the DF-31A ICBM that 
also uses a transporter-erector-launcher to 
increase its mobility and survivability. This 
force is complemented by road-mobile, solid- 
fueled CSS-5 Mod 2 and Mod 6 (DF-21) 
MRBMs and DF-26 IRBMs for regional 
deterrence missions. 
Sea-based Platforms. China continues to 
produce the JIN-class SSBN, with four 
commissioned and at least one other under 
construction. China’s JIN SSBNs, which are 
equipped to carry up to 12 CSS-N-14 (JL-2) 
SLBMs, are the country’s first viable sea-based 
nuclear deterrent. China’s next-generation 
Type 096 SSBN, reportedly to be armed with 
the follow-on JL-3 SLBM, will likely begin 
construction in the early-2020s. Based on the 
40-plus-year service life of China’s first- 
generation SSNs, China will operate its JIN and 
Type 096 SSBN fleets concurrently. 
Future Efforts. The PLA is upgrading its 
aircraft with two new air-launched ballistic 
missiles,  one  of  which  may  include  a  nuclear

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
77 
 
 
 
payload. The PLA is developing a range of 
technologies China perceives are necessary to 
counter U.S. and other countries’ ballistic 
missile defense systems, including MaRV, 
MIRVs, decoys, chaff, jamming, thermal 
shielding, and hypersonic glide vehicles. 
Additionally, the PLA will likely continue 
deploying more sophisticated C2 systems and 
refining  C2  processes as growing numbers  of 
mobile ICBMs and future SSBN deterrence 
patrols require the PLA to safeguard the 
integrity of nuclear release authority for a larger, 
more dispersed force. 
 
 
DEVELOPMENTS IN NUCLEAR DETERRENCE 
Nuclear Triad. China maintains nuclear-capable delivery systems in the PLARF and PLAN, and 
the PLAAF has been re-assigned a nuclear mission. The deployment and integration of nuclear- 
capable bombers would, for the first time, provide China with a nuclear “triad” of delivery systems 
dispersed across land, sea, and air – a posture considered since the Cold War to improve survivability 
and strategic deterrence. A defense industry publication has also discussed the development of a new 
low-yield nuclear weapon. 
>      In 2016, the PLAAF commander referred publicly to the military’s efforts to produce an advanced 
long-range strategic bomber, a platform observers tied to nuclear arms. China is developing a 
stealthy, long-range strategic bomber with a nuclear delivery capability that could be operational 
within the next ten years. 
Launch on Warning. PLA writings express the value of a “launch on warning” nuclear posture, 
an approach to deterrence that uses heightened readiness, improved surveillance, and streamlined 
decision-making processes to enable a more rapid response to enemy attack. These writings highlight 
the posture’s consistency with China’s nuclear “No First Use” policy, suggesting it may be an 
aspiration for China’s nuclear forces. China is working to develop a space-based early warning 
capability that could support this posture in the future.

78 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLA UNDERGROUND FACILITIES 
The PLA continues to maintain a robust and technologically advanced underground facility (UGF) 
program protecting all aspects of its military forces, including C2, logistics, missile systems, and naval 
forces. China has thousands of UGFs with more being constructed each year. The PLA may utilize 
these UGFs to protect valuable assets from the effects of missile strikes and conceal military 
operations from adversaries. China’s nuclear “No First Use” policy also contributed to the 
construction of UGFs for the country’s nuclear forces, which plan to survive an initial nuclear strike. 
China began to update and to expand its military UGF program in the mid- to late-1980s. This 
modernization effort took on a renewed urgency following China’s observation of U.S. and coalition 
air operations during the 1991 Gulf War and their use in OPERATION ALLIED FORCE (Kosovo) 
in 1999. These military campaigns convinced China that it needed to build more survivable, deeply 
buried facilities to protect from the effects of modern penetrating munitions. We expect that China 
will continue to develop and expand its UGF program to support its growing forces.

79 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page left intentionally blank

80 
 
 
 
4 
RESOURCES FOR FORCE 
MODERNIZATION

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
81 
 
 
 
China has the political will and fiscal strength to 
sustain a steady increase in defense spending, 
supporting the continued modernization of the 
PLA, the development of a military-civilian 
fused defense industry, and the exploration of 
new technologies with defense applications. 
China draws from diverse sources to support 
PLA 
modernization, 
including: 
domestic 
defense 
investments, 
indigenous 
defense 
industrial development, a growing R&D/S&T 
base, dual-use technologies conveyed in part 
through military-civil fusion, and acquisition of 
foreign technology and know-how. 
China’s long-term goal is to create a wholly 
indigenous 
defense-industrial 
sector, 
augmented by a strong commercial sector, to 
meet the needs of PLA modernization, and to 
compete as a top-tier supplier in the global 
arms trade. However, the PLA still looks to 
foreign sources to fill some critical, near-term 
capability gaps and to accelerate the rate of 
advancement. 
China 
leverages 
foreign 
investments, 
commercial 
joint 
ventures, 
academic exchanges, the foreign experience of 
Chinese students and researchers, and state- 
sponsored industrial and technical espionage to 
increase the level of technologies and expertise 
available to support military R&D and 
acquisition. 
MILITARY EXPENDITURES TRENDS 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 China’s announced 2017 military budget 
increase continues decades of spending 
increases, sustaining China’s position as the 
second-largest military spender in the world. 
 China’s published military budget omits 
several major categories of expenditure; 
actual military-related spending is higher than 
its official budget. 
In early 2017, China announced a 6.5 percent 
inflation-adjusted increase in its annual military 
budget to $154.3 billion, approximately 1.3 
percent of gross domestic product (GDP). 
This budget continues more than two decades 
of annual defense spending increases and 
sustains China’s position as the second-largest 
military spender in the world after the United 
States. China’s defense budget has doubled 
during the past decade; analysis of data from 
2008 through 2017 indicates China’s official 
military budget grew at an annual average of 8 
percent in inflation-adjusted terms over that 
period. China likely is able to support 
continued defense spending growth for the 
foreseeable future.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA’S    ESTIMATED   MILITARY 
EXPENDITURES. 
China’s 
published 
military budget omits several major categories 
of expenditure, including R&D and foreign 
weapons procurement. Actual military-related 
spending is higher than its official budget, 
estimated at more than $190 billion in 2017. It 
is difficult to precisely calculate actual military 
expenses, largely because of China’s poor 
accounting transparency.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
83 
 
 
 
CHINA’S    ESTIMATED    DEFENSE 
BUDGET GROWTH. Jane’s Defense 
Budgets expects China’s official defense 
budget to increase by an annual average of 6 
percent, growing to $240 billion by 2021, and 
will have an increasing proportion available for 
training, 
operations, 
and 
modernization 
following China’s 2015 announcement that the 
PLA will reduce its size by 300,000 personnel. 
China’s economic growth will slow during the 
next decade, projected to fall from 6.8-percent 
growth in 2017 to 3 percent in 2028. This could 
slow, but not halt, future defense spending 
growth. 
Assuming 
accurate 
economic 
projections and a steady defense burden, 
China’s official defense budget would be larger 
than $240 billion by 2028, remaining the largest 
spender in the Indo-Pacific region, besides the 
United States. Economic growth and national 
defense requirements would drive future 
defense spending trends. 
 
 
 
 
2017 Official Defense Budget Comparison (adjusted for inflation to 2017 USD) 
 
Billion (USD) 
 
 
China (Official Budget) $154.3 
India $55.2 
Russia (National Defense Budget) $48.6 
Japan $46.1 
Republic of Korea $33.3 
Taiwan $10.5 
 
Comparison of China’s official defense budget with those of other regional powers

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
84 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENTS AND TRENDS IN 
CHINA’S DEFENSE INDUSTRY 
Defense Sector Reform. China’s defense 
industrial complex continues to adapt and 
reorganize to improve weapon system research, 
development, and production by addressing 
bottlenecks and challenges to close the gap of 
an estimated one to two generations behind its 
main competitors in the global arms industry. 
Over the past three years, the CMC has taken 
organizational 
and 
policy 
measures 
to 
reenergize the PLA’s work on defense research 
and original innovation capacity through 
cooperation with the market sector. 
> In 2016, the CMC established the S&T 
Commission, a high-level defense research 
body, as an independent organization under 
the high command. It also emphasized the 
importance of “military-civilian fusion,”        
a phrase used in part to refer to         
leveraging      the      same      resource      pool 
to develop dual-use technologies, policies, 
and organizations for military benefit. 
> In early 2017, the PLA set up a Scientific 
Research Steering Committee that falls 
directly under the CMC, consisting of 
scientists and engineers experienced with 
cutting-edge technologies. Along with the 
CMC S&T Commission, it will spearhead 
S&T innovation by consulting for the 
CMC to decide on early-stage research 
projects. 
> In mid-July 2017, China reorganized the 
three top PLA academic institutes – the 
PLA Academy of Military Science (AMS), 
National Defense University (NDU), and 
National 
University 
of 
Defense 
Technology (NUDT) – as part of ongoing 
PLA reforms. With the new structure, the 
AMS will focus on scientific research 
related to military affairs, facilitating closer 
ties between military theory and S&T 
development. 
In 2016, China adopted the 13th Five Year 
Program (2016-2020) which, among other 
things, 
sets 
focus 
areas 
for 
research, 
development, and innovation. Several of these 
have defense implications, including aerospace 
engines (such as turbofan technology) and gas 
turbines; 
quantum 
communications 
and 
computing; 
innovative 
electronics 
and 
software; automation and robotics; special 
materials and applications; nanotechnology; 
neuroscience, neural research, and artificial 
intelligence;  and  deep  space  exploration and 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

China’s defense industrial complex is 
adapting and reorganizing to close an 
estimated one to two generation gap behind 
its global competitors. 

The CMC undertook organizational and 
policy measures, including setting up a new 
Scientific Research Steering Committee, to 
reenergize the PLA’s defense research and 
original innovation capacity through 
cooperation with the market sector.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
85 
 
 
 
on-orbit servicing and maintenance systems. 
Other areas where China is concentrating 
significant R&D resources include nuclear 
fusion, hypersonic technology, and the 
deployment and “hardening” of an expanding 
constellation 
of 
multi-purpose 
satellites. 
China’s drive to expand military-civilian fusion 
and international economic activity supports 
these goals. 
A wide range of organizations work together to 
increase military-civilian fusion. The State 
Administration for Science Technology and 
Industry for National Defense (SASTIND) 
and the PLA’s EDD work together to monitor 
and guide the state and military sides of China’s 
defense industrial apparatus, respectively. The 
EDD and its service counterparts cooperate 
with China’s ten state-owned defense industrial 
corporations through a network of military 
representative bureaus and offices to supervise 
quality 
control 
and 
defense 
contract 
compliance. 
More 
broadly, 
the 
National 
Science 
Foundation of China (NSFC), the China 
Academy of Sciences (CAS), and the Ministry 
of Science and Technology (MOST) fund and 
promote basic and applied research, scientific 
innovation, 
and 
high-tech 
integration 
throughout China’s scientific, engineering, and 
civil-military industrial complex. The CAS, 
working closely with the NSFC, is the highest 
academic institution for comprehensive R&D 
in the natural and applied sciences in China and 
reports directly to the State Council in an 
advisory   capacity,    with   some   of   its   work 
ultimately funding disciplines and contributing 
to products for military use. The NSFC and 
CMC S&T Commission signed a five-year 
strategic cooperation agreement in August 
2016 to collaborate on military-civilian co- 
innovation and basic research for national 
defense. 
MILITARY EQUIPMENT 
MODERNIZATION TRENDS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Missile and Space Industry. The majority 
of China’s missile programs, including its 
ballistic and cruise missile systems, are 
comparable to other international top-tier 
producers. China’s production of a wide range 
of ballistic, cruise, air-to-air, and SAMs for the 
PLA and for export has probably been 
enhanced by upgrades to primary assembly and 
solid rocket motor production facilities. 
Though China has become one of the world’s 
most advanced producers of SAM systems, 
China has purchased Russia’s S-400 air defense 
system and may receive it in 2018. China’s 
space  industry  is  rapidly  expanding  its ISR, 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

Many of China’s missile programs are 
comparable to other top-tier producers. 

China’s space, armaments, and aviation 
industries are rapidly advancing; however, 
quality deficiencies persist in some export 
armament equipment, and the aircraft 
industry remains reliant on foreign-sourced 
aircraft engine components.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
86 
 
 
 
navigation, 
and 
communication 
satellite 
constellations while making considerable 
progress in space lift, human spaceflight, and 
lunar exploration programs. China hopes to 
expand its space launch vehicle industry to 
support commercial launches and make rapid 
satellite launch services available to foreign 
customers. China will probably launch, 
assemble in-orbit, and operate a crewed 
Chinese space station before 2025. 
Naval/Shipbuilding Industry. China is 
the top ship-producing nation in the world and 
has increased its shipbuilding capacity and 
capability for all types of military projects, 
including submarines, surface combatants, 
naval aviation, sealift, and amphibious assets. 
China’s two largest state-owned shipbuilders – 
the China State Shipbuilding Corporation and 
Shipbuilding 
Industry 
Corporation 
– 
collaborate in shared ship designs and 
construction 
information 
to 
increase 
shipbuilding efficiency. China now produces 
its naval gas turbine and diesel engines 
domestically – as well as almost all shipboard 
weapons and electronic systems – and is almost 
entirely self-sufficient with little dependence 
on 
traditional 
foreign 
suppliers 
for 
shipbuilding. 
Armaments Industry. China’s production 
capacity continues to advance in almost every 
area of PLA ground systems, including 
armored personnel carriers, assault vehicles, air 
defense artillery systems, artillery pieces, and 
new versions of main battle tanks and light 
tanks. China is capable of producing ground 
weapon systems at or near world-class 
standards; however, quality deficiencies persist 
with some export equipment. 
Aviation Industry.  China’s aviation 
industry has advanced to produce a large 
transport aircraft; modern fourth- to fifth- 
generation 
fighters 
incorporating 
low- 
observable 
technologies; 
modern 
reconnaissance and attack UAVs; and attack 
helicopters. 
China’s 
commercial 
aircraft 
industry has invested in high-precision and 
technologically advanced machine tooling and 
production processes, avionics, and other 
components applicable to the production of 
military aircraft. However, China’s aircraft 
industry remains reliant on foreign-sourced 
components for dependable, proven, high- 
performance 
aircraft 
engines. 
China’s 
infrastructure 
and 
experience 
for 
the 
production of commercial and military aircraft 
are improving as a result of China’s ongoing 
C919 commercial airliner and Y-20 large 
transport programs.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
87 
 
 
 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
GOALS IN SUPPORT OF MILITARY 
MODERNIZATION 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 China has developed long-term civilian 
planning processes and PLA regulations to 
identify key S&T goals supporting military 
modernization. 
 China identified specific leading-edge 
industries with the potential to provide 
technological breakthroughs, such as 
advanced manufacturing and artificial 
intelligence, to prioritize these processes. 
The National Medium- and Long-Term 
Program 
for 
Science 
and 
Technology 
Development (2006-2020), issued by the State 
Council in February 2006, seeks to transform 
China into an “innovation-oriented society” by 
2020. The plan defines China’s S&T focus in 
terms 
of 
basic 
research, 
leading-edge 
technologies, key fields and priority subjects, 
and “major special items,” many of which have 
military applications. In July 2016, China’s 
State Council issued the 13th Five-Year 
Program that extends some of those “major 
special items” out to 2030 and introduces new 
ones such as big-data. 
> Between 2016 and 2017, the PLA enacted 
several national regulations along with 
major organizational restructure to meet 
these 2020 and 2030 goals and deepen 
military-civilian  cooperation.  For  instance, 
the Central Commission for Integrated 
Military and Civilian Development, newly 
established in January 2017, aims to 
promote the acceleration of military- 
civilian 
cooperation 
and 
achieve 
a 
beneficial arrangement for both parties. 
Basic Research. As part of a broad effort 
to expand basic research capabilities, China 
identified several areas as major strategic needs 
or science research plans requiring active 
government involvement and funding: material 
design and preparation; manufacturing in 
extreme environmental conditions; aeronautic 
and 
astronautic 
mechanics; 
information 
technology development; and biotechnology 
research. 
Leading-edge Technologies. China has 
identified certain industries and technology 
groups 
with 
the 
potential 
to 
provide 
technological 
breakthroughs, 
to 
remove 
technical obstacles across industries, and to 
improve 
international 
competitiveness. 
Examples of applications include radar, 
counterspace capabilities, secure C4ISR, smart 
materials, and low-observable technologies. 
China 
is 
focusing 
on 
the 
following 
technologies for rapid development: 
> Information Technology. Priorities include 
intelligent perception technologies, ad hoc 
networks, and virtual reality technologies. 
> Artificial Intelligence (AI). Priorities include 
autonomous  and  swarm  intelligence.  
China wants  to  be  the  world leader  in AI

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
88 
 
 
 
by 2030, as outlined in its 2017 National 
Artificial Intelligence Development Plan. 
> New Materials. Priorities include smart 
materials and structures, high-temperature 
superconducting technologies, and highly 
efficient energy materials technologies. 
> Advanced Manufacturing. Priorities include 
extreme 
manufacturing 
technologies, 
intelligent service advanced machine tools, 
and industrial processes. Strategic guidance, 
such as “Made in China 2025” published in 
2015, lays out a path to sustainability and 
emphasizes the importance of China-made 
components. 
> Advanced  Energy  Technologies.  Priorities 
include hydrogen energy and fuel cell 
technologies, 
alternative 
fuels, 
and 
advanced vehicle technologies. 
> Marine Technologies. Priorities include three- 
dimensional 
maritime 
environmental 
monitoring 
technologies; 
fast, 
multi- 
parameter ocean floor survey technologies; 
and deep-sea operations technologies. 
> Laser and Aerospace Technologies. Priorities 
include the development of chemical and 
solid-state laser technologies to field a 
weapons-grade 
system 
ultimately 
for 
ground-based and airborne platforms. 
> Quantum 
Satellites. 
Priorities 
include 
unconditional security of network data 
across long distances, ultimately creating a 
global quantum network  of classical  (i.e., 
non-quantum) data secured by quantum 
cryptographic keys. 
FOREIGN TECHNOLOGY 
ACQUISITION 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 China continues to supplement indigenous 
military modernization efforts through 
targeted foreign technologies and intellectual 
property acquisition. 
 Additionally, China very likely uses its 
intelligence services and other illicit 
approaches to obtain key national security 
and export-restricted technologies, controlled 
equipment, and other materials unobtainable 
through other means. 
China continues to supplement indigenous 
military modernization efforts through the 
acquisition of foreign technologies and know- 
how. China is actively pursuing an intensive 
campaign to obtain foreign technology through 
imports, foreign direct investment, industrial 
and cyberespionage, and establishment of 
foreign R&D centers. China is investing in the 
critical technologies that will be foundational 
for future innovations in commercial and 
military 
applications 
such 
as 
artificial 
intelligence, robotics, autonomous vehicles, 
augmented and virtual reality, financial 
technology, and gene editing. The line 
demarcating products designed for commercial 
versus military purposes is blurring with these 
new technologies. China’s legal acquisition   
efforts    supplement    its     military-industrial

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
89 
 
 
 
base through methods and practices which 
include: 
> Imports. China acquires dual-use, export 
controlled technology by applying for 
licenses through the Department of 
Commerce. The majority of China’s imports 
have traditionally been electronic and 
materials processing, test, inspection, and 
production equipment. 
> Foreign  Direct  Investment.  China  actively 
invests in, or outright purchases, foreign 
companies that have technology, facilities, 
and people working in key technology areas. 
> Talent Recruitment. China uses various 
incentive strategies to attract foreign 
personnel to work on and manage strategic 
programs and to fill technical knowledge 
gaps. 
> Research and Development Centers.  China 
actively seeks partnerships with private, 
government, 
and 
academic 
research 
laboratories to gain exposure to cutting- 
edge technology and researchers. These 
partnerships also provide the technical 
know-how to run, manage, and organize 
such facilities. 
Espionage Activities Supporting China’s 
Military Modernization. China uses a variety 
of methods to acquire foreign military and 
dual-use technologies, including cyber activity 
and exploitation of the access of Chinese 
nationals – such as students or researchers    – 
acting as procurement agents or intermediaries. 
China very likely uses its intelligence services 
and employs other illicit approaches that 
violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain 
key national security and export-restricted 
technologies, controlled equipment, and other 
materials unobtainable through other means. 
 
> In December 2016, a citizen of China who 
is also a lawful permanent resident of the 
United States pled guilty in Federal district 
court to charges related to theft of 
numerous 
sensitive 
military 
program 
documents for technologically advanced 
titanium from a U.S. company and 
transporting 
them to China. The individual 
worked on the F119 and F135 military 
fighter jet engines, which are used 
respectively in the USAF F-22 Raptor and 
F-35 Lightning II. 
> In  January  2017,  a  Chinese-born 
naturalized citizen of the United States pled 
guilty in Federal district court to the 
unauthorized development or production 
of special nuclear material outside the 
United States while acting as a consultant to 
China General Nuclear Power Company. 
Although it is unclear whether any military 
advantage was obtained, civil nuclear 
technology has been identified as part of 
China’s current military-civilian fusion 
effort. 
Chinese defense S&T organizations and 
classified PLA intelligence provide technical 
targeting  requirements  to  guide  the  work  of

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
90 
 
 
 
collection units in open-source collection and 
analysis, and human capital transfer and 
exchanges that no longer solely focus on ethnic 
Chinese, but also individuals with relevant 
placement  and  access.   In  addition,  multiple 
U.S. criminal indictments and investigations 
since 2010 involved non-ethnic Chinese U.S. 
citizens and naturalized Chinese U.S. citizens 
or permanent resident aliens procuring and 
exporting controlled items to China.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page left intentionally blank

92 
 
 
 
5 
FORCE MODERNIZATION 
FOR A TAIWAN CONTINGENCY

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
93 
 
 
 
China’s 
overall 
strategy 
continues 
to 
incorporate elements of both persuasion and 
coercion to hinder the development of political 
attitudes in Taiwan favoring independence. 
China has stressed that Taiwan must accept the 
“1992 Consensus,” which is an ambiguous 
term 
used 
by 
the 
previous 
Taiwan 
administration and Chinese leaders as a basis 
for 
engagement. 
The 
major 
PLA-wide 
reorganization of combat units in 2017 likely 
affected units responsible for a Taiwan 
contingency.  Concurrently,  the  PLA 
continued to develop and deploy increasingly 
advanced military capabilities intended to 
coerce Taiwan, signal Chinese resolve, and 
gradually improve capabilities for an invasion. 
These improvements pose major challenges to 
Taiwan’s security, which has historically been 
rooted in the PLA’s inability to project power 
decisively across the 100 nm Taiwan Strait, the 
natural geographic advantages of island 
defense, Taiwan’s armed forces’ technological 
superiority, and the possibility of U.S. 
intervention. 
CHINA’S STRATEGY IN THE 
TAIWAN STRAIT 
 
 
 
 
China appears prepared to defer the use of 
force as long as it believes that unification over 
the long-term remains possible and that the 
costs of conflict outweigh the benefits. China 
argues that the credible threat of force is 
essential to maintain the conditions for political 
progress and to prevent Taiwan from making 
moves toward de jure independence. China has 
refused for decades to renounce the use of 
force 
to 
resolve 
the 
Taiwan 
issue. 
Simultaneously, China’s leaders proclaim their 
desire for peaceful unification under the 
principle of “one country, two systems,” most 
recently as part of President Xi Jinping’s 
address opening the CCP’s 19th Party 
Congress. 
The circumstances under which the mainland 
has historically warned that it would use force 
have evolved over time in response to the 
island’s declarations of its political status, 
changes in PLA capabilities, and China’s view 
of Taiwan’s relations with other countries. 
These circumstances have included: 
> Formal 
declaration 
of 
Taiwan 
independence; 
> Undefined 
moves 
toward 
Taiwan 
independence; 
> Internal unrest on Taiwan; 
> Taiwan’s acquisition of nuclear weapons; 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

While China advocates for peaceful 
reunification with Taiwan, China has never 
repudiated the use of military force, and 
continues to develop and deploy increasingly 
advanced capabilities needed for a potential 
military campaign. 

Circumstances that would prompt the use of 
force remain ambiguous, preserving China’s 
flexibility.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
94 
 
 
 
> Indefinite delays in the resumption of cross-
Strait dialogue on unification; 
> Foreign intervention in Taiwan’s internal 
affairs; and, 
> Foreign forces stationed on Taiwan. 
 
Article 8 of China’s March 2005 Anti-Secession 
Law states that China may use “non-peaceful 
means” if “secessionist forces … cause the fact 
of Taiwan’s secession from China,” if “major 
incidents entailing Taiwan’s secession” occur, 
or if “possibilities for peaceful reunification” 
are exhausted. The ambiguity of these 
conditions preserves China’s flexibility. In 
December 2017, Chinese Embassy official Li 
Kexin, in response to U.S. Congressional 
language recommending the U.S. Navy explore 
visiting Taiwan, stated that such a visit would 
prompt China to take Taiwan by force. 
CHINA’S COURSES OF ACTION 
AGAINST TAIWAN 
 
 
 
 
 
China has a range of options based on the 
PLA’s increasing capabilities in multiple 
domains. China could pursue a measured 
approach by signaling its readiness to use force 
or conduct punitive actions against Taiwan. 
The PLA could also conduct a more 
comprehensive 
and 
more 
methodical 
campaign designed to force Taiwan to 
capitulate to unification, or unification 
dialogue, under PRC terms. China would seek 
to deter potential U.S. intervention in any 
Taiwan contingency campaign. Failing that, 
China would attempt to delay intervention 
and 
seek victory in an asymmetric, limited war of 
short duration. In the event of a protracted 
conflict, China might fight to a standstill and 
pursue a political settlement. The PLA could 
initiate the military options listed below 
individually or in combination together. 
Air and Maritime Blockade. PLA 
writings describe a Joint Blockade Campaign in 
which China would employ kinetic blockades 
of maritime and air traffic, including a cut-off 
of Taiwan’s vital imports, to force Taiwan’s 
capitulation. According to these writings, large-
scale missile strikes and possibly seizures of 
Taiwan’s offshore islands would accompany a 
Joint Blockade in an attempt to achieve a rapid 
Taiwan surrender, while at the same time 
posturing air and naval forces to conduct 
weeks or months of blockade operations if 
necessary.  China’s  air  and  maritime  blockade 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

Multiple military options exist for a Taiwan 
campaign, ranging from an air and maritime 
blockade to a full-scale amphibious invasion 
to seize and occupy some or all of Taiwan or 
its offshore islands. 

China could engage in a deliberate force 
buildup to signal an imminent military 
campaign or conduct a surprise campaign to 
force rapid military and political resolutions 
before other countries could respond. 

Should the United States intervene, China 
would try to delay effective intervention and 
seek victory in a high-intensity, limited war of 
short duration.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
95 
 
 
 
operations will also likely be complemented by 
concurrent EW, network attacks, and IO to 
isolate Taiwan’s government and populace 
further. 
Limited Force or Coercive Options. 
China might use a variety of disruptive, 
punitive, or lethal military actions in a limited 
campaign 
against 
Taiwan, 
probably 
in 
conjunction with overt and clandestine 
economic and political activities. Such a 
campaign could include computer network or 
limited kinetic attacks against Taiwan’s 
political, military, and economic infrastructure 
to induce fear in Taiwan and to degrade the 
Taiwan population’s confidence in their 
leaders. Similarly, PLA SOF could infiltrate 
Taiwan 
and 
conduct 
attacks 
against 
infrastructure or leadership targets. 
 
Air and Missile Campaign. China could 
use missile attacks and precision air strikes 
against air defense systems, including air 
bases, 
radar sites, missiles, space assets, and 
communications facilities to degrade Taiwan’s 
defenses, neutralize Taiwan’s leadership, or 
break the Taiwan people’s resolve. 
Invasion of Taiwan. Publicly available 
Chinese writings describe different operational 
concepts for an amphibious invasion of 
Taiwan. The most prominent of these, the 
Joint Island Landing Campaign, envisions a 
complex operation relying on coordinated, 
interlocking campaigns for logistics, air, and 
naval support, and EW. The objective would 
be to break through or circumvent shore 
defenses,   establish   and   build   a   beachhead, 
transport personnel and materiel to designated 
landing sites in the north or south of Taiwan’s 
western coastline, and launch attacks to seize 
and to occupy key targets or the entire island. 
Large-scale amphibious invasion is one of the 
most complicated and difficult military 
operations. Success depends upon air and sea 
superiority, the rapid buildup and sustainment 
of supplies onshore, and uninterrupted 
support. An attempt to invade Taiwan would 
likely strain China’s armed forces and invite 
international intervention. These stresses, 
combined with China’s combat force attrition 
and the complexity of urban warfare and 
counterinsurgency (assuming a successful 
landing and breakout), make an amphibious 
invasion of Taiwan a significant political and 
military risk. 
The PLA is capable of accomplishing various 
amphibious operations short of a full-scale 
invasion of Taiwan. With few overt military 
preparations beyond routine training, China 
could launch an invasion of small Taiwan-held 
islands in the South China Sea such as Pratas or 
Itu Aba. A PLA invasion of a medium-sized, 
better-defended  island  such  as  Matsu  or 
Jinmen is within China’s capabilities. Such an 
invasion would demonstrate military capability 
and political resolve while achieving tangible 
territorial gain and simultaneously showing 
some measure of restraint. However, this kind 
of operation involves significant, and possibly 
prohibitive, political risk because it could 
galvanize pro-independence sentiment on 
Taiwan and generate international opposition.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
96 
 
 
 
 
EFFECT OF PLA REFORM ON A TAIWAN CONTINGENCY 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The PLA aims to increase its ability to conduct complex joint operations. 
 
 Although ongoing reforms may decrease near-term readiness, in the long-term they should enable 
better planning and preparation for joint military operations across the Taiwan Strait. 
One of the overarching goals of the structural reforms now reshaping the PLA is to construct a military 
capable of conducting complex joint operations, including those that would be involved in a Taiwan 
contingency. PLA reforms are aimed at clarifying command authorities, improving joint integration, 
and facilitating the transition from peace to war. The abolishment of military regions in favor of 
military theaters – in this case, the PLA’s Eastern Theater – has also likely streamlined and improved 
the PLA’s ability to conduct yearlong planning and preparation for joint military operations across the 
Taiwan Strait. In the near term, PLA combat units may experience decreased readiness and proficiency 
to conduct large-scale joint operations as they reorganize units, integrate new capabilities, and adjust 
to new command structures. 
A significant addition to the overall structure of the PLA under current reforms is the establishment 
of the SSF and JLSF. During a Taiwan contingency, the JLSF, in conjunction with subordinate joint 
logistics support centers, would coordinate joint logistics and the delivery of materiel as well as oversee 
various civil-military support systems to sustain the campaign. The creation of the SSF probably 
improves the PLA’s ability to execute and coordinate IO (especially cyber, EW, and counterspace) in 
a Taiwan contingency. It may also improve the PLA’s ability to manage and provide space-based 
reconnaissance to the CMC and Eastern Theater, improving PLA command staffs’ situational 
awareness of Taiwan military units and facilities. The PLA is likely still exploring how to reform its 
joint command processes to integrate IO and ISR capabilities more fully at the theater-level, but 
structural reforms have removed the biggest barriers to integrating these strategic capabilities at the 
theater-level. 
Structural reforms within the military services also have implications on resources and operational 
capabilities available to the PLA for a future Taiwan contingency. 
> In 2017, the PLAN established a PLANMC headquarters and began expanding the PLANMC. 
However, the extent of PLANMC expansion and the roles that the PLANMC will be assigned 
remain unclear – the PLANMC may be assigned roles  pertaining  to  overseas  base  defense  or  small

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island seizure, leaving large-scale amphibious operations under the purview of the PLAA’s 
amphibious units. 
> The PLA Airborne Corps (formerly the PLAAF 15th Airborne Corps) also underwent major 
changes in 2017, reorganizing its previous units into airborne infantry brigades, a special 
operations brigade, an aviation brigade, and a support brigade. The goal of reorganization was to 
create a responsive and streamlined airborne corps capable of air-delivering modular combat units 
– including aerial drop of mechanized infantry forces. 
 
> The PLAA continues the expansion and transformation of rotary-wing aviation into its own 
combat arm capable of maneuver, precision strike, and three-dimensional transportation of forces. 
The PLAA intends to field at least one army aviation brigade per group army and military district 
as part of its on-going restructure and modernization. Furthermore, in 2017, the PLAA established 
its first two helicopter-based air assault infantry brigades, with subsequent plans to equip these 
brigades with both transport and assault helicopters.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
98

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
99

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
100 
 
 
 
THE PLA’S CURRENT POSTURE 
FOR A TAIWAN CONFLICT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preparation for a Taiwan conflict with the 
possibility of U.S. intervention continues to 
play a prominent role in China’s military 
modernization program. 
PLA Army. The PLAA is improving and 
increasing its three-dimensional options for a 
Taiwan invasion scenario. It is converting the 
bulk of its maneuver units to combined arms 
brigades, including the former amphibious 
divisions and amphibious armor brigade. As 
part of this change, the PLAA has increased the 
types of arms and combat support functions 
organic to these brigades, which should 
eventually create more capable, modular 
brigades  and  battalions.   The  expansion  of 
army aviation and the creation of two new air 
assault brigades also provides more three- 
dimensional attack, air assault, and close air 
support options for a Taiwan invasion scenario. 
Additionally, the PLAA’s ongoing fielding of 
advanced  air  defense,  EW,  and  C2  systems 
enhances the combat power, force protection, 
and sustainment capabilities of its brigades. 
Improved communications networks provide 
real-time data transmissions within and 
between units, enabling better C2 during 
operations including between services. The 
PLAA continues to conduct company-level 
amphibious landing training, including during 
difficult weather and at night, but will need 
increased training at larger echelons to fully 
integrate their new structure and three- 
dimensional capabilities. As these new systems 
proliferate, the PLAA will increase its ability to 
establish, defend, and exploit a beachhead 
lodgment. 
PLA Navy. The PLAN is improving anti-air 
and 
anti-surface 
warfare 
capabilities, 
developing an at-sea nuclear deterrent, and 
introducing new multi-mission platforms 
capable of striking Taiwan in a cross-Strait 
conflict, as well as conducting diverse 
missions 
in other contingency operations. New attack 
submarines, modern surface combatants with 
anti-air capability, and fourth-generation naval 
aircraft entering the force are designed to 
achieve sea superiority within the first island 
chain as well as to deter and counter any 
potential third party intervention in a Taiwan 
conflict. China’s amphibious ship fleet, 
however, has in recent years focused on 
acquiring a small number of LPDs, indicating a 
near-term focus on smaller scale expeditionary 
missions rather than a large number of LSTs 
and medium landing craft that would be 
necessary for a large-scale direct beach assault. 
There   is   also   no   indication   that  China  is 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

PLA services and support forces continue to 
improve training and acquire new capabilities 
for a Taiwan contingency. 

Although the PLAN seeks to achieve 
maritime superiority within the first island 
chain and to deter a third party from 
intervening in a Taiwan campaign, there is no 
indication it is significantly expanding its 
landing ship force necessary for an 
amphibious assault on Taiwan.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
101 
 
 
 
significantly expanding its landing ship force 
at 
this time – suggesting that a direct beach- 
assault operation requiring extensive lift is less 
likely in planning. 
PLA Air Force. The PLAAF has maintained 
a force posture that provides a variety of 
capabilities for a Taiwan contingency. It has 
stationed a large number of advanced aircraft 
within an unrefueled range of Taiwan, 
providing it with a significant capability to 
conduct air-superiority and ground-attack 
operations against Taiwan. A number of long- 
range air defense systems provide a strong layer 
of defense of China’s mainland against 
counterattack. 
In     addition,     China’s 
development of support aircraft provides the 
PLAAF with improved ISR capability to 
support PLA operations in a contingency. 
PLA Rocket Force. The PLARF is prepared 
to conduct missile attacks against high-value 
targets, including Taiwan’s command and 
control facilities, air bases, radar sites, and 
others in an attempt to degrade Taiwan’s 
defenses, neutralize Taiwan’s leadership, or 
break the public’s will to fight. 
Strategic Support Force. PLA doctrinal 
writings emphasize the importance of space 
and cyberspace domains in joint operations. 
PLA writings suggest that the SSF would be 
responsible for the use of EW and cyber 
operations during a Taiwan contingency since 
one of the missions of the force is “seizing and 
maintaining battlefield information control in 
contemporary informatized warfare.” 
Joint Logistics Support Force. The PLA’s 
JLSF, established in late 2016, has the primary 
goal of supporting a strategic campaign such as 
a Taiwan invasion by conducting command 
and control of joint logistics, delivering 
materiel, and overseeing various civil-military 
integration support mechanisms. 
TAIWAN’S DEFENSIVE 
CAPABILITIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taiwan has historically enjoyed military 
advantages in the context of a cross-Strait 
conflict, such as technological superiority and 
the inherent geographic advantages of island 
defense, but China’s multi-decade military 
modernization effort has eroded or negated 
many of these. Although Taiwan is taking 
important steps to compensate for the growing 
disparities – building its war reserve stocks, 
growing its defense industrial base, improving 
joint operations and crisis response capabilities, 
and strengthening its officer and non- 
commissioned     officer     corps     –     these 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

Taiwan’s advantages continue to decline as 
China’s modernization efforts continue. 

Taiwan’s transition to an all-volunteer force 
by 2019 will be costlier than anticipated, 
straining the limited defense budget and 
diverting funds from defense acquisition, 
training, and readiness. 

To counter China’s improving capabilities, 
Taiwan is developing new concepts and 
capabilities for asymmetric warfare.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
102 
 
 
 
improvements only partially address Taiwan’s 
declining defensive advantages. Taiwan’s 
Ministry of National Defense 2017 National 
Defense Report reflects adjustments to the 
military’s strategy for defending the island, 
placing greater emphasis on protecting its 
littorals and near-shore coastal areas. The 
modified 
strategy 
stresses 
enhanced 
asymmetric capabilities, as well as suggesting 
greater reliance on Taiwan’s Air Force and 
Navy. 
Taiwan currently has approximately 215,000 
personnel in the armed forces (approximately 
70 percent of whom are volunteers), supported 
by approximately 1.7 million reservists and 
nearly 1 million civil defense volunteers. 
Taiwan’s military modernization program 
envisions a continued decrease in Taiwan’s 
active duty force to approximately 175,000 
personnel as part of a transition to an all- 
volunteer force by 2019. This transition has 
slowed due to severe difficulties recruiting 
enough volunteers. The cost savings from 
manpower reductions provides some margin 
to improve individual pay and benefits, 
housing, and incentive pay; however, these 
savings have been insufficient to cover the full 
increase in manpower-related costs needed to 
attract and retain personnel under the new 
system. The unanticipated magnitude of 
transition costs has led Taiwan to divert funds 
from 
foreign 
and 
indigenous 
defense 
acquisition programs, as well as near-term 
training and readiness. 
In addition, Taiwan’s military spending 
remains at approximately two percent of its 
GDP.    Taiwan’s    President    Tsai    recently 
pledged to increase the island’s defense budget 
at a pace at least equal to overall economic 
growth, not including an additional special 
fund reserved for major defense procurements. 
Meanwhile, China’s official defense budget has 
grown to roughly 15 times that of Taiwan, with 
much of it focused on developing the capability 
to unify Taiwan with the mainland by force. 
Recognizing the growing disparity between 
their respective defense expenditures, Taiwan 
is working to develop new concepts and 
capabilities for asymmetric warfare. Some 
specific areas of emphasis include offensive 
and defensive information and electronic 
warfare; high-speed stealth vessels; shore- 
based mobile missiles; rapid mining and 
minesweeping; unmanned aerial systems; and 
critical infrastructure protection. Defense 
officials are working to streamline and 
prioritize Taiwan’s defense spending to enable 
these capabilities. 
The United States maintains a “one-China” 
policy that is based on the three Joint 
Communiqués and the Taiwan Relations Act 
(TRA). The United States opposes any 
unilateral change to the status quo in the 
Taiwan Strait by either side and does not 
support Taiwan independence. The United 
States continues to support the peaceful 
resolution of cross-Strait issues in a manner, 
scope, and pace acceptable to both sides. 
Consistent with the TRA, the United States 
contributes to peace, security, and stability in 
the Taiwan Strait by providing defense articles 
and services to enable Taiwan to maintain a 
sufficient self-defense capability. In June 2017, 
the United States announced the sale of $1.42

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
103 
 
 
 
billion in defense articles and services to 
Taiwan, including MK-48 6AT Heavy Weight 
Torpedoes, AGM-154 Joint Standoff Weapons,    
and   AGM-88    High-Speed   Anti-Radiation 
Missiles. Since 2010, the United States has 
announced more than $15 billion in arms sales 
to Taiwan.
CHINA’S AMPHIBIOUS CAPABILITIES 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 The PLAA and PLANMC continue to equip, plan, and train for sustained amphibious 
operations. 
 
 The PLAN did not make significant additions to its amphibious fleet in 2017 but launched a 
YUZHAO LPD that could enter service in 2018. 
The PLA continues to make modest gains in amphibious warfare by developing additional capabilities 
to conduct amphibious landings and seize and defend small islands. The PLA has 12 units organized 
and equipped to conduct amphibious operations. Over the last five years, the PLAA and the 
PLANMC have fielded new equipment designed specifically for amphibious operations such as the 
ZBD-05 amphibious infantry fighting vehicle and the PLZ-07B amphibious self-propelled howitzer. 
Both PLAA and PLANMC units equipped for amphibious operations conduct regular company- to 
battalion-level amphibious training exercises. However, the PLA rarely conducts amphibious exercises 
involving echelons above a battalion, though both PLAA and PLANMC units have emphasized the 
development of combined arms battalion formations since 2012. 
In 2017, the PLA reorganized amphibious infantry divisions of the former 1st Group Army and 42nd 
Group Army as well as the former 31st Group Army amphibious armor brigade, into a total of five 
amphibious combined arms brigades now under the new 72nd Group Army and 74th Group Army. 
Amphibious training throughout 2017 continued to focus upon the ability to conduct and sustain 
amphibious operations while incorporating real-time ISR, precision targeting for close air support 
assets, integrated command and control, and nighttime reconnaissance and attack training. 
The PLANMC continues to make modest gains in its proficiency to conduct amphibious operations. 
Despite the tripling of the number of PLANMC brigades, there are no indications that any of the new 
units are conducting – or are even equipped to conduct – amphibious warfare training. In 2017, the 
PLANMC may have reduced some of its annual training due to restructuring from PLA reforms. At 
least one squad of operational PLAN marines from the South Sea Fleet conducted coral reef/small 
island seizure training in the Paracel Islands in March 2017. 
The PLAN did not make significant additions to its amphibious fleet in 2017, but launched a 
YUZHAO LPD that could enter service in 2018.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
U.S.-CHINA 
MILITARY-TO-MILITARY CONTACTS

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
105 
 
 
 
U.S. STRATEGY FOR 
ENGAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 2017 National Security Strategy, the 2018 
National Defense Strategy, and the 2018 Nuclear 
Posture Review recognize the growing trend of 
military competition in a dynamic security 
environment. The United States will continue 
to seek areas of cooperation with competitors, 
while preserving the ability to compete 
successfully from a position of strength. U.S. 
defense contacts and exchanges conducted in 
2017 were designed to support overall U.S. 
policy and strategy toward China. They have 
been carefully tailored to manage and reduce 
risk, clarify and develop areas of cooperation 
where it is in the United States’ mutual interest, 
and they are conducted in accordance with the 
relevant statutory limitations of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2000, as amended. 
In 2017, DoD’s plan for military-to-military 
contacts with the PRC focused on three 
interconnected lines of effort: (1) building 
sustained and substantive dialogue through 
policy dialogues and senior leader engagements; 
(2) promoting risk reduction and risk 
management efforts that diminish the potential 
for misunderstanding or miscalculation; and (3) 
building concrete, practical cooperation when 
possible. 
The pace and scope of China’s military 
modernization provide opportunities as well as 
challenges for military-to-military engagement. 
The PLA’s growing military capabilities can 
facilitate deeper practical cooperation in areas 
ranging from humanitarian assistance to 
counter-piracy; however, as China’s military 
develops and expands its reach, the risk of an 
accident or miscalculation also increases, 
putting a premium on risk reduction efforts. 
Pursuit of a constructive, results-oriented 
relationship with China is an important part of 
U.S. strategy in the Indo-Pacific region. DoD 
seeks to ensure the U.S.-China military-to- 
military relationship is a stabilizing element to 
the overall bilateral relationship through 
strengthened risk reduction and finding ways 
that best serve the interests of the United States 
and its allies and partners. The military-to- 
military relationship seeks to encourage China 
to act in a manner consistent with international 
law and norms. 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

DoD engagement with China supports 
overall U.S. policy and strategy toward 
China. 

DoD’s plan for military-to-military contacts 
with the PRC focus on three interconnected 
lines of effort: (1) building sustained and 
substantive dialogue; (2) promoting risk 
reduction and risk management efforts that 
diminish the potential for misunderstanding 
or miscalculation; and (3) building concrete, 
practical cooperation in areas of mutual 
interest.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
106 
 
 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

High-level contacts enable leaders to 
exchange views, identify common interest 
areas, manage differences, and facilitate 
common approaches to shared challenges. 

For example, in June 2017, the Secretaries of 
State and Defense hosted the inaugural U.S.- 
China Diplomatic and Security Dialogue in 
Washington, D.C. 

Recurring institutionalized events serve as a 
mechanism for dialogue at the strategic- and 
policy-levels, including risk reduction and 
practical cooperation. 

Functional engagements focus on risk 
reduction and communication channels to 
promote deconfliction and coordination. 

Ship visits and exercises promote trust and 
improve the ability to interact and coordinate 
in providing international public goods. 
 
MILITARY-TO-MILITARY 
ENGAGEMENT IN 2017 – 
HIGHLIGHTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DoD conducts all contacts with China in a 
manner consistent with the relevant provisions 
of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2000, as amended. 
In 2017, the U.S. and China military-to-military 
relationship focused on risk reduction. The 
two militaries advanced consultations on air 
and maritime  safety  via  the  Military  Maritime 
Consultative 
Agreement 
meetings 
and 
inaugurated a Joint Staff Dialogue Mechanism 
that promotes increased communication on 
crisis management and risk reduction through 
high-level policy dialogue. Additionally, DoD 
continued to make progress with the PLA in 
developing the capacity to cooperate in 
multilateral settings. The two militaries 
participated in a Disaster Management 
Exchange with an emphasis on deconfliction in 
a Multinational Coordination Cell. Such 
examples of military-to-military engagement 
enable 
risk 
reduction 
and 
enhance 
understanding of how each side interacts in the 
delivery of international public goods. 
Selected visits, exchanges, exercises, and 
arrangements are highlighted below. A 
complete list of 2017 engagements is provided 
in Appendix I. 
High-Level Visits and Engagements. 
High-level contacts are an important means to 
exchange views on the international security 
environment, to identify areas of common 
interest, to manage differences, and to facilitate 
common approaches to shared challenges. 
Discussions focused on areas of military 
cooperation 
and 
candidly 
addressed 
differences. 
In June 2017, the Secretaries of State and 
Defense hosted the inaugural U.S.-China 
Diplomatic 
and 
Security 
Dialogue 
in 
Washington, D.C., representing a new high- 
level framework for dialogue launched by 
President  Donald  Trump  and  President  Xi

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
107 
 
 
 
Jinping in Mar-a-Lago to deepen areas of 
cooperation while narrowing differences on 
key diplomatic and security issues. The Chinese 
side, led by State Councilor Yang Jiechi and 
then-Director of the Joint Staff Department 
General Fang Fenghui, participated in the talks 
designed to elevate and focus bilateral 
discussion on ways to improve relations, 
contribute to greater risk reduction, and 
maintain effective channels of communication. 
Both sides engaged on strategic topics, 
discussed differences, and affirmed a strong 
commitment to cooperate. 
In July 2017, the Chief of Naval Operations, 
Admiral John Richardson, conducted a video 
teleconference 
through 
the 
Defense 
Telephone Link with the PLAN Commander, 
Vice Admiral Shen Jinlong, to discuss the 
military-to-military relationship and maritime 
issues. The communication link enables 
sustained channels of communication between 
defense leaders. In November 2017, the two 
Joint Staffs exercised the Defense Telephone 
Link’s video capability to prepare for the Joint 
Staff Dialogue Mechanism with a call 
connecting the Director of the Joint Staff for 
Strategy, Plans and Policy and the PLA Deputy 
Director of the JSD. 
In August 2017, the Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, General Joseph Dunford, 
visited Beijing and Shenyang. General Fang 
Fenghui, then-Director of the JSD, hosted the 
Chairman for meetings in Beijing, including 
meetings with President Xi Jinping, State 
Councilor    Yang    Jiechi,     and    then-Vice 
Chairman General Fan Changlong. The 
Chairman’s visit included a visit to the 
Northern Theater Command, where General 
Dunford met with the Northern Theater 
Commander. The visit concluded with General 
Dunford and General Fang signing the Joint 
Staff Dialogue Mechanism, an important tool 
in improving crisis management and crisis 
communication between the two militaries. 
In September 2017, Vice Admiral Yuan Yubai, 
Commander 
of 
the 
Southern 
Theater 
Command visited Hawaii and San Diego. Vice 
Admiral Yuan met with the Commander, U.S. 
Pacific Command (USPACOM), Admiral 
Harry Harris, and also traveled to San Diego. 
The visit discussed cooperation in areas of 
mutual interest, increased understanding, and 
represented the first visit of a Southern Theater 
Commander to the United States. The Deputy 
Director of the JSD, Major General Shao 
Yuanming, also visited USPACOM in Hawaii 
and met with Admiral Harris. 
In November 2017, Major General Shao met 
with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
General Dunford, during a visit to Washington 
D.C. and New York. The high-level visits 
represented an opportunity for both sides to 
discuss the military-to-military relationship and 
the Joint Staff Dialogue Mechanism. 
Recurring 
Exchanges. 
Recurring 
institutionalized events form the backbone of 
U.S.-China defense discussions each year.  
They  serve  as  a  regularized  mechanism  for

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
108 
 
 
 
dialogue at the strategic and policy levels, 
including 
risk 
reduction 
and 
practical 
cooperation. 
In January 2017, then Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense Abraham Denmark 
hosted the Defense Policy Coordination Talks 
with Rear Admiral Li Ji, Deputy Director, 
Office for International Military Cooperation 
(OIMC). 
The 
U.S. 
delegation 
included 
representatives 
from 
the 
Joint 
Staff, 
USPACOM (USPACOM Deputy Director for 
Strategic Planning and Policy, Brigadier 
General Gillette, and Deputy Director for 
Plans and Policy (Asia), Major General John 
Quintas), and the State Department. The 
dialogue covered issues ranging from military 
to military engagements, confidence-building 
measures, and practical areas of cooperation. 
In November 2017, Major General William 
Hix, Headquarters Army, Director of Strategy, 
Plans, and Policy, led a delegation to Beijing for 
the third annual Army-to-Army Dialogue 
Mechanism. The dialogue provided an 
opportunity to exchange views on HA/DR 
operations, PKO, and risk reduction. 
Also in November 2017, Lieutenant General 
Richard Clarke, Director of the Joint Staff J5, 
Strategy, Policy and Planning, chaired the 
inaugural Joint Staff Dialogue Mechanism 
meeting and hosted Major General Shao 
Yuanming, Deputy Chief of the JSD, in 
Washington, D.C. The engagement focused on 
crisis 
management 
and 
promoted 
risk 
reduction. 
In December 2017, Acting Assistant Secretary 
of Defense for Asian and Pacific Security 
Affairs, David Helvey, led a delegation to 
Beijing for the Asia-Pacific Security Dialogue 
with Director of the Office of International 
Military Cooperation, Major General Hu 
Changming. The U.S. delegation included 
representatives from the State Department, the 
Joint Staff, and USPACOM. The dialogue 
discussed regional security issues of mutual 
concern. 
Functional and Academic Exchanges. 
Functional engagements focus on advancing 
risk 
reduction, 
understanding, 
and 
communication 
channels 
to 
promote 
deconfliction and coordination. Reciprocal 
exchanges – including between functional 
officers, rising leaders, and institutions of 
professional military education – help to 
identify and explore new areas of cooperation, 
discuss differences, and serve to develop a 
generation of leaders on both sides who are 
knowledgeable and adept at handling this 
increasingly complex and vital relationship. 
Increasing contacts between mid-level officers 
is an important objective for both militaries as 
they seek to build familiarity and mutual 
understanding between future leaders. 
In February 2017, an Air War College 
delegation visited China. In April 2017, a 
National War College delegation visited China, 
followed by a U.S. Marine War College 
delegation and the U.S. National Defense 
University CAPSTONE delegation to China in 
May   2017.      Each   delegation   offered   an

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
109 
 
 
 
opportunity to increase understanding of 
China and the Pacific through engagements 
with various echelons of the PLA. 
In May 2017, Submarine Forces Pacific hosted 
the first Submarine Rescue Workshop with the 
PLAN in San Diego, California. The exchange 
promoted 
practical 
cooperation 
through 
discussions on best practices and included a 
tour of the Undersea Rescue Command. 
In May 2017, the first Military Maritime 
Consultative Agreement (MMCA) Working 
Group met in Qingdao to improve maritime 
safety  through  open  communication between 
U.S. and Chinese naval and air forces. In 
November 2017, the second MMCA Working 
Group and MMCA Plenary met in Hawaii. 
Senior 
representatives 
from 
USPACOM 
Command, U.S. Pacific Air Forces, and U.S. 
Pacific Fleet met with a PLAN and PLAAF 
delegation led by Rear Admiral Wang Dazhong, 
Deputy Chief of Staff of the PLAN.  Both sides 
reviewed unsafe incidents over the last year and 
discussed implementation and assessment of 
the Rules of Behavior for Safety of Air and 
Maritime 
Encounters 
Memorandum 
of 
Understanding. 
In September 2017, Headquarters Department 
of the Army hosted a PLA Military Court 
Delegation to the United States. The 
engagement discussed international norms 
and 
standards  in  military  legal  matters  and  how 
each military legal system is organized and 
structured. The Chinese provided insight into 
how the PLA manage legal affairs related to 
deployed forces overseas. 
Ship Visits and Exercises. Ship visits and 
exercises promote trust between the two sides 
and improve the ability to interact and 
coordinate in providing international public 
goods in areas of mutual interest, such as 
search and rescue (SAR), HA/DR, and 
counter-piracy. Port calls are also used to 
enhance operational safety and exercise 
communications and navigation protocols. 
In June 2017, the USS STERETT conducted a 
port visit to Zhanjiang.   The Commander   of 
U.S. Pacific Fleet, Admiral Scott Swift, 
participated in the port visit and met with the 
PLAN Southern Fleet Commander. Admiral 
Swift also met with PLAN Commander Vice 
Admiral Shen Jinlong. The port visit included 
exchanges and interactions between the two 
navies. 
In November 2017, PLA and U.S. Army 
soldiers participated in a Disaster 
Management 
Exchange (DME) in Oregon. U.S. Army 
Pacific Commander, General Robert Brown, 
met with Southern Theater Army Commander 
Major General Zhang Jian. The exchange 
focused on HA/DR in a national flooding 
scenario in which both armies would interact 
as part of a Multinational Coordination Center.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
110 
 
 
 
PLANNING FOR MILITARY-TO-MILITARY ENGAGEMENTS IN 2018 
 
A list of planned engagements for 2018 is provided in Appendix II.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
111 
 
 
 
SPECIAL TOPIC: CHINA’S EXPANDING GLOBAL INFLUENCE 
China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), publicly released in 2013 and formerly named “One Belt, One 
Road,” aims to expand economic and commercial ties to China by financing, constructing, and 
developing transportation infrastructure, natural gas pipelines, hydropower projects, technology and 
industrial parks throughout the Indo-Pacific, Africa, the Middle East, Europe, and the Americas. China 
views BRI as a way to enhance its trade connectivity, reduce surplus domestic industrial capacity, develop 
poorer interior provinces, promote energy security, and internationalize Chinese industrial and 
financial standards. 
China intends to use BRI to develop strong economic ties with other countries, shape their interests 
to align with China’s, and deter confrontation or criticism of China’s approach to sensitive issues. 
Some countries participating in BRI could develop economic dependencies on China, often from 
over-relying on Chinese capital. Some BRI investments could create potential military advantages for 
China, should China require access to selected foreign ports to pre-position the necessary logistics 
support to sustain naval deployments in waters as distant as the Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, and 
Atlantic Ocean to protect its growing interests. In 2017, China released a “Vision of Maritime 
Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative,” which lays out three maritime corridors and the 
importance of maritime security cooperation. One identified corridor is from China through the 
Indian Ocean to Africa and the Mediterranean Sea. Another corridor is from China to Oceania and 
the South Pacific.  The last corridor extends from China to Europe through the Arctic Ocean. 
In August 2017, China officially opened its first overseas military base at Doraleh, Djibouti, following 
more than a year of base construction, and funding an expansion at Doraleh port in 2013. China states 
that its Djibouti base will support PLA PKO, counterpiracy, and HA/DR operations. The base 
includes barracks, an underground facility, a tarmac and eight hangars for helicopter and UAV 
operations, but it currently lacks a dedicated naval berthing space, requiring PLA ships to dock at the 
commercial port. A PLANMC mechanized infantry company with at least eight infantry fighting 
vehicles arrived in July at the base in Djibouti on an amphibious transport dock. The PLA base has 
already conducted live-fire training exercises at a Djiboutian national firing range with its infantry 
fighting vehicles. This unit is capable of supporting future noncombatant evacuation operations, 
search and seizure in the Gulf of Aden, hostage rescue, and small-scale combat actions. This new base, 
along with regular naval vessel visits to foreign ports, extend the reach of China’s armed forces, 
reflecting China’s growing influence. 
The growth of China’s global economic footprint make its interests increasingly vulnerable to 
international and regional turmoil, terrorism, piracy, serious natural disasters and epidemics. This 
vulnerability places new requirements on the PLA to address these threats. A more robust overseas 
logistics and basing infrastructure would allow China to project and sustain military power at greater 
distances. China’s leaders may assess that a mixture of military logistics models, including preferred 
access to overseas commercial ports and a limited number of exclusive PLA logistics facilities, 
probably collocated with commercial ports, most closely aligns with China’s overseas military logistics

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
112 
 
 
 
needs. China’s expanding international economic interests create an increased demand for the PLA to 
operate in more distant maritime environments to protect Chinese citizens, investments, and critical 
SLOCs. China will seek to establish additional military bases in countries with which it has a 
longstanding friendly relationship and similar strategic interests, such as Pakistan, and in which there 
is a precedent for hosting foreign militaries. China’s overseas military basing will be constrained by the 
willingness of potential host countries to support a PLA presence.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
113 
 
 
 
SPECIAL TOPIC: CHINA’S APPROACH TO NORTH KOREA 
In 2017, China’s relationship with North Korea reached the lowest level in decades. In response to 
North Korea’s repeated nuclear and missile tests, China supported UN Security Council resolutions 
(UNSCR) 2356, 2371, 2375, and 2397 to impose additional sanctions on its neighbor, including a ban 
on coal imports, restrictions on specific sectors, and a cap on permissible energy experts to North 
Korea. China also temporarily suspended flights to North Korea and closed the main road, the China- 
North Korea Friendship Bridge, between the two countries. These actions deepened North Korean 
animosity towards China and North Korean official media made uncharacteristically critical statements 
towards China. 
China’s objectives for the Korean Peninsula include stability, denuclearization, and no U.S. forces near 
China’s border. China’s priority is maintaining stability on the Korean Peninsula, which includes 
preventing a DPRK collapse and preventing a military conflict on the Peninsula. As a result, in 2017, 
Chinese leaders were opposed to North Korea’s provocative nuclear and missile activities and were 
probably concerned that these activities invite additional military deployments and activities by the 
United States and its allies on or near the Korean Peninsula. Although China supported additional 
sanctions against North Korea, Chinese leaders were reluctant to embrace measures that they assessed 
risk destabilizing North Korea. This included, for example, a reluctance to support sanctions that 
completely cut off oil supplies to North Korea. 
In 2017, China advocated for a dual track approach towards North Korea that embraced both dialogue 
and pressure. Chinese leaders believed that pressure alone would be insufficient to compel North 
Korea to change its behavior and that the international community should engage in diplomatic 
dialogue and offer incentives to North Korea. China also remained wary of U.S. military activities and 
deployments of capabilities to the region and continued to advocate for a suspension of U.S.-South 
Korean military exercises in exchange for a suspension of North Korean nuclear and missile activity. 
> In 2017, China used economic and diplomatic pressure, unsuccessfully, in an attempt to urge 
South Korea to reconsider the deployment of the THAAD system. Near the end of the year, 
as China and the new South Korean administration sought to restore bilateral relations, China 
pressed for additional guarantees from South Korea related to THAAD. 
> China and Russia have been coordinating their policies on Korean Peninsula issues since at 
least April 2015. They have held eight Consultations on Northeast Asia Security, attended by 
the Chinese assistant and Russian deputy foreign ministers and defense officials, to coordinate 
policies including opposition to THAAD and support for dialogue to deescalate tensions. 
China’s rhetoric towards North Korea also became more strident, including suggestions that the PLA 
could respond to a crisis on the Korean Peninsula. China has long been concerned about stability 
along its border with North Korea. Should a crisis or conflict occur on the Peninsula, China’s leaders 
could order the PLA to engage in a range of operations. These could range from securing the China- 
North Korea border to prevent the flow of refugees to a military intervention into North Korea.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
114 
 
 
 
China could also cite the Sino-North Korea Mutual Aid and Cooperation Friendship Treaty – signed 
in July 1961 – as a justification to cross the border into North Korea. However, China’s willingness to 
intervene into North Korea to defend Kim Jong Un is unclear. China’s Northern Theater – like the 
Shenyang MR before it – would be responsible for leading any Chinese military response to a 
contingency on the Korean Peninsula. 
> Since at least 2004, the PLA has sought to strengthen its ability to conduct joint operations 
near the Korean Peninsula, placing particular emphasis on border defense. Other elements of 
the PLA have focused on defending the Yellow Sea from intervention by the United States 
and South Korea. More recent training has sought to improve the Northern Theater’s civil-
military fusion, night training, and transport of PLA units across the Bo Hai from the 
Shandong Peninsula to the Liaoning Peninsula. 
> The Northern Theater contains three group armies of approximately 170,000 soldiers, a naval  
fleet, two air force bases, one specialized air division, two naval aviation divisions, and 
People’s Armed Police (PAP) units that conduct border defense operations. Additional 
theaters could also be asked to support a larger North Korea related contingency. 
> In response to a chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear incident on the Korean 
Peninsula, the PLA could deploy emergency response units with specialized equipment and 
personnel who routinely train for rapid responses.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
115 
 
 
 
SPECIAL TOPIC: PLA PROGRESS IN BECOMING A JOINT FORCE 
China’s military is continuing major reforms to PLA organization and operations that include the most 
comprehensive restructuring of forces in its history. One of the goals of these reforms, conceptualized 
over the past several decades and launched by President Xi Jinping in late 2015, is to advance the 
PLA’s ability to conduct joint operations and increase its combat effectiveness. Drawing from PLA 
experience in previous border conflicts and observations of U.S. military operations in the Persian 
Gulf in the 1990s, the PLA recognized joint operations are imperative to the successful conduct of 
future warfare. In December 1998, the CMC initiated a series of military reforms to transform the 
PLA into a modern and professional joint operations force which were subsequently outlined in the 
January 1999 “PLA Joint Combat Program.” 
Through the 2000s, the PLA developed new doctrine for joint campaigns and produced new 
educational materials in the joint operational arts. PLA training increasingly included combined arms 
and long distance maneuvers, though in-depth coordination between multiple services remained 
relatively infrequent and superficial. The PLA also invested heavily in the transformation of the PLA 
logistic system to enhance combat service support proficiency and materiel management. To facilitate 
joint coordination on the battlefield, the PLA fielded new tactical C4ISR systems and improved fixed 
communications architectures to facilitate the transmission of intelligence and information across 
services, making a joint common operating picture and joint fires integration possible at national and 
theater commands. 
> The ICP, first observed in 2006, is an automated command system software suite with 
associated hardware located in PLA fixed and mobile command posts that connects the 
PLA’s national-level, theater-level, and operational unit command posts via a joint 
communications architecture. Its key services include command and control, intelligence, 
communications, EW, surveying and navigation, meteorology, political work, logistics 
support, and equipment. The PLA has publicly touted the ICP’s ability to integrate 
communications horizontally and vertically across military services and theaters. Its use has 
become widespread across the PLA, and has even been observed in combined exercises with 
Russia. 
The PLA is a historically army-centric organization, and bureaucratic intransigence has for years 
limited the PLA’s ability to transform itself into a modern joint force. Beginning in 2015, the execution 
of PLA reforms are addressing this need, as well as critical related issues such as institutional 
intransigence borne of corruption and the parochial interests of senior PLA leaders. In addition to 
strengthening Party control over the PLA, China’s leaders directed a complete restructuring of the 
PLA headquarters to strengthen CMC administrative control of the PLA and to establish a joint 
command system capable of organizing and directing operations on a routine basis.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
116 
 
 
 
> The previous seven Military Regions 
were replaced by five joint theater 
commands each assigned specific 
operational 
missions to defend China’s 
territorial and strategic interests. With 
the possible exception of strategic 
units associated with the PLARF, SSF, 
JLSF, and CMC support and training 
missions, control of all PLA units has 
reportedly 
shifted 
to 
theater 
commands, centralizing control of 
forces 
for 
emergency 
response, 
territorial 
defense, 
and 
regional 
offensive operations under single 
operational authorities. 
> Service headquarters were delegated resource management and force readiness 
responsibilities, while joint force headquarters manage operations. To enable joint force 
management, an Army headquarters was established and the newly redesignated PLARF was 
elevated to serve as a service alongside the PLAA, PLAN, and PLAAF. 
> A CMC-subordinated SSF was formed to consolidate space and cyber functions, and a Joint 
Logistics Support Force was created to manage strategic logistics support to PLA operations. 
Reforms in 2017 and the resulting restructuring of PLA forces have highlighted the PLA’s vision for 
the future of PLA combat operations. They included the disestablishment of five group army 
headquarters, the reorganization of many divisions and regiments into combined arms brigades, and 
the formation of some air assault brigades. A PLANMC headquarters was established and the Marine 
Corps is tripling to seven brigades across all three naval fleets. The PLAAF reorganized its Airborne 
Corps into nine brigades, established additional air bases, and restructured its fighter and attack 
divisions into brigades subordinate to the new bases. 
To standardize training, operations, and equipment development, the PLA is also reorganizing its 
system of academies and research institutions. Organizations have been realigned to enable joint 
oversight and management of equipment research and development to create efficiencies in the 
acquisition system. Joint operations and warfighting concepts are being infused into academic 
curriculum, targeting mid-level officers, to enhance joint interoperability and command proficiency. 
PLA leaders are also revising personnel and promotion systems to reduce nepotism, broaden the 
experience of PLA officers, and encourage and grow operational experience. 
The PLA will likely face challenges in fully implementing these reforms, foremost of which is to sustain 
their scope and pace amid senior leadership transitions and expanding PLA missions.  Their  success

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
117 
 
 
 
likely depends greatly on strong centralized leadership and direction that can dispel inter-service 
rivalries, guide and assess organizational change, and influence corresponding reforms in China’s 
defense industrial base and other supporting institutions. To capitalize on joint organizational reforms, 
the PLA will probably need to field significant quantities of new weapons and communications 
systems required to operationalize its combined operations warfighting concepts. Finally, as China’s 
leaders pursue their ambitions for a more globally deployable strategic force, the PLA will need to 
develop the doctrine, institutional structures and procedures, infrastructure, and platforms to project, 
support, and sustain forces abroad – all of which appear relatively nascent today.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
118 
 
 
 
SPECIAL TOPIC: OVERWATER BOMBER OPERATIONS 
The PLA has long been developing air strike capabilities to engage targets as far away from China as 
possible. Over the last three years, the PLA has rapidly expanded its overwater bomber operating 
areas, gaining experience in critical maritime regions and likely training for strikes against U.S. and 
allied targets. The PLA may continue to extend its operations beyond the first island chain, 
demonstrating the capability to strike U.S. and allied forces and military bases in the western Pacific 
Ocean, including Guam. Such flights could potentially be used as a strategic signal to regional states, 
although the PLA has thus far has not been clear what messages such flights communicate beyond a 
demonstration of improved capabilities. 
 
Western Pacific. PLA aircraft first operated beyond the first island chain in 2013, when a PLAN ASCM- 
capable H-6G bomber transited through the Bashi Channel; however, the H-6G bomber lacks the 
range and endurance to patrol the western Pacific Ocean effectively and strike key U.S. and allied 
facilities. China began to field the longer-range H-6K bomber in 2013, incorporating cruise missile 
pylons to turn the bomber into a stand-off strike platform. The H-6K’s capabilities provided the 
PLAAF an offensive strike capability against Guam with LACMs. 
 
The PLAAF began flying the H-6K past the First Island Chain into the western Pacific Ocean in 2015, 
alternating transits through the Miyako Strait and the Bashi Channel and flying within LACM range 
of Guam. In 2016, the PLAAF improved its capabilities by adding AWACS and fighter aircraft to its 
bomber flight packages to provide defensive counter-air protection of the bombers beyond the first 
island chain. 
 
In 2016, the PLAAF also circumnavigated Taiwan for the first time by passing through both the 
Miyako Strait and Bashi Channel in the same mission, and significantly increased the number of 
circumnavigation missions in 2017. In addition to long-range flight plans, future H-6 missions may 
also target Taiwan. Depending on the weapons load, potential future H-6 missions could include anti- 
ship or shorter-range strikes targeting eastern Taiwan from all directions or supporting a blockade. 
Currently, such missions are vulnerable without defense counter-air support provided by fighters 
traveling along the route with the bombers. 
 
South China Sea. In 2016, China began flying H-6K missions in the South China Sea, probably as far as 
Scarborough Reef, conducting maritime patrols and ISR. H-6s could, if deployed to airfields in the 
Spratly Islands, extend their range through the Balabac Strait into the Celebes Sea or through the 
Sunda or Malacca Strait to fly into the Indian Ocean. 
 
Sea of Japan. In August 2016, two PLAN H-6 bombers accompanied by a Y-8 AEW&C aircraft 
conducted the first PLA flights into the Sea of Japan. In January 2017, they flew the same route, this 
time with six bombers supported by two reconnaissance aircraft. In August 2017, the PLAAF further 
expanded the PLA’s operating area by sending six PLAAF H-6K bombers through the Miyako Strait, 
and for the first time,  turned north to fly east of Okinawa and as far north as the Kii Peninsula. These

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
119 
 
 
 
flights demonstrated a maturing capability for H-6K bombers to conduct off-axis strikes against U.S. 
and allied facilities. Previously demonstrated flight endurance of the PLAAF H-6K suggest future 
missions could fly around Japan, along the Philippines’ coast, and use a wider area of operations 
throughout the Philippine Sea than current operations by Chinese aircraft. 
 
PLA Maritime Bomber Operations 
Date 
Service 
Operating Area 
Notes 
 
Sep 2013 
 
PLAN 
 
Western Pacific 
1st PLA flight ever beyond first island 
chain; occurred on anniversary of 
Japan nationalizing Senkakus 
Dec 2014 
PLAN 
Western Pacific 
1st ever PLAAF flight beyond first island 
chain 
Mar 2015 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
 
May 2015 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
 
Aug 2015 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
 
Nov 2015 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
 
Aug 2016 
PLAN 
Sea of Japan 
1st PLA flight into Sea of Japan 
 
Sep 2016 
 
PLAAF 
 
Western Pacific 
Probably 1st flight to include fighters 
and AWACS with the bombers beyond 
the first island chain 
Nov 2016 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
1st circumnavigation of Taiwan 
Dec 2016 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
2nd circumnavigation of Taiwan 
Jan 2017 
PLAN 
Sea of Japan 
2nd mission to Sea of Japan, this time 
with six H-6G bombers 
Jul 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
Circumnavigation of Taiwan, 
concurrent missions in each direction 
Aug 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
Circumnavigation of Taiwan 
Aug 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific, east of Japan 
north of the Miyako Strait 
First flights along eastern Japan 
Nov 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
 
Nov 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
Notably included EW and tanker 
aircraft in addition to fighters 
Nov 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
Separate missions through both 
Miyako and Luzon Straits in one day 
Dec 2017 
PLAN 
Western Pacific 
Separate missions through both 
Miyako and Luzon Straits 
Dec 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
 
 
Dec 2017 
 
PLAAF 
 
Western Pacific 
Circumnavigation of Taiwan; PLAAF 
spokesman described as a “circling- 
the-island patrol” 
Dec 2017 
PLAAF 
Sea of Japan 
1st PLAAF flight into Sea of Japan and 
entered the Korean ADIZ 
Dec 2017 
PLAAF 
Western Pacific 
Supported by a Y-8 that continued on 
to circumnavigate Taiwan

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
120

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
121 
 
 
 
SPECIAL TOPIC: XI JINPING’S INNOVATION-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 
In May 2016, nearly a decade after China’s strategic push towards indigenous innovation, Xi Jinping 
re-emphasized the importance of S&T innovation at a National S&T Innovation Conference, stating, 
“if science and technology flourish, the nation will flourish, and if science and technology are strong, 
the country will be strong.” Xi’s speech extolled indigenous S&T innovation as key to modernizing 
China’s military, ensuring its national security, and ushering in sustainable socioeconomic 
development. S&T advances in the commercial sector are increasingly influencing China’s future 
military modernization, as Xi pushes greater military-civilian collaboration. 
> In early 2017, the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) and the Central Military 
Commission Science and Technology Commission jointly announced the “13th Five-Year 
Plan–Military-Civilian Fusion S&T Developmental Guide,” a roadmap for military-civilian 
fusion efforts in the next five years. 
> In October 2017, Xi Jinping highlighted at the 19th Party Congress the importance of the 
strategy to revitalize the country through science, education and innovation-driven 
breakthroughs and the strategy of military-civilian integrated development – both key to 
complete building a well-off society with a great Chinese military and a modernized economic 
system. 
The ultimate goal of S&T modernization is to rejuvenate China by 2050 as an S&T powerhouse. For 
the next 30 years, China’s leaders have arranged its innovation-driven development strategy into the 
following four major milestones: 
2020: Advance domestic competence for global innovation competition. The ability to rank side-by-side with other 
innovation-driven countries remains a top priority under Xi Jinping. These development goals center 
on upgrading the industrial economy (including modern agriculture, clean and efficient energy, and 5th 
generation mobile telecommunications networks), building science innovation parks, and attracting 
top-tier researchers. China intends these projects to further advance China’s global ranking and to 
strengthen defense technology development between the military and civilian sectors. 
2025: Reduce reliance on foreign technology. In October 2015, China’s State Council published the Made in 
China 2025 plan, outlining development trajectories to establish and promote China-made 
components, create well-known Chinese brands, and increase the domestic and international market 
share in 10 strategic industries. The plan aims to develop internationally competitive leading 
enterprises; improve technical, equipment, and quality standards to international levels; and create a 
long-term industrial supply chain and perfect mass production. To achieve core technology 
breakthroughs, the plan incentivizes accumulating patents, increasing Chinese intellectual property, 
and establishing engineering platforms and collaborative innovation centers for S&T. The 10 strategic 
industries are: 
1) New generation information technology;

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
122 
 
 
 
2) High-grade machine tooling and robotics; 
3) Aerospace equipment; 
4) Marine engineering equipment; 
5) Advanced rail transportation equipment; 
6) New-energy automobiles; 
7) Electric power equipment; 
8) Agricultural equipment; 
9) New materials; and, 
10) Biomedicine. 
2030: Make milestone contributions to the global scientific community. Striving to take the lead on breakthroughs 
in important S&T areas, China’s 13th Five-Year Program outlines major S&T Innovation Projects for 
2030 to benefit both the Chinese economy and its military. Projects include AI 2.0, national cyberspace 
security, aircraft engines and combustion turbines, quantum computing and quantum communication, 
advanced manufacturing, clean and efficient energy production, green technologies and environmental 
solutions, agriculture advances, biology and health, resource management in both space and ocean, 
and deep-earth exploration. 
> China’s AI 2.0 project moves beyond its focus with AI 1.0, which centered solely on 
discovering AI, to focus on the networking and intelligentization of the entire industry chain. 
In July 2017, China published a national AI blueprint that lays out its R&D trajectory to 
achieve major breakthroughs in the AI field and become the world’s primary AI innovation 
center by 2030. 
2050: Lead and dominate as the S&T powerhouse. China’s long-term objective remains to become the 
global leader in innovative scientific development. Major milestones focus on S&T popularization by 
training S&T personnel, fostering a favorably education environment for cultivating S&T talent, and 
strengthening intellectual property protection. As Xi stated, “without generally raising the scientific 
quality of all the people, it will be difficult to establish a huge high-quality innovation army.” 
China’s push for leadership in global S&T development comes at a time in which dual-use technology 
advances, applicable for both commercial and military purposes, increasingly occur in the commercial 
sector. This means that efforts by China to cultivate a broad base of S&T talent, particularly given its 
stated focus on dual-use sectors, will be relevant to China's military power in coming decades. Specific 
examples include advanced computing, essential for weapons design and testing; industrial robotics, 
potentially useful for improving weapons manufacturing; new materials and electric power equipment, 
which could contribute to improved weapon systems; next generation information technology, which 
could enable improved C4ISR and cyber capabilities; commercial directed energy equipment, which 
could contribute to the development of directed energy weapons; and artificial intelligence, which 
could contribute to next-generation autonomous systems such as missiles, swarming technology, or 
cyber capabilities.

123 
 
 
APPENDIX I:  CHINA AND TAIWAN FORCES DATA 
Due to ongoing PLA restructuring of combat units, the characterization and numbers of units and 
systems are approximate, as units are in the process of forming, downsizing, reorganizing, or 
disbanding. Therefore, the data in this year’s report applies a new methodology that may result in 
significantly different numbers than shown in previous reports but does not necessarily reflect a 
sudden change in capability. 
 
Taiwan Strait Military Balance, Ground Forces 
 
China 
Taiwan 
 
Total 
Eastern and 
Southern Theaters 
Total 
Personnel 
(Active in Combat Units) 
915,000 
360,000 
140,000 
Group Armies/Army Corps 
13 
5 
3 
Combined Arms Brigades 
78 (includes 5 with 
amphibious role) 
30 (includes 5 with 
amphibious role) 
NA 
Mechanized Infantry Brigades 
 
Transitioning to Combined Arms Brigades 
(see above) 
3 
Motorized Infantry Brigades 
6 
Armor Brigades 
4 
Air Assault/Army Aviation 
Brigades 
13 
5 
4 
Artillery Brigades 
15 
7 
3 
Airborne Brigades 
6 
6 
0 
Marine Brigades 
7 
4 
2 
Tanks 
7,400 
UNKNOWN 
1,200 
Artillery Pieces 
10,600 
UNKNOWN 
2,300 
Note: The 2017 chart focuses on PLA combat units and applies observed widespread changes in 
the new group armies to all group army units. The methodology applied for the new group army 
construct as the PLAA transitions to brigades is six combined arms brigades and one of each 
specialty brigade (army aviation/air assault and artillery) per group army. Some units are likely in 
the early stages of development and are not fully operational. Personnel numbers comprise 
group armies, marines, and airborne, including subordinate units not listed in the table.

124 
Taiwan Strait Military Balance, Naval Forces 
 
 
 
China 
Taiwan 
 
Total 
Eastern and Southern 
Theaters 
Total 
Aircraft Carriers 
1 
0 
0 
Destroyers 
28 
20 
4 
Frigates 
51 
39 
22 
Corvettes 
28 
21 
0 
Tank Landing Ships/ 
Amphibious Transport Dock 
33 
30 
13 
Medium Landing Ships 
23 
17 
0 
Diesel Attack Submarines 
47 
32 
2 
Nuclear Attack Submarines 
5 
2 
0 
Ballistic Missile Submarines 
4 
4 
0 
Coastal Patrol (Missile) 
86 
68 
44 
Coast Guard Ships 
240 
UNKNOWN 
23 
Note: The PLAN has the largest force of principal combatants, submarines, and amphibious 
warfare ships in the region. In the event of a major Taiwan conflict, the Eastern and Southern 
Theater Navies would participate in direct action against the Taiwan Navy. The Northern Theater 
Navy (not shown) would be responsible primarily for protecting the sea approaches to China, 
and could provide mission-critical assets to support other fleets. In conflict, China may also 
employ China Coast Guard and People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia ships to support military 
operations.

125 
Taiwan Strait Military Balance, Air Forces 
 
 
 
China 
Taiwan 
 
Total 
Eastern and 
Southern Theaters 
Total 
Fighters 
1,490 
400 
420 
Bombers/Attack 
530 
190 
0 
Transport 
400 
UNKNOWN 
30 
Special Mission Aircraft 
130 
UNKNOWN 
40 
 
Note: The chart displays military aircraft only, but the PLAAF and PLAN may supplement military 
transports with civilian aircraft in a combat scenario. In the event of a major Taiwan conflict, 
aircraft numbers may be significantly increased by forward deploying aircraft from other 
theaters. 
 
 
China’s Rocket Force 
System 
Launchers 
Missiles 
Estimated Range 
ICBM 
50-75 
75-100 
5,400-13,000+ km 
IRBM 
16-30 
16-30 
3,000+ km 
MRBM 
100-125 
200-300 
1,500+ km 
SRBM 
250-300 
1,000-1,200 
300-1,000 km 
GLCM 
40-55 
200-300 
1,500+ km

126 
 
 
APPENDIX II: MILITARY-TO-MILITARY EXCHANGES 
 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
August 
  HIGH-LEVEL VISITS TO UNITED STATES 
 
Southern Theater Commander 
September 
Deputy Chief of the Joint Staff Department 
November 
  RECURRENT EXCHANGES 
 
Defense Policy Coordination Talks in China 
January 
Diplomatic and Security Dialogue 
June 
Military Maritime Consultative Agreement Working Group in China and the Plenary 
in the United States 
May/ 
November 
Army-to-Army Dialogue Mechanism 
November 
Joint Staff Dialogue Mechanism 
November 
Asia Pacific Security Dialogue 
December 
  ACADEMIC EXCHANGES 
 
U.S. Air War College Delegation to China 
February 
U.S. National War College Delegation to China 
April 
PLA Air Force Command College to the United States 
April 
U.S. Marine Corps War College Delegation to China 
May 
U.S. National Defense University CAPSTONE to China 
May 
PLA Academy of Military Science Delegation to United States 
November 
  FUNCTIONAL EXCHANGES 
 
USN Ship Visit (USS STERETT) to China 
June 
Peacekeeping Center Exchange to China 
June 
Disaster Management Exchange in the United States 
November 
  JOINT AND MULTILATERAL EXERCISES 
 
KHAAN QUEST in Mongolia 
July-August 
U.S.-CHINA MILITARY-TO-MILITARY CONTACTS FOR 2017 
HIGH-LEVEL VISITS TO CHINA 
Month (2017)

127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Senior Defense or Military Leader to China (TBD) 
   HIGH-LEVEL VISITS TO UNITED STATES 
 
PRC Senior Defense or Military Leader to the United States (TBD) 
   INSTITUTIONALIZED EXCHANGES 
 
Defense Policy Coordination Talks (TBD) 
Joint Staff Dialogue Mechanism (TBD) 
MMCA Plenary and Working Groups (TBD) 
Disaster Management Exchange (TBD) 
Defense Consultative Talks (TBD) 
Asia-Pacific Security Dialogue (TBD) 
   ACADEMIC EXCHANGES 
 
PRC Academy delegation to the United States (TBD) 
U.S. NDU or Academy delegation to China (TBD) 
   FUNCTIONAL EXCHANGES 
 
PLA Navy Ship Visit to the United States (TBD) 
U.S. Navy Ship Visit to China (TBD) 
U.S.-CHINA MILITARY-TO-MILITARY EXCHANGES PLANNED FOR 2018 
HIGH-LEVEL VISITS TO CHINA

128 
 
 
C4ISR 
APPENDIX III: ACRONYMS 
A2/AD 
Anti-access/area denial 
AEW&C 
Airborne early warning and control 
AGI 
Intelligence collection ship 
AI 
Artificial intelligence 
ASBM 
Anti-ship ballistic missile 
ASCM 
Anti-ship cruise missile 
ASEAN 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ASW 
Anti-submarine warfare 
BMD 
Ballistic missile defense 
BRI 
Belt and Road Initiative 
C2 
Command and control 
C4I 
Command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence 
Command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance 
CAS 
China Academy of Sciences 
CASIC 
China Aerospace and Science Industry Corporation 
CCG 
China Coast Guard 
CCP 
Chinese Communist Party 
CG 
Cruiser 
CMC 
Central Military Commission 
DDG 
Guided missile destroyer 
DoD 
U.S. Department of Defense 
DPP 
Democratic Progressive Party 
EDD 
Equipment Development Department 
EEZ 
Exclusive economic zone 
EW 
Electronic warfare 
FFG 
Guided-missile frigate 
FFL 
Corvette 
GDP 
Gross domestic product 
GLCM 
Ground-launched cruise missile 
GPS 
Global Positioning System 
HA/DR 
Humanitarian assistance/disaster relief 
IADS 
Integrated air defense system 
ICBM 
Intercontinental ballistic missile 
ICT 
Information and communications technology 
IEA 
International Energy Agency 
IO 
Information operations 
INTERPOL 
International police 
IRBM 
Intermediate-range ballistic missile

129 
 
 
ISR 
Intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance 
JLSF 
Joint Logistics Support Force 
JOCC 
Joint Operations Command Center 
JSD 
Joint Staff Department 
LACM 
Land-attack cruise missile 
LOSC 
Law of the Sea Convention 
LPD 
Amphibious transport dock 
LST 
Tank landing ship 
MaRV 
Maneuverable reentry vehicle 
MIRV 
Multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles 
MOOTW 
Military operations other than war 
MPS 
Ministry of Public Security 
MR 
Military region 
MRBM 
Medium-range ballistic missile 
MSS 
Ministry of State Security 
NFU 
“No first use” 
NSC 
National Security Commission 
NSFC 
National Science Foundation of China 
OTH 
Over-the-horizon 
PAP 
People’s Armed Police 
PKO 
Peacekeeping operations 
PAFMM 
People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia 
PLA 
People’s Liberation Army 
PLAA 
PLA Army 
PLAAF 
PLA Air Force 
PLAN 
PLA Navy 
PLANMC 
PLA Navy Marine Corps 
PLARF 
PLA Rocket Force 
PRC 
People’s Republic of China 
R&D 
Research and development 
S&T 
Science and technology 
SAM 
Surface-to-air missile 
SLBM 
Submarine-launched ballistic missile 
SLOC 
Sea lines of communication 
SLV 
Space Launch Vehicles 
SOF 
Special operations forces 
SRBM 
Short-range ballistic missile 
SS 
Diesel-powered attack submarine 
SSBN 
Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine 
SSF 
Strategic Support Force

130 
 
 
SSN 
Nuclear-powered attack submarine 
SSP 
Air-independent attack submarine 
TRA 
Taiwan Relations Act 
UAV 
Unmanned aerial vehicle 
UCAV 
Unmanned combat aerial vehicle 
UGF 
Underground facility 
UN 
United Nations 
UNSCR 
UN Security Council Resolution



