



3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary 
4
CHAPTER 1
Naval Strategy and Missions 
5
CHAPTER 2
PLA(N) Equipment—Building a Modern Navy 
10
CHAPTER 3
Training, Exercises, and Joint Operations 
23
CHAPTER 4
PLA(N) Structure and Leadership 
29
CHAPTER 5 
Maritime Claims—Securing China’s “Blue Territory”  
37
Outlook 
43
Additional resources:
Posters of China Equipment, Leadership Structure, and PLA(N) and MLE Recognition 
Guide enclosed in inside back pocket.
Multimedia vignette links of China’s Defensive Layers and South China Sea Maritime 
Claims can be found on pages 6 and 39 respectively.
Next Page
Previous Page
Table of Content

4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
S
ince our last publication in 2009, 
the People’s Liberation Army Navy 
(PLA(N)) has made significant strides in 
operationalizing as well as modernizing 
its force. Although the PLA(N)’s primary focus 
remains in the East Asia region, where China 
faces multiple disputes over the sovereignty 
of various maritime features and associated 
maritime rights, in recent years, the PLA(N) has 
increased its focus on developing blue-water naval 
capabilities. Over the long term, Beijing aspires to 
sustain naval missions far from China’s shores. 
When we wrote the 2009 publication, China had just 
embarked on its first counterpiracy missions in the 
Gulf of Aden, but most PLA(N) operations remained 
close to home. Nearly six years later, these missions 
have continued without pause, and China’s greater 
fleet has begun to stretch its legs. The PLA(N) has 
begun regular combat training in the Philippine Sea, 
participated in multinational exercises including 
Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) 2014, operated in the 
Mediterranean, increased intelligence collection 
deployments in the western Pacific, and for the first 
time deployed a submarine to the Indian Ocean. 
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) has continued 
to modernize its military, providing the PLA(N) with 
increasingly modern multipurpose platforms such as 
the LUYANG III-class destroyers and the JIANGDAO-
class corvettes. The Chinese military also continues 
to evolve its doctrine, organization, and training to 
ensure its personnel are able to effectively fight mod-
ern wars with modern equipment. Sustained leader-
ship emphasis on “realistic” and “complex” training 
has influenced training patterns and improved 
operational proficiency during the past five years. In 
late 2012, Xi Jinping extolled the continued impor-
tance of cultivating “real combat” awareness through-
out the military. Today, the PLA(N) conducts complex 
multidiscipline warfare training throughout the year.
China’s force modernization has concentrated on 
improving the quality of its force, rather than its 
size. Quantities of major combatants have stayed 
relatively constant, but their combat capability 
has greatly increased as older combatants are 
replaced by larger, multi-mission ships. With a 
greater percentage of the force consisting of 
these modern combatants capable of blue water 
operations, the PLA(N) will have an increasing 
capability to undertake missions far from China.
In addition to improving the traditional destroyer and 
frigate backbone of its fleet, the PLA(N) is on the 
verge of incorporating very different platforms that will 
greatly influence the operations of its future fleet. The 
JIN-class nuclear ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) 
is poised to begin strategic patrols in the near future, 
for the first time, putting Chinese intercontinental 
range ballistic missiles to sea. At the same time, 
with the commissioning of the KUZNETSOV-
class air craft carrier “LIAONING,” China has 
taken the first step as a carrier-capable navy.
Against this back drop of increasing military capability, 
China’s leaders appear increasingly willing to assert 
China’s maritime claims, even when such actions 
risk exacerbating tension with China’s neighbors. 
Since 2009, friction in the South China and East 
China Seas has become commonplace. With its 
expanding Coast Guard, China has been able to 
quickly respond to incidents it feels violated its 
claimed sovereignty in disputed areas. This trend 
has been highlighted by sustained China Coast 
Guard operations at a number of disputed features, 
including Scarborough Reef, Second Thomas 
Shoal, and the Senkaku Islands. More recently, 
China has begun strengthening its position in the 
Spratly Islands. Throughout 2014, China reclaimed 
hundreds of acres of land at the seven features 
that it occupies and appears to be building much 
larger facilities that could eventually support both 
maritime law enforcement and naval operations. 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

5
CHAPTER 1
NAVAL STRATEGY AND MISSIONS
The Evolution of a Naval Strategy
On September 25, 2012, China’s senior leadership officially 
commissioned the KUZNETSOV-class LIAONING, the 
country’s first aircraft carrier. Although LIAONING remains 
several years from becoming fully operational, and even 
then will offer relatively limited combat capability, this 
milestone signals a trend in Chinese naval strategy that 
has long-term implications for the region and the United 
States. China’s leaders have embraced the idea that mari-
time power is essential to achieving great power status. 
Since the 1980s, China’s naval strategy has evolved from a 
limited, coastal orientation, to one that is mission-focused 
and becoming increasingly unconstrained by geography. 
The People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLA(N)) primarily 
focuses on developing its modern naval combat capability 
to execute a range of contingency operations. Many of 
those operations include the expectation of U.S. military 
intervention. Additionally, China is becoming more involved 
in a range of “diversified missions” throughout Asia and 
beyond. China will invest in the Navy, Coast Guard, and 
maritime industries to more actively and effectively assert 
its security and economic interests in the coming decades. 
Over the past two years, China’s top leadership has em-
phasized the need for China to become a maritime power. 
In his final report as chairman of the Communist Party of 
China at the 18th Party Congress, Hu Jintao declared, 
“We should enhance our capacity for exploiting marine re-
sources...resolutely safeguard China’s maritime rights and 
interests, and build China into a maritime power.” Presi-
dent Xi Jinping further championed efforts to comprehen-
sively advance China’s maritime development, declaring 
at a high-profile study session in July 2013 that “[w]e need 
to do more to take interest in the sea, understand the sea, 
and strategically manage the sea, and continually do more 
to promote China’s efforts to become a maritime power.” 
The public emphasis on maritime power and the need to 
“resolutely safeguard” China’s maritime rights and inter-
ests reflects a growing consensus in China that maritime 
power is essential to advancing China’s overall national 
development.
From its founding in 1949 until the mid-1980s, China’s 
strategic concept of naval operations was limited to 
“coastal defense.” This strategy emphasized defending 
China’s coast from amphibious invasion, presumably by 
Taiwan and U.S. forces, in what would primarily be a land 
war. Since the 1980s, China’s shifting threat perceptions 
and growing economic interests have catalyzed a major 
shift in strategic orientation and the perceived utility of 
naval forces. In particular, Chinese naval strategists 
have sought to expand the bounds of China’s maritime 
capabilities and defenses beyond coastal waters. By 
1987, PLA(N) Commander Admiral Liu Huaqing had 
established a strategy referred to as “offshore defense.”
Offshore defense focuses on regional goals and deter-
ring a modern adversary from intervening in a regional 
conflict. Admiral Liu characterized “offshore” areas as 
those east of Taiwan and the northern part of the Pacific 
Ocean, stretching beyond the First Island Chain. 
Offshore defense is often associated with operations 
in the Yellow Sea, East China Sea, and South China 
Sea—China’s “near seas.” In the late 1980s, the develop-
ment of offshore defense paralleled the Central Military 
Commission (CMC)’s adoption of a new military strategy 
that focused on local wars on China’s periphery rather 
than a major confrontation with the Soviet Union. 
Events of the 1990s, including U.S.-led operations against 
Iraq and Serbia, U.S. intervention in the Taiwan Strait crisis 
of 1995–96, and the ongoing modernization of Japan’s 
and Taiwan’s navies, highlighted for Chinese strategists 
China’s continued vulnerability to threats from the sea and 
long-range precision strike weapons. These trends made 
it clear to Beijing that China was ill-prepared for modern 
warfare. The CMC charged the PLA with developing the 
ability to fight “local wars under modern, high-tech condi-
tions.” To do so, the PLA has advocated two key concepts 
to guide its modernization: “informationization” and “non-
contact warfare.” The PLA(N) has subsequently sought to 
develop a force with integrated, highly technical systems 
capable of long-range strikes for regional deterrence. 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

6
“Informationization” describes China’s effort to incor-
porate modern information technology into all aspects of 
military operations, such as command and control (C2), 
logistics, and targeting. China’s leaders recognize that the 
information advantage is vital on the modern battlefield. 
“Non-contact warfare” involves employing platforms 
and weapons in long-range, precision strikes from outside 
an enemy’s “defended zone.” The PLA(N)’s commitment 
to non-contact warfare is demonstrated by its continued 
acquisition of long-range weapons to be launched from 
ships, submarines, aircraft, or shore-based platforms as 
well as the associated detection and targeting capabilities 
required to employ these weapons to their fullest capacity.
Although the PLA(N)’s primary focus remains in the “near 
seas,” where China faces multiple disputes over the 
sovereignty of various islands and associated maritime 
rights, in recent years the PLA(N) has increased focus 
on developing “far seas” naval capabilities. Over the long 
term, Beijing aspires to be able to sustain some naval 
missions far from China’s shores. China has already 
conducted initial far seas missions, which have included 
intelligence collection, humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief, non-combatant evacuation operations, 
and protection of Sea Lines of Communication (SLOC) in 
the form of counterpiracy escort missions in the Gulf of 
Aden. Future missions could include support to combat 
operations. The expansion of Chinese naval operations 
into the western Pacific and Indian Oceans during the past 
five years will help facilitate these growing mission sets. 
Additionally, Chinese acquisition patterns demonstrate a 
growing emphasis on ships that are both multi-mission 
capable and large enough to sustain far seas operations.
PLA(N) Roles and Missions
Like many other rising powers throughout history, China’s 
interest in maritime power has grown in concert with its 
economic and security agenda. With a heavy reliance on 
maritime commerce, Beijing now has a vested interest 
in ensuring the security of international trade. Beijing 
also faces growing pressure to contribute to world peace 
and international security missions. Finally, the PLA(N) 
is at the forefront of addressing a number of enduring 
PRC security challenges, from being prepared to force 
Taiwan reunification with the mainland to providing the 
military expedient for asserting Chinese maritime claims 
in the East China Sea and South China Sea. Although 
Figure 1-1. China’s Defensive Layers
click here for the Multimedia Vignette or the image below
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

7
nontraditional missions are a significant influence and 
drive the PLA(N) to operate in the far seas, traditional 
naval missions to safeguard maritime security and main-
tain the sovereignty of territorial waters will remain a 
priority for naval operations, training, and planning. 
The Cross-Strait Problem 
The PRC views reunification with Taiwan as an immutable, 
long-term goal and hopes to prevent any third party from 
intervening in what China asserts is an internal matter. 
China’s leaders have long emphasized their preference for 
peaceful reunification; however, they also note that China 
is not prepared to wait indefinitely for a political resolution. 
For several decades, China’s naval investments have 
focused heavily on capabilities to deter Taiwan’s moves 
toward independence, to successfully reverse Taiwan’s 
actions should deterrence fail, and if necessary, to forcibly 
reunify Taiwan with the mainland even if the United States 
were to become militarily involved. As a military strategist 
at Beijing’s Academy of Military Sciences stated, “We 
can resolve a crisis if we are in a position to deter.” 
For these reasons, China’s modernization efforts during the 
1990s and early 2000s focused on preparing for a Taiwan 
conflict and developing capabilities to deter, delay, and, 
if necessary, degrade potential U.S. military intervention. 
China has built or acquired a wide array of advanced 
platforms including submarines, major surface combatants, 
missile patrol craft, maritime strike aircraft, and land-based 
systems employing new and sophisticated antiship cruise 
missiles (ASCMs) and surface-to-air missiles. China also 
developed the world’s first antiship ballistic missile (ASBM), 
a system specifically designed to attack enemy aircraft 
carriers. Chinese leaders hope that simply possessing 
these military capabilities will deter pro-independence 
moves or—should deterrence fail—permit a range of 
military options that can be tailored to the specific situation. 
Given the pace of PLA(N) modernization, the gap in 
military capability between the mainland and Taiwan will 
continue to widen in China’s favor over the coming years. 
During the 1995-96 cross-strait crisis, Beijing engaged in 
large-scale exercises and missile demonstrations; however, 
its options for dealing with Taiwan directly were limited. 
China was ill-prepared to execute a major reunification 
campaign and even less capable of countering U.S. forces 
intervening on Taiwan’s behalf. Nearly two decades later, 
China has closed some of the capability gaps—including 
air defense and long-range maritime strikes—that would 
support a number of Taiwan-related campaigns. 
Following Taiwan’s 2008 election, cross-strait relations 
enjoyed a sustained warming trend. The ensuing 
stability assuaged PRC concerns over the possibility 
of a near-term crisis and enabled the PLA(N) to focus 
attention on other mission areas; however, it has not 
affected the underlying political challenge. From the 
perspective of the PLA, and the PLA(N) in particular, 
developing the capabilities to compel reunification 
will remain a central priority in the years ahead. 
Beyond Taiwan 
China’s nontraditional security interests in the far seas, 
as well as island sovereignty disputes and resource 
competition in the near seas, increasingly influence 
modernization and planning priorities. Former President 
Hu Jintao’s 2004 assertion of the PLA’s “new historic 
missions” highlighted new expectations for the navy. Two 
of the articulated missions—providing a security guarantee 
to safeguard China’s national development and playing 
an important role in ensuring world peace—significantly 
adjusted China’s national defense strategy and broadened 
its definition of security to include new geographic and 
functional areas beyond the PLA’s traditional territorial 
security missions. Missions such as naval escort in the 
Gulf of Aden support China’s economic interests while 
simultaneously advancing China’s international image. 
China’s Defense White Papers have chronicled the shift to 
a wider range of military missions, highlighting pressure 
from economic globalization and strategic competition, 
as well as the requirement for “diversified military tasks,” 
such as disaster relief, counterterrorism, and counterpiracy. 
The 2008 Defense White Paper specifically articulated 
a requirement for military operations other than war 
(MOOTW), noting China’s intent to gradually develop 
the capabilities to operate cooperatively in the open 
ocean and contend with nontraditional security threats. 
China’s 2013 Defense White Paper noted that the PLA(N) 
“endeavors to accelerate the modernization of its forces 
for comprehensive offshore operations...[and] develop blue 
water capabilities.” It asserted that China’s armed forces 
must adapt to meet new challenges, including nontradi-
tional missions, and charged the PLA with strengthening 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

8
overseas operational capabilities such as emergency 
response, escort, and noncombatant evacuation missions. 
During the past decade, requirements for diversified 
missions and far seas operations have stimulated an 
operational shift and have catalyzed the acquisition of 
multi-mission platforms capable of improved sustainability 
and self-defense in blue water. Most of the PLA(N)’s new 
acquisitions are suited for both near seas and far seas 
missions. The LUYANG III-class DDG (Type 052D), which 
entered service in 2014, embodies the trend toward a more 
flexible force with advanced air defenses and long-range 
strike capability. The large YUZHAO-class LPD (Type 
071) is capable of amphibious and logistical operations 
in the near seas, although it is also equipped to support 
expeditionary operations and nontraditional security 
missions, such as counterpiracy patrols, around the world.
The PLA(N) has also begun nearly annual humanitarian 
assistance missions with ANWEI-class (Type 920) hospital 
ship “PEACE ARK.” PEACE ARK has deployed to South 
Asia and Africa in 2010 and 2013, Latin America in 2011, 
and Oceania and the Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise 
in 2014. It also conducted its first disaster relief mission 
to the Philippines in late 2013 following Typhoon Haiyan. 
Protecting Maritime Sovereignty 
In the East China and South China Seas, Beijing faces 
longstanding disputes with its neighbors about maritime 
boundaries, economic rights, and sovereignty over 
various geographic features. During the past few years, 
maritime disputes have intensified between China and 
rival claimants such as Japan, the Philippines, and 
Vietnam. China’s Navy, Coast Guard, and Chinese 
economic actors are increasingly visible throughout 
the region and are increasingly proactive in asserting 
Beijing’s maritime claims, even when directly challenged 
by other claimants’ naval and Coast Guard assets. 
Historically, Beijing has preferred to use diplomacy, 
economic influence, and Coast Guard patrols to assert 
maritime sovereignty; however, the Navy provides 
an important security guarantee with the means to 
intimidate smaller claimants and deter larger ones. 
Beijing’s growing confidence in its capabilities and 
various tools of influence has likely contributed to 
Atlantic
Ocean
Indian
Ocean
Mediterranean Sea
Strait of  
Malacca
Philippine
Sea
Pacific 
Ocean
SAUDIA
ARABIA
IRAN
YEMEN
INDIA
JAPAN
INDONESIA
PHILLIPPINES
AUSTRALIA
RUSSIA
Bab al Mendeb
Strait of  
Hormuz
MALAYSIA
Figure 1-2. Sea Lane Protection
Taiwan Strait
South China 
 Sea
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

9
its decision to adopt more assertive tactics when it 
feels that its maritime interests are challenged. 
In a conflict or crisis, the PLA(N) has a variety of options 
to assert its maritime interests through military force. 
The PLA(N) could lead an amphibious campaign to 
seize key disputed island features or conduct blockade 
or sea line of communication (SLOC) interdiction 
campaigns to secure strategic operating areas. 
Sea Lane Protection 
China’s leaders view sustained economic growth as the 
central requirement for transforming China into a powerful 
nation. Since any disruption of critical international choke-
points would undermine China’s export-driven economy, 
the PLA(N) is expected to defend major SLOCs. It is along 
these maritime routes that the overwhelming majority of 
China’s foreign trade—more than 90 percent by volume 
and more than 65 percent by value—is transported. The 
SLOCs are essential to China for the export of finished 
goods and the import of raw materials, including crude oil.
SLOC protection is not simply a matter of deploying 
ships to chokepoints. It requires the capability to sustain 
a maritime presence in strategic locations, in hostile 
conditions, and for extended periods. When President 
Hu initially called for this type of capability in his 2004 
expansion of China’s historic missions, concerns 
over the Malacca Strait dominated discussion of 
SLOC security. Today, as China’s economic interests 
expand, China’s SLOC concerns extend to even more 
distant waters. This appears to have generated greater 
discussion on the potential of overseas naval bases.  
The PLA(N)’s sustained counterpiracy operations in the 
Gulf of Aden demonstrate Beijing’s intention to protect 
important SLOCs. China’s participation serves several 
purposes: first, it is in line with the PLA(N)’s mission 
requirements to protect the PRC’s strategic maritime inter-
ests; second, it provides the PLA(N) with the opportunity 
to develop and refine the operational capabilities it needs 
for “far seas” operations; and third, it enhances China’s 
image as a responsible member of the global community.
Looking Ahead
In contrast to its narrow focus just a decade ago, the 
PLA(N) is evolving to meet a wide range of missions 
including conflict with Taiwan, enforcement of maritime 
claims, protection of economic interests, as well as 
counterpiracy and humanitarian missions. The PLA(N) 
will also soon assume a central role in China’s nuclear 
deterrent with the first ballistic missile submarine patrols 
with an intercontinental-range missile. In the next decade, 
China will complete its transition from a coastal navy to 
a navy capable of multiple missions around the world. 
China’s leaders see the evolution of naval strategy 
as necessary to preserve China’s interests and com-
mensurate with its role as an emerging major power.  
Although being prepared to forcibly reunify Taiwan with 
the mainland will remain a driving force behind China’s 
naval modernization, the PLA(N) is simultaneously 
focusing resources on a growing array of other chal-
lenges, particularly competition over regional territory 
and rights. Friction between China and its neighbors 
appears increasingly likely as Beijing seeks to deter rival 
activities and assert its own claimed rights and interests.
Aside from these challenges, the PLA(N)’s growing 
capabilities and broad strategic focus also creates 
new opportunities for cooperation with other countries, 
including the United States. China’s sustained presence 
in the Gulf of Aden underscores the potential to achieve 
mutually beneficial objectives, such as countering piracy. 
Similarly, China’s new hospital ships, amphibious ships, 
and even the new aircraft carrier create opportunities 
for China to contribute to the delivery of humanitarian 
assistance, disaster relief, and other positive services.
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

10
CHAPTER 2
PLA(N) EQUIPMENT– 
BUILDING A MODERN NAVY
During the past 15 years, China’s ambitious naval mod-
ernization has produced a more technologically advanced 
and flexible force. The PLA(N) currently possesses more 
than 300 surface combatants, submarines, amphibious 
ships, and missile-armed patrol craft. Although the overall 
order-of-battle has remained relatively constant in recent 
years, the PLA(N) is rapidly retiring legacy combatants 
in favor of larger, multi-mission ships, equipped with 
advanced antiship, antiair, and antisubmarine weapons 
and sensors. Since 2000, the PLA(N) has been on track to 
dramatically increase its combat capability by 2020 through 
rapid acquisition and improved operational proficiency.
During 2014 alone, more than 60 naval ships and 
craft were laid down, launched, or commissioned, 
with a similar number expected through the end of 
2015. Major qualitative improvements are occurring 
within naval aviation and the submarine force, which 
are increasingly capable of striking targets hundreds 
of miles from the Chinese mainland. Although the 
PLA(N) faces capability gaps in some key areas, it is 
emerging as a well equipped and competent force. 
From the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, China often 
built small numbers of a large variety of ships, chang-
ing classes rapidly as advancements were made. 
In the period between 1995 and 2005 alone, China 
constructed or purchased major surface combatants 
and submarines in at least 15 different classes. Using 
imported technology, reverse engineering, and indigenous 
development, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
rapidly narrowed the technology and capability gap 
with modern navies during the 1990s and 2000s. 
As the PLA(N) narrowed the technological gap, procure-
ment became more indigenous and more efficient. The last 
delivery of a major naval platform from a foreign country 
was the SOVREMENNYY II-class DDGs in 2006. China is 
implementing much longer production runs of its domesti-
cally produced surface combatants and conventional 
submarines, suggesting greater satisfaction with recent 
designs. The JIANGKAI-class (Type 054A) frigate series, 
LUYANG-class (Type 052B/C/D) destroyer series, and the 
upcoming new cruiser (Type 055) class are considered to 
be modern and capable designs that are comparable in 
many respects to the most modern Western warships. 
Likewise, the PLA-Navy Air Force continues improving 
its capabilities. It is better equipped to project air power 
from shore and has begun the difficult journey towards 
carrier aviation. Two months after the carrier LIAONING 
was commissioned in 2012, J-15 aircraft successfully 
conducted their first-ever carrier-based take-off and 
landings. Full integration of a carrier air regiment remains 
several years in the future, but remarkable progress 
has been made already. Chinese officials acknowledge 
plans to build additional carriers but they have not 
publicly indicated whether the next carrier will incorporate 
catapults or which aircraft they plan to embark. 
With a greater percentage of the force consisting of large, 
multi-mission combatants capable of blue water opera-
tions, the PLA(N) will have an increasing capability to 
undertake missions in far seas, and is assuming its place 
among the most powerful navies in Asia. Additionally, the 
introduction of long-range anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCM), 
non-PLA(N) weapons such as the DF-21D anti-ship ballistic 
missile (ASBM), and the requisite Command, Control, 
Communications, Computers, Intelligence Surveillance 
and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) architecture to provide 
targeting data will allow China to expand its combat 
capability further into the Philippine and South China Seas.
 
Multi-Mission Platforms
In the initial stages of China’s modernization drive, 
the PLA(N) successfully concentrated resources on 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

11
CHINA
Figure 2-1. PLA(N) Fleet Composition
North Sea Fleet
  3 Nuclear Attack Submarines
25 Diesel Attack Submarines
  8 Destroyers
10 Frigates
11 Amphibious Ships
18  Missile Patrol Craft
  6 Corvettes
Ningbo
East Sea Fleet
18 Diesel Attack Submarines
  9 Destroyers
22 Frigates
20 Amphibious Ships
30 Missile Patrol Craft
  6 Corvettes
Qingdao
South Sea Fleet
  2 Nuclear Attack Submarines
  4 Nuclear Ballistic Missile Submarines
16 Diesel Attack Submarines
  9 Destroyers
20 Frigates
25 Amphibious Ships
38 Missile Patrol Craft
  8 Corvettes
Zhanjiang
North Sea Fleet HQ
East Sea Fleet HQ
South Sea Fleet HQ
PLA(N) HQs
improving its antisurface warfare (ASUW) capabilities, 
both in surface and submarine development. Subsequent 
efforts to improve antiair warfare (AAW) capabilities 
were evident with the surface force, along with mod-
est improvements in antisubmarine capability. 
Every major PLA(N) surface combatant currently under 
construction is capable of embarking a helicopter, 
an addition that supports over-the-horizon targeting 
(OTH-T), antisubmarine warfare (ASW), and search 
and rescue. Meanwhile, the submarine force remains 
largely concentrated on ASUW, with the JIN-class SSBN 
poised to strengthen China’s nuclear deterrent once the 
vessel begins strategic patrols in the near future. Naval 
aviation is widening its mission set by incorporating 
more diverse aircraft and capabilities, including airborne 
early warning, carrier aviation, and unmanned aerial 
vehicles. As a whole, although some older platforms 
remain in the inventory, the PLA(N) is clearly shifting 
to a force employing assets that are able to execute a 
wide variety of missions both near and far from home.
PLA(N) Surface Force
Less than a decade ago China’s naval surface force was 
an eclectic mix of vintage, modern, converted, imported, 
and domestic platforms, which utilized a variety of 
weapons and sensors with wide-ranging capabilities. In 
the late 1990s to early 2000s, the PLA(N) transitioned 
from a “green water” force to one capable of operating 
offshore. During this period China imported several major 
combatants, weapon systems, and sensors from Russia 
while concurrently producing and developing its own 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

12
YUAN SSP
SONG SS
LUYANG II DDG
J-10
PLA(N) has concentrated on precision warfare against a modern adversary.
LUYANG I DDG
J-8
SONG SS
LUDA I DD
J-7E
MING SS
Figure 2-2. PLA(N) Rapid Modernization
designs. By the second decade of the 2000s, the PLA(N)’s 
surface production shifted to platforms using wholly 
Chinese designs and that were primarily equipped with 
Chinese weapons and sensors (though some engineering 
components and subsystems remain imported or license-
produced in country). Furthermore, the era of small class 
design runs has given way to series production of multiple 
new destroyer, frigate, and corvette classes as China’s 
rapid technological advancement in naval design begins to 
approach a level commensurate with other modern navies.
As of this publishing, the PLA(N) consists of approximately 
26 destroyers (21 of which are considered modern), 52 
frigates (35 modern), 20 new corvettes, 85 modern missile-
armed patrol craft, 56 amphibious ships, 42 mine warfare 
ships (30 modern), more than 50 major auxiliary ships, and 
more than 400 minor auxiliary ships and service/support 
craft. During 2013, more than 60 total naval ships and craft 
were laid down, launched, or commissioned; we expect 
a similar number by the end of 2015. In 2013 and 2014, 
China launched more naval ships than any other country 
and is expected to continue this trend through 2015-16. 
In recent years, shipboard air defense is arguably the 
most notable area of improvement on PLA(N) surface 
ships. China has retired several legacy destroyers and 
frigates that had at most a point air defense capability, 
with a range of just several miles. Newer ships entering 
the force are equipped with medium-to-long range area 
air defense missiles. The PLA(N) produced a total of six 
LUYANG II-class (Type 052C) destroyers with the HHQ-9 
surface-to-air missile (~55 nm), and is now receiving 
the new LUYANG III-class (Type 052D) destroyer, 
which carries an extended-range variant of the HHQ-9. 
Additionally, at least 20 JIANGKAI II-class (Type 054A) 
frigates are now operational with the vertically-launched 
HHQ-16 (~20-40 nm), with more under construction. 
These newer platforms use modern combat manage-
ment systems and air-surveillance sensors, such as the 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

13
Chinese SEA EAGLE and DRAGON EYE phased-array 
radar. While some older platforms with little or no air 
defense capability remain in the PLA(N) inventory, the 
addition of these new units allows the PLA(N) surface 
force to operate with increased confidence outside of 
shore-based air defense systems, as one or two ships are 
equipped to provide air defense for the entire task group.
The PLA(N) continues to emphasize ASUW as a core 
strength, with continued development of advanced ASCMs 
and OTH-T systems. Most combatants still carry variants 
of the YJ-83 ASCM, while the LUYANG destroyer is 
fitted with the YJ-62, and the newest class, the LUYANG 
III destroyer is fitted with the new vertically-launched 
YJ-18 ASCM. While the maximum effective ranges of the 
export variants of the YJ-83 family (C802, C802A) and 
YJ-62 family (C602) are advertised as 65nm, 100nm, and 
650nm respectively, it is likely the domestic versions of 
these systems have much longer ranges. A new cruiser 
to be built in China in the latter half of the decade will 
carry a variety of antisurface weapons, some of which 
will be newly developed. The PLA(N) recognizes that 
these extended-range weapons require OTH-T capability 
to realize their full potential and has invested in maritime 
reconnaissance systems at the national and tactical levels, 
as well as communication systems such as datalinks, 
to provide targeting information to launch platforms.
Historically, ASW has lagged behind ASUW and AAW 
as a priority for the PLA(N). Although ASW remains 
a relative capability gap, recent new-construction 
classes are equipped with a variety of new sonar systems, 
including towed arrays and variable-depth sonars, as 
well as hangars to support embarked helicopters.  
LUYANG II DDG 
Type 052C
LUYANG III DDG 
Type 052D
JIANGKAI II FFG 
Type 054A
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90nm
HHQ-9 Extended Range
HHQ-9
HHQ-7
Range (Nautical Miles)
Figure 2-3. Naval Surface-to-Air Missile Ranges
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

14
During the past two decades, 
China phased out hundreds of Cold 
War-era OSA and HOUKU-class 
missile patrol boats and gun-armed 
SHANGHAI and HAINAN-class 
patrol craft (among others) as 
the PLA(N) transitioned from 
coastal defense missions towards 
offshore and far seas operations. 
However, China retains a modern 
coastal-defense and area-denial 
capability with 60 HOUBEI (Type 
022) class missile patrol craft (PTG) 
built in the mid-2000s to supple-
ment 25 1990s-vintage HOUJIAN 
and HOUXIN-class missile patrol 
combatants. The HOUBEI design 
integrates a high-speed wave-
piercing catamaran hull, waterjet 
propulsion, signature-reduction 
features, and the YJ-83 family 
ASCM. Although poorly equipped for 
offshore patrol duties, the HOUBEI 
is valuable for reacting to specific 
threats in China’s exclusive econom-
ic zone (EEZ) and slightly beyond. 
In 2012, China began producing 
the new JIANGDAO-class (Type 
056) corvette (FFL), which offers 
precisely the flexibility that the 
HOUBEI lacks. The JIANGDAO is 
equipped to patrol China’s claimed 
EEZ and assert Beijing’s interests 
in the South China and East China 
Seas. The 1500-ton JIANGDAO 
is equipped with 76mm, 30mm, 
and 12.7mm guns, four YJ-83 
family ASCMs, torpedo tubes, 
and a helicopter landing area. 
The JIANGDAO is ideally-suited 
for general medium-endurance 
patrols, counterpiracy missions, 
and other littoral duties in regional 
waters, but is not sufficiently armed 
or equipped for major combat 
operations in blue-water areas. At 
least 20 JIANGDAOs are already 
operational and 30 to 60 total units 
may be built, replacing both older 
small patrol craft as well as some 
of the PLA(N)’s aging JIANGHU 
I-class (Type 053H) frigates (FF).
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Range (Nautical Miles)
C602
C802
100
110
120
140
150
130
160nm
Figure 2-4. Surface Antiship Cruise Missile Ranges
JIANGDAO FFL 
Type 056
HOUBEI PTG 
Type 022
JIANGHU I FF 
Type 053H
C802A
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

15
China’s amphibious 
ship force has 
remained steady in 
recent years after 
a modernization 
program in the 
early 2000s. China 
has built four large 
YUZHAO (Type 071) 
class amphibious 
transport docks (LPD), which provide a considerably 
greater and more flexible capability than the older landing 
ships, signaling China’s development of an expeditionary 
warfare and OTH amphibious assault capability, as well as 
inherent humanitarian assistance/disaster relief (HA/DR) 
and counterpiracy capabilities. The YUZHAO can carry 
up to four of the new air cushion landing craft YUYI LCUA 
(similar to LCAC), as well as four or more helicopters, 
armored vehicles, and troops on long-distance deploy-
ments. Additional YUZHAO construction is expected in 
the near-term, as is a follow-on amphibious assault ship 
(LHA) that is not only larger, but incorporates a full-deck 
flight deck for helicopters. Low numbers of YUTING II 
LSTs are currently being built to replace older YUKAN 
units that are reaching the ends of their service lives.
An expanded set of missions further into the western 
Pacific and Indian Ocean, such as counterpiracy deploy-
ments, HA/DR missions, survey voyages, and goodwill 
port visits have increased demands on the PLA(N)’s fleet 
of ocean-going replenishment and service vessels. In 
2013 China added two new FUCHI-class replenishment 
oilers (AORs), bringing the total AOR force to seven 
ships; two more were launched in 2014. These ships 
constantly rotate deployments in support of China’s 
Gulf of Aden (GOA) counterpiracy deployments. 
The PLA(N) also recently added three state-of-the-art 
DALAO-class submarine rescue ships (ASR), which 
use the LR-7 submersible, and three DASAN-class fast-
response rescue ships (ARS), which have a tri-maran hull 
form. Other recent additions include the ANWEI-class 
hospital ship (AH), the DANYAO I/II-class AF (island 
resupply ships), YUAN WANG-class 5 and 6 (satellite 
and rocket launch telemetry), five KANHAI-class AG 
(SWATH-hull survey ships), two YUAN WANG 21 mis-
sile tenders (AEM), and the large DAGUAN-class AG, 
which provides berthing and logistical support to the 
KUZNETSOV-class aircraft carrier LIAONING. In addition, 
several new DONGDIAO-class intelligence collection 
ships (AGI) have been launched since early 2013 and 
have begun to join the fleet, bringing China’s fleet of 
DONGDIAOs to four at present. Several additional large, 
specialized auxiliary ship construction programs are 
currently underway as well, including new icebreakers and 
logistical support ships for South China Sea operations.
PLA(N) Submarine Force
Similar to the surface force, China’s submarine force 
appears to be concentrating on a smaller mix of units when 
compared to the late 1990s and early 2000s, suggesting 
the PLA(N) is more satisfied with current designs. For 
its diesel-electric force alone, between 2000 and 2005, 
China constructed MING-class SS, SONG-class SS, the 
first YUAN-class SSP, and purchased an additional eight 
KILO-class SS from Russia. While all of these classes 
remain in the force, only the YUAN SSP is currently in 
production. Reducing the number of different classes 
in service helps streamline maintenance, training, and 
interoperability. Currently, the submarine force consists 
YUZHAO LPD 
Type 071
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
2005
2014
2020
Diesel
Nuclear
51
8
9
11
59
63
Figure 2-5. PLA(N) Ratio of Diesel  
to Nuclear Submarines 
number of submarines
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

16
of five nuclear attack submarines, four nuclear 
ballistic missile submarines, and 57 diesel attack 
submarines. By 2020 the submarine force will 
likely grow to more than 70 submarines.
China’s submarine force is very different from that 
of the U.S. Navy, but has characteristics that are 
well suited for its more limited mission set. Most of 
China’s submarine force is conventionally powered, 
with ASCMs, but without towed arrays. These 
submarines are optimized for regional missions that 
concentrate on ASUW near major SLOCs. China’s 
small nuclear attack submarine force is more capa-
ble of operating further from the Chinese mainland, 
conducting intelligence, surveillance and reconnais-
sance (ISR), and ASUW missions. China’s subma-
rines are not currently optimized for two missions at 
the core of U.S. submarines—ASW and land attack.
The YUAN SSP is China’s most modern convention-
ally powered submarine. Twelve are currently in 
service, with as many as eight more slated for 
production. Its combat capability is comparable to 
the SONG SS, as both are capable of launching 
Chinese-built ASCMs, but the YUAN SSP has 
the added benefit of an air independent power 
(AIP) system and may have incorporated quieting 
technology from the Russian-designed KILO SS. The 
AIP system provides a submarine a source of power 
other than battery or diesel engines while the vessel 
still submerged, increasing its underwater endurance, 
and therefore reducing its vulnerability to detection.
The remainder of the conventional submarine force is a 
mix of SONG SS, MING SS, and Russian-built KILO SS. 
Of these, only the MING SS and four of the older KILO 
SS lack an ability to launch ASCMs. Eight of China’s 
12 KILO SS are equipped with the SS-N-27 ASCM, 
which provides a long-range antisurface capability out 
to approximately 120 nm. China’s newest indigenous 
submarine-launched ASCM, the YJ-18, extends a similar 
capability to the SONG, YUAN, and SHANG classes. 
Previously, China’s only indigenous sub-launched ASCM 
was the YJ-82, which has a much shorter range.
China also continues to modernize its nuclear-powered 
attack submarine force, although it continues to be 
a relatively small percentage of the total number of 
submarines. The SHANG-class SSN’s initial production 
run stopped after only two hulls that were launched in 
2002 and 2003. After nearly 10 years, China is continu-
ing production with four additional hulls of an improved 
variant, the first of which was launched in 2012. These 
six total submarines will replace the aging HAN class 
SSN on nearly a one-for-one basis in the next several 
years. Following the completion of the improved SHANG 
SSN, the PLA(N) will progress to the Type 095 SSN, 
which may provide a generational improvement in 
many areas such as quieting and weapon capacity.
Perhaps the most anticipated development in China’s 
submarine force is the expected operational deployment 
of the JIN-class SSBN, which will mark China’s first 
credible at-sea second-strike nuclear capability. The 
JL-2 submarine launched ballistic missile (SLBM), has 
nearly three times the range of the XIA-class SSBN’s 
JL-1 SLBM, which was only able to range targets in the 
immediate vicinity of China. The JL-2 SLBM underwent 
successful testing in 2012 and is likely ready to enter 
the force. Once deployed, the JIN/JL-2 weapon system 
20
40
60
80
0
2005
2014
2020
66%
41%
36%
34%
59%
64%
Figure 2-6. PLA(N) Ratio of Antiship 
Cruise Missile Equipped Submarines
Submarines
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

17
will provide China with a capability to strike targets on 
the continental United States. To maintain a continuous 
peacetime presence, the PLA(N) would likely require a 
minimum of five JIN SSBNs; four are currently in service.
PLA(N) Air Forces
The role of the PLA(N) Air Force (PLANAF) has been 
steadily evolving for the past decade as navy combatants 
range farther from shore and are more capable of providing 
their own air defense. This has allowed the PLANAF to 
concentrate on an expanded array of missions, particularly 
maritime strike, but also including maritime patrols, ASW, 
airborne early warning, and logistics. The advent of 
the LIAONING aircraft carrier signals a new age for the 
PLANAF, which will now evolve from an almost exclusively 
land-based force to possessing a sea-based component.
Helicopters
The PLA(N) operates three main helicopter variants: 
the Z-9, the Z-8, and the HELIX. The first helicopter 
and the primary helicopter operated by the PLA(N) is 
the Z-9C. In the early 1980s, China obtained a license 
to produce the AS 365N Dauphin II helicopters and 
its engines from Aerospatiale (now Eurocopter). The 
AS 365s produced in China were labeled as the Z-9, 
and the naval variant was designated “Z-9C.”  
Known to be flying by 2000, the Z-9C is capable of operat-
ing from any helicopter-capable PLA(N) combatant. The 
Z-9C can be fitted with the KLC-1 search radar, dipping 
sonar, and is usually observed with a single, lightweight 
torpedo. A new roof-mounted electro-optical (EO) tur-
ret, unguided rockets, and 12.7mm machine gun pods 
have been seen on several Z-9Cs during counterpiracy 
deployments. The PLA(N) has approximately 20 opera-
tional Z-9Cs in its inventory. An upgraded naval version, 
designated the Z-9D, has been observed carrying ASCMs. 
The Z-8 is also a Chinese-produced helicopter based on a 
French design. In the late 1970s, the PLA(N) took delivery 
of the SA 321 Super Frelon, which was reverse engineered 
and designated the Z-8. The Z-8 made its maiden flight in 
1985 and reached initial operational capability by 1989. 
Low-rate production continued through the 1990s and into 
the early 2000s; however, production has recently acceler-
ated because of the development of upgraded versions. 
The Z-8 is a 
medium lift-helicopter. 
Although capable of 
a wide variety of mis-
sions, it is generally 
employed for search 
and rescue, troop 
transport, and logisti-
cal support roles. 
The Z-8 is usually 
seen with a rescue 
hoist and a nose 
radome and usually 
operates unarmed. 
Other equipment may 
include an EO turret 
and a search light; 
during counterpiracy 
deployments, several 
Z-8s were seen with 
weapons pylons that 
are capable of carry-
ing up to four arma-
ment pods—the same 
rocket and 12.7 mm 
machine gun pods 
seen on the Z-9Cs.  
Although the Z-8’s size provides a greater cargo capacity 
compared to other PLA(N) helicopters, it also limits its 
ability to deploy from most PLA(N) combatants. The Z-8 
and a Z-8 variant, possibly called the Z-18, have been 
observed operating with LIAONING. The Z-18 is an 
AEW variant that has been observed since 2009. A large 
cylindrical radar antenna is stowed aft of the main cabin’s 
rear-loading ramp or door and is lowered during opera-
tions allowing the antenna to rotate 360 degrees. Another 
version of the Z-8 that has been operating in the maritime 
environment is a medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) variant, 
designated the Z-8JH. It is similar to other Z-8s, except 
for the large red-cross insignia on the tail and fuselage. 
The Z-8JH has been seen deployed on the ANWEI AH.
Variants of the HELIX are the only imported helicopters 
operated by the PLA(N). In 1999, the PLA(N) took delivery 
of an initial batch of eight Russian-built HELIX helicopters. 
Five were reportedly Ka-28 HELIX A and three were 
Ka-27PS HELIX D helicopters. The PLA(N) ordered nine 
Z-9C
Ka-28 Helix
Z-8
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

18
more aircraft in October 2009, and it is likely that all 17 
HELIX helicopters are operational. Like the Russian Ka-27, 
the exported Ka-28s can be used for several mission 
sets but are usually used for ASW, while the Ka-27PS are 
optimized for search and rescue and logistical support 
missions. The Ka-28 is fitted with a search radar and 
dipping sonar and can also employ sonobuoys, torpedoes, 
depth charges, or mines. In 2010, China purchased nine 
Ka-31 AEW helicopters and the E-801 radar system. The 
radar antenna is mounted underneath the main body of 
the aircraft, and 
when the antenna is 
deployed in flight, the 
helicopter’s landing 
gears retract to allow 
the antenna to rotate 
360 degrees. To keep 
pace with the rest of 
the PLA(N) and meet 
growing demand for 
embarked helicop-
ters, the helicopter 
fleet will probably 
experience continued 
growth in the 
foreseeable future.
Fixed-wing 
Aircraft
During the past 
two decades, the 
PLANAF has made 
great strides in mov-
ing beyond its humble 
origins. Antiquated 
fixed-wing aircraft such as the Nanchang Q-5 Fantan and 
the Harbin H-5 Beagle have given way to an array of rela-
tively high-quality aircraft. This force is equipped for a wide 
range of missions including offshore air defense, maritime 
strike, maritime patrol, antisubmarine warfare, and, in the 
not too distant future, carrier-based operations. Just a 
decade ago, this air modernization relied very heavily on 
Russian imports. Following in the footsteps of the People’s 
Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF), the PLA(N) has recently 
begun benefitting from domestic combat aircraft production. 
Historically, the PLA(N) relied on older Chengdu J-7 
variants and Shenyang J-8B/D Finback fighters for offshore 
air defense. These aircraft offered limited range, avionics, 
and armament. The J-8 is perhaps best known in the 
West as the aircraft that collided with a U.S. Navy EP-3 
reconnaissance aircraft in 2001. The PLA(N)’s first major 
air capability upgrade came with the Su-30MK2 FLANKER. 
While the PLAAF had received numerous FLANKER vari-
ants from Russia between 1992 and 2002, the PLA(N) did 
not acquire its initial aircraft until very late in that process.  
In 2002, China 
purchased 24 
Su-30MK2, making 
it the first 4th-
generation fighter 
aircraft fielded with 
the PLA(N). These 
aircraft feature both 
an extended range 
and maritime radar 
systems. This allows 
the Su-30MK2 to 
strike enemy ships 
at long distances, 
while maintaining a robust air-to-air capability. Several 
years later, the PLA(N) began replacing its older J-8B/D 
with the newer J-8F variant. The J-8F featured improved 
armament such as the PL-12 radar-guided air-to-air missile, 
upgraded avionics, and an improved engine with higher 
thrust. Today, the PLA(N) is taking deliveries of modern 
domestically produced 4th-generation fighter aircraft such 
as the J-10A Firebird and the J-11B FLANKER. Equipped 
with modern radars, glass cockpits, and armed with PL-8 
and PL-12 air-to-air missiles, PLA(N) J-10A and J-11B are 
among the most modern aircraft in China’s inventory.
For maritime strike, the PLA(N) has relied on the H-6 
BADGER bomber for decades. The H-6 is a licensed 
copy of the ex-Soviet Tu-16 BADGER medium jet 
bomber, maritime versions of which can employ 
advanced ASCMs against surface targets. Despite the 
age of the design, the Chinese H-6 continues to receive 
electronics and payload upgrades, which keep the 
aircraft viable. We think as many as 30 of these aircraft 
remain in service. Noted improvements for the upgraded 
BADGER include the ability to carry a maximum of four 
ASCMs, rather than the two previously seen on earlier 
H-6D variants. Some H-6 have also been modified as 
tankers, increasing the PLA(N)’s flexibility and range. 
Su-30MK2 Flanker G
J-10A Firebird A
J-11B Flanker L
H-6
JH-7 FLOUNDER
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

19
With at least five regiments fielded across the three fleets, 
the JH-7 FLOUNDER augments the H-6 for maritime 
strike. The JH-7 is a domestically produced tandem-seat 
fighter/bomber, developed as a replacement for obsolete 
Q-5 Fantan light attack aircraft and H-5 Beagle bombers. 
Updated versions of the JH-7 feature a more capable radar 
and additional weapons capacity, enhancing its maritime 
strike capabilities. The JH-7 can carry up to four ASCMs 
and two PL-5 or PL-8 short-range air-to-air missiles, provid-
ing considerable payload for maritime strike missions.
In addition to combat aircraft, the PLA(N) is expanding its 
inventory of fixed-wing maritime patrol aircraft (MPA), air-
borne early warning (AEW), and surveillance aircraft. China 
has achieved significant new capabilities by modifying 
several existing airframes. The Y-8, a Chinese license-pro-
duced version of the ex-Soviet An-12 Cub, forms the basic 
airframe for several PLA(N) special mission variants. All 
of these aircraft play a key role in providing a clear picture 
of surface and air contacts in the maritime environment. 
As the PLA(N) pushes farther from the coast, long-range 
aircraft capable of extended on-station times to act as the 
eyes and ears of the fleet become increasingly important.  
Internet photos from 2012 indicated the development of a 
Y-9 naval variant that is equipped with a MAD (magnetic 
anomaly detector) boom, typical of ASW aircraft. This 
Y-9 ASW variant features a large surface search radar 
mounted under the nose as well as multiple blade anten-
nae on the fuselage for probable electronic surveillance. 
Also present is a small EO/IR turret just aft of the nose 
wheel and an internal weapons bay forward of the main 
landing gear. The fact that this aircraft appeared in a 
primer yellow paint scheme indicates that it was under 
development and probably has not yet entered service. 
Finally, and perhaps most notably, with the landing of 
the first J-15 carrier-based fighter aboard LIAONING 
in November 2012, the PLA(N) took its first major 
step toward a carrier-based aviation capability. The 
development of LIAONING and the first J-15 aircraft are 
covered in a dedicated section later in this chapter.
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
China continues developing multi-mission unmanned 
aerial vehicles (UAVs) for the maritime environment and 
may have begun integrating UAVs into its operations to 
enhance situational 
awareness. For well 
over a decade, China 
has actively pursued 
UAV technology and 
now ranks among a 
handful of countries 
involved in UAV tech-
nology and develop-
ment. China recently 
unveiled its first 
prototype unmanned 
combat aerial 
vehicle (UCAV), Lijan, 
which features a 
blended-wing design 
and low observable 
technologies. 
The PLA(N) will probably emerge as one of China’s 
most prolific UAV users, employing UAVs to supplement 
manned ISR aircraft as well as to aid targeting for land-, 
ship-, and other air-launched weapons systems. UAVs 
will probably become one of the PLA(N)’s most valuable 
ISR assets. They are ideally suited for this mission set 
because of their long loiter time, slow cruising speed, 
and ability to provide near real-time information through 
the use of a variety of onboard sensors. In the near 
term, the PLA(N) may use strategic UAVs such as the 
BZK-005 or the Soaring Dragon to monitor the surround-
ing maritime environment. In addition to land-based 
KJ-200 MOTH
Y-8 MASK 
Y-9 ASW 
BZK-005
S-100
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

20
systems, the PLA(N) is also pursuing ship-based UAVs 
as a supplement to manned helicopters. To date, we 
have observed the PLA(N) operating the Austrian 
Camcopter S-100 rotary-wing UAV from several surface 
combatants. Following initial evaluation and deployment 
of the Camcopter S-100, the PLA(N) will likely adopt a 
domestically produced UAV into ship-based operations.
China’s Aircraft Carrier Program
With spectacular ceremony in September 2012, China 
commissioned LIAONING, joining the small group of 
countries that possess an aircraft carrier. Since that time, 
the PLA(N) has continued the long and dangerous path of 
learning to operate fixed-wing aircraft from a carrier. The 
first launches and recoveries of the J-15 aircraft occurred 
in November 2012, with additional testing and training in 
early July 2013. With the first landing complete, China 
became only the fifth country in the world to possess 
conventional takeoff and landing fighters aboard an aircraft 
carrier. Nonetheless, it will take several years before 
Chinese carrier-based air regiments are operational.
LIAONING is quite different from the U.S. Navy’s 
NIMITZ-class carriers. First, since LIAONING is smaller, 
it will carry far fewer aircraft in comparison to a U.S.-
style carrier air wing. Additionally, the LIAONING’s 
ski-jump configuration significantly restricts aircraft 
fuel and ordnance loads. Consequently, the aircraft it 
launches have more a limited flight radius and combat 
power. Finally, China does not yet possess specialized 
supporting aircraft such as the E-2C Hawkeye. 
Unlike a U.S. carrier, LIAONING is not well equipped to 
conduct long-range power projection. It is better suited to 
fleet air defense missions, where it could extend a protec-
tive envelope over a fleet operating in blue water. Although 
it possesses a full suite of weapons and combat systems, 
LIAONING will likely offer its greatest value as a long-term 
training investment. This “starter carrier” will enable the 
PLA(N) to train its first groups of pilots and deck crews 
in areas critical to conducting carrier aviation. China’s 
follow-on carriers will inevitably offer platform improve-
ments, eventually including a catapult launching system.
China’s first carrier air regiment will consist of the 
Shenyang J-15 Flying Shark, as it is known in China, which 
is externally similar to the Russian Su-33 FLANKER D. 
However, in a pattern typical of Chinese military systems 
indigenization, the aircraft is thought to possess many 
of the domestic avionics and armament capabilities of 
the Chinese J-11B FLANKER. Notable external differ-
ences between the J-15 and J-11B include folding wings, 
strengthened landing gear, a tailhook under a shortened 
tail stinger, two-piece slotted flaps, canards, and a retract-
able in-flight refueling probe on the left side of the nose.  
Likely armament 
for the J-15 will 
include PL-8 and 
PL-12 air-to-air 
missiles similar to the 
J-11B and modern 
ASCMs similar to 
those carried by 
the JH-7. Six J-15 
prototypes are cur-
rently involved in testing, and at least one two-seat 
J-15S operational trainer had begun flight testing as of 
November 2012. The first landings aboard LIAONING 
came three years after the J-15’s maiden flight in summer 
2009. In the months preceding the landings, the PLA(N) 
conducted multiple J-15 approaches. Production J-15 
aircraft are now rolling off the assembly line as China 
begins training its first regiment of carrier pilots.
Naval Mines
China has a robust mining capability and currently 
maintains a varied inventory estimated at more than 50,000 
mines. China has developed a robust infrastructure for 
naval mine-related research, development, testing, evalua-
tion, and production. During the past few years, China has 
gone from an obsolete mine inventory, consisting primarily 
J-15 Flying Shark
LIAONING CV-16  
KUZNETSOV-class
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

21
of pre-WWII vintage moored contact and basic bottom 
influence mines, to a vast mine inventory consisting of a 
large variety of mine types such as moored, bottom, drift-
ing, rocket-propelled, and intelligent mines. The mines can 
be laid by submarines (primarily for covert mining of enemy 
ports), surface ships, aircraft, and by fishing and merchant 
vessels. China will continue to develop more advanced 
mines in the future such as extended-range propelled-
warhead mines, antihelicopter mines, and bottom influence 
mines more able to counter minesweeping efforts. 
China has also invested heavily in improving its mine 
countermeasure (MCM) capabilities. A number of 
advanced, dedicated MCM vessels have joined the fleet 
in recent years, including the capable WOCHI-class 
minehunting ships (MHS) and new WOZANG-class 
minehunters acting as mother-ships to the remote-
controllable WONANG-class inshore minesweepers 
(MSI). China is improving its minehunting capabilities 
with improved SONARs and mine neutralization vehicles. 
Chinese warfare exercises have routinely included 
both mining and mine countermeasure events.
Maritime C4ISR
To effectively employ sophisticated naval platforms and 
long-range weaponry, any modern navy requires an 
advanced maritime command, control, computers, com-
munication, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
(C4ISR) capability. The ranges of modern ASCMs extend 
well beyond the range of a ship’s own sensors. Emerging 
land-based weapons, such as the DF-21D ASBM with a 
range of more than 810 nm, are even more dependent on 
remote targeting. Modern navies must be able to effectively 
build a picture of all activities occurring in the air and sea.  
For China, this provides a formidable challenge. Just to 
characterize activities in the “near seas,” China must build 
a picture covering nearly 875,000 square nautical miles 
(sqnm) of water- and air-space. The Philippine Sea—a 
key interdiction area in the event of a conflict over Taiwan 
or in the South China Sea—expands the battlespace by 
another 1.5 million sqnm. In this vast space, navies and 
coast guards from seven regional countries as well as 
several globally deploying nations combine with tens of 
Chinese Cyber Warfare Development
Cyber capabilities represent one of the 
most revolutionary changes to warfare 
in modern history. Many security 
experts have debated how and to what 
extent cyber will be employed during 
the next major conflict. Regardless 
of cyber’s limitations or potential, we 
know that China is one of a handful of 
countries on the forefront of develop-
ing military cyber capabilities. China’s 
2010 Defense White Paper highlighted 
the importance of cybersecurity in 
China’s national defense. Publicly, 
China has maintained that it is a 
victim rather than an originator of 
cyber actions, but documents such as 
the 2013 Mandiant Report highlight 
the PLA’s large cyber effort.
During peacetime, cyber espionage 
enables data collection for intelligence 
purposes and lays the groundwork for 
future cyber network attacks. During 
war, cyber attacks can constrain an 
adversary’s actions, or act as a force 
multiplier when coupled with kinetic 
attacks. Strategic Chinese military 
writings do not specifically deal with 
how China would employ cyber 
operations in a maritime environment, 
although they do make clear the 
importance of cyber operations.  
The PLA highlights network warfare 
as one of the “basic modes of sea 
battle” alongside air, surface, and 
underwater long-range precision 
strikes.” As the PLA’s larger military 
investment in emerging domains 
such as cyber matures, the applica-
tion of cyber operations in the 
maritime realm will consequently 
bolster the PLA(N)’s capability.
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

22
thousands of fishing 
boats, cargo ships, 
oil tankers, and other 
commercial vessels.
China is developing 
a wide array of 
sensors to sort 
through this complex 
environment and 
contribute to its 
maritime picture. 
The most direct method is reporting from the ships and 
aircraft that China operates at sea. These provide the 
most detailed and reliable information, but can only cover 
a fraction of the needed space. A number of ground-based 
coastal radars provide overlapping coverage of the area 
immediately off the coast, but their range is similarly limited. 
 
To gain a broader view of the activity in its near and far 
seas, China has turned to more sophisticated sensors. 
The skywave OTH radar provides awareness of a much 
larger area than conventional radars by bouncing signals 
off the ionosphere. At the same time, China operates a 
growing array of reconnaissance satellites, which allow 
it to observe maritime activity anywhere on the earth. 
Two civilian systems also contribute to China’s maritime 
awareness. The first is a coastal monitoring network for 
the Automatic Identification System (AIS)—an automated 
system required on most commercial vessels by the 
International Maritime Organization. China’s Beidou 
system, installed on several thousand of its fishing boats, 
provides GPS-like navigation to the boats as well as 
automatic position reporting back to a ground station 
in China, allowing the location of the fishing fleet to be 
constantly monitored by fishing enforcement authorities.
DF-21
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

23
CHAPTER 3
TRAINING, EXERCISES,  
AND JOINT OPERATIONS 
Overview
Much like the acquisition of advanced weapons, platforms, 
and sensors, the professionalization and training of 
PLA(N) personnel is an essential component of China’s 
naval modernization. Sustained leadership emphasis 
on “realistic” and “complex” training has influenced 
training patterns and improved operational proficiency 
during the past decade. In late 2012, shortly after 
becoming General Secretary of the Communist Party 
of China (CPC) and Chairman of CPC Central Military 
Commission (CMC), Xi Jinping extolled the continued 
importance of cultivating “real combat” awareness 
throughout the military. Since the early 2000s, the PLA(N) 
has steadily increased the complexity of its training and 
exercises to meet the challenge of modern warfare. 
Just over a decade ago, PLA(N) training was heavily 
dependent on an annual conscription cycle and focused 
almost exclusively on anti-surface warfare (ASUW). 
Recent exercises suggest the PLA(N) has strengthened 
its training cycle, has become relatively proficient in 
ASUW, is making notable gains in area air defense, and 
has seen some progress in deep water anti-submarine 
warfare (ASW). In addition to becoming more sustained 
and complex, training has expanded from China’s littoral 
to areas within and beyond the First Island Chain. “Far 
seas” operations, particularly to the South China and 
Philippine Seas, have become routine in recent years. The 
PLA(N) has also improved coordination between its various 
branches. Finally, it has demonstrated a desire to operate 
in more realistic conditions featuring electronic warfare.  
Before China’s Gulf of Aden counterpiracy operations 
commenced in 2009, the PLA(N) was largely a training 
fleet, with very little operational experience. Since 
that time, the PLA(N) has conducted more than 19 
counterpiracy missions, expanded its participation in 
multi-national exercises, and  frequently patrolled near 
disputed areas such as the Senkaku Islands, Scarborough 
Reef, and Second Thomas Shoal to promote China’s 
claimed maritime rights and territorial sovereignty. This 
latter mission is one of increasing importance for the 
PLA(N), according to China’s 2012 Defense White Paper. 
These operations provide the PLA(N) with valuable 
operational experience and increase confidence in 
its ability to assert PRC’s interests within the region. 
The operations have also attracted the attention and, 
in some cases, concern of China’s neighbors. 
Evolution of the Training Cycle
Until the early 2000s, PLA(N) training and proficiency 
levels were heavily contingent on the annual conscription 
cycle, and focused primarily on ASUW. Major training 
standdowns would occur in late November and last 
through the early part of the next year as new conscripts 
entered the force. Initial training consisted primarily of 
independent or unit-level basic warfare training. As the 
year progressed, more complex unit or flotilla-level training 
occurred. By mid-year, basic warfare drills transitioned to 
more advanced, coordinated warfare training, culminating 
in a series of year-end exercises. Following these 
exercises, units would stand down as new conscripts 
entered into the force, only to begin the cycle anew.
Today, however, the PLA(N) conducts complex 
multi-discipline warfare training throughout the year, 
and the scope of naval training has broadened to 
include more robust ASW and anti-air warfare (AAW) 
training, all of which are integrated using advanced 
Command, Control, Communications, Computers 
and Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
(C4ISR) systems. Under the new model, general unit 
readiness is maintained at a higher level throughout 
the year, and the impact of new conscripts entering the 
force is less evident, particularly with the increasing 
maturity of China’s noncommissioned officer corps. 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

24
The PLA(N) has replaced basic-level independent 
training with robust flotilla-level or combined arms 
training that includes coordinated air, surface, and 
submarine operations. Today’s training cycle is defined 
by three levels of combat readiness, rather than a 
conscription cycle. “Level one” indicates that ships are 
fully operational and combat certified, “level two” indicates 
that ships have recently completed maintenance but 
are not combat certified, and “level three” indicates 
ships in a maintenance status. Under this model, 
individual unit proficiency and progression through the 
training cycle vary according to readiness levels.
The addition of more effective classroom training and 
shore-based simulation systems likely plays an important 
role in maintaining a high level of personnel readiness. 
These initiatives provide crews with basic and advanced 
hands-on training throughout the year, irrespective of ship 
availability or readiness level. This improves the overall 
quality of training and shortens the training cycle. In 
addition to shore-based simulators, vessel training centers 
(VTCs) help maintain year-round readiness levels. Located 
in each of the three fleets and subordinate to the fleet 
headquarters, VTCs provide crews with a variety of basic 
and advanced-level training by supplying technical and 
tactical foundation training, transition training for vessels 
recently outfitted with new weapons or equipment, and 
training instruction for new or returning ship commanders.
The PLA reportedly intends to further reform the 
training cycle during 2015. The PLA’s training 
transformation will likely have the most significant 
impact on joint service integration, an area where 
progress has remained relatively slow. Anticipated 
changes include improved multi-service training, 
intended to increase integration among the services. 
Training Guidelines and Reforms
During the past several years, annual General Staff 
Department (GSD) training guidelines have directed the 
PLA to improve overall combat readiness by conducting 
training representative of actual wartime operations. 
Specific guidelines call for rigorous training based on 
“realistic” combat scenarios, “far seas” training, and 
an emphasis on information-based systems. China’s 
most recent Defense White Paper noted efforts to 
intensify training for blue water deployments and 
operations in complex battlefield environments.
In 2015, the Navy Headquarters Military Training 
Department directed the PLA(N) to advance 
the complexity of training and exercises by 
emphasizing scenarios that emulate war-realistic 
settings. According to these guidelines, PLA(N) 
training and exercises should do the following:
• 
Increase training in accordance 
with real-war requirements.
• 
Strengthen command authority and relationships 
through realistic opposing force training.
• 
Deepen tactical innovation.
• 
Improve training in the actual use of weapons 
in an electromagnetic environment.
• 
Continue “far seas” training.
• 
Rectify training methods by avoiding 
formalism and scripting in exercises.
• 
Improve joint campaign-level training.
In addition to annual training guidelines, senior 
military leadership has outlined overarching 
goals for the PLA during the 12th Five-Year 
Plan (2011–15). These objectives include:
• 
Organize and improve multi-branch training.
• 
Strengthen integration of units and 
information-based systems.
• 
Focus training for “far seas” operations.
• 
Modernize management of training and standardize 
training evaluation and assessment process.
• 
Develop a strong base for simulation 
and network-based training.
“Far Seas” Training
China’s senior naval leadership characterizes “far seas” 
training and deployments (that is, those conducted 
at extended distances beyond routine Chinese local 
operating areas) as the new norm for China’s Navy. While 
the PLA(N) has conducted the occasional long-range 
naval surface and submarine patrols since at least the 
early 1980s, trends over the last few years reflect an 
unambiguous shift in the frequency, complexity, and 
distance of Chinese naval operations. The PLA(N) now 
conducts routine surface deployments to the South 
China and Philippine Seas, including an unprecedented 
seven deployments to the Philippine Sea in 2012 and 
nine deployments in 2013. In 2014, a PLA(N) South Sea 
Fleet surface task group consisting of the amphibious 
dock landing ship “CHANGBAISHAN” and the missile 
destroyers “HAIKOU” and “WUHAN” conducted a 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

25
first-time training deployment to the Eastern Indian 
Ocean. Future surface deployments to the central and 
eastern Pacific are likely within the next five years. 
“Far seas” training deployments serve multiple objectives. 
At the strategic level, they display the PLA(N)’s 
conventional deterrence capability and underscore 
Beijing’s desire to assert and defend its maritime rights and 
interests. Operationally, the deployments demonstrate the 
PLA(N)’s ability to conduct tasks associated with military 
operations other than war; they also emphasize “around-
the-clock” 24-hour training, and they simulate situations 
closer to actual combat conditions. At the tactical level, 
far sea deployments enhance the PLA(N)’s core warfare 
proficiencies in ASUW, ASW, and AAW. They enable crews 
to practice various capabilities, including maritime escort, 
ship boarding, counterpiracy, counterterrorism, at-sea 
replenishment and sustainment, and opposing force drills. 
In late-October 2013, the PLA(N) conducted a 15-day 
at-sea confrontation exercise in the Philippine Sea 
under the umbrella of MANEUVER-5. Accord to media 
reporting, MANEUVER-5 was supported by air and naval 
forces from the North Sea, East Sea, and South Sea 
Fleets. This was the first time the PLA(N) organized all 
three fleets for simultaneous open-ocean training and 
marked the largest PLA(N) exercise conducted in the 
western Pacific Ocean. PLA(N) Commander Admiral Wu 
Shengli emphasized that MANEUVER-5 was intended 
to be “combat-realistic.” Additionally, in December 
2014, participants from all three of the PLA(N)’s fleets 
conducted a large-scale naval exercise in the western 
Pacific. During this exercise, PLA(N) participants focused 
on improving command decisionmaking, long-distance 
maneuver, and dynamic opposing force training.  
In addition to “far seas” deployments beyond the First 
Island Chain, the PLA(N) has maintained two combatants 
and a naval auxiliary in the Gulf of Aden supporting 
counterpiracy operations since early 2009. Since those 
operations began, the PLA(N) has conducted more than 19 
counterpiracy deployments to the Gulf of Aden, conducted 
escort operations for more than 6,000 China- and non-
China-flagged ships and responded to numerous pirate 
attacks. In 2011, a PLA(N) vessel played a symbolic role 
in escorting civilian ferries carrying Chinese civilians who 
were evacuated from Libya. Marking another historic 
first, in 2014, the PLA(N) conducted naval operations in 
the Mediterranean Sea in support of a UN-sponsored 
operation to remove chemical weapons from Syria.   
Opposing Force Training
As part the effort to enhance realism in training, the 
PLA(N) and PLANAF regularly incorporate “opposing 
forces play” into their exercises. The PLA(N) uses 
these confrontation drills to simulate combat scenarios 
and emphasize command and control and tactical 
decisionmaking. Accordingly, these interactions have 
become less scripted in recent years. This type of 
training is employed to evaluate a commander’s ability 
to develop and execute operational plans according 
to loosely defined objectives. These dynamic training 
events, which stress tactical flexibility, are occurring 
on a regular basis and at greater distances from the 
Chinese coast. The recent large-scale exercises 
conducted in the western Pacific in 2013 and 2014 
are the best examples of this type of training, as 
they feature elements from all three fleets and near-
continuous red-versus-blue training evolutions.
Combat Support Operations
The PLA(N) has also begun employing operational 
support exercises, which feature various types of 
logistics support, as would likely be required in wartime. 
Logistics support is now featured prominently in most 
fleet-level and “far seas” deployments. This type of 
training usually consists of general fuel and stores 
replenishment, rescue and salvage operations of 
damaged ships, and emergency response and at-sea 
medical support. This training shift reflects recent 
directives to improve the capabilities of shore-based 
infrastructure and naval auxiliary units to support ships, 
submarines, and helicopters in wartime operations. 
Use of Advanced Training Aids
The PLA(N)’s increasing use of advanced training 
aids, including simulators and mobile targets, has also 
contributed to proficiency and year-round readiness. 
Employed on land, at sea, and in the air, these training 
aids simulate enemy combatants or incoming threats 
to improve tactical proficiency. The PLA(N) frequently 
employs advanced mobile targets equipped with passive 
and active jamming equipment to simulate a variety of 
threat scenarios. These advanced training aids can be 
easily reconfigured to simulate various targets, providing 
crews with highly dynamic training environments.  
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

26
Civil-Military Integration
During the past five years, tension over disputed land 
features and maritime rights in the East China and South 
China Seas have catalyzed PRC efforts to improve civil-
maritime integration and effectively assert China’s interests. 
Typically, Beijing prefers to employ its Coast Guard in the 
forefront of maritime sovereignty operations, with PLA(N) 
ships providing a less overt security guarantee. China 
has also utilized civilian fishing vessels to advance its 
maritime objectives. Coordinating the activities of these 
distinct organizations is an ongoing challenge that has 
important implications for China and for the region. 
Recent PLA(N) exercises, training, and operational 
deployments have incorporated greater civil-military 
integration. In 2012, elements of the PLA(N)’s East Sea 
Fleet and Chinese maritime law enforcement conducted 
the exercise EAST CHINA SEA COOPERATION, 
which remains the largest combined civil-military 
exercise to date. The exercise focused on civil-
military command integration, search and rescue 
operations, and emergency medical support. 
In May 2013, the PLA(N) also participated in a six-day 
maritime medical and rescue exercise, HEALTH SERVICE 
MISSION 2013. According to PRC media, the exercise 
included the hospital ship PEACE ARK and mobilized 
civilian health services across multiple provinces. The 
exercise was intended to simulate combat-oriented medical 
support to forces involved in maritime defensive operations. 
Exercise serials consisted of maritime medical command 
and coordination and the timely at-sea triage of injured 
and sick personnel. Civil-military integration exercises 
will likely continue to expand in scope and frequency.
In May 2014, China’s unilateral deployment of a deep-
water oil rig in an area disputed with Vietnam touched 
off a diplomatic crisis between Beijing and Hanoi, and 
both sides deployed large numbers of coast guard 
ships, fishing vessels, and some naval combatants 
to the area. Ships rammed one another and China’s 
Coast Guard deployed water cannons in the tense 
months to follow. The tense situation could have easily 
escalated into a military conflict. Beijing likely regards 
civil-military integration as essential in these types of 
disputes, both as a means to pressure rival claimants 
and as an instrument of retaining centralized control. 
Training in a Complex Electromagnetic 
Environment (CEME)
In accordance with PLA General Staff Department 
(GSD) training guidelines, the PLA(N) places heavy 
emphasis on training and exercising in a “complex 
electromagnetic environment” (CEME). In 2006, 
military training guidelines shifted from “training under 
mechanized conditions” to “training under informatized 
conditions.” Since that time, complex electronic warfare 
training has remained a top priority for the PLA(N). To 
improve the realism and complexity of training, PLA(N) 
exercises have included greater numbers of “live” or 
“hostile” electronic environments. The PLA(N) has even 
developed an Electronic Countermeasures Simulation 
Training Center in the North Sea Fleet to assist with 
CEME training. In addition, PLA(N) ships, submarines, 
and occasionally aviation units exercise and train in 
simulated nuclear, biological, and chemical environments.
Joint Training with Foreign Navies
During the last decade, the PLA(N) has actively promoted 
naval diplomacy through goodwill cruises and low-level 
joint exercises. Between September and December 
2013, a three-ship task group from the North Sea Fleet 
conducted a historic deployment to South America, by 
way of a first-time transit through the Strait of Magellan, 
with stops in Chile, Brazil, and Argentina. The PLA(N) and 
the Russian Navy (RFN) also conducted two joint naval 
exercises, one in Russia in 2013 and the second in China 
in 2014. These exercises highlighted growing mutual 
security concerns within the region and paved the way 
for greater cooperation between the PLA(N) and RFN. 
Marking another historic first and a milestone in U.S. 
Navy-PLA(N) relations, PLA(N) ships joined the 2014 Rim 
of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise in Hawaii. The PLA(N) 
dispatched a four-ship flotilla to RIMPAC, the largest 
surface contingent of any RIMPAC participant outside of 
the United States. This contingent included two advanced 
surface combatants, an auxiliary oiler, and a hospital 
ship. The PLA(N) ships participated in various gunnery, 
rescue and assist (R&A), boarding, and medical exercises 
in a multi-national task force, and PLA(N) performance 
was on par with many other participating navies. 
China’s successful participation in RIMPAC highlighted 
its emergence as a capable navy in the Pacific and its 
increasing confidence in showcasing its own abilities. 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

27
Developing Integrated Joint Operations
The ability of individual military services to work as a 
cohesive team in pursuit of common objectives, often at 
the tactical level, is essential in modern warfare. That is 
why PLA leaders have emphasized the development of 
“Integrated Joint Operations.” Despite its considerable 
rhetorical emphasis on achieving this goal, the PLA’s record 
of achievement appears mixed during the past decade. 
In practice, the PLA has approached the concept of 
jointness as different services operating toward a common 
goal in a joint or combined campaign, but often with 
operations separated by time and space. More recently, 
China’s analysis of U.S. military operations and other 
observations of modern warfare have convinced the PLA’s 
leadership to expand integration between the services to 
include enhanced joint operations at the tactical level. 
Important doctrinal publications, such as the PLA National 
Defense University Press Science of Campaigns, place a 
high priority on joint warfare. The 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 
and 2012 Defense White Papers highlight the importance 
of Integrated Joint Operations, stating joint operations are 
the basic form of modern warfare and bring the operational 
strengths of different services into full play. The PLA’s 
General Staff Department promoted the 2009 Outline 
for Military Training and Evaluation as the new starting 
point for the adoption of Integrated Joint Operations.
In addition to doctrine, a number of the PLA professional 
military education (PME) institutions are increasing 
the level of joint PME within the Chinese military. On 
28 November 2006, the command 
academies of the Army, Air Force, Navy, 
Second Artillery, and Nanjing Military 
Region signed a cooperative agreement 
to accelerate the development and 
education of joint commanders. 
According to official PLA press, at least 
a few senior military officers and a 
small number of mid-grade officers in 
China have attended the academies of 
sister services, although this practice 
is nowhere near as widespread as 
it is in the U.S. military. Additionally, 
it is not clear if accomplishing the 
appropriate levels of the PLA’s version 
of “Joint PME” is required for promotion, 
the way it is in the U.S. military. 
Despite a rhetorical, doctrinal, and academic commitment 
to the development of Integrated Joint Operations, the 
PLA appears to have made sporadic progress at the 
operational level. In terms of tactical training, PLA media 
have published a number of articles on joint training 
exercises that include photographs of Army attack 
helicopters flying air cover for Navy ships in support of 
amphibious landing exercises, as well as discussion of 
Army, Air Force, and militia elements operating in the same 
command post during air defense training. According to one 
article, Air Force and Navy personnel operated together to 
provide logistics, air traffic control, and targeting support 
during an air force overwater strike training exercise. 
Due in part to linguistic nuance, many reported instances 
of “joint” training might be characterized more accurately 
as “opposing force training.” For example, PLAAF aircraft 
attacking PLA(N) surface vessels or PLAAF aircraft acting 
as targets for PLA air defense forces are sometimes 
reported as “joint training.” Such opposing force play does 
not require the level of tactical and operational coordination 
that would be necessary for multiple services operating 
in concert toward a common goal. China characterizes 
exercises of any type with a foreign military as “joint” 
even though many of these training evolutions involve 
only small numbers of personnel from one service. 
Exercise patterns reflect the desire to address gaps in 
joint capabilities. Every year since 2007, the Jinan Military 
Region of the PLA has conducted the LIANHE “joint” 
exercise in which all services of the PLA participate along 
Joint command post exercise
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

28
with units from the People’s Armed Police. According 
to PLA media, the LIANHE exercises are used to test 
and develop joint concepts for the whole of the PLA.
In non-tactical areas such as logistics, the PLA is 
successfully increasing operating efficiency through 
greater joint operations. Under an order issued by 
President Hu Jintao, the Jinan Military Region (MR) was 
chosen to lead the development of a theater-level joint 
logistics system. The “Great Joint Logistics” scheme 
was initially announced in April 2007 with the Jinan MR 
serving as a test case for the other six military regions 
in the PLA. Joint logistics concepts have since been 
promulgated to the remaining six military regions with 
significant success, according to official PLA media.                    
Although the PLA appears committed to pursuing 
Integrated Joint Operations, the Army’s historic dominance 
over other services may complicate these efforts. Some 
officers have complained that the ongoing dominance 
of the “great infantry” concept across the military has 
affected the development of joint operations and training. 
To achieve true Integrated Joint Operations, the PLA will 
likely need to create a spirit of teamwork throughout the 
services by developing the training, doctrine, procedures, 
and equipment needed to foster such cooperation.
To become a modern, combat-capable navy, the PLA(N) has 
steadily implemented more realistic training during the past 
decade, as demonstrated by the normalization of “far seas” 
operations, dynamic opposing force training, and long-
distance combat support exercises. Although some gaps 
remain, these training reforms have catalyzed sustained 
increases in the PLA(N)’s tactical warfighting proficiency. 
In particular, adjustments to the training cycle, personnel 
reform, and the push for greater levels of training complexity 
have improved the PLA(N)’s operational readiness. 
PLA leaders and planners are committed to developing 
systems for conduct of joint operations, but they recognize 
the complexity of that task and are conscious of the fact 
that the PLA lacks real world experience. These factors 
likely moderate leadership expectations of what can be 
achieved and compel military leaders to take an iterative 
approach, relying heavily on top-down supervision by the 
GSD and frequent formal evaluations to ensure steady and 
measurable progress in a controlled environment before 
promulgating joint operations directives across the force.     
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

29
CHAPTER 4
PLA(N)  
STRUCTURE AND LEADERSHIP
Organization 
The PLA(N) operates three fleets and controls all of 
China’s Naval and Naval Air (PLANAF) forces as well 
as two marine brigades. The 13-member Navy Party 
Standing Committee is the Navy’s senior-most decision-
making organ and is responsible for the day-to-day 
administration of the PLA(N). Like the PLA’s seven 
military regions (MRs), Air Force (PLAAF), and Second 
Artillery Corps (SAC), the PLA(N)’s organizational 
structure mirrors the PLA’s four General Departments. 
The Central Military Commission (CMC) sits at the top of 
China’s national command structure. Chaired by Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) General Secretary and PRC 
President Xi Jinping, this group oversees and sets policy 
for China’s armed forces. The CMC currently consists of 
Chairman Xi Jinping, two uniformed vice chairmen, the 
heads of each of the General Departments of the PLA, 
and the Minister of National Defense (MND), as well as the 
commanders of the PLA(N), PLAAF, and Second Artillery.
The four General Departments of the PLA 
immediately beneath the CMC are:
• 
General Staff Department (GSD)
• 
General Political Department (GPD)
• 
General Logistics Department (GLD)
• 
General Armament Department (GAD)
PLA(N) Headquarters in Beijing is subordinate to 
the four General Departments, equal in grade to 
the PLA’s seven MRs and to the other services. It 
consists of four first-level departments that perform 
leadership and administrative functions for the Navy 
and provide support to the operational fleets:
• 
Headquarters Department: Oversees PLA(N) 
administrative and functional departments includ-
ing operations, training, communications, and 
intelligence. The PLA(N) Chief of Staff is concurrently 
the Director of the Headquarters Department.
• 
Political Department: Responsible for all 
political work including discipline, officer 
assignments, propaganda, and security.
• 
Logistics Department: Handles construc-
tion of facilities, technical support to naval 
vessels, fuel, health care, finance, transporta-
tion, and other areas related to supply. 
• 
Armament Department: Provides technical 
support to all PLA(N) equipment and weapons 
systems from concept development to retirement.
The PLA(N) has three geographically oriented fleets which 
direct day-to-day operations. The deputy commanders 
of each fleet command the respective aviation force.
• 
North Sea Fleet: Headquartered in Qingdao, the 
North Sea Fleet is responsible for the Bo Hai, Yellow 
Sea, and the northern portion of the East China Sea
• 
East Sea Fleet: Headquartered in Ningbo, 
the East Sea Fleet covers the majority of the 
East China Sea and the Taiwan Strait
• 
South Sea Fleet: Headquartered in Zhanjiang, the 
South Sea Fleet is responsible for the South China 
Sea, as well as the PLA(N)’s two marine brigades.
Party Control
The PLA is a party (rather than a state) army, and the 
CCP exercises military control through the PLA’s dual 
leadership system in which the commander and political 
commissar share responsibility and are usually equal in 
grade. Decisionmaking in the PLA(N), as in the rest of the 
PLA, is intended to be a consensus-based process. Party 
committees, which also exist at every echelon, are the deci-
sionmaking organs in peacetime. Political commissars are 
usually Secretary or Chair of their unit’s party committee, 
with the unit commander serving as Deputy Secretary. For 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

30
example, since Wu Shengli became PLA(N) Commander 
in August 2006, the PLA(N) has had three political com-
missars (ADM Hu Yanlin, ADM Liu Xiaojiang, and LTGEN 
Miao Hua), all of whom served as Secretary of the Navy 
Party Committee while Wu serves as Deputy Secretary. 
At Navy Headquarters, the Party Committee convenes to 
address service-wide issues including operations, political 
work, logistics, armament, and a host of other issues. 
At the lower echelons of the service, such as the flotilla 
(zhidui) or vessel level, party committees convene to 
Figure 4-1. Leadership Structure as of Feb 2015
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

31
discuss specific operational objectives, such as review-
ing navigation plans or improving the unit’s emergency 
readiness. PLA(N) vessel leaders can convene party 
committee meetings while underway, but such meetings 
are intended to complement the unit’s particular objectives.
PLA writings assert that political work should not interfere 
with or degrade military operations. Rather, PLA com-
mentators and political officers often argue that political 
work—such as ensuring sailors understand the training 
plan, ensuring operational security, or even looking into 
a sailor’s physical and mental health—is an enabler of 
military operations. Although there are likely to be excep-
tions, most political officers throughout the PLA(N) serve 
in the same warfare area or fleet for decades, giving 
them as much familiarity with the unit as their commander 
counterpart and the personnel under their charge. 
Shenyang
Beijing
Lanzhou
Chengdu
Guangzhou
KAZAKHSTAN
RUSSIA
KYRGYSTAN
TAJIKISTAN
AFGHANISTAN
PAKISTAN
INDIA
BANGLADESH
MONGOLIA
LAOS
THAILAND
CAMBODIA
VIETNAM
PHILIPPINES
JAPAN
N. KOREA
S. KOREA
Nanjing
Jinan
Qingdao
Ningbo
Zhanjiang
Figure 4-2. China Military Regions and Fleet Headquarters
North Sea Fleet HQ
East Sea Fleet HQ
South Sea Fleet HQ
PLA(N) HQs
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

32
The Navy Party Standing Committee
The Navy Party Standing Committee (NPSC) is the 
Navy’s senior-most decisionmaking organ, responsible 
for the day-to-day (peacetime) administration of the 
PLA(N), as well as dissemination and implementation 
of CMC directives. In this sense the NPSC is akin to 
a “Navy Politburo,” whose members include the most 
senior and influential officers in the service. The NPSC 
should not be confused with the larger Navy Party 
Committee, which numbers in the hundreds and comprises 
“elected” representatives from lower grade units; the 
NPSC currently consists of just 13 officers, including the 
PLA(N) Political Commissar and Commander. The size 
of the NPSC fluctuates depending on how many Deputy 
Commanders the PLA(N) has; currently there are five.
Admiral Wu Shengli
Commander, PLA(N)
The Chinese government’s April 
2013 Defense White Paper, The 
Diversified Employment of China’s 
Armed Forces, prominently called for 
the safeguarding of China’s maritime 
rights and interests, protection of 
China’s overseas interests, and 
securing international SLOCs. PLA(N) 
Commander, ADM Wu Shengli is 
responsible for building the force and 
preparing the navy to contend with this 
ever-expanding set of naval missions. 
He has led a major shift in naval 
operations, including naval operations 
at greater distances from China.
Admiral Wu Shengli was born 
in Zhejiang Province in August 
1945. His father, a high-ranking 
official in the Zhejiang provincial 
government, gave him the name 
Shengli (“victory”) in celebration 
of Japan’s very recent defeat. Wu 
entered the PLA in 1964, shortly 
before China’s Cultural Revolution. 
Wu’s princeling status (as the son of a 
high-ranking official) may have assist-
ed him early in his military career, 
but it appears that his capabilities, 
not his lineage, were essential to his 
subsequent advancements. ADM Wu 
is a career surface-warfare officer who 
has commanded a destroyer flotilla, a 
naval support base, and held several 
shore-based positions including East 
Sea Fleet Deputy Commander and 
South Sea Fleet Commander. 
In 2004, ADM Wu was promoted to 
Deputy Chief of the General Staff 
Department (GSD). While at GSD, 
he was probably responsible for 
national defense mobilization issues. 
ADM Wu was appointed PLA(N) 
Commander in August 2006 and 
elected to the CMC in October 2007 
and again at the 18th Party Congress 
in 2012. He is eligible to remain 
PLA(N) Commander until 2017. 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

LTGEN 
Miao Hua (1955)
PLA(N) Political 
Commissar (PC),
Secretary, Navy 
Party Standing 
Committee (NPSC),
Grade 3
VADM Jiang 
Weilie (1955)
PLA(N) DCDR, 
Member, NPSC, 
Grade 4
VADM Ding 
Haichun (1954/5)
PLA(N) Deputy 
PC, Member, 
NPSC, Grade 4
RADM 
Xu Weibing
DIR, PLA(N) 
Logistics Dept,
Member, NPSC,
Grade 5
ADM  
Wu Shengli (1945) 
CMC Member, 
PLA(N) 
Commander, 
Deputy Secretary, 
NPSC, Grade 2
VADM Liu Yi 
(1955) PLA(N) 
DCDR, Member, 
NPSC, Grade 4
VADM Tian 
Zhong (1956)
PLA(N) Deputy 
Commander 
(DCDR), Member, 
NPSC, Grade 4
RADM Ding Yi 
(1959), PLA(N) 
DCDR, Member, 
NPSC, Grade 4
RADM Qiu 
Yanpeng (1956)
PLA(N) Chief of 
Staff, Director, 
PLA(N) HQ Dept, 
Member, NPSC, 
Grade 4
VADM Du 
Jingchen (1952) 
PLA(N) DCDR, 
Member, NPSC, 
Grade 4
VADM Wang 
Dengping (1952) 
PLA(N) Deputy 
PC, Member, 
NPSC, Grade 4
RADM Yang 
Shiguang
DIR, PLA(N) 
Political Dept,
Member, NPSC, 
Grade 4
NAVY PARTY  
STANDING COMMITTEE  
Figure 4-2.
RADM 
Wang Jianguo
DIR, PLA(N) 
Armament Dept,
Member, NPSC,
Grade 5
33
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

34
In addition to Admiral Wu Shengli, the following are  
members of the NPSC.
LTGEN Miao Hua (b. 1955) was trans-
ferred from the position of Political 
Commissar (PC) of the Lanzhou Military 
Region to PLA(N) PC in late December 
2014. His appointment continues a 
precedent of non-navy officers serving in 
PLA(N) political officer billets, such as former PLA(N) PC 
Liu Xiaojiang and former South Sea Fleet PC Huang 
Jiaxiang. Miao was selected onto the 18th CCP Discipline 
Inspection Committee in 2012. He is eligible to remain 
PLA(N) PC through 2020, three years after ADM Wu is 
expected to retire.
VADM Tian Zhong (b.1956) is the most 
senior of the five PLA(N) Deputy 
Commanders. He has had a distin-
guished career as a PLA(N) surface 
warfare officer and previously com-
manded the North Sea Fleet. Tian 
became a flag officer at the age of 45 and took command of 
the fleet at 51. Tian has also served in leadership positions 
in the North and South Sea Fleets. He has written articles 
on the navy’s role in military operations other than war 
(MOOTW) and the importance of joint training in the PLA. 
Of note, since he was its commander, the North Sea Fleet 
has participated in the Jinan MR’s “joint training pilot” 
program. In 2011, Tian participated in an international panel 
of naval officers in London, addressing the impact of piracy. 
Tian’s strong foreign engagement experience also includes 
leading task groups and delegations to Russia and North 
Korea. In 2012, Tian was selected to the 18th CCP’s 
Central Committee. He is eligible to remain a PLA(N) 
Deputy Commander until 2019, but it is likely he will 
promote to a higher grade assignment before then.
VADM Du Jingchen (b.1952) was 
laterally transferred from PLA(N) Chief of 
Staff to PLA(N) Deputy Commander in 
July 2014. A career surface warfare 
officer, Du has several notable achieve-
ments, including his selection to serve as 
the first task group commander of the PLA(N)’s counterpi-
racy deployment to the Gulf of Aden in 2009. His rapid 
promotion from South Sea Fleet Chief of Staff to East Sea 
Fleet Commander in December 2009 and subsequent 
transfer to PLA(N) Chief of Staff in late 2010 reflects the 
confidence CMC leaders appear to have in Du’s abilities. 
He is eligible to remain in his current positional grade 
through 2015.
VADM Jiang Weilie (b.1955) joins VADM 
Tian Zhong as a strong contender for 
promotion to a higher-grade assignment, 
including PLA(N) Commander. A surface 
warfare officer, Jiang has served in all 
three fleets, including Commander of the 
South Sea Fleet. Like Tian, Jiang was selected to the CCP 
Central Committee at the CCP’s 18th Party Congress in 
2012. The two former fleet commanders also led separate, 
extended-area surface deployments in early 2013. During 
Jiang’s April 2013 deployment to the western Pacific, he 
was quoted in PLA media as saying that the PLA(N) will 
begin to normalize open-sea training in areas farther from 
China. During his brief time as Director of the PLA(N) 
Armament Department, Jiang oversaw reforms to the 
PLA(N)’s weapons acquisition system, reportedly a key 
objective set forth by the CMC. Jiang is eligible to remain in 
position until 2018, but he is likely to promote to a higher 
grade.
VADM Liu Yi (b.1955) has often been 
characterized by “first” and “youngest,” 
while serving in positions of distinction in 
the PLA(N)’s submarine force. After 
reportedly joining the PLA(N) at age 14, 
Liu became commanding officer (CO) of 
a conventional submarine by age 26 and CO of an SSN by 
age 38. As a PLA(N) Deputy Chief of Staff, Liu commanded 
a midshipman training cruise to Japan and Republic of 
Korea in October 2009. He was promoted to his current 
assignment of PLA(N) Deputy Commander in July 2011. Liu 
is eligible to remain in this position through 2018.
VADM Ding Yi (b.1959) is the most junior 
PLA(N) Deputy Commander and the only 
Deputy Commander with an aviation 
background. While serving in the East 
Sea Fleet’s Aviation Force, Ding was 
instrumental in showcasing the PLA(N)’s 
“Flying Leopard” fighter/bombers during the PLA’s military 
review in Tiananmen Square during the PRC’s 50th anni-
versary celebration. He took command of the North Sea 
Fleet’s Aviation Force in 2010, where he served until his 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

35
July 2013 promotion to PLA(N) Deputy Commander. Ding’s 
relative youth means he could remain in this position or a 
position of similar grade until 2022. He was promoted to 
Vice Admiral in July 2014.
VADM Wang Dengping (b.1952) is one 
of two PLA(N) Deputy Political 
Commissars (DPC). He was embarked 
during the PLA(N)’s first global circum-
navigation cruise in 2002, commanded by 
former PLA(N) Deputy Commander Ding 
Yiping. Wang is one of the most vocal PLA political work 
officers in recent memory. While serving as a delegate to 
the annual National People’s Congress, Wang often made 
strongly worded pronouncements calling for defense of 
China’s sovereignty in disputed territories in the South 
China Sea. Wang will probably retire in 2015.
VADM Ding Haichun (b.1954 or 1955) is 
a PLA(N) Deputy Political Commissar 
(DPC) Ding ran the political department 
at Nanjing Naval Command College 
before becoming PC of the PLA(N)’s 
naval support base in Lushun and then 
PC of the PLA(N) Logistics Department. In late 2011 he 
was promoted to East Sea Fleet PC, where he remained 
until transferring to the position of PLA(N) Political 
Department Director in July 2013. He was once again 
laterally transferred to his current assignment in late 
December 2014. Ding is eligible to remain a PLA(N) DPC 
until 2017 or 2018.
RADM Qiu Yanpeng (b.1956) is dual-
hatted as PLA(N) Chief of Staff and 
Director of the PLA(N) Headquarters 
Department. Qiu rose through the ranks 
of the PLA(N)’s surface fleet, going on to 
command the prominent 6th Destroyer 
Flotilla in the East Sea Fleet. Although the flotilla is not 
necessarily equipped with the PLA(N)’s most modern 
surface combatants, prominent leaders including PLA(N) 
Commander Wu Shengli and former Deputy Commander 
Ding Yiping also commanded the 6th, suggesting it is an 
important assignment that augurs well for future promo-
tions. In 2007, Qiu gained valuable international engage-
ment experience while serving as a flotilla commander 
during the Pakistani-hosted multilateral military exercise 
AMAN-07. Qiu later became an East Sea Fleet Deputy 
Chief of Staff. During that assignment he commanded the 
PLA(N)’s fourth counterpiracy deployment to the Gulf of 
Aden. Qiu briefly served as Commander of the North Sea 
Fleet until he was laterally transferred to his current position 
in July 2014. He is eligible to remain at his current grade 
until 2019.
RADM Yang Shiguang (date of birth 
unknown) is Director of the PLA(N)’s 
Political Department, which reports to the 
PLA(N) PC and is responsible for propa-
ganda, security, counterintelligence, and 
officer management. Yang’s prior assign-
ments include Political Commissar of the Naval 
Aeronautical Engineering Academy and Director of the East 
Sea Fleet Political Department. His promotion to PLA(N) 
Political Department Director in late December 2014 was 
likely due to a shuffle of PLA(N) political work officers 
triggered by the unexpected death of PLA(N) DPC VADM 
Ma Faxiang and the retirements of PLA(N) PC ADM Liu 
Xiaojiang and DPC LTGEN Wang Sentai. 
RADM Xu Weibing (date of birth 
unknown) has been Director of the 
PLA(N) Logistics Department since 2011, 
when he relieved Lin Yongqing who died 
of illness. Little is known about RADM Xu 
other than his prior service as 
Commander of the PLA(N)’s former naval support base in 
Shanghai, which likely provided him with a skill set not 
often used by PLA(N) Logistics Department leaders: 
hosting and entertaining foreigners. 
RADM Wang Jianguo (date of birth 
unknown) is Director of the PLA(N) 
Armament Department. He has served in 
the Armament Department since at least 
2009, including as the department’s 
senior engineer. In 2009 he co-authored 
a book of more than 500 pages on the theory of equipment 
acquisition. In 2012, he accompanied then-PLA(N) Deputy 
Commander VADM Zhang Yongyi on a delegation to the 
United States.
Fleet Leaders
The commanders and political commissars of the PLA(N)’s 
three fleets direct the PLA(N)’s day-to-day operations. 
They are also strong contenders for promotion to higher 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

36
grade assignments in the four general departments or 
the NPSC. All three fleet commanders are dual-hatted 
as deputy commanders of their parent MR. Most, if not 
all three, fleet political commissars are concurrently 
deputy PC of the respective MR. (The North Sea Fleet 
belongs to Jinan MR, East Sea Fleet to Nanjing MR, 
and the South Sea Fleet to Guangzhou MR). 
North Sea Fleet (NSF) Commander 
RADM Yuan Yubai (b.1956) is a nuclear 
submariner who appears to have spent 
his entire career in the North. After 
studying at the Qingdao Submarine 
Academy, he likely commanded HAN-
class submarines, allegedly spending more than three 
months on patrol at one early point in his career. In 2007 he 
was appointed Commander of the PLA(N)’s 1st Submarine 
Base, where he remained until he was appointed North Sea 
Fleet Chief of Staff in 2010. In 2013, Yuan led China’s 14th 
counterpiracy task group to the Gulf of Aden. He was 
promoted to NSF Commander in July 2014.
North Sea Fleet Political Commissar 
VADM Bai Wenqi (b.1956) previously 
served in North Sea Fleet Aviation with 
current PLA(N) Deputy Commander Ding 
Yi. He has served in political work tracks 
in the South Sea Fleet as well. Per 
convention, VADM Bai should be Secretary of the North 
Sea Fleet Party Committee. Bai is eligible to remain in this 
assignment until 2019.
East Sea Fleet Commander VADM Su 
Zhiqian (b.1955) joins PLA(N) Deputy 
Commander Su Shiliang as one of the 
few—and perhaps the only—PLA(N) 
officers to have commanded two fleets. 
VADM Su previously commanded the 
South Sea Fleet. While serving in surface warfare assign-
ments, Su studied in Russia, suggesting he may possess 
some Russian language skills. In 2007, he commanded a 
PLA(N) task group deployment to Russia, the United 
Kingdom, France and Spain. As a fleet commander, Su is a 
contender for assignments in Beijing, but likely faces tough 
competition from the other two fleet commanders who were 
selected to the CPC Central Committee at the 18th Party 
Congress in 2012, whereas he was not.
East Sea Fleet Political Commissar 
VADM Wang Huayong (b.1955) is one of 
the few officers at his level with prior 
experience in the Marines. In the early 
2000s, Wang served as PC of a Marine 
Brigade, before promoting to assign-
ments in the South Sea Fleet including PC of a destroyer 
flotilla and Yulin Naval Support Base. Wang was promoted 
to East Sea Fleet PC in July 2013, where he is eligible to 
remain until 2018. Wang was promoted to Vice Admiral in 
July 2014.
South Sea Fleet Commander RADM 
Shen Jinlong (b. 1956) has a strong 
background in the oversight of naval 
training and education, going back to his 
time as Director of a Vessel Training 
Center in the North Sea Fleet in 2003. 
After commanding a North Sea Fleet destroyer flotilla for 
several years, Shen took command of Lushun Naval 
Support Base. He authored an article on naval operations 
other than war in 2009 and was then appointed 
Commandant of the Dalian Naval Academy, where he 
oversaw the professional military education of midshipmen 
and junior officers. Shen was later appointed Commandant 
of the PLA(N)’s most senior educational institution, the 
Naval Command College in Nanjing. He was promoted to 
South Sea Fleet Commander in late 2014 after briefly 
serving as a Deputy Commander. Shen is eligible to serve 
in this position through 2019.
South Sea Fleet Political Commissar 
RADM Liu Mingli (b. 1956) was pro-
moted to this position in late 2014 after 
serving as Political Commissar of South 
Sea Fleet Aviation (and concurrently a 
Fleet DPC). Little is known of Liu’s early 
career other than his service as PC of the Naval Armament 
Research Academy and Director of the East Sea Fleet 
Political Department. While serving as South Sea Fleet PC, 
he is likely responsible for ensuring that sailors operating in 
or near disputed waters understand and carry out China’s 
legal and diplomatic claims. Like South Sea Fleet 
Commander Shen Jinlong, Liu is eligible to remain South 
Sea Fleet PC through 2019.
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

37
MARITIME CLAIMS—SECURING 
CHINA’S “BLUE TERRITORY”
Relationships among Asian states have long been plagued 
by disputes over the sovereignty of various maritime 
features, associated maritime rights, and overlapping 
and excessive jurisdictional claims. Since World War II, 
tensions have oscillated from naval skirmishes and island 
grabs to protracted periods of calm and stability. The 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and 
China achieved some progress in assuaging tensions 
with the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in 
the South China Sea, which effectively halted the seizure 
of additional maritime features by all claimants. Since 
2009, however, friction between China and its neighbors 
in the South China and East China Seas has grown 
significantly. China’s leaders appear increasingly willing 
to pursue China’s maritime interests, even when such 
actions risk exacerbating tension with China’s neighbors. 
In his first publicized policy speech as Chairman of the 
Communist Party of China, Xi Jinping told China’s Politburo 
in January 2013 that, “No foreign country should ever nurse 
hopes that we will bargain over our core national interests.” 
Beijing likely calculates that an assertive approach to 
rival claimants will deter challenges to China’s interests. 
Beijing was frustrated in 2009 when Vietnam and Malaysia 
jointly submitted an extended continental shelf claim to 
the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, 
that overlapped areas also claimed by China. Beijing also 
reacted sharply in 2012 when the Japanese Government 
purchased from private owners several of the islands 
known in Japan as the Senkakus and in China as the 
Diaoyu. Also in 2012, the Philippines filed an arbitration 
case against some of China’s claims in the South China 
Sea following a standoff at Scarborough Reef that ulti-
mately resulted in China seizing de facto control of the reef. 
 
Chinese commentators frequently refer to China’s “three-
million-square kilometers of blue territory,” which would 
incorporate nearly 90 percent of the area within the major 
bodies of water within the First Island Chain, including the 
Bo Hai, the Yellow Sea, the East China Sea, and the South 
China Sea. To the frustration of international legal experts, 
Beijing maintains a policy of ambiguity over what specific 
rights it actually claims in this vast area, with the nature of 
its Nine-Dash Line in the South China Sea being a prime 
example. In many instances, China’s efforts to exercise 
jurisdiction in this “blue territory” are inconsistent with 
accepted international standards as outlined in the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). 
More than a decade of sustained investment in its Navy 
and Coast Guard has given the Chinese leadership 
additional tools to pressure or deter rival claimants. Until 
recently, China lacked the enforcement capability and 
situational awareness to effectively exercise a jurisdictional 
presence throughout these disputed waters. As China has 
closed these gaps, it has been able to quickly respond 
to incidents it feels violate its claimed sovereignty in 
disputed areas. This trend was evidenced in April 2012, 
when Chinese maritime law enforcement (MLE) ships 
effectively blocked the Philippine Navy from detaining 
Chinese fishermen at Scarborough Reef, a feature 
claimed by both countries. China also responded rapidly 
with a Coast Guard presence at the Senkaku Islands 
in September 2012 following the Japanese govern-
ments’ aforementioned purchase of several islands. 
More recently, China has begun strengthening its 
position in the Spratly Islands. Throughout 2014, China 
reclaimed hundreds of acres of land at the seven 
features that it occupies and appears to be building 
much larger facilities that could eventually support both 
MLE and naval operations. Although other countries 
have upgraded their own outposts in previous years, 
the sheer scale of China’s activity is unprecedented.
Basis for Claims
China cites language in UNCLOS and historic rights 
pre-dating UNCLOS as the foundation for its expansive 
regional claims. PRC Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi 
CHAPTER 5
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

38
asserted to then-U.S. Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton in 2012 that there is “plenty 
of historical and jurisprudence evidence” 
to demonstrate China’s sovereignty over 
the islands in the South China Sea and 
adjacent waters. China’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs asserts that the Senkaku Islands in 
the East China Sea “have been the inherent 
territory of China since ancient times.” 
Regional states including Japan, Vietnam, 
and the Philippines offer differing historical 
narratives in support of their own respective 
claims. Controversy over maritime boundaries 
arises from the geography of the area and its 
tumultuous history during the latter half of the 
19th century and the first half of the 20th cen-
tury. The Sino-Japanese War, World War II, 
the Chinese Civil War, and the transition from 
colonial states to independent countries in 
Southeast Asia all complicated the establish-
ment of clear maritime boundaries. China’s 
maritime claims remain the largest, and 
Beijing has proven reluctant to clearly articu-
late the basis and limitations of its claims.
East China Sea
China and Japan face both a resource 
dispute in the East China Sea and dispute 
over title to the Senkaku Islands, called the “Diaoyu” 
Islands in Chinese. On the question of resource rights, 
China claims that UNCLOS and related legal precedent 
entitle it to seabed rights throughout most of the East China 
Sea, based on the prolongation of its continental shelf. 
Tokyo, also citing UNCLOS, counters that the principle of 
equidistance should be employed to delineate all resource 
rights. Although UNCLOS states that international law 
should be the basis for resolving such conflicts, it does 
not explicitly indicate which method should be used to 
resolve this type of dispute. Furthermore, third-party 
arbitration appears highly unlikely. At stake for both Beijing 
and Tokyo is the right to exploit oil and gas deposits 
throughout a large portion of the East China Sea. 
China has developed natural gas infrastructure in 
several areas bordering Japan’s claimed equidistant 
line. Japan objects to PRC exploitation so close to 
this line, claiming that China would effectively extract 
resources that span the border. In 2008, China and 
Japan reached an agreement to jointly develop the East 
China Sea, but that agreement was never implemented 
and its prospects have grown increasingly bleak as 
tensions increased over the disputed Senkaku Islands. 
The Senkaku Island group consists of just five 
small, uninhabited islands between 90 and 150 nm 
east-northeast of Taiwan. The islands are important 
both as a matter of national pride and identity and 
because their title could convey associated fishing 
and mineral rights. While China, Taiwan, and Japan all 
claim sovereignty of the islands, Japan has maintained 
administrative control of the islands since the rever-
sion of the Ryukyus to Japanese control in 1972.
The Senkaku dispute dates back to 1895, when both 
sides agree that Japan took control of the islands. 
The disagreement arises from the question of their 
status before Japan’s seizure. Beijing contends that, like 
Figure 5-1. East China Sea Maritime Claims
Names and boundary representation are not necessarily authoritative.
*Administered by Japan;
claimed by China and Taiwan
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

39
Taiwan and the Penghu Islands, the Senkaku Islands 
were wrested from a weak Qing government. China 
contends that under the 1943 Cairo Declaration and 
1945 Potsdam Proclamation, the Senkakus, like other 
territory Japan seized from China, must be relinquished. 
Japan rejects the argument that the Senkaku Islands 
were part of China prior to 1895 and argues they were 
“terra nullius” (that is, not owned by any country) at the 
time they were occupied. Thus, the Senkakus would not 
be subject to the post-World War II requirements to return 
land to China. The Japanese government does not formally 
recognize that a dispute over the islands even exists.
For much of the past 40 years, China and Japan have 
essentially ignored the dispute. Japan maintained Coast 
Guard patrols of the area, but did not attempt to enforce 
exclusive fishing rights outside of the immediate 12nm 
territorial waters around the islands. However, two recent 
incidents—the 2010 ramming of a Japanese coast guard 
ship by a Chinese fishing boat and the subsequent 
detention of its captain and the 2012 purchase of three of 
the islands by the Japanese government from its private 
owners—have raised the issue to the forefront of 
Sino-Japanese relations. China, once content to 
maintain its claim without actively contesting the 
Japanese Coast Guard presence at the islands, 
has begun conducting routine patrols in the area.
South China Sea
China has long claimed sovereignty over islands 
in the South China Sea, particularly those in the 
Spratly and Paracel Island groups. Vietnam also 
claims the Paracel Islands while Brunei, Malaysia, 
the Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam claim and 
occupy at least portions of the Spratly Islands. 
There are also additional bilateral disputes over 
other features such as Scarborough Reef. 
Chinese officials frequently state that China holds 
“indisputable sovereignty over the islands in the 
South China Sea and adjacent waters.” Beijing 
affirmed sovereignty over the Pratas, Spratly, and 
Paracel Islands, as well as Macclesfield Bank in 
its 1992 territorial sea law. However, the exact 
nature and extent of its claims on those “adjacent 
waters” remains ambiguous. Chinese maps show 
a Nine-Dash Line encompassing the vast majority 
of the South China Sea, but Beijing has never published 
the coordinates of this line, nor has it declared what rights 
it purports to enjoy in this area. Despite repeated calls 
to clarify its claims in the Nine-Dash Line, China has yet 
to offer a clear, legal rationale of this expansive claim. In 
December 2014, the U.S. Department of State published 
an analysis of the Nine-Dash Line, stating that “unless 
China clarifies that the dashed-line reflects only a claim 
to islands within that line and any maritime zones that 
are generated from those land features...its dashed line 
claim does not accord with the international law of the 
sea.” U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian 
and Pacific Affairs Danny Russel has also expressed 
particular concern over China’s Nine-Dash Line and 
stated that the international community “would welcome 
China to clarify or adjust its Nine-Dash Line claim to bring 
it in accordance with the international law of the sea.”
Contentious disputes in the South China Sea have occa-
sionally turned violent. China, which occupied the eastern 
Paracel Islands and objected to Vietnam’s presence in the 
western portion of the island group, successfully ousted 
Vietnamese from the Paracels in 1974. China and Vietnam 
click here for the Multimedia Vignette or the image above
Figure 5-2. South China Sea Maritime Claims
Names and boundary representation are not necessarily authoritative.
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

40
again clashed in 1988 at Johnson Reef in the Spratly 
Islands. During that brief conflict, the PLA(N) sank three 
Vietnamese supply ships, killing dozens of Vietnamese 
sailors. Since 1988, South China Sea claimants have 
refrained from any direct military confrontation, but tensions 
periodically flare over resource exploration, construction 
of structures on the disputed reefs, and fishing activity. 
The non-binding 2002 “Declaration on the Conduct of 
Parties in the South China Sea,” signed by China and the 
Association for Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) suc-
cessfully ended the seizure of additional territory, but it has 
not moved parties towards a permanent understanding. 
Tensions began to rise again in 2009 in conjunction with 
a deadline for the UNCLOS-commissioned Commission 
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS). As various 
countries made submissions to the commission and 
passed associated domestic legislation, those with overlap-
ping claims filed counterstatements and public protests. 
Simultaneously, China’s increasing capacity to patrol the 
South China Sea allowed its MLE ships to be available to 
quickly respond to various actions it deemed as infringing 
on its claimed sovereignty or jurisdictional authority.
These incidents included blocking the USNS 
IMPECCABLE in 2009, severing survey cables of the 
Vietnamese seismic survey ship BINH MINH 02 in 
2011 and 2012, and instituting a long-term presence at 
Scarborough Reef following the Philippine Navy’s attempt 
to arrest Chinese fishermen for poaching. During the 
summer of 2014, tensions between China and Vietnam 
again spiked when China deployed a new deep-water 
oil rig for exploratory drilling in a disputed area near 
the Paracel Islands. Although both sides refrained from 
employing military force, the tense area was awash with 
dozens of civilian and military ships from both sides, 
frequently and deliberately colliding with one another 
and creating the conditions for a rapid escalation.  
Over the past year, China has embarked on a large-scale 
effort to reclaim land at all seven of the features that it 
occupies. Prior to this project, China occupied only small 
outposts with a land area of less than five acres, and 
was the only claimant except Brunei that did not have an 
airfield in the archipelago. It has since added hundreds of 
acres of land, allowing for a large expansion of facilities 
at its outposts. Once complete, these facilities will enable 
an even greater Chinese presence in the disputed area.
Yellow Sea
Although not as contentious as the maritime disputes in the 
East and South China Seas, China also has disputes with 
North and South Korea in the Yellow Sea, primarily over 
unresolved Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) demarcation. 
Even though these disputes do not receive the global 
attention that the East China and South China Seas attract, 
they occasionally turn violent and create political friction. 
These disputes have resulted in the loss of life of South 
Korean Coast Guard personnel and Chinese fishermen.  
Rights in the Exclusive Economic Zone 
While China has no maritime territorial disputes with 
the United States, Beijing is consistently critical of U.S. 
activities in and above China’s EEZ. China and a small 
number of other states seek to prohibit at least some 
military activities in their EEZ. Beijing is particularly critical 
of U.S. military surveys and reconnaissance activities. 
Beijing argues that such activities adversely impact 
Chinese security and effectively require China’s 
consent. The United States maintains that militaries 
enjoy high seas freedoms in an EEZ, with the excep-
tion of a small set of explicitly prohibited activities. 
This point of contention is the basis for Chinese monitor-
ing and occasional harassment of U.S. reconnaissance 
activities near China. These tense interactions have 
occasionally resulted in high-profile incidents, such as 
the 2001 collision between an EP-3 and a Chinese fighter 
and the 2009 harassment of the USNS IMPECCABLE. 
China cites U.S. reconnaissance in its EEZ along with 
arms sales to Taiwan and the restrictions of the 2000 
National Defense Authorization Act as “three obstacles” 
to better cooperation between the two militaries. 
This position has not inhibited China from beginning 
its own intelligence collection in the EEZs of other 
foreign countries in recent years, including inside the 
undisputed U.S. EEZs surrounding Hawaii and Guam.
China Coast Guard in the Lead
At the 12th National People’s Congress in March 2013, 
China announced that four of the five MLE agencies would 
be combined to form a new China Coast Guard (CCG) 
under administrative control of the State Oceanographic 
Administration (SOA) and operational control of the Public 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

41
Security Bureau (PSB). Beijing presumably hopes that the 
consolidation will alleviate coordination difficulties between 
the various maritime actors, create efficiencies, and central-
ize control of maritime issues. The consolidation allows the 
CCG to more flexibly deploy patrol ships in response to 
sovereignty challenges and more easily maintain presence 
in regional hotspots. When deployed, the CCG sometimes 
coordinates with the PLA(N), which, when necessary, will 
deploy destroyers and frigates several dozen miles from 
the incident to provide a nearby, but indirect presence. 
In recent years the PLA(N) has reduced its overt participa-
tion in coastal patrols, law enforcement, EEZ enforcement, 
and territorial claim issues as the CCG assumed these 
operations. China prefers using its Coast Guard as the 
primary enforcer of its maritime claims. This approach limits 
China 
Japan
Vietnam
Philippines
95 X Large
110 X Small
205
* A number of older WAGORs (non-naval 
oceanographic research ships) used as 
patrol ships were included
*Navy AFT (stores ship) and AF (combat stores ship) vessels are 
not included 
*This includes WPCs (non-naval patrol craft) and WAITs non-
naval intelligence trawler
5 X Large
50 X Small
55
0 X Large
4 X Small
4
53 X Large
25 X Small
78
Malaysia
2 X Large
0 X Small
2
*For the purposes of this graphic, Large vessels are greater than 1,000 tons; Small vessels 
are between 500–1,000 tons.
Indonesia
3 X Large
5 X Small
8
Figure 5-3. Regional Maritime Law Enforcement Comparison
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

42
the potential for confrontational incidents to escalate since 
most CCG ships are unarmed, and those that are have 
relatively light weapons. This approach also helps Beijing 
manage the public optic of any enforcement actions. 
Prior to the CCG’s establishment, two of the MLE 
agencies—the State Oceanic Administration’s China 
Marine Surveillance (CMS), and the Bureau of Fisheries 
Law Enforcement Command (FLEC)—were the entities 
responsible for enforcing China’s rights in its claimed 
waters. The FLEC managed Chinese fishing and attempted 
to prevent fishing by other countries in China’s claimed 
waters. CMS was responsible for other economic and 
environmental enforcement. This included protection of 
Chinese oil and gas survey ships operating in contested 
waters and preventing other countries’ exploration of 
similar areas. In 2011, CMS ships severed the cable towing 
sensors of a survey ship contracted by PetroVietnam. 
Both CMS and the FLEC, along with the PLA(N), were 
involved in the 2009 harassment of USNS IMPECCABLE 
as it conducted operations southeast of Hainan Island.
China’s effective use of “white hull” ships as front line 
forces was demonstrated in a series of incidents in 
2012, 2013, and 2014. In April 2012, CMS and FLEC 
ships responded to an attempt by the Philippine Navy 
to detain Chinese fishermen that they claimed were 
illegally harvesting giant clams at Scarborough Reef—a 
feature claimed by both countries. The ensuing standoff 
between CMS and the Philippine Coast Guard lasted 
several weeks. While the Philippines removed its patrol 
craft in June, China maintains its presence, effectively 
gaining de facto control of the disputed feature.
The CCG also featured prominently as tensions rose 
over the Senkaku Islands. Following the Japanese 
purchase of three of the islands from private owners, 
China established a regular Coast Guard presence 
in the vicinity of the islands. This response marked 
the first time China sustained a presence to directly 
challenge Japanese administrative control.
In May 2013 China established a persistent Coast Guard 
presence near Second Thomas Shoal in the eastern 
Spratly Islands. In 1999, the Philippines intentionally 
grounded a tank landing ship (LST) there to establish an 
outpost after China occupied nearby Mischief Reef in 1995. 
The Philippine Navy has continuously maintained a detach-
ment of marines on the LST since its 1999 grounding.
During the last decade, China’s MLE force has under-
gone a major modernization, which increased both the 
sizes of its ships and their overall capability. These 
civilian maritime forces have added approximately 
100 new large patrol ships (WPS), patrol combatants/
craft (WPG/WPC), and auxiliary/support ships, not 
including small harbor and riverine patrol boats. 
The current phase of the construction program, which 
began in 2012, will add over 30 large patrol ships and 
over 20 patrol combatants to the force by 2015. This 
will increase by 25 percent the overall CCG force level 
in a fleet that is also improving rapidly in quality. Most 
MLE ships are either unarmed or armed only with light 
deck weapons (12.7mm, 14.5mm, and 30mm guns) and 
generally use commercial radars and communications 
equipment. Several of the largest ships are equipped 
with helicopter landing and hangar facilities as well. 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page

43
OUTLOOK
President Xi Jinping continues to 
emphasize the importance of maritime 
power to enable China’s continued rise. 
Taiwan reunification remains the main 
driver for military modernization; how-
ever, other requirements such as “new 
historic missions” are pushing develop-
ment of mission sets such as military 
operations other than war (MOOTW) 
and sea lines of communication (SLOC) 
protection. These new missions, 
combined with Beijing’s long standing 
interest in developing a “powerful 
navy,” are together driving the People’s 
Liberation Army Navy (PLA(N)) into new, 
increasingly distant operating areas. 
Nontraditional missions and maritime 
security cooperation provides the PLA(N) 
with real-world operational experience in 
new areas and enhances coordination 
with foreign navies. China’s maritime 
power is an important facet of its national 
power, expanding from its traditional role 
of addressing regional security chal-
lenges, such as maritime disputes and 
reunification with Taiwan, to enhancing 
its strategic deterrence and increasingly 
protecting Chinese interests abroad. 
The PLA(N) has solidified its ability 
to conduct “offshore defense” and is 
transitioning to developing a credible 
capability outside the First Island Chain. 
China’s new strategy will combine its 
historical interest in “offshore defense” 
with an added emphasis on “blue-water 
defense.” We see evidence of the shift-
ing strategic focus in the PLA(N)’s rapid 
retiring of legacy combatants in favor 
of larger, multimission ships equipped 
with advanced antiship, antiair, and 
antisubmarine weapons and sensors. 
Highlighting this transition is the fact that 
every major PLA(N) surface combatant 
under construction is capable of embark-
ing a helicopter, an addition that supports 
over the horizon targeting (OTH-T), 
antisubmarine warfare, and search and 
rescue. The OTH-T capability of the 
force is increasingly important as the 
PLA(N) continues to add advanced, 
long-range weapons to its arsenal. 
As evidenced by recent exercises, 
the PLA(N) has embraced training 
under more realistic conditions. We 
expect that this trend will continue. 
Furthermore, the Chinese media has 
recently announced that in 2105, the 
military will “conduct several large-scale 
transregional exercises”; this emphasis 
should help China improve joint opera-
tions, a capability consistently identified 
as an area of concern. The PLA(N)’s 
commitment and ability to sustain its 
counterpiracy operations in the Gulf 
of Aden indicates Beijing’s dedication 
to pursuing diversified military tasks 
around the world. We expect this trend 
will continue or even expand as new 
security challenges provide opportuni-
ties for international operations. 
China’s growing global interest will place 
pressure on the military to respond to 
crises where Chinese interests are at 
risk. Choosing when and how to employ 
its increasingly capable military will be a 
challenge for China’s current and future 
leaders. China has used the PLA(N) 
to assist in the evacuation of citizens 
from Libya and Yemen, participate in 
the removal of chemical weapons from 
Syria, and respond to emergencies 
and disasters. All of these operations 
have been done in cooperation with 
international bodies and the countries 
concerned, but they also highlight a 
gradual loosening of China’s historic 
reticence for sending its military abroad.
Predicting the composition of China’s 
naval force in the next 10–15 years is 
difficult because of the opaque nature of 
China’s military requirements and acqui-
sition process. Another factor that will 
play an important part in the PLA(N)’s 
continued growth and modernization 
is China’s economic health. Despite its 
slowing economy, China has continued 
double-digit increases to its defense 
budget. In March, China announced a 
military budget of $141.5 billion, a rise 
of 10 percent. Should China’s economy 
slow further, leadership could be faced 
with difficult decisions concerning 
continued military modernization. 
Regardless of these economic pres-
sures, it is evident that the PLA(N) is a 
navy in transition. We must remember 
that China is only in the middle of its 
military modernization, with continued 
improvements planned over the following 
decades. As we view the past 20 years 
of PLA(N) modernization, the results 
have been impressive, but at its core 
the force has remained essentially the 
same—a force built around destroyers, 
frigates and conventional submarines. 
As we look ahead to the coming 
decade, the introduction of aircraft 
carriers, ballistic missile submarines, and 
potentially a large-deck amphibious ship 
will fundamentally alter how the PLA(N) 
operates and is viewed by the world. 
Next Page
Table of Content
Previous Page



