Countering U.S. Military Intervention in Asia
by Joel Wuthnow
CHINA STRATEGIC PERSPECTIVES  20
Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs
Institute for National Strategic Studies
National Defense University

Cover image: deepAI
The mission of the China Center is to serve as a national focal 
point and resource center for multidisciplinary research and analytic 
exchanges on the national goals and strategic posture of the People’s 
Republic of China and the ability of that nation to develop, field, and 
deploy an effective military instrument in support of its national stra-
tegic objectives. The Center keeps officials in the Department of 
Defense (DOD), other government agencies, and Congress apprised of 
the results of these efforts. The Center also engages the faculty and 
students of the National Defense University and other components of 
the DOD professional military education system in aspects of its work 
and thereby assists their respective programs of teaching, training, and 
research. The Center has an active outreach program designed to pro-
mote exchanges among American and international analysts of 
Chinese military affairs.
Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs

Taming the Hegemon

Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs
Institute for National Strategic Studies
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
Series Editor: Phillip C. Saunders
National Defense University Press
Washington, D.C.
September 2025
by Joel Wuthnow
Taming the Hegemon: Chinese Thinking on 
Countering U.S. Military Intervention in Asia

For current publications of the Institute for National Strategic Studies, please visit https://inss.ndu.edu/
Publications/NDU-Press/.
Opinions, conclusions, and recommendations expressed or implied within are solely those 
of the contributors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Defense Department or any 
other agency of the Federal Government. Cleared for public release; distribution unlimited.
Portions of this work may be quoted or reprinted without permission, provided that a 
standard source credit line is included. NDU Press would appreciate a courtesy copy of reprints 
or reviews.
First printing, September 2025
Acknowledgments: For useful feedback on previous drafts, the author thanks Christopher 
Andrews, Thomas J. Christensen, John Culver, Jeffrey Engstrom, David M. Finkelstein, Phillip 
C. Saunders, and Chad Sbragia. Any mistakes or omissions are the responsibility of the author 
alone.

v
Taming the Hegemon
Contents
Executive Summary............................................................................................1
Introduction.........................................................................................................3
Prospects of U.S. Intervention...........................................................................6
A Typology of Options.....................................................................................13
Chinese Thinking on Counter-Intervention.................................................20
Implications and Conclusion...........................................................................32
Notes...................................................................................................................37
About the Author..............................................................................................51

1
Taming the Hegemon
Executive Summary
This report assesses recent Chinese thinking on countering U.S. intervention in Asia, spe-
cifically in a Taiwan contingency. Key findings include:
 
■People’s Liberation Army (PLA) analysts assume U.S. forces will intervene in a Tai-
wan contingency, up to and including mainland strikes. This assumption, based on pru-
dent military planning, has persisted for decades even as Chinese observers increasingly 
viewed U.S. power in a state of relative decline. It drives the PLA to advocate for careful 
preparation of counter-intervention options.
 
■States in China’s position have historically relied on four options to counter third-party 
intervention in offensive campaigns: direct assault against intervening forces; deterrence 
actions against the third party’s political leadership; a fait accompli against the main target 
before the intervener can mobilize; and creation of strategic buffers between the attacker 
and the intervener.
 
■PLA sources emphasize the options that require direct confrontation—direct assault 
and strategic deterrence of the United States—because they are the most decisive. The first 
relies on asymmetric warfare against key targets in the U.S. military system. The second 
leverages nuclear, conventional, and informational (space, cyber, and cognitive warfare) 
tools to pressure U.S. leaders to reject a recommendation to intervene. Both options are 
part of an effort to “deter and check” the “powerful enemy," which is a frequent euphe-
mism for the United States.
 
■The PLA has a different attitude toward escalation in these two options. A direct assault 
emphasizes military expediency. PLA scholars focus on precision strikes but also high-
casualty attacks if necessary for the campaign plan. Deterrence relies on brinkmanship. 
The two Taiwan Strait crises of the 1950s are touted as examples of successful deterrence 
while managing risks. 
 
■The PLA appears less interested in the two indirect options because they cannot guar-
antee success. A fait accompli would be difficult due to strategic warning and a U.S. ability 
to respond quickly. Beijing will try to create strategic buffers by pressuring U.S. allies and 
partners to deny access, but those efforts could fail—and the U.S. military has options to 
intervene that do not rely on host nation support. 
 
■There is little deterrent value in shifting to a policy of strategic clarity regarding Tai-
wan’s defense since the PLA already anticipates U.S. intervention. Chinese President Xi

2 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
Jinping appears to share that perspective. However, in the future, Chinese civilian leaders 
might hold more sanguine views on the likelihood of U.S. intervention than their military 
advisors, implying that messaging needs to be focused on both the PLA and the civilian 
leadership. 
 
■PLA deterrent signaling in the strategic domains (nuclear, space, and cyber) could cre-
ate crisis instability even if the intent is to avoid escalation. Discussions with PLA inter-
locutors, including both senior-level discussions and crisis simulations, could help man-
age those risks. 
 
■Assuming Beijing has already made a strategic decision for war, the best U.S. response 
to Chinese deterrence is ambiguity and obfuscation. There are dangers in yielding to the 
deterrent threat, which would be tantamount to capitulation, or rejecting it out of hand, 
since Beijing would then pivot immediately to a direct assault. Entertaining but not com-
mitting to a favorable response from China’s perspective can buy time for U.S. forces to 
begin dispersal into a wartime posture. 
 
■Deterring and defeating a PLA direct assault requires improvements to make U.S. tar-
gets less vulnerable while also exploiting the PLA’s own asymmetric disadvantages, es-
pecially its need to concentrate forces in the Taiwan Strait without guaranteed air and 
maritime supremacy. There are also opportunities to misdirect PLA resources into targets 
less essential for U.S. success. 
 
■The PLA may currently discount a fait accompli option, but that could change. The 
U.S. military should build and demonstrate capabilities that can slow an invasion despite 
reduced warning. U.S. messaging can also highlight failures of previous fait accompli at-
tempts, including Russian president Vladimir Putin’s 2022 gambit to cloak the Ukraine 
invasion as an exercise and North Korean leader Kim Il Sung’s failure in the Korean War. 
 
■Contestation over U.S. access, basing, and overflight is part of the backdrop of strategic 
competition in Asia. Beijing will use all means at its disposal to block U.S. forces from 
using military facilities on allied territory and could have some success. U.S. planning for 
intervention should not assume that such access is guaranteed.

3
Taming the Hegemon
Introduction
China could use force to try to compel reunification with Taiwan in 2027, 2035, 2049, or 
anytime in between. Key to its decision calculus will be its assessments of whether the United 
States has the intention and capability to intervene. The military balance across the Taiwan Strait 
has already shifted decisively in China’s favor.1 Taiwan can buy time through defense reforms, 
but effective resistance to an invasion depends on U.S. intervention. This fact is well known 
to the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), which has long considered mitigating U.S. interven-
tion as a linchpin of its operational plans. The most dangerous scenario is one where the PLA 
concludes that the United States has become a “paper tiger” that lacks the resolve and military 
capabilities to intervene. Embracing this idea, they could advise Chinese leaders that war could 
proceed with minimal risks—a one-on-one match with a much inferior opponent. 
Fortunately, this is not the judgment that PLA officers have reached. They continue to ar-
gue in internal writings that Chinese military planners must account for the possibility of U.S. 
intervention at a time and scale sufficient to influence the course of the war. Recognizing the 
U.S. military as an enduring threat has also focused their attention on developing credible coun-
termeasures. This study finds that the PLA has focused its efforts on two primary options—de-
terring U.S. intervention by marshaling nuclear, conventional, and informational capabilities 
to threaten unacceptable consequences for U.S. political decisionmakers, and, failing that, con-
ducting a direct assault against key links in the U.S. military system using precision strikes and 
other means. The first option is exercised through a brinkmanship policy but seeks to manage 
risks, while the second focuses on military expediency and carries high risks of escalation and a 
broader war between the two powers. The two options are not contradictory but rather part of 
a cohesive whole: seek to deter but prepare to defeat. 
China’s concepts for counter-intervention are broader than U.S. analyses often assume. 
Most of the attention in public discussions is on specific weapons and platforms that create anti-
access/area-denial (A2/AD) challenges for U.S. forces. The sections of the annual Department of 
Defense reports on Chinese military power that deal with counter-intervention usually focus on 
relevant capabilities such as anti-ship ballistic missiles and counter-space systems.2 Other reports 
and analyses likewise emphasize PLA hardware.3 Wargames are usually premised on assump-
tions of robust PLA capabilities and magazine depth, with red team players employing hardware 
in a way that U.S. subject matter experts believe is most efficacious.4 Such approaches are limited 
not only because accurate appraisals of PLA hardware are difficult to conduct in open-source 
analysis, but also because they artificially narrow China’s choices to a warfighting option.

4 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
Surprisingly, little work has been done to understand Chinese thinking on counter-inter-
vention as opposed to documenting capabilities. In a 2014 essay, M. Taylor Fravel and Chris-
topher Twomey could not find much evidence of Chinese consideration of A2/AD concepts in 
doctrinal writings, concluding that this is not a primary feature of Chinese military strategy.5 In 
a rebuttal, Timothy Heath and Andrew Erickson argued that China is nonetheless developing 
A2/AD capabilities and engaging in plans for a “regional restructuring” to limit U.S. access by 
expanding China’s own strategic influence.6 Ryan Martinson relates the views of senior leaders 
supporting a deterrent and wartime role for the PLA Navy in counter-intervention.7 Brandon 
Babin persuasively argues that China’s recent nuclear buildup is intended to deter U.S. interven-
tion in a conventional war in Asia.8 While these articles all illuminate pieces of the puzzle, the 
most recent comprehensive survey of PLA discussions on this topic dates from Roger Cliff and 
colleagues’ 2007 RAND report Entering the Dragon’s Lair, which carefully catalogued the list of 
U.S. targets PLA analysts thought needed to be held at risk.9 The intervening two decades have 
given the PLA ample time to update their thinking based on new capabilities and an analysis of 
which U.S. vulnerabilities should be exploited. 
Gaining a more accurate picture of current PLA thinking about its options to counter U.S. 
intervention is of increasing urgency as the U.S. Department of Defense shifts its own strategy. 
Trump administration Defense Secretary Peter Hegseth describes China as the U.S. military’s 
“pacing threat” and stresses the urgency of deterring China’s possible use of force to achieve 
reunification, which would threaten Taiwan’s survival and peace and stability in Asia.10 A wider 
aperture on Chinese thinking can help U.S. policymakers anticipate the strategies that the PLA 
will employ to deter, delay, disrupt, or defeat U.S. participation in a war, and to develop ways to 
undermine those approaches in peacetime and wartime. 
This report provides an updated view on PLA thinking on how to counter U.S. interven-
tion in a Taiwan contingency.11 It relies on professional PLA writings, primarily the internal 
journals China Military Science and Military Arts that are published by the Academy of Military 
Sciences (AMS), which is the center of doctrinal development for the PLA. Articles in these 
journals are written not only by PLA scholars but also by senior operational figures from the 
theater commands and Central Military Commission departments, providing insights into in-
fluential viewpoints being circulated in the PLA. The report also leverages insights from oth-
er professional journals as well as teaching volumes produced by AMS and the PLA National 
Defense University (NDU), whose function is to train the senior commanders who would be 
responsible for implementing these options. This report avoids reliance on PLA newspapers,

5
Taming the Hegemon
which are intended for general consumption, and media commentary from PLA pundits whose 
primary purpose is to cater to nationalist whims or influence foreign perceptions.12
The report is organized into four main sections. The first establishes that the PLA contin-
ues to assume U.S. intervention as part of its military planning. Those judgments have remained 
unchanged despite (or perhaps because of) the rise of an alternative narrative in China’s strate-
gic community that the United States has entered a period of irreversible decline. This section 
also discusses the ways in which PLA authors think the United States could intervene and the 
general principles that they assert should guide China’s response. The second section develops 
a typology of counter-intervention options. Based on historical examples of states in China’s 
position, it argues that leaders have four basic choices: direct assault, deterrence, fait accompli, 
and strategic buffer. These options vary in terms of whether the intervener is targeted directly 
or indirectly, and whether the primary means of defeat is military or political. 
The third section applies this typology to the PLA literature. It finds strong evidence that 
PLA analysts continue to discuss and update their thinking on the parameters of a direct as-
sault on U.S. forces. The PLA has embraced the idea of an asymmetric operation targeting the 
weak links in the U.S. military system and is refreshing those ideas based on new technology. 
It also finds an increasing emphasis on the deterrent option. This would involve the use of 
strategic capabilities to hold broader U.S. interests at risk to deter a decision to intervene. PLA 
authors discuss conventional, nuclear, and informational tools relevant to this option and note 
that history provides evidence that deterrence can work. A focus of these discussions is on Mao 
Zedong’s use of brinkmanship to deter U.S. participation in the two Taiwan Strait crises of the 
1950s. Other PLA sources describe Russian nuclear signaling in the Ukraine war as evidence of 
successful deterrence. On the other hand, there is less support for the fait accompli and strategic 
buffer options. This suggests that the PLA cannot rely on the assumption that it can achieve a 
quick victory before U.S. forces can respond, nor can it assume that depriving U.S. forces of ac-
cess to regional bases will be possible or sufficient. 
The final section considers the policy implications. This includes seven main points: 1) 
Washington should uphold the policy of strategic ambiguity since the PLA already assumes that 
U.S. intervention is likely—shifts in declared policy would provoke without deterring; 2) U.S. 
strategic messaging should focus on both Chinese civilian leaders and the PLA given that their 
views on U.S. intervention may differ in the future; 3) talks should be carried out with PLA in-
terlocutors to reduce the risks of crisis instability that could result from aggressive deterrent sig-
naling, especially in the strategic domains (nuclear, space, and cyber); 4) once Beijing has made 
a strategic decision for war, U.S. decisionmakers should respond ambiguously to PLA deterrent

6 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
threats to buy time for U.S. forces to disperse into a wartime posture and increase overall readi-
ness; 5) U.S. defense strategy should focus on reducing the vulnerability of critical U.S. systems 
while targeting asymmetric PLA weaknesses, especially its need to mass forces in the Taiwan 
Strait; 6) any future PLA confidence in a fait accompli option should be undermined through 
messages that highlight U.S. capabilities to respond despite reduced warning time; and 7) com-
petition for access, basing, and overflight will continue, but U.S. planning for intervention should 
not assume host nation support. 
Prospects of U.S. Intervention
PLA analysts continue to base their discussions of how a war with Taiwan would unfold, 
and the requirements necessary to ensure operational success, on the assumption of a U.S. in-
tent to actively participate in the conflict. This section begins with a discussion of PLA writings 
anticipating U.S. intervention and notes that this assumption remains even as a simultaneous 
narrative has developed since the late 2000s that U.S. power is in decline. It then reviews the 
ways in which PLA authors expect the United States to intervene, ranging from low levels of 
support, to blockade, to full-scale attacks on mainland China. Finally, it identifies a series of 
general principles that PLA writings suggest must be followed when developing counter-in-
tervention options, including the need for a careful net assessment of forces, a strong internal 
defense, and policies that differentiate the main target from the intervening power. 
Interference and Intervention
U.S. military “intervention” [干预] in a war would constitute an extreme form of what 
Chinese officials routinely criticize as U.S. “interference” [干涉] in cross-strait relations.13 Bei-
jing has been frustrated with U.S.-Taiwan political and military coordination since unofficial 
relations began in 1979. Those concerns grew after the strategic U.S.-China alignment ended 
with the 1989 Tiananmen massacre and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, and U.S. 
administrations pursued stronger ties with an economically vibrant and democratizing Tai-
wan.14 China’s complaints focused on U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, including the George H.W. 
Bush administration’s sale of 150 F-16s in 1992, and a relaxation of U.S. restrictions on unof-
ficial contacts, especially the Clinton administration’s decision to allow then-Taiwan president 
Lee Teng-hui to give a pro-democracy speech at Cornell University in June 1995.15 Even before 
Lee’s visit, Jiang Zemin asserted that “certain foreign forces” have “meddled in the Taiwan issue,” 
which “impedes the process of China’s peaceful reunification, but also threatens peace, stability, 
and development in the Asia-Pacific region.”16

7
Taming the Hegemon
Such concerns lingered under Hu Jintao and have intensified in the Xi era.17 Xi has railed 
against foreign “interference” in cross-strait affairs on many occasions, implicitly referencing 
U.S. support for the island. At the 20th Party Congress in October 2022, Xi twice mentioned 
“opposing external interference” in his report. He explained that China’s statement that it would 
never “give up the use of force and reserve the option of taking all necessary measures” was 
aimed not at ordinary Taiwan citizens, but at a “very small number of ‘Taiwan independence’ 
separatists” and at “external interference.”18 The same year, the party’s propaganda department 
published a primer on “the Chinese Communist Party’s national reunification” that detailed the 
challenges of “external interference” for rank-and-file cadres:
We firmly oppose external interference. The Taiwan issue is China’s internal 
affairs, which concerns China’s core interests and the national sentiments of the 
Chinese people. No external interference is allowed. We do not promise to give up 
the use of force and reserve the option of taking all necessary measures. We are 
targeting external interference and a very small number of “Taiwan independence” 
separatists and their separatist activities, not our compatriots in Taiwan. We must 
firmly oppose external forces stirring up trouble in the Taiwan Strait, prevent 
and resolve major risks, and actively stabilize the external environment related 
to Taiwan. In the face of increasing interference from external forces, we must 
strengthen planning for the reunification process, maintain strategic focus, take 
positive and proactive actions, and strive to promote the peaceful reunification of 
the motherland.19
Chinese observers blame U.S. actions for enflaming the situation. Xiao Yang, director of 
the political research office at the Shanghai Institute for Taiwan Studies, identifies four nega-
tive trends in U.S. policy that have caused alarm. First is the “officialization” of U.S.-Taiwan 
exchanges, including a visit by then-U.S. Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan in 2022. 
Second were U.S. efforts to better integrate Taiwan into global industrial supply chains, thereby 
weakening China’s economic leverage over the island’s leaders. Third was increasing “military-
security interaction and cooperation” under both U.S. Republican and Democratic administra-
tions, including growing arms sales and frequent U.S. naval transits through the Taiwan Strait. 
Fourth was U.S. support for a greater role for Taiwan in international organizations such as the 
World Health Assembly and the International Civil Aviation Organization.20 In response, Xiao

8 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
calls for a greater focus on “blocking external forces from interfering in the Taiwan issue,” in-
cluding through updated legislation and reinvigorated propaganda campaigns.21
Complaints about U.S. “interference,” however, did not translate into a consensus about the 
likelihood of U.S. “intervention” immediately after the Cold War. Washington has maintained 
a policy of “strategic ambiguity” about the conditions under which it would intervene since the 
U.S.-Taiwan mutual defense treaty was dissolved in January 1979, and some in China initially 
believed that the United States might not be willing to bear the costs of war for Taiwan.22 How-
ever, debate about U.S. intentions narrowed as signs of U.S. support for Taiwan, and perceptions 
of hostile U.S. motives toward China, became more prominent in the 1990s. One perceived 
signal of aggressive U.S. intent was the Clinton administration’s decision to deploy two aircraft 
carrier battle groups near the Taiwan Strait during the 1995–1996 crisis that erupted after Lee’s 
visit to the United States.23 A more decisive moment was the accidental North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) bombing of China’s Belgrade embassy during the Kosovo air war in May 
1999. For Chinese analysts, this not only reflected a worrisome trend of U.S. interventionism 
but also was regarded as evidence that the United States would use force to maintain its hege-
monic status in Asia.24 
The question of whether U.S. forces would intervene might have been answered in the 
“great peace and development debate” of 1999,25 but it was not inevitable that this consensus 
would endure for more than two decades. Chinese analysts could have raised doubts about U.S. 
intentions to defend Taiwan as relative U.S. power began what they perceived as an irreversible 
decline. Indeed, an “American decline” narrative gained traction in China’s strategic commu-
nity during the late Hu and Xi eras.26 Influential PLA authors shared this perspective. In a 2021 
China Military Science article, Lieutenant General Qi Jianguo, then-deputy chief of the joint 
staff department for intelligence, wrote that the “global financial crisis in 2008 was the peak of 
the U.S. hegemonic order, and it also marked the beginning of the decline of U.S. hegemony. 
The COVID-19 pandemic in 2019 was also an important point that marked the beginning of 
the collapse of the U.S. hegemonic order.”27 A declining hegemon might prefer not to expend its 
waning power in a war, even if it continued its peacetime “interference” in cross-strait affairs. 
Yet this is not the conclusion that PLA analysts reached. Rather, there is continuity in the 
argument that the PLA must prepare for the intervention of a “powerful enemy” [强敌], which 
is a ubiquitous euphemism for the United States.28 The 2001 Science of Military Strategy, written 
by AMS scholars, advised that commanders should “be prepared to deal with possible interna-
tional intervention” both at the outset of and during a conflict to “prevent a reversal of the war 
situation.”29 It also cautioned that “even if the direct combat target [that is, Taiwan] is weaker

9
Taming the Hegemon
than us, the possibility of powerful enemy intervention and support cannot be ruled out.”30 
These arguments continued after the “American decline” narrative began in the late 2000s. The 
2009 volume Science of Army Operations, for instance, argued that “the biggest obstacle to our 
national reunification is the military intervention of a powerful enemy.”31 The 2013 revision to 
the Science of Military Strategy expanded on its previous warning a dozen years earlier not to be 
complacent about the risks of foreign intervention:
In the future, regardless how great the probability of a powerful enemy 
implementing large-scale military intervention or directly initiating a war against 
us, we cannot count on luck and must keep a foothold at the foundation of having 
ample war preparations and powerful military capabilities of our own, rather 
than at the assessment that the enemy will not come, intervene, or strike.32
More recent PLA sources reaffirm these arguments. The 2020 Science of Military Strategy, 
written by scholars at PLA NDU, asserted that “there is always the risk of military intervention 
by external forces,” and “once the conflict expands, the PLA could face a situation of ‘one-to-two’ 
or ‘one-to-many,’” implying the possibility of a coalition forming against China that might in-
clude U.S. allies such as Japan, Australia, and the Philippines.33 PLA articles on niche warfight-
ing subjects also assume U.S. intervention. For example, a 2025 Military Arts article prefaces the 
need for quick responses by airborne troops with the prediction that “there is a high risk of pow-
erful enemy intervention.”34 An article on army logistics argues that in the future, “the powerful 
enemy’s intervention will be deeper, our breakthrough [capabilities] will be more difficult, and 
the combat consumption rates will be higher.”35 These conclusions suggest either a perception 
among PLA observers that U.S. decline is likely to make Washington even more aggressive as 
it seeks to retain its leading position in Asia, or that those who expect U.S. intervention believe 
that the pace and scope of the decline are not enough to contain the ability of the “powerful 
enemy” to leverage military capabilities against China.36 
Modes of U.S. Intervention
In the view of PLA analysts, U.S. intervention could take several forms. In his Lectures on 
Joint Campaign Command, AMS scholar Senior Colonel Zhang Peigao divides intervention into 
three types. A “low” level of intervention would represent a continuation of peacetime “inter-
ference” activities into a crisis, such as forward presence of foreign military forces and close-in 
surveillance operations, which Zhang regards as a kind of “military deterrence.”37 A 2024 China

10 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
Military Science article similarly describes intelligence support to improve a partner’s “battle-
field situational awareness, combat planning, and command and control efficiency,” which the 
authors argue requires the PLA to impose an information blockade at the outset of a war.38 The 
same article also discusses provision of “energy and material support,” such as oil, natural gas, 
and food, which are “important foundations for supporting the war and normal operations of 
society,” and which should thus be cut off by the offensive side.39
A “medium” level of intervention could involve U.S. blockades and counter-blockades. For 
Zhang Peigao, this could include the declaration of no-fly zones and maritime blockades.40 A 
2000 Modern Navy article likewise states that the PLA “cannot rule out the possibility that the 
U.S. Navy will assist the Taiwan military in implementing counter-blockade operations,” includ-
ing the deployment of U.S. minesweepers to keep Taiwan’s ports open.41 In a more aggressive 
way, PLA Naval Research Institute professor Senior Captain Liang Fang anticipates that U.S. 
forces will also seek to close China’s access to strategic passageways such as the Strait of Malacca 
in any regional conflict:
As soon as there is an incident involving the Taiwan Strait and the South China 
Sea, the U.S. Navy and Air Force [strengths] that are stationed in peripheral 
areas will be able to quickly reach the area where the incident [occurred], 
and this will greatly affect the actions of the People’s Republic of China’s troop 
strengths and control the resolution of the Taiwan Strait and the South China Sea 
issue. Speaking overall, the United States treats containment of maritime strategic 
accesses as an important card for preventing China from completing its grand 
enterprise of unifying the motherland.42
Liang’s concern, in other words, is that the United States will attempt to shape Beijing’s risk 
calculus for continuing the war by endangering its own access to strategic materials, such as oil, 
and potentially merchant traffic.43
The highest level of intervention would involve direct strikes against PLA combat forces, 
including those in mainland China.44 Even before the 2010 publication of the influential Air-
Sea Battle concept by the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, which called for 
high-intensity strikes against the mainland,45 PLA analysts anticipated such actions. The 2000 
Modern Navy article referenced above predicted U.S. sea-launched Tomahawk missiles and air-
strikes in “gradually escalating attacks on the mainland,” whose targets could include “not only 
our landing troops, but also civilian and military facilities.”46 The 2006 Science of Campaigns, a

11
Taming the Hegemon
teaching volume produced by PLA NDU, noted that the “powerful enemy” has “stealth penetra-
tion, long-range attack, and precision strike capabilities” that could be used to conduct “unin-
terrupted airstrikes against us under various weather conditions.”47 The passage compares U.S. 
capabilities with the PLA’s “relatively limited” ability to counter long-range strikes, placing them 
“in a grim situation of defeating the superior with the inferior.”48
The 2010 Air-Sea Battle report confirmed what PLA authors already expected. Later PLA 
writings cited this concept as proof of their convictions and expanded on previous warnings 
about mainland strikes. In 2012, Zhang Peigao wrote that Air-Sea Battle is the “main combat 
style” of the “powerful enemy,” who will “make full use of our electromagnetic radiation signals 
intercepted through long-range pre-reconnaissance” to “support their own targeted destruction 
of our command-and-control system.”49 Zhang observed that this was the same concept used 
by U.S. forces to “quickly paralyze the command system” of Iraqi forces in the Gulf War.50 Simi-
larly, a 2014 China Military Science article by Major General Zhang Ming, then-director of the 
General Staff Department’s Strategic Planning Bureau, argued that the Obama administration’s 
rebalance to Asia strategy included a military intention to implement the Air-Sea Battle concept 
by “promoting Asia-Pacific forward deployments.” Summing up the options available to U.S. 
decisionmakers, he concluded, the “powerful enemy” will “help its allies gain comprehensive 
battlefield control and intervene directly or indirectly.”51
General Principles for China’s Response
The expectation of U.S. intervention leads PLA scholars to recommend careful planning in 
developing response options and capabilities. Zhang Peigao writes that the PLA should “careful-
ly formulate countermeasures and make advanced preparations based on an accurate judgment 
of the situation.”52 Given that the “powerful enemy” might intervene through different means, 
Zhang suggests that plans should be “adaptable and flexible,” determined by “on-site, real-time 
monitoring,” and incorporate “necessary improvements” according to changes in the battlefield 
situation.53 The 2013 Science of Military Strategy adds that the development of relevant capabili-
ties is useful not only in a contingency but also in strategic messaging. The “more ample our war 
preparations and the stronger our military capabilities,” it argues, the “less likely the powerful 
enemy would dare to rashly initiate a war against us.”54
PLA sources identify several principles for an effective response. First is that plans should 
be based on an ongoing net assessment of U.S. and PLA capabilities. Senior Colonel Chen Qiyin, 
then an official in the Southern Theater Command’s joint staff department, argues that mili-
tary theories (that is, doctrine) should analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the “powerful

12 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
enemy.”55 A 2024 China Military Science article recommends studying the “weak links in the 
powerful enemy’s combat system” and identifying “checks and balances” that can exploit those 
vulnerabilities, while considering the “advanced concepts, methods, and technologies” of the 
adversary to improve PLA responses.56 In the authors’ words, “learn from the barbarians to de-
feat the barbarians.”57 Along these lines, Major General Chen Hui, then-deputy chief of staff of 
the Eastern Theater Command Air Force, argues that the frequent presence of enemy ships and 
aircraft in his theater, which often involve the “validation of new tactics and new attack methods 
of the powerful enemy,” constitutes a “natural training ground for realistic [PLA] training.”58
A second principle is that the PLA must adopt a strong internal defense. Based on uncer-
tainty about the forms and locations of U.S. intervention, Zhang Peigao recommends the promul-
gation of “local defense plans for other directions” as well as defenses against enemy information 
attacks and precision strikes.59 A 2009 volume, Science of Army Operations Under Informatized 
Conditions, warns that commanders should carry out anti–air raid and anti-sabotage prepara-
tions in both forward and rear areas. This includes defense of “assembly areas, important military 
installations, important cities, important lines of communication, traffic hubs, and important 
bridges.”60 Such preparations are necessary to “thwart the enemy’s intervention and support the 
smooth implementation of the [island] landing joint operations.”61 This prescription is consis-
tent with doctrinal requirements for the People’s Armed Police—China’s premier paramilitary 
service—to conduct “defensive operations” including protection of internal targets in wartime.62
Third is that planners should differentiate the main combat target (Taiwan) from the inter-
vening force (the United States). Although the two might support each other, the PLA needs to 
determine the amount of resources in terms of manpower, munitions, and equipment to expend 
on the main target versus the third party. For Zhang Peigao, the former should be the primary 
focus of attacks, but the PLA must “leave enough room” to handle the latter, and coordination 
between the two should be conducted prior to and throughout the conflict.63 A China Military 
Science article recognizes that severing the intervening force from the main target is an essen-
tial task, but “how to grasp the balance of direct combat against the enemy and responding to 
the intervention of external major powers” is a “major issue that needs to be solved in strategic 
guidance.”64 Moreover, as discussed below, some Chinese sources argue that it can be beneficial 
to formulate different approaches toward the two parties.65 
In sum, the need to counter U.S. intervention remains a key factor informing PLA plan-
ning for major operations against Taiwan. The judgment that planners must consider not only 
the likelihood but also the mode of U.S. intervention and diligently prepare counters is a consis-
tent theme in PLA writings since the late 1990s. The persistence of this theme suggests that the

13
Taming the Hegemon
military is not so overconfident that it can discount the possibility, but also not so underconfi-
dent to think that U.S. intervention would pose an insurmountable obstacle. On this basis, PLA 
analysts have discussed a variety of ways to frustrate U.S. intervention so that options against 
the main target can work as intended. This is the subject of the following sections. 
A Typology of Options
Leaders in China’s position have used a variety of ways to address the challenge of for-
eign intervention in wartime. Based on examples from the world wars, the Cold War, and the 
post–Cold War era, this section develops a typology of options. The typology consists of four 
options that vary along two dimensions (see table). These dimensions reflect the basic choices 
that leaders of an offensive campaign need to make. First is whether to directly target the in-
tervening party or to use indirect methods including a fait accompli before the intervener can 
act or strategic buffers that restrict the intervener’s freedom of action. Second is the means of 
defeat. Leaders can choose blunt military instruments to cripple adversary military systems or 
to conduct a rapid invasion. But they can also use a broader range of nuclear, conventional, and 
even non-military tools to shape target decisionmaking. This could involve signaling to the in-
tervening state’s leadership or to prospective host nations. This section explains the logic of each 
option and illustrates them with historical examples, both successful and unsuccessful. 
Direct Assault
The first option is a direct military assault on the third party. This option applies when 
the intervening side has already begun to mobilize and deploy forces or when the attacker con-
cludes that intervention is inevitable—that is, it cannot be deterred. The mechanism of defeat is 
Primary Mechanism of Defeat
Blunt Force
Political Signals
Targeting Intervention
Direct
Direct assault: Disrupt or defeat 
intervening side through military assault. 
May be preemptive or reactive and employ 
kinetic or nonkinetic weapons. 
Deterrence: Threaten intervening leaders 
with unacceptable costs through conventional, 
strategic, or nonmilitary means.
Indirect
Fait accompli: Conduct a rapid attack 
against the main target before intervener 
can mobilize and deploy forces. Requires 
strategic surprise through deception.
Strategic buffer: Threaten or co-opt potential 
host nations to deny intervener access, 
basing, or overflight, raising the difficulty of 
intervention.
Table. Typology of Options

14 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
to employ force to deny the opponent a credible intervention option, or to reduce the effective-
ness of the intervention so that an attack on the main target can proceed within an acceptable 
level of risk. This is the most decisive option because, if successful, it eliminates the possibility 
of external obstruction. However, it is also the most escalatory option because it requires the 
use of force against the intervening third party. This could entail both vertical escalation as the 
intervener uses a higher degree of force to pursue its objectives or even expands its war aims to 
include elimination of the attacking regime, or horizontal escalation as the conflict expands to 
other regions or other states join the conflict. A war of limited duration against a neighbor over 
a specific territorial dispute could grow into a protracted war against a “powerful enemy,” the 
risks of which would outweigh the reward sought in the initial campaign. 
Seeking to manage the escalation risks, the attacker could control the timing and intensity 
of its operations. A preemptive strike might be more decisive, but the attacker could wait until 
the intervener has deployed forces, hoping that they might use force first. This would allow 
the attacker to claim that it is pursuing a “self-defensive counter-attack”66 rather than a war 
of aggression and reduce international support for the defender. On the modern battlefield, 
the attacker could also control the intensity of its campaign by using non-kinetic tools such 
as cyber-attacks against adversary networks or reversible attacks on space systems, or by us-
ing precision weapons to strike targets while minimizing casualties. The attacker might also 
refrain from targeting intervening troops stationed in other countries (for example, U.S. forces 
in Japan) to reduce the likelihood of host nations becoming involved. However, steps to con-
trol escalation would come at the expense of military effectiveness; a “knockout punch” would 
be harder to achieve. 
The most famous example of this option is Japan’s attack on U.S. forces at Pearl Harbor 
in 1941. The strategic problem was Tokyo’s judgment that Washington would intervene to op-
pose Japanese expansion into territory controlled by the British Empire or the Netherlands, 
especially Malaya and the Dutch East Indies.67 Yet control of these territories was critical to 
Japan’s imperial aspirations because of access to raw materials, such as oil, rubber, nickel, and 
tin. Abandoning those ambitions, however, was not an option because it would have required 
a fatal humiliation of the government.68 A direct conflict was inevitable, but Japanese leaders 
understood that a protracted war against U.S. forces would be untenable because U.S. industrial 
capacity was seven times greater than Japan’s. The only option was a surprise attack on the Pa-
cific Fleet in Hawaii to buy Japan enough time to consolidate its position in Southeast Asia and 
the Pacific Islands. That strike failed because U.S. aircraft carriers were not destroyed and, in the 
broader sense, the United States was emboldened to fight a long war.69

15
Taming the Hegemon
Another example is the Central Powers’ campaign against Romania in World War I. When 
the war started, Romanian king Carol I considered joining the Central Powers but decided on 
neutrality. It was thus a surprise when his successor, the German-born Ferdinand I, signed an 
alliance with the Triple Entente in August 1916. Romania’s intervention in the war needed to 
be crushed because of the threat of a new front that would have diverted troops from the main 
theater, and because it endangered Austro-Hungarian supply lines in Transylvania. The Central 
Powers agreed to a joint campaign to topple the Romanian regime that involved an assault on 
Bucharest by German, Bulgarian, and Turkish forces; by December, most of Romania had come 
under enemy control.70 Although it was not a strategic surprise, the campaign succeeded be-
cause of a major imbalance between Romanian forces and the multinational coalition it faced. 
Deterrence
A second option is deterrence. As with a direct assault, the main target is the intervener, 
but the mechanism of defeat is different. Rather than using blunt military tools, the attacker 
threatens unacceptable consequences against the putative intervener before it enters the war. 
Those consequences could include the possibility of a military defeat but could also involve 
broader damage to the intervener’s territory, economy, or other interests so that decisionmakers 
conclude that the likely rewards of intervention are not worth the risks to those other interests. 
The tools selected for this option could include conventional forces as well as other instruments 
such as economic power, and, in the modern context, strategic capabilities such as nuclear weap-
ons, cyber threats to civilian infrastructure, and threats to commercial space systems. Threats 
could be transmitted through rhetoric or through actions meant to increase their credibility. 
The tradeoffs involved in this option are the inverse of direct assault. One risk is that the 
threats might not be persuasive enough to influence the target’s calculus. If the threat fails, the 
intervener would have the full range of military forces left at its disposal. Moreover, the issuance 
of threats could deprive the attacker of its ability to surprise the main target (as well as any third 
parties supporting them) as it would have likely revealed its intentions to clearly communicate 
those threats. This could provide defenders time to increase their own readiness. The most sig-
nificant risk is that more aggressive deterrent actions designed to make threats more persuasive, 
such as conducting cyber-attacks, could inadvertently cause a target to be more resolved to 
intervene than if the action had not occurred. Those actions could also prompt tit-for-tat retali-
ation that could destabilize the crisis situation, especially if they involve strategic signaling. The 
main reward is that deterrence could eliminate the possibility of intervention without the actual 
costs of a direct military clash or at least restrain the scope of the adversary’s involvement to a

16 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
lower level.71 Without the prospect of intervention, the main target would be isolated and could 
capitulate without the need for war, saving the attacker blood and treasure. An added benefit is 
that, if deterrence fails, the mobilization of some deterrent tools (for example, long-range preci-
sion strike or counter-space weapons) could be useful in direct assault. Mobilization of nuclear 
forces would also be a useful backstop against vertical escalation.72
The prospect of “winning without fighting” has led numerous aggressors to attempt to de-
ter intervention. In World War I, Germany attempted to deter U.S. involvement by threatening 
unrestricted submarine warfare against trans-Atlantic shipping. The threats were initially rhe-
torical, with Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz exclaiming to a U.S. newspaper in 1915, “What would 
America say if Germany declares submarine war on all enemy merchant ships?”73 The sinking 
of the British ship Lusitania in May 1915 pushed Washington closer to war because 128 victims 
were U.S. citizens, but isolationist sentiment in the United States prevailed. In February 1917, 
Germany increased its deterrent actions by sinking the U.S. freighter Housatonic, but controlled 
escalation by allowing passengers to board lifeboats, which likely delayed U.S. involvement by a 
month.74 However, the loss of U.S. citizens in several sinkings in March galvanized U.S. support 
for war. In his speech to Congress requesting a declaration of war, President Woodrow Wilson 
stated: “American ships have been sunk, American lives have been taken, in ways [which] have 
stirred us very deeply.”75 By escalating to lethal attacks on U.S. shipping, Germany’s deterrent 
campaign caused the outcome it most wanted to avoid. 
A successful example of deterrence was Adolf Hitler’s ploy to convince Britain and France 
not to interfere in the annexation of the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia in 1938. Hitler per-
ceived that neither great power had the resolve to defend this territory, even though France had a 
formal alliance with the Czech government. To promote non-intervention, Hitler first informed 
the French that Germany was building “the most gigantic fortifications that ever existed” along 
the Franco-German border and then warned British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain that 
without annexation, Hitler “would be prepared to risk a world war.”76 This prompted Cham-
berlain to put more pressure on the Czech leadership to agree to annexation. Hitler’s success, 
cemented in the September 1938 Munich Agreement, rested on warnings, but not lethal actions, 
against opponents who preferred appeasement over conflict. It was not until Hitler’s invasion of 
Poland almost a year later that Britain and France changed their strategy.77
Another example of attempted deterrence was Vladimir Putin’s use of nuclear signaling to 
deter NATO involvement in the February 2022 invasion of Ukraine. As Michael Kofman and col-
leagues noted before the war, Russian military doctrine distinguishes general conventional forces 
from “strategic deterrent forces,” whose utility is to threaten unacceptable consequences on ad-

17
Taming the Hegemon
versary economic and military interests, including “deterring third parties from intervening.”78 
Those “strategic deterrence forces” include not only nuclear but also non-nuclear capabilities 
that can deliver strategic effects.79 Regular Russian bomber exercises carried out before the war 
were part of a strategy to maintain general deterrence.80 At the outset of the war, Putin employed 
several deterrent actions, including holding bomber exercise Operation Grom that simulated 
nuclear strikes on several Scandinavian countries and sending ballistic missile submarines to 
sea equipped with the intercontinental-range Yars nuclear missile.81 Putin matched these actions 
with intimidating rhetoric as the war commenced:
I would now like to say something very important for those who may be tempted 
to interfere in these developments from the outside. No matter who tries to stand 
in our way or all the more so create threats for our country and our people, they 
must know that Russia will respond immediately, and the consequences will be 
such as you have never seen in your entire history. No matter how the events 
unfold, we are ready. All the necessary decisions in this regard have been taken. I 
hope that my words will be heard.82
While Putin’s threats might appear to have succeeded, they probably made no difference. 
Ukraine was not a NATO ally, and President Joseph Biden signaled two weeks before the war 
that he would not send U.S. forces into Ukraine.83
Fait Accompli
A third option is to defeat the main target before the third party can mobilize and deploy 
forces. An intervention is still possible but less likely if the attacker has already consolidated 
its position and especially if it has toppled the government. Achieving a fait accompli depends 
heavily on speed and deception. The attacker might mask its own war preparations under the 
cover of an exercise or send conflicting diplomatic signals to confuse its opponents, just as Japan 
continued negotiations with the United States until Pearl Harbor. The benefit of this approach 
is that it avoids direct military engagement with the intervener while also surprising the main 
target. The major risk is that the deception could be exposed, which would eliminate the ele-
ment of surprise, allow defenders to increase their own readiness, and prompt greater interna-
tional support. Moreover, if the main target is well prepared, they might weather the attack long 
enough for the intervention to take place even if the plan is not exposed beforehand.

18 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
In the Korean War, Kim Il Sung tried to achieve a fait accompli by overrunning South Ko-
rean defenses and overthrowing the government. To succeed, Kim needed support from Joseph 
Stalin, whose main concern was that U.S. forces would intervene from Japan and deal a crushing 
blow to the communists. In a January 1950 meeting in Moscow, Kim reassured Stalin that the 
offensive would conclude in three days, well before U.S. forces could arrive at a scale necessary 
to make a difference, and that a popular uprising of 200,000 communist sympathizers in the 
South would aid the invasion. Kim was also emboldened because he thought Washington would 
hesitate based on Secretary of State Dean Acheson’s January 1950 speech that indicated that the 
Korean Peninsula was outside the U.S. “defensive perimeter” and that any “initial reliance must 
be on the people attacked to resist it.”84 Stalin ultimately approved the plan, although he re-
mained wary of a direct U.S.-Soviet clash and limited overt Soviet participation throughout the 
war.85 While North Korean troops achieved strategic surprise,86 U.S. airstrikes slowed the initial 
invasion, and the tide of war turned with the Inchon landing in September 1950.87 
The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 illustrates the role of deception 
in generating confusion and reducing warning among foreign analysts. Soviet leader Leonid 
Brezhnev decided to use force to suppress the political reforms that had begun in the “Prague 
Spring” in January. Brezhnev did not fear U.S. or NATO intervention, since Czechoslovakia 
was behind the Iron Curtain, but he intended to catch the international community off guard. 
Brezhnev began his buildup of forces in June under the pretext of a Warsaw Pact exercise in 
Czechoslovakia and Poland. At the same time, the Soviets moved a larger concentration of 
forces to the Czech border from Hungary and East Germany.88 The troop movements caused 
debate in the West. Some analysts thought that the Soviets only intended to put pressure on 
Czechoslovakia and would not invade,89 others believed that they were part of routine exercises, 
and still others correctly assessed Brezhnev’s intent. Writing in Studies in Intelligence in 1970, a 
U.S. author drew lessons for the future:
The fact that any U.S. analysts were taken in by the Soviet announcements on 
“exercises” is cause for considerable concern that intelligence analysts also might 
fail to recognize a deception effort when it might be vital to U.S. security to detect 
it. Our experience in the invasion of Czechoslovakia has reinforced the opinion 
long held by warning analysts that the U.S., at both its intelligence and policy 
levels, is extremely vulnerable to deception.90

19
Taming the Hegemon
Future analysts took this lesson to heart. When Vladimir Putin attempted similar tactics by 
announcing large “snap exercises” on the eve of the Ukraine invasion, his plans were exposed—
depriving him of the casus belli he sought in the court of international opinion.91
Strategic Buffer
A final option is to limit the ability of a third party to intervene by creating strategic buf-
fers between the attacking state and the intervener. As with a fait accompli, this option avoids 
direct confrontation with the intervener. The difference is that the mechanism of defeat rests 
more on political tools exercised against susceptible governments and not on the blunt military 
instruments required in a rapid invasion. In this respect, this option is more like the deterrence 
approach, which also leans on political tools. Yet these two options are somewhat different in 
the range of tactics that can be used to influence target decisionmaking. In deterrence, the at-
tacker wields the threat of unacceptable costs to deter a government that would otherwise be 
tempted to intervene; in a strategic buffer option, the attacker could either use coercion or 
promise inducements to governments that might seek to avoid involvement in a war. Economic 
or diplomatic side payments could therefore be part of the equation. 
As with the other choices, there are tradeoffs in pursuing this option. The benefit is that this 
approach does not require direct confrontation with a major adversary, narrowing the scope of 
the war and reducing the likelihood of crisis instability involved in deterrence. It is simply a way 
to make intervention more difficult for an enemy whose plans depend on foreign access. One 
risk is that host nations could ignore the threats or inducements because allowing third-party 
intervention through their territory or airspace is a higher priority. This could be due to alliance 
commitments or to the judgment that a war against the main target would put their own sover-
eignty at risk. Another problem is that success might not eliminate the possibility of successful 
intervention if the opponent is able to bypass the buffer zone. For instance, the United States 
might avoid dependence on forward bases and ports by leveraging its undersea capabilities or 
through bombers launched from U.S. territory.
This option was central to Soviet strategy on reducing NATO presence in parts of its near 
abroad. Finnish neutrality is one example. In the 1949 Finland-Soviet treaty, Stalin provided 
assurances that he would not interfere in Finland’s internal affairs if Helsinki promised not 
to allow foreign forces to use its territory as a “springboard” for aggression against the Soviet 
Union.92 At the same time, Stalin pressured Finland to influence Sweden not to join NATO 
with the implicit threat that Sweden’s accession would trigger Soviet military presence in Fin-
land.93 This gambit was successful not only because these countries preferred neutrality, but

20 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
also because U.S. officials similarly saw value in a Swedish buffer against the Soviet Union.94 
The Soviets were more concerned about Austria becoming involved in NATO planning and 
as a corridor for moving NATO forces between Germany and Italy. Their approach was to 
make the Soviet Union’s postwar military withdrawal from Austria contingent on Austrian 
neutrality; this was accomplished in a 1955 treaty.95 These negotiations achieved the Soviet 
goal of reducing NATO presence in border regions, though NATO could still pose threats from 
bombers and missiles in Western Europe and deployed nuclear weapons beginning in 1954. 
In sum, prospective attackers have several options to reduce the risks of intervention. The 
two direct options target the intervener but vary in terms of an emphasis on the use of force 
once intervention is regarded as inevitable (direct assault) or threats to convince foreign de-
cisionmakers not to mobilize in the first place (deterrence). The two indirect options avoid 
confrontation with the intervener but are different in whether they rely on a rapid assault on 
the main target (fait accompli) or on political steps to deprive the intervener of foreign access 
(strategic buffer). Each option has its own set of risks and rewards, and there are examples of 
leaders selecting each of them, albeit with varying levels of success. The next section applies this 
typology to PLA writings to assess the likelihood that Beijing would select any of these options, 
and to evaluate how they might be implemented. 
Chinese Thinking on Counter-Intervention
A review of the PLA literature on counter-intervention suggests that the greatest emphasis 
for planners is on the two direct options. A direct assault is typically defined in terms of asym-
metric operations that target the weak links in the U.S. operational system to delay or defeat 
intervention. The main concern here is with military expediency and not escalatory risks. At 
the same time, there is an equal emphasis on the deterrence option. Authors who discuss this 
option suggest that the PLA can use strategic capabilities, including nuclear, conventional, and 
information warfare forces, to undermine U.S. resolve to intervene. Here, there is much greater 
concern with the possibility of escalation and crisis stability. The two options are not contradic-
tory but fit into a cohesive whole: deterrence should be attempted, but if it fails, the PLA must be 
ready to fight immediately. There is less attention on the two indirect options, since neither a fait 
accompli nor a strategic buffer can ensure that PLA plans will not be detected, and intervention 
will not be able to be conducted at a scale that would threaten the campaign.

21
Taming the Hegemon
Direct Assault
PLA sources, as one would expect, consistently argue for a capability to defeat foreign in-
tervention through decisive action. For decades, these discussions have emphasized holding en-
emy systems at risk through asymmetric means, or what are sometimes called “assassin’s mace” 
[杀手锏] weapons, rather than through a head-to-head confrontation.96 The 2006 Science of 
Campaigns suggests paralyzing “the enemy’s information systems and air dominance systems 
with sudden and intense firepower,” trapping the opponent “in a passive position where he is 
hard put to respond.”97 The authors add that the “intervention of a powerful enemy or interfer-
ence by a regional military alliance” during a conflict means that “sufficient combat reserves” 
will need to be on hand.98 A 2009 volume similarly proposes “noncontact operations” [非接触
作战]—which is a misnomer because it involves kinetic strikes on “enemy information systems” 
and other key targets but not large force-on-force engagements—using “elite strengths.”99 The 
2020 Science of Military Strategy also favors destroying the “key nodes and vital points of the 
enemy’s combat systems” by “defeating the strong with the weak.”100 
Chinese writings discuss several key targets that are regarded as essential to U.S. interven-
tion.101 These are elements of what PLA theorists describe as a “system of systems” that must 
work together to achieve their intended effects. By compromising any specific system, including 
reconnaissance and early warning, information transmission, command and control, firepower, 
or comprehensive support, the enemy’s overall system will become less effective.102 Specific tar-
gets listed in the 2015 internal volume Study on Asymmetric Operations include U.S. naval and 
air bases, ammunition and fuel depots, aircraft carriers, and early warning aircraft.103 A 2022 
article in Military Arts likewise argues that “even the powerful enemy’s system is not perfect,” 
with weaknesses in satellite capabilities, early warning aircraft, aircraft carriers, fixed bases, and 
data links that should be targeted through kinetic or non-kinetic means.104 
The means of attack, for these authors, are simply those that can most efficiently destroy 
adversary systems. The 2015 volume Research on Port Landing Operations notes that air force, 
naval, and conventional missile forces all have counter-intervention missions in a landing cam-
paign. Missiles, in particular, should be used to strike the “center of gravity of the anti-landing 
party’s combat system and strive to destroy or paralyze it,” referring to both the intervener and 
the main target.105 A China Military Science article published the same year advocated the de-
velopment of “asymmetric high-tech means that can check and balance the powerful enemy,” 
such as high-powered microwaves, anti-satellite laser technology, and kinetic interceptors, which

22 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
requires greater investments in “strategic frontier technology fields” including network and elec-
tromagnetic field, space and near-space, and uncrewed aerial vehicle technology.106
More recent PLA articles discuss new or upgraded capabilities relevant to achieving asym-
metric advantages. A 2022 China Military Science article from AMS researcher Major General 
Fu Bingzhong, for instance, describes the cross-domain collaboration between “unmanned 
combat forces” in the air, land, sea, and space domains, which can target the information sys-
tems, networks, and command and control centers of the “powerful enemy” and implement 
precision strikes.107 Continuing this theme, Major General Feng Zhongguo, deputy comman-
dant of the PLA Army Command Academy, writes in the same journal that the PLA must 
“enrich the strategic means and methods of counterbalancing the powerful enemy,” including 
through collaborative unmanned systems that can create “aerial swarms, ground wolf packs, 
and underwater fish schools,” alongside traditional weapons such as long-range missiles, spe-
cial forces, air and missile defenses, and network and electronic warfare tools.108 Meanwhile, 
authors from the Dalian Naval Academy suggest that resisting the “powerful enemy” requires 
blue-water capabilities that can counter foreign naval operations close to China and hold at risk 
its “overseas strategic bases” and sea lines of communication outside the first island chain.109
PLA sources also associate counter-intervention with the larger modernization goal of 
“intelligentization” [智能化], based on the incorporation of artificial intelligence into PLA 
command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
(C4ISR) systems.110 In a 2023 China Military Science article, AMS scholar Senior Colonel Lan 
Yongming writes that “the need to cope with the powerful enemy” means that the PLA should 
construct an “intelligent” network information system that can “intelligently optimize the pri-
oritization of strike targets and choose the best combat method.”111 In line with the principle 
that counter-intervention requires a strong defense, Lan also states that the upgraded system 
should be able to be quickly reconstituted in wartime conditions.112 Notably, Lan’s article pre-
ceded the 2024 reorganization of the former Strategic Support Force that resulted in a new In-
formation Support Force, a core purpose of which is to upgrade PLA networks to become more 
“intelligent” and more resilient to adversary attacks.113
As discussed above, an attacker can attempt to limit escalation by controlling the timing 
and intensity of operations. Nevertheless, PLA writings emphasize military expediency—once 
war has begun, the PLA should operate on a timeline and with the tools that can most effec-
tively defeat intervention. Regarding the timing of operations, Roger Cliff and colleagues note 
that a PLA lesson from the Gulf War was the need to seize the initiative, which could require 
preemptive strikes. PLA observers faulted Iraq for adopting a passive approach that the U.S.-

23
Taming the Hegemon
led coalition exploited during Desert Storm.114 This theme continues in writings published de-
cades after the Gulf War. For instance, the 2009 Science of Joint Operations states that “taking 
the initiative through decisive action,” including preemptive strikes, is a principle of modern 
joint operations that should be mastered.115 The 2020 Science of Military Strategy argues that 
because “losing the advantages of the first opportunity, one’s own combat system may be de-
stroyed,” the PLA should “seize the first opportunity and win the initiative in the war.”116
Regarding the selection of tools, PLA sources focus on precision strikes consistent with 
the concept of “noncontact operations” but do not rule out the possibility that deadlier attacks 
might be necessary for the operation. The 2009 volume Science of Army Operations Under In-
formatized Conditions focuses on attacks on information systems, but “in situations where the 
strategy permits, [we should] even attack the enemy’s strategic depth and inflict heavy losses to 
maintain initiative in war.”117 Likewise, a 2012 China Military Science article proposes “annihi-
lating the enemy’s living forces,” which would “create a situation favorable for us.”118 As opposed 
to concluding that such actions would embolden adversary resolve, as Japan experienced after 
the Pearl Harbor attack, the authors assume that high-casualty attacks would “shake the enemy’s 
entire war system and trigger anti-war sentiment in the enemy’s country.”119 By contrast, none 
of the sources consulted for this study indicated a preference to rely solely on non-kinetic tools 
to control the risks of escalation.
Deterrence
The concept of “winning without fighting,” in the Western interpretation of the Art of War, 
is an alluring possibility for aggressors.120 This is no less true in PLA writings on counter-inter-
vention. In his Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, Zhang Peigao argues that attacks should 
continue against the main target “until they give up resistance,” while deterrence should be the 
“main focus” against third parties, so that they “do not dare to intervene rashly and [so that] the 
intensity of the military intervention of the powerful enemy can be reduced to the maximum 
extent.”121 PLA sources often discuss the logic and tools of this approach under the heading of 
“strategic deterrence” [战略威慑].122 In his Theory of Strategic Deterrence, PLA NDU scholar 
Zhang Yan explains that:
As a special form of military strategy, strategic deterrence is, after all, not war, 
although it similarly can have a certain impact on politics, economics, and society. 
However, its destructiveness is much less than actual combat, and not only can it 
leave greater room for political and diplomatic struggle, but it can also reduce the

24 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
excuses for outside forces to intervene. This is also the basic reason why as long as 
deterrence can achieve its goals, there will be no considerations about using the 
means of war.123
The authors of the 2020 Science of Military Strategy agree that deterrence is preferable to 
direct assault because of the possibility of limiting the scope of the conflict. Their argument rests 
on the premise that any actual intervention would “affect the course of the war and the long-
term development of the country” and should thus be avoided.124 In the chapter on “strategic 
deterrence,” the authors explain that this requires reaching out to potential interveners through 
“diplomatic channels” to “issue warnings to the other party as appropriate” and prevent the 
expansion or “internationalization” of the conflict.125 Rather than waiting until the opponent 
has already mobilized and deployed forces, the authors contend that the “best time to use deter-
rence” is when the other side is still weighing its options “but is not very sure yet and the final 
determination has not yet been made.”126 Deterrent actions at this stage of the conflict could 
“make it difficult for the other party to form a will to act . . . or if the will to act is formed, it will 
hesitate and not be able to put it into practice.”127
Based on this logic, Xi Jinping instructed the PLA to “build a strong system of strategic de-
terrence forces” [打造强大战略威慑力量体系] at the 20th Party Congress in October 2022.128 
Xi’s statement followed similar guidance from Jiang Zemin to build a “strategic deterrence sys-
tem” in 2002, but the connotation was somewhat different.129 Whereas Jiang framed his discus-
sion in terms of strategic nuclear modernization, Xi’s statement was not limited to that field. 
Rather, as in the similar Russian concept of “strategic deterrence,” he called for an improved 
set of strategic capabilities to counterbalance foreign opponents. In an analysis of Xi’s concept, 
PLA National University of Defense Technology professor Ge Tengfei writes in a party journal 
that the intent is to “resolutely oppose interference by external hegemonic forces in national 
sovereignty and security issues.”130 The system does this by “clearly telling external intervening 
forces that no one should underestimate the Chinese peoples’ strong determination, firm will, 
and strong ability to defend national sovereignty and territorial integrity.”131 Achieving this ob-
jective requires not only a nuclear deterrent but also modernization in other “fields of emerging 
strategic capabilities and disruptive technologies such as cyberspace and space.”132
Other PLA sources discuss several types of capabilities that can be used to achieve strategic 
deterrence in a crisis. First is nuclear signaling. The 2004 Science of Second Artillery Campaigns 
describes the rungs of a signaling ladder through which nuclear forces can be used to intimi-
date third parties, including raising alert statuses, conducting snap exercises or launches, and

25
Taming the Hegemon
even blurring or lowering the threshold for nuclear use—suggesting that China might not wait 
until it has been attacked with nuclear weapons to launch a nuclear attack as its no-first-use 
doctrine requires.133 A 2023 China Military Science article likewise argues that to “curb military 
intervention by countries outside the region in advance,” it can be useful for the offensive side 
to “conduct large-scale strategic nuclear force exercises before the conflict begins.”134 Offering 
a service-specific prescription, Dalian Naval Academy authors write that a sea-based deterrent 
should be developed to showcase “reliable, credible, and effective nuclear deterrence” against 
the “powerful enemy within and outside the first island chain.”135
Russia’s nuclear signaling during the war in Ukraine likely clarified PLA thinking on the 
utility of nuclear weapons in deterring intervention. Putin’s tactics were consistent with those 
recommended in the Science of Second Artillery Campaigns, which focused on creating a “psy-
chological shock” rather than on nuclear employment. Russia’s actions could therefore have 
reaffirmed existing PLA beliefs in these methods or functioned as a case study.136 One group 
of National University of Defense Technology scholars assesses that Russia’s use of hypersonic 
missiles in its strategic nuclear exercises “fully exerted” a “strategic deterrent effect.”137 An article 
from another scholar at the same institution suggested that Russia’s signaling campaign was 
effective in convincing the United States to confine its involvement to the level of a proxy war 
(what Zhang Peigao would classify in the “low” intervention category).138 Nevertheless, such 
discussions were likely downplayed because of Beijing’s disavowal of Russian nuclear threats as 
it sought to balance support for Moscow with other diplomatic goals.139
Second are displays of conventional forces. Given China’s large stockpiles of long-range 
missiles, it is unsurprising that several PLA sources discuss how these can be used in a deter-
rent campaign. The 2006 Science of Campaigns asserts that conventional missile launches can 
be staged not only to strike targets but also to “implement conventional deterrence against the 
enemy.”140 The Theory of Strategic Deterrence similarly suggests that “firing missiles carrying 
non-nuclear warheads towards relevant areas (or sea areas)” can achieve an intimidation ef-
fect.141 Though not specifically cited, an example would be China’s launching of ballistic missiles 
in waters near Taiwan during the 1995–1996 crisis to deter Taiwan independence. More recent-
ly, a 2023 China Military Science article highlights the ability of air-launched ballistic missiles 
and “other hypersonic weapons” to threaten “enemy ammunition depots and command posts” 
from standoff distances, which has a “significant deterrent effect.”142
Conventional deterrence can also include a maritime component. Zhang Peigao, for in-
stance, anticipates that the United States will mobilize naval forces to intimidate Beijing during a 
crisis and potentially to conduct blockade activities. After all, Washington deployed aircraft car-

26 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
riers in the 1995–1996 Taiwan Strait crisis. In the future, he suggests that the PLA should “orga-
nize submarines to approach the enemy’s large-scale ship formations secretly when necessary . . . 
so that the powerful enemy dares not intervene rashly.”143 Also writing from a naval perspective, 
Liang Fang contends that the PLA should build blue-water naval forces that can “react rapidly” 
to foreign naval blockades and therefore “force the enemy to abandon his intentions to threaten 
the security of China’s maritime strategic accesses.”144 More generally, Lieutenant General Ren 
Haiquan, former AMS president, wrote in a 2013 article that “joint long-range warfare” capabili-
ties are intended “not to strike the powerful enemy early and hard,” but to “strive to deter war and 
check-and-balance the powerful enemy.”145
Third is manipulation of the information environment. Most PLA discussions of “strategic 
deterrence” since the 2001 Science of Military Strategy include space and cyber weapons in the 
list of strategic capabilities.146 Fiona Cunningham argues that these “information age” weapons 
allowed Beijing to strengthen deterrence amid an imbalance of nuclear forces.147 Such informa-
tion tools can be useful not only in threatening economic or social consequences—for instance, 
crippling critical infrastructure through cyberattacks—but also in shaping the information en-
vironment. A 2018 China Military Science article argues that a propaganda war through the me-
dia can be useful in “disintegrating the enemy’s combat determination, destroying the people’s 
will to resist,” and “interfering with its determination to intervene.”148 The Theory of Strategic 
Deterrence suggests that “using media propaganda to issue statements and declarations, and 
issuing mobilization orders” can also undermine adversary resolve.149 A 2022 article in China 
Military Science argues that such declarations should be paired with “strong national defense 
mobilization,” which underscores China’s “determination” to carry out a long war and therefore 
has relevance to “achieving the strategic goal of deterring the powerful enemy.”150
The key question for leaders exercising a deterrent option is how much risk to take in imple-
menting deterrent actions. The German example from World War I discussed above illustrates 
the risks in overly aggressive signals. It is certainly the case that Chinese concepts of “deterrence” 
[威慑] have a connotation of what Western deterrence theory regards as “compellence”—using 
aggressive means to convince an opponent to abandon an action that they are already pursu-
ing.151 Risky actions such as conventional missile strikes designed not to destroy an adversary’s 
operational system, as in the direct assault option, but to threaten further consequences once an 
intervener has already begun to mobilize, would be consistent with this definition. Sinking an ad-
versary ship as a deterrent action designed to cause a foreign government to cease participation in 
a counter-blockade could also fit the concept. Such actions would parallel the purported Russian

27
Taming the Hegemon
military doctrine to “escalate-to-deescalate,” 
which could require crossing the threshold of 
lethal violence to establish credibility.152
However, Chinese analysts caution that 
in facing a “powerful enemy,” deterrent ac-
tions should be tailored to limit the risks of 
escalation. This point is sometimes made 
through historical analogy. PLA discussions 
frequently recall how Mao allegedly caused 
U.S. forces to retreat in the two Taiwan Strait 
crises of the 1950s without prompting a di-
rect U.S.-China conflict (see text box for 
detail).153 In the first crisis, which lasted from 
1954 to 1955, Mao employed a “brinkman-
ship” policy of shelling Kuomintang (KMT) 
ships and forces stationed on Dachen Island 
but without targeting U.S. ships from the Sev-
enth Fleet, which in the view of PLA histori-
ans “caused the U.S. escort ships to retreat to 
the high seas without firing a single shot.”154 
PLA sources also praise Mao for his decision 
not to interfere with the KMT’s evacuation 
from Dachen at the end of the crisis, since 
doing so would have precipitated a conflict 
between the PLA and U.S. escort ships and 
aircraft in the area.155
PLA scholars also praise Mao’s deter-
rent tactics during the second Taiwan Strait 
crisis from August to December 1958.156 
Mao’s dilemma was shelling KMT forces on 
Jinmen and Mazu with the presence of U.S. 
embedded military advisors and ships in the 
surrounding waters. He authorized the bom-
bardment under the condition that the PLA 
Historical Memory Versus 
Reality in the 1950s Taiwan 
Strait Crises
While PLA analysts praise Mao for de-
terrent actions that limited U.S. involvement 
in the two crises, they do not concede that 
Mao failed in securing his broader politi-
cal and strategic objectives. In the first crisis, 
Mao’s intent was to deter Chiang Kai-Shek and 
President Dwight Eisenhower from signing 
a formal defense treaty. However, PLA shell-
ing of Taiwan’s offshore islands prompted not 
only the treaty but also the Congressional 
Formosa Declaration, which authorized the 
use of force to defend the offshore islands if 
Taiwan or the Pescadores were threatened. In 
1958, Mao attempted to mobilize support for 
the Great Leap Forward and test U.S. resolve 
to defend the offshore islands. However, Mao 
was forced to suspend his punitive campaign 
after the Seventh Fleet assembled dozens of 
ships in the area. Mao then agreed to limit the 
shelling to alternate day attacks in predictable 
locations and rationalized his inability to seize 
the islands from the KMT. These performative 
attacks lasted for 20 years until the normaliza-
tion of U.S.-China relations in 1979.*
* Allen S. Whiting, “China’s Use of Force, 1950–96, 
and Taiwan,” International Security 26, no. 2 (2001), 
108–11; Thomas J. Christensen, Worse Than a Monolith: 
Alliance Politics and Problems of Coercive Diplomacy in 
Asia (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011).

28 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
not target U.S. forces and only after Marshal Peng Dehuai convinced him that U.S. forces would 
not become involved. Even if U.S. ships opened fire, he instructed that “you are not to fight 
back without orders.”157 Avoiding attacks on U.S. forces controlled escalation, but according to 
Chinese historians, the PLA’s artillery attacks nonetheless deterred U.S. support for KMT at-
tempts to resupply Jinmen since “unexpectedly, the American ships not only did not fire back, 
but abandoned [the KMT] ships and turned around to flee towards Taiwan.”158 Hence, “U.S. 
military intervention was eliminated to the maximum extent, thus achieving the expected stra-
tegic goal.”159 Mao later recalled the success of his brinkmanship campaign against Washington:
Last year, we learned of [Secretary of State John Foster] Dulles’s “brink of war 
policy,” and Dulles became our teacher. His “brink of war policy” was directed at 
us, and we also used the “brink of war policy” against them. The Kuomintang 
fought with us for decades, and we are still fighting the Kuomintang. The 
Kuomintang had no food to eat, and the United States gave them food. [Last 
year], U.S. warships were only three miles away from the islands within the range 
of our shells. They were on the brink of war, and so were we. We used the “brink of 
war” to counter the “brink of war,” but they didn’t dare to move forward and only 
went to the brink of war. We didn’t attack them, and they didn’t dare to move. 
They looked at us, and we looked at them, for more than two months.160
These examples reinforce the conclusion in PLA writings that deterrence without escala-
tion is not only possible but also historically precedented. On the modern battlefield, this strain 
of thinking suggests, the United States might once again refrain from fully supporting the de-
fense of Taiwan in the face of successful brinkmanship.
A deterrence campaign that comes to the “brink of war” might fail, which would neces-
sitate activation of the direct assault option. A key issue, which PLA analysts do not address, 
is that this decision to pivot would be made by the senior civilian leadership. They would have 
to conclude that deterrence has been ineffective and that the only remaining option to address 
U.S. intervention is to implement the direct assault. This decision would be made in high-stress 
conditions and likely with incomplete or contradictory information. It is at this moment that 
disagreements could form within the civilian leadership, or between senior civilians and their 
military advisors.161 PLA sources might assume a flawless transition from deterrence to war-
fighting, but delays prompted by such disagreements could provide time for the defenders to 
improve their own readiness.

29
Taming the Hegemon
Fait Accompli
PLA writings do not clearly articulate a fait accompli option but emphasize speed and 
deception.162 The 2006 Science of Campaigns argues that the attacker should maintain a “rapid 
operational tempo” so that “even if the enemy knows our operational intention, they are still 
unable to effectively respond.”163 It also states that “operational suddenness” is necessary if the 
PLA “fights with a high-tech and powerful enemy.”164 However, “suddenness” does not equate 
to confidence in a fait accompli since the authors assume that rapid movements would be part 
of a direct attack that would include “firepower damage and force-strength assault.”165 A clearer 
vision of a fait accompli comes in a 2025 Military Arts article on PLA Marine Corps moderniza-
tion that encourages forces to “quickly control the target area” and make foreign forces “too late 
to intervene” [来不及介入].166 But it is more likely that the authors were envisioning operations 
such as the seizure of a small reef in the South China Sea given the main focus of the Marines 
on those missions and not a larger campaign across the Taiwan Strait.167
These discussions also highlight the role of deception in seizing the initiative. PLA scholars 
have long been interested in the use of deception tactics to create advantages against stronger 
enemies. The 2001 volume Military Deception Under High-Tech Conditions considers examples 
of successful deception from historical operations, including German issuance of “false intel-
ligence” during Operation Barbarossa in 1941, Japan’s feigned diplomatic negotiations with the 
United States before Pearl Harbor, and the fake units established by the U.S. military to deceive 
German defenders prior to the Normandy landings.168 Perhaps most relevant to a future Tai-
wan campaign are PLA lessons from Britain’s successful operations to reassert control over the 
Falklands in April 1982.169 PLA analysts note how the British foreign secretary made a statement 
understating the size and intent of the operation, as well as a feint led by two aircraft carriers 
that drew Argentine attention away from the actual landing zone.170
The PLA’s interest in deception continues in more recent sources. The Science of Campaigns 
references “concealment, camouflage, and deception” alongside “information operations” such 
as “jamming, confusion, and deception against the enemy” and the use of “computer viruses 
to harass the enemy’s command and control system.”171 A 2022 China Military Science article 
similarly argues that “winning by surprise” in the future requires use of “various stealth tech-
nologies” as well as “deceptive psychological warfare . . . so that new combat forces can attack 
the enemy at an unexpected time and place, and achieve combat surprise.”172 As with the Science 
of Campaigns, however, the authors do not presuppose that such tactics are used in a fait ac-
compli. Instead, the utility of surprise is to facilitate “covert assaults on enemy key targets, seize

30 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
the initiative in battle, and ultimately achieve the purpose of the war.”173 This is consistent with 
the expectation of a direct assault on the intervener. 
While speed and deception are interpreted as keys to success, there are two reasons why 
these factors do not translate into greater interest in a fait accompli option. The first is that PLA 
observers might doubt their ability to conceal preparations for a landing campaign or other use 
of force. Modern battlefields are more transparent than the historical examples PLA authors 
have studied, providing defenders with stronger means of detecting large movements of troops 
and equipment, and differentiating between exercises and mobilization. As former National 
Intelligence Officer for East Asia John Culver argues, any Chinese offensive would “almost cer-
tainly not be subtle, at least to the U.S. intelligence community and probably not to Taiwan and 
other Western observers.”174 Second is that even if warning times were reduced, the United 
States could rely on forward-based drones (that is, Hellscape), long-range bombers, and other 
capabilities to create risks for a PLA offensive. Hence, while seizing the initiative is a criterion 
for success, PLA observers likely conclude that a direct assault would still be necessary.
Strategic Buffer
PLA sources also pay less attention to creating strategic buffers to limit adversary freedom 
of action. Most articles in the broader Chinese literature that address this option are from ci-
vilian scholars affiliated with the diplomatic apparatus. These writings seek to identify fissures 
between the United States and host nations to consider how those differences can be exploited 
to weaken a U.S.-led coalition. For instance, a 2024 article from a civilian scholar assesses that 
“transactional countries,” including the Philippines, allow use of their bases “mainly for mate-
rial interests,” and are also prone to “domestic nationalist sentiments” that make the “risks of 
using military bases . . . relatively high.”175 Another article similarly notes that host countries can 
“impose restrictions on overflight rights” and “specific types of combat operations.”176 Access 
will be determined by “the degree of threat perceptions and interest overlap, the host coun-
try’s domestic public’s view of the conflict, and the perception of the possible retaliation of U.S. 
competitors.”177 Still another article describes Japan’s support as ambivalent because China has 
defined Taiwan as a “core interest,” and any interference could lead to “unpredictable and seri-
ous consequences” in Tokyo’s relations with Beijing.178 
These authors also argue that China should drive wedges between the United States and 
allies and partners whose territory it depends on for access, basing, and overflight. One ar-
ticle states that Beijing should “make plans to differentiate U.S. allies in emergencies such as 
crises and combat operations, and how to influence the stability of the political access of the

31
Taming the Hegemon
host countries of their bases to the U.S.”179 Another author encourages China to “take advan-
tage of the asymmetrical relationships and conflict of interest between the United States and 
its allies.”180 This author concludes that states “sometimes prefer to ally with potential threats 
in geostrategic relationships rather than natural allies.”181 Such comments are consistent with a 
broader Chinese literature that probes contradictory interests in U.S. alliance relationships, and 
China’s own use of economic statecraft, as means that can be used to weaken U.S. influence in 
the Indo-Pacific.182
Of note, there is interest in the PLA literature on topics related to overseas basing that 
could have relevance to the strategic buffer option. A 2022 China Military Science article, for 
instance, discusses the legal principles under which states utilize foreign bases, which notes that 
if a tenant uses its overseas bases “privately or jointly” with the host nation to “carry out interna-
tionally unlawful acts that infringe on the rights and interests of a third country,” the host nation 
carries responsibility.183 This principle could justify deterrent threats against host nations not to 
allow U.S. forces access in a Taiwan contingency or direct retaliation. But this is not the author’s 
main purpose. Instead, the article fits into a genre of articles that is driven by China’s own inter-
est in overseas bases; it does not explain what the PLA should do to counter U.S. basing.184
As with the fait accompli option, the lack of PLA attention to a strategic buffer approach 
indicates that this is not a preferred approach to countering U.S. intervention. One limitation is 
that, unlike Soviet policy at the beginning of the Cold War, Beijing cannot expect that several 
key countries near Taiwan will not host U.S. forces. China is already surrounded by countries 
who are longstanding U.S. allies that provide either permanent or rotational basing for U.S. 
forces and must assume that those forces could be employed in a conflict. In addition, even if 
some (or all) host nations refuse to provide access, basing, and overflight, the PLA would still be 
vulnerable to the U.S. naval and long-range air force capabilities that are central to concepts of 
force employment that descend from the Air-Sea Battle construct. Hence, while diplomats seek 
to exploit differences between Washington and its allies, the PLA cannot rely on this approach 
to promote the success of its future operations. 
In sum, PLA thinking on counter-intervention emphasizes the two direct options: direct 
assault and deterrence. This is logical because these are the two most decisive options. Either 
Washington can be deterred from acting through powerful “strategic deterrence” forces, or, if 
deterrence is not on the table, the PLA can conduct “noncontact operations” to delay or defeat 
intervention once it is underway. Indeed, suggesting that both options must be pursued in tan-
dem, an authoritative Central Military Commission study outline references both warfighting 
and deterrence against the “powerful enemy” in its guidance on force development:

32 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
To strengthen the construction of the weapons and equipment system, we must 
insist on key breakthroughs and work hard to fill the gaps in the system and make 
up for the shortcomings and weaknesses. In particular, we must work hard to deter 
and check [威慑制衡] the powerful enemy. Deterrence means having the ability 
to deter them so that they dare not take action; checks-and-balances mean that “I 
will not lose to you” in a local war, just like the War to Resist U.S. Aggression and 
Aid Korea [that is, the Korean War].185
Neither the fait accompli nor the strategic buffer option can ensure that U.S. forces will 
not be able to respond in time and at a scale that will influence the course of the war. Efforts 
will continue improving the PLA’s ability to use speed and deception to its advantage, and to 
convince host nations not to provide access in wartime, but the ultimate guarantee of success 
can only be provided through direct confrontation.
Implications and Conclusion
The PLA continues to anticipate that U.S. forces will intervene in a Taiwan contingen-
cy. This intervention could range from low-level activities such as providing intelligence sup-
port, to assisting in countering a Chinese blockade or imposing a distant blockade on Chinese 
shipping, to striking PLA targets on the mainland. PLA analysts have thus encouraged careful 
counter-intervention planning for decades. Historical cases suggest that there are four basic op-
tions available to Beijing: direct assault, deterrence, fait accompli, and strategic buffer. The PLA 
literature focuses mostly on the first two options, which involve direct confrontation with the 
United States but operate through different mechanisms: a direct assault involves an early and 
decisive “knockout punch,” while deterrence attempts to persuade Washington not to intervene 
while limiting the risks of escalation. There is less evidence that the other two options are central 
to the PLA’s thinking on countering U.S. intervention given their limitations.
The analysis suggests that the existing literature that focuses almost exclusively on PLA 
hardware is not wrong but offers too narrow of a view of the choices—and dilemmas—that Bei-
jing must consider when building its campaign plan and implementing it in a crisis. Capabili-
ties such as anti-ship ballistic missiles, hypersonic glide vehicles, and strategic bombers can be 
used to implement asymmetric operations, which is fully consistent with the tactics that Roger 
Cliff and colleagues anticipated in their 2007 report. But those tools can also compose the con-
ventional leg of a “strategic deterrence” campaign, alongside nuclear and informational (cyber, 
space, and cognitive warfare) tools. Analysts and wargame designers should think of China’s

33
Taming the Hegemon
options as part of a cohesive plan, like a boxer’s “one-two punch,” to deter, but failing that, to 
defeat. Red teams might consider the views on escalation that are built into these choices. In 
deterrence, the PLA might approach the threshold of violence but hold back. Yet in scenarios 
premised on a direct assault (the proverbial second punch), red teams would be well advised to 
suggest high-intensity and even preemptive moves to secure victory.
These findings imply several implications and recommendations for U.S. policy. First, a 
deeply ingrained PLA belief that Washington will intervene means that a change in declaratory 
policy will not have much deterrent effect vis-à-vis the PLA. Arguments that the United States 
should pursue “strategic clarity” to strengthen deterrence against China are weakened because 
the PLA already assumes and is preparing for U.S. intervention.186 A change in policy could be 
treated in Beijing as a political provocation that it must respond to, which would increase risks 
to Taiwan without providing a material benefit for the island’s security.187 Similarly, occasional 
statements by U.S. presidents that Washington would certainly intervene have little deterrent 
effect, but these are less consequential because they can be framed as gaffes, which means that 
Beijing has less imperative to respond to underscore its resolve.188
Second, policymakers should not assume that PLA judgments on the likelihood of U.S. 
intervention will always be shared by civilian Chinese leaders. The PLA’s assessment that Wash-
ington will intervene contributes more to deterrence than a view that the United States is a 
“paper tiger” that will never intervene, even if it means that they must develop counters. Xi Jin-
ping appears to share this judgment, since authoritative Chinese Communist Party documents 
require the PLA to be able to “deter and check” the United States. However, there is another 
scenario in which either Xi or his successor reaches a different conclusion. By historical analogy, 
policymakers should remember that a reason for Hitler’s willingness to invade Poland in Sep-
tember 1939 was his insistence that England and France lacked the willpower and capabilities to 
intervene. At a conference at his Berghof mountain retreat two weeks before the invasion, Hitler 
commented to his generals that England’s situation in the world was “very precarious,” while 
France lacked manpower and artillery. He concluded: “Our enemies are little worms. I saw them 
in Munich.”189 Hitler’s generals remained privately skeptical, and some even pursued a failed 
coup against him, but the leader’s judgment outweighed his military advisors.190 
It is possible that Xi could embrace similarly unrealistic thinking despite the PLA’s insis-
tence that the U.S. threat must be taken seriously. Like Hitler, Xi has consolidated power such 
that his personal assessment on the risks and rewards of war outweighs all others.191 Frequent 
purges make it unlikely that a senior general would strongly push back once Xi indicates his 
belief.192 The lack of checks and balances in the Chinese system therefore makes it necessary to

34 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
better understand his perspectives on the likelihood and possible results of U.S. intervention. Xi 
could doubt intervention due to an embrace of the narrative of an “American decline,” overes-
timation of the PLA’s capabilities or resolve relative to the United States,193 and the idea that he 
might have an opportunity to achieve victory to cement his legacy.194 It is also possible that his 
successor could have views that are out of sync with the PLA. In these circumstances, the PLA 
might not be able to convince the top leader otherwise. While these are unlikely possibilities, 
U.S. leaders should continue to deliver deterrent messages to senior Chinese civilian leaders and 
not rely solely on exercises and demonstrations focused on the PLA itself. 
Third, U.S. policy should emphasize crisis stability talks with China. Washington should 
anticipate that Beijing’s initial approach in a crisis will be to implement “strategic deterrence.” 
Indeed, some Chinese military activities such as aggressive maritime and air activities against 
U.S. and allied forces in Asia are already part of a general deterrent campaign. While PLA au-
thors suggest a brinkmanship policy that limits the escalatory risks by nearing the threshold of 
lethal force without crossing it, there are still inherent risks. For instance, intimidation tactics 
used against U.S. air and naval forces in the region raise the probability of accidents, and crisis 
signaling in the nuclear, space, or cyber domains that could prompt unintentional escalation if 
the target misreads China’s intentions. This could lead to a much larger war than China intends. 
Since Beijing has an interest in avoiding those results, it could agree to peacetime discussions 
on how to prevent and manage crises, especially in areas with potential strategic consequences 
such as in the nuclear arena. In recent years, such talks have already been pursued at a low level 
between the two defense establishments but could be upgraded to more senior levels.195 An-
other option is crisis simulations held between governmental subject matter experts to clarify 
the risks and discuss possible off-ramps. 
Fourth, the best U.S. response to Chinese deterrent threats during a crisis is to maintain 
ambiguity about its intentions for as long as possible. The assumption is that Beijing has already 
made a strategic decision to use force and will not back down due to international pressure. 
How to respond to Chinese messaging is thus a pivotal question. Yielding to the threats is tan-
tamount to capitulation: Taiwan would be isolated and face a quick defeat. However, rejecting 
Chinese threats also carries with it a risk. In the logic of the “one-two punch,” if the first punch 
is ineffective, the attacker will quickly pivot to the second punch. It is imperative that Beijing 
not conclude that its deterrent has failed because it will move quickly to a direct assault to seize 
the initiative. An ambiguous U.S. response would encourage Beijing to believe that “winning 
without fighting” is still possible, while providing a critical opportunity to coordinate with Tai-
wan and allies and partners. Wherever possible, the United States could also take advantage of

35
Taming the Hegemon
this window to increase its own readiness and reposition forces into a warfighting posture (for 
example, maximum dispersal of forces). However, those moves should be conducted as subtly 
as possible, since once Beijing discovers the ruse, it will pivot to the second punch. 
Fifth, the most effective way to deter and defeat a direct PLA assault is to reduce the vul-
nerabilities of the key targets that the PLA believes it can threaten while exploiting asymme-
tries in the PLA’s own operational systems. The United States, in other words, must also master 
“system destruction warfare.” Reducing vulnerability implies efforts that are already underway 
in areas such as logistics resiliency, air base hardening, dispersal of forces to many locations in 
and outside the first island chain, avoiding overreliance on satellites (for example, by shifting 
to a greater emphasis on proliferated low Earth orbit constellations or other communications 
modes), and improving C4ISR redundancy.196 Moreover, the PLA has its own asymmetric dis-
advantages that can be exploited, the most important of which is its need to concentrate troops 
and equipment in the confines of the Taiwan Strait where air and maritime superiority cannot 
be guaranteed.197 Strengthening both close-in and long-range strike forces that can destroy in-
vasion forces at their mustering locations, in transit, and on vulnerable beachheads is therefore 
essential. U.S. strategy can also leverage other PLA asymmetries, such as rigid command and 
control practices that slow down decisionmaking.198 Some capabilities designed to achieve these 
effects can be revealed in peacetime to promote deterrence, while most should be reserved for 
wartime use to create dilemmas that the PLA would have difficulty countering. 
There are also possibilities to misdirect PLA investments and force allocations into tar-
gets that are less critical to U.S. operational success.199 For instance, PLA authors continue to 
describe aircraft carriers as a key target in the generation of combat sorties in a regional con-
tingency. In a crisis, Washington could choose to keep aircraft carriers and other large surface 
combatants at standoff distances and project power through harder-to-detect submarines, long-
range bombers, and dispersed close-in forces operating from austere locations. However, if the 
PLA continues to assess that aircraft carriers are a key link in the U.S. operational chain, then 
it will invest resources to build counters and dedicate targeting and strike assets to hold them 
at risk—which would reduce its ability to focus on more essential U.S. capabilities. Demonstra-
tions or exercises that highlight misleading capabilities could be useful for this effect. 
Sixth, lack of PLA interest in a fait accompli is not a reason for complacency. Limited at-
tention to the option in the PLA literature probably reflects a judgment that completing a rapid 
invasion of Taiwan before U.S. forces can arrive would be too difficult to implement. This as-
sessment could change if the PLA gains confidence in its ability to move quickly and mask its 
invasion forces under a plausible cover such as an exercise. Dissuading this thinking relies on

36 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
demonstrating U.S. capabilities that can be activated despite reduced warning to slow an initial 
invasion, buying time for other forces to flow into the theater. It can also be emphasized in mes-
saging that aggressors have often faced difficulties in conducting such operations—China can 
be reminded not only of Putin’s failure to mask his invasion as an exercise in February 2022, but 
also of Kim Il Sung’s conviction that South Korea would be overrun in three days. Kim’s folly 
proved that Stalin’s trust was misplaced, triggered U.S. intervention, and drew China into the 
conflict, with a disastrous result for all involved. 
Finally, U.S. policymakers should regard contestation for access, basing, and overflight 
as part of the backdrop of strategic competition in Asia and not as a core feature of China’s 
approach to counter-intervention. There is little question that Beijing will use all tools at its 
disposal, including economic statecraft and military tactics, to persuade Japan, the Philippines, 
the Republic of Korea, and Australia not to allow U.S. forces access. Some (or all) of those efforts 
may be successful even if Washington attempts to convince its allies otherwise.200 It is therefore 
advisable to continue to diversify basing and access arrangements and to develop long-range 
capabilities that do not depend on access to foreign territory. But this is not the main battlefield 
on which the PLA intends to compete. Recognizing that U.S. allies might still grant access, and 
that some U.S. forces can operate from U.S. territory or through the global commons, the PLA 
has focused on deterrent and direct assault options—these are the options that demand the 
greatest attention when considering how best to employ U.S. forces in a contested environment.
In sum, the PLA fully expects the United States to intervene in a Taiwan conflict and has 
been thinking through its options for 30 years. Deterrence requires that the PLA, and China’s 
leaders, continue to worry about the possibility and effectiveness of U.S. intervention, and that 
they lose hope in the most plausible counters. This requires steps not only to defeat PLA hard-
ware but also to shape perceptions that, if left unchecked, could promote the same optimism in 
a quick victory that tempted their predecessors into foolish decisions.

37
Taming the Hegemon
Notes
1 On the balance of forces, see Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2024: Annual Report to Congress (Washington, DC: Office of the Secretary of 
Defense, 2024), 164–66, https://media.defense.gov/2024/dec/18/2003615520/-1/-1/0/military-and-
security-developments-involving-the-peoples-republic-of-china-2024.pdf.
2 Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2024, 84.
3 China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win (Washington, DC: Defense 
Intelligence Agency, 2019), 65, https://www.dia.mil/Portals/110/Images/News/Military_Powers_Pub-
lications/China_Military_Power.pdf; 2024 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission (Washington, DC: U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis-
sion, November 2024), 553–54, https://www.uscc.gov/annual-report/2024-annual-report-congress; J. 
Michael Dahm, China C4ISR and Counter-Intervention, Testimony Before the U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the U.S. and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners, March 21, 2024, https://www.uscc.
gov/sites/default/files/2024-03/J.Michael_Dahm_Testimony.pdf; Thomas H. Shugart, Deterring the 
Powerful Enemy: China’s Counter-Intervention Capability in a Regional Conflict, Testimony Before 
the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Capabilities and Con-
cepts for “Counter-Intervention,” March 21, 2024, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2024-03/
Thomas_Shugart_Testimony.pdf; Stephen Biddle and Ivan Oelrich, “Future Warfare in the Western 
Pacific: Chinese Anti-access/Area Denial, U.S. AirSea Battle, and Command of the Commons in East 
Asia,” International Security 41, no. 1 (2016), 7–48, https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00249; Nicholas 
D. Anderson and Daryl G. Press, “Access Denied? The Sino-American Contest for Military Primacy in 
Asia,” International Security 50, no. 1 (2025), https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC.a.7; Andrew S. Erickson, 
“China’s Evolving Anti-Access Approach: ‘Where’s the Nearest (U.S.) Carrier?’” China Brief 10, no. 
18 (2010), 5–8, https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-evolving-anti-access-approach-wheres-the-
nearest-u-s-carrier/.
4 See, for example, Mark F. Cancian et al., The First Battle of the Next War: Wargaming a 
Chinese Invasion of Taiwan (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies [CSIS], 
2023), https://www.csis.org/analysis/first-battle-next-war-wargaming-chinese-invasion-taiwan; Chris 
Dougherty, Buying Time: Logistics for a New American Way of War (Washington, DC: Center for a 
New American Security, 2023), https://www.cnas.org/press/press-release/buying-time-logistics-for-a-
new-american-way-of-war.
5 M. Taylor Fravel and Christopher P. Twomey, “Projecting Strategy: The Myth of Chinese 
Counter-intervention,” The Washington Quarterly 37, no. 4 (2014), 171–87, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
0163660X.2014.1002164. See also Christopher P. Twomey, “What’s in a Name? Building Anti-Access/
Area Denial Capabilities Without Anti-Access/Area Denial Doctrine,” in Assessing the People’s Lib-
eration Army in the Hu Jintao Era, ed. Roy Kamphausen et al. (Carlisle Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War 
College Press, 2014), 153.
6 Timothy Heath and Andrew S. Erickson, “Is China Pursuing Counter-Intervention?” The 
Washington Quarterly 38, no. 3 (2015), 143–56, https://doi.org/10.1080/0163660X.2015.1099029.

38 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
7 Ryan D. Martinson, “Counter-Intervention in Chinese Naval Strategy,” Journal of Strategic 
Studies 44, no. 2 (2021), 265–87, https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2020.1740092.
8 Brandon J. Babin, “Xi Jinping’s Strangelove: The Need for a Deterrence-Based Offset Strat-
egy,” in Modernizing Deterrence: How China Coerces, Compels, and Deters, ed. Roy D. Kamphausen 
(Washington, DC: National Bureau of Asian Research, 2023), 67–99, https://www.nbr.org/publication/
xi-jinpings-strangelove-the-need-for-a-deterrence-based-offset-strategy/.
9 Roger Cliff et al., Entering the Dragon’s Lair: Chinese Antiaccess Strategies and Their 
Implications for the United States (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2007), https://www.rand.org/pubs/
monographs/MG524.html.
10 “Remarks by Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth at the 2024 Shangri-La Dialogue in 
Singapore (as Delivered),” Department of Defense, May 31, 2025, https://www.defense.gov/News/
Speeches/Speech/article/4202494/remarks-by-secretary-of-defense-pete-hegseth-at-the-2025-shangri-
la-dialogue-in/.
11 For a brief overview, see Joel Wuthnow, “How China Could Counter U.S. Intervention in 
War Over Taiwan,” War on the Rocks, May 27, 2025, https://warontherocks.com/2025/05/how-china-
could-counter-u-s-intervention-in-war-over-taiwan/.
12 Andrew Chubb, “Propaganda, Not Policy: Explaining the PLA’s ‘Hawkish Faction’ (Part 
One),” China Brief 13, no. 15 (2013), https://jamestown.org/program/propaganda-not-policy-explain-
ing-the-plas-hawkish-faction-part-one/.
13 Most PLA sources use 干预 to describe external military intervention by an adversary in 
wartime; some also use 介入 (which is the basis of the Chinese translation of the U.S. doctrinal phrase 
“antiaccess,” as 反介入). 干涉 usually refers to broader interference or meddling in another country’s 
internal affairs, though confusingly干预 is sometimes also used in this context. The preference for 干
预 or 介入is at odds with the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) dictionary, which does not have an 
entry for these terms or for the U.S. phrase antiaccess/area-denial (A2/AD). Instead, it defines military 
intervention [军事干涉 or 武装干涉] as “the act of a country or international organization using armed 
force to forcibly intervene in the internal affairs of a country.” See PLA Military Terminology [中国人
民解放军军语] (Beijing: Military Sciences Press, 2011), 7.
14 Alan D. Romberg, Rein In at the Brink of the Precipice: American Policy Toward Taiwan 
and U.S.-PRC Relations (Washington, DC: Henry L. Stimson Center, 2003), 105–93, https://www.
stimson.org/wp-content/files/file-attachments/Complete%20Rein%20In%203rd%20Ed.pdf.
15 On Taiwan leader visits, see Susan V. Lawrence, Taiwan Presidents’ U.S. Transit Visits, 
IF12371 (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, January 3, 2025), https://www.congress.
gov/crs-product/IF12371.
16 Jiang Zemin, “Continue to Promote the ‘Reunification’ of the Motherland,” Xinhua, January 
30, 1995, trans. CSIS, https://interpret.csis.org/translations/continue-to-promote-the-reunification-of-
the-motherland/.
17 Rhetoric under Hu was similar. The 2010 defense white paper, for instance, stated that the 
United States, “in defiance of the three Sino-U.S. joint communiques, continues to sell weapons to 
Taiwan, severely impeding Sino-U.S. relations and impairing the peaceful development of cross-Strait 
relations.” See China’s National Defense in 2020, Xinhua, June 23, 2010, http://eng.mod.gov.cn/xb/
Publications/WhitePapers/4887922.html.

39
Taming the Hegemon
18 “Full Text of the 20th Party Congress Report” [二十大报告全文], Xinhua, October 25, 
2022, https://www.gov.cn/zhuanti/zggcddescqgdbdh/sybgqw.htm.
19 Liu Junchuan, ed., The Chinese Communist Party’s National Reunification [中国共产党祖
国统一] (Beijing: Jiuzhou Press, 2022), 342.
20 Xiao Yang, “In the New Era, We Will Continue to Improve the Institutional System to Op-
pose External Interference” [新时代持续完善反对外部势力干涉的制度体系], Cross-Taiwan Strait 
Studies [台海研究], no. 1 (2023), 73–4.
21 Xiao, “In the New Era, We Will Continue to Improve the Institutional System to Oppose 
External Interference.”
22 Strategic ambiguity is a result of the Taiwan Relations Act not specifying whether the 
United States would militarily intervene, despite its pledges to provide arms of a “defensive character.” 
Every U.S. administration since 1979 has reaffirmed support for the act.
23 Kristen Gunness and Phillip C. Saunders, Averting Escalation and Avoiding War: Lessons 
from the 1995–1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis, China Strategic Perspectives 17 (Washington, DC: NDU 
Press, 2022), https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Media/News/Article/3253814/averting-escalation-and-avoid-
ing-war-lessons-from-the-19951996-taiwan-strait-cr/; Robert S. Ross, “The 1995–96 Taiwan Strait 
Confrontation: Coercion, Credibility, and the Use of Force,” International Security 25, no. 2 (2000), 
87–123, https://www.jstor.org/stable/2626754.
24 David M. Finkelstein, China Reconsiders Its National Security: “The Great Peace and 
Development Debate of 1999” (Arlington, VA: CNA, 2000), 30–1, https://www.cna.org/reports/2000/
PeaceAndDevelopment.pdf; M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy Since 1949 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2019), 224.
25 Finkelstein, China Reconsiders Its National Security.
26 See, for example, Rush Doshi, The Long Game: China’s Grand Strategy to Replace Ameri-
can Order (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2021), 161–76; Michael D. Swaine, “Chinese Views 
of U.S. Decline,” China Leadership Monitor 69 (Fall 2021), 1–21, https://www.prcleader.org/post/
chinese-views-of-u-s-decline; Jude Blanchette and Seth G. Jones, “Beijing’s New Narrative of U.S. 
Decline,” CSIS Interpret: China Project, July 2021, https://opensource.csis.org/features/beijing-narra-
tive-us-decline/.
27 Qi Jianguo, “Understanding and Thinking About Great Changes Unseen in a Century” [对
百年未有之大变局的认识与思考], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 3 (2021), 91.
28 To be sure, PLA usage of 强敌 is not limited to the United States after the Cold War. This is 
a generic term that refers to any strong opponent and differentiates them from weaker opponents, or 弱
敌; Japan, for instance, was a 强敌 during World War II. Identification of the specific 强敌is usually 
through context.
29 Academy of Military Sciences Strategic Research Department, Science of Military Strategy 
[战略学] (Beijing: Military Sciences Press, 2001), 416.
30 Science of Military Strategy, 455. Brackets inserted.
31 Cui Yafeng, ed., Science of Army Operations [陆军作战学] (Beijing: PLA Press, 2009), 
104.

40 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
32 Academy of Military Sciences Military Strategy Studies Department, Science of Military 
Strategy, trans. China Aerospace Studies Institute (Beijing: Military Sciences Press, 2013), 124 (101 in 
the original).
33 Xiao Tianliang, ed., Science of Military Strategy [战略学] (Beijing: National Defense Uni-
versity Press, 2020), 45.
34 Yu Qingjiang, “Implementing Chairman Xi’s Important Instructions and Striving to Build a 
Strong, Modern Airborne Corps” [贯彻习主席重要指示努力建设一支强大的现代化空降兵部队], 
Military Arts [军事学术], no. 1 (2025), 1.
35 Dai Mingxiang and Yin Yanmei, “Accelerate the Transformation and Improvement of the 
Quality and Efficiency of the Army’s Logistics Readiness” [加快提高陆军后勤备战转型质效], Mili-
tary Arts [军事学术], no. 1 (2025), 49.
36 Chinese sources are conflicted on this point. See Swaine, “Chinese Views of U.S. Decline,” 
17–8.
37 Zhang Peigao, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command [联合战役指挥教程] (Beijing: 
Military Sciences Press, 2012), 213–4. Similarly, a 2000 Modern Navy article blasted U.S. arms sales 
and other displays of support as forms of “military deterrence” to “intimidate our army and attempt to 
prevent the realization of the great cause of reunification of the motherland.” See Sun Lihua and Tao 
Guang, “A Predictive Analysis of Patterns of U.S. Intervention in the Taiwan Issue” [美国干预台湾问
题样式预测分析], Modern Navy [当代海军], no. 4 (2000).
38 Xu Hengbing and Xu Di, “On New-Quality Productivity and New-Quality Combat Effec-
tiveness” [论新质生产力和新质战斗力], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 6 (2024), 62.
39 Xu and Xu, “On New-Quality Productivity and New-Quality Combat Effectiveness.”
40 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, 213–4.
41 Sun and Tao, “A Predictive Analysis of Patterns of U.S. Intervention in the Taiwan Issue.”
42 Liang Fiang, On Maritime Strategic Access [海上战略通道论], trans. China Aerospace 
Studies Institute (Beijing: Current Affairs Press, 2011), 278.
43 Liang’s analysis predicted a strategy of “offshore control” proposed in 2012 by U.S. scholar 
T.X. Hammes, which would target China’s overseas trade rather than conducting mainland strikes. See 
T.X. Hammes, Offshore Control: A Proposed Strategy for an Unlikely Conflict, INSS Strategic Forum 
278 (Washington, DC: NDU Press, June 2012), https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/stratfo-
rum/SF-278.pdf.
44 For a discussion, see John Speed Myers, Mainland Strikes and U.S. Military Strategy 
Towards China (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2019), https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/
RGSD430.html.
45 Jan van Tol et al., AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure Operational Concept (Washington, 
DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2010), https://csbaonline.org/research/publica-
tions/airsea-battle-concept.
46 Sun and Tao, “A Predictive Analysis of Patterns of U.S. Intervention in the Taiwan Issue.”
47 Zhang Yuliang, ed., Science of Campaigns [战役学] (Beijing: Military Sciences Press, 
2006), 332.
48 Zhang, ed., Science of Campaigns.

41
Taming the Hegemon
49 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, 214–5.
50 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command.
51 Zhang Ming, “Reflections on Several Strategic Issues in the New Situation” [对新形势下几
个战略问题的思考], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 2 (2014), 19.
52 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, 217–8.
53 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command.
54 Science of Military Strategy (2013), 100.
55 Chen Qiyin, “Advancing the Modernization of Military Theories in the New Era” [推进新
时代军事理论现代化], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 6 (2018), 107. The PLA does not 
have a specific word for doctrine in the Western sense, but the same idea is relevant in military theories 
[军事理论].
56 Cheng Jinming et al., “Vigorously Promote Warfare Innovation for the New Era” [大力推进
新时代战法创新], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 3 (2024), 127–8.
57 Cheng, Li, and Du, “Vigorously Promote Warfare Innovation for the New Era.”
58 Chen Hui, “Focus on Balancing Powerful Enemies and Opponents, Adapt to the Transfor-
mation and Development of the Air Force, and Continuously Improve the Actual Combat Training 
Level of the Troops” [聚焦制衡强敌对手顺应空军转型发展持续提升部队实战化训练水平], Mili-
tary Arts [军事学术], no. 1 (2022), 12.
59 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, 212–3, 217–8.
60 Chai Yuqiu and Xu Guocheng, Science of Army Operations Under Informatized Conditions 
[信息化条件下陆军作战学] (Beijing: Military Sciences Press, 2009), 358. Notably, the “antiair raid” 
campaign would be integrated in either a joint blockade campaign or a joint island landing campaign. 
See Michael Casey, “Firepower Strike, Blockade, Landing: PLA Campaigns for a Cross-Strait Con-
flict,” in Crossing the Strait: China’s Military Prepares for War With Taiwan, ed. Joel Wuthnow et al. 
(Washington, DC: NDU Press, 2022), 132, https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/Books/
crossing-the-strait/crossing-the-strait.pdf.
61 Casey, “Firepower Strike, Blockade, Landing,” in Wuthnow et al., ed. Crossing the Strait.
62 Joel Wuthnow, China’s Other Army: The People’s Armed Police in an Era of Reform, China 
Strategic Perspectives 14 (Washington, DC: NDU Press, 2019), 22, https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Por-
tals/82/China%20SP%2014%20Final%20for%20Web.pdf.
63 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, 215–6.
64 Xu and Xu, “On New-Quality Productivity and New-Quality Combat Effectiveness,” 62.
65 Specifically, the idea is that the main target should bear the brunt of the assault while deter-
rence can be attempted to sideline the intervener. See discussion below for details.
66 A “self-defensive counter-attack” [自卫还击作战] is how Beijing described its 1979 war 
with Vietnam, claiming that Hanoi had initiated the conflict by attacking Cambodia 2 months earlier. 
Presumably, in a future war with Taiwan, Beijing will frame its actions as defensive regardless of how 
the war begins, but it might gain higher foreign legitimacy if the intervener fires the first shot.
67 Bruce M. Russett, “Deterrence Theory and Decision Theory,” Journal of Peace Research 4, 
no. 2 (1967), 94–9, https://doi.org/10.1177/002234336700400201.

42 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
68 Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision (Stanford: Stanford University 
Press, 1962), 354.
69 Even the destruction of U.S. aircraft carriers in Pearl Harbor probably would not have 
changed the outcome of the war. Of the three U.S. carriers that participated in the pivotal battle of 
Midway in June 1942, only one (USS Enterprise) had been homeported in Pearl Harbor the previous 
December. Moreover, even if all carriers had been destroyed, the fundamental imbalance in U.S. vs. 
Japanese war capacity would have remained. Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto doubted that a war could be 
won in the short term and warned about Japanese defeat over the longer-term months before the sur-
prise attack. See Jeffrey Record, Japan’s Decision for War in 1941: Some Enduring Lessons (Carlisle 
Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War College Press, 2009), 3–4, https://press.armywarcollege.edu/cgi/view-
content.cgi?article=1632&context=monographs.
70 Glenn E. Torrey, The Romanian Battlefront in World War I (Lawrence: University Press of 
Kansas, 2011).
71 From a Chinese perspective, as discussed below, an example would be the confinement of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s role in Ukraine to the level of a “proxy war” involving train-
ing and logistics support, but not a direct “boots on the ground” role.
72 Thanks to Chris Andrews for suggesting this point.
73 Lawrence Sondhaus, German Submarine Warfare in World War I: The Onset of Total War at 
Sea (London: Rowman and Littlefield, 2017), 24.
74 Sondhaus, German Submarine Warfare in World War I, 112.
75 Sondhaus, German Submarine Warfare in World War I, 115.
76 Daniel Sobelman, “Re-conceptualizing Triangular Coercion in International Relations,” 
Cooperation and Conflict 58, no. 3 (2023), 365–7, https://doi.org/10.1177/00108367221098494.
77 Gerhard L. Weinberg, A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994), 6–121.
78 Michael Kofman et al., Russian Strategy for Escalation Management: Evolution of Key 
Concepts (Arlington, VA: CNA, 2020), 10, https://www.cna.org/reports/2020/04/DRM-2019-U-
022455-1Rev.pdf.
79 Kofman et al., Russian Strategy for Escalation Management.
80 Samuel Charap et al., Understanding Russian Coercive Signaling (Santa Monica, CA: 
RAND, 2022), 67–8, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA198-9.html.
81 Stephen Blank, “Nuclear Weapons in Russia’s War Against Ukraine,” Naval War College 
Review 75, no. 4 (2022), 68, https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol75/iss4/6/.
82 “Address by the President of the Russian Federation,” February 24, 2022, http://en.kremlin.
ru/events/president/news/67843.
83 “Biden Warns Americans in Ukraine to Leave, Says Sending Troops to Evacuate Would Be 
‘World War,’” NBC News, February 10, 2024, https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/white-house/biden-
warns-americans-leave-ukraine-russia-troops-world-war-rcna15781.
84 By contrast, Dean Acheson clarified that Japan, the Ryukyus, and the Philippines were 
within the “defensive perimeter.” See Dean Acheson, “Speech on the Far East,” National Press Club, 
January 12, 1950, https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/1950-01-12.pdf.

43
Taming the Hegemon
85 Kathryn Weathersby, “The Soviet Role in the Early Phase of the Korean War: New Docu-
mentary Evidence,” Journal of American-East Asian Relations 2, no. 4 (1993), 433, https://www.jstor.
org/stable/23613018.
86 P.K. Rose, “Two Strategic Intelligence Mistakes in Korea, 1950,” Studies in Intelligence 45, 
no. 5 (2001), 57–65, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/tr/pdf/ADA529658.pdf.
87 Kenneth Moll, “The Guns of July 1950,” Air and Space Forces, September 1, 2005, https://
www.airandspaceforces.com/article/0905korea/.
88 Cynthia M. Grabo, “Soviet Deception in the Czechoslovak Crisis,” Studies in Intelligence 
14, no. 1 (1970, declassified 1993), 12–3, https://www.cia.gov/resources/csi/static/Soviet-Deception-
Czechoslovak-Crisis.pdf. See also Cynthia M. Grabo, Anticipating Surprise: Analysis for Strategic 
Warning (Washington, DC: Joint Military Intelligence College, 2002), https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/
ADA476752.
89 Leo J. Reddy, “NATO Before and After the Czechoslovak Crisis,” Vanderbilt Journal 
of Transnational Law 2, no. 2 (1969), 69, https://scholarship.law.vanderbilt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=2685&context=vjtl.
90 Grabo, “Soviet Deception in the Czechoslovak Crisis,” 17.
91 Joshua C. Huminski, “Russia, Ukraine, and the Future Use of Strategic Intelligence,” 
PRISM 10, no. 3 (2023), 9–25, https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Media/News/News-Article-View/Arti-
cle/3511951/russia-ukraine-and-the-future-use-of-strategic-intelligence/.
92 The treaty specifically referenced German troops; Joseph Stalin was apparently more 
concerned about avoiding a repeat of Operation Barbarossa than U.S. or NATO aspirations in the late 
1940s. See Jussi Hanhimäki, “‘Containment’ in a Borderland: The United States and Finland, 1948–
49,” Diplomatic History 18, no. 3 (1994), 360, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7709.1994.tb00218.x.
93 John Lukacs, “Finland Vindicated,” Foreign Affairs 71, no. 4 (1992), 50–63, https://www.
jstor.org/stable/20045309.
94 Douglas Brommesson et al., “Sweden’s Policy of Neutrality,” in Successful Public Policy in 
the Nordic Countries: Cases, Lessons, Challenges, ed. Caroline de la Porte et al. (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2022), 291.
95 Wolfgang Mueller, “The USSR and Permanent Neutrality in the Cold War,” Journal of Cold 
War Studies 18, no. 4 (2016), 157, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26925643.
96 Thomas J. Christensen, “Posing Problems Without Catching Up: China’s Rise and Chal-
lenges for U.S. Security Policy,” International Security 25, no. 4 (2001), 5–40, https://www.jstor.org/
stable/3092132; Michael Pillsbury, China Debates the Future Security Environment (Washington, DC: 
NDU Press, 2000), 292–7.
97 Zhang, Science of Campaigns, 97.
98 Zhang, Science of Campaigns.
99 Chai and Xu, Science of Army Operations Under Informatized Conditions, 349. The PLA’s 
encyclopedia notes that “non-contact operations” were “widely used in the Kosovo War, the Afghani-
stan War, and the Iraq War.” Its main characteristics include use of “integrated reconnaissance intel-
ligence information systems” to provide targeting; use of “long-range precision-guided weapons to 
destroy the enemy’s main targets”; use of hard and soft kill methods to “destroy the enemy’s command

44 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
information systems”; and protecting one’s own targets. See China Military Encyclopedia [中国军事
百科全书] (Beijing: Encyclopedia of China Publishing House, 2007).
100 Science of Military Strategy (2020), 293.
101 For an extensive discussion, see Cliff et al., Entering the Dragon’s Lair, 51–77.
102 Yu Liming, Study on Asymmetric Operations [非对称作战研究] (Beijing: NDU Press, 
2015), 185. For a discussion, see Jeffrey Engstrom, Systems Confrontation and System Destruction 
Warfare (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2018), https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1708.html; 
and Mark Cozad et al., Gaining Victory in Systems Warfare: China’s Perspective on the U.S.-China 
Military Balance (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2023), 61–90, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_re-
ports/RRA1535-1.html.
103 Yu, Study on Asymmetric Operations, 185.
104 Peng Daorong, “A Different Perspective on Systems Warfare” [换个视角看体系战], Mili-
tary Arts [军事学术], no. 1 (2022).
105 Xu Lisheng and Wang Zhaoyong, eds., Research on Port Landing Operations [港口登录作
战研究], trans. China Aerospace Studies Institute (Beijing: NDU Press, 2015), 88.
106 Zhu Qichao et al., “Innovation of Military Strategy in the Perspective of Scientific and 
Technological Revolution” [科技革命视野中的军事战略创新], China Military Science [中国军事科
学], no. 3 (2015), 76.
107 Fu Bingzhong, “Research on the Concept of Space-Ground Integrated Unmanned Combat” 
[天地一体无人战概念研究], Military Arts [军事学术], no. 1 (2022), 41.
108 Feng Zhongguo, “Characteristics and Trends of World Army Development” [世界陆军发
展的特点及趋势], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 2 (2022), 84.
109 Yu Lingling et al., “Mao Zedong Thought on Building and Employing Naval Forces” [毛泽
东海军建设运用思想探要], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 6 (2023), 52.
110 For an overview, see J. Michael Dahm and Elsa B. Kania, “The Advent of Intelligent 
Power: The Evolution of China’s Outlook on Military Informationization and Intelligentization,” in 
The PLA in a New Era: Individuals, Ideas, and Influence, ed. Joel Wuthnow et al. (Washington, DC: 
NDU Press, forthcoming).
111 Lan Yongming, “Consideration on Focusing on the New Characteristics of Future Battle-
field Coordination to Promote the Modernization of Force Structure” [着眼未来战场对抗新特点推进
兵力结构现代化的思考], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 1 (2023), 117.
112 Lan, “Consideration on Focusing on the New Characteristics of Future Battlefield Coordi-
nation to Promote the Modernization of Force Structure.”
113 Joel Wuthnow, “A New Step in China’s Military Reform,” Joint Force Quarterly 117 (2nd 
Quarter 2025), 4–13, https://digitalcommons.ndu.edu/joint-force-quarterly/vol117/iss2/3/; J. Michael 
Dahm, “A Disturbance in the Force: The Reorganization of People’s Liberation Army Command and 
Elimination of China’s Strategic Support Force,” China Brief 24, no. 9 (2024), https://jamestown.org/
program/a-disturbance-in-the-force-the-reorganization-of-peoples-liberation-army-command-and-elim-
ination-of-chinas-strategic-support-force/.
114 Cliff et al., Inside the Dragon’s Lair, 31–4.
115 Dang Chongmin and Zhang Yu, “Science of Joint Operations” [联合作战学] (Beijing: PLA 
Press, 2009), 87.

45
Taming the Hegemon
116 Science of Military Strategy (2020), 279.
117 Chai and Xu, Science of Army Operations Under Informatized Conditions, 349.
118 Liu Changlong and Huang Peirong, “Continue to Promote Improvements in Our Ability to 
‘Fight Based on Existing Equipment’” [“持续推进” 立足现有装备打仗能力提升], China Military 
Science [中国军事科学], no. 4 (2012), 126–7.
119 Liu and Huang, “Continue to Promote Improvements in Our Ability to ‘Fight Based on 
Existing Equipment.’”
120 See John F. Sullivan, “Sun Tzu’s Fighting Words,” The Strategy Bridge, June 15, 2020, 
https://thestrategybridge.org/the-bridge/2020/6/15/sun-tzus-fighting-words. Sullivan argues that the 
correct interpretation of this passage in the Art of War would focus on routing an enemy before it is 
fully organized, which implies use of force rather than convincing an enemy not to fight in the first 
place.
121 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, 215–6.
122 For a discussion, see Dean Cheng, “Chinese Views on Deterrence,” Joint Force Quarterly 
60 (1st Quarter 2011), 92–4, https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/jfq/jfq-60/jfq-60_92-94_
Cheng.pdf. See also Lonnie Henley, “War Control: Chinese Concepts of Escalation Management,” in 
Shaping China’s Security Environment, ed. Andrew Scobell and Larry M. Wortzel (Carlisle, PA: U.S. 
Army War College Press, 2006), 86–7, http://www.jstor.com/stable/resrep11961.8.
123 Zhang Yan, Theory of Strategic Deterrence [战略威慑论] (Beijing: Social Science Aca-
demic Press, 2018), 145.
124 Science of Military Strategy (2020), 256.
125 Science of Military Strategy (2020), 123.
126 Science of Military Strategy (2020), 138.
127 Science of Military Strategy (2020), 139.
128 “Full Text of the 20th Party Congress Report.”
129 Joel Wuthnow, “Shield, Sword, or Symbol: Analyzing Xi Jinping’s ‘Strategic Deterrence,’” 
Brookings, March 7, 2024, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/shield-sword-or-symbol-analyzing-xi-
jinpings-strategic-deterrence/.
130 Ge Tengfei, “Build a Strong System of National Strategic Deterrence Forces” [打造强大
的国家战略威慑力量体系], People’s Tribune [人民论坛], no. 21 (2022): 39. The publication is a 
subsidiary of People’s Daily, which makes this assessment more authoritative. 
131 Ge, “Build a Strong System of National Strategic Deterrence Forces.”
132 Ge, “Build a Strong System of National Strategic Deterrence Forces.”
133 Michael S. Chase and Arthur Chan, China’s Evolving Approach to “Integrated Strategic 
Deterrence” (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2016), 36–44, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
RR1366.html.
134 Zhu Siyu et al., “New Technologies Generate Innovations in Operational Methods and New 
Methods of Warfare Bring About Technological Integration: A Study of the Application of New Tech-
nologies and New Operational Methods in Recent Armed Conflicts and Its Implications” [新技术催生
战法创新新战法带动技术融合: 近期武装冲突中新技术新战法应用研究与启示], China Military

46 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
Science [中国军事科学], no. 1 (2023), 64.
135 Yu et al., “Mao Zedong Thought on Building and Employing Naval Forces,” 52.
136 Joel Wuthnow, Rightsizing Chinese Military Lessons From Ukraine, China Strategic Forum 
68 (Washington, DC: NDU Press, September 2022), 5, https://inss.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/
stratforum/SF-311.pdf.
137 Jin Ning and Ma Jianguang, “The Strategic Deterrence and Influence of the United States 
and Russia in the Context of Great Power Competition” [大国博弈背景下的美俄战略威慑与影响], 
Russian and Eastern European Studies [俄罗斯东欧中亚研究], no. 3 (2022), 42–62.
138 Yang Guanghai, “U.S. Proxy War in Ukraine: Motives, Measures, and Implications” [美国
在乌克兰的代理人战争: 动因, 举措与启示], Peace and Development [和平与发展], no. 1 (2023), 
24–42.
139 On PLA thinking on the broader nuclear dimensions of the conflict, see Maryanne Kivle-
han-Wise and Tsun-Kai Tsai, “PRC Lessons Learned From Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: Implications 
for a Taiwan Conflict,” in The PLA in a Complex Security Environment: Preparing for High Winds 
and Choppy Waters, ed. Benjamin Frohman and Jeremy Rausch (Washington, DC: National Bureau 
of Asian Research, 2024), 121–2, https://www.nbr.org/publication/prc-lessons-learned-from-russias-
invasion-of-ukraine-implications-for-a-taiwan-conflict/.
140 Zhang, Science of Campaigns, 629.
141 Zhang, Theory of Strategic Deterrence, 93.
142 Zhu et al., “New Technologies Generate Innovations in Operational Methods and New 
Methods of Warfare Bring About Technological Integration,” 64.
143 Zhang, Lectures on Joint Campaign Command, 216–7.
144 Liang, On Maritime Strategic Access, 302.
145 Ren Haiquan, “Strengthening National Defense and the Armed Forces Building at the New 
Stage in the New Period” [加强新时期新阶段国防和军队建设], China Military Science [中国军事
科学], no. 3 (2013), 10. Emphasis added.
146 Cheng, “Chinese Views of Deterrence.”
147 Fiona S. Cunningham, Under the Nuclear Shadow: China’s Information-Age Weapons in 
International Security (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2025).
148 Wang Yunlei et al., “Issues on Army Deterrence and Operations Under Multi-Dimensional 
Conditions” [陆军全域慑战若干问题], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 2 (2018), 27. 
This can also include social media manipulation. See Scott W. Harold et al., Chinese Disinformation 
Efforts on Social Media (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2021), https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_re-
ports/RR4373z3.html.
149 Zhang, Theory of Strategic Deterrence, 26. 
150 Yu Sen et al., “Base on Integrated National Strategic Systems and Capabilities to Enhance 
National Defense Mobilization Capabilities” [依托一体化目家战略体系和能力提升国防动员能力], 
China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 3 (2022), 72.
151 Cheng, “Chinese Views on Deterrence”; Chase and Chan, China’s Evolving Approach to 
“Integrated Strategic Deterrence,” 4–5.

47
Taming the Hegemon
152 Katarzyna Zysk, “Escalation and Nuclear Weapons in Russia’s Military Strategy,” RUSI 
Journal 163, no. 2 (2018), https://www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/rusi-journal/escala-
tion-and-nuclear-weapons-russias-military-strategy. For an opposing view, see Kristin Ven Bruusgaard, 
“The Myth of Russia’s Lowered Nuclear Threshold,” War on the Rocks, September 22, 2017, https://
warontherocks.com/2017/09/the-myth-of-russias-lowered-nuclear-threshold/.
153 Science of Military Strategy (2013), 119.
154 Sun and Tao, “A Predictive Analysis of Patterns of U.S. Intervention in the Taiwan Issue,” 
18.
155 Xia Hongbo et al., “Fundamental Experience of Military Struggle Against U.S. Under the 
Guidance of Mao Zedong After the Founding of the People’s Republic of China” [新中国成立后毛泽
东指导对美军事斗争的基本经验], Military History [军事历史], no. 4 (2019), 57.
156 Zhao Xuegong, “The Second Taiwan Strait Crisis and U.S.-China Relations” [第二 次台湾
海峡危机与中美关系], Contemporary China History Studies [当代中国史研究] 10, no. 3 (2003), 70.
157 Tang Fuquan and Wang Daowei, “An Exploration of the Strategic Planning Art of the 
Chinese Communist Party in Resisting U.S. Intervention in the Military Struggle Along the Southeast 
Coast” [中国共产党在东南沿海军事斗争中抗御美国干预的战略运筹艺术探要], Military History 
Research [军事历史研究], no. 1 (2011), 17–8.
158 Tang and Wang, “An Exploration of the Strategic Planning Art of the Chinese Communist 
Party in Resisting U.S. Intervention in the Military Struggle Along the Southeast Coast.”
159 Tang and Wang, “An Exploration of the Strategic Planning Art of the Chinese Communist 
Party in Resisting U.S. Intervention in the Military Struggle Along the Southeast Coast.”
160 Mao Zedong, “Conversations With Leaders of the Communist Parties of Some Latin 
American Countries” [同拉丁美洲一些国家共产党领导人的谈话], March 3, 1959, https://marx-
istphilosophy.org/maozedong/mx8/005.htm.
161 For instance, civilians could adopt a more risk-acceptant posture than their cautious mili-
tary advisors, or the reverse. Depending on the strength of the top leader, decisionmaking could require 
bargaining and argumentation that delays the war. This scenario would fit with Model III (governmen-
tal politics) in Allison’s framework. See Graham Alllison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban 
Missile Crisis (New York: Little, Brown, 1971).
162 This is fully consistent with PLA writings on war control. See Alison A. Kaufman and Dan-
iel M. Harnett, Managing Conflict: Examining Recent PLA Writings on Escalation Control (Arlington, 
VA: CNA, 2016), 68–70, https://www.cna.org/reports/2016/drm-2015-u-009963-final3.pdf.
163 Zhang, Science of Campaigns, 96.
164 Zhang, Science of Campaigns.
165 Zhang, Science of Campaigns.
166 Zhu Zhuansheng, “Aim to Win High-End Naval Battles, Accelerate the Construction of 
the Marine Corps’ Combat Capabilities” [瞄准打赢高端海战, 加速推进海军陆战队作战能力建设], 
Military Arts [军事学术], no. 1 (2025), 10.
167 Joshua Arostegui, “PLA Army and Marine Corps Amphibious Brigades in a Post-Reform 
Military,” in Wuthnow et al., Crossing the Strait, 161–94.

48 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
168 Li Weiguo, ed., Military Deception Under High-Tech Conditions [高技术条件下军事欺
骗] (Beijing: NDU Press, 2001).
169 See Christopher D. Yung, “Sinica Rules the Waves? The People’s Liberation Army Navy’s 
Power Projection and Anti-Access/Area Denial Lessons from the Falklands/Malvinas Conflict,” in Chi-
nese Lessons from Other Peoples’ Wars, ed. Andrew Scobell et al. (Carlise Barracks, PA: U.S. Army 
War College Press, 2011), 75–114, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/tr/pdf/ADA553490.pdf.
170 Li, Military Deception Under High-Tech Conditions, 35.
171 Zhang, Science of Campaigns, 126.
172 Xu Wenhua and Du Liping, “Influence and Demand of Future Warfare on Military Train-
ing” [未来战争对军事训练的影响及要求], China Military Science [中国军事科学], no. 1 (2022), 
107. 
173 Xu and Du, “Influence and Demand of Future Warfare on Military Training.”
174 John Culver, “How We Would Know When China Is Preparing to Invade Taiwan,” 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, October 3, 2022, https://carnegieendowment.org/
posts/2022/10/how-we-would-know-when-china-is-preparing-to-invade-taiwan?lang=en.
175 Liu Xinhua, “Characteristics, Motivations, and Trends of the Adjustment of the U.S. Indo-
Pacific Military Base System” [美国印太军事基地体系调整的特点, 动因与趋势], Forum of World 
Economics and Politics [世界经济与政治论坛], no. 3 (2024), 36–7.
176 Chen Guiyun and Yuan Zheng, “U.S. Deployment of Defense Facilities in the Indo-Pacific 
Region and Strategic Reassessment of ‘Base Dependence’” [美国在印太地区防务设施部署与 “基地
依赖” 战略重估], Indian Ocean Economic and Political Review [印度洋经济体研究], no. 6 (2024), 
74–5.
177 Chen and Yuan, “U.S. Deployment of Defense Facilities in the Indo-Pacific Region and 
Strategic Reassessment of ‘Base Dependence.’”
178 Wang Shushen, “The Evolution of the U.S. Indo-Pacific Strategy and the Situation in the 
Taiwan Strait” [美国印太战略演进与台海局势], Taiwan Studies [台湾研究], no. 2 (2023), 18.
179 Chen and Yuan, “U.S. Deployment of Defense Facilities in the Indo-Pacific Region and 
Strategic Reassessment of ‘Base Dependence,’” 75.
180 Zhang Yao, “The Networking of the U.S. Asia-Pacific Security Architecture: Strategic 
Tools, Internal Limitations, and China’s Response” [美国亚太安全架构网络化：战略工具、内在限
度与中国应对], Journal of Strategy and Decision-Making [战略决策研究], no. 6 (2024), 30.
181 Zhang, “The Networking of the U.S. Asia-Pacific Security Architecture: Strategic Tools, 
Internal Limitations, and China’s Response.”
182 See, for example, Andrew D. Taffer, “Threat and Opportunity: Chinese Wedging in the 
Senkaku/Diaoyu Dispute,” Asian Security 16, no. 2 (2020), 157–78, https://doi.org/10.1080/14799855.
2019.1567493; Tommy Sheng Hao Chai, “How China Attempts to Drive a Wedge in the U.S.-Australia 
Alliance,” Australian Journal of International Affairs 74, no. 5 (2020), 511–31, https://doi.org/10.108
0/10357718.2020.1721432; and Khang X. Vu, “External Coercion, Internal Accommodation: China’s 
Wedge Strategies Towards the Vietnam–United States Partnership, 2013–2022,” Journal of Contempo-
rary China 33, no. 149 (2024), 850–70, https://doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2023.2228718.

49
Taming the Hegemon
183 Wang Wenjuan, “Application of International Law by the U.S., Russia, and Other Major 
Countries in Their Overseas Military Bases” [美俄等因海外军事基地的国际法运川], China Military 
Science [中国军事科学], no. 6 (2022), 146.
184 See, for example, Isaac B. Kardon, “China’s Overseas Base, Places, and Far Seas Logis-
tics,” in The PLA Beyond Borders: Chinese Military Operations in Regional and Global Context, ed. 
Joel Wuthnow et al. (Washington, DC: NDU Press, 2021), 73–106, https://digitalcommons.ndu.edu/
books-and-book-chapters/1/.
185 Central Military Commission Political Work Department, Study Outline on Xi Jinping 
Strong Army Thought [习近平强军思想学习纲要] (2023), 102. Emphasis added.
186 Richard Haass and David Sacks, “American Support for Taiwan Must Be Unambiguous,” 
Foreign Affairs, September 2, 2020, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/american-
support-taiwan-must-be-unambiguous.
187 Michael Cunningham, “Should the USA Maintain Its Policy of Strategic Ambiguity To-
wards Taiwan?” The Heritage Foundation, June 24, 2024, https://www.heritage.org/china/commentary/
should-the-usa-maintain-its-policy-strategic-ambiguity-towards-taiwan; Steven M. Goldstein, “In 
Defense of Strategic Ambiguity in the Taiwan Strait,” National Bureau of Asian Research, October 15, 
2021, https://www.nbr.org/publication/in-defense-of-strategic-ambiguity-in-the-taiwan-strait/.
188 President Joe Biden is widely known to have pledged to intervene on Taiwan’s behalf four 
times during his Presidency. However, President Biden is not alone. After the EP-3 incident in April 
2001, President George W. Bush likewise stated that the United States would do “whatever it took” to 
defend the island. See David E. Sanger, “U.S. Would Defend Taiwan, Bush Says,” New York Times, 
April 26, 2001, https://www.nytimes.com/2001/04/26/world/us-would-defend-taiwan-bush-says.html.
189 Karl-Heinz Frieser, The Blitzkrieg Legend (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2013), 
33.
190 Frieser, The Blitzkrieg Legend.
191 It is also unclear who in the PLA would be willing to challenge those views if they were to 
emerge. Xi’s purge of Central Military Commission Vice Chairman He Weidong in 2025 removed the 
sole source of credible advice on Taiwan from that body.
192 Tyler Jost and Daniel C. Mattingly, “After Xi: The Succession Question Obscuring China’s 
Future—And Unsettling Its Present,” Foreign Affairs, September/October 2025, https://www.foreignaf-
fairs.com/china/after-xi-jinping-jost-mattingly.
193 Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2017), 344–8.
194 Kevin Rudd, “Rudd: The War in Ukraine Won’t Change Xi’s Plans for Taiwan,” Financial 
Review, June 24, 2022, https://www.afr.com/policy/foreign-affairs/rudd-the-war-in-ukraine-won-t-
change-xi-s-plans-for-taiwan-20220621-p5avbk.
195 “U.S. Department of Defense Holds First Crisis Communications Working Group With 
the People’s Republic of China People’s Liberation Army,” Department of Defense, October 29, 2020, 
https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2398907/us-department-of-defense-hosts-
first-crisis-communications-working-group-with-t/. See also Michael D. Swaine, Avoiding the Abyss: 
An Urgent Need for Sino-U.S. Crisis Management, Quincy Paper No. 16 (Washington, DC: Quincy

50 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20
Institute, 2024), https://quincyinst.s3.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/09/27142210/QUIN-
CY-PAPER-NO.-16-—-SWAINE.pdf; Michael D. Swaine, “How to Stop the United States and China 
From Sliding Into War,” War on the Rocks, November 25, 2024, https://warontherocks.com/2024/11/
how-to-stop-the-united-states-and-china-from-sliding-into-war/.
196 Some of these principles are enshrined in the Joint Warfighting Concept. See Thomas A. 
Walsh and Alexandra L. Huber, “A Symphony of Capabilities: How the Joint Warfighting Concept 
Guides Service Force Design and Development,” Joint Force Quarterly 111 (4th Quarter 2023), 4–15, 
https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Media/News/News-Article-View/Article/3568312/a-symphony-of-capabili-
ties-how-the-joint-warfighting-concept-guides-service-for/. On airbase hardening, see Anderson and 
Press, “Access Denied?” On space resilience, see Zachary Burdette, “The U.S.-China Military Balance 
in Space,” International Security 49, no. 4 (2025), 71–118, https://doi.org/10.1162/isec_a_00509.
197 Elbridge A. Colby, The Strategy of Denial: American Defense in an Age of Great Power 
Conflict (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2022).
198 Joel Wuthnow, System Overload: Can China’s Military Be Distracted in a War Over 
Taiwan? China Strategic Perspectives 15 (Washington, DC: NDU Press, 2020), https://ndupress.ndu.
edu/Portals/68/Documents/stratperspective/china/china-perspectives-15.pdf; Joel Wuthnow, “Defend-
ing Taiwan in an Expanded Competitive Space,” Joint Force Quarterly 104 (1st Quarter 2021), 89–94, 
https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Media/News/News-Article-View/Article/2884395/defending-taiwan-in-an-
expanded-competitive-space/.
199 On competitive strategies, see Thomas G. Mahnken, ed., Competitive Strategies for the 
21st Century: Theory, History, and Practice (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2012); and Andrew 
W. Marshall, Long-Term Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis (Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND, 1972), https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R862.html.
200 Kelly Grieco and Jennifer Kavanaugh, “Coalition of the Unwilling: Why Asia’s Geography 
Impedes Coalition Building,” unpublished manuscript; Kelly Grieco and Jennifer Kavanaugh, “The 
Elusive Indo-Pacific Coalition: Why Geography Matters,” The Washington Quarterly 47, no. 1 (2024), 
103–21, https://doi.org/10.1080/0163660X.2024.2326324.

51
Taming the Hegemon
About the Author
Dr. Joel Wuthnow is a Senior Research Fellow in the Center for the Study of Chinese Mili-
tary Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, at the National Defense University. Prior to 
joining NDU, he was a China analyst at the Center for Naval Analyses, a post-doctoral fellow 
in the China and the World Program at Princeton University, and a pre-doctoral fellow at the 
Brookings Institution. His recent books and monographs include China's Quest for Military 
Supremacy (Polity, 2025, with Phillip C. Saunders), Sea Dragons: Special Operations and Chinese 
Military Strategy (Naval War College Press, 2025, with John Chen), Crossing the Strait: China’s 
Military Prepares for War with Taiwan (NDU Press, 2022; lead editor); Gray Dragons: Assessing 
China's Senior Military Leadership, China Strategic Perspectives 16 (NDU Press, 2022); The PLA 
Beyond Borders: Chinese Military Operations in Regional and Global Context (NDU Press, 2021; 
lead editor); System Overload: Can China’s Military Be Distracted in a War over Taiwan? China 
Strategic Perspectives 15 (NDU Press, 2020); and Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA: Assessing Chi-
nese Military Reforms (NDU Press, 2019; co-editor).
Dr. Wuthnow received an A.B. in Public and International Affairs from Princeton Uni-
versity, an M.Phil. in Modern Chinese Studies from Oxford University, and a Ph.D. in Political 
Science from Columbia University.

52 
China Strategic Perspectives, No. 20

53
Taming the Hegemon

No. 19 China’s Military Diplomacy 
by Phillip C. Saunders and Melodie Ha (06/25)
No. 18 Discerning the Drivers of China’s Nuclear Force Development: Models, Indicators, and Data 
by David C. Logan and Phillip C. Saunders (07/23)
No. 17 Averting Escalation and Avoiding War: Lessons from the 1995–1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis 
by Kristen Gunness and Phillip C. Saunders (12/22)
No. 16 Gray Dragons: Assessing China’s Senior Military Leadership
by Joel Wuthnow (09/22)
No. 15 System Overload: Can China’s Military Be Distracted in a War over Taiwan? 
by Joel Wuthnow (06/20)
No. 14 China’s Other Army: The People’s Armed Police in an Era of Reform 
by Joel Wuthnow (04/19)
No. 13 China’s Strategic Support Force: A Force for a New Era 
by John Costello and Joe McReynolds (10/18)
No. 12 Chinese Perspectives on the Belt and Road Initiative: Strategic Rationales, Risks, and Implications 
by Joel Wuthnow (09/17)
No. 11 Chinese Military Diplomacy, 2003–2016: Trends and Implications 
by Kenneth Allen, Phillip C. Saunders, and John Chen (07/17)
No. 10 Chinese Military Reforms in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, Challenges, and Implications 
by Joel Wuthnow and Phillip C. Saunders (03/17)
No. 9 China Moves Out: Stepping Stones Toward a New Maritime Strategy 
by Christopher H. Sharman (03/15)
No. 8 Red China’s ‘Capitalist Bomb’: Inside the Chinese Neutron Bomb Program 
by Jonathan Ray (01/15)
No. 7 “Not an Idea We Need to Shun”: Chinese Overseas Basing Requirements in the 21st Century 
by Christopher Yung and Ross Rustici, with Scott Devary and Jenny Lin (10/14)
No. 6 China’s Forbearance Has Limits: Chinese Threat and Retaliation Signaling and Its Implications for 
a Sino-American Military Confrontation 
by Paul H.B. Godwin and Alice Miller (04/13)
China Strategic Perspectives Series
Editor, Dr. Phillip C. Saunders