Constraining Iran’s Nuclear Potential in the 
Absence of the JCPOA
P
reventing a nuclear-armed Iran remains a top U.S. security objective, but in recent months Tehran has 
accelerated its sensitive nuclear activities and threatened to pursue nuclear weapons, creating significant 
new challenges for addressing proliferation risks. Since Iran began breaching limits imposed by the 2015 
nuclear deal, known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), it has expanded its uranium enrichment 
capacity, amassed more nuclear material, and invested in new, more proliferation-sensitive activities. 
Whereas Iran’s initial violations of the JCPOA’s limits were designed to pressure the United States to return to  
the accord after former U.S. President Donald Trump unilaterally withdrew from the deal in 2018, Tehran’s more 
recent nuclear activities appear focused on reaching the threshold of nuclear weapons. These advances irreversibly 
altered the pathways available to Iran if the decision were made to develop nuclear weapons and the speed at 
which Tehran could produce weapons-grade material. 
In addition to Iran’s technical advances, the proliferation risk posed by Iran’s threshold status is compounded 
by its decisions to reduce International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) monitoring and a security environment that 
risks tilting Tehran’s calculus toward developing a nuclear arsenal.  
Arms Control Association, 1200 18th Street NW, Suite 1175, Washington, DC 20036 • (202) 463-8270
HIGHLIGHTS
• Since 2019, Iran has significantly expanded its 
sensitive nuclear activities, which has irreversibly 
altered the pathways available to Iran if the 
decision were made to develop nuclear weapons.
• The proliferation risk posed by Iran’s nuclear 
advances is amplified by the monitoring gaps 
that Tehran created by reducing IAEA access and 
monitoring.
• Iranian officials have long denied any interest in 
nuclear weapons but there are new signs that Iran 
may rethink the prohibition on nuclear weapons if 
security conditions change.
• Iran’s technical expertise cannot be reversed, and its 
nuclear infrastructure is less vulnerable to attack. 
As a result, military strikes against Iran would set 
back the program, but only temporarily, and risk 
driving Tehran to develop nuclear weapons. 
• Tehran has signaled its willingness to de-escalate 
tensions, including on its nuclear program. Leaders 
in Washington should seize this opportunity to 
incentivize Tehran to take steps that increase 
monitoring of its nuclear program and reduce 
proliferation risk.
• The experience of the 2015 nuclear deal 
demonstrated the limitations of transactional 
bargaining. The regional nuclear environment also 
has shifted since 2015 and there is an increased 
risk that additional states will seek to match Iran’s 
capabilities. The United States should be thinking 
now about alternative frameworks for negotiating 
a longer-term nuclear deal, or series of deals, that 
take into account Iran’s nuclear advances and 
mitigate regional proliferation risks. 
By Kelsey Davenport 
Director for Nonproliferation Policy, Arms Control Association
Policy White Paper
Analysis of Weapons-Related Security Threats and Effective Policy Responses
July 2024

32
The military confrontation between Iran and Israel in 
April highlighted how Iran’s nuclear strategy is shifting in 
response to the regional security environment. Iran’s direct 
attack on Israel on April 13 in retaliation for an earlier strike 
on an Iranian diplomatic compound in Syria and subsequent 
statements from Iranian officials threatening that Iran will 
rethink its nuclear doctrine if Israel strikes its nuclear facilities 
or threatens Iran’s security interests are designed to deter 
future attacks and leverage the country’s threshold status to 
control escalation.1 
Although the immediate risk of a broader conflict between 
Israel and Iran has decreased slightly since April and the U.S. 
intelligence community continues to assess that Tehran is not 
pursuing nuclear weapons, the events in April demonstrate 
how U.S. policy will need to take into account Iran’s shifting 
nuclear doctrine and its technical advances and contend with 
these new challenges in future diplomatic efforts.
With the U.S. presidential election months away and the 
restoration of the JCPOA effectively off the table, there is no 
quick fix to the nuclear crisis. However, Tehran has signaled 
its willingness to de-escalate tensions, including on its 
nuclear program. 
Given this approach and newly-elected President Masoud 
Pezeshkian’s support for nuclear talks, there may be a short 
window for de-escalatory steps after he takes office in August. 
The Biden administration should seize this opportunity to 
incentivize Tehran to take steps that increase monitoring of 
its nuclear program to de-escalate nuclear tensions in the 
short term, buying time for more comprehensive, longer-term 
negotiations to reduce Iranian and regional proliferation risks. 
Iran’s Nuclear Advances 
When Iran first began breaching the JCPOA’s limits in 2019 
in response to the U.S. withdrawal from the nuclear deal the 
previous year, its initial actions focused on resuming activities 
that were rolled back under the 2015 accord.2 This included 
exceeding the stockpile cap of 300 kilograms of uranium 
enriched to 3.67 percent, resuming enrichment up to 20 
percent, and restarting enrichment at Fordow. Although these 
activities were troubling breaches of the JCPOA, they were 
quickly and fully reversible. 
However, as Tehran sought to expand its leverage, it began 
investing in new, more proliferation-sensitive activities that 
resulted in the acquisition of knowledge that can not be 
reversed. This included activities such as:
• enriching uranium to 60 percent, a level just short of 
the 90 percent level considered weapons-grade and a 
capability Iran had not mastered before the JCPOA’s 
negotiation.
• enriching using more efficient centrifuges, such as the 
IR-2, IR-4, and IR-6 models, that were not used on a 
large scale prior to the JCPOA.
• using cascade designs that allow Tehran to switch 
between enrichment levels more quickly. 
• further experimentation with uranium metal 
production, which was prohibited by the JCPOA, and 
a key component of weaponization. 
As a result of the irreversible knowledge gains from these 
activities, Iran’s nuclear program is fundamentally different 
from the pre-JCPOA period. Several critical differences include: 
1. Drop in the time necessary to achieve “breakout.” 
Breakout is a common metric for assessing how 
quickly a country can produce enough fissile material 
for a nuclear weapon. In the case of highly enriched 
uranium, a significant quantity for one nuclear device 
is approximately 25kg of uranium enriched to 90 
percent. Although breakout calculations rely on certain 
technical assumptions and do not take intent into 
account, it is a useful metric for assessing technical 
progress in Iran’s uranium enrichment program.3 In the 
lead-up to negotiations on the JCPOA, Iran’s breakout 
time to produce enough weapons-grade material 
for one bomb was about 2-3 months. The JCPOA’s 
restrictions on enrichment capacity, stockpiles, and 
enrichment level pushed breakout to about 12 months. 
As of early 2024, Iran could produce enough nuclear 
material for one bomb in about a week and enough 
for five to six weapons in a month. Iran’s stockpiles of 
material enriched to 20 percent and 60 percent and its 
installation of more efficient centrifuges contribute to 
the significant decline in breakout.  
 As Iran’s stockpiles of highly enriched uranium 
grow and/or Iran installs further advanced centrifuges, 
the breakout time to multiple nuclear weapons will 
continue to shrink. A future nuclear deal with Iran 
should seek to put time back on the breakout clock, but 
it is highly unlikely that any agreement can achieve 
a 12-month breakout, similar to the JCPOA. Even if 
Tehran agreed to limits similar to those in the JCPOA, 
the knowledge Tehran has gained about advanced 
centrifuge production, operation, and higher-level 
enrichment would allow the country to reconstitute 
its program more quickly. As a result, the United States 
will likely need to contend with an Iran that is closer to 
nuclear weapons than it was in the past. 
2. Expanded pathways to nuclear weapons. Iran’s 
nuclear advances have expanded the country’s 

32
pathways to developing nuclear weapons. Iran’s recent 
enrichment work, for example, would enable Tehran 
to move to weapons-grade enrichment using fewer 
steps than what was likely pre-JCPOA. Iran’s advances 
also increase the viability of the so-called sneak-out 
option, which would entail producing weapons-grade 
material at undeclared, covert sites. With more efficient 
centrifuges, Tehran would need fewer machines to set 
up an illicit enrichment process. A covert site with 
a smaller footprint that can more quickly produce 
weapons-grade materials decreases the likelihood of 
detection. Similarly, Tehran could decide to divert 
highly enriched uranium from its declared stockpiles 
and enrich it to weapons-grade at an undeclared 
location.  
 Although any diversion from Iran’s declared nuclear 
stockpiles would be detected by the IAEA, Tehran’s 
ability to use more efficient centrifuges to quickly 
enrich its HEU to weapons-grade levels makes timely 
detection more critical for preventing proliferation. 
Any delay in detection also reduces the already short 
window for the international community to act before 
the weapons-grade material is moved to another site 
for weaponization. This risk is magnified by the IAEA’s 
inability to access critical facilities, such as centrifuge 
workshops, that are not subject to inspections under 
a comprehensive safeguards agreement. As the IAEA’s 
Director General Rafael Mariano Grossi stated in 2023, 
it is no longer possible to ensure that all of Iran’s 
centrifuges are accounted for.4 
3. Increased resiliency. Iran has responded to past acts 
of sabotage and threats to its nuclear infrastructure by 
hardening its facilities. Tehran continued that trend 
in recent years by building a new underground facility 
at its Natanz complex after attacks on its centrifuges 
manufacturing and assembly facilities in Natanz and 
Karaj. The new facility, like Fordow, the deeply buried 
enrichment facility near Qom, will be challenging to 
destroy using conventional weaponry.5 Additionally, 
Iran is expanding its nuclear program. The dispersal of 
infrastructure increases the complexity of any large-
scale attack on the program, particularly if Tehran has 
moved materials and components, such as centrifuges, 
to covert locations. As a result, Iran’s nuclear program 
is more difficult to target militarily than it was prior 
to the JCPOA. Relatedly, Iran’s uranium enrichment 
advances could enable it to build back its nuclear 
program more quickly in response to an attack. 
A billboard in T ehran depicts Iranian ballistic missiles. Iran used ballistic missiles in a large-scale attack against Israel on April 13. If 
T ehran were to develop nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles would be the likely delivery system. Photo by Atta Kenare/AFP via Getty Images)

54
Iran’s centrifuge advances, for example, would allow 
the country to reconstitute its uranium enrichment 
capacity more quickly by focusing on manufacturing 
more efficient machines.
Monitoring Gaps
The proliferation risk posed by Iran’s nuclear advances is 
amplified by the monitoring gaps resulting from Tehran’s 
decision to limit IAEA access and monitoring over the past 
three years. 
When Tehran was fully implementing the JCPOA’s 
verification mechanisms, the country’s nuclear program was 
subject to the most intrusive monitoring regime negotiated. 
Every aspect of Iran’s fuel cycle was subject to verification 
measures. In addition to its legally required comprehensive 
safeguards agreement under the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty (NPT), the JCPOA required Iran to implement the 
additional protocol, which gives the IAEA access to sites that 
support the program but do not house nuclear material and 
requires Tehran to provide the agency with more information 
about the nuclear program. The JCPOA also required further 
transparency measures, such as daily access to Natanz 
and Fordow, continuous surveillance at certain nuclear 
facilities, and prohibitions on certain activities relevant 
to weaponization.6 Although many of the JCPOA-specific 
monitoring mechanisms expired over time, Iran was required 
to implement the additional protocol in perpetuity. 
However, in February 2021 Iran halted implementation of 
the additional protocol and the JCPOA-specific monitoring 
mechanisms. The suspension was required under a December 
2020 law that Tehran passed after the assassination of Mohsen 
Fakhrizadeh, a nuclear scientist who played a critical role in 
Iran’s pre-2003 organized nuclear weapons program.7 
Although Tehran did allow IAEA cameras to operate at 
certain facilities as part of a February 2021 agreement with 
the agency to mitigate the damage caused by the reduction 
in IAEA access, the agency has not had access to the camera 
data. Furthermore, Iran removed the cameras in June 2022 
after the IAEA board passed a resolution censuring Tehran for 
failing to cooperate with the agency on a separate safeguards 
issue. The IAEA and Iran agreed in March 2023 to restore the 
surveillance, but Iran has only allowed nine of the planned 
30 cameras to begin operating again.8 As a result of the 
monitoring gaps, Grossi concluded that the agency lost its 
continuity of knowledge regarding Iran’s nuclear program.9 
Tehran is still implementing its comprehensive safeguards 
agreement, which gives the IAEA regular access to all sites in 
Iran that house nuclear materials, as legally required by the 
NPT. However, past proliferators such as Iraq and North Korea 
demonstrated that comprehensive safeguards agreements are 
insufficient to guard against determined proliferators and that 
states can exploit those gaps. 
Iran’s decision to reduce monitoring exacerbates 
proliferation risk in both the short and long term. Specifically, 
there is:
1. Increased risk of diversion of non-nuclear materials. 
IAEA inspectors have not accessed facilities that support 
Iran’s nuclear program but do not house nuclear 
materials in over three years. These facilities include 
Iran’s uranium milling site and centrifuge production 
and assembly workshops. Without agency access and 
monitoring, there is an increased risk that Tehran is 
diverting non-nuclear materials for a covert program. 
2. Increased risk of delayed detection of breakout. 
Although IAEA inspectors still have regular access to 
Iran’s uranium enrichment facilities and would detect 
any move by Iran to produce weapons-grade material 
at those sites or divert enriched material, Iran’s short 
breakout and limitations on access increase the risk that 
Tehran could delay detection if it made the decision 
to pursue nuclear weapons. The aftermath of Iran’s 
missile attack on Israel demonstrates how Tehran could 
use regional security dynamics to close its nuclear 
facilities to inspectors, as it did on April 14.10 Given 
Israel’s history of sabotage against Iranian facilities, it 
is plausible that Iran could announce the closure of 
its facilities due to security concerns and bar inspector 
access. Delaying inspectors even for a few days would 
give Iran a jumpstart on diverting enriched uranium or 
breaking out. 
3. Longer-term challenges in verifying limits under 
a future deal. As a result of the gaps in access 
and surveillance at key nuclear sites, the IAEA has 
concluded it will be difficult, if not impossible, to 
reestablish reliable baseline inventories for certain 
materials, such as centrifuge components and uranium 
ore concentrate, even with future Iranian cooperation.11 
Without reliable baselines, it will be difficult to verify 
with confidence that Iran is meeting limits set by a 
future deal (if the deal were to include restrictions in 
these areas). The longer these gaps persist, the more 
uncertainty there is likely to be regarding the reliability 
of baseline inventories in the future. Any challenge in 
verifying Iran’s compliance limits could undermine 
the sustainability and support of a future agreement, 
particularly in the United States. For instance, the Iran 
Nuclear Agreement Review Act (INARA) requires the 
administration to submit a certification to Congress 
that a nuclear agreement with Iran can be verified by 

54
the IAEA.12 It will be more challenging for a future 
president to issue such a certification if the deal 
includes limits on areas where the IAEA has already 
raised concerns about credible baselines. Without a 
certification, it is more likely that Congress would use 
INARA’s provisions to try and block the president from 
granting sanctions relief to Iran. 
4. Challenges in effectively designing safeguards for 
new nuclear facilities. When Iran suspended the 
additional protocol and JCPOA-specific monitoring 
measures, Tehran also halted the implementation of 
Modified Code 3.1 to its comprehensive safeguards 
agreement. Unlike the additional protocol, which 
Iran was implementing voluntarily, Modified Code 
3.1 is a legal obligation. It requires a state to provide 
design information about a new nuclear facility to the 
IAEA once the decision is made to begin or authorize 
construction. Modified Code 3.1 updates the original 
safeguards requirement, which mandated that states 
provide design information 180 days before nuclear 
materials are introduced to a facility. The longer lead 
time allows the agency to develop a more effective 
and thorough safeguards approach. The IAEA disputes 
Iran’s claim that it can suspend Modified Code 3.1 
and continues to reiterate that Modified Code 3.1 
cannot be unliterally suspended—an interpretation 
supported by the IAEA’s Board of Governors. In a June 
2024 censure resolution on Iran, the board called 
upon Tehran to implement Modified Code 3.1. The 
resolution said Modified Code 3.1 is a legal obligation 
that “cannot be modified or suspended unilaterally.”13 
As a result of Iran’s failure to meet its Modified Code 
3.1 obligations, the IAEA has not received design 
information for several new nuclear facilities that 
Tehran announced are under construction. This 
includes a new research reactor at Esfahan and the 
new Iran Hormoz nuclear power plant. These facilities 
pose little immediate proliferation risk, although Iran 
may argue an expanded uranium enrichment program 
is necessary to fuel these reactors. More concerning 
in the short term is the underground facility Iran is 
constructing at Natanz. Some officials and experts have 
suggested it may be intended for uranium enrichment 
and not just centrifuge assembly as Iran claims.14 
(Tehran similarly built the Fordow enrichment facility 
in violation of Modified Code 3.1 after having claimed 
The IAEA Board of Governors censured Iran in June for failing to cooperate with the IAEA’s investigation into undeclared nuclear 
activities and to provide the agency with design information about new nuclear facilities. Iran’s decision to reduce IAEA monitoring 
compounds proliferation risk. (Photo by Dean Calma/IAEA)

76
to have suspended the provision.15) The longer Iran 
goes without providing the information required by 
Modified Code 3.1, the more challenges the IAEA 
may face in designing safeguards and the greater the 
risk that Tehran is building facilities to diversify its 
options for breakout or sneak out if the decision is 
made to develop nuclear weapons. Additional facilities, 
particularly a deeply buried enrichment facility a 
Natanz, also could be more difficult to roll back once 
operational and provide Iran with greater leverage in a 
future nuclear deal. 
Shifting Nuclear Weapons Policy? 
In addition to Iran’s technical advances, recent statements 
demonstrate a shift in Iranian nuclear policy that has 
implications for proliferation risk. 
Iranian officials never admitted that the country pursued 
an illicit nuclear weapons program prior to 2003 (despite 
IAEA conclusions to the contrary) and continue to assert 
that Tehran does not need nuclear weapons for its national 
security.16 In denying interest in nuclear weapons, officials 
frequently cite a fatwa issued by Iran’s Supreme Leader, 
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, in 2003 that forbids the production 
and use of weapons of mass destruction, describing such 
weapons as contrary to Islam.17  
Recent statements from Iranian officials, however, appear 
to confirm what experts have long assessed: the fatwa is not 
immutable, and Iran will rethink its position on nuclear 
weapons if security conditions shift and a nuclear deterrent is 
perceived as necessary.18 
For instance, following Iran’s April 13 attack on Israel, 
Ahmad Haghtalab, the IRGC commander in charge of 
security at Iran’s nuclear facilities, said that Israel’s threats 
against Iranian nuclear facilities “make it possible to 
review our nuclear doctrine and deviate from our previous 
considerations.”19 His reference to “doctrine” suggests 
rethinking the country’s position on nuclear weapons. 
Haghtalab also suggested that Iran would respond to an attack 
on its nuclear facilities by retaliating against Israeli facilities. 
Following Haghtalab’s comments, Kamal Kharrazi, an 
advisor to the Supreme Leader, acknowledged the fatwa’s 
prohibition of nuclear weapons, but said “if the enemy 
threatens you, you will inevitably have to make changes 
to your doctrine.”20 Kharrazi went on to repeat similar 
comments several days later when he said that Iran has 
made “no decision to build a nuclear bomb but should Iran’s 
existence be threatened, there be no choice but to change our 
military doctrine.” 
Former JCPOA negotiator Abbas Aragchi made a similar 
comment in May, stating that Israel’s “nuclear threat can 
disrupt the security equations in the region” and could  
force states to “reconsider their security calculations and 
nuclear doctrines.”21 
Current and former officials involved in Iran’s nuclear 
program lent credence to these threats by underscoring 
that Iran has the necessary capabilities to develop nuclear 
weapons. Current Atomic Energy Organization of Iran (AEOI) 
head Mohammad Eslami and former head Ali Akhbar Salehi 
said in 2024 that Iran has the capabilities necessary to build a 
bomb but has chosen not to do so.22 
Iranian comments about weaponization are likely intended 
for several audiences. Domestically, Iran is signaling it will 
protect its territorial integrity and may be socializing the idea 
of a nuclear deterrent. Iran also is directing these comments at 
a foreign audience, particularly its adversaries in the region and 
the United States, to leverage its threshold status and the threat 
of weaponization to deter further aggression and attacks. 
While Tehran has used its nuclear program as leverage in 
the past, those efforts were focused on gaining concessions. 
When Tehran did attempt to deter certain actions, such as 
further censures by the IAEA board, its actions were aimed 
at expanding the nuclear program, not threats to rethink its 
nuclear doctrine.
Tehran’s willingness to use its threshold status more overtly 
as a source of leverage for deterrence suggests an important 
shift in the country’s nuclear policy. If Tehran perceives 
security benefits from leveraging its threshold status, it will 
seek to cement that status, making it more challenging to 
negotiate a rollback of the program. 
Implications of Iran’s Nuclear T rajectory on  
U.S. Policy
Iran’s nuclear advances and its shift in language regarding its 
nuclear program have implications for U.S. policy options for 
preventing proliferation and reducing nuclear risk. Pathways 
that were viable at the beginning of the Biden administration, 
such as the restoration of the JCPOA, are no longer effective 
mechanisms for addressing Iran’s nuclear risk. As Grossi said 
in a March 28 interview, the “Iran of 2015 is not the “Iran of 
2024,” noting that Iran’s nuclear advances have superseded 
the technological basis that served as a basis for the JCPOA.23 
The United States will need to take these changes into account 
in designing a new strategy for engaging Iran and deterring 
Tehran from taking further steps toward nuclear weapons. 
The New Challenges to Military Options
Successive U.S. presidents, including Joe Biden, have 
threatened to use military force if necessary to prevent Iran 
from developing nuclear weapons. The Biden administration 
continues to reiterate that the United States will strike Iran  

76
as a “last resort” to ensure the country does not acquire 
nuclear weapons.24
 Although Biden tempers military signaling with support 
for diplomacy as the preferred option to address the Iranian 
nuclear crisis, current and former policymakers are calling 
for preventive strikes on Iran’s nuclear program now, despite 
continued assessments from the U.S. intelligence community 
that Iran is not engaged in key nuclear weapons-related 
activities. These calls were particularly pronounced during 
the period of heightened tensions between Iran and Israel in 
April. For instance, former Trump National Security Advisor 
John Bolton suggested that Israel use Iran’s April 13 missile 
attack “as an opportunity to destroy Iran’s nuclear weapons 
program.”25 Although the risk of an Israeli counterstrike on 
Iran’s nuclear infrastructure has waned, there will be continued 
pressure on U.S. and Israeli officials to strike Iran’s nuclear 
facilities absent de-escalation, despite the risks of a strike 
spurring Iranian nuclear weapons development in response. 
The drawbacks to military action have become more 
pronounced due to Iran’s nuclear advances, its shifting 
nuclear policy, and an increased tolerance for risk. First, any 
military strike against Iran’s nuclear infrastructure will only 
set back the program temporarily. This is not new—the United 
States intelligence community has long assessed that Iran has 
the necessary capabilities to develop nuclear weapons if the 
decision were made to do so—and that knowledge cannot be 
bombed away.26 However, Iran’s nuclear advances suggest that 
Tehran could build back more quickly than it could in 2012-
2013 before diplomacy rolled back Iran’s nuclear program, 
particularly because of its centrifuge advances. 
Second, Iran’s nuclear program is more challenging to target 
now than it was in 2013, before the diplomatic breakthrough 
that led to the interim deal, known as the JPOA, and then 
later the JCPOA. Since then, Iran has expanded its nuclear 
program, building more hardened and dispersed facilities. Of 
particular concern is the new facility under construction at 
the Natanz complex that appears to be more deeply buried 
and difficult to target than Fordow. Targeting Fordow and the 
Natanz facility would require repeated strikes using the largest 
conventional weapon in the U.S. arsenal.27 
Given the complexity and challenges inherent in a large-
scale military strike, there is an increased risk that Iran will 
divert materials to covert locations if it sees any indication 
of an imminent attack. Tehran may have already moved 
technologies and materials that are not subject to IAEA 
safeguards, such as centrifuges. The gaps in monitoring 
make it difficult to track any such diversions, increasing the 
challenges in conducting military strikes. 
Third, the shift in Iran’s nuclear strategy and Tehran’s 
decision to directly attack Israel on April 13 to retaliate for a 
Iran is building a new, deeply buried facility at the Natanz nuclear complex that would be challenging to destroy in the event of a 
military strike. (Photo by Majid Saeedi/Getty Images)

98
strike on an Iranian diplomatic compound in Syria suggests 
that Tehran is less risk-averse and more willing to consider 
developing nuclear weapons in response to a strike. Recent 
statements from officials about Iran rethinking its nuclear 
doctrine appear designed to deter an attack but also signal 
Iran’s resolve to respond to any targeting of its nuclear 
facilities by developing nuclear weapons. These statements 
could also put more domestic pressure on Iran to follow 
through on its threat to weaponize in response to an attack. 
Relatedly, Iran’s willingness to directly strike Israel and its 
threat to retaliate in response to further attacks on its nuclear 
facilities suggests that Tehran will respond militarily to any 
strike against its nuclear program, likely opening a broader 
conflict with the United States and/or Israel. 
There is also a risk that the United States or Israel 
prematurely resorts to military force by miscalculating Iran’s 
intentions. Iran’s near-zero breakout window and limited 
monitoring reduce decision-making time, increasing the risk 
of misinterpreting Iran’s intentions. 
Despite these challenges and the risk of miscalculation, the 
United States is still likely to resort to force if there is evidence 
that Tehran has made the decision to develop nuclear 
weapons. No U.S. president will want the legacy of allowing a 
nuclear-armed Iran, irrespective of the likelihood of a military 
action igniting a push to weaponization down the road and a 
broader regional conflict. 
The Urgent Need for Nuclear Deescalation
The drawbacks of military action underscore the critical 
importance of diplomatic options to walk Iran back from 
the threshold of nuclear weapons and expand monitoring of 
its program. As retired U.S. General Frank Mckenzie, former 
commander of U.S. Central Command, said at a gathering 
in April, “It remains my opinion today that the best way to 
keep Iranians from possessing a nuclear weapon remains 
some form of diplomatic agreement, however unsatisfying 
and incomplete parts of it may be. The worst way is through 
military action against their nuclear program either by us or 
... the Israelis.” He also noted that, “the less you know about 
the problems and risks inherent in a strike, the more positive 
about its potential success one tends to be.”28
With the unexpected election of Masoud Pezeshkian after 
the deaths of President Ebrahim Raisi and Foreign Minister 
Hossein Amir Abdollahian in a helicopter crash on May 
19 and the U.S. presidential election five months away, it 
appears that neither side has the political will or time to begin 
negotiations on a broad comprehensive nuclear framework. 
Reciprocal de-escalatory steps, however, are a viable option to 
stabilize the nuclear crisis and reduce proliferation risk until 
after the U.S. election.
Despite the presidential transition in Iran, it is unlikely 
that Tehran will significantly alter its nuclear trajectory. 
Although the presidency can impact policy outcomes, as 
President Hassan Rouhani’s support for negotiations and the 
JCPOA demonstrated, nuclear policy is set by the Supreme 
Leader’s office. Iran’s willingness to engage with the Biden 
administration on limited, de-escalatory nuclear measures 
in 2023 and comments from officials over the past several 
months suggest that the country may be willing to take 
similar steps in the coming months in exchange for sanctions 
relief.29 A de-escalatory package may be even more attractive 
to the new president if it includes tangible economic benefits 
that would provide an early win for a new administration 
seeking to establish itself and shore up support. 
A crucial component of any de-escalatory package should 
be enhancing IAEA monitoring and expanding access for 
inspectors. Although enhancing transparency does not move 
Iran back from its threshold status, the benefits are two-fold.
First, in the short term, additional monitoring will provide 
greater assurance any dash toward nuclear weapons at Iran’s 
declared facilities or diversion of materials will be more 
quickly detected. Ensuring the earliest possible detection 
increases the window for the international community to 
respond to an Iranian breakout, which is crucial when the 
timeframe for producing weapons-grade material for multiple 
bombs is so short. Additionally, monitoring may deter Iran 
from diverting materials, such as centrifuges, for a sneak-out 
or to preserve capacity in the event of a military strike. 
Second, enhancing transparency now can help lay the 
groundwork for a comprehensive deal down the road. 
If the IAEA can begin reconstituting a record of Iran’s 
nuclear activities, the agency will have a clearer picture of 
where the challenges will be in establishing new baselines. 
Understanding these challenges can inform how future 
negotiators think about crafting an effective agreement and 
what additional information or actions may be necessary from 
Iran to address the risks posed by these gaps. 
To achieve these benefits, the United States and its partners 
should focus on incentivizing Iran to take de-escalatory 
steps that improve transparency. The priority should be 
expanding IAEA access to facilities that support the country’s 
nuclear program but do not house nuclear materials, such as 
centrifuge workshops and uranium mills. Allowing inspectors 
to access these facilities provides both of the aforementioned 
benefits: deterring the diversion of non-nuclear materials 
and providing the agency with information to begin 
reconstructing a history of Iran’s nuclear activities, such as 
production and inventories of centrifuge components. 
Since it is unlikely that Iran would agree to implement 
the additional protocol and provide access under that 

98
agreement, the agency and Iran could negotiate a separate 
access arrangement that would allow inspectors to visit 
certain facilities outside of the sites inspected under the 
comprehensive safeguards agreement. There is a precedent for 
these types of technical visits.
This access arrangement could include Iran agreeing to 
turn over surveillance recordings from key facilities between 
February 2021, when Iran and the IAEA reached an agreement 
to allow certain monitoring, and June 2022, when Tehran 
disconnected those cameras. Grossi has emphasized the 
importance of the agency having access to that data.30 
If additional access cannot be negotiated, an alternative 
could be for the agency to allow the IAEA to reinstall—
or in the case of new facilities introduce—surveillance 
equipment and allow the IAEA regular access to the data 
recorded. If Tehran is willing to hand over the recordings, 
this arrangement could provide similar benefits in deterring 
diversion and monitoring Iran’s capacities. 
Beyond reintroducing access and/or monitoring at sites that 
support the nuclear program, Iran could restore daily access 
to inspectors at Natanz and Fordow and install additional 
enrichment monitors. Although inspectors have frequent 
access to these sites under Iran’s comprehensive safeguards 
agreement and Iran’s enrichment is monitored in parts of 
Natanz and Fordow, daily access would provide additional 
assurance that any move by Iran to breakout or divert material 
would be quickly detected. Daily access and enrichment 
monitoring also benefit Tehran by reducing the risk of U.S. 
and/or Israeli miscalculations. For example, if there were to 
be an accidental spike in enrichment above declared levels 
or a material accountancy error, the IAEA may be better 
positioned to quickly determine if the incident was accidental 
or intentional. 
A de-escalatory package could also include a commitment 
from Iran to resume implementation of Modified Code 
3.1. Iran’s adherence to these legally required safeguards 
measures does less to reduce proliferation risk in the short-
term. However, given Tehran’s history of building covert, 
undeclared facilities, having Modified Code 3.1 in place would 
provide greater assurance that Iran is not building a new, 
more deeply buried uranium enrichment facility at the Natanz 
complex and that new facilities can be effectively safeguarded. 
Prioritizing monitoring has clear benefits in reducing the 
risk of breakout, diversion, and miscalculation, but Tehran 
would also gain from expanding access. Iran continues to 
assert that it does not seek a broader conflict with the United 
States or Israel and that its nuclear program is peaceful.31 
Miscalculation over Iran’s nuclear activities increases the risk 
of military strikes against the program, which could push Iran 
to a broader conflict and reduce a key source of leverage it has 
over the United States. Additional monitoring reduces those 
risks and helps keep open the option of a future deal. 
 Comments from Iranian officials also suggest that Tehran 
may be open to expanding monitoring and IAEA access. In 
March 2023, Iran agreed in a joint statement with the IAEA 
to voluntarily expand agency monitoring. After taking some 
steps in April and May, such as allowing the IAEA to install 
enrichment monitoring devices and cameras at a centrifuge 
Newly-elected Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian arrives at the shrine of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. During his campaign, 
Pezeshkian expressed support for negotiations with the West over Iran’s nuclear program. (Photo by Atta Kenare/AFP via Getty Images)

1110
workshop in Esfahan, Tehran ceased cooperating with the 
agency under the March 2023 statement. In September 2023, 
Eslami told Grossi not to expect any additional cooperation 
without sanctions relief.32 After a May 7 trip to Iran to revive 
the March 2023 joint statement, Grossi told reporters Iran is 
looking for incentives the IAEA cannot offer, namely sanctions 
relief, before expanding cooperation.33 This suggests that 
monitoring may be an avenue where Iran is willing to negotiate 
reciprocal de-escalatory measures. 
Although transparency should be the primary focus of a 
de-escalation package, the United States could seek additional 
commitments from Iran that reduce proliferation risk. Tehran 
is highly unlikely to take steps that extend the country’s 
breakout, which is near-zero for the first nuclear weapon and 
about a month for five to six weapons, or move Tehran back 
from threshold status. However, Iran’s leaders may be willing 
to take steps that prevent breakout to multiple weapons from 
dropping further. 
Given that Iran will not risk breaking out to produce one 
bomb’s worth of weapons-grade uranium, preventing the 
breakout time to multiple weapons from decreasing further 
provides greater assurance that any move to weaponization 
will be detected with enough time for the United States and 
the international community to respond. To achieve this, Iran 
could convert 20 and 60 percent enriched uranium produced 
beyond an agreed-upon stockpile number into powder or 
blend it down back to 5 percent. Tehran could also commit not 
to install or operate additional advanced centrifuge machines. 
In exchange for taking these steps, the United States could 
provide Iran with tangible economic benefits. Given that 
the United States faces a credibility deficit when it comes to 
sanctions relief after the Trump administration’s withdrawal 
from the JCPOA and the Biden administration’s decision to 
halt payments using the Iranian funds transferred to Qatar 
as part of the 2023 de-escalation package, Washington 
could look at options to work with states in the region and 
states that have economic ties with Iran, such as China, to 
create a more credible incentive package. That could include 
unfreezing additional funds for humanitarian trade or 
providing waivers for limited oil transactions. One advantage 
of the latter incentive is that it could be quickly reversed if 
Iran reneged on its escalatory commitments. Encouraging 
limited regional investment in Iran could also be an attractive 
option for Iran and provide buy-in from regional states. 
A Longer-T erm Framework
Expanded IAEA access and more intrusive monitoring can 
deescalate tensions in the short-term and provide greater 
assurance that the agency will detect a breakout, but it is 
insufficient in the long-term. Allowing Tehran to remain a 
threshold state increases the risk of the country developing 
nuclear weapons or using its proximity to weapons for 
leverage or coercive purposes. Furthermore, Iran’s threshold 
status risks driving other states in the region, most notably 
Saudi Arabia, to match its capabilities. 
Iran’s experience with the JCPOA, however, suggests that if 
Tehran is interested in a nuclear deal, it is unlikely to accept a 
similarly structured transactional bargain. Even before Trump 
withdrew from the JCPOA and reimposed sanctions—despite 
Iran’s compliance—Iran was dissatisfied with the performance 
of sanctions relief. If the United States cannot credibly lift 
sanctions, the credibility of relief as an incentive diminishes. 
Washington’s ability to reimpose sanctions, despite widespread 
support for the JCPOA internationally and Iran’s compliance 
with the accord, further demonstrates the credibility deficit the 
United States will face in future negotiations.34
Additionally, from a nonproliferation perspective, a 
similarly structured agreement will be unlikely to deliver 
nonproliferation benefits on par with the JCPOA, most 
notably the same 12-month breakout. Although breakout 
should not be the prevailing metric for determining the 
nonproliferation value of the deal it will carry important 
weight politically: anything less than what the JCPOA 
achieved will open a future agreement up to criticism in 
Washington and increase the risk that Congress will try to 
block implementation of the accord. 
Furthermore, if Iran perceives security benefits from 
leveraging its threshold status, future negotiations may need 
to address more directly the regional threat environment or 
support dialogue at the regional level that mitigates Iran’s 
perceived need to remain on the threshold of nuclear weapons. 
Given these challenges, the United States should be 
considering new approaches for negotiating with Iran that go 
beyond transactional bargaining. A new strategy could include 
the following considerations: 
1. Greater focus on transparency and monitoring. A 
new nuclear deal with Iran will likely include some 
restrictions on the program but even with limitations 
in place, the international community will likely need 
to contend with an Iran that is technically closer to a 
weapon than it was under the JCPOA. The irreversibility 
of Iran’s knowledge gains and the speed at which it 
could reconstitute its program dilutes the effectiveness 
of capacity limits on the uranium enrichment program. 
This suggests that the monitoring and verification 
measures will play a more crucial role in a future deal. 
In addition to intrusively monitoring Iran’s fuel cycle 
capabilities, verification measures could include a 
greater focus on monitoring prohibited weaponization 

1110
activities such as those laid out in Section T of the 
JCPOA and establishing an agreed-upon system for 
assessing compliance. 
2. Broaden the array of incentives offered to Iran. 
Washington’s demonstrated ability to reimpose 
sanctions reduces the credibility of a sanctions-relief 
off-ramp in any future deal. In addition to studying the 
JCPOA experience and examining how to provide more 
tangible and durable benefits when sanctions are lifted, 
a new framework for negotiations should consider 
additional incentives that would be attractive to Iran 
and more durable. This could include encouraging 
greater direct investment in Iran, including from states 
in the region, and guarantees on cooperative nuclear 
activities that benefit Tehran without increasing 
proliferation risk. Cooperative nuclear activities could 
include assistance on fuel fabrication technology or a 
U.S. commitment to purchase uranium enriched to 20 
percent if Tehran produced the material under certain 
conditions. Such an arrangement would also benefit 
the U.S. nuclear industry and the 20 percent gap in 
fuel availability that is hindering the development and 
testing of new nuclear reactor designs.35 
3. Involve regional stakeholders in nuclear restrictions. 
The nuclear landscape in the Middle East has shifted 
significantly since negotiations commenced on the 
JCPOA. There is greater interest in civil nuclear energy 
and other peaceful applications of nuclear technology, 
such as nuclear medicine and nuclear applications 
in agriculture. This expanding civil nuclear interest 
provides both risks and opportunities. As states 
develop nuclear programs there is a risk they will seek 
to match Iran’s fissile production and weaponization-
related capabilities, increasing proliferation risk. But 
the expansion also creates opportunities. Iran has 
long argued that it does not wish to be singled out 
within the NPT regime. Pursuing certain restraints at 
a regional level would address that concern. States, 
for instance, could jointly agree to implement IAEA 
additional protocols, agree to prohibitions on certain 
weaponization activities, and/or refrain from plutonium 
reprocessing. These agreements could reinforce 
negotiations between the United States and Iran and 
reduce regional proliferation risks. Relatedly, the rise in 
nuclear programs creates opportunities for collaboration 
in areas of shared interest, such as nuclear security and 
safety. Encouraging cooperative activities in these areas 
helps build ties between expert communities that serve 
as a form of transparency and communication regarding 
a country’s nuclear intentions. 
4. Situate a nuclear deal within a broader Iran policy. 
One of the most common criticisms regarding the 
JCPOA was that it did not address Iran’s activities 
in the region that the United States and its partners 
consider destabilizing. The JCPOA was never intended 
to be a panacea—it was narrowly construed to remove 
the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran. The experience 
of holding a transactional nuclear agreement to a 
transformational standard, however, is indicative of 
the challenges facing a new nuclear agreement. It 
suggests that sustaining a nuclear accord in the future 
is more likely to be successful if the United States 
can demonstrate that it is engaging, or supporting 
engagement, on a broader range of security issues. The 
United States could look to support security dialogues 
between Iran and other states in the region and set up 
parallel forums to discuss areas where the United States 
and Iran may have shared concerns. 
Strengthen Nonproliferation Norms
The United States should complement its Iran strategy with 
efforts to strengthen nonproliferation norms writ large. 
Although the P5+1 (China, France, Germany, Russia, the 
United Kingdom, and the United States) is no longer a viable 
structure for projecting great-power unity on preventing 
Iranian proliferation, these states still have an interest in 
preventing the erosion of nonproliferation norms and the 
rise of additional threshold states. Russia is unlikely to play 
a constructive role even on general provisions to strengthen 
nonproliferation given its blatant rejection of nuclear 
norms. China, however, has an interest in deterring further 
proliferation—particularly given South Korea may be the most 
likely state behind Iran to develop nuclear weapons—and 
preventing conflict in the Middle East. 
To date, China appears reluctant to use its leverage with Iran 
specifically to encourage the country to de-escalate. However, 
Beijing may be willing to engage with the United States 
and the E3 more generally on reinforcing nonproliferation 
norms. If these states were to express shared concerns about 
certain civil nuclear activities relevant to weaponization or 
articulate the consequences of a state withdrawing from the 
NPT and/or weaponizing a civil nuclear program, it could 
help demonstrate to Iran that it will face costs for developing 
nuclear weapons. 
Conclusion
With U.S. attention focused on the Gaza conflict, the Biden 
administration’s strategy toward Iran appears to be focused 
on avoiding escalation and preventing a crisis.  This approach 
risks missing an opportunity to stabilize the nuclear crisis 

PB12
ENDNOTES
1. Eric Brewer, “Iran’s New Nuclear Threat: How Tehran Has Weaponized its 
Threshold Status,” Foreign Affairs, June 25, 2024, https://www.foreignaffairs 
.com/iran/irans-new-nuclear-threat.  
2. Julia Masterson and Kelsey Davenport, “Restoring the Nuclear Deal with Iran 
Benefits U.S. Nonproliferation Priorities,” Arms Control Association Issue Brief, 
Volume 13, Issue 1, March 15, 2021, https://www.armscontrol.org/issue 
-briefs/2021-03/restoring-nuclear-deal-iran-benefits-us-nonproliferation-priorities.
3. Kelsey Davenport and Julia Masterson, “The Limits of Breakout Estimates in 
Assessing Iran’s Nuclear Program,” Arms Control Association Issue Brief, Volume 
12, Issue 6, August 4, 2020, https://www.armscontrol.org/issue-briefs/2020-08 
/limits-breakout-estimates-assessing-irans-nuclear-program.
4. Jon Gambrell, “UN atomic chief backs nuclear power at COP28 as world 
reackons with proliferation,” Associated Press, November 30, 2023, https://
apnews.com/article/cop28-climate-talks-grossi-iaea-iran-nuclear-power 
-11a37c802d7e0bca6538d5c66a9ec6fd. 
5. Jon Gambrell, “An Iranian nuclear facility is so deep underground that US 
airstrikes likely couldn’t reach it,” Associated Press, May 22, 2023, https://
apnews.com/article/iran-nuclear-natanz-uranium-enrichment-underground 
-project-04dae673fc937af04e62b65dd78db2e0. 
6. “The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action at a Glance,” Arms Control 
Association Factsheet, 2016, https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/joint 
-comprehensive-plan-action-jcpoa-glance. 
7. “New Iran Law Accelerating Enrichment,” The Iran Primer, United Institute of 
Peace, December 7, 2020, https://iranprimer.usip.org/blog/2020/dec/07/new 
-iran-law-accelerating-enrichment.
8. Andrew England, Iran open to ‘serious dialogue,’ says UN nuclear chief, 
Financial Times, May 14, 2024 https://www.ft.com/content/d5e07404-2fed-4f60 
-ba11-59e6734665c2. 
9. Verification and monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in light of 
United Nations Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Director 
General, International Atomic Energy Agency, GOV/2023/8, February 28, 2023, 
https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/documents/gov2023-8.pdf. 
10. “IAEA chief worried Israel could strike Iran nuclear facilities,” Reuters, April 
16, 2024, https://www.straitstimes.com/world/iaea-chief-worried-israel-could 
-strike-iran-nuclear-facilities.
11. Verification and monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in light of 
United Nations Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Director 
General, International Atomic Energy Agency, GOV/2023/57, November 15, 
2023, https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/documents/gov2023-57.pdf. 
12. INARA
13. NPT Safeguards Agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran, Resolution of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency’s Board of Governors, GOV/2024/39, 
June 5, 2024, https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/24/06/gov2024-39.pdf. 
14. Jon Gambrell, “An Iranian nuclear facility is so deep underground that 
US airstrikes likely couldn’t reach it,” Associated Press, May 22, 2023, https://
apnews.com/article/iran-nuclear-natanz-uranium-enrichment-underground 
-project-04dae673fc937af04e62b65dd78db2e0.
15. James Acton, “Iran Violated International Obligations on Qom Facility,” 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 25, 2009, https://
carnegieendowment.org/research/2009/09/iran-violated-international 
-obligations-on-qom-facility?lang=en. 
16. “Iran says nuclear weapons have no place in its nuclear doctrine,” Reuters, 
April 22, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/iran-says-nuclear 
-weapons-have-no-place-its-nuclear-doctrine-2024-04-22/. 
17. Mohammad Hossein Sabouri, “Iran’s Nuclear Fatwa: Analysis of a 
Debate.” Journal of Military Ethics 15 (3): 227–45, 2016.
18. Farzan Sabet, “Iran’s nuclear weapon option emerges from the shadows 
during the April crisis,” Iran Wonk, Substack, May 7, 2024, https://iranwonk 
.substack.com/p/irans-nuclear-weapon-option-emerges.
19. “Iranian commander says Tehran could review ‘nuclear doctrine’ amid 
Israeli threats,” Reuters, April 18, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/middle 
-east/iranian-commander-warns-tehran-could-review-its-nuclear-doctrine-amid 
-israeli-2024-04-18/. 
20. Beatrice Farhat, “Iran warns it will change ‘nuclear doctrine’ if threatened 
by Israel,” Al-Monitor, May 9, 2024, https://www.al-monitor.com/originals 
/2024/05/iran-warns-it-will-change-nuclear-doctrine-if-threatened 
-israel#ixzz8ZpquuLXA. 
21. Abbas Aragchi, Remarks, Al Jazeera Forum, May 27, 2024.  
22. Ali Akbar Salehi, Interview on Nasim TV , February 11, 2024. 
23. Rafael Mariano Grossi, Interview, Amanpour and Co., PBS, March 29, 2024.  
24. “Biden says he would use force as ‘last resort’ to keep Iran from 
nuclear weapons,” Reuters, July 13, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/
middle-east/biden-says-he-would-use-force-last-resort-keep-iran-nuclear-
weapons-2022-07-13/. 
25. “Former Trump advisor Bolton: Opportunity for Israel to destroy Iran 
nuclear program,” The Jerusalem Post, April 14, 2014, https://www.jpost.com/
middle-east/former-national-security-advisor-bolton-opportunity-for-israel-to-
destroy-iran-nuclear-program-796985. 
26. “Iran: Nuclear Intentions and Capabilities, National Intelligence Estimate,” 
National Intelligence Council, November 2007, https://www.dni.gov/files/
documents/Newsroom/Reports%20and%20Pubs/20071203_release.pdf. 
27. “Weighing the Costs and Benefits of Miltiary Action Against Iran,” The Iran 
Project, September 2012, https://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/media/
documents/event/IranReport_091112_ExecutiveSummary.pdf.
28. General (Ret.) Frank McKenzie, “The Iran Enigma,” Global National Security 
Institute, University of South Florida, April 10, 2024, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=kgJzDXhWfdw&list=PLm9bckPQyMTohGAbdty7uPx0dpzTppEy 
J&index=3&t=701s.
29. Michael Crowely, Ronen Bergman, and Farnaz Fassihi, “Prisioner Deal 
Could Smooth Effort to Contain Iran’s Nuclear Program,” The New York Times, 
August, 10, 2024, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/08/10/us/politics/iran-us-
prisoners-nuclear-program.html; Kelsey Davenport, “IAEA Condemns Iran 
for Failure to Cooperate,” Arms Control Today, December 2023, https://www.
armscontrol.org/act/2023-12/news/iaea-condemns-iran-failure-cooperate. 
30. Kelsey Davenport, “IAEA Services Cameras in Iran,” P4+1 and Iran Nuclear 
Deal Alert, Arms Control Association, February 16, 2024,  https://www 
.armscontrol.org/blog/2024-01/p4-1-iran-nuclear-deal-alert. 
31. “Iran Says it Does Not Seek Escalation in the Region,” Asharq Al Awsat, 
April 16, 2024, https://english.aawsat.com/world/4968191-iran-says-does-not-
seek-escalation-region.
32. “NPT Safeguards Agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran,” Report 
by the Director General, International Atomic Energy Agency, GOV/2023/58, 
https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/documents/gov2023-58.pdf.
33. Press Conference with IAEA Director General Rafael Mariano Grossi, 
IAEAvideo, Vienna, May 7, 2024, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4yMI2IFo
y78&list=PLCsYX9QVCDTGpRPcQo7xiHOR-xZoHuJA0&index=2.
34. “Iran welcomes US sanctions relief, but says ‘not enough,’” Al Jazeera, 
February 5, 2022.  https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/2/5/iran-welcomes-us-
sanctions-relief-but-expects-more.
35. “US seeks proposals for domestic HALEU production,” World Nuclear News, 
January 10, 2024, https://world-nuclear-news.org/Articles/US-seeks-proposals-
for-domestic-HALEU-production.
through mutual de-escalation and lay the groundwork for 
future negotiations. Providing Iran with an incentive to 
enhance monitoring would be a small price to pay to reduce 
the risk of proliferation and miscalculation. Deescalating 
nuclear tensions also creates time and space for future 
negotiations on a longer-term agreement. It is past time that 
U.S. diplomatic urgency equaled the urgency of the threat 
posed by Iran’s growing nuclear program. 