Yemen Conflict Monitor | ACLED
Skip to main content
Register or log in to myACLED
Create your free myACLED account to access advanced features, effective tools, and the full power of ACLED data.
If you already have an account, please log in.
Register
Login
Get in touch
The YCM is a living hub that combines data-driven analysis with robust qualitative assessments of political violence and disorder to enable greater awareness of how the status quo is shifting, complemented by providing a deeper contextual understanding of the conflict environment.
Background
What is the YCM?
The YCM is an online platform providing an array of analytical tools and products to help users keep up to date with the latest developments. The YCM combines data-driven analysis with robust qualitative assessments of political violence and disorder to enable greater awareness of how the security situation is evolving.
Yemen remains one of the world’s
most complex and severe conflict environments
, making timely and reliable information on violence patterns, drivers, and agents an imperative to inform realistic dialogue and negotiation at all levels, allow for conflict-sensitive and effective program design, and bolster accountability.
YCM outputs
The YCM includes an interactive map of Yemen, updated weekly, displaying incidents and fatalities over a set period of time, with a number of filters so that users can focus on areas of interest. It additionally features multiple monitors designed to track key thematic developments and connections with ACLED’s conflict forecasting and early warning tools to identify potential escalation hotspots across Yemen.
Interactive map
The dashboard maps political violence events in Yemen and related events in Saudi Arabia since the onset of the regional conflict in March 2015. Data can be filtered by date and event type.
For further data exploration, see our interactive map covering
Red Sea attacks
.
Regional profiles
feature interactive maps showing events within each region, and
actor profiles
feature interactive maps showing events featuring each actor.
Access restricted
Register or upgrade your myACLED account to see this map
Find out more
Restricted page:
Data on Yemen
Download this file for all of our Yemen data since 2020. The file is updated with new data every Tuesday.
Explore further
Middle East Overview: May 2026
April was the deadliest month in Gaza this year, conflict in Iraq took on its own trajectory, and violence continued in southern Lebanon despite the ceasefire.
7 May 2026
Middle East Overview: April 2026
On the heels of the US-Iran two-week ceasefire agreement, ACLED experts detail the impacts in the region, including in Lebanon, the Gulf, Yemen, Israel, and Iraq — and their outlook on what's to come.
8 April 2026
Luca Nevola on Houthi attacks following weeks of inactivity
ACLED’s Yemen and the Gulf Senior Analyst Luca Nevola comments on Houthi involvement in the war after weeks of relative silence
30 March 2026
Luca Nevola on why the Houthis are holding back — and whether it will last
ACLED’s Yemen and the Gulf Senior Analyst Luca Nevola comments on Houthi stance amid regional escalation
27 March 2026
See all
Inside ACLED’s work on the Yemen conflict
ACLED’s Yemen Conflict Monitor navigates a complex media landscape, cross-checking Arabic-language sources, verified social media, and local partner insights to provide the most reliable picture of political violence.
ACLED’s Senior Analyst for Yemen,
Luca Nevola
, breaks down the key challenges of collecting reliable conflict data.
Showing 10 of 65 items
Middle East Overview: May 2026
April was the deadliest month in Gaza this year, conflict in Iraq took on its own trajectory, and violence continued in southern Lebanon despite the ceasefire.
7 May 2026
Middle East Overview: April 2026
On the heels of the US-Iran two-week ceasefire agreement, ACLED experts detail the impacts in the region, including in Lebanon, the Gulf, Yemen, Israel, and Iraq — and their outlook on what's to come.
8 April 2026
Middle East Special Issue: March 2026
ACLED experts unpack the evolution of the US-Israeli war with Iran and its escalation throughout the Middle East.
4 March 2026
Al-Qaeda’s “new normal” in Yemen: strategic continuity despite a leadership change
AQAP’s new leader signaled he would shift the group’s focus. So far, his early rhetoric hasn’t matched ground reality.
12 February 2026
Middle East Overview: February 2026
Israel intensified its attacks on Gaza and Lebanon, deadly state repression across Iran halts protests, and violence escalated between state forces and the SDF in northern Syria.
9 February 2026
Middle East Overview: January 2026
In Gaza, lethal hostilities continued to subside, while Israel consolidated and expanded its control; protests rocked Iran; and Gulf proxy rivalries fuelled a political storm in southern Yemen.
12 January 2026
Israel recalibrates its military campaigns in a region still on edge
In 2025, Israel launched attacks in Iran, Lebanon, Palestine, Qatar, Syria, and Yemen. Its next moves may be influenced by diplomatic efforts and internal politics.
11 December 2025
تغذّي صراعات القوى الإقليمية توتّراتٍ متصاعدة على امتداد البحر الأحمر
خفّض الحوثيون هجماتهم على سفن الشحن التجاري، لكن التطورات في القرن الإفريقي واليمن تضع البحر الأحمر عند مفترق طرق بين خفض التصعيد والانزلاق نحو دوّامة من العنف.
11 December 2025
Regional power struggles fuel simmering tensions across the Red Sea
The Houthis have drawn down their attacks on commercial shipping, but dynamics in the Horn of Africa and Yemen bring the Red Sea to a crossroads between de-escalation and spiraling violence.
11 December 2025
إسرائيل تعيد ضبط حملاتها العسكرية في منطقة لا تزال متوترة
في عام 2025، شنّت إسرائيل هجمات على إيران ولبنان وفلسطين وقطر وسوريا واليمن. وقد تتأثر خطواتها المقبلة بالجهود الدبلوماسية والسياسات الداخلية.
11 December 2025
Share on
Share to social media
X
Facebook
Linkedin