Jeffrey Lewis |  James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies
About
Research
Events
Education
Experts
Donate
Jeffrey Lewis
Director
East Asia Nonproliferation Program (EANP)
[email protected]
Monterey, CA
831.647.6616
Background
Before coming to CNS, he was the Director of the Nuclear Strategy and Nonproliferation Initiative at the New America Foundation.
Prior to that, Dr. Jeffrey Lewis was Executive Director of the Managing the Atom Project at the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Executive Director of the Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs, a Visiting Fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and a desk officer in the Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Policy. He is also a Research Scholar at the Center for International and Security Studies at the University of Maryland’s School of Public Policy (CISSM).
Education
Dr. Lewis received his Ph.D. in Policy Studies (International Security and Economic Policy) from the University of Maryland and his B.A. in Philosophy and Political Science from Augustana College in Rock Island, Ill.
CNS Work
CNS Experts Join Nobel Laureate Assembly for the Prevention of Nuclear War
On the 80th anniversary of the Trinity nuclear test explosion in Alamogordo, New Mexico, Nobel Laureates and nuclear experts convened at the University of Chicago.
New Podcast ‘The Reason We’re All Still Here’ Explores Nuclear History
Outrider.org launched a podcast “The Reason We’re All Still Here,” with Jeffrey Lewis discussing nuclear weapons history and the citizens who chose to build a safer world.
Putin’s War with Ukraine: Voices of CNS Experts on the Russian Invasion
A compendium of CNS expert analysis and commentary on the nuclear ramifications of the war, as well as educational materials for expert and general audience.
A Full Spectrum Look at North Korea’s Nuclear Program: From Above, On the Ground, and In Person
The three presentations demonstrated the power of the viewing from a multi-spectrum perspective and highlighted CNS’ unusual and diverse pool of expertise.
It’s Time to Accept That North Korea Has Nuclear Weapons
Washington needs to contemplate the unthinkable: accepting that North Korea is a nuclear state. – Jeffrey Lewis in the New York Times.
The day Middlebury graduate students detected the start of the Russia-Ukraine war
From that moment forward, all other CNS OSINT work in the office screeched to a halt. This night was the first time my work was in response to a real time crisis.
OSINT Webinar: “So You Want to be an Internet Detective?”
WEBINAR: Focus on open-source tools and their power to enable anyone including students, policy makers, journalists, and experts to get to the truth.
Whose Bomb Is It Anyway?
All nuclear weapons programs are the same. Think you can tell them apart?
Masters Students in Dual Degree Program Defend Theses
Students from Russia, the United States and South Korea presented their final papers as the result of their studies in 2019-2021.
Slowing a New Arms Race Means Compromising on Missile Defenses
If Biden wants to slow this arms race, he will need to accept limits on U.S. missile defense systems.
1
2
3
4
5
6
...
11
>>
View list on separate page
Bibliography
Dr. Lewis is the author of
Minimum Means of Reprisal: China’s Search for Security in the Nuclear Age
(MIT Press, 2007) and publishes
ArmsControlWonk.com
, the leading blog on disarmament, arms control and nonproliferation. He also contributes a regular column on nuclear issues to Foreignpolicy.com
Experts
Experts by Alphabetical List
Experts by Topic
Experts by Location
General Media Inquiries
CNS in the Media
Mailing Address
James Martin Center for
Nonproliferation Studies
460 Pierce Street
Monterey, CA 93940 USA
Campus Map
Contact
Email:
[email protected]
Phone: +1 (831) 647-4154
Fax: +1 (831) 647-3519
Additional Locations
Press inquiries:
Experts
Connect & Contribute
Subscribe to Newsletter
Donate
Copyright © 2026 James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS). All rights reserved.