ASIA
REPORT
Military Operations  
Other Than War in  
China’s Foreign Policy
By James Siebens, Ryan Lucas
Military Coercion  
and Chinese Foreign 
Policy
Defense Strategy  
& Planning

1
The Stimson Center
The Stimson Center promotes international security, shared prosperity and justice 
through applied research and independent analysis, deep engagement, and policy 
innovation. For three decades, Stimson has been a leading voice on urgent global issues. 
Founded in the twilight years of the Cold War, the Stimson Center pioneered practical 
new steps toward stability and security in an uncertain world. Today, as changes in 
power and technology usher in a challenging new era, Stimson is at the forefront: 
Engaging new voices, generating innovative ideas and analysis, and building solutions to 
promote international security, prosperity, and justice 
.
Please Cite this Publication As
Siebens, James and Ryan Lucas  
2022, Military Operations Other Than War in China’s Foreign Policy, The Stimson Center, 
Washington, D.C., USA 
Front Cover Image
UNAMID Honour Guards Protect Borehole, UN Photo/Albert Gonzalez Farran
 
Back Cover Image
First Detachment of China’s Peacekeeping Infantry Battalion Arrives in Juba, UN Photo/
UN Photo/JC McIlwaine
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was made possible through the generous support of Stand Together Trust 
and an anonymous donor in the interest of fostering better understanding of China’s 
foreign policy and strategy. The authors would like to extend special thanks to Drake 
Avila, Ike Barrash, Spencer Dingman, Junyang Hu, Lucas Nardin, Meghan Shoop, 
Jocelyn Wang, and Will Weinfield, each of whom contributed research and editorial 
support to this project during their internships with the Stimson Center’s Defense 
Strategy and Planning program. The authors would also like to thank Jason Li and Jesse 
Marks, who served as informal advisors on this project. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Tables ..........................................................................................................................1
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................3
Introduction .............................................................................................................................4
Historical Development and Key Objectives .......................................................................9
“Small Action, Big Command”: PLA Thinking on MOOTW ............................................15
Types of MOOTW ..................................................................................................................23
Counterterrorism and Stability Maintenance ................................................................24
Rights and Interests Protection ........................................................................................29
Counterpiracy and Far-Seas Escort .................................................................................33
International Peacekeeping Operations ..........................................................................38
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HA/DR) ..............................................38
Non-Combatant Evacuation Operations (NEOs) .........................................................43
International Military Exercises and Military Diplomacy ...........................................50
PLA Development and MOOTW .........................................................................................53
Responding to Diversified Missions ................................................................................56
Unifying C2 and Promoting Jointness ............................................................................58
Targeted and Flexible Use of Force Abroad ....................................................................60
Considerations for Policymakers ..........................................................................................63
 
TABLE OF TABLES
Table 1: MOOTW Major Characteristics .............................................................................16
Table 2: Strategic Guidance for MOOTW ............................................................................17

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
2 3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
China’s President Xi Jinping recently approved trial guidelines to provide a specific “legal 
underpinning for non-war military operations. ”1 This announcement has drawn widespread 
attention to what has heretofore been an underappreciated element of China’s military 
doctrine. In the US, such operations are more commonly known as “military operations 
other than war” (MOOTW). However, unlike in the US, MOOTW remain a formal 
component of Chinese military doctrine. What are MOOTW , and what roles do they play 
in China’s foreign policy? According to the public outline of President Xi’s order, their 
primary objectives are to prevent and neutralize risks and challenges to China’s interests, 
to maintain national sovereignty and regional stability, and to standardize and regulate the 
PLA ’s planning and conduct of non-war military operations. This report examines the ways 
in which China has used MOOTW , in principle and in practice, to advance these objectives 
(and others) in recent decades.
Some of China’s MOOTW ostensibly contribute to shared goals of international peace and 
security and have thus drawn praise from the UN and other multinational coalitions.2 At 
the same time, the PLA ’s growing international role has raised concerns over how these 
new military capabilities may affect other countries’ security. Through its participation in 
international peacekeeping, for example, the PLA has demonstrated improved expeditionary 
capability in a way that may “overlap” with future warfare requirements and may make 
Beijing more capable of using force abroad.3 As a result, MOOTW that might, in practice, be 
a shared point of cooperation may also contribute to increased international competition. 
However, China’s pursuit of MOOTW also presents opportunities for China to meaningfully 
contribute to global security objectives in line with international norms.4 
China’s embrace of MOOTW remains understudied compared to other core components 
its military discourse and doctrine. MOOTW are essential to Beijing’s understanding of 
the utility of military force as a means by which it can advance foreign policy objectives and 
shape the international security environment in the 21st century. It is essential for analysts 
and policymakers in the US, and globally, to discern between Chinese MOOTW that 
threaten regional peace and stability and those that have the potential to strengthen and 
contribute to the rules-based international order.
1    “Fabu Jundui Feizhanzheng Junshi Xingdong Gangyao (Shixing)” 发布 《军队非战争军事行动纲要 （试行） 》 
[Release of the Outline for Military Operations Other Than War (for Trial Implementation)], People’s Daily, June 
14, 2022, http://politics.people.com.cn/n1/2022/0614/c1024-32445392.html ; Hwang Chun-mei, “Chinese leader Xi 
Jinping signs new rules governing ‘non-war” military operations,” Radio Free Asia, June 13, 2022,  
https://www.rfa.org/english/news/china/military-rules-06132022153121.html . 
2  “Peacekeeping, Development in Focus as UN Chief Meets Chinese Foreign Minister,” UN News , September 22, 
2013, https://news.un.org/en/story/2013/09/449642-peacekeeping-development-focus-un-chief-meets-chinese-
foreign-minister.
3   PLA Expeditionary Capabilities and Implications for United States Asia Policy, before the U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, 114th Cong. (2016) (Statement of Kristen Gunness, Senior Policy Researcher at the RAND 
Corporation), 2, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/testimonies/CT400/CT452/RAND_CT452.pdf . 
4   Kristen Gunness in testimony to the USCC has described this as “Two Concerns and Two Opportunities.” See:  
PLA Expeditionary Capabilities and Implications for United States Asia Policy, before the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission , 3. 
Photo of electricity lines in Phuket, Thailand is 
under public domain and supplied courtesy of 
Mussi Katz’s Flickr account.
U.S. Army_US-China annual disaster management 
exchange: U.S. Army.

its military doctrine. Both authoritative and quasi-authoritative Chinese military sources 
list MOOTW as an official category of PLA activity. For example, the 2013 edition of the 
Science of Military Strategy, a highly influential publication of the PLA ’s Academy of Military 
Science, lists three general strategic means for a military: acts of warfare, acts of deterrence, 
and military operations other than war.11 
China’s President Xi Jinping recently signed an order putting forth a set of trial guidelines 
to provide a specific “legal underpinning for non-war military operations” under China’s 
domestic legislative framework.12 According to the public outline of the order, the primary 
objective is to prevent and neutralize risks and challenges to China’s interests, to maintain 
national sovereignty and regional stability, and to standardize and regulate the PLA ’s 
planning and conduct of non-war military operations. Proponents of this move consider 
the order to be a necessary step to clarify the formal legal scope of China’s non-war 
military operations, ranging from disaster relief and humanitarian assistance to the limited 
use of force overseas in the context of maritime escorts and peacekeeping, for example. 
Skeptics, on the other hand, perceive the announcement as a strategic justification for 
China’s expanding military footprint beyond its borders, and a possible allusion to 
potential military operations targeting Taiwan. For example, Eugene Kuo Yujen, an analyst 
with Taiwan’s Institute for National Policy Research, has argued that the announcement 
seemingly replicated Vladimir Putin’s description of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as a 
“special military operation” rather than a war or an invasion.13 
As demonstrated by the attention generated by President Xi’s recent order, China’s embrace 
of MOOTW remains understudied compared to its discourse and doctrine around both 
warfare and deterrence. This report posits that China’s doctrine and conduct of MOOTW 
are essential to understanding how Beijing understands the strategic and operational utility 
of its armed forces, and the means by which it aims to achieve foreign policy objectives in 
the 21st century. This report seeks to help fill a gap in the literature by examining China’s 
MOOTW on its own terms as a distinct category of Chinese military activity. It is necessary 
to examine China’s pursuit of MOOTW , and to delineate its development and deployment 
of different capabilities over time, to understand the important roles that MOOTW continue 
to play in advancing China’s foreign policy objectives, and to better discern how and when 
American and Chinese interests may align or diverge.
At the turn of the century, China’s security calculus focused principally on maintaining 
domestic order and ensuring stability on its periphery. But in the past two decades, the 
steady outflow of Chinese investments and citizens have exposed China to a broad array 
of non-traditional security challenges, forcing the PRC government to develop greater 
capacity to assert and protect overseas interests. The Belt and Road Initiative now links 
China’s economy and citizens to dozens of countries around the world, including many 
11   Xiaosong Shou, Ed., Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng  战略学教程 [The Science of Military Strategy] (Beijing: Military Sci -
ence Publishing House, 2013), 6.
12     “Fabu Jundui Feizhanzheng Junshi Xingdong Gangyao (Shixing)” 发布 《军队非战争军事行动纲要 （试行） 》 
[Release of the Outline for Military Operations Other Than War (for Trial Implementation)], People’s Daily, June 
14, 2022, http://politics.people.com.cn/n1/2022/0614/c1024-32445392.html ; Hwang Chun-mei, “Chinese leader Xi 
Jinping signs new rules governing ‘non-war” military operations,” Radio Free Asia, June 13, 2022, https://www.rfa.
org/english/news/china/military-rules-06132022153121.html . 
13   Bill Birtles, “Xi Jinping announces plans to allow Chinese military to undertake ‘armed forces operations’ abroad,” 
ABC News, June 14, 2022, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-06-14/xi-jinping-expands-china-military-influence-
abroad/101152154. 
STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
4 5
Photo of electricity lines in Phuket, Thailand is 
under public domain and supplied courtesy of 
Mussi Katz’s Flickr account.
Photo of electricity lines in Phuket, Thailand is 
under public domain and supplied courtesy of 
Mussi Katz’s Flickr account.
INTRODUCTION
The end of the Cold War and the rise of globalization brought about a sudden shift in focus 
for the militaries of the advanced industrialized world. This shift resulted in some countries 
leaning away from preparation for a major conflict and toward the management of non-
traditional security challenges, including transnational threats such as environmental 
disasters, humanitarian crises, and challenges from non-state actors. 
In 1995, the US Department of Defense published JP 3-07, Joint Doctrine for Military 
Operations Other Than War (MOOTW), which articulated the ways in which the United 
States would use military force aside from engaging in sustained combat operations. 
MOOTW were understood to advance national security priorities primarily through three 
interrelated mechanisms: deterrence, forward presence, and crisis response capabilities.5 The 
doctrine made explicit the use of the armed forces to help shape the security environment 
and diplomatic relations through persistent military presence activities such as “periodic and 
rotational deployments, access and storage agreements, multinational exercises, port visits, 
foreign military training, foreign community support and military-to-military contacts. ”6 
Within this doctrine, the military was conceived of not just as a warfighting tool, but also as 
a political instrument used to shape an international environment favorable to the United 
States. As General John Shalikashvili – then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff — wrote 
in the preface to the Joint Doctrine for Military Operations Other Than War, although the 
military has “historically focused on warfighting, our military profession is increasingly 
changing its focus to a complex array of military operations other than war. ”7 
The United States was the first country to develop a doctrinal framework for military 
operations other than war (MOOTW), but militaries worldwide soon began to develop 
their own such guidelines.8 Y et, the United States abandoned its MOOTW doctrine in 
2006, eliminating the formal dichotomy between war and non-war military operations. 
Contemporary US joint operations doctrine now describes military operations as occurring 
on a “conflict continuum that spans from peace to war. ”9
Inspired by US MOOTW doctrine, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and its People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) in recent years have devoted significant attention and resources to 
addressing non-traditional security challenges and have embraced MOOTW – sometimes 
translated as “non-war military activities/operations” — as an important conceptual 
framework.10 Unlike in the US, China has maintained MOOTW as a formal component of 
5   U.S., Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Joint Doctrine for Military Operations Other Than War,” (Washington, DC: Department 
of Defense, 1995), https://www.bits.de/NRANEU/others/jp-doctrine/jp3_07.pdf . 
6    Ibid, I-4.
7   Ibid. 
8   Ibid.
9     U.S., Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Joint Operations,” (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2017),  
https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp3_0ch1.pdf?ver=2018-11-27-160457-910 . 
10   We have elected to use the term Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW) to describe China’s non-war 
operations (非战争军事行动). The U.S. Department of Defense has also used the term “non-war military activities” 
(NWMA) to describe the PLA’s non-war operations. See: U.S., Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Military and 
Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2021,” (Arlington, VA: Department of Defense, 
2021). https://media.defense.gov/2021/Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-1/0/2021-CMPR-FINAL.PDF . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
6 7
in precarious security situations. Simultaneously, China has sought to portray itself as 
both a major power and a “responsible stakeholder” in the international community.14 
MOOTW , and international security cooperation more broadly, have thus become 
indispensable to fulfilling both of these roles. In the words of PLA strategists, China’s 
military operations abroad are the “soft use” of “hard power. ”15
The PLA now conducts a range of peacetime operations that it lacked the capacity or 
political will to carry out two decades ago. The PLA patrols the Gulf of Aden as part 
of an international counterpiracy coalition and sends combat units to participate in 
United Nations (UN) peacekeeping operations in Sub-Saharan Africa. It has conducted 
non-combatant evacuation operations in the Middle East and has established its first 
overseas “support base” in Djibouti. The PLA also pursues military diplomacy through 
combined military exercises and naval port calls around the world.16 Closer to home, 
the PLA and the People’s Armed Police (PAP) conduct “rights protection” operations 
in the East and South China Seas, cooperate with Southeast Asian nations on maritime 
security and counter-narcotics operations, and deploy within China to respond to 
disasters and social unrest. As a testament to the importance of these activities, a 2017 
article by Central Military Commission Vice Chairman Xu Qiliang praised them as 
a series of “major military operations” conducted under the leadership of Xi Jinping, 
that have “effectively safeguarded national sovereignty, security, and development 
interests, boosted the prestige of the nation and the military, and enhanced national self-
confidence and pride. ”17 In total, such non-war operations currently constitute a sizeable 
portion of the PLA ’s actual activities.
Some of China’s operations ostensibly contribute to shared goals of international peace 
and security and have thus drawn praise from the UN and other multinational coalitions.18 
China is now a leading contributor to UN peacekeeping operations, and has significantly 
expanded its conduct of international humanitarian assistance and disaster relief 
operations.19 However, China’s increasingly assertive (and arguably, illegal) MOOTW 
concerning its contested jurisdictional and territorial claims in the South China Sea, 
for example, have exacerbated longstanding disputes with its neighbors, and China’s 
14   Andrew Taffer, “Washington Still Wants China to Be a Responsible Stakeholder,” Foreign Policy, December 29, 2020, 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/12/29/washington-china-responsible-stakeholder/ . 
15   Tianliang Xiao, Ed., Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) 战略学 (2020年修订) [The Science of Military Strategy 
(2020 Revision)], (Beijing: Guofang Daxue Chubanshe, 2020), 312.
16   Kenneth Allen, Phillip C. Saunders, and John Chen, “China Military Diplomacy, 2003-2016: Trends and 
Implications,” China Strategic Perspectives 11, July 2017, https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/
stratperspective/china/ChinaPerspectives-11.pdf?ver=2017-07-17-153301-093 . 
17     “Xu Qiliang: Laogu Queli Xi Jinping Qiangjun Sixiang Zai Guofang He Jundui Jianshe Zhong de Zhidao Diwei,” 
许其亮： 牢固确立习近平强军思想在国防和军队建设中的指导地位 [Xu Qiliang: Firmly Establish the Guiding 
Position of Xi Jinping Thought on Strengthening the Army in National Defense and Army Construction], People’s 
Daily, November 14, 2017, http://cpc.people.com.cn/n1/2017/1114/c64094-29644061.html . 
18   “Peacekeeping, Development in Focus as UN Chief Meets Chinese Foreign Minister,” UN News, September 22, 2013, 
https://news.un.org/en/story/2013/09/449642-peacekeeping-development-focus-un-chief-meets-chinese-foreign-minister.
19   Matthew Southerland, “The Chinese Military’s Role in Overseas Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: 
Contributions and Concerns,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, July 11, 2019, https://www.
uscc.gov/research/chinese-militarys-role-overseas-humanitarian-assistance-and-disaster-relief-contributions .
abusive actions in Xinjiang have drawn widespread condemnation.20 Furthermore, some 
observers of the PLA ’s growing international role have raised concerns over how these new 
military capabilities may affect their own countries’ security. Through its participation in 
international peacekeeping, for example, the PLA has demonstrated improved expeditionary 
capability in a way that may “overlap” with future warfare requirements and may make 
Beijing more capable of using force abroad.21 
Scholar Erik Lin-Greenberg has labeled these spirals “non-traditional security dilemmas” 
and argues that participation in MOOTW “exacerbates security competition by 
revealing military capabilities and providing states with skills that make offensive action 
easier. ”22 This is compounded by the fact that competitors are often suspicious of one 
another’s underlying aims for conducting MOOTW and may view these operations as a 
“threatening indicator of a state’s more assertive foreign and defense policy. ”23 For example, 
US policymakers have heavily scrutinized China’s first overseas base (officially a “logistics 
facility”) in Djibouti, which opened in 2017 with the mission of supporting the PLA ’s 
MOOTW in the region.24 
However, just as China’s pursuit of MOOTW may raise real security concerns for the 
US, it also presents opportunities for China to meaningfully contribute to global security 
objectives in line with international norms.25 MOOTW may provide both shared points 
of cooperation as well as sources of increased international competition. Thus, separating 
the potential risks from the benefits requires a nuanced understanding of the underlying 
motives driving the PLA ’s military operations other than war and the degree to which they 
may directly benefit China in future conflict scenarios. 
This report first provides an overview of the PLA ’s development of MOOTW and explains 
how China views them as part of a broader national security doctrine. This is followed 
by a summary of the PLA ’s key MOOTW , citing specific examples of the doctrine in 
action. The report then outlines PLA development in pursuit of MOOTW and how this 
may support its future combat capabilities and operational concepts. Finally, the report 
concludes with a discussion of how policymakers and analysts can better discern between 
PLA activities that jeopardize, versus contribute to, international peace and security.
20   Oriana Skylar Mastro, “How China is bending the rules in the South China Sea,” The Interpreter, February 17, 2021, 
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/how-china-bending-rules-south-china-sea ; “‘Break Their Lineage, 
Break Their Roots:’ China’s Crimes against Humanity Targeting Uyghurs and Other Turkic Muslims,” Human 
Rights Watch, April 19, 2021, https://www.hrw.org/report/2021/04/19/break-their-lineage-break-their-roots/chinas-
crimes-against-humanity-targeting . 
21   PLA Expeditionary Capabilities and Implications for United States Asia Policy, before the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, 114th Cong. (2016) (Statement of Kristen Gunness, Senior Policy Researcher at the 
RAND Corporation), 2, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/testimonies/CT400/CT452/RAND_CT452.
pdf. 
22   Erik Lin-Greenberg, “Non-Traditional Security Dilemmas: Can Military Operations Other Than War Intensify 
Security Competition in Asia?” Asian Security 14, no. 3 (2018): 282.
23   Ibid, 291. 
24   “China Sets Up Base in Djibouti,” Xinhua, July 11, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-
07/11/c_136435716.htm. 
25   Kristen Gunness in testimony to the USCC has described this as “Two Concerns and Two Opportunities.” See:  
PLA Expeditionary Capabilities and Implications for United States Asia Policy, before the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission , 3. 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
8 9
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
KEY OBJECTIVES
While the PLA ’s conduct of MOOTW is largely a 21st century phenomenon, it is 
rooted in a general shift that began after the Cold War. From Jiang Zemin to Xi 
Jinping, the PRC government has grappled with how to integrate non-traditional 
security challenges into a broader concept of national security. This effort was 
driven by civilian leadership, who saw a clear role for the state in protecting China’s 
economic development and preserving domestic stability. 26 This prioritization of 
non-traditional security subsequently created the conditions for the PLA to prioritize 
MOOTW and made these operations an important element of strategy within China’s 
armed forces. 
China’s national security policy is guided by a set of strategic guidelines that set 
top-line priorities for the military. When Jiang Zemin first came to power in 
1989, the strategic guideline focused principally on the threat of a Soviet invasion 
and the outbreak of large-scale conflict. 27 Within a few short years, the trifecta of 
Tiananmen Square, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the US victory in the Gulf War 
left China facing a fundamentally different security environment. 28 Responding 
to these threats, the Central Military Commission adopted an updated strategic 
guideline of “winning local wars under high-technology conditions” in 1993. Jiang 
Zemin stated that the goals of this strategy were to “defend national territorial 
sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, safeguard the reunification of the 
motherland and social stability, and provide strong security guarantees for reform 
and opening and modernization. ” 29 The 1993 strategic guideline does not mention 
MOOTW , and almost all of the doctrinal and operational focus of the PLA was 
centered on preparing for future military combat on China’s periphery. 30 However, 
Jiang’s mention of safeguarding China’s continued economic development set an 
important precedent for the years to come.
In the late 1990s, China publicly promoted a “New Security Concept” that sought to 
expand traditional ideas of military and political security to better account for the 
rise of non-traditional security challenges. 31 In a March 1999 speech in Geneva, Jiang 
Zemin outlined that the “core of such a new concept of security should be mutual 
26    Andrea Ghiselli, “Civil-military relations and organizational preferences regarding the use of the military in 
Chinese foreign policy: insights from the debate on MOOTW,” Journal of Strategic Studies  43, no. 3 (2020): 421-442. 
27   M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy Since 1949 , (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2018), 139.
28   Rush Doshi, The Long Game: China’s Grand Strategy to Displace American Order,  (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2021). 
29   Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy Since 1949 , 184.
30   Ibid, 182-216.
31   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “China’s Position Paper on the New Security Concept,” 
(Beijing: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2002), https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/ce/ceun/eng/xw/t27742.htm . 
UN_Chinese Peacekeeping in South Sudan#1:  
Cunha, Gregorio. United Nations.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
10 11
trust, mutual benefit, equality and cooperation. ”32 In line with this concept, China 
became a founding member of the Shanghai Five group in 1996, which ultimately 
evolved into the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) in 2001. And at the 16th 
CCP National Congress in 2002, Jiang advocated for the concept to “preserve peace 
and promote development” in the face of new challenges to the international political 
and economic order.33 
A significant shift occurred in the mid-2000s following the appointment of Hu Jintao 
to Chairman of the Central Military Commission. In December 2004, Hu introduced 
the “New Historic Mission” for the PLA.34 This new mission expanded the PLA ’s official 
tasks to encompass China’s expanding national interests and contributions to global 
stability and security. Specifically, the New Historic Mission called on the PLA to: 
1. Provide an important guarantee of strength for the Chinese Communist 
Party to consolidate its ruling position;
2. Provide a strong security guarantee for safeguarding the period of 
strategic opportunity for national development;
3. Provide powerful strategic support for safeguarding national interests; 
4. Play an important role in safeguarding world peace and promoting 
common development.35 
The fourth task of “safeguarding world peace and promoting common development” 
shares similar goals to Jiang Zemin’s “New Security Concept, ” but for the first time, 
explicitly directed the PLA to shoulder this responsibility. Subsequently, in a March 
2006 speech to the PLA Delegation at the National People’s Congress, Hu Jintao 
instructed the PLA to complete “diversified military tasks” ( 多样化军事任务), 
including both combat and noncombat operations. 36 The PLA began to research 
32   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Promote Disarmament Process and Safeguard World 
Security,” Jiang Zemin, (Geneva, Switzerland: Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United 
Nations of Geneva and Other International Organizations in Switzerland, 1999), https://www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/cegv//
eng/cjjk/cjjblc/jhhwx/t85322.htm . 
33   People’s Republic of China, “Build a Well-off Society in an All-Round Way and Create a New Situation in Building 
Socialism with Chinese Characteristics,” Jiang Zemin, (Beijing: Xinhua News Agency, 2002), http://www.china.org.
cn/english/2002/Nov/49107.htm . 
34   James Mulvenon, “Chairman Hu and the PLA’s New Historic Missions,” China Leadership Monitor , no. 27 (2009). 
https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/CLM27JM.pdf . 
35   Fravel, Active Defense , 229.
36   “Hujintao zai Jiefangjun Daibiao Tuan Quanti Huiyi shang Qiangdiao Jianchi ba Kexue Fazhan Guan Zuowei 
Zhongyao Zhidao Fangzhen Tuidong Guofang he Jundui Jianshe you Kuai you Hao de Fazhan” 胡锦涛在解放军
代表团全体会议上强调 坚持把科学发展观作为重要指导方针 推动国防和军队建设又快又好地发展 [At the 
Plenary Meeting of the PLA Delegation, Hu Jintao Emphasized that the Scientific Outlook on Development is an 
Important Guiding Principle to Promote the Rapid and Good Development of National Defense and Army Build -
ing], Tianjin Daily, March 12, 2006. https://news.sina.com.cn/c/2006-03-12/09008421613s.shtml . 　
MOOTW in-depth that same year. 37 CCP leadership further highlighted “diversified 
military tasks” at the 17th Party Congress in 2007 when Hu Jintao emphasized that 
China must “enhance the military’s capability to respond to various security threats 
and accomplish diverse military tasks. ”38
MOOTW made their first high-level appearance in China’s official strategic discourse 
in the Ministry of National Defense’s 2008 White Paper, which stated that the PLA 
is continuously increasing “the capability of conducting MOOTW , ” and that China’s 
military guideline “takes MOOTW as an important form of applying national military 
forces, and scientifically makes and executes plans for the development of MOOTW 
capabilities. ”39 The 2008 White Paper lists counterterrorism, (domestic) stability 
maintenance, emergency rescue, international peacekeeping, and international 
security cooperation operations as the non-war “diversified military tasks” carried out 
by the PLA.40
The PLA ’s increased focus on MOOTW was made clear in a 2009 speech by Central 
Military Commission Vice Chairman General Xu Caihou. Speaking to a largely 
American audience at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, 
General Xu centered his speech on MOOTW as “an increasingly important form of 
applying military forces, ” and detailed operations like counterterrorism, disaster relief, 
peacekeeping, and international assistance as “the routine and constant missions” for 
the PLA.41 General Xu also exhaustively described the PLA ’s recent conduct of MOOTW 
and showed a video detailing the PLA ’s response to the 2008 Wenchuan Earthquake. He 
explicitly stated that the “multiple military tasks” described in his speech, all of which 
fall under the MOOTW umbrella, “provide a broader space for Chinese-U.S. military 
exchanges and cooperation. ”42 
The Ministry of National Defense and the PLA continued to devote more attention to 
MOOTW in the last years under Hu Jintao. In 2010, and again in 2011, Hu told the PLA 
delegation at the National People’s Congress that China must “scientifically arrange the 
building of capabilities for MOOTW . ”43 Also in 2011, the PLA ’s Academy of Military 
37   Fan Gaoyue and James Char, Introduction to China’s Military Operations Other Than War, (Singapore: S. 
Rajaratnam School of International Studies, 2019), 3m https://www.rsis.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/
PR190225_Introduction-to-Chinas-Military-Operations-Other-than-War.pdf . 
38   People’s Republic of China, “Hold High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Strive for 
New Victories in Building a Moderately Prosperous Society in all,” (Beijing: Xinhua, 2007),  
http://www.china.org.cn/english/congress/229611.htm#9 . 
39   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of National Defense, “China’s National Defense in 2008,” (Beijing: State 
Council Information Office, 2009), http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7060059.htm . 
40   Ibid.
41   Xu Caihou, “Statesmen Forum: Gen. Xu Caihou,” (speech, Washington, DC, October 26, 2009), Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/event/091026csis_genxu_0.pdf . 
42   Ibid.
43   “Hujintao Chuxi Shiyi Jie Quanguo Renda Si Ci Huiyi Jiefangjun Daibiao Tuan Quanti Huiyi” 胡锦涛出席十一届
全国人大四次会议解放军代表团全体会议 [Hu Jintao Attends the Plenary Session of the PLA Delegation at the 
Fourth Session of the Eleventh National People’s Congress], People’s Daily, March 13, 2011, http://www.npc.gov.cn/
zgrdw/npc/dbdhhy/11_4/2011-03/13/content_1644215.htm.; Chen Xin, “Hujintao Qiangdiao Quanmian Tigao Lüx -
ing Wo Jun Lishi Shiming Nengli (Tu)” 胡锦涛强调全面提高履行我军历史使命能力(图) [Hu Jintao Emphasizes 
Comprehensively Improving the Ability to Fulfill our Military’s Historical Mission (Photo)], China Broadcasting 
Network, March 13, 2010, http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/2010-03-13/1524586788.html .

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
12 13
Science formally established a “Research Center for Non-War Military Operations. ”44 
By the time Hu left office in 2012, he warned that China was facing “existential” and 
“developmental” problems caused by traditional and non-traditional security issues, and 
thus the PLA was expressly required to play a more active role during peacetime.45
Under Xi Jinping, the PLA has continued to pursue a range of MOOTW . Since 
assuming office, Xi has introduced an “Overall National Security Outlook” which 
fuses disparate elements of national power into a comprehensive approach to national 
security.46 Xi first proposed the theory in April 2014, at the inaugural meeting of the 
recently established National Security Commission of the CCP Central Committee. At 
the meeting, Xi emphasized that the Party “must pay close attention to both traditional 
and non-traditional security” and view development and security in tandem, as the 
“former is the foundation of the latter while the latter is a precondition for the former. ”47 
Xi drove home this point at a June 2014 Politburo collective study session on military 
modernization, in which he lectured that the CCP must “change the mindset of 
safeguarding traditional security, and establish the mindset of safeguarding national 
comprehensive security and the expansion of strategic interests. ”48  
China’s official security policy now reflects these priorities. China’s 2015 Defense 
White Paper lists eight “strategic tasks” for the PLA, which include: “safeguard[ing] 
the security of China’s overseas interests…participat[ing] in regional and international 
security cooperation and maintain[ing] regional and world peace…[and] perform[ing] 
such tasks as emergency rescue and disaster relief, rights and interests protection, guard 
duties, and support for national economic and social development. ”49 The paper further 
states that MOOTW are a “necessary requirement for China’s armed forces to fulfill 
their responsibilities and missions in the new period, ” and that the PLA will “work 
harder to create a favorable strategic posture with more emphasis on the employment of 
military forces and means, provide a solid security guarantee for the country’s peaceful 
development…[and] actively participate in both regional and international security 
cooperation and effectively secure China’s overseas interests. ”50 The 2019 Defense White 
Paper echoes these points, and makes clear that the fundamental goal of China’s national 
44   “Jiefangjun Junshi Kexueyuan Chengli Fei Zhanzheng Junshi Xingdong Yanjiu Zhongxin” 解放军军事科学院成立
非战争军事行动研究中心 [The PLA Academy of Military Sciences Established the Research Center for Non-War 
Military Operations], China News Service , December 13, 2011, http://www.china.com.cn/military/txt/2011-12/13/
content_24139505.htm . 
45   People’s Republic of China, “Report to the 18th National Congress of the CCP,” (Beijing: Xinhua, 2012),  
https://www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/ceus//eng/zt/18th_CPC_National_Congress_Eng/t992917.htm . 
46   “Xi: National Security ‘a matter of prime importance,’” Xinhua, April 16, 2014, http://www.china.org.cn/chi -
na/2014-04/16/content_32104039.htm;  Jude Blanchette, “Ideological Security as National Security,” Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, (2020), 1, https://www.csis.org/analysis/ideological-security-national-security . 
47   Xi Jinping, “A Holistic View of National Security,” in The Governance of China  (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 
2014), 232.
48   “Xi Jinping: Zhunque Bawo Shijie Junshi Fazhan Xin Qushi Yushijujin Dali Tuijin Junshi Chuangxin” 习近平:准
确把握世界军事发展新趋势与时俱进大力推进军事创新 [Xi Jinping: Accurately Grasp the New Trends of World 
Military Development and Advance with the Times and Vigorously Promote Military Innovation], Xinhua, August 
30, 2014, http://www.xinhuanet.com//politics/2014-08/30/c_1112294869.htm . 
49   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of National Defense, “China’s Military Strategy,” (Beijing: State Council Infor -
mation Office, 2015), https://news.usni.org/2015/05/26/document-chinas-military-strategy . 
50    Ibid. 
defense is to resolutely safeguard “China’s sovereignty, security, and development 
interests. ”51 And in 2020, a revision to China’s National Defense Law officially tasked the 
PLA with defending “overseas development interests. ”52    
To be clear, the PLA ’s most important mission remains developing the ability to “fight 
and win wars. ”53 Xi Jinping and the PLA leadership routinely emphasize that the military 
“must focus on combat readiness, ” and preparation for contingencies involving Taiwan 
and other traditional security risks will continue to guide China’s military training 
and development.54 However, the last two decades have seen an expansion of Chinese 
strategic thinking about the role of MOOTW to the point that these operations are 
now a significant component of China’s military doctrine. The COVID-19 pandemic 
has demonstrated the fundamental threat posed by non-traditional security challenges, 
and the PLA will continue to play a key role in guaranteeing China’s national and 
developmental interests. 
51   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of National Defense, “China’s National Defense in the New Era,” (Beijing: State 
Council Information Office, 2019), http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-07/24/c_138253389.htm . 
52   U.S., Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Re -
public of China 2020,” (Arlington, VA: Department of Defense, 2020), ix, https://media.defense.gov/2021/
Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-1/0/2021-CMPR-FINAL.PDF. 
53   “Xi Focus: Xi Calls for Good Start in Strengthening Military, National Defense in 2021-2025,” Xinhua, March 9, 
2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2021-03/09/c_139797879.htm . 
54   Ibid. 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
14 15
“SMALL ACTION, BIG COMMAND”: 
PLA THINKING ON MOOTW 
While China’s official references to MOOTW can be found in broader national security 
concepts and strategies, China has no public authoritative doctrine on MOOTW .55 
However, writings by PLA strategists provide insight into how China conceptualizes 
and prioritizes MOOTW . Previous surveys of Chinese literature identify competing 
lists of MOOTW , with divergences on deterrence operations (shows of force), nuclear, 
biological, and chemical rescue and relief, and international military cooperation.56 
While not exhaustive, the latest edition of the PLA ’s dictionary of military terms defines 
MOOTW as follows:
Military activities that the armed forces carry out to protect the nation’s security 
and developmental interests, but which do not directly constitute warfare. 
[MOOTW] include counterterrorism and stability maintenance, humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief, rights and interest protection, safety and security 
operations, international peacekeeping, and international rescue operations.57
Quasi-authoritative military sources like the Science of Military Strategy — an influential 
textbook used by high-level PLA officers, with versions published by both the PLA ’s 
Academy of Military Science in 2013 and National Defense University in 2020 – reflect 
contemporary PLA thinking on MOOTW . The 2013 edition of the Science of Military 
Strategy for the first time devoted an entire chapter to MOOTW , describing them as 
an “indispensable and important component of military strategy. ”58 The 2020 edition 
of the Science of Military Strategy also includes a comprehensive chapter on MOOTW , 
and both editions list the “major characteristics” and points of “strategic guidance” on 
MOOTW . The major characteristics and strategic guidance of MOOTW detailed in the 
2020 edition are included in Table 1 and Table 2 below:
 
55   Chinese writings reference several non-public MOOTW regulations. For example, the Central Military Commis -
sion approved a “Military Operations Other Than War Capacity Building Plan” 《军队非战争军事行动能力建设
规划》in 2009 and “Regulations on the Army’s Participation in Military Operations Other Than War” 《军队参加
非战争军事行动条例》in an unknown year. See: “Guofangbu: Jundui Niandi Jiang Jiancheng 8 Zhi Gong 5 Wan 
Ren Yingji Jiuyuan Budui” 国防部: 军队年底将建成8支共5万人应急救援部队 [Ministry of National Defense: 
The Army Will Build 8 Rescue Units With a Total of 50,000 People by the End of the Year], Xinhua, April 20, 2010, 
http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2010-04/20/content_1587746.htm . 
56   M. Taylor Fravel, “Economic Growth, Regime Insecurity, and Military Strategy: Explaining the Rise of Noncombat 
Operations in China,” Asian Security  7, no. 3 (2011): 177-200; Fan and Char, Introduction to China’s Military Opera-
tions Other Than War.
57   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng , 154. 
58   Ibid, 154.
UNAMID Honour Guards Protect Borehole,  
UN Photo/Albert Gonzalez Farran

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
16 17
Table 1: MOOTW Major Characteristics (2020 Science of Military Strategy)59 
Mandarin English Translation
使命任务重要，政治性突出 The Mission is Important, Politics is Prominent
行动日益频繁，常态性突出 Operations are Increasingly Frequent, Normality  
is Prominent
事发突然紧急，应急性突出 Incidents are Unexpectedly Urgent, Emergency  
Response is Prominent
对抗强度较低，灵活性突出 Intensity of Conflict is Relatively Low, Flexibility  
is Prominent
力量构成多元，联合性突出 Force Composition is Diversified, Jointness  
is Prominent
任务差异性大，专业性突出 Mission Sets are Different, Professionalism  
is Prominent
境外行动增多，国际性突出 Overseas Operations are Increasing, Internationalism  
is Prominent
行动透明度高，公开性突出 Operations are Highly Transparent, Openness  
is Prominent
59   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding), 297-302.
Table 2: Strategic Guidance for MOOTW (2020 Science of Military Strategy)60 
Mandarin English Translation
从国家利益的高度筹划和指导非战
争军事行动
Plan and Direct MOOTW with National Interests at a 
High Level
非战争军事行动与政治，经济，外
交密切配合
Closely Coordinate MOOTW with Politics, Economics, 
and Diplomacy
统一指挥和调控非战争军事行动 Unify MOOTW Command and Control
加强非战争军事行动中各种力量
的联合
Strengthen Force Jointness in MOOTW
精心准备与灵活运用各种专业力量 Prepare Carefully and Flexibly Employ Various  
Professional Forces
注重提高非战争军事行动的综合保
障能力
Focus on Improving Integrated Support Capabilities for 
MOOTW
搞好非战争军事行动中的舆论法理
斗争与心理攻防
Gain Advantage in Fighting Lawfare and Public 
Opinion as well as Psychological Offense and Defense 
of MOOTW
The first of these characteristics emphasizes that MOOTW are “always centered 
on the nation’s political goals, support economic and social development, and are 
launched in coordination with diplomatic struggle. ”61 MOOTW must be strictly 
controlled by politics and must be planned and directed based on national interests. 62 
Political control ensures that MOOTW support the priorities of the CCP leadership 
and are subordinated to non-military tools of statecraft. The strategic guidance for 
MOOTW thus emphasizes that China’s national interests “plan and direct” the PLA ’s 
conduct of MOOTW and highlights the need for a “unified command and control” to 
implement this close coordination between different elements of government power, 
meaning that all MOOTW must have “the Party Central Committee and the Central 
Military Commission make decisions. ”63 This political control allows higher-ranking 
authorities to “rationally” plan military actions while keeping in mind the strategic 
objectives and political requirements of any military operation. The clear top-down 
strategic direction of MOOTW planning has led Chinese analysts to adopt the 
principle of “small action, big command” for the conduct of MOOTW .64 
60   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding),  302-311.
61   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng , 160.
62    Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding), 299.
63   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng, 157.
64   Morgan Clemens, “Chapter 11: PLA Thinking on Military Operations Other Than War,” in China’s Evolving 
Military Strategy, ed. Joe McReynolds, (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institute Press, 2016), loc. 5065, Kindle.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
18 19
Moreover, Chinese strategists believe that MOOTW are relatively public and 
transparent compared to other types of military activity. As a result, MOOTW have 
an outsized influence on domestic and international perceptions of China and the 
PLA. Domestically, MOOTW embody the CCP’s “political will in peacetime and its 
ability to govern in times of crisis. ”65 Such operations are thus intended to shore up 
the CCP’s continued legitimacy in securing China’s interests and realizing the “China 
Dream. ” Conversely, MOOTW play an important role in representing China’s role in 
the world. Ideally, MOOTW can help portray China as a responsible stakeholder, and 
even “help establish a new type of military cooperative relationship with potential 
war adversaries and possible targets of competition. ”66 But the authors of the Science 
of Military Strategy also recognize that the relative transparency of MOOTW can 
contribute to mistrust. They write that “Western countries adopt ‘double standards’ in 
criticizing China’s [military] actions, ” thus China must “fully consider” and minimize 
negative international public perceptions of its operations. 67 As a result, the authors 
assert that China should wage public opinion struggle in tandem with MOOTW and 
take considered “psychological offensive and defensive moves. ”68 Thus, MOOTW 
are understood to play a vital role in shaping the political environment and public 
perceptions of China, both at home and abroad.
The characteristics of MOOTW listed in the Science of Military Strategy  also 
provide insight into the military qualities desired by the PLA. These qualities 
can be summarized into three primary categories: responsive, targeted, and joint. 
First, MOOTW require the armed forces to have a high level of responsiveness 
in order to act quickly and without prior planning to address unexpected crises. 
Second, the intensity of conflict in MOOTW is lower than in warfare and requires 
a “more flexible, more selective, and more targeted” use of military force. 69 Finally, 
MOOTW require strong integration between the military and other actors, 
including coordination with the People’s Armed Police, militia units, and civilian 
government agencies when responding to domestic crises, and cooperation with 
foreign militaries on conducting international MOOTW . The Science of Military 
Strategy authors write that as initial steps to achieve these core competencies, the 
PLA should develop specialized and elite professional forces, such as disaster rescue 
or counterterrorism units, to improve reconnaissance and early warning intelligence 
collection, strengthen simulation exercises and contingency planning, and continue 
to build joint support capabilities. 70 
Chinese sources do not detail the conditions under which China would be willing to 
use force while conducting MOOTW . The Science of Military Strategy acknowledges 
that some types of confrontational MOOTW (such as counterterrorism and 
counterpiracy) “require the use of a low-level of violent force, ” without elaborating 
65   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 297. 
66   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng , 160.
67   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 301, 309.
68   Ibid, 309.
69   Ibid, 299.
70   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 307.
further.71 One element of the “more flexible, more selective, and more targeted” use 
of military force described above is to have a narrow target in military operations to 
minimize the negative or unintended consequences of using force. 72 MOOTW must 
also firmly “act in accordance with [international and domestic] law. ”73 In practice, 
there likely remains a degree of ambiguity to the level of force the PLA is willing to 
use while conducting MOOTW . 
While MOOTW are distinct from many deterrence operations, they can have a 
deterrent effect on potential adversaries. For example, PLA operations in the East 
and South China Seas that are meant to protect “China’s rights and interests” can also 
serve as demonstrations of force against competing claimants in ongoing territorial 
disputes. For example, the type of aerial patrols conducted by the PLAAF following 
China’s establishment of an Air Defense Identification Zone in the East China Sea 
in 2013 were simultaneously meant to assert China’s interest in the area and to deter 
regional rivals. 74 
Chinese strategists write that overseas operations in particular can “demonstrate 
strategic capabilities, deter hostile forces, and shape an inviolable national image. ” 75 
As noted by Morgan Clemens, the “low-intensity, high efficiency” nature of MOOTW 
can also “warn, pressure, or deter an enemy. ”76 The US Department of Defense has 
also stated that China’s MOOTW can “include operations in which the PLA uses 
coercive threats. ”77
In the past decade, overseas MOOTW have usurped domestic MOOTW as the 
predominant focus of Chinese military strategists. As Taylor Fravel has noted, PRC 
concepts of MOOTW are fundamentally more inward looking than US military 
operations.78 Indeed, a sizeable portion of PLA writing on MOOTW focuses on 
domestic HA/DR and social stability operations. 79 This is driven in part by the fact 
the PLA ’s largest modern mobilizations have all occurred within Chinese territory. 
However, as China’s economic commitments have become increasingly global, its 
MOOTW are now largely focused on the protection of China’s overseas interests. 
The PLA National Defense University’s 2015 edition of the Science of Military Strategy  
includes an entire chapter on the use of military force overseas, principally pertaining 
71   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 299.
72   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng , 157.
73   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 310-311.
74   U.S., Congressional Research Service, “China’s Air Defense Identification Zone,” Ian E. Rinehart and Bart Elias, 
(Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2015), 11, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/R43894.pdf . 
75   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 315.
76   Morgan Clemens, “Chapter 11: PLA Thinking on Military Operations Other Than War,” loc. 5196, Kindle.
77   Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 
2021,” 35.
78   Fravel, “Economic Growth, Regime Insecurity, and Military Strategy,” 196.
79   For example, China put forward the Regulation on the Army’s Participation in Disaster Rescue（《 军 队 参 加 抢 险 救
灾 条 例 》）in 2005, and the Emergency Response Law of the People’s Republic of China（《 中 华 人 民 共 和 国 突 发 事 件
应对法》 ）in 2007.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
20 21
to MOOTW .80 It posits that China’s overseas operations effectively safeguard China’s 
expanding interests, including protecting individuals, assets, and strategic Sea Lanes 
of Communication (SLOC), creating a favorable overseas investment environment, 
and deepening diplomatic and military ties with other nations. 81 Overseas operations 
are also intended to promote regional stability, shape a “positive national image” of 
China, and improve the operational capabilities of the PLA. 82
Critically, MOOTW are also seen as an important way for the PLA to develop its 
operational capabilities. China’s 2008 Defense White Paper (the first official mention 
of MOOTW) makes a clear distinction between the “core capability of winning local 
wars in conditions of informationization and the capability of conducting MOOTW . ”83 
However, the two are still seen as linked; Chinese strategists and military leaders 
explicitly state that MOOTW directly support China’s efforts to modernize the PLA, 
gain practical operational experience, and prepare for future combat scenarios. 
In 2009, President Hu Jintao encouraged the PLA to focus on improving “the ability 
to carry out military operations other than war” in addition to “building core military 
capabilities. ”84 In 2011, CMC Vice Chairman Guo Boxiong emphasized that the 
PLA had “integrated the construction of non-war military activity capabilities into 
the overall planning and implementation” of military modernization reforms and 
preparations for “military struggle. ”85 Similarly, PLA Navy (PLAN) Commander Wu 
Shengli praised the Navy’s participation in escort missions in and around the Gulf of 
Aden as a “major exercise and a test of our ability. ”86 The Science of Military Strategy  
highlights that war and non-war military operations “have very similar requirements 
in a number of areas, ” and that MOOTW allow the PLA to “test organizational and 
command capabilities…examine the forms, levels, and effectiveness of military 
combat preparations…and to raise level of preparation for war. ” 87 The 2015 National 
Defense White Paper also includes “preparing for MOOTW” as an important effort in 
preparation for “military struggle. ”88  
 
80   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 312-326.
81   Ibid, 313-314.
82   Ibid.
83   People’s Republic of China, “China’s National Defense in 2008,” 12. 
84   U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving 
the People’s Republic of China 2011, Annual Report to Congress, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/
pubs/2011_CMPR_Final.pdf . 
85   “Hujintao huijian canjia quan jun fei zhanzheng junshi xingdong yantao huodong daibiao” 胡锦涛会见参加全军
非战争军事行动研讨活动代表 [Hu Jintao Meets with Representatives Participating in the Seminar on Non-Wr 
Military Operations of the Armed Forces] Guangming Daily, September 7, 2011, https://epaper.gmw.cn/gmrb/
html/2011-09/07/nw.D110000gmrb_20110907_5-01.htm . 
86   Shengli Wu and Xiaojiang Liu, “Laoji Qianjun Zhongtuo Bu Fu Huhang Shiming,” 牢记千钧重托不负护航使命 
[Keep in Mind the Important Task of Fulfilling the Escort Mission], Qiushi, December 26, 2010.
87   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng , 161. 
88   Ministry of National Defense, “China’s Military Strategy.”
The PLA ’s MOOTW receive less attention than its preparations for full-scale combat, 
but they remain an essential element of the PLA ’s global responsibilities and activities, 
and directly support the PLA ’s planning for wartime contingencies. The study of 
China’s conduct of MOOTW thus provides insight into China’s national security 
objectives and the operational capabilities of the PLA. 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
22 23
TYPES OF MOOTW
China’s leaders view MOOTW as supporting three primary objectives: protecting 
China’s national and developmental interests, projecting China’s image as a “responsible” 
great power, and providing the PLA with opportunities to gain operational experience. 
However, the motivation and conduct of each type of operation varies in practice, and 
thus each category of MOOTW deserves its own independent examination. 
As previously noted, the PLA has no consistent definition of what operations constitute 
MOOTW , and multiple sources provide different categories of non-war operations.89 
Taking these definitions as a starting point, we break down China’s MOOTW into 
the following categories based on the characteristics of each type of action, their 
prominence in current PLA operations, and their relevance to a policy audience:
• Counterterrorism and Stability Maintenance 
• Maritime Rights and Interests Protection 
• Counterpiracy and Far-Seas Escort 
• Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HA/DR)
• Non-Combatant Evacuation Operations (NEOs)
• International Peacekeeping  
• International Military Exercises and Military Diplomacy
 
These categories largely mirror the category of activities listed in the 2011 PLA 
Dictionary, but do not represent an exhaustive list of China’s MOOTW .90 For example, 
Chinese strategists often include the provision of security at domestic special events, 
such as the 2008 Olympics, as one of the PLA ’s MOOTW . Such operations are relatively 
rare and have limited relevance to PLA posture and capabilities, and thus are not a 
focus of this study. The possibility that the PLA will expand its range of missions in 
the coming years also makes it difficult to identify a complete set of operations that 
constitute MOOTW . Nevertheless, the following sections detail the most important and 
substantial MOOTW conducted by the PLA over the past two decades.  
 
89   For a discussion of the differing categories of MOOTW, see Fan and Char, “Introduction to China’s Military 
Operations Other Than War.”
90   We have also added two additional categories of MOOTW activity that differ from the 2011 PLA dictionary: 
“Counterpiracy and Far-Seas Escort” and “International Military Exercises and Military Diplomacy.” By some 
definitions, “Counterpiracy and Far-Seas Escort” operations are included as “rights and interests protection” 
operations (e.g., Fan and Char, “Introduction to China’s Military Operations Other Than War,” 6). However, we 
believe that the objectives of counterpiracy differ from other maritime “rights and interests protection” operations, 
and that the prominence of the Gulf of Aden counterpiracy patrols in China’s overseas MOOTW warrants 
their inclusion as a stand-alone category of MOOTW. Additionally, despite the fact that the majority of China’s 
international military exercises are focused on MOOTW, we believe that international military exercises present a 
unique set of motivations and benefits to China that are worth highlighting as a distinct category of MOOTW.
U.S. Army_US-China annual disaster management 
exchange2: U.S. Army.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
24 25
In the 1990s, a series of violent incidents in China’s far-western Xinjiang Uyghur 
Autonomous Region posed a growing security challenge for the PRC government.94 The 
PLA and PAP suppressed the uprisings, and in the aftermath, the CCP launched the 
“Strike Hard” campaign to crack down on additional violence.95 As part of the “Strike 
Hard” campaign, Chinese authorities arrested and sentenced Uighurs suspected of 
engaging in terrorist or separatist activities, even if those activities involved peaceful 
protests.96 Chinese authorities also targeted Xinjiang newspapers, magazines, and social 
organizations to prevent the spread of separatist discourse.97 Jiang Zemin drew attention 
to these “violent terrorist incidents” in international and domestic speeches and called 
on regional nations to “firmly oppose ethnic separatism and terrorism. ”98 In June 2001, 
China, Russia, and several Central Asian states formally established the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO), which lists among its main goals and tasks the need to 
“jointly counteract terrorism, separatism, and extremism in all their manifestations” and 
to “consolidate multidisciplinary cooperation in the maintenance and strengthening of 
peace, security, and stability in the region. ”99 
Following 9/11, China expanded its international outreach on counterterrorism as 
part of the “Global War on Terror. ” According to one PRC government-affiliated 
researcher, China “grasped the opportunity” to increase ties with the US and other 
countries on counterterrorism issues.100 China published a white paper on “East 
Turkestan terrorists” and successfully lobbied the US and the UN to place the East 
Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM) – an overseas separatist movement advocating 
for an independent Xinjiang – on their official lists of terror organizations.101 China 
also launched limited military cooperation with other countries on counterterrorism. 
In 2002, China conducted its first ever combined military exercise between the Kyrgyz 
armed forces and the PLA, simulating a counterterrorism drill, and has since conducted 
dozens of counterterrorism exercises with SCO nations.102 A survey of China’s combined 
military exercises found that 16% of China’s international military exercises address 
counterterrorism, including China’s largest annual combined military exercise series, 
Peace Mission.103
94   James Millward, “Violent Separatism in Xinjiang: A Critical Assessment,” East-West Center Policy Studies 6 , 2004, 
viii, https://www.eastwestcenter.org/system/tdf/private/PS006.pdf?file=1%26type=node%26id=32006 . 
95   Center for Naval Analyses, “China’s Response to Terrorism,” Murray Scot Tanner and James Bellacqua (2016) 43, 74. 
https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/Chinas%20Response%20to%20Terrorism_CNA061616.pdf .. 
96   Human Rights Watch, “China: Human Rights Concerns in  Xinjiang,” October 2001, https://www.hrw.org/legacy/
backgrounder/asia/china-bck1017.htm .  
97   Ibid.
98   Center for Naval Analyses, “China’s Response to Terrorism,” 22.
99   Charter of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization , St. Petersburg, 7 June 2002,  United Nations Treaty Series , vol. 
2896, No. 50517, available from  https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/Volume%202896/Part/volume-
2896-I-50517.pdf.
100   Tanner and Bellacqua, “China’s Response to Terrorism,” 23.
101   The United States removed ETIM from its terrorist list in 2020. See: Asim Kashgarian, “Uighur Diaspora Hails 
Removal of ETIM from US Terror List,” VOA News, December 25, 2020, https://www.voanews.com/a/extremism-
watch_uighur-diaspora-hails-removal-etim-us-terror-list/6200004.html.
102   “Backgrounder: Major PLA-related joint anti-terror military exercises and trainings,” People’s Daily, December 21, 
2007, http://en.people.cn/90001/90776/6325264.html
103   Allen, Saunders, and Chen, “China Military Diplomacy, 2003-2016,” 30.
DIA_2019 China Military Power rep: U.S. Department of Defense.
Counterterrorism and Stability Maintenance
CCP leadership has a high degree of insecurity about challenges to its sovereignty 
and domestic rule, and views many of its foremost threats as internal, rather than 
from external adversaries. China’s non-war military doctrine thus places particular 
emphasis on domestic counterterrorism and “stability maintenance” operations, 
which include efforts to quell domestic unrest and combat the “three evils” of 
terrorism, separatism, and extremism. 91 These operations most frequently rely on 
the PAP , the paramilitary wing of the CCP , with the PLA playing a limited support 
role.92 China has also taken steps to address the threat of international terrorism 
targeting Chinese overseas interests or supporting the “three evils” within China. 
However, China has largely eschewed using the PLA for significant counterterrorism 
operations overseas, relying instead on multilateral mechanisms and building partner 
nation capabilities to address the “symptom and the root cause” of terrorism. 93 
Counterterrorism and stability maintenance operations are important missions for 
China to confront perceived national security challenges and project an image of 
China as a global security leader, but they also demonstrate the current limit of the 
PLA ’s expansion of “diversified military tasks. ”   
91   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng , 154.
92   Joel Wuthnow, “China’s Other Army: The People’s Armed Police in an Era of Reform,” Center for the Study of 
Chinese Military Affairs Institute for National Strategic Studies  China Strategic Perspectives 14, (2019), 3, https://inss.
ndu.edu/Portals/82/China%20SP%2014%20Final%20for%20Web.pdf .
93   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Written Statement by Foreign Minister Wang Yi at the 
11th Ministerial Plenary Meeting of the Global Counterterrorism Forum,” (Beijing: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
2021), https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/zxxx_662805/t1913053.shtml . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
26 27
China’s counterterrorism strategy maintains a significant domestic focus, which 
differentiates it from the counterterrorism doctrines of other countries, such as the 
United States. According to Taylor Fravel, the PLA ’s focus on domestic operations is a 
“response to internal threats to regime security that are a byproduct of rapid economic 
growth. ”104 Xi Jinping has personally emphasized the link between counterterrorism and 
continued development, stating in a speech that if terrorism is not adequately addressed 
in China, “social stability will suffer shocks…and the broad outlook for reform, 
development, and stability will be affected. ”105
China most frequently relies on the PAP for its domestic counterterrorism and stability 
maintenance operations. The PAP serves as the CCP’s paramilitary arm and is directly 
under the authority of the Central Military Commission.106 PRC Defense White Papers 
have referred to the PAP as “the state’s backbone and shock force in handling public 
emergencies and maintaining social stability, ” and note that the PAP has established 
a “counterterrorism force structure” that includes special-duty squadrons, platoons, 
and emergency-response squads.107 The PLA has served in a secondary position to the 
PAP in conducting counterterrorism operations within China. This is possibly due to 
the sensitive nature of domestic deployments following Tiananmen in 1989. Domestic 
PLA counterterrorism operations since 1989 have included short deployments to 
Xinjiang in the 1990s, to Lhasa in 2008, and to Urumqi in 2009.108 However, the PLA ’s 
role in responding to the 2008 and 2009 riots was largely relegated to transportation 
and logistics support.109 While Chinese news articles sometimes document joint 
counterterrorism exercises between the PLA and PAP , such exercises do not appear to 
occur frequently.110
The PAP’s counterterrorism and domestic stability operations are inseparable from 
China’s ongoing crackdown in Xinjiang, which involves large-scale PAP deployments. 
For perspective, the PAP’s spending per capita in Xinjiang and Qinghai (a neighboring 
province with a large Tibetan population) are both approaching double the national 
104   Fravel, “Economic Growth, Regime Insecurity, and Military Strategy: Explaining the Rise of Noncombat 
Operations in China,” 178.
105   Austin Ramzy and Chris Buckley, “’Absolutely No Mercy’: Leaked Files Expose How China Organized Mass 
Detention of Muslims,” The New York Times, November 16, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/11/16/
world/asia/china-xinjiang-documents.html . 
106   As of 2018; Joel Wuthnow, “China’s Other Army: The People’s Armed Police in an Era of Reform,” Center for the 
Study of Chinese Military Affairs Institute for National Strategic Studies  China Strategic Perspectives 14, April 2019, 
https://inss.ndu.edu/Portals/82/China%20SP%2014%20Final%20for%20Web.pdf , 3. 
107   People’s Republic of China, The State Council Information Office, “The Diversified Deployment of China’s Armed 
Forces,” (Beijing: The State Council Information Office, 2013), http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/
node_7181425.htm. 
108   Murray Scot Tanner and James Bellacqua, “China’s Response to Terrorism,” Center for Naval Analyses , June 2016, 
75, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/Chinas%20Response%20to%20Terrorism_CNA061616.pdf . 
109   Tanner and Bellacqua, “China’s Response to Terrorism,” 75; Edward Cody, “Backstage Role of China’s Army in 
Tibet Unrest is a Contrast to 1989,” Washington Post , April 13, 2008, https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
content/article/2008/04/12/AR2008041202215.html . 
110   “Shouci! Xinjiang Wujing Te Zhan zhidui yu Lu Hang Lianhe Fankong Yanlian” 首次！ 新疆武警特战支
队与陆航联合反恐演练 [First! Joint Counterterrorism exercise between Xinjiang Armed Police Special 
Operations Detachment and Army Aviation], CCTV Network,  October 27, 2021, https://mil.news.sina.com.cn/
china/2021-10-27/doc-iktzscyy2051716.shtml . 
average.111 The PAP maintains seven mobile detachments and a counterterrorism Special 
Operations unit in Xinjiang that can be quickly deployed to any unrest.112 A newspaper 
affiliated with the PAP reported that as of 2021, the PAP’s special operations forces 
have conducted 31 counterterrorism missions in Xinjiang that resulted in the deaths 
of 91 suspects.113 According to China’s 2019 Defense White Paper, the PAP has assisted 
in “capturing 12,995 terrorists.“114 These operations have drawn broad international 
criticism for their heavy-handed tactics and abuses of human rights.115 
The increasing number of Chinese businesses and citizens abroad has taken Chinese 
interests to countries and regions with significant terrorism risks, including the Middle 
East and parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. Terrorist attacks in the last fifteen years have 
targeted Chinese citizens in over a dozen countries, resulting in over 40 deaths.116 In 
particular, extremists affiliated with the Baluchistan Liberation Army have repeatedly 
targeted China’s investment along the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.117 China also 
accuses ETIM of operating abroad in Syria and Afghanistan, and in 2017 Islamic State 
fighters publicly pledged to attack Chinese targets.118 
 In 2015, China passed a counterterrorism law that formally permitted the PLA and 
PAP to deploy abroad for counterterrorism missions, subject to the approval of the 
CMC.119 But in practice, China has not consistently relied on deployments or special 
operations forces to conduct counterterrorism raids within foreign countries, with 
limited exceptions. The PAP has stationed special forces at the Chinese embassies in 
Afghanistan and Iraq, has conducted joint counterterrorism operations on the Sino-
Afghan border, and has operated a forward base in Tajikistan.120 In Tajikistan, these 
operations form part of a three-pronged approach that aims to provide equipment and 
111   Adrian Zenz, “Corralling the People’s Armed Police: Centralizing Control to Reflect Centralized Budgets,” China 
Brief, April 24, 2018, https://jamestown.org/program/corralling-the-peoples-armed-police-centralizing-control-to-
reflect-centralized-budgets/ . 
112   Joel Wuthnow, “China’s Other Army: The People’s Armed Police in an Era of Reform,” 13.
113   “Heroic armed police squadron in Xinjiang lauded for counter-terrorism achievements,” The Global Times, July 12, 
2021, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202107/1228464.shtml?id=11 . 
114   People’s Republic of China, “China’s National Defense in the New Era.” 
115   “‘Break Their Lineage, Break Their Roots’,” Human Rights Watch
116   United States Institute of Peace, “China’s Approach to International Terrorism,” Dawn Murphy, September 
2017, https://www.usip.org/publications/2017/10/chinas-approach-international-terrorism ; European Council 
on Foreign Relations, “Terror Overseas: Understanding China’s Evolving Counter-Terrorism Strategy,” 
Mathieu Duchâtel, (2016), 3, https://ecfr.eu/wp-content/uploads/ECFR_193_-_TERROR_OVERSEAS_
UNDERSTANDING_CHINAS_EVOLVING_COUNTER_TERROR_STRATEGY.pdf . 
117   Kinling Lo, “Pakistan attack targeting Chinese adds to concern over security threats,” South China Morning Post , 
August 24, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3146087/pakistan-attack-targeting-chinese-
adds-concern-over-security . 
118   United States Institute of Peace, “China’s Approach to International Terrorism.”
119   People’s Republic of China, The National People’s Congress, “Anti-Terrorism Law of the People’s Republic of China,” 
(Beijing: China National People’s Congress Network, 2015), http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/xinwen/2018-06/12/
content_2055871.htm  
120   European Council on Foreign Relations, “Terror Overseas,” 6; “China again dismisses reports of military patrols 
in Afghanistan,” Reuters, February 23, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-china-afghanistan/china-again-
dismisses-reports-of-military-patrols-in-afghanistan-idUKKBN162132 ; Gerry Shih, “In Central Asia’ Forbidding 
highlands, a quiet newcomer: Chinese troops,” The Washington Post, February 18, 2019, https://www.washington -
post.com/world/asia_pacific/in-central-asias-forbidding-highlands-a-quiet-newcomer-chinese-troops/2019/02/18/
78d4a8d0-1e62-11e9-a759-2b8541bbbe20_story.html . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
28 29
facilities to Tajikistan to boost its security capabilities, conduct joint operations, and 
align Tajikistan’s security interests with China.121 There is no publicly available evidence 
that the PAP has conducted large-scale overseas counterterrorism operations or raids. 
Instead, China’s efforts have focused principally on relying on and strengthening host 
country capabilities to address China’s security concerns. One prominent example of 
this is Pakistan, which in 2016 established a 15,000-strong Army Division that was 
meant to protect the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor from terrorist attacks.122   
The PLA ’s hesitancy to conduct its own counterterrorism operations abroad is driven 
by the nature of China’s security challenges, foreign policy principles that constrain 
the use of overseas force, and China’s limited capability to deploy and sustain forces 
overseas. As these factors change over time, it is possible, though still unlikely, that 
China may conduct more targeted counterterrorism operations abroad. China does 
face risks from overseas terrorist groups, but the principal focus remains domestic 
terror threats. Additionally, China’s longstanding principle of “non-intervention” 
and “non-interference” precludes the PLA from conducting a unilateral intervention 
abroad and prioritizes the role of the UN or other multilateral channels in addressing 
transnational issues.123 China’s Ambassador to the UN, in a 2018 speech, emphasized 
that international counterterrorism efforts should be “in compliance with the purposes 
and principles of the UN Charter and give the central coordination role to the United 
Nations. ”124 While meeting with the Afghan Taliban, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang 
Yi emphasized that the Taliban shouldered the burden of dealing with terrorist groups 
within the country and must “sever ties” with ETIM.125 In theory, China could conduct 
counterterrorism operations abroad with either UN authorization or host-state consent, 
but the PLA remains untested in its ability to support sustained special forces operations 
outside of China’s own borders. 
121   Dirk van der Kley, “China’s Security Activities in Tajikistan and Afghanistan’s Wakhan Corridor,” in Securing the 
Belt and Road: China’s Evolving Military Engagement Along the Silk Roads , ed. Nadège Rolland (Washington, D.C.: 
National Bureau of Asian Research, 2019), 72.
122   Raza Khan, “15,000 troops of Special Security Division to protect CPEC projects, Chinese nationals,” Dawn, 
August 12, 2016, https://www.dawn.com/news/1277182 . 
123   “China, Russia Stress Non-Interference in Countries’ Internal Affairs,” China Daily, February 5, 2021, https://
global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202102/05/WS601ca8cba31024ad0baa772f.html .
124    Zhaoxu Ma, Statement by Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu At the United Nations  
High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States , United Nations, June 28, 2018, 
https://www.un.org/counterterrorism/ctitf/sites/www.un.org.counterterrorism.ctitf/files/S1-China.pdf . 
125   Yun Sun, “A Reluctant Embrace: China’s New Relationship with the Taliban,” War on the Rocks, August 10, 2021, 
accessed November 22, 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2021/08/a-reluctant-embrace-chinas-new-relationship-
with-the-taliban/ . 
US Navy_US-China navy search rescue exercise: Flickr.
Rights and Interests Protection
In the last two decades, China has significantly expanded the capacity and reach of its 
paramilitary and law enforcement operations within and near its borders to protect China’s 
“rights and interests. ” Under Xi, China has undertaken several new MOOTW in disputed 
areas in the East and South China Seas. Attention to this activity is primarily focused on 
the maritime “gray zone” strategy of China’s Coast Guard (CCG) and the People’s Armed 
Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM), both of which have relied on direct coercion to deter 
and compel other countries’ security forces and civilians to comply with China’s regulations 
and claimed jurisdiction, and thus to exert effective control over disputed territories. At 
the same time, China has expanded partnerships with its neighbors in Southeast Asia to 
counter drug trafficking, illegal fishing, and other transnational security issues. A similar 
trend has occurred on China’s Western border, where China has strengthened border control 
mechanisms with regional countries while simultaneously conducting MOOTW that 
arguably erode regional security and establish Chinese territorial control. These operations 
demonstrate China’s overlapping, and at times contradictory, objectives of defending 
Chinese interests while improving its international image and regional influence.
In 2021, the National People’s Congress adopted a “Coast Guard Law, ” which outlines 
the roles and responsibility for the CCG, which came under the jurisdiction of the 
PAP in 2018.126 The law stipulates that the basic tasks of “maritime rights protection 
126   Coast Guard Law of the People’s Republic of China, Order No. 71, 25th session of the Standing Committee of the 
Thirteenth National People’s Congress, (January 22, 2021), http://en.pkulaw.cn/display.aspx?id=09868c44d041e
84ebdfb&lib=law ; Weishuai Sun, “海警队伍转隶武警部队没有改变其基本任务属性” Hailing Duiwu Zhuanli 
Wujingbudui Meiyou Gaibian Qijiben Renwu Shuxing [The Transfer of China Coast Guard to the Armed Police 
Force did not Change Its Basic Mission Attributes], Ministry of National Defense of The People’s Republic of China, 
June 28, 2018, http://www.mod.gov.cn/jzhzt/2018-06/28/content_4818019.htm ; Ministry of National Defense of 
The People’s Republic of China, “Defense Ministry’s Regular Press Conference on June 28,” China Military, June 29, 
2018, http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2018-06/29/content_8075007.htm . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
30 31
and law enforcement” are to “protect maritime security, maintain maritime security 
order, combat maritime smuggling and illegal immigration, conduct supervisory 
inspection of the development and utilization of marine resources, marine ecological 
and environmental protection, marine fishery production operations, ” as well 
as to “prevent, stop, and punish illegal and criminal maritime activities. ”127 The 
complication of these regulations is that the “Coast Guard Law” grants the CCG 
authority to operate in “waters under the jurisdiction of China, ” an ambiguous term 
that encompasses contested areas. As a result, the CCG has consistently operated 
around claimed maritime features spanning from the Senkaku Islands in the East 
China Sea to James Shoal off the coast of Borneo. 128
In terms of MOOTW doctrine, such patrols of disputed territory are considered 
“rights enforcement” operations and are a component of protecting China’s national 
and developmental interests. The normalization of PLAN and CCG patrols in the 
South China Sea has directly enabled the harassment of foreign vessels at disputed 
features. To this day, the routine harassment of foreign vessels occurs on “rights 
protection” (维权) missions carried out by the CCG. There is also evidence that 
efforts to prevent or curtail foreign fishing have increased in intensity in recent years, 
particularly the enforcement of China’s annual fishing moratorium.129 
In 2013, the PLAN established “normalized combat readiness patrols” in the 
Spratly Islands that “safeguard national territorial sovereignty” and improve 
coordination with the CCG. 130 The same year, China’s maritime law enforcement 
agencies announced plans to “normalize” all “fishery protection” missions and 
rights defense patrols in the South China Sea. ”131 China’s 2013 Defense White Paper 
explicitly articulated that the “PLAN provides security support for China’s maritime 
law enforcement, fisheries, and oil and gas exploitation…[and] has established 
mechanisms to coordinate and cooperate with law-enforcement organs of marine 
surveillance and fishery administration, as well as a joint military-police-civilian 
defense mechanism. ”132 In press coverage of the changes in policy, the director of 
127   Coast Guard Law of the People’s Republic of China, Order No. 71, 25th session of the Standing Committee of the 
Thirteenth National People’s Congress.
128   Ryan D. Martinson, Echelon Defense: The Role of Sea Power in Chinese Maritime Dispute Strategy  
(Newport: U.S. Naval War College, 2018), CMSI Red Books, Study No. 15, 47-53,  
https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1014&context=cmsi-red-books  
129   Kevin Varley et al., “Fight Over Fish Fans a New Stage of Conflict in South China Sea,”  Bloomberg , September 1, 
2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2020-dangerous-conditions-in-depleted-south-china-sea/ .  
130   Yi Gao, “Zhongguo Haijun Yi Changtaihua Xunluo Nansha Zhanshi Cheng Suishi Zhunbei Zhandou” 中国海
军已常态化巡逻南沙 战士称随时准备战斗 [The Chinese Navy Has Normalized Patrols of the Spratly Islands, 
Soldiers Say They Are Ready to Fight at Any Time], PLA Daily, May 16, 2013, http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/2013-05-
16/0400724747.html. 
131   “Woguo Zai Nansha Haiyu Zhengshi Qidong Changtaihua Huyu” 我国在南沙海域正式启动常态化护渔 [China 
Officially Launches Normalized Fisheries Protection in Spratly Island Waters], Xinjing Bao, May 11, 2013, http://
news.sina.com.cn/c/2013-03-11/031926490360.shtml ; “Haijian Dishi Zhidui Jinzhu Sansha Shi Nanhai Xunhang 
Jiang Changtaihua” 海监第十支队进驻三沙市 南海巡航将常态化 [CMS 10th Detachment Stationed in Sansha 
City, South China Sea Patrols to Be Normalized], Reference News , March 11, 2013, http://china.cankaoxiaoxi.
com/2013/0311/176268.shtml.
132   Government of the People’s Republic of China, State Council, “The Diversified Employment of China’s Armed 
Forces,” (Beijing: Information Office of the State Council, 2013), http://english.www.gov.cn/archive/white_pa -
per/2014/08/23/content_281474982986506.htm .
the South China Sea Branch of the Fisheries Law Enforcement Command (FLEC) 
stated that the goal of the rights protection and fishing protection work is to focus 
on “Scarborough Shoal, protect Mischief Reef, strengthen supervision of the Paracel 
Islands and Gulf of Tonkin, and normalize fishing protection in the Spratly Islands. ”133
The rise in coercive actions in the past decade accompanied the CCP leadership’s 
increased emphasis on the protection of China’s rights and interests. 134 For example, 
Xi Jinping stated in 2013 that China must “insist on maintain[ing] the unity of 
national sovereignty, security, and development interests, and maintain maritime 
rights and interests to match the improvement of overall national strength. ”135 
According to Zhou Fangyin, a former researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social 
Sciences (CASS), a rise in regional tensions resulted in the Chinese government 
adjusting its “presumption that regional stability was of the highest importance” and 
instead newly prioritized the “defense of China’s sovereign interests. ”136
Even as the CCG harassment of foreign vessels has degraded the regional security 
environment, some regional nations have demonstrated a willingness to partner with 
China on shared transnational security issues. For example, China and the Philippines in 
2017 established a Joint Coast Guard Committee on Maritime Cooperation that pledged 
to combat crime, conduct search and rescue, and partner in environmental protection and 
emergency response.137 In January 2020, a CCG vessel visited the Philippines to donate 
supplies and conduct bilateral maritime search and rescue exercises to “promote mutual 
trust and create a new channel for bilateral maritime cooperation. ”138 
133   “Woguo Nansha…” 我国南沙展开常态化护渔 重点看好黄岩岛 [China Will Launch Normalized Fisheries 
Protection…], Xinhua
134   For more on China’s use of coercion in the South China Sea, see: Andrew Chubb, “PRC Assertiveness in the South 
China Sea: Measuring Continuity and Change, 1970–2015.”  International Security 45, no. 3 (2020): 79-121; Ketian 
Zhang, “Cautious Bully: Reputation, Resolve, and Beijing’s Use of Coercion in the South China Sea,” International 
Security 44, no. 1 (July  2019): 117–59.China has used coercion in its maritime territorial disputes in the South China 
Sea, despite adverse implications for its image. China is curiously selective in its timing, targets, and tools of coercion: 
China rarely employs military coercion, and it does not coerce all countries that pose similar threats. An examina -
tion of newly available primary documents and hundreds of hours of interviews with Chinese officials to trace the 
decisionmaking processes behind China’s use and nonuse of coercion reveals a new theory of when, why, and how 
China employs coercion against other states, especially in the South China Sea. Contrary to conventional wisdom, the 
findings show that China is a cautious bully that does not use coercion frequently. In addition, when China becomes 
stronger, it tends to use military coercion less often, choosing instead nonmilitary tools. Moreover, concerns with its 
reputation for resolve and with economic cost are critical elements of Chinese decisionmaking regarding the costs 
and benefits of coercing its neighbors. China often coerces one target to deter others—“killing the chicken to scare 
the monkey.” These findings have important implications for how scholars understand states’ coercive strategies and 
the future of Chinese behavior in the region and beyond.”,”container-title”:”International Security”,”DOI”:”10.1162/
isec_a_00354”,”ISSN”:”0162-2889”,”issue”:”1”,”journalAbbreviation”:”International Security”,”page”:”117-159”,”so
urce”:”Silverchair”,”title”:”Cautious Bully: Reputation, Resolve, and Beijing’s Use of Coercion in the South China 
Sea”,”title-short”:”Cautious Bully”,”volume”:”44”,”author”:[{“family”:”Zhang”,”given”:”Ketian”}],”issued”:{“date-parts”:
[[“2019”,7,1]]}}}],”schema”:”https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json”} 
135   “Xi Jinping: Yao Jinyibu Guanxin Haiyang, Renshi Haiyang, Jinglüe Haiyang,” 习近平: 要 进 一 步 关 心 海 洋 ，认 识 海
洋 ，经 略 海 洋 [Xi Jinping: We Must Further Care about the Ocean, Understand the Ocean, and Manage the Ocean], 
Xinhua, July 31, 2013, http://www.gov.cn/ldhd/2013-07/31/content_2459009.htm . 
136   Fangyin Zhou, “Between assertiveness and self-restraint: understanding China’s South China Sea policy,” 
International Affairs 91, no. 4 (2016): 875.
137   Prashanth Parameswaran, “What’s Behind the New China-Philippines Coast Guard Exercise?” The Diplomat, 
March 15, 2017, https://thediplomat.com/2017/03/whats-behind-the-new-china-philippines-coast-guard-exercise/ . 
138   Jin Zhou, “China, Philippines coast guards enhance cooperation,” China Daily, January 15, 2020, https://global.
chinadaily.com.cn/a/202001/15/WS5e1ef405a3101282172713b4.html . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
32 33
Similarly, China and Vietnam have consistently conducted joint patrols of their 
delimited border in the Gulf of Tonkin. In 2006, the PLAN and the Vietnamese Navy 
launched the biannual patrols, which are “aimed at strengthening the cooperation 
between the two navies and maintaining the stability of the fishing industry and 
oil exploration” in the Gulf.139 The two countries’ Coast Guards have conducted the 
majority of the joint patrols, but in 2019, this responsibility was transferred to the 
PLA Southern Theater Command and the Vietnamese Navy.140 Even during times of 
tension, the two countries have maintained the patrols as a “rare example of limited 
cooperation. ”141 The two countries stay on their own delineated sides of the Gulf, 
providing an outlet for cooperation while respecting each other’s sovereignty in the 
patrolled waters. Furthermore, Vietnam and China often organize bilateral drills after 
the completion of the patrols.142 
The PAP also conducts monthly multilateral patrols of the Lower Mekong River. 
China initiated the patrols with Laos, Myanmar, and Thailand in the aftermath of 
a piracy attack that killed thirteen Chinese sailors on the Mekong River in 2011. 143 
In the first five years of the patrols, the partner countries arrested 10,000 criminal 
suspects, seized 36 metric tons of drugs, and rescued 135 commercial ships from 
pirates on the Mekong. 144 China has also established information sharing centers with 
the partner countries to improve intelligence analysis. 145 Even during the pandemic, 
all four nations held monthly joint patrols using remote video to direct the operations. 
Additionally, after the completion of a monthly patrol in 2020, one of the Chinese 
vessels conducted a combat drill in Laos. Both actions demonstrate the increasing 
closeness between China and these other three Southeast Asian nations when 
cooperating on regional security issues. 
139   “China Launches Joint Naval Patrol with Vietnam,” Shanghai Daily, April 29, 2006, http://www.china.org.cn/
english/2006/Apr/167254.htm . 
140   Panyue Huang, “China, Vietnam Navies Wrap up 30th Joint Patrol in Beibu Gulf,” Ministry of National Defense of 
the People’s Republic of China, June 30, 2021, http://eng.mod.gov.cn/news/2021-06/30/content_4888478.htm.
141   Prashanth Parameswaran, “China-Vietnam Joint Patrols in the Spotlight,” The Diplomat, October 31, 2018, https://
thediplomat.com/2018/10/china-vietnam-joint-patrols-in-the-spotlight/ . 
142   Huang, “China, Vietnam Navies.”
143   Edward Wong, “China and Neighbors Begin Joint Mekong River Patrols,” The New York Times, December 10, 2011, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/11/world/asia/china-and-neighbors-begin-joint-mekong-river-patrols.html.
144   Yan Zhang and Yingqing Li, “Joint Action Helps to Reduce Crime,” China Daily, March 23, 2016, http://english.
www.gov.cn/news/top_news/2016/03/23/content_281475312787763.htm.
145   Ibid.
US Navy_Sailors visit a Chinese ship: Flickr.
Counterpiracy and Far-Seas Escort
On December 26, 2008, three PLAN ships departed from Hainan to sail to 
the Gulf of Aden to combat a growing international threat of piracy. Thirteen 
years later, the PLAN has now completed thirty-eight counterpiracy escort task 
force (ETF) missions and escorted over 6,500 vessels in the Gulf of Aden. 146 As 
China’s most consistent and most distant case of MOOTW , China’s counterpiracy 
operations have served as a symbol of the PLA ’s evolving responsibilities and its 
increasingly global reach. 147 
146   “Chinese Naval Fleets Escort over 6,600 Vessels in Gulf of Aden, Somalia over 10 Years,” Xinhua, April 19, 2019, 
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-04/19/c_137990862.htm . 
147   Andrew S. Erickson and Austin M. Strange, No Substitute for Experience: Chinese Antipiracy Operations in the Gulf 
of Aden, (Newport, RI: China Maritime Studies Institute, 2013), https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcon -
tent.cgi?article=1009&context=cmsi-red-books .

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
34 35
The Gulf of Aden, one of the world’s most important Sea Lines of Communication 
(SLOC), experienced a surge in piracy beginning in 2008. That year, pirates 
attacked about 20% of the 1,265 Chinese commercial ships sailing through the 
Gulf and hijacked seven ships flying under the Chinese flag or containing Chinese 
sailors or cargo. 148 In response to the threat, the UN Security Council unanimously 
voted for Resolution 1816 in June 2008, which authorized “all necessary means 
to repress acts of piracy and armed robbery” off the coast of Somalia. 149 China 
publicly supported international efforts to combat piracy and, after nearly a year 
of domestic deliberation and interagency coordination, authorized the PLAN to 
conduct missions itself. 150 The decision to deploy a PLAN ETF represented two 
key milestones for the PLAN: it was the first time that the PLAN had performed 
a distant seas MOOTW and the first time that PLAN ships participated in a 
multinational naval mission. 151 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and PLA officers publicly emphasized two key motives 
for the launch of the escort missions. The first was the protection of Chinese assets and 
the broader threat that piracy posed to “international navigation, maritime trade, and 
s e c u r i t y.”152 The second public justification highlighted China’s growing role as a world 
actor, with MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang stating that the PLAN deployment is “based 
on UN Security Council Resolutions and…is a reflection of [the] Chinese government’s 
commitment to safeguarding world peace and stability and [the] concept of ‘putting 
people’s interest[s] first, [and] exercising state power for the people. ”153 Rear Admiral 
Xiao Xinnian, Deputy Chief of Staff of the PLAN, similarly stated at the time that the 
mission “fully reflects the Chinese government’s active fulfillment of its international 
obligations and its image as a responsible great power. ”154 
An additional objective of the counterpiracy operations was for the PLAN to 
gain direct experience in long-distance operations. 155 MFA officials detailing 
the operations made no mention of the PLAN’s desire for experience. However, 
148   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Liu Jianchao’s Regular 
Press Conference on December 18, 2008,” (Beijing: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2008), https://www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/
cekp//eng/fyrth/t526955.htm.
149   UN Security Council resolution 1816, Resolution 1816 (2008) [On Acts of Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Vessels 
in Territorial Waters and the High Seas Off the Coast of Somalia] , S/RES/1816 (2008), available from  
https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N08/361/77/pdf/N0836177.pdf?OpenElement . 
150   Strange and Erickson, No Substitute for Experience , 21, 46.
151   Both of these milestones are reflected in state media retrospectives on the counterpiracy escort missions. See: “Diyi 
Pi Huhang Biandui: Kaichuang Zhongguo Haijun Shishang Duoxiang Diyi” 第 一 批 护 航 编 队 ：开 创 中 国 海 军 史 上
多项第一 [The First Escort Formations: Creating a Number of Firsts in the History of the Chinese Navy], Xinhua, 
August 17, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2017-08/17/c_1121500917.htm . 
152   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Liu Jianchao’s Regular 
Press Conference on December 18, 2008,” (Beijing: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2008), https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/
ce/cgtrt/eng/fyrthhz/lxjzzdh/t526955.htm . 
153   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Qin Gang’s Regular Press 
Conference on December 23, 2008,” (Beijing: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2008), https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/ce/cg -
trt/eng/fyrthhz/lxjzzdh/t529049.htm . 
154   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of National Defense, “The Ministry of National Defense Introduced the 
Navy’s Escort Situation in the Gulf of Aden and the War in Somalia,” (Beijing: Ministry of National Defense, 2008), 
http://www.gov.cn/xwfb/2008-12/23/content_1185458.htm . 
155    See Strange and Erickson, No Substitute for Experience , 2.
at the launch of the first ETF mission, PLAN Commander Wu Shengli stated 
that the patrols were “a major exercise and test for our Navy’s ability to perform 
missions and tasks. ”156 Furthermore, the 2008 Ministry of National Defense White 
Paper highlighted the need for the PLAN to “gradually develop its capabilities of 
conducting cooperation in distant waters and countering non-traditional security 
threats. ”157 And in 2011, an acting Party Secretary for an ETF stated that the 
Navy must “expand military training according to local conditions, toughen the 
force on all sides, [and] conscientiously raise the ability to fulfill missions [and] 
responsibilities. ”158 Based on these operations over the past thirteen years, it is 
possible to gauge if China has accomplished these three objectives. 
As of 2021, the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Aden has receded dramatically, with 
no successful ship hijackings reported in the region since March 2017.159 In line 
with China’s objective of demonstrating itself as a “responsible great power, ” the 
UN and Western countries (including the US) have praised China’s contributions 
to counterpiracy missions.160 The completion of counterpiracy patrols has also 
enabled military diplomacy with other countries that strengthen China’s standing 
as an international military power. From 2008 to 2018, PLAN ships deployed for 
counterpiracy missions completed 203 port calls in 62 countries.161 Beginning in 
January 2012, China has coordinated its Gulf of Aden patrols with India and Japan and 
has conducted patrol exercises with the US, South Korea, the EU Combined Task Force, 
and NATO.162 
Furthermore, the missions have provided essential training for the PLAN’s far seas 
operations. The Gulf of Aden escort missions were the first time the PLAN completed a 
long-term mission away from China’s near periphery, and the escort fleet quickly broke 
its record of continuous navigation time for a PLAN fleet.163  They have also facilitated 
an unprecedented level of interagency coordination between the PLAN, the Ministry 
of Transportation, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.164 After a decade of operation, 
the ETF mission now reportedly completes a “first-level counterpiracy response” five 
times faster than the PLAN could in 2008.165 In a recent December 2019 interview, a 
156   Wu and Liu, “Laoji Qianjun Zhongtuo Bu Fu Huhang Shiming.” 
157   People’s Republic of China, “China’s National Defense in 2008.” 
158   Strange and Erickson, No Substitute for Experience , 5.
159   UN Security Council resolution 2554, Resolution 2554 (2020) [On Piracy and Armed Robbery at Sea Off the Coast of 
Somalia], S/RES/2554 (2020), available from https://undocs.org/S/RES/2554(2020) . 
160   Christopher Bodeen, “US praises China anti-piracy role off Somalia,” San Diego Tribune,  February 28, 2009, 
https://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/sdut-china-us-022809-2009feb28-story.html.
161   China Power Team, “How is China Bolstering its Military Diplomatic Relations?” Center for Strategic and 
International Studies , October 27, 2017, https://chinapower.csis.org/china-military-diplomacy/ . 
162   Andrew Erickson and Austin Strange, “China’s Blue Soft Power: Antipiracy, Engagement, and Image Enhance -
ment,” Naval War College Review 86, no. 1 (Winter 2015), https://www.jstor.org/stable/26397817?seq=1.  
163   “Di Yi Pi Huhang Biandui: Kaichuang Zhongguo Haijun Shishang Duo Xiang Di Yi” 第 一 批 护 航 编 队 ：开 创 中 国
海军史上多项第一 [The First Batch of Escort Formations: Creating a Number of First in the History of the Chinese 
Navy], Xinhua, August 17, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2017-08/17/c_1121500917.htm . 
164   Erickson and Strange, “No Substitute for Experience,” 1. 
165   “Huhang, ‘Jian’ Zhi Yading Wan” 护航, “舰”指亚丁湾 [Escort, “Ship” to the Gulf of Aden], Xinmin Weekly, 
November 30, 2018, https://m.xinminweekly.com.cn/content/9032.html . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
36 37
commander of a PLAN ship participating in the 33rd ETF emphasized that “[just as] 
escorting ships happens in far seas, combat happens in far seas, training must also be 
carried out in far seas!”166
Even as the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Aden diminished, China has maintained and 
is likely to continue its ETF missions. The missions continue to fulfill China’s goals of 
strengthening its international reputation and providing operational experience to the 
PLAN. At the same time, China’s interests and objectives for the missions have evolved. 
In the earliest years of the counterpiracy patrols, the missions were largely “crisis driven” 
in response to the very real threat posed to Chinese shipping and economic interests 
transiting the Gulf of Aden.167 Over time, the missions have expanded to become “multi-
purpose oriented” and enable the PLAN to respond to an array of security challenges 
in the region.168 This was made clear in February 2011 when the PLAN diverted 
the Xuzhou, a missile frigate and one of the Navy’s most modern warships, from 
counterpiracy patrols to the Libyan coast to support the evacuation of Chinese citizens 
from the country.169 In March 2015, the PLAN again diverted an ETF to conduct an 
emergency evacuation of Chinese nationals in Y emen.170 PLAN ships on a scheduled 
ETF have also participated in the search for MH 370, disposed of Syrian chemical 
weapons, and delivered fresh water to the Maldives.171 
China’s counterpiracy patrols provide insight into the nature and future trajectory of 
China’s military operations in the Gulf of Aden. First, China’s ETF is notable for its 
relative independence from the multinational coalitions completing the same mission. 
Despite participating in bilateral exercises with several nations, China has not sailed 
under any of the international joint task forces also responsible for combatting piracy 
in the Gulf of Aden, such as the US-led Combined Task Force 151. This aligns with 
PLA strategists’ view that the use of overseas force is a question of sovereignty and that 
it must be “independently commanded. ”172 Thus, although China’s participation in the 
patrols “strictly follows the principal of international military cooperation, ” China does 
not accept the command of other countries or regional organizations, nor will it join 
coalition operations led by other nations.173 
166   “Di 33 Pi Huhang Biandui Jin Tie Huhang Renwu Kaizhan Yuanhai Lianbing” 第33批护航编队紧贴护航任务开
展远海练兵 [The 33rd Batch of Escort Formations Closely Follows Escort Missions to Carry out Far-Sea Training], 
PLA Daily, December 6, 2019, http://military.cctv.com/2019/12/06/ARTIrMdqKymZpjqAkfnrL5pg191206.shtml . 
167   Andrea Ghiselli, Protecting China’s Interests Overseas: Securitization and Foreign Policy , (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2021), 230.
168   Ibid, 230.
169   Jeremy Page, “Libyan Turmoil Prompts Chinese Naval Firsts,” Wall Street Journal,  February 25, 2011, https://www.
wsj.com/articles/BL-CJB-13381 . 
170   “Yemen Crisis: China Evacuates Citizens and Foreigners from Aden,” BBC, April 3, 2015, https://www.bbc.com/
news/world-middle-east-32173811.
171   Minnie Chan, “Largest Ever Chinese Rescue Fleet to Join Search for Malaysia Airlines Plane,” South China Morning 
Post, March 11, 2015, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1445152/largest-ever-chinese-rescue-fleet-join-
search-malaysia-airlines-plane ; Zhou Wa, “Warships to Help Dispose of Syrian Chemical Weapons,” China 
Daily, December 26, 2013, http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/epaper/2013-12/26/content_17198885.htm ; “China Sends 
Fresh Water to the Maldives,” China Daily, December 7, 2014, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/2014-12/07/
content_19037526.htm . 
172   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 323.
173   Ibid, 323.
China’s counterpiracy patrols are also notable for their relatively restrained use of force. 
China has followed stricter rules of engagement when operating against pirates compared to 
other nations conducting naval missions in the Gulf of Aden. Scholars Austin Strange and 
Andrew Erickson have documented the internal debates among Chinese officials about the 
legal rights and limitations of the PLAN’s escort patrols, and the general reluctance to detain 
foreign pirates.174 From the onset of operations, PLAN officials have stated that the “tactics, 
techniques, and procedures for China are different than those for other countries, ” and 
China has generally avoided using force beyond firing warning shots.175 The PLAN detained 
Somali pirates for the first time in April 2017, over seven years after the first ETF patrol.176 
A Chinese newspaper article later detailed that the ETF’s on-board legal advisor had no 
established protocol for the detention of the pirates and had to work with superiors in the 
moment to formulate a legal strategy to authorize the PLAN’s action.177 
The opening of the PLA Logistics Facility in Djibouti has further supported the PLAN’s 
counterpiracy missions. According to an official in the PLAN Logistics Department, 
the Djibouti base will shift the logistics model away from a reliance on supply ships 
supplemented by foreign port visits to one based on “overseas bases supplemented by 
foreign ports and domestic support, ” which will subsequently help the PLAN “better 
respond to multiple security threats and complete diversified military tasks. ”178 A 
researcher at the PLAN Military Academic Research Institute in 2018 further stated 
that the escort missions have led the PLAN to actively explore “new models of overseas 
guarantees” and to adopt an “informationized, commercialized, and institutionalized 
far-seas comprehensive support system. ”179 Y et, despite these projections, it remains 
to be determined if China has successfully adopted these capabilities. Although PLA 
analysts have predicted the reduced role of supply ships in the conduct of counterpiracy 
missions, since 2018 the composition of each PLAN’s escort fleet has remained 
consistent and included a PLAN Type 903 replenishment ship.180 It is likely that the 
PLAN will continue to rely on its existing support models for ETFs until it acquires 
additional far seas resupply capabilities. 
174   Strange and Erickson, No Substitute for Experience , 47-49.
175   Andrew S. Erickson and Austin M. Strange, Six Years at Sea…and Counting: Gulf of Aden Anti-Piracy and China’s 
Maritime Commons Presence , (Washington, D.C.: Jamestown Foundation, 2015), http://www.andrewerickson.
com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Erickson-Publication_Anti-Piracy_China_Jamestown-Book_GoA-Mission_6-
Years _ 2015_Fina l.pdf.
176   Ankit Panda, “As Somali Pirates Return, Chinese Navy Boasts of Anti-Piracy Operations,” The Diplomat, April 16, 
2017, https://thediplomat.com/2017/04/as-somali-pirates-return-chinese-navy-boasts-of-anti-piracy-operations/ . 
177   Ghiselli, Protecting China’s Interests Overseas, 222;  Dong Zhuhong “Jian Hui zai Yading Wan Shanyao” 检徽在亚
丁湾闪耀 [The Inspection Badge Shines in the Gulf of Aden], Procuratorate Daily, August 1, 2017, http://newspaper.
jcrb.com/2017/20170801/20170801_004/20170801_004_1.htm . 
178   “Liangjian Yading Wan” 亮剑亚丁湾 [The Bright Sword of the Gulf of Aden], China Youth Daily, December 24, 
2018, http://zqb.cyol.com/html/2018-12/24/nw.D110000zgqnb_20181224_4-03.htm  
179   “Huhang Baozhang Tixi Shixian Xiaoneng Yusheng” 护航保障体系实现效能跃升 [Escort Guarantee System 
Achieves a Leap in Efficiency], PLA Daily, December 23, 2018, http://military.people.com.cn/n1/2018/1223/c1011-
30482604.html . 
180   Isaac B. Kardon, Conor M. Kennedy, and Peter A. Dutton, Gwadar: China’s Potential Strategic Strongpoint in 
Pakistan (Newport: U.S. Naval War College, 2020), CMSI China Maritime Reports, No. 7, 58, https://digital-
commons.usnwc.edu/cmsi-maritime-reports/7 . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
38 39
Commemorating the ten-year anniversary of the mission in December 2018, Ministry 
of National Defense Spokesperson Wu Qian stated that “looking ahead, the PLA Navy 
will continue efforts and contribute to building a community of shared future for 
mankind as well as world peace and stability. ”181 As the UN Security Council continues 
to unanimously extend its resolution authorizing the missions, China is likely to 
maintain its patrols indefinitely as a routine operation for the PLA.
UN_Chinese Peacekeeping in South Sudan#2: Cunha, Gregorio. United Nations.
 
International Peacekeeping Operations 
China’s participation in peacekeeping operations (PKOs) predates its other foreign 
MOOTW , with China first dispatching five PLA military observers to the Suez as part of 
the UN Truce Supervision Organization in the Middle East in 1990.182 Thirty years later, 
China touts its PKOs as serving as a “force of justice for world peace and development, ” 
and Chinese experts refer to PKOs as “China’s diplomatic calling card. ”183 However, 
in some instances, China’s commitment to PKOs serves to protect Chinese overseas 
181   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of National Defense, “Defense Ministry’s Regular Press Conference on Dec. 
27,” (Beijing: Ministry of National Defense, 2018), http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2018-12/27/content_9390144.
htm. 
182   People’s Republic of China, State Council Information Office “China’s Armed Forces: 30 Years of Peacekeeping 
Operations,” (Beijing: State Council Information Office, 2020), https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202009/18/
WS5f641de9a31024ad0ba7a5de.html . 
183   People’s Republic of China, “China’s Armed Forces: 30 Years of Peacekeeping Operations.”; “Zhao Lei: Weihe 
Zhengzai Chengwei Zhongguo Waijiao Mingpian” 赵磊: 维和正在成为中国外交名片 [Zhao Lei: Peacekeeping 
is Becoming China’s Diplomatic Calling Card], FTChinese , September 29, 2015, http://www.ftchinese.com/
story/001064211?full=y&archive.
economic interests. It also provides the PLA with operational experience and exposure 
to a diverse set of missions, and bolsters China’s image as a responsible great power and 
a contributor to global security.
The nature of PRC participation in PKOs has changed over time, and scholars 
have tended to categorize China’s position on peacekeeping into distinct phases.184 
Beginning in 1990, China contributed several dozen technical advisors and military 
observers to ongoing peacekeeping missions. In 1992, China contributed nearly 400 
military engineers to the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia, its largest deployed 
contingent until 2006. At the turn of the century, China for the first time supported a 
non-consensual peacekeeping mission in East Timor, and provided support units to 
UN missions in Liberia, Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Hu Jintao’s 
New Historic Mission in 2004 provided greater responsibility to peacekeeping in China’s 
national defense policy, and in that same year, the Ministry of Defense’s white paper 
mentioned peacekeeping for the first time.185 
In 2006 and 2007, China openly supported the United Nations-African Union Mission 
in Darfur, a significant milestone for the PLA ’s participation in PKOs. China’s vote to 
authorize the mission came after years of backing the Sudanese government at the 
UN Security Council, before shifting its stance and actively pressuring Khartoum 
to accept UN peacekeepers.186 Scholar Courtney Fung argues that China ultimately 
changed its position due to the “influence” of both great powers and developing nations 
that supported the operation.187 China sent a contingent of several hundred military 
engineers to UNAMID and in 2007 dispatched a “self-defensive security unit” to protect 
its peacekeepers in Sudan.188 A similar unit was deployed in 2012 in South Sudan.189 As 
a self-defense unit, they were not officially considered under UN jurisdiction, but their 
deployment represented a “turning point” in how China engaged with UN PKOs.190 
In 2009 and 2010, officials at the Ministry of National Defense’s Peacekeeping Office 
stated that China would consider requests from the UN for combat troops, in line with 
China’s “defensive” national defense policy, the response of the international community, 
184   Courtney J. Fung, “What explains China’s deployment to UN peacekeeping operations?,”  International Relations 
of the Asia-Pacific  16, no. 3 (2016): 409-441; Yin He, “China Rising and Its Changing Policy on UN Peacekeeping,” 
in United Nations Peace Operations in a Changing Global Order,  eds. Cedric de Coning and Mateja Peter (Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2019).
185   People’s Republic of China, “China’s National Defense in 2004,” (Beijing: The State Council Information Office, 
2004). http://en.people.cn/whitepaper/defense2004/defense2004.html . 
186   Courtney J. Fung, “What explains China’s deployment to UN peacekeeping operations?,” 22.
187   Ibid, 22.
188   “China Values Self-Defense in Peacekeeping Operations,”  Xinhua, February 23, 2012, http://www.china.org.cn/
world/2012-02/23/content_24715382.htm . 
189   U.S., U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “China’s First Deployment of Combat Forces to a UN 
Peacekeeping Mission-South Sudan,” Daniel M. Hartnett, (Washington, DC: U.S-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, 2012), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/MEMO-PLA-PKO_final_0.pdf . 
190   Ghiselli, Protecting China’s Interests Overseas, 212; United States Institute of Peace, “China’s Evolving Role as a UN 
Peacekeeper in Mali,” Jean-Pierre Cabestan, (2018), 1, https://www.usip.org/publications/2018/09/chinas-evolving-
role-un-peacekeeper-mali . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
40 41
and the willingness of the host country.191 The PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs viewed 
these deployments as a “natural progression” of China’s PKO responsibilities.192 In 2012 
and 2013, China deployed a small number of infantry troops as “security forces” in 
South Sudan and Mali, which would principally guard peacekeeping headquarters and 
living areas. 193In January 2015, China sent a 700-strong infantry battalion to the UN 
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).194 As of 2020, PRC battalions assigned to UNMISS 
had completed six rotations, over 144 patrols, and 314 armed escorts.195
Official explanations for China’s participation in PKOs emphasize China’s desire to 
project a role as a global leader. In 2006, China’s UN Ambassador Wang Guangya 
stated that as “major powers are withdrawing from the peacekeeping role…China 
felt it is the right time for us to fill this vacuum. ”196 In September 2020, China’s State 
Council Information Office released an official white paper on China’s contribution 
to UN PKOs.197 In a press conference for the white paper, Major General Luo Wei, 
Director of the Peacekeeping Affairs Center of the Ministry of National Defense, 
emphasized China’s objectives, in short, are to “fulfill [China’s] responsibility as a 
major power, maintain world peace, and work to build a community with a shared 
future for mankind. ”198 The peacekeeping white paper outlines six principles of China’s 
participation in PKOs: uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter; follow 
the basic principles of UN PKOs; champion a vision of global governance based on 
extensive consultation, joint contribution, and shared benefits; pursue common, 
comprehensive, cooperative, and sustainable security; stay committed to peaceful 
means in settling disputes; and build stronger peacekeeping partnerships. 199 
China’s desire to serve as a leader in PKOs is driven both by its desired status as a 
major power on par with the US and its self-declared status as the world’s largest 
developing nation. Senior Colonel Lu Jianxin, an instructor at the Ministry of 
National Defense’s Peacekeeping Center, has argued that China’s simultaneous 
obligations as both a permanent member of the UN Security Council and as a 
191   “Zhongguo Jiang Ying Lianheguo Qingqiu Kaolv Shifou Paiqian Weihe Zuozhan Budui” 中国将应联合国请求
考虑是否派遣维和作战部队 [China Will Consider Whether to Send Peacekeeping Troops at the Request of the 
United Nations], China News, November 21, 2009, http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/2009-11-21/1026574644.html ; 
Cheng Guangjin, “Chinese Combat Troops ‘Can Join UN Peacekeeping,’” China Daily, July 7, 2007, https://www.
chinadaily.com.cn/china/2010-07/07/content_10073171.htm . 
192   Courtney Fung, “Providing for global security: implications of China’s combat troop deployment to UN peace -
keeping,”  Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations  25, no. 4 (2019), 516.
193   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of National Defense, “China’s First Deployment of Combat Forces to a UN 
Peacekeeping Mission-South Sudan”; “2013 Nian 6 Yue Guofang Bu Li Xing Jizhe Hui” 2013年6月国防部例行记者会 
[Regular Press Conference of the Ministry of National Defense in June 2013], (Beijing: Ministry of National Defense, 
2013), http://www.scio.gov.cn/xwfbh/gbwxwfbh/xwfbh/gfb/document/1333297/1333297.htm ; “China to Send Secu -
rity Force for Peacekeeping Mission in Mali,” Xinhua, June 28, 2013, http://en.people.cn/90786/8303006.html . 
194   Dennis Blasko, “China’s Contribution to Peacekeeping Operations: Understanding the Numbers,” China Brief, 
December 5, 2016, https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-contribution-peacekeeping-operation-understanding-
numbers/. 
195   People’s Republic of China, “China’s Armed Forces: 30 Years of Peacekeeping Operations.” 
196   Colum Lynch, “China Filling Void Left by West in U.N. Peacekeeping,” Washington Post , November 24, 2006, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/11/23/AR2006112301007.html . 
197   People’s Republic of China, “China’s Armed Forces: 30 Years of Peacekeeping Operations.” 
198   Ibid.
199   Ibid.
“major developing country” motivate China’s contributions to PKOs.200 An officer 
at the Ministry of Public Security’s Peacekeeping Police Training Center has further 
argued that “national identity” is the most important factor shaping China’s stance 
on PKOs.201 These explanations align with scholar Courtney Fung’s findings that 
“identity-related concerns” drive China to participate in PKOs. 202 The motivating 
factors for these concerns, however, may have evolved over time. According to Zhao 
Lei, a professor at the Central Party School of the Chinese Communist Party, China 
participated in PKOs in the 1990s to push back against a perceived “China threat” 
narrative that existed in the West, while PKOs in the 21st century promote China’s 
“responsible great power image. ”203  
These motivations were made clear in President Xi Jinping’s highest-level speech 
on peacekeeping to date, which he delivered at the September 2015 UN Leaders’ 
Summit on Peacekeeping. Xi praised PKOs as an “important approach to maintaining 
world peace and security, ” and highlighted China as a “major provider of armies and 
funds for peacekeeping operations. ”204 During his speech, Xi announced a series of 
measures and initiatives to underscore China’s support of PKOs, including building 
a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops, joining the new UN Peacekeeping 
Capability Readiness System, and pledging US$100 million to the African Union to 
support the formation of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for 
Immediate Response to Crisis. 205
Xi Jinping’s 2015 announcement that China planned to build an 8,000-troop standby 
force led some analysts to believe that China planned to increase its contribution to 
active PKOs to 8,000 troops. In practice, the “standby force” is a non-deployed set of 
Chinese troops that are trained and ready to participate in PKOs if authorized. The 
2020 peacekeeping white paper stated that the force has “28 units in 10 categories – 
infantry, engineer, transport, medical, force protection, rapid response, helicopter, 
transport aircraft, UAV , and surface ship units. ”206 The standby force is part of the UN’s 
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (PCRS), a system developed in 2015 to 
reinforce the readiness and quick deployment of peacekeeping forces.207  
200   Jianxin Liu, “Zhongguo Jundui Canjia Lianheguo Weihe Xingdong de Chuxin he Shiming” 中国军队参加联合
国维和行动的初心和使命 [The Origins and Mission of the Chinese Armed Forces’ Participation in UN Peace -
keeping Operations], Guangming Daily, September 20, 2020, https://epaper.gmw.cn/gmrb/html/2020-09/20/
nw.D110000gmrb_20200920_2-07.htm . 
201   Yin He, “China Rising and Its Changing Policy on UN Peacekeeping,” in United Nations Peace Operations in a 
Changing Global Order,  eds. Cedric de Coning and Mateja Peter (Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).
202   Courtney J. Fung, “What explains China’s deployment to UN peacekeeping operations?,”   International Relations of 
the Asia-Pacific  16, no. 3 (2016): 409-441.
203   Lei Zhao, “Two pillars of China’s global peace engagement strategy: UN peacekeeping and international peace -
building,”  International Peacekeeping  18, no. 3 (2011), 345.
204   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Xi Jinping Attends and Addresses UN Leaders’  
Summit on Peacekeeping,” (Beijing: Mission of the People’s Republic of China in the African Union, 2015),  
https://www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/cgauchm/eng/zgyw_3/t1304147.htm
205   Ibid. 
206   People’s Republic of China, “China’s Armed Forces: 30 Years of Peacekeeping Operations.”
207   “Military,” United Nations Peacekeeping , https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/military . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
42 43
Standby forces are assessed based on readiness and can only be pledged to deploy when they 
have reached rapid deployment level (RDL), the fourth level of readiness. As of 2020, only 
six of China’s 28 units were rated at a level 3 readiness status.208 Thus, none of China’s standby 
force may be currently eligible for 60-day deployment by the UN under PCRS; however, 
this might change in the future as China continues to train its standby forces. Besides a 
military standby force, the Chinese Ministry of Public Security also established a permanent 
peacekeeping police squad in 2016, which the UN upgraded to RDL status in 2019.209
Importantly, PKOs allow the PLA to participate in international military cooperation 
and diplomacy. The first mention of UN peacekeeping in PRC Defense White Papers 
was in 2004, when it was included in the objective to “carry out military exchanges 
and cooperation. ”210 China carried out its first joint exercise focused on peacekeeping 
in 2009, with Mongolia.211 Since then, China has participated in field and table-top 
peacekeeping exercises with the Philippines, India, Indonesia, Thailand, and Brazil.212 
China has also launched peacekeeping training centers for foreign soldiers and police 
forces. In a 2013 visit to one of these training centers, then-UN Secretary General 
Ban Ki-moon praised China’s support for ensuring that “peacekeepers are trained and 
equipped to address new threats. ”213  
Rarely mentioned in official explanations for China’s contributions to PKOs are two 
commonly ascribed ulterior motives: the desire to protect China’s economic assets 
abroad, and the desire to improve the operational and combat capabilities of the PLA.214 
Chinese experts generally acknowledge linkages between contributions to PKOs and 
protecting and promoting China’s economic development and overseas interests. Zhao 
Lei writes that China stands “to gain much from its peacekeeping contribution” and that 
China needs “stable overseas markets to secure its sustainable economic development, ” 
though he notes that it is “too simplistic” to argue that PKOs are solely for China’s 
economic interests.215 PRC officials have similarly told UN officials that PKOs are tied 
to the “need to protect the country’s citizens and investments in Africa. ”216 Furthermore, 
the 2020 edition of the Science of Military Strategy somewhat bluntly states that PKOs 
“lay the foundation for a favorable overseas investment environment in the future. ”217
208   People’s Republic of China, “China’s Armed Forces: 30 Years of Peacekeeping Operations.”
209   Ibid.
210   “China’s National Defense in 2004,” People’s Daily, n.d, http://en.people.cn/whitepaper/defense2004/defense2004(2).
html.
211   Ibid.
212   Ibid.
213   United Nations, Office of the Secretary-General, “Remarks at the China Peacekeeping Military Training Centre,” 
Ban Ki-Moon, (Beijing: Office of the Secretary-General, 2013),  https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/speech -
es/2013-06-19/remarks-china-peacekeeping-military-training-centre . 
214   Jonas Parello-Plesner and Mathieu Duchâtel, “China’s Strong Arm: Protecting Citizens and Assets Abroad” 
(London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, May 2015); Brookings Institution, “China’s pragmatic 
approach to UN peacekeeping,” Richard Gowan (2020), https://www.brookings.edu/articles/chinas-pragmatic-
approach-to-un-peacekeeping/ . 
215    Zhao, “Two pillars of China’s global peace engagement strategy,” 348.
216   Richard Gowan, “China’s Pragmatic Approach to UN Peacekeeping,” Brookings Institution,  September 14, 2020, 
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/chinas-pragmatic-approach-to-un-peacekeeping/ . 
217   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 313.
Regarding an operational experience objective, PKOs do provide real but limited 
training for deployed troops. The  Chinese expert Jiang Zhenxi told reporters in 2012 
that the benefit for PLA troops participating in PKOs includes “broadening their 
horizons, familiarizing [themselves] with international rules, improving their quality…
[and] improv[ing] [their] crisis handling capabilities. ”218 According to Dennis Blasko, 
“engineering, logistics, and medical units” perform in a similar role to what they may 
undertake in combat, and combat units can “conduct patrols, armed escort, and local 
security in a hostile environment. ”219 Additionally, combat units can gain operational 
exposure, which can give officers “experience in mapping politically devised mandates 
onto practical concepts of operations and rules of engagement. ”220 Y et, the relevancy to 
future combat operations is possibly overstated. These missions largely “do not replicate 
actual combat experience and are distributed within an extremely limited subset of 
the entire PLA. ”221 As of 2021, China’s deployment of infantry troops to PKOs has not 
exceeded 1,000 troops in any single rotation and the responsibility of these troops is 
typically limited to protection and escort missions.
UN_PLA humanitarian rescue: Schneider, Evan. United Nations
 
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HA/DR)
Since 2010, the PLA has contributed to international humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief (HA/DR) operations with unprecedented frequency. In the past 
decade, China has deployed its military to respond to natural disasters in Nepal, the 
Philippines, and Japan, epidemics in Sierra Leone and Liberia, and sudden crises in 
218   Yun  Li and Wei Qin, “Women Weishenme Yao Paichu Junshi Guanchayuan” 我们为什么要派出军事观察员 [Why 
Should We Deploy Military Observers?], China Youth Daily, September 7, 2012, http://zqb.cyol.com/html/2012-
09/07/nw.D110000zgqnb_20120907_3-09.htm . 
219   Dennis Blasko, “China’s Contribution to Peacekeeping Operations: Understanding the Numbers.”
220   Courtney Fung, “Providing for global security,” 517.
221   Ibid, 517.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
44 45
the Maldives and Indian Ocean. 222 According to China’s 2019 Defense White Paper, 
the PLA has deployed over 950,000 soldiers, 26,000 vessels, and 820 aircraft in 
domestic and international emergency response and disaster relief operations. 223 Most 
recently, the PLA has also participated in HA/DR missions in response to the ongoing 
COVID-19 pandemic. These operations have enabled China to protect its overseas 
citizens from conflict, signaled China’s contributions to international security as a 
“responsible stakeholder, ” furthered bilateral and multilateral military partnerships, 
and tested the PLA ’s expeditionary capabilities.
The PLA has long played a role in domestic responses to natural disasters or 
humanitarian crises within China’s borders. Major rescue efforts included the 
mobilization of 100,000 troops in response to the 1976 Tangshan earthquake, 
300,000 troops in response to the 1998 Y angtze River floods, and the 138,000 
relief forces following the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake. 224 In particular, the 2008 
Wenchuan earthquake directly tested the PLA ’s ability to handle the type of non-
traditional security challenges emphasized in Hu Jintao’s “New Historic Mission. ” 
The PLAAF completed the “largest air transportation operation” in its history in 
response to the disaster, but the PLA ’s operations generally underscored “continued 
problems with equipment, logistics, airlift capability, and joint operations [between 
PLA branches]. ”225 Following the Wenchuan earthquake, China’s international HA/
DR operations increased at an unprecedented rate. This trend possibly reflects a 
greater confidence in China’s HA/DR capabilities following the earthquake, or, to the 
contrary, may reflect a perceived need to gain additional experience with these kinds 
of operations in light of the shortcomings of the 2008 operation. 226 
The PLA has since gone on to contribute to an array of major international HA/
DR operations in the Indo-Pacific. The PLAAF has sent some of its largest transport 
aircraft, the IL-76 and Y-20, to deliver emergency supplies to Mongolia, Pakistan, 
Thailand, and Myanmar, among other countries. 227 The PLAN has similarly tasked a 
variety of destroyers, amphibious ships, and its hospital ship, Peace Ark, to ongoing 
crises.228 The largest of these operations was in 2015, when China sent 1,088 PLA and 
PAP personnel to Nepal to assist following an earthquake. According to the Director 
222   Southerland, “The Chinese Military’s Role in Overseas Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: 
Contributions and Concerns,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission.
223   Government of the People’s Republic of China, “China’s National Defense in the New Era,” (Beijing: State Council 
Information Office, 2019), http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-07/24/c_138253389.htm .
224   Dou Ding, “PLA’s Disaster Relief Works: Review and Reform,” East Asian Policy  2, no. 3 (2010): 49-57,  
https://research.nus.edu.sg/eai/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2017/11/Vol2No3_DingDou.pdf .
225   Harold M. Tanner, “The People’s Liberation Army and China’s Internal Security Challenges,” in The PLA at 
Home and Aborad: Assessing the Operational Capabilities of China’s Military , eds. Roy Kamphausen, David Lai, 
and Andrew Scobell, (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2010), 268; RAND Corporation, “The Chinese Air 
Force’s First Steps Toward Becoming an Expeditionary Air Force,” Cristina Garafola and Timothy Heath (2017), 21,  
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2056.html .
226   RAND Corporation, “The Chinese Air Force’s First Steps Toward Becoming an Expeditionary Air Force,” 23. 
227   RAND Corporation, “The Chinese Air Force’s First Steps Toward Becoming an Expeditionary Air Force,” 23;
Wang Xinjuan, “5th Anniversary of the Commissioning of Y-20 Transport Aircraft,” China Military Online , July 6, 
2021. http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2021-07/06/content_10058945.htm
228   Southerland, “The Chinese Military’s Role in Overseas Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: 
Contributions and Concerns,” 10-11. 
of the PLA ’s Emergency Response Office, it was the largest contingent sent abroad for 
a humanitarian mission since the establishment of the PRC. 229 Another significant 
operation was China’s deployment of the Peace Ark and the Kunlunshan amphibious 
ship in response to the 2013 Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines. It was the first time 
that the PLAN had participated in an international disaster relief operation. 230
China has likewise sought to promote its international image by responding to 
epidemics. In 2014, as Ebola began spreading across West Africa, the PLA deployed 
approximately 500 personnel to Sierra Leone and Liberia to establish diagnosis 
and treatment centers. China also sent $120 million in aid and 500 civilian medical 
personnel to the broader region. For their efforts, China received high praise from 
West African leaders. 231 
The PLA has also carried out numerous humanitarian assistance operations in 
response to the ongoing COVID epidemic. 232 China’s vaccine diplomacy has been 
unique in several ways. Most of the assistance was conducted via commercial sales 
rather than donations as implied by official statements. China’s engagement has 
also been established predominantly through opaque bilateral agreements linked to 
other foreign policy goals. 233 In the past year, the PLA has assisted in the delivery 
of PPE and vaccines to countries around the world, most of whom fit within China 
foreign policy priorities emphasizing Belt and Road Initiative states and South-South 
diplomacy. In 2020 and 2021, the PLAAF delivered medical supplies to Myanmar, 
Vietnam, Pakistan, and Tunisia, and dispatched PLA medical teams to Laos, Pakistan 
and Myanmar.234 The medical team in Myanmar assisted with the construction of a 
COVID-19 testing lab in the Defence Services General Hospital in Y angon. 235 
However, some of China’s assistance has come with ulterior motives, and political 
interests have arguably played a key role in China’s public health diplomacy. Notably, 
Beijing has been reticent to cooperate with international organizations or to share 
epidemiological information. For example, a cover-up of the origin of SARS in 2003 
229   “China sends record military personnel numbers to Nepal,” Xinhua, May 27, 2015, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
china/2015-05/07/content_20652513.htm . 
230   Southerland, “The Chinese Military’s Role in Overseas Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: 
Contributions and Concerns,” 7.
231   Ibid, 6.
232   Elsa Kania and Ian Burns Mccaslin, “People’s Warfare against Covid-19: Testing China’s Military Medical and 
Defense Mobilization Capabilities” (Washington, D.C.: Institute for the Study of War, December 2020), https://
www.understandingwar.org/sites/default/files/ISW%20Report%20People%27s%20Warfare%20against%20CO -
VID-19%20ISW%20China%20December%202020.pdf;  Shunguo Liu and Ren Zhou, “Xietiao Jundi Tong Zhan ‘Yi’” 
协调军地同战“疫” [Coordinating the Military and Local Government to Fight the “Epidemic”], Xinhua, February 
10, 2020, http://www.mod.gov.cn/action/2020-02/10/content_4860113.htm.
233   China Power Team, “Is China’s Covid-19 Diplomacy Succeeding?” China Power, last modified March 17, 2022, 
https://chinapower.csis.org/china-covid-medical-vaccine-diplomacy/.  
234   Mercator Institute for China Studies, “The PLA’s Mask Diplomacy: China Global Security Tracker No. 7,” Helena 
Legarda, (2020), https://merics.org/en/tracker/plas-mask-diplomacy . 
235   “Chinese military medics assist Myanmar military in building COVID-19 testing laboratory,” Xinhua, May 1, 2020, 
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-05/01/c_139022026.htm . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
46 47
prevented the discovery of the disease’s source for a decade. 236 When African swine 
fever flared up in China in 2018, China refused to share information with Taiwan. 237 
Similarly, initial statistics on the spread of COVID-19 were suppressed, and the WHO 
mission to determine the origins of COVID-19 was obstructed. 238
Analysts, and the PLA itself, have highlighted that HA/DR operations allow the 
PLA to improve its operational capabilities. Jeffrey Engstrom has argued that aid 
provision, delivery, and distribution provide the opportunity for the PLA to gain joint 
coordination experience between military branches and government ministries. 239 
Specific operations like airlifts have relevance to future combat scenarios and can also 
be tested in HA/DR operations. 240 China’s 2015 Defense White Paper states that HA/
DR operations provide the PLA an opportunity to “enhance their own capabilities and 
expertise. ”241 
The PLA ’s participation in international HA/DR operations is also driven by 
reputational concerns and a desire to further its foreign relations with a variety of 
actors. China has consistently promoted its HA/DR operations as proof of its role as a 
responsible global actor. Following a 2015 PLA humanitarian operation in Nepal, the 
MFA issued a press release, commenting “it proves again that China is Nepal’s most 
reliable friend, closest neighbor and most trustworthy partner. A friend in need is a 
friend indeed. ”242 
Similarly, HA/DR operations provide an opportunity for military diplomacy. China 
frequently participates in joint HA/DR exercises with Thailand, Mongolia, and other 
Indo-Pacific nations. HA/DR is also one of the few fields in which the US and China 
have been able to conduct bilateral exercises, as HA/DR exercises do not conflict with 
US legislation restricting international cooperation in ways that may “create a national 
security risk. ”243 As such, the US and China have held an annual Disaster Management 
Exchange, the most recent of which occurred over video in November 2020. 244 
Although China hopes to accrue positive benefits from its participation in 
international HA/DR operations, Beijing has also sparked controversy by appearing to 
236   Jeremy Page, Betsy McKay, and Drew Hinshaw, “How the WHO’s Hunt for Covid’s Origins Stumbled in 
China,” The Wall Street Journal, March 17, 2021, 4, https://www.wsj.com/articles/who-china-hunt-covid-ori -
gins-11616004512.
237   Southerland, “The Chinese Military’s Role in Overseas Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: 
Contributions and Concerns,” 7.
238   Page, McKay, and Hinshaw, “How the WHO’s Hunt.”
239   Jeffrey Engstrom, “Taking disaster seriously: East Asian military involvement in international disaster relief 
operations and the implications for force projection.” Asian Security  9, no. 1 (2013): 38-61.
240   Athol Yates, “China’s Risk Equation: Using Military Forces in International Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster 
Relief Activities,” Institute for Security and Development Policy (2013), 25.
241   People’s Republic of China, “China’s Military Strategy.”
242   Government of the People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “President Ram Baran Yadav and 
Prime Minister Sushil Koirala of Nepal Meet with Wang Yi,” (Beijing: 2015), https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/ce/cggb/
eng//xwdt/t1276306.htm . 
243   Southerland, “The Chinese Military’s Role in Overseas Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: 
Contributions and Concerns,” 4.
244   U.S., U.S. Army Pacific, “US and Chinese Armies Conduct Virtual Collaboration on HA/DR,” (Fort Shafter: 
2020),  https://www.army.mil/article/240780/us_and_chinese_armies_conduct_virtual_collaboration_on_hadr . 
place politics over best practices in some instances. During the 2015 Nepal operation, 
the PLA only cooperated with the Nepal Army bilaterally, rather than following 
international best practices and coordinating through the Multinational Military 
Coordination Center. As a result, Nepal divided Indian, Chinese, and American 
efforts into individual sectors. According to a US Department of Defense official, the 
PLA treated their sector as “sovereign territory, ” refusing help from the American 
military even when it was clear that American vertical lift capabilities could have 
compensated for the PLA ’s shortfall in that sector.245 An additional example is China’s 
initial response to Typhoon Haiyan in 2013. China initially offered only $100,000 
in cash and relief supplies, drawing criticism within and outside China. Some 
commentators attributed the small donation — less than ten percent of what China 
that year pledged to Pakistan following an earthquake — to Beijing and Manila’s 
ongoing tensions in the South China Sea. China later raised its donation amount to 
$1.4 million. 246 
US Army_13th annual U.S.-China Disaster Management Exchange: U.S. 
 
Non-Combatant Evacuation Operations (NEO)
The PLA ’s increased focus on Non-Combatant Evacuation Operations (NEO) is a logical 
result of China’s expanding overseas economic interests. The growth of Chinese foreign 
trade and investment has led to the outflow of Chinese citizens, including to areas 
prone to conflict. From 2000 to 2010, the MFA managed the evacuation of Chinese 
245   Anonymous retired U.S. defense official quoted in Southerland, “The Chinese Military’s Role in Overseas Humani -
tarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: Contributions and Concerns,” 5.
246   Samantha Stainburn, “China to give more disaster aid to victims of Typhoon Haiyan as the suffering continues,” 
The World, November 14, 2013, https://theworld.org/stories/2013-11-14/china-give-more-disaster-aid-victims-
typhoon-haiyan-suffering-continues .

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
48 49
civilians from natural disasters or social unrest. When necessary, the MFA chartered 
civilian aircrafts to evacuate Chinese citizens. 247 But in 2011, in the wake of anti-
government protests in Benghazi and escalating civil war in Libya, the Central 
Military Commission authorized the PLA to assist in the evacuation of 30,000 
Chinese citizens (and ultimately 2,100 foreign nationals) from Libya. A majority 
of these evacuees worked for Chinese railway, communication, and oil companies 
operating in the country. 248 
On February 25, 2011, the PLAN diverted the Xuzhou missile frigate from its 
Gulf of Aden anti-piracy patrols to support the evacuation effort. 249 Two days 
later, the PLAAF sent four IL-76 aircraft to Libya, which conducted 12 sorties 
to evacuate Chinese nationals to Khartoum and Beijing. 250 The Xuzhou and IL-
76 aircraft operated in tandem with chartered civilian aircraft, cruise ships, and 
merchant ships. 251 During the operation, the PLA coordinated with the Ministries 
of Commerce, Foreign Affairs, and Public Security. 252 The 2011 Libyan evacuation 
demonstrated the PLA ’s growing capacity to support some long-range operations 
and established a precedent for future PLA evacuation operations. Following 
the evacuations, PLA generals remarked that the PLA is likely to participate in 
more evacuations of overseas Chinese citizens. 253For example, one PLA Major 
General stated the PLA ’s performance in the evacuation showed the Chinese army’s 
enhanced capacity to respond to conventional and non-conventional security 
threats and “ ...has also underscored [the] Chinese army’s capacity in long-distance 
transportation. ”254 These capabilities would soon be tested further.
In March 2015, due to the rapid onset of a Saudi-led air campaign in Y emen, the 
PLAN North Sea fleet operating in the Gulf of Aden was diverted for four days 
to the city of Aden to evacuate more than 500 Chinese citizens as well as two 
foreign experts to Djibouti. 255 This action represented a number of notable firsts 
for the PLAN, showcasing its increased capabilities and ambition since 2011. 
This operation was the “first evacuation using PLAN vessels at a foreign port, 
the first evacuation of foreigners,  and the first pause in China’s patrols in the 
247   “Jinnianlai Zhongguo de Zhongda Cheqiao Xingdong” 近年来中国的重大撤侨行动 [Recent Chinese Major 
Evacuation Operations], March 31, 2015, Xinhua. https://world.huanqiu.com/article/9CaKrnJJpD9 .
248   Shixiong Mei and Zurong Yang, “Diyici Dongyong Junshi Liliang Cheqiao: 2011 Nian Libiya Dacheqiao” 第一次
动用军事力量撤侨: 2011年利比亚大撤侨 [The First Use of Military Force to Evacuate Overseas Chinese: The 2011 
Libyan Evacuation], August 15, 2017, Xinhua, http://www.xinhuanet.com//2017-08/15/c_1121487719.htm .
249   Ibid. 
250   Ibid.
251   Ibid.
252   Gabe Collins and Andrew S. Erickson, “Implications of China’s Military Evacuation of Citizens from Libya,” China 
Brief, March 11, 2011, https://jamestown.org/program/implications-of-chinas-military-evacuation-of-citizens-
from-libya/.
253   “Chinese army likely to join more overseas evacuations after Libya mission: PLA generals,” Global Times , March 5, 
2011, https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/630167.shtml .
254   Ibid.
255   Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, “PLA Navy Used for First Time in Naval Evacuation from Yemen Conflict,” The 
Jamestown Foundation, April 3, 2015, https://jamestown.org/program/pla-navy-used-for-first-time-in-naval-
evacuation-from-yemen-conflict/.  
Gulf of Aden. ”256 Foreign Ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying confirmed that 
this evacuation was a “special action” and the first time the Chinese government 
evacuated foreign nationals from a dangerous zone, “a move embodying the notions 
of ‘putting the people first’ , internationalism and humanitarianism held by the 
Chinese government. ”257
It is worth acknowledging that China has not taken steps to launch sustained 
operations to protect Chinese citizens and businesses operating in dangerous 
environments abroad. Instead, China will likely continue to rely on the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs to lead civilian evacuations, and to leverage an emerging Chinese 
private security industry and close partnership with host countries as major 
components of its strategy to protect overseas citizens and commercial interests. 258 
For example, following the collapse of the Afghan government in August 2021, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs evacuated 210 Chinese citizens from Kabul. 259 In 2021, 
China coordinated with the Ethiopian government to evacuate several hundred 
Chinese citizens from Tigray amidst ongoing conflict in the region. 260 Thus, while 
the PLA ’s role in NEOs has clearly grown in recent years, it has not usurped the 
leading role of China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and is likely to continue to 
augment, rather than replace, China’s civilian capacity in such operations.
NEOs are intertwined with the PLA ’s other far-seas operations, in part, to protect 
China’s global economic networks. The PLAN ships that assisted in the Libya 
and Y emen NEOs were both in the region due to China’s ongoing contribution to 
the Gulf of Aden anti-piracy mission. In this regard, China’s far-seas operations 
are mutually reinforcing, and allow the PLA to take on greater international 
responsibility. These campaigns support China’s “Belt and Road” aspirations 
and bolster the national sense of pride and security. After the successful Y emen 
operation, the state-run Global Times  stated, “the meaning of Chinese national 
security is expanding from a fixed goal of territorial waters to individuals who move 
overseas, so it is a never-ending mission. ” 261
256   Ibid; Yuandan Guo and Tang Li, “Zhonggguo Haijun Zhanshi Daguo Zeren Yizhou Chuangzao San Ge ‘Shouci’”
中国海军展示大国责任 一周创造三个“首次” [China’s navy Shows Great Power Responsibility, Creating Three 
“Firsts” in a Week], Global Times , April 3, 2015, https://world.huanqiu.com/article/9CaKrnJJxu6.
257   People’s Republic of China, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying’s Regular 
Press Conference on April 3, 2015,” (Beijing: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2015). https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/ce/cegv/
eng/fyrth/t1251976.htm . 
258    Sergey Sukhankin, “Chinese Private Security Contractors: New Trends and Future Prospects,” China Brief, May 15, 
2020, https://jamestown.org/program/chinese-private-security-contractors-new-trends-and-future-prospects/ . 
259   German Marshall Fund of the United States, “China’s Bet on the Taliban Protecting its Nationals,” Jonas Parello-
Plesner and Mathieu Duchâtel, August 26, 2021, https://www.gmfus.org/news/chinas-bet-taliban-protecting-its-
nationals . 
260   Laura Zhou, “Chinese flee northern Ethiopia as civil conflict hits region,” South China Morning Post , November 24, 
2020, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3111056/chinese-flee-northern-ethiopia-civil-conflict-
hits-region . 
261   Beauchamp-Mustafaga, “PLA Navy Used for First Time.”

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
50 51
AP_Vostok 2018 military exercise: Grits, Sergei. Army University Press.
International Military Exercises and Military Diplomacy
The expansion of the PLA ’s military missions has led to new opportunities for 
bilateral and multilateral partnerships. China has promoted military cooperation 
on shared non-traditional security challenges through senior-level visits, port calls, 
and combined exercises with other nations. 262 These operations enable China to 
address security concerns directly by developing the PLA ’s operational capabilities 
and indirectly by building partner capacity. China’s pursuit of military diplomacy 
also demonstrates its commitment to security partners, bolsters its image as a global 
security leader, and helps manage regional geopolitics. 
Until the turn of the century, the PLA historically did not engage in combined 
military exercises with other nations. This may have reflected China’s traditional 
view of a limited role for the deployment of military forces abroad. 263 However, the 
emerging focus on non-traditional security threats under Jiang Zemin provided an 
opportunity to address shared challenges with regional nations. The establishment of 
the SCO in 2001 paved the way for China’s first combined exercise, a counterterrorism 
drill between the Kyrgyz armed forces and PLA in 2002. 264 Since then, the SCO has 
262   Kenneth Allen, Phillip C. Saunders, and John Chen, “China Military Diplomacy, 2003-2016: Trends and 
Implications.”
263   Wilson Chun Hei Chau, “Explaining China’s Participation in Bilateral and Multilateral Military Exercises,” 
Security Challenges  7, no. 3 (2011): 51.
264   “Backgrounder: Major PLA-related joint anti-terror military exercises and trainings,” People’s Daily, December 21, 
2007, http://en.people.cn/90001/90776/6325264.html . 
served as the most important platform for China to pursue combined exercises with 
Russia and several Central Asian nations, as well as Pakistan and India, both of which 
are recent additions to the SCO. 265
The PLA ’s combined exercises with foreign nations do address significant shared 
security concerns. Combined exercises train forces in crisis response and establish 
bilateral relationships applicable to a range of military scenarios. For example, the 
SCO’s annual Peace Mission exercises “nominally focused on counterterrorism, 
have included combat-related activities such as air defense, bombing, and aerial 
refueling. ”266 The 2020 edition of the Science of Military Strategy  states that the 
three main avenues for foreign military cooperation are intelligence sharing, 
command coordination, and logistics support, all of which are routinely tested in 
bilateral exercises and have broad utility for war and non-war operations. 267 China 
has reached agreements with Central Asian nations under the SCO framework to 
permit military transit through third-party countries and provide logistical support 
for military exercises. 268 Concurrently, by working with the PLA, foreign nations’ 
militaries, especially those of smaller nations, can gain vital experience that may help 
prepare them to better address domestic security issues that China has an interest in 
mitigating, but which it may be reluctant to engage with directly. 
Military diplomacy also serves explicit geopolitical objectives to build regional 
influence. Like other MOOTW , CCP central leadership closely coordinates and aligns 
military diplomacy with broader foreign policy goals. The 2013 Science of Military 
Strategy states that cooperative military activities “strengthen strategic confidence, 
increase military transparency, display our military’s excellent image, raise our military’s 
international prestige, and expand our nation’s international influence. ”269 According 
to Rush Doshi, China established the SCO for geopolitical reasons, believing that the 
organization “could blunt American influence [in Central Asia] and reassure China’s 
neighbors about Beijing’s intentions. ”270 
As a result, China has used the SCO as a platform for broader military and diplomatic 
cooperation beyond counterterrorism, especially with Russia. In the 2000s, the timing, 
location, and capabilities of several Peace Mission exercises indicate the drills were 
preparations for possible North Korea contingencies.271 In the past decade, Sino-Russian 
military cooperation has expanded to aerial, maritime, and missile defense exercises. In 
2012, China and Russia staged their first Joint Sea exercise in the Y ellow Sea featuring a 
total of eight Russian combat vessels, 16 Chinese surface ships, two submarines, and 13 
265   Matthew Southerland, Will Green, and Sierra Janik, “The Shanghai Cooperation Organization: A Testbed for 
Chinese Power Projection,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, November 12, 2020, https://
www.uscc.gov/research/shanghai-cooperation-organization-testbed-chinese-power-projection.
266   Kenneth Allen, Phillip C. Saunders, and John Chen, “China Military Diplomacy, 2003-2016: Trends and 
Implications,” 3.
267   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 300-301.
268   Southerland, Green, and Janik, “The Shanghai Cooperation Organization,” 6.
269   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue , 120.
270   Rush Doshi, The Long Game, 127.
271   Stephen Blank, “Peace-Mission 2009: A Military Scenario Beyond Central Asia,” The Jamestown Foundation, Au -
gust 20, 2009, https://jamestown.org/program/peace-mission-2009-a-military-scenario-beyond-central-asia/.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
52 53
aircraft to conduct counterpiracy, joint air defense, maritime search and rescue, and anti-
submarine warfare drills.272 In 2019 and 2020, China and Russia conducted joint aerial 
strategic patrols.273 These exercises frequently occur in areas relevant to China and Russia’s 
regional security interests, such as the Baltic and East China Seas.274 Furthermore, China 
and Russia held 2016 and 2017 exercises which featured computer simulated anti-missile 
operations apparently in response to the US deployment of the Terminal High Altitude 
Area Defense system (THAAD) in South Korea.275 These exercises expanded the Sino-
Russian defense relationship into new services, capabilities, and geopolitical hotspots, and 
helped to cement the relationship’s evolution beyond the Peace Mission exercises.
Similar to Sino-Russian exercises, the nature of Sino-Pakistani exercises reveals both 
the depth of their security cooperation in critical areas of mutual interest. Combined 
naval and air exercises have taken place in areas notably close to India. Starting in 
2012, the PLAAF and Pakistan Air Force (PAF) have held annual combined exercises 
named Shaheen aimed at increasing inoperability in aerial combat scenarios. China 
and Pakistan conducted the 2020 edition of Shaheen in Sindh province, adjacent to 
India.276 Additionally, since 2013, the PLA and the Pakistan Army’s special forces have 
annually participated in the Warrior series of bilateral combined exercises focusing on 
counterterrorism. The annual naval exercises, named Guardian, have been held between 
China and Pakistan since 2014.277 Similar to Shaheen IX’s location, the Guardian 2020 
exercise was held off India’s west coast. Despite this, the PLA stated that the drills were 
not targeted at any third country.278 
The complex nature of the Sino-Thai defense relationship demonstrates key differences 
between the Southeast Asian geopolitical landscape and that of Central or South Asia. 
Combined exercises have been a key part of the Sino-Thai military relationship for 
the past two decades, and since the 2014 Thai coup, have formed a key component 
of China’s push for deeper defense cooperation.279 The first Sino-Thai exercise was a 
mine clearance training program that the PLA held for the Royal Thai Army (RTA) 
in 2005.280 This focus on non-traditional security threats became codified in the 2007 
Sino-Thai Joint Action Plan, which would lead to the Strike series of exercises between 
272   Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), “Assessing Chinese-Russian Military Exercises,” Richard 
Weitz, (2021), https://www.csis.org/analysis/assessing-chinese-russian-military-exercises-past-progress-and-
future-trends .
273   Ibid, 3. 
274   Ibid, 9.
275   “China, Russia to hold further anti-missile drills after U.S. decision,” Reuters, October 11, 2016, https://www.
reuters.com/article/china-russia-security-drills/china-russia-to-hold-further-anti-missile-drills-after-u-s-thaad-
decision-idINKCN12B19U. 
276   Rajeswari Pillai Rajagopalan, “China-Pakistan Naval Drills: More Than Just Symbolism,” The Diplomat, July 10, 
2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/01/china-pakistan-naval-drills-more-than-just-symbolism/ .
277   Muhammad Faisal, “Pakistan-China Relations: Beyond CPEC,” Strategic Studies  40, no. 2 (2020): 38-39
278   Rajeswari Pillai Rajagopalan, “China-Pakistan Naval Drills: More Than Just Symbolism,” The Diplomat, July 10, 
2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/01/china-pakistan-naval-drills-more-than-just-symbolism . 
279   ISEAS, “Thailand’s Military Relations with China: Moving from Strength to Strength,” Ian Storey, (2019) 9.  
https://www.iseas.edu.sg/images/pdf/ISEAS_Perspective_2019_43.pdf . 
280   Ian Storey, “China’s Bilateral Defense Diplomacy in Southeast Asia,” Asian Security  8, no. 3 (2012): 303.
the PLA and RTA special forces.281 Prior to 2014, Sino-Thai exercises largely avoided 
conventional military objectives to avoid arousing American objections to its treaty 
ally’s defense activities.282 Since the 2014 Thai coup, combined Sino-Thai exercises have 
occurred on an annual basis. From 2014 to 2019, the first-ever cooperation between 
the PLA and RTA Air Forces came to the fore with half of their joint exercises centered 
on aerial warfare.283 Overall, the increase in Sino-Thai combined exercises since 2014 
reflects how China stepped in after the coup at a time of American political hesitancy 
toward Thailand and made itself a rival security partner.284 Nonetheless, China’s military 
engagement with Thailand must strike a delicate balance, not just with the US, but also 
other Southeast Asian countries lest they lean to the US camp because of perceptions 
of Chinese military preponderance. As such, non-traditional security threats like 
counterterrorism and HA/DR have remained a key focus of Sino-Thai exercises.285 These 
considerations also led China to engage the US through participation in American 
military exercises.
China’s combined exercises with the US constitute key opportunities to evaluate 
American military capabilities and burnish its domestic image.286 China’s approach 
to the 2014 RIMPAC exercises illustrated how it approached multilateral combined 
exercises with the US. Beyond studying US military capabilities by participating in 
the 2014 Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise, China dispatched an intelligence 
gathering ship that remained in the international waters adjacent to the exercise.287 In 
terms of domestic image, RIMPAC exercises are valuable opportunities for the CCP to 
disseminate media portraying the PLA on equal footing with their advanced military 
adversary.288 Ultimately, the US disinvited China from RIMPAC 2018 in response to 
China’s continued militarization of the South China Sea. 
China took its first hesitant steps into combined exercises because of the growing 
importance of non-traditional security threats like terrorism to its core interests. 
However, with the decline in the terrorist threat and return of great power competition, 
China has abandoned its hesitancy toward exercises as they now constitute an important 
foundation of strategic alignments and global and regional arenas. 
281   Ibid, 246.
282   Storey, “China’s Bilateral Defense Diplomacy in Southeast Asia,” 303.
283   ISEAS, “Thailand’s Military Relations with China,” 7-8.
284   Ibid, 9.
285   Ibid, 8.
286   Harold, Scott W. “Optimizing the U.S.-China Military-to-Military Relationship.” Asia Policy 26, no. 3 (2019): 156.
287     Ibid, 154.
288       Ibid, 156.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
54 55
PLA DEVELOPMENT AND MOOTW
China has made it a priority for the PLA to improve its conduct of MOOTW , with clear 
implications for the PLA ’s development of competencies and operational capabilities. 
China’s adoption of MOOTW has been part of a deliberate evolution of the PLA as a 
learning institution, transforming itself over time into a modern military capable of 
projecting power and advancing Chinese foreign policy. For every successful operation, 
China has also sought to identify shortcomings in the PLA ’s ability to carry out 
MOOTW . For example, in the aftermath of the 2008 Wenchuan Earthquake, the PLA 
undertook its largest deployment since the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese War but struggled 
with “mobilizing and delivering forces” and reportedly lacked “training, specialized 
rescue units and equipment. ”289 In response, the Central Military Commission in 2009 
released an “ Armed Forces MOOTW Capabilities Development Plan, ” which set a goal 
of establishing “a smooth and efficient emergency command system, an appropriate 
scope of professional forces, applicable and useful equipment, solid and effective 
targeted training, a basic network for comprehensive support, and preliminary laws and 
regulations” to meet the needs of successfully conducting MOOTW .290 Over a decade 
later, many of these objectives remain works in progress. 
PLA forces have gained substantial training and real-world experience through their 
routinization of MOOTW , striving to become more efficient and effective through 
meaningful command and control reforms under Xi Jinping. The PLA has also bolstered 
its ability to operate far from China’s shores through improved military hardware 
and logistical support capacity, for example with the launch of the PLA ’s support base 
in Djibouti. With this outgrowth of military activity, the PLA has set new objectives 
in completing their “diversified missions. ” Ultimately, the PLA strives to be more 
responsive, integrated, and targeted in its conduct of MOOTW . 
289   Harold M. Tanner, “The People’s Liberation Army and China’s Internal Security Challenges,” 268-269.
290   Chen Xiujun, “Zai Feizhanzheng Junshi Xingdong Zhong Shuxie Zhongcheng – Guofang He Jundui Jianshe 
Chengjiu Zongshu Zhi Wu” 在非战争军事行动中书写忠诚 – 国防和军队建设成就综述之五  [Writing Loyalty 
into Non-War Military Activities – A Summary of 5 Achievements in National Defense and Army Construction], 
Xinhua, September 18, 2012, https://www.chinacourt.org/article/detail/2012/09/id/587286.shtml . 
Office of President of Russia_Vostok 2018 military 
exercise2: Army University Press.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
56 57
Responding to Diversified Missions
When China faced complex emergencies, such as the 2008 Wenchuan Earthquake 
or the 2011 evacuation of Chinese citizens from Libya, the PLA was unprepared 
or lacked the capabilities or capacity to fully complete the mission. In 2011, the 
PLA ’s limited strategic airlift capacity hindered its ability to assist in the evacuation 
of Libya. The PLAAF sent only four IL-76 aircraft and civilian charter aircraft 
ultimately transported over 90% of the evacuated Chinese citizens. 291 According 
to Andrea Ghiselli, the Libya evacuation signaled a fundamental shift to the 
PLA about its role in peacetime. In the aftermath of the operation, PLA officers 
expressed the view that “sudden emergencies” are the “link between traditional and 
non-traditional security. ”292 The Science of Military Strategy  similarly states that 
these types of emergency situations are the “focus of preparation for MOOTW . ” 293  
The PLA has undertaken personnel reforms to support emergency response 
operations. The diverse nature of MOOTW require “different [types of] professional 
forces” to achieve a desired outcome, and as a result, the PLA has established highly 
specialized units that are trained to respond to emergencies. 294 For example, in 
2010, the PLA created eight “professional emergency rescue forces” in the wake of 
the Wenchuan earthquake, totaling 50,000 troops available for rapid emergency 
response. 295 The PLAAF has trained several elite units to manage the logistics of 
emergency response missions. 296 PLA reforms under Xi Jinping have also led to 
force structure adjustments that created “more independent, deployable army units 
capable of quickly adapting to a wide variety of missions, ” suitable for MOOTW . 297
Core military competencies that can assist the PLA in rapid deployment and 
emergency response include improved strategic airlift capabilities, advanced 
reconnaissance and early warning intelligence systems, and a well-developed 
logistics network. Indeed, PLA officers in the aftermath of the Libya evacuation 
identified “long-range air and sea transport and a truly global and reliable 
global position communication system” as critical capabilities to develop. 298 The 
completion of the Beidou navigational system in June 2020 now provides worldwide 
and reliable global position communication coverage for the PLA, but China is still 
291   Parello-Plesner and Duchâtel, China’s Strong Arm, 112. 
292   Andrea Ghiselli, “Civil-Military Relations and Organisational Preferences Regarding the Use of the Military in 
Chinese Foreign Policy: Insights from the Debate on MOOTW,” Journal of Strategic Studies  43, no. 3 (2020), 434.
293   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 298.
294       Ibid, 300.
295   “Guofangbu: Jundui Niandi Jiang Jiancheng 8 Zhi Gong 5 Wan Ren Yingji Jiuyuan Budui” 国 防 部 ：军 队 年 底 将
建成8支5万人应急救援部队 [Ministry of National Defense: The Army Will Build 8 Emergency Rescue Units 
Totaling 50,000 People By the End of the Year], April 20, 2010, Xinhua, http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2010-04/20/con -
tent_1587746.htm ; Ding, Dou. “PLA’s Disaster Relief Works: Review and Reform,” East Asian Policy , Volume 2, No. 
3 (July/September 2010), 49-57. 
296   Cristina L. Garafola and Timothy R. Heath, “The Chinese Air Force’s First Steps Toward Becoming an 
Expeditionary Air Force,” Rand Corporation , 2017, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2056.html , 
297   John Chen, “Choosing the ‘Least Bad Option’: Organizational Interests and Change in the PLA Ground Forces,” in 
Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA: Assessing Chinese Military Reforms , eds. Phillip C. Saunders et al., (Washington, 
DC: NDU Press, 2019), 91.
298   Ghiselli, “Civil-Military Relations,”434.  
taking steps to improve its ability to respond at a moment’s notice to crises around 
the world. 299
The PLA has conducted military exercises and domestic missions to test its 
strategic airlift capabilities. These exercises have taught the PLAAF to “navigate 
abroad, manage issues of diplomatic access, and operate with greater autonomy. ” 300 
Furthermore, China indigenously developed the Y-20 heavy lift military cargo 
plane, which came into service in 2016 and in 2018 carried out its first combat 
training exercise. 301 The Y-20 also participated in the PLA ’s HA/DR missions during 
the COVID-19 pandemic by assisting with the delivery of medical supplies and 
personnel to Wuhan and Southeast Asia, for example. These missions, according to 
Chinese experts, tested the PLAAF’s ability to coordinate the takeoff and landing 
of multiple Y-20s, demonstrating that they can “be deployed by air in a short time 
instead of being transported slowly, allowing them to form combat capabilities in the 
frontline very quickly. ”302   
The PLA has also been charged with improving its reconnaissance and early warning 
intelligence collection so that China can respond immediately to a growing crisis. 
The 2020 edition of the Science of Military Strategy mentions that the PLA ’s deficient 
far-seas reconnaissance capabilities have made it “difficult to detect, identify, and 
deal with” pirates in the Gulf of Aden. 303 To remedy this shortcoming, the PLA has 
invested heavily in developing advanced satellite and remote sensing systems to 
improve global data collection. 304 The Djibouti support base also likely enables “early 
warning and intelligence gathering activities. ” 305 The location of the base makes it 
well-positioned for general intelligence and reconnaissance missions, including 
collection on foreign militaries operating in the region and preparation for possible 
emergency contingencies. Recent activity at and near Djibouti has indicated that 
China is expanding its intelligence collection activities in the Indian Ocean region. 
For example, in 2021, US intelligence observed Chinese ships entering a commercial 
port in Abu Dhabi that are a “type typically used by the Chinese military for signals 
intelligence collection. ”306
299   “China Launches Last BDS Satellite to Complete Global Navigation Constellation,” Xinhua, June 23, 2020,  
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-06/23/c_139161359.htm . 
300   RAND Corporation, “The Chinese Air Force’s First Steps Toward Becoming an Expeditionary Air Force,” Cristina 
L. Garafola and Timothy R. Heath (2017), https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2056.html . 
301   “Y-20 heavy transport aircraft conducts first airborne, air delivery training,” Xinhua, May 8, 2018,  
https://www.ecns.cn/2018/05-08/301808.shtml . 
302   Xuanzun Liu, “Chinese Air Force’s Strategic Projection Capability Proven in Epidemic: experts,” Global Times , 
February 17, 2020, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202002/1179916.shtml . 
303   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 319.
304   U.S., Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2020,” (Arlington, VA: Department of Defense 2020), 65, https://media.defense.gov/2020/
Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF . 
305   Peter Dutton et al., “China Maritime Report No. 6: Djibouti,” 36. 
306   Katie Bo Lillis, Natasha Bertrand, and Kylie Atwood, “Construction halted on secret project at Chinese port in 
UAE after pressure from US, officials say,” CNN, November 19, 2021, https://www.cnn.com/2021/11/19/politics/
china-uae-us-construction-port/index.html . 

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
58 59
In addition to the Djibouti base, the PLA has strengthened its general far seas 
logistics operations to support rapid deployments. In 2016, the PLA established 
a Joint Logistic Support Force to “unify joint logistics forces at the strategic level 
and support the five new joint theater commands. ” 307 This new support system is 
meant to be able to “rapidly respond to emergency situations requiring large-scale 
logistics support. ”308 The PLA has supplemented its support capabilities with dual-use 
agreements for commercial ports, many of which are owned or operated by Chinese 
firms.309 China has also trained its support units and partners for rapid logistics 
capabilities through international exercises, which have provided experience in 
transporting PLA units and partnering with other countries for logistics support. 310  
 
Unifying C2 and Promoting Jointness
The PLA has prioritized the development of joint operational capabilities between 
its different military branches since witnessing the US’ decisive performance in the 
Gulf War.311 The ability of the military to coordinate actions between different service 
branches and types of units continues to be understood as essential to prevailing in 
an “informationized local war. ”312 Similarly, Chinese strategists repeatedly emphasize 
the need for a high degree of integration between PLA branches and non-PLA 
actors for the successful conduct of MOOTW . In pursuit of this goal, the PLA has 
taken steps to unify the command and control (C2) of MOOTW and expand joint 
operations training in the far seas.
The 2020 edition of the Science of Military Strategy thus calls for strengthening 
integration in MOOTW along four key lines: between the PLA branches, between 
the PLA and PAP , between the PLA and government ministries, and between the 
PLA and foreign militaries. 313 MOOTW require significant coordination between 
the PLA, PRC government agencies, and CCP leadership. 314 This is driven, in part, 
by a belief that MOOTW are inherently political, and that the CCP must therefore 
actively manage all military actions to ensure that they closely align with political 
objectives. Furthermore, MOOTW often require the participation of non-military 
elements of government. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of 
Transportation have both played an active role in China’s domestic and international 
307   Modernization of PLA Logistics: Joint Logistic Support Force,  before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission , 115th Cong. (2018) (statement of Kevin McCauley, independent analyst), 2, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/
default/files/McCauley_Written%20Testimony.pdf . 
308   McCauley, testimony on  Modernization of PLA Logistics , 7. 
309   Kardon, “China’s Overseas Base, Places, and Far Seas Logistics,” 93.
310   Southerland, Green, and Janik, “The Shanghai Cooperation Organization,” 6.
311   PLA Joint Training and Implications for Future Expeditionary Capabilities , before the U.S.-China Security and 
Economic Review Commission , 114th Cong. (2016), (statement of Mark Cozad, RAND Corporation), 1, https://www.
rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/testimonies/CT400/CT451/RAND_CT451.pdf . 
312   Ibid, 2.
313   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 306-307. 
314   U.S. Joint Operation Doctrine distinguishes between integrated actions of the armed forces (joint operations) and 
unified actions, which refers to the “synchronization, coordination, and integration of the activities of governmen -
tal and nongovernmental entities.” For the purposes of this study, integrated refers to coordination between both 
military and non-military tools of statecraft.
MOOTW , such as in the 2011 Libya evacuation. 315 Finally, more complex MOOTW 
may require joint operations by multiple military branches, as well as coordination 
with foreign militaries. 
Strengthening the PLA ’s ability to prosecute complex joint operations will remain 
most relevant to large-scale domestic HA/DR missions within China or in China’s 
near periphery. In these scenarios, the PLA is most likely to mobilize significant 
forces across multiple branches on short notice, as was the case in the 2008 
Wenchuan earthquake response. In the future, the PLA will likely also be ready to 
conduct more advanced joint operations in the far seas. Doing so would “allow the 
PLA to handle nontraditional security challenges more effectively” while improving 
China’s options to respond to complex crisis scenarios. 316 
To facilitate and improve integration, China has made efforts to formalize a unified 
command structure for MOOTW under the purview of the Central Military 
Commission. Officially, the large majority of overseas MOOTW are now directed 
by the Overseas Operation Office within the Joint Staff Department, which was first 
established in 2016. At the time of its establishment, a Ministry of National Defense 
spokesperson described the Office as “responsible for the planning, preparation, and 
implementation of MOOTW for the entire PLA and PAP . ”317 A Global Times article 
detailing the Overseas Operation Office writes that it can “strengthen rapid response 
capabilities…[and have] more targeted planning and coordination functions. ” 318 
The PLA has also taken steps to expand joint operations training in the far seas. In 
2021, the PLA ’s Zhanlan exercises, which simulate offensive naval operations beyond 
the first island chain, went further than previous iterations of the drills in elevating 
“joint forces at the tactical level. ”319 
The PLA still suffers an implementation gap in conducting joint operations, 
particularly in the far seas. A significant portion of China’s routine MOOTW have 
required only minimal coordination between different branches. 320 Specific PLA 
branch headquarters still possibly manage several routine MOOTW despite the 
establishment of the Joint Staff Department Overseas Operation Office. For example, 
PLA interlocutors told researchers at the National Defense University that the PLAN 
315   Parello-Plesner and Duchâtel, China’s Strong Arm, 110-113.
316   Joel Wuthnow, Phillip C. Saunders, and Ian Burns McCaslin, “PLA Overseas Operations in 2035: Inching Toward a 
Global Combat Capability,” INSS Strategic Forum 309, (2021), 5, https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/
stratforum/SF-309.pdf?ver=vBGjBJXsarEsg7nATeBMBQ%3d%3d .
317   Xu Ren, “Zhongyang Junwei Lianhe Canmou Bu Zuozhanju Chengli Haiwai Xingdongchu” 中央军委联合
参谋部作战局成立海外行动处 [The Operation Bureau of the Joint Staff Department of the Central Military 
Commission established the Overseas Operations Office], China Military Online , March 31, 2016, http://www.81.
cn/xwfyr/2016-03/31/content_6986671.htm . 
318   “Jiemi Jiefangjun ‘Haiwai Xingdong Chu’ Qianhua Jingwai Kuai Fan Zhineng” 解密解放军‘海外行动处’强化境外
快反职能 [Uncovering the PLA’s Overseas Operations Office to strengthen Overseas Rapid Response Functions], 
Global Times , March 25, 2016, http://military.people.com.cn/n1/2016/0325/c1011-28226523.html . 
319   Roderick Lee, “The PLA Navy’s Zhanlan Training Series in 2021: Growing Emphasis on Joint Operations on the 
High Seas,” China Brief, May 7, 2021, https://jamestown.org/program/the-pla-navys-zhanlan-training-series-in-
2021-growing-emphasis-on-joint-operations-on-the-high-seas/.
320 Wuthnow et al., “PLA Overseas Operations,” 4.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
60 61
remains in control of the Gulf of Aden counterpiracy missions. 321 Other analysts have 
argued that the Joint Staff Department Overseas Operations Office’s “status as an 
administrative office and its relatively junior grade” make its command of significant 
overseas MOOTW unlikely. 322
Targeted and Flexible Use of Force Abroad
The PLA ’s willingness to use force abroad in the conduct of MOOTW is a critical 
question for China’s evolving role in international security. China has so far 
demonstrated restraint in its conduct of MOOTW . However, it remains possible that 
a sudden unforeseen crisis could quickly change the risk calculus of PRC government 
leaders around the use of force abroad to protect China’s overseas interests.323 Chinese 
strategists acknowledge the possibility that certain operations may require kinetic 
military action, but that any such PLA operation would likely be small-scale and with 
limited goals, in part to ensure that the situation does not escalate.324 To prepare for this 
type of contingency, the PLA is developing several core capabilities that would allow it 
to operate with a limited footprint and highly targeted use of force.
The 2013 and 2020 editions of the Science of Military Strategy note the relatively “low 
level of violence” typically involved in MOOTW , while acknowledging that special 
circumstances may require the use of armed force.325 For example, counterterrorism or 
counterpiracy operations may require a direct confrontation with adversaries during 
the conduct of routine operations.326 This was the case in 2017 when PLAN Special 
Forces soldiers completed two successful hostage rescues in the Gulf of Aden. 327 In 
one of the operations, a Somali official stated that the PLAN Special Forces killed two 
out of a group of nine attackers.328 A crisis may also provoke heightened use of force, as 
demonstrated by the 2011 deaths of 13 Chinese citizens in Thailand. In that case, China’s 
Ministry of Public Security led the hunt for the chief suspect, a local drug kingpin 
named Naw Kham, in tandem with Laos, Myanmar, and Thailand.329 China at one point 
allegedly considered using a drone to strike Naw Kham’s rural hideout, before Laotian 
authorities ultimately captured him through more traditional methods.330
321   Ibid, 1. 
322   Roderick Lee and Morgan Clemens, “Organizing to Fight in the Far Seas: The Chinese Navy in an Era of Military 
Reform,” China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 9, 2020, 10. 
323   Andrea Ghiselli, “Continuity and Change in China’s Strategy to Protect Overseas Interests,” War on the Rocks, 
August 4, 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2021/08/continuity-and-change-in-chinas-strategy-to-protect-
overseas-interests/ . 
324   Shou, Zhanlüe Xue Jiaocheng , 164, 168.
325 Ibid, 164; Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 299.
326   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 324.
327   “Chinese Navy Hands Pirates Over to Somali Authorities,” Maritime Executive , May 8, 2017, https://www.
maritime-executive.com/article/chinese-navy-hands-pirates-over-to-somali-authorities . 
328   “Chinese Navy Hands Pirates Over to Somali Authorities.”
329   Jane Perlez and Bree Feng, “Beijing Flaunts Cross-Border Clout in Search for Drug Lord,” The New York Times, 
April 4, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/05/world/asia/chinas-manhunt-shows-sway-in-southeast-asia.
html. 
330   Jane Perlez, “Chinese Plan to Kill Drug Lord with Drone Highlights Military Advances,” The New York Times, Feb-
ruary 20, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/21/world/asia/chinese-plan-to-use-drone-highlights-military-
advances.html ; Parello-Plesner and Duchâtel, China’s Strong Arm, 97. 
In both routine and crisis circumstances, China has only used or considered using 
limited force against a well-defined target and with a clear objective. These types of 
operations are regarded as best suited for highly specialized forces that can operate 
with a limited footprint. As a result, the PLA has invested resources in training and 
expanding its Marines and Special Operations Forces (SOF) in order to confront a 
range of non-traditional security challenges. PLA Army SOF have been involved in 
SCO counterterrorism exercises for nearly two decades. 331 Since 2008, every Gulf of 
Aden ETF has included a contingent of PLAN SOF , known as the “Water Dragons. ”332 
PLA SOF units have also deployed to UN Peacekeeping Missions in Mali. The PLA 
base in Djibouti is home to a detachment of PLAN Marine Corps special forces that 
have conducted anti-piracy and hostage rescue trainings. 333 Since 2015, China has 
reformed and expanded the PLAN Marine Corps, with a possible total strength of 
40,000 personnel. 334 This expansion indicates that the Marine Corps is likely to be 
“the country’s main expeditionary force in the future to man overseas bases and 
perform other missions on distant shores. ”335
Although China is developing the capabilities to use force abroad during MOOTW 
operations, political and diplomatic constraints will likely continue to limit China’s 
willingness to use force on a consistent basis. For instance, China’s decision not 
to strike Naw Kham was partly due to “international and sovereignty issues. ” 336 
China’s foreign policy principle of “non-interference” constrains its ability to 
conduct unilateral operations abroad without host state consent. This goes beyond 
a mere norm, as the Science of Military Strategy explicitly lists political, diplomatic, 
and international constraints as limiting the use of military force overseas. 337 Any 
overseas use of force is thus likely to be approved by and coordinated with host 
nations or the UN. As such, China would be most likely to only use force abroad in a 
limited operation carried out by special forces, in line with China’s current and near 
future power projection capabilities and stated foreign policy principles.
331   Southerland, Green, and Janik, “The Shanghai Cooperation Organization,” 9.
332   Peter Wood, “Chinese Special Forces,” Ashtree Analytics , January 6, 2020, https://www.ashtreeanalytics.com/
posts/562. 
333   Peter Dutton et al., “China Maritime Report No. 6: Djibouti,” 32-33.
334   Dennis J. Blasko and Roderick Lee, “The Chinese Navy’s Marine Corps, Part 1: Expansion and Reorganization,” 
China Brief, February 1, 2019, https://jamestown.org/program/the-chinese-navys-marine-corps-part-1-expansion-
and-reorganization/ . 
335   Dennis J. Blasko, “The PLA Army after ‘below the neck’ reforms: adjusting to China’s joint warfighting, deterrence, 
and MOOTW posture,” Journal of Strategic Studies  44, vol. 2 (2021): 171.
336   Perlez and Feng, “Beijing Flaunts Cross-Border Clout.”
337   Xiao, Zhanlüe Xue (2020 Nian Xiuding) , 317.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
62 63
CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
POLICYMAKERS
China’s embrace of MOOTW has coincided with its ascendance as a world power. Its 
increasingly global economic interests have necessitated the adoption of operational 
concepts that align with its need to conduct military operations abroad to protect 
and promote those interests, while remaining consistent with its principled aversion 
to waging war overseas. Further, China’s contributions to international peacekeeping 
operations, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, and its participation in 
international military exercises have helped strengthen China’s diplomatic relations 
with some of its neighbors and promoted China’s image as a responsible great power 
and a strong contributor to international order. In addition to non-combatant 
evacuations, these operations in particular have provided Chinese forces with 
opportunities to gain practical field experience in areas vital to conducting a variety 
of overseas missions, especially logistical support and sustainment. MOOTW thus 
provide a valuable framework for the role of China’s military in advancing its foreign 
policy priorities and upholding national security.
In terms of China’s military strategy, MOOTW augment the traditional role of the 
PLA in defending China from foreign attacks and guaranteeing CCP rule in China. 
The adoption of the MOOTW framework has given China’s military and political 
leadership a mandate to better delineate responsibility for combating terrorism, 
separatism, and extremism at home across the PAP and PLA, and to clarify the 
PLA ’s role in protecting Chinese interests and citizens abroad or conducting 
international missions in partnership with other countries or on behalf of the 
UN. By engaging in MOOTW , China can deepen its security cooperation with its 
partners, and can arguably exert greater influence over other states, as well as within 
multilateral fora like the SCO and the UN, by making itself an increasingly integral 
partner and contributor to international security missions.
Western analysis tends to frame China’s progress in military modernization 
and training through a narrow “China threat” lens, interpreting any efforts by 
China to improve its military forces and broaden their operational capabilities 
as unambiguous indications of a rising danger of Chinese military aggression. 
While China’s military remains focused on combat readiness and developing the 
capabilities necessary to prevail in war, especially in preparation for contingencies 
involving Taiwan, it is important for analysts and policymakers in the US to discern 
between efforts that threaten regional peace and stability, and those that have the 
potential to contribute to the rules-based international order. Based on the PLA ’s 
increased emphasis on MOOTW in recent decades, much of China’s recent military 
development appears more consistent with the latter than the former, at least in 
terms of doctrine.
When assessing how to interpret various Chinese MOOTW for purposes of 
US policy, it is necessary to consider the extent to which China’s actions are 
consistent with international norms and law, and broadly align with the priorities 
of the international community. As such, China’s contributions to UN PKOs, its 
protection of international trade routes as part of multinational maritime security 
DOD_PLA Rim of the Pacific Exercise 2014:  
Sorensen, John. U.S. Department of Defense.

STIMSON CENTER STIMSON CENTER
Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy Military Operations Other Than War and China’s Foreign Policy
64 65
missions, and its provision of support to humanitarian assistance and disaster relief 
operations could all be regarded as net positive contributions to international order. 
Such contributions are essential to greater “burden-sharing” in the international 
system, and ideally, these efforts should be treated as potential areas for the US and 
its allies to deepen cooperation with China in an effort to better integrate China 
into the rules-based international order. Cooperating with China in these areas may 
allow the US to better shape China’s international conduct in carrying out military 
operations abroad and can help ensure that China’s actions are kept in line with 
international laws and norms.
On the other hand, some of China’s domestically focused MOOTW , particularly 
its counterterrorism operations in Xinjiang, have raised grave concerns over 
human rights, and should be understood as clear challenges to international law 
and norms concerning responsible state conduct. Here, and in similar instances, 
China’s evolving military capabilities may simply help make it more effective at 
suppressing domestic dissent, potentially in ways that could threaten regional 
peace and security. For example, China’s efforts to employ security forces to 
simultaneously suppress domestic protest and deter foreign interference in Hong 
Kong sparked widespread concern. 338 Similarly, much of China’s maritime rights 
protection and law enforcement operations have been directed at asserting Chinese 
jurisdiction and de facto control over international waters and disputed territories 
or features in the South and East China Seas. Thus, many Chinese MOOTW have 
exacerbated regional tensions and made friction with neighboring forces a common 
occurrence. At the same time, the international community has an interest in broad 
counterterrorism cooperation among states, as well as international collaboration 
around the protection of SLOC. It will be critical to bridge the gap between 
international law and norms and China’s regularized conduct, particularly in these 
areas, to help ensure the stability of the international system.
Lastly, China’s military assistance to, and cooperation with, regional partners 
should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Such cooperation is practically 
inevitable for such a large and wealthy country, and may help or hinder US 
interests in international stability, depending on the particular circumstances. In 
some instances, as in response to the 2015 earthquake in Nepal, China has made 
significant contributions to international relief efforts that were broadly aligned 
with the goals of the international community. In other cases, such as following 
the 2014 coup in Thailand, China’s engagement has undermined human rights and 
democratic governance in direct contradiction of US interests. Thus, the US and the 
international community should adopt a flexible approach to Chinese MOOTW , 
rather than mounting universal opposition.
China’s increased emphasis on MOOTW in recent years and its acknowledgment 
of their relevance to domestic and international politics indicates that China may 
be embracing a new, more internationally engaged role for itself. As one of the few 
countries with deep experience conducting MOOTW , and as the only other country 
338   Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga et al., “Deciphering Chinese Deterrence Signalling in the New Era” (Santa Monica: 
RAND Corporation, 2021), https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1074-1.html .
with comparable economic and military capacity, the US has a special responsibility 
to understand the ways in which MOOTW are likely to be employed by China, and 
to appropriately calibrate its policy response. Rather than categorically opposing 
Chinese MOOTW , international support or condemnation should be consistently 
conditioned on the extent to which China’s actions contribute to, or detract from, 
the values, norms, and laws of the UN system. China’s efforts to enhance its role 
as a responsible great power should be assessed through this lens in good faith; to 
this end, the MOOTW framework provides a discrete set of activities and strategic 
motives upon which to focus such assessments.

This report was produced by the Stimson Center’s Defense Strategy and 
Planning Program in the interest of fostering better understanding of 
China’s foreign policy and strategy. The report was made possible thanks to 
the generous support of Stand Together Trust and an anonymous donor.