NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
ALLIED JOINT DOCTRINE  
FOR  
COUNTERINSURGENCY 
(COIN) –  
 
AJP-3.4.4 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
ii 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK)

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
i 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED
 
 
 
 
ALLIED JOINT DOCTRINE  
FOR  
COUNTERINSURGENCY 
(COIN) –  
 
AJP-3.4.4 
 
FEBRUARY 2011 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
ii 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK) 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANISATION 
NATO STANDARDISATION AGENCY (NSA) 
NATO LETTER OF PROMULGATION 
4 Ferbuary 2011 
L AJP-3.4.4 - ALLIED JOINT DOCTRINE FOR COUNTERINSURGENCY (COIN) is a 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED Publication. The agreement ofnations to use this publication is recorded in 
STANAG 2611. 
2. AJP-3.4.4 is effective upon receipt. 
iii 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
iv 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK) 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
v 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE IS RESERVED FOR NATIONAL LETTER OF PROMULGATION 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
vi 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK) 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
vii 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
RECORD OF CHANGES 
 
Change 
Date 
Date 
Entered 
Effective 
Date 
By Whom 
Entered 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
viii 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
ix 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
 
RECORD OF RESERVATIONS 
 
 
CHAPTER RECORD OF RESERVATION BY NATIONS 
General GBR, USA 
1 USA 
2  
3 GBR, USA 
4 USA 
5 GBR 
  
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
x 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
xi 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
RECORD OF SPECIFIC RESERVATIONS 
 
NATION SPECIFIC RESERVATIONS 
GBR 
a. GBR does not agree with the incorrect use of hte word "Neutrality" in Para 0344. 
b. GBR has reservations on the legal implications of the wording used in Para 0510; and 
also in Para 0541. 
c. GBR proposes an immediate re-write of AJP-3.4.4 once Edition One has been ratified 
and suggests that this may the opportunity to address minor reservations, detailed 
comments and future developments. 
USA 
a.  The United States (US) does not subscribe to the language in paragraph 0101 and 
footnote 2 that introduces a new term “wicked problems” (not NATO approved) to replace 
an acceptable term “complex operations”.  Non-NATO approved terms should not be used 
in the lexicon of this AJP.   
 
 Rationale.  The US does not believe that a new term based on a book or article is sufficient 
reference to insert into a ratification draft.  Also, since the term is rather colloquial in 
nature, it does not clearly describe the COIN operational environment.  “Complex 
operations” is consistent with other uses of the term in this document. 
 
b.  The US does not subscribe to the proposed definition of insurgency in paragraphs 0109, 
0302 and the glossary, that defines an insurgency as “the actions of an organized, often 
ideologically motivated, group or movement that seeks to effect or prevent political change 
in a region” versus “overthrowing or forcing a change of a governing authority”, or that it 
“focuses on persuading or coercing the population through the use of violence and 
subversion.”   
 
Rationale.  Proposed definition is not consistent with nor appreciably improves upon 
approved definition for “insurgency” found in AAP-6(2010), NATO Glossary of Terms 
and Definitions, i.e., “an organized movement aimed at the overthrow of a constituted 
government through the use of subversion and armed conflict.”  While the AAP-6 
definition may not be perfect, the proposed definition in AJP-3.4.4 RD2 lacks concision 
and precludes those potential contexts where the focus of the insurgency may be on the 
government itself, and not the population. As such, an acceptable compromise would be to 
modify the AAP-6 definition to read: “an organized movement aimed at that seeks political 
change or the overthrow of a constituted government governing authority through the use 
of subversion and armed conflict.” 
 
c.  The US does not accept the misuse of “effect” in paragraph 0419.  At present the 
sentence reads, “The LOOs are the insurgency’s operational ways to cause effects to 
change the current conditions.”  An acceptable solution would be to change the sentence to 
read, “The LOOs are the insurgency’s operational ways to cause generate effects to change 
the current conditions.” 
 
      Rationale.  Effects are created or generated to support the achievement of objectives.  
This proposed change harmonizes “effects” with AJP-01, “Allied Joint Doctrine”, and 
Military Committee Memorandum (MCM)-0041-2010, “Military Committee Position on 
the Use of Effects in Operations”. 
      
d.  The United States does not subscribe to the terms and definitions in the glossary that 
deviate from AAP-47, “Allied Joint Doctrine Development”, for AJP lexicon.  The United 
States specifically does not agree with terms and definitions included in the glossary that: 
   
(1) Are not in accordance with Military Committee Terminology Conference (MCTC) 
agreements:  actor (definition should be in accordance with MCM-0041-2010). 
 
(2) Are definitions that are misquoted from Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-6 or 
another proponent Allied joint publication:  counterinsurgency and insurgency. 
 
(3) Are not AAP-6 approved:  defeat, information activities, information operations, 
irregular activity and reintegration. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
xii 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
xiii 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
COUNTERINSURGENCY 
 
 
References: 
 
a. AAP-6  Glossary of Terms and Definitions 
b. AAP-15 Glossary of Abbreviations 
c. AJP-01 Allied Joint Doctrine 
d. AJP-2.5  Captured Persons, Materiel and Documents 
e. AJP-3  Allied Doctrine for Joint Operations 
f. AJP-3.2 Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations 
g. ATP-3.2.1  Allied Land Tactics 
h. ATP-3.2.1.1  Guidance for the Conduct of T actical Stability Activities and Tasks 
i. AJP-3.2.3.3  Allied Joint Doctrine for Military Police 
j. AJP-3.4  Non Article 5 Crisis Response Operations 
k. AJP-3.5 Allied Joint Doctrine for Special Operations 
l. AJP-3.10 Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations 
m. AJP-3.10.1 Allied Joint Doctrine for Psychological Operations 
n. AJP-3.15 Allied Joint Doctrine for Countering Improvised Explosive Device (C-IED) 
o. AJP-9  Allied Joint Doctrine for Civil- Military Co-operation (CIMIC) doctrine 
p. C-M (2008)0029-COR1 Comprehensive Appr oach Action Plan (2 April 2008) 
 
PREFACE 
 
0001. AJP-3.4.4 Allied Joint Doctrine for Counterinsurgency (COIN) provides a common NATO 
doctrine to guide commanders and staffs of operational formations and units engaged in the 
conduct of COIN.  The publication also informs a wide range of civil actors and 
organisations, involved in security and stabilisation of the full range of capabilities that the 
military may contribute to a joint, interagency and multinational response to the resolution 
of complex challenges, such as caused by an insurgency. 
 
0002. AJP-3.4.4 has been developed for use at the operational and tactical levels and describes 
COIN as one of the predominant campaign themes1.  The publication provides a description 
of the complex operational environment, its actors and all important influencing factors.  
The publication describes insurgency as the most dangerous and challenging irregular 
activity that can occur in a failed or fragile state.  The description of insurgency sets the 
scene for a comprehensive description of the attributes of counterinsurgency, the planning 
and the military contribution.   
 
0003. AJP-3.2 ‘Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations’ provides the doctrinal underpinning for 
the counterinsurgency (COIN) campaign theme and its relationship to the conduct of 
operations across the full range of military activities.  AJP-3.4 ‘Non-Article 5 Crisis 
Response Operations’ (NA5CRO) describes the considerations relevant to the successful 
conduct of various types of complex operation; insurgency being one of the identified 
irregular threats that the Alliance has to counter. 
                                                      
1 The description of COIN as a separate campaign theme is evolving.  In recent draft publications, such AJP-3B, the term countering irregular-activity 
(including counter insurgency as probably the most demanding variant) is now being introduced as one of the major campaign (sometimes called 
operational) themes. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
xiv 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
COUNTERINSURGENCY 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Chapter 1 - Introduction 
Purpose 
Background 
Structure of the counterinsurgency publication 
Understanding counterinsurgency in context 
The operational environment 
A comprehensive approach 
Counterinsurgency and the range of military activities 
 
Chapter 2 - The Operational Environment 
Section I - Operating context 
Elements of a stable state 
State instability 
Vulnerabilities of governance and authority 
  Section II - Variable factors of the operational environment 
The political environment 
The human environment 
The physical environment 
The security environment 
The information environment 
The economic environment 
Section III - Actors 
Section IV - The relationship between insurgency and irregular activity 
Section V - The capability of irregular activists 
 
Chapter 3 - Insurgency and Counterinsurgency 
Introduction 
 
Part I - Insurgency
 
Section I - Overview 
Section II - Key conditions for an insurgency 
Section III - Dynamics of insurgency 
Section IV - Insurgent’s vulnerabilities 
 
Part II - Counterinsurgency
 
Section V - Overview of counterinsurgency 
Section VI - Attributes in counterinsurgency 
Section VII - Indicative tasks and activities in counterinsurgency 
 
 
Chapter 4 - Planning for Counterinsurgency 
Section I - Introduction 
Section II - Levels of operations and counterinsurgency 
Section III - Intelligence 
Section IV - Counterinsurgency campaign planning overview 
Section V - Operational Art 
Section VI - Operational design 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
xv 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Section VII - Planning considerations 
 
Chapter 5 - The Milita
ry Contribution 
Section I - Introduction 
Section II - Considerations 
Section III - Paradoxes 
Section IV - Military objectives during COIN 
Section V – Operational approach (Clear, hold, build) 
Section VI - Execution of military activities 
Section VII - Land component contribution 
Section VIII - Maritime component contribution 
Section IX - Air component contribution 
Section X - Special Operations Forces component contribution 
Section XI - Transfer of governance and security responsibility 
 
Annex A - Strategies of Insurgency 
Annex B - Insurgent activities for Achieving Their Goals 
Annex C - Motivation Methods 
Annex D - Elements of Operational Design 
 
Lexicon 



NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
1-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
                                                     
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION 
 
Purpose 
 
0101. AJP-3.4.4 provides a common NATO doctrine to guide commanders, staffs and 
forces engaged in the conduct of COIN.  It also informs civil actors involved in 
security and stabilisation of the full range of capabilities that the military may 
contribute to a joint, interagency and multinational response to the resolution of such 
‘wicked problems’.2 
 
0102. AJP-3.2 ‘Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations’ provides the doctrinal 
underpinning for the counterinsurgency (COIN) campaign theme and its relationship 
to the conduct of operations across the full range of military activities.  AJP-3.4 
‘Non-Article 5 Crisis Response Operations’ (NA5CRO) describes the considerations 
relevant to the successful conduct of various types of complex operations, insurgency 
being one of the identified irregular threats that the Alliance has to counter.   
 
0103. This document aims to inform and guide the planning and conduct of NATO 
counterinsurgency.  It is based on the assumption that a decision to launch NATO or 
NATO-led operations involving COIN will be taken in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of international law.  It is also based upon the assumption that the conduct 
of COIN operations will have to conform to relevant international law.  Any 
provisions, definitions or obligations in this AJP may not be interpreted or construed 
as state practice or a change in effective agreements on the law of armed conflict 
(LOAC).   
 
0104. All statements and terminology regarding an insurgency and its organisational and 
operational patterns are not intended to convey any legal connotation or combatant 
status, but rather assist NATO commanders and staffs in understanding and 
describing their operational environment and planning and executing COIN 
operations. 
 
0105. This document does not address such insurgencies as may occur within the territory 
of any NATO member state.  It is fully understood that such situations will be 
governed by the affected state's domestic law. 
 
Background 
 
0106. The post-1945 international organisational architecture has struggled at times to cope 
with and adapt to the complexity associated with intra-state violence and instability.  
Organisations were designed to deal with inter-state conflict.  Therefore, the 
approach has been based on applying the traditional norm of state sovereignty.  In the 
current international strategic context, however, most of the major threats and risks 
emanate from failed or fragile states.  The fragility of such states has the potential to 
destabilise entire regions.  A characteristic of fragile states is the inability of their 
governments to discharge their responsibilities effectively.  Insecurity and instability 
is likely to follow, caused by those with specific grievances and opportunists keen to 
 
2 A wicked problem is one that is difficult to resolve because of incomplete, contradictory, and changing requirements that are often difficult to 
recognise and predict.  When solving one aspect of a problem complex interdependencies may manifest themselves in unintended consequences.  
Rittel, Horst, and Melvin Webber; "Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning," pp.  155-169, Policy Sciences, Vol.  4. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
1-2 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
exploit the vacuum
 of authority.  Frequently the states do not have an effective 
monopoly on the use of violence, which inhibits their ability to prevent or resolve 
societal conflicts.  NATO’s response to global instability, conflict and failed states in 
areas affecting Alliance interests will demand a wide range of intergovernmental 
activity, potentially including Allied military operations to assist a host nation (HN).  
This presents us with a new set of challenges distinctly different from those we have 
previously faced. 
 
0107. Since the end of the Cold War, NATO has undergone significant transformation to 
enable it to meet global instability challenges.  Alliance partners are routinely 
engaged in the conduct of complex operations beyond their own territory.  To remain 
effective, NATO must maintain the ability to respond swiftly and decisively across 
the full range of intervention scenarios, a requirement that not only applies to the 
prevention and mediation of conflict but also extends to the stabilisation of 
environments emerging from, or still in, violent conflict, in order to support recovery 
and provide a platform for political, economic and social progress. 
 
Structure of the Counterinsurgency Publication 
 
0108. This publication is structured as follows: 
 
a. Chapter 1 places COIN, as a campaign theme, in context describing the 
operational environment, the importance of developing a comprehensive 
approach, and the requirement to understand how the range of military 
activities relates to the conduct of COIN. 
 
b. Chapter 2 describes the complexity of the operational environment and its 
constituent parts, including: actors, irregular activities and, within this, the role 
of the insurgent. 
 
c. Chapter 3 describes insurgency and COIN and the prerequisites and favourable 
conditions that lead to insurgency.  It focuses on the dynamics and 
vulnerabilities of an insurgency.  The chapter also details “the attributes” of 
COIN, which should be used in concert with the principles of Allied joint and 
multinational operations. 
 
d. Chapter 4 discusses those factors essential to the planning process within a 
COIN campaign. 
 
e. Chapter 5 explains the military contribution to the COIN campaign aiming at 
the tactical level. 
 
Understanding Counterinsurgency in Context 
  
0109. Insurgency is defined as the actions of an organised, often ideologically motivated, 
group or movement that seeks to effect or prevent political change of a governing 
authority within a region, focused on persuading or coercing the population through 
the use of violence and subversion.
3  Conversely, COIN is defined as the set of 
political, economic, social, military, law enforcement, civil and psychological 
                                                      
3 This term and definition is being staffed within the context of this publication for ratification and will be proposed as a modification to the existing 
term in AAP-6. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
1-3 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
activ
ities with the aim to defeat4 insurgency and address any core grievances.5  
However, efforts taken to counter an insurgency cannot ignore the destabilising 
effects of irregular activity.  For the purpose of this publication, irregular activity is 
defined as the use or threat of force by irregular forces, groups or individuals, 
frequently ideologically or criminally motivated, to effect or prevent change as a 
challenge to governance and authority.6  Insurgency and COIN are distinctly 
different but cannot be looked at in isolation; nor can countering an insurgency 
ignore the impact of irregular activity and its destabilising effects.  Insurgents seek to 
force political change on those in political power, whereas counterinsurgents seek to 
check insurgent activity and its associated irregular activity, so fostering perceived 
legitimacy of the HN government. 
 
0110. Both insurgents and counterinsurgents employ varied tactics and methods.  These 
include political, military, economic, social, information and infrastructure activities 
(ways), in an attempt to reach a favourable outcome (ends) and within the resources 
available, including time (means).  If this broad array is generally categorised as 
political and military in nature, political considerations are of much greater 
importance than military considerations in a struggle for the consent of the 
population.  Therefore, every action in COIN should support a political resolution to 
the problem.  This is particularly important when considering those organisations 
that contribute to humanitarian assistance and economic development efforts, some 
of whom operate in an impartial and neutral manner.  When viewed through the lens 
of an insurgent these activities are unlikely to be perceived as neutral because they 
promote the legitimacy of the HN government.  This presents a dilemma to the HN 
and the Alliance and provides the insurgent an opportunity to exploit such 
vulnerabilities.  Unity of purpose and unity of effort are essential for the multiplicity 
of actors engaged within a COIN environment and such a coordinated approach must 
be nurtured and safeguarded. 
 
0111. Civil authorities should normally have the lead for delivering internal security and 
stabilisation.  However, the lack of a permissive environment may require military 
forces to contribute more widely to security and capacity-building tasks.  As a result 
the military contribution may dominate the early phases of a campaign during the 
contest to deliver a favourable security environment that protects the population.  
The aim of such activity is to foster HN government capacity and legitimacy, build 
human security and stimulate economic activity.  Tasks that may fall to the military 
include: providing security for the population, restoration of essential services, 
support to economic and infrastructure development, establishment of interim 
governance and security of communication.  This military contribution within a 
unified and comprehensive approach sets those decisive conditions that allow 
security and stabilisation to flourish and sits at the heart of the COIN campaign.  
Civil and military actors must work together in a coordinated and integrated manner. 
 
0112. The success of both civil and military activities is determined in the cognitive realm 
and is a function of key target audiences perception, and the ability to match words 
                                                      
4 Definition of  “defeat” in accordance with ST 2287: “(To) diminish the effectiveness of the enemy, to the extent that he is either unable to 
participate in combat or at least cannot fulfil his intention“ 
5 This term and definition is being staffed within the context of this publication for ratification and will be proposed as a modification to the existing 
term in AAP-6. 
6 This term and definition is being staffed within the context of this publication for ratification and will be proposed as a modification to the existing 
term in AAP-6. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
1-4 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
with the deeds.  The synchronisation and coordination of inform
ation activities and 
public diplomacy are critical to the success of a COIN campaign.  Both insurgents 
and counterinsurgents attempt to gain the support of the population and the 
population has a critical role to play in the outcome of complex operations.  The 
support of the population must therefore be a key factor throughout the planning and 
execution of COIN campaigns.  As an insurgency tends to be nested within regional 
complexity, characterised by instability and conflict, it is essential that both the 
political and military apparatus address the strategic context of the operational 
environment to ensure that any political settlement is both enduring and self-
sustaining. 
 
0113. Part of the military contribution is likely to involve countering a mix of insurgency, 
terrorism, criminality and disorder.  For this reason, the threats to the security and 
stability of a state or region, and the variety of tasks the military may be called upon 
to perform, are wide-ranging.  The military increasingly operates alongside a 
proliferation of multi-agency and multinational actors to deliver a secure and stable 
environment.  Increased globalisation, changes in international systems, complex 
sovereignty issues, and the increasing number of transnational actors who seek to 
influence international outcomes and the governance of global affairs, demand a new 
approach.  While stability remains the decisive condition, the platform without which 
the state cannot prosper, the provision of security is the key element in delivering an 
enduring political settlement.  Within this context, COIN represents an important 
aspect of the overall military contribution at the tactical level and demands the 
employment of the full range of military activities
7; the application and employment 
of which must be guided by the “attributes of COIN”8. 
 
0114. The likelihood of success in a COIN campaign is a function not simply of the 
application of coherent military power against an opponent, but also of a range of 
wider factors, such as the uncertainties induced by unpredictable events, the interplay 
of chance and the vagaries of human nature.  It is therefore crucial, in order to 
identify opportunity and risk, that commanders understand fully the context in which 
military power is to be applied and the type of campaign in which they are engaged.  
Only then can commanders shape the situation to their advantage, learning, adapting 
and anticipating as the campaign evolves. 
 
The Operational Environment 
 
0115. For this publication, the operational environment can be described as composite of 
the conditions, circumstances, influences, characteristics and actors which affect the 
employment of military forces and bear on the decisions of the unit commander (and 
civil actors) and will differ with each military operation or campaign. 
 
0116. This publication describes a generic operational environment that NATO forces may 
encounter when conducting COIN.  The complexity of COIN requires commanders 
and their staffs to understand how non-military and potentially international 
organisations (IOs) and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) operate to achieve a 
stable and self-sustaining secure environment.  A NATO military response towards 
any conflict or crisis must therefore be integrated into a wider overall framework, or 
                                                      
7 AJP-3.2 describes military activities as - offensive, defensive, stability and enabling - all of which can be further broken down into land tactical 
activities. 
8 The attributes of COIN are described in Chapter 3, Part II.  Some nations refer to attributes as principles. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
1-5 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
collective strategy.  This collective strategy m
ust be planned and executed in practice 
through a comprehensive approach with unity of purpose and effort. 
 
0117. Although direct, open state-on-state conflict may be absent, the operational 
environment will continue to show a marked increase in the prevalence of irregular 
activities.  The growth of ungoverned space, fuelled by perceived or actual 
grievance, deprivation and resentment affects the sentiments and sensibilities of the 
global population.  Key drivers that may cause conflict include: 
 
a. globalisation and global inequality; 
b. urbanisation and changing demographic trends; 
c. re-emergence of extremist ideologies; 
d. access to technology, networks and cyberspace;  
e. humanitarian crises (including natural disasters); and 
f. competition for resources. 
 
A Comprehensive Approach 
 
0118. Complex crises do not lend themselves to simple definition or analysis. Today’s 
challenges demand a comprehensive approach by the international community, 
including the coordinated action from an appropriate range of civil and military 
actors, enabled by the orchestration, coordination and de-confliction of NATO’s 
political and military instruments with the other instruments of power. This needs to 
be a broader cooperation and planning in accordance with the principles and 
decisions of relevant senior NATO bodies.  NATO’s engagement in a comprehensive 
approach to crisis management is focused at three levels: 
a. At the political and strategic level, NATO concentrates on building confidence 
and mutual understanding between international actors. 
b. At the theatre level, NATO force commanders must be empowered to conduct 
effective cooperation and coordination with indigenous local authorities and 
other international actors in the execution of operations. 
c. At the operational level, the priority is to cooperate with other international 
actors in the overall planning for complex operations in which a large degree 
of civil-military interaction will be required. 
  All 3 levels must function in a co mplementary manner to achieve success.
9 
0119. Within a complex operational environment there is a need to proactively coordinate 
the activities of a wide range of actors.  A comprehensive approach seeks to 
stimulate a cooperative culture within a collaborative environment, while facilitating 
a shared understanding of the situation.  It should invigorate existing processes and 
strengthen relationships at the joint, inter-agency and multinational levels.  A 
comprehensive approach should also consider actors beyond government, such as 
NGOs, IOs and others all conduct activities that have a bearing on the overall 
outcome.  This is particularly relevant for land forces at all levels where they should 
expect to operate alongside these actors.  It should be clearly understood that NATO 
military forces do not own, nor should they expect to lead, this comprehensive 
                                                      
9 This section on comprehensive approach is based upon AJP-01(D) RD1. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
1-6 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
approach, but they should aim
 to foster and create those conditions where 
cooperation and collaboration support the campaign. 
 
Counterinsurgency and the Range of Military Activities 
 
0120. In general terms, armed forces operate through the use or threat of collective 
violence.  However, while military forces must be prepared to conduct high-intensity 
conflict, they must also be adaptive organisations capable of performing a wide 
variety of other activities, including humanitarian assistance, peace support, 
deterrence, and helping to reconstruct failed states through capacity building.  This 
last role has gained increased importance in the operational environment because the 
level of threat and violence frequently prevents civilian organisations from 
performing their development and capacity building tasks.  This environment and the 
increasing use of armed forces for security, military support to stabilisation activities 
and reconstruction efforts demand a re-examination of how we visualise the conduct 
of operations. 
 
0121. The range of military activities provides a framework for understanding the 
complexity of the operational environment while analysing, planning, and preparing 
for, executing and assessing operations.  Recent experiences have shown that 
campaigns and subordinate operations often require military forces to operate 
effectively across the spectrum of conflict.  Commanders cannot focus on a single 
activity or sequential progression.  Rather, they must be able to effectively visualise 
how a campaign or operation is likely to evolve over time and in light of changing 
circumstances throughout their area of operations (AOO).  Although they usually 
will not control civilian activities and may have limited influence upon them, 
commanders must nonetheless understand all military and civilian aspects of a 
comprehensive approach because of its impact upon the operational environment and 
resulting effects upon military requirements.  Campaign success is likely to depend 
on understanding such simultaneity, how it evolves throughout the campaign, and 
how it affects the planning and execution of activities.  All commanders, even at the 
lowest levels, must grasp this concept if military forces are to remain relevant and 
effective in the future. 
 
0122. All types of military activities can be conducted simultaneously, although some may 
be sequential - such as attack followed by defence.  The balance among the types of 
military activity employed gives a campaign its predominant character.  A major 
combat campaign theme may consist primarily of offensive activities, while COIN 
requires the measured application of offensive, defensive, stability and enabling 
tasks, cognizant of the effect one type of activity may have on the relative success of 
another.  Stability tasks must be planned for and resourced prior to the 
commencement of any campaign, as they represent an inevitable phase at a relatively 
early stage of any campaign, and its success will often require substantial lead time.

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED
CHAPTER 2 - THE OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
Section I - Operating Context 
 
0201. This chapter develops the understanding of the operational environment introduced 
in AJP-3.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations.  For the purpose of this 
publication, the operational environment is described as a composite of the 
conditions, circumstances, influences, characteristics and actors which affect the 
employment of military forces and bear on the decisions of the unit commander 
(and civil actors) and will differ with each military operation or campaign. 
This composite will consist of those elements found in a theatre of operations, such 
as the populace and their culture, and of some elements that will be imported such 
as the influence of transnational or international organisations, and Alliance forces 
themselves. 
 
0202. Understanding the complexity and interrelationships between elements of the 
operational environment is fundamental to both insurgent and counterinsurgent 
operations.  While this chapter addresses some of the generic aspects of the 
operational environment in isolation, the reader should be cognizant that the 
operational environment is truly dynamic, interconnected and constantly adapting 
to change.  The operational environment may be shaped deliberately or 
unintentionally by external factors and provides those conditions that allow 
irregular activity to flourish if left unchecked.  See Section II for additional 
information on the operational environment. 
 
Elements of a Stable State 
0203. It is important to examine the functionalities and norms that underpin a stable state, 
because it is the breakdown in these elements that generates state fragility and 
failure.  Figure 2.1 introduces a simple model that illustrates the elements of a 
stable state: human security, economic and infrastructure development; governance 
and the rule of law.  While these elements can be analysed individually, it is 
unhelpful and potentially distorting to view them as separate and discrete.  The 
stability of the state depends upon the manner in which the elements interact and 
are mutually supporting.  The three elements, underpinned by societal 
relationships, form the interdependent building blocks that make up a stable state. 
 
 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Figure 2.1 - Elem
ents of a Stable State 
0204. Security.  Security is characterised by freedom from persecution, want and fear; 
adequate provision of essential commodities such as water and food; broader 
environmental security; and the protection of private property, public assets and 
cultural values.  The ability to protect itself against this range of threats, and extend 
this protection to the population, is a vitally important competence and function of 
a stable state.  An inability to get produce to market, get children to school and to 
travel freely will have a direct impact on the confidence of the population.  These 
concepts are not absolute - perceptions matter.  Security can be broken down into 
human security, personal security, national security, and physical security. 
 
a. Human Security is characterised by: freedom from persecution, want and fear; 
adequate provision of essential commodities to sustain life; broader 
environmental security; and the protection of cultural values. 
 
b. Personal Security is that part of human security which ensures protection of 
an individual from persecution, intimidation, reprisals and other forms of 
systematic violence. 
 
c. National Security is the traditional understanding of security as encompassing 
the safety of a state or organisation and its protection from both external and 
internal threats. 
 
d. Physical Security is that part of National Security that relates to national assets 
and infrastructure. 
 
0205. Economic and Infrastructure Development.  The economic infrastructure, level 
of natural resources, degree of technological development, industrial base, 
communications network and level of government revenue will shape the ability of 
the state to provide stable governance.  Collectively these meet the needs and 
expectations of the population.  For members of the population, economic 
development determines their quality of life in terms of the ability to access jobs, 
basic commodities, health, education, adequate housing and reliable energy. 
 
0206. Governance and the Rule of Law.  The rule of law is fundamental to legitimate 
governance.  A stable state has a sustainable political structure that facilitates the 
peaceful resolution of internal contests for power.  In a functioning state, 
government and the institutions of civil society are able to provide security as well 
as the fiscal and judicial functions that are prerequisites for basic public 
administration and service delivery 
 
0207. Societal Relationships.  The three elements of a stable state encompass the 
substantive functionalities and competencies of the state.  However, the context is 
also fundamentally determined by the societal relationships that underpin and are 
interwoven with these elements.  In a stable state the social, cultural and 
ideological factors that bind society are broadly consistent with the manner in 
which state institutions discharge their responsibilities and gain consent from the 
population.  There will also be an enduring political settlem
ent that frames the 
manner in which political power is organised. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
State Insta
bility 
 
0208. Degradation of any of the elements of the state will lead to erosion of the others.  
This in turn creates a web of poor governance, economic breakdown and insecurity 
that stimulates and exacerbates conflict.  This may cause, or be caused by, a 
collapse in the political settlement that regulates key societal and state 
relationships.  Despite huge contextual variations - and every situation will be 
different - there will be a downward spiral of state stability.  This can be 
characterised by decline or disintegration at the nexus where human security, 
economic development, governance and the rule of law meets and the consequent 
unravelling of the political settlement.  Figure 2.2 illustrates this downward spiral. 
 
 
Figure 2.2 - Fragile States: the Downward Spiral 
0209. When states become unstable to the point where effective governance begins to 
break down, the effects can be felt not only locally, but regionally and even 
globally.  Initially, the impact is felt by the local population, as the inability of the 
state to perform its core functions leads to the previously described downward 
spiral of insecurity, economic decline and weak governance.  This instability is 
likely to have a regional impact if displaced persons flow across borders and 
become refugees and transnational criminal networks and other irregular activists 
flourish in the ungoverned spaces10 that arise.  The existence of these ungoverned 
spaces are attractive to irregular activists as it potentially allows them to recruit, 
organise and plan their activities untroubled by state or international authorities. 
                                                      
10 “Ungoverned space” refers to areas that are not effectively governed by a state authority. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Vulnerabilities of Governance and Authority 
 
0210. A state’s authority is dependent upon the successful am algamation and interplay of 
the following four factors: 
a. Mandate.  Mandate refers to the perceived leg itimacy that establishes a state 
authority, whether through the principles of universal suffrage, a recognised or 
accepted caste/tribal model, or an authoritarian rule. 
b. Manner.  Manner refers to the perceived legitim acy of the way in which those 
exercising that mandate conduct themselves, both individually and collectively. 
c. Support and Consent.  Support and consent refer to the extent to which 
factions, local populations and others com
ply with, or resist the authority of 
those exercising the mandate.  The level of consent may range from active 
resistance, through unwilling compliance, to freely given support. 
d. Expectations.  Expectations refer to the exten t to which the expectations and 
aspirations of factions, local populations and others are managed or are met by 
those exercising the mandate. 
0211. When the relationship between the governing and the governed breaks down, 
challenges to authority are likely.  If a section of the population cannot achieve a 
rem
edy for a significant concern through established political discourse, it may 
resort to irregular activity.  If successful, even on a small scale, this irregular 
activity might be able to garner increased popular support and develop into an 
insurgency. 
Section II Variable Factors of the Operational Environment 
 
0212. An assessment of the operational environm ent likely describes the conditions in 
which instability and a resulting insurgency can take place and may subsequently 
flourish. To enable a greater understanding of these conditions and to enhance 
assessment the operational environment is theoretically divided into six discrete 
environments: political, human, physical, security, information and economic (see 
Figure 2.3).  In practice, however, these environments are dynamically interrelated.  
All aspects of the operational environment require careful consideration within the 
estimate process so that a military commander may maximise operational 
awareness and potentially influence the factors that impact on the strategy of a 
comprehensive approach. It is important to understand that these environments are 
formed, led and influenced by human beings, either individually or as a group 
(government, etc). These human beings and groups are addressed as actors.  Partly 
they will occur within this section on the variable factors and partly they will be 
described in section III. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-5 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
Figure 2.3 Variables of the Operational Environment  
 
The Political Environment 
 
0213. Political environments differ significantly from  one region to another, and the 
difficulties of conducting operations in any one environment are likely to be unique 
for each situation.  For instance, the political pressure on an HN government could 
take the form of internal political struggles, regional political pressures, religious 
and ideological issues, and traditional and/or cultural issues.  It could be further 
complicated by the mere presence of NATO forces or by the consequences of 
actions by NATO-led forces in-theatre.   
0214. NATO forces need to be aware of the political environm ent, and the perceptions of 
the populations living in these areas, in order to place military actions into a 
strategic context.  An action taken against one state or region may generate 
reactions in other parts of the world.  An awareness of these potential links will 
also help a commander and his staff to appreciate the implications of military 
actions throughout their area of interest.  Mandate and legitimacy are essential in 
maintaining Alliance cohesion, because without these two important principles an 
alliance cannot enjoy the support of the HN and international community, and this 
will inevitably erode the level of support from respective home populations. 
0215. Political oversight and even inte
 rvention in military matters is a reality, which 
means that virtually all military activity is subject to scrutiny by supporters and 
hostile groups.  Decisions and actions rarely affect a single level of military 
operation; for example, an action at the tactical level may generate an effect 
(positive or negative) at the strategic level.  Within COIN this is very evident.  
Nevertheless, a commander will need to be well informed of political 
developments, and to be ready for rapid changes in a political situation that may 
have serious consequences for military forces.   
The Human Environment  
 
0216. The human environment encompasses groups and potential actors, including the 
opponent th
at military forces will need to understand and/or influence if military 
forces are to operate effectively and support the HN in achieving success.  At the 
same time, opponents will seek to exercise influence by both lethal and nonlethal 
public actions, propaganda, use of the international media and other suitable means 
to dominate the local population and use them to their cause. 
0217. Groups.  Potential allian ces can form or change rapidly during the course of an 
operation or campaign.  The nature and description of individual actors within the 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-6 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
operational environm
ent are covered in Section III.  Everyone present has the 
potential to influence the course of events in ways which may be positive or 
negative.  The commander will strive to understand the full range of actors; their 
motivations, aspirations, interests and relationships.  Actors can be divided into 
four categories based on their aims, methods and relationships, including positive, 
neutral, negative and hostile. 
a. Positive.  Those in this category will generally see the HN governm ent as both 
legitimate and beneficial and will be supportive of their actions.  They would 
be expected to include members of the HN government and its institutions, 
including the judiciary, the police, the armed forces and other internal security 
forces.  These institutions are liable to infiltration by groups opposed to either 
the HN government or NATO intervention. 
b. Neutrals.  Neutrality covers those who m ay stop short of active opposition to 
the host government at the one end, through passive consent, to those who 
support it but with reservations at the other.  The conflict produces uncertainty 
for neutral actors with the potential for both risk and reward.  Groups in this 
category will often play a critical role in the campaign, especially if they 
constitute a large proportion of the population.  Historically, the passive 
acquiescence of neutrals has proven to be vital to the success of an insurgency.  
This group cannot be expected to support the HN government until it has 
clearly shown that it is likely to prevail. 
c. Negative.  T
 hose in this category oppose the HN authority but their day-to-day 
behaviour stops short of violence against that authority.  Those who adopt a 
negative stance will do so for a variety of reasons.  These will range from 
historical grievance, ideology or religion, to nationalism or animosity based on 
personal experience.  They will seek to utilise the political settlement to 
achieve their aims.  They are the element of the population from whom the 
more violent activists will attempt to draw their support base, but who will not 
automatically be prepared to provide that support.  Guarding against these 
individuals becoming the next generation of insurgents will have as much to do 
with our behaviour as with that of the hostile groups. 
d. Hostile.  Those in this category are actively and violently opposed to the HN 
governm
ent and NATO forces.  They will view violence as a legitimate means 
to their ends.  However, even amongst those who are in this category there will 
be reconcilable and irreconcilable elements.  Hostile groups may choose to 
utilise the political settlement in addition to violent means to achieve their 
aims. 
0218. Leadership and Authority.  The leading personalities, som etimes referred to as 
competing elites, within the human environment will differ from state to state or 
region to region depending on culture, education, religion and political beliefs.  
This results in a complex linkage by which authority and power may be exercised.  
This is of relevance, as the allegiance of a group may not be to a head of state but 
to someone else inside or outside the state borders.  Respect for these elites, either 
chiefs or elders, for example, is traditionally maintained in many states.  These 
elites may have been influenced or marginalised by other individuals such as 
insurgents, warlords or criminals.  Nevertheless, a commander should endeavour to 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-7 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
discover who the elites are, as they are likely to have knowledge of and exert 
inf
luence in the community. 
0219. Cultural Awareness.  It is necessary to respect cultural and religious differences, 
and every ef
fort should be made to avoid causing offence.  Consequently, adequate 
time needs to be allocated to cultural awareness training prior to deployment in the 
AOO.  The consequences of cultural insensitivity are an increased risk of isolation 
of military forces by the local population and provide opportunities for exploitation 
by an adversary. 
0220. The beneficial effect of service men and wom en being able to communicate using 
local languages, at all levels of competence, can never be underestimated.  
Linguists with high levels of competence may not normally be available on a 
routine basis, but low levels of linguistic competence are still useful because local 
interpreters may not always be available, and it demonstrates a measure of cultural 
appreciation to the local population. 
0221. Cultural Structures.  A n understanding of what is termed the “key leader” culture 
is important and can bring together culture, education, history, religion and 
political beliefs.  Societies which, at face value, appear less developed are very 
likely to have highly complex societal structures where role and position are 
reinforced from the very lowest family level to the highest tribal or clan level.  The 
role of fathers and brothers within a family can be as important as that of tribal or 
village elders.  A religious leader may also have as much respect and attention 
within a community or regional area as the titular leaders.  However, it may be 
necessary to consider carefully the influence of religion in any particular 
community before being involved too closely with any religious group.  Some 
extremists consider that there should be a rejection of modern lifestyle and the 
perceived decadence, corruption and promiscuity that can accompany it. 
0222. Cultural Considerations within Planning.  The cultu ral aspects of the human 
environment must be included in the planning of operations.  A picture as clear as 
possible is required from government authorities to determine not just insurgent 
strengths but other cultural nuances and influences which can be brought to bear 
and have potential influence and effect to aid a military commander. 
The Physical Environment 
 
0223. General.  T he challenges posed by operating in any physical environment are 
different, with the geography and climate of each environment exerting an 
influence on the conduct and nature of military operations.  Irregular activists and 
adversaries have demonstrated an understanding that open, unpopulated terrain 
favours a sophisticated military force by allowing it to employ its advantages in 
manoeuvre, reconnaissance and long-range, precision-guided weapons.  Irregular 
activists attempt to reduce these advantages by adopting “interior lines” that are 
likely to take advantage of constraints on operating these weapons systems.  This 
could be manifested, for example, by operating in more complex and close terrain 
amongst civilians.  Urban areas offer the most complex terrain and provide the 
adversary with the capability to offset conventional military capability and to 
operate with more prospect of success both locally and by making use of 
international media facilities, normally located in urban areas. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-8 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0224. Expansion of Urban Areas.  In m any rapidly developing cities, the slums and 
shanty towns are growing twice as fast as the city as a whole.  Operations in these 
areas can be made more difficult because of the transient populations and 
temporary structure.  The conditions in urban areas will give rise to grievances and 
long-standing rivalries, and could well be the cause of future political instability.  
A commander will need to be cognizant of the possibility that COIN operations in 
urban areas may lead to increased collateral damage and the potential loss of 
goodwill and consent. 
0225. Climate and Seasonal Weather Patterns.  NATO f orces will need to operate in 
all seasons, by day and night.  An adverse change in the weather could add 
difficulty to all aspects of observation and movement, thereby increasing risk and 
encouraging the simplification of military activity.  A sophisticated insurgent will 
monitor the responses to climatic variations and will seek to take advantage of any 
perceived weakness to either: support the local population through activities such 
as harvesting crops or to plan for offensives or pauses to correspond to the 
appropriate season. 
0226. Infrastructure.  Natura
 l resources and infrastructure form part of the physical 
environment and vary significantly by region and state.  Transport infrastructure 
will affect movement and provide a channelling effect which can be used by any 
side.  Other national or regional infrastructures may be targeted to demonstrate 
offensive capability or to have a psychological effect on the population.  Natural 
resources may also be targeted for destruction, or illicitly used for the creation of 
wealth to fund irregular activities.  Existing HN infrastructure that enables a 
normal routine for the population will materially assist HN and NATO efforts to 
gain the support of the local population.  If the infrastructure is vulnerable and 
subject to attack, it will be harder for consent to be obtained and legitimacy to be 
maintained. 
0227. Commanders need to realise that a weak HN infrastructure brings vulnerability and 
m
any pressures to bear on the NATO force, because support for rebuilding and 
redevelopment can be complicated and resource consuming.  Commanders have to 
realise that it is typically not their mission to reconstruct the country, but to support 
the re-establishment of basic services, and to contribute to the overall 
reconstruction by establishing and maintaining a secure and stable environment.  In 
the short term quick-impact projects can be beneficial, but commanders should 
ensure that such efforts support a comprehensive approach to the overall 
reconstruction programme.  If such a programme has not emerged, commanders 
should work within a comprehensive approach to generate one if possible. 
The Security Environment 
 
0228. The key element of the security environment is the security s
 ector that is comprised 
of the individuals and institutions responsible for the safety and security of the HN 
and the population.  This often includes the military and any state-sponsored 
paramilitary forces; national and local police; the justice and corrections systems; 
coastal and border security forces; oversight bodies; and militia and private 
military and security companies employed by the state.  The security sector 
represents the foundation of effective, legitimate governance and the potential of 
the state for enduring viability. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-9 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0229. Not all military actors, or perceived military acto rs, conduct themselves with the 
level of professionalism of NATO forces.  Moreover, they do not always act in 
accordance with international law, particularly the LOAC, and the customs of war.  
The prior actions of armed, uniformed elements may make initial engagement with 
the local community quite difficult for many civilians because it is virtually 
impossible to distinguish between one uniform and another.  Considerable time and 
patience may be required for on-scene NATO forces to build a workable rapport 
with the local community in order to gain a credible understanding of all issues that 
affect local inhabitants.  Some of the key actors within the security environment are 
described as follows: 
a. Foreign Military Forces.  Foreign m ilitary forces are military elements of 
other nations influencing or operating within the borders of the HN and may be 
friendly or hostile to NATO forces.  These forces may be present due to a 
request for intervention or assistance, or by aggressive military action.   
b. Alliance Force.  A NATO-led force, operating under a United Nations (U
 N) 
mandate, may be formed in order to respond to operations across the full 
spectrum of conflict.  The Alliance objectives will be pursued and realised by 
the armed forces of two or more nations working towards an agreed end state.  
NATO-led operations may involve a large number of military forces with 
differing capabilities, each representing their own national interests and 
possibly having limited experience in their dealings with each other.  National 
caveats can have a significant influence on the planning and execution of 
NATO-led operations. 
c. Embassy Military Staff.  Many em
 bassies and high commissions have 
military staff.  This staff has responsibilities that range from ceremonial duties 
to the development of closer bilateral military relations. 
d. Military Advisers to Host Nation.  Foreign m ilitary advisors may be 
operating within the HN.  These advisers will be professional military from 
another nation that is providing training or other assistance under bilateral 
arrangements. 
e. Host Nation Security Forces.  HN security forces are those forces raised, 
trained and sustained by the HN to provide protection from
 external threats and 
maintain security and stability within the state.  These forces comprise the 
HN’s security sector.  These forces may include military services such as the 
army, navy, marines, coastguard and air force, as well as internal intelligence 
forces, border guards, customs officials and law enforcement personnel.  
Paramilitary forces may also be present, and they may or may not be 
considered part of the HN’s formal security sector.  These paramilitary forces 
typically have responsibility for internal security and may focus on protecting a 
certain segment of the population or region.  Depending on the circumstances, 
security sector reform (SSR) may be required to foster long-term security, 
stabilisation, legitimacy and the rule of law.   
f. Former Host Nation Military Forces.  In a post-conflict or fragile state 
situation, an
 HN may have to conduct disarmament, demobilisation and 
reintegration (DDR) for some security forces.  DDR in COIN often focuses on 
former insurgents who have defected, sought amnesty and/or reconciled.  DDR 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-10 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
m
ay also focus on standing paramilitary forces that may challenge long-term 
HN government control or even sovereignty.  Depending on the organisation of 
and the support for DDR efforts, former military personnel may have retained 
their uniforms, weapons and equipment.  More importantly, they may still have 
significant grievances with the HN government or segments of the population. 
The Information Environment 
 
0230. A globalised media and the proliferation of information collectors add an 
unavoidable transparency to all activ
ities conducted during military operations.  
Reports of military actions are available to all who have access to the Internet, 
television, radio or global networks, and this information can be used by the 
adversary to great effect.  Within the information environment NATO forces 
should seek to employ information activities within a comprehensive framework 
utilising the positive dominant narrative of the campaign.  This narrative and 
associated themes enable NATO forces to maintain consistency and manage how 
the general public understands specific events.  Adversaries and their supporters 
will exploit military mistakes and failures, no matter how minor, and fill any 
information gap between military action and supporting statements using 
propaganda and disinformation to persuade a local population to support their 
cause while undermining the HN government and military authorities in the area.  
Allowing irregular adversaries the upper hand in information activities creates 
significant difficulties for commanders when conducting operations amongst and in 
support of a population.  In the process of taking action, it is essential that the 
military’s public response is accurate, truthful, timely and consistent with the 
dominant narrative. 
0231. While adversaries may not support freedom of the m
 edia and other agencies, they 
will invariably make use of them for their own purposes.  NATO forces will have 
to be aware of this and ensure that their actions are capable of withstanding 
subsequent intense and detailed media scrutiny.  Even the most carefully planned 
and well conducted operation can be turned into a negative event by the adversary, 
when played out in the media. 
0232. The Internet enables the widespread dissem
 ination of religious, political and 
cultural doctrine and material, some of which has been extreme in nature, resulting 
in the recruitment of fanatical and dedicated followers across the world and also 
from the immediate theatre of operations.  The Internet provides easy access to 
technical information on weapons design, employment and military tactical 
publications. 
0233. Although access to modern communication technology has enhanced an 
adversa
ry’s capability and flexibility for irregular activities, it also makes them 
vulnerable as reliance on this technology enables NATO forces to locate them and 
monitor their activities.  In urban areas, less advanced and even primitive weapon 
systems, such as roadside bombs utilising precision-machined components, may 
still find effective uses.  Technical information for the development of effective 
low-cost weapon systems is widely available and enables an insurgent to develop 
and adapt resources to match the activities of NATO forces. 
0234. Irregular adversaries could exploit local knowledge and inform
 ation more readily 
than NATO forces.  As such, it is critical for NATO forces to acquire good local 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-11 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
knowledge to support tactical m
ilitary operations, which is an inherently human 
activity requiring time and effort.  Likewise, NATO forces need to use public 
affairs activities and information activities in the AOO and elsewhere with at least 
as much vigour as an adversary. 
The Economic Environment 
 
0235. States can move between stability and instability as econom ic and political 
conditions change.  External influences can have a direct effect on a state’s ability 
to develop economically and, depending on the nature of the influence, this can 
increase competition with other states in the region.  Within a state or region there 
will generally be an economic divide between those that “have” and those that 
“have not” resulting in additional tensions that could give rise to serious threats to 
stability.  Global, regional or interstate competition for natural resources will 
increase friction: interruptions to the flow of natural resources or commercial 
supplies by one state may ultimately result in conflict with another.  There may 
also be other direct consequences of such actions, including the inability of a state 
to farm effectively or of its industry to function competitively, resulting in a loss of 
trade and an increase in unemployment.  States whose economies depend overly on 
one material or resource can be particularly sensitive to changes in supply, price or 
volatility in global markets. 
0236. The economic superiority of a state, rather than its m ilitary capability, may be 
critical to regional dominance.  In addition, a strong economic position allows a 
state or groups within the state to buy technology or to conduct more prolonged 
military operations.  Economics directly influences the relationship between states 
and between individual state (and non-state) actors at the regional or global level.  
Such relationships can result in military or political assistance being offered, or 
conversely could lead to increases in tension which might result in conflict.  Such 
tensions may also undermine any security environment established by military 
forces. 
0237. Awareness of the economic environment may e
 nable suitable actions to be taken 
by a military force in order to decrease tensions.  There is a direct link between 
effective security operations and the promotion of stability, reduced crime, 
economic migrations and an increased sense of general assurance.  The effects of 
such actions should be maximised through influencing suitable target audiences.  
External economic influences can also have a destabilising influence, just as 
external economic assistance can help develop and sustain a state.  Successful 
operations may well depend more on improving local and national economies 
rather than on the force used to ensure a state’s security. 
Section III - Actors 
 
0238. General.  In addition to actors such as the HN population, its security forces and 
NATO forces, it is appropriate to describe the various types of
 other actors11 that a 
commander is likely to interact with when dealing with irregular activities, and 
particularly insurgency.  It is possible that some actors will have been in the theatre 
long before any military forces arrive and hence their views, opinions and concerns 
                                                      
11 Actor refers to all parties and stakeholders that are part of the operational environment and either directly or indirectly have a share, take part, or 
influence the outcome. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-12 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
could be significant to a commander developing an understanding of the 
environm
ent.  The influence each actor has needs to be understood together with 
the parameters within which they operate.  In particular, it is necessary to know the 
degree to which formal control and coordination can be achieved, the 
appropriateness of civil-military cooperation (CIMIC) and the levels required. 
0239. Any situation where there is instability that spawns an insurgency is likely to have 
a m
ultitude of HN participants, including security forces, other government 
agencies and NGOs including religious, charitable, social, and business groups.  If 
not initially, then over time, external sponsors typically support one side or the 
other, especially as an insurgency grows.  Inevitably there will be humanitarian 
issues or international concerns that can bring IO involvement.  HN and third-party 
organisations (for example some NGOs and IOs) can have both public and private 
interests and objectives that are generally in accord with, but might conflict with, 
the accomplishment of national political and military objectives.  Maintaining 
awareness of third-party activity will be challenging for NATO forces, as some 
organisations may not wish to have direct contact with military forces because it 
could compromise their own position and role.  Military tasks may result from the 
links with third-party participants.  Liaison with the other groups can lead to entry 
points for military activity; equally, information sharing can improve situational 
awareness. 
0240. Host Nation Civil Authorities.  HN sovereignty is potentially one of the m
 ost 
difficult issues for a commander during COIN operations, both in regard to forces 
contributed by other states and the HN.  Often, in addition to traditional military 
command practices, a commander is required to lead through coordination, 
communication and consensus, where political sensitivities have to be 
acknowledged, understood and managed.  It is important to remember that the two 
most important precepts of COIN are protecting the population and promoting the 
legitimacy of the HN government.  When pursuing lesser or supporting objectives, 
commanders must be cognisant of the potential for undermining these two primary 
objectives.  This may be particularly challenging if the HN is unable to provide 
protection and basic services to the population and is widely perceived as 
incompetent and/or corrupt. 
0241. Legal matters need to be carefully considered and m
 anaged, as they have the 
potential to impede the development of important relationships with key personnel 
and organisations and may affect the actual or perceived legitimacy of the 
counterinsurgent force as well as its operations.  Particular attention should be paid 
to such matters within the following areas: 
a. ports and airports security control; 
b. basing; 
c. border crossings;  
d. collecting and sharing information;  
e. protection of the security forces;  
f. jurisdiction over members of the Allied and multinational forces;  
g. location and access;  
h. operations in territorial waters, both sea and internal;  
i. overflight rights;  
j. transport systems and associated legal regulations;  

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-13 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
k. policing and/or security activities - detection, detention, arrest and penal and 
justice authority and procedures;  
l. enf
orcing compliance with the law of armed conflict and human rights law 
as well as supporting the prosecution of the perpetrators of war crimes and 
crimes against humanity; and 
m. status of forces agreements (SOFAs). 
 
0242. A commander should employ all aspects related to CIMIC in order to create 
coordinating procedures, such as establishing committees or providing liaison 
officers, to facilitate coo
peration and build trust with the HN authorities, whose 
representatives should have leading roles in such arrangements for reasons that 
include bolstering the HN’s legitimacy.  These organisations can facilitate 
operations by reducing sensitivities and misunderstandings while removing 
impediments.  National issues can be formally resolved with the HN by developing 
appropriate technical agreements to augment existing or recently developed 
SOFAs.  In many cases, security assistance organisations, NGOs and IOs have 
detailed local knowledge and reservoirs of goodwill that can help establish a 
positive and constructive relationship with the HN.  Building relationships takes 
time but, while confidence is being instilled, tolerance of a the presence of a NATO 
force can be used up if other measures are not put in place or are not seen to be 
effective. 
0243. Coordination and support should be established down to local levels such as 
villages and neighbourhoods.  A comm
ander and his staff should be aware of the 
political and social structures in their AOOs.  During many COIN efforts, evidence 
of national level governance will be weak or missing at the regional and local 
levels.  Commanders should work to build linkages between the periphery and the 
central government and try to avoid becoming a long term surrogate for the HN.  
“Bottom-up” efforts should be joined to “top-down” efforts to the extent possible. 
0244. International Organisations.  IOs are described as organisations created by a 
for
mal agreement (e.g. a treaty) between two or more governments.  They may be 
established on a global, regional or functional basis for wide-ranging or narrowly 
defined purposes and are normally formed to protect and promote national interests 
shared by member states.  The most notable example is the UN.  Regional 
organisations such as the Organisation of American States and the European Union 
and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) may be 
involved in some forms of stability operations.  The UN in particular has many 
subordinate and affiliated agencies active worldwide.  Depending on the situation 
and HN needs, any number of UN organisations may be present, such as the 
following: 
a. The Office of the Chief of Humanitarian Affairs;  
b. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations;  
c. The World Food Programme;  
d. The UN High Commissioner for Refugees (known as UNHCR);  
e. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights; and  
f. The UN Development Programme. 
 
0245. A commander will have to ensure that coordination, liaison and any collaboration 
with IOs is harm
onised, where possible, to suit the strategic aims for conducting a 
COIN operation, because IOs are not a subordinate actor and need to be aware of 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-14 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
and included in any planning in the cam
paign.  The opportunities to have the active 
assistance of IOs could pay handsome dividends in the international arena, and 
efforts to enlist their cooperation should not be overlooked. In its interaction with 
non-NATO actors, NATO will continue to act in accordance with the 
implementation of the Comprehensive Approach Action Plan (Ref p). 
0246. Alliance and Coalition Governments.  Other go vernments from Allied nations 
may also be in the operational area (OA).  Allied governments are those 
governments which, for the purposes of the situation, have agreed to act together as 
Alliance or coalition partners.  The aim of any alliance or coalition is to achieve 
unity of purpose and unity of effort which takes account of national priorities and 
constraints.  However, it is important for a commander to note whatever the 
situation, it is usual to have some form of liaison or at least contact with each 
government or military force represented in the OA. 
0247. Non-governmental Organisations.  NGOs are legally different from
  UN agencies 
and international bodies.  “NGO” is an official term used in Article 71 of the UN 
Charter to describe a wide range of primarily non-profit organisations motivated by 
humanitarian and religious values that are usually independent of governments, the 
UN and the commercial sector.  The term “NGO” encapsulates a diverse group of 
interests, including thousands of very different organisations, varying in size, 
maturity, expertise, quality and mission.  Increasingly, NGOs are used by national 
and international donors as effective and non-political agencies in any campaign 
area.  The larger the NGO is in terms of staff and the resources available, the 
greater the need to deconflict military action with NGO activities. 
0248. NGO tasks might range from a general remit to “alleviate poverty” to a specific 
m
ission to “support health care services in communities affected by insurgency”.  
An NGO’s mission is usually underwritten by values or principles that guide their 
conduct and which may be expressed in terms of human rights, emphasising that 
their work promotes rights to life, food, water, health and freedom of expression. 
0249. The profusion of NGOs in an AOO means that coordination and cooperation are 
becom
ing increasingly complicated and have taken an increasing amount of time to 
resolve.  In the early part of an insurgency some NGOs will generally form some 
kind of network umbrella group or consortium.  As an insurgency escalates and the 
number of NGOs and donor funding potentially increase, there will be a 
commensurate increase in the need for better coordination, driven by the 
requirements of accountability and donor involvement.  This has the potential to 
develop into competition for funding and other resources which can distort 
relationships and cause friction.  The need to counteract such pressures places a 
practical emphasis on regular liaison and communication at all levels in as 
comprehensive a manner as possible. 
0250. There can be an inherent tension between NGOs and military forces due to 
organisational m
isunderstandings and different cultures.  NGOs will generally try 
to provide impartial support to the HN population, but may unintentionally provide 
material support to insurgents.  Military forces will be eager to prevent insurgents 
from taking advantage of NGO support for material gain and may control access or 
transportation networks critical for NGOs to fulfil their mission.  Using a 
cooperative approach will greatly enhance the ability of NATO forces to 
understand NGOs, develop mutual understanding, share information and 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-15 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
coordinate activities.  However, some NGOs by way of conscience will not wish to 
be seen with
, or perceived as cooperating with military forces.  Commanders 
should develop an understanding of their position, and some means should be 
developed by which activities are deconflicted through a third party such as the 
UN. 
0251. Commercial Organisations.  Multin ational corporations are often engaged in 
reconstruction, economic development and governance activities under contract 
from supporting governments.  These companies are, or could become part of the 
redevelopment of the state and should be part of the HN’s overall plan for 
development.  As a minimum, military commanders should know which companies 
are present in their AOO and where those companies are conducting business.  
There are also many businesses that sell expertise in areas related to supporting 
governance, economics, education and other aspects of civil society.  Providing 
capabilities similar to some NGOs, these firms often obtain contracts through 
government agencies. 
0252. Private Security Companies.  Increasing threats from  insurgent forces and/or 
criminal elements against civil actors have created a demand for private security 
companies.  These companies may act in support of IOs, NGOs, multinational 
corporations, the media or others who are prepared to pay for protection.  The 
standards of contract security are extremely diverse, from former highly trained 
special forces to untrained armed thugs.  Contract security personnel uniform and 
arm themselves as they deem fit for their task.  This has resulted in contract 
security personnel wearing uniforms and carrying military-style weapons, and thus 
obscuring the distinction between contractors and the military.  Guidance should be 
issued that provides instructions and advice on the provision of facilities, including 
medical care, the sharing of information, the coordination of operations and 
oversight.  This will require some adaptation of military procedures.   
0253. Media.  In as m uch as all military activities are open to public scrutiny and may be 
misrepresented by the media, commanders should ensure that adequate public 
affairs coordination with the media is conducted to maintain a working relationship 
and to not compromise current and future military operations.  Appropriate media 
guidelines should be issued and control measures in place.  Commanders must plan 
for media interaction and consider embedding media representatives at applicable 
levels, conducting regular press conferences and investing time and resources into 
developing a military-media relationship beneficial to both parties.  Understanding 
that the media can influence operations by shaping public opinion and perhaps 
adversary perceptions is critical in COIN.  All public affairs information should be 
timely and must be accurate. 
Section IV - The Relationship between Insurgency and Irregular Activity 
 
0254. For the purposes of this publication the term  “irregular activity” is defined as: “the 
use or threat, of force, by irregular forces, groups or individuals, frequently 
ideologically or criminally motivated, to effect or prevent change as a challenge to 
governance and authority.”  
0255. As explained in Chapter 1, insurgency is considered an irregular activity, carried 
out by an organised group or m
ovement.  Terrorists, especially transnational 
terrorists, and criminal enterprises may align with an insurgency to take advantage 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-16 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
of the unstable situation, or an insurgency m
ay include some forms of terrorism 
and major criminal activities to reach its desired end state.  Chapter 3 gives a more 
detailed explanation.  This section discusses the relationship between the various 
irregular activities, the special place of insurgency and also extra attention for 
terrorism, because of the strong links between these two types of irregular 
activities. 
0256. Irregular activities become significant when the y challenge authority or assume 
proportions that normal law enforcement cannot contain.  From that point they 
form the basis for irregular threats in all parts of the operational environment that 
may include not only a state, but perhaps other regional partners.  The threat of 
vulnerable states and regions may trigger multinational intervention (e.g. NATO 
forces).  Irregular activities may be divided into: 
a. Insurgency.  The essentials of insurgency and COIN are the main focus of the 
remainder of this publication and are therefore not addressed here. 
 
b. Terrorism.  Terrorism is defined as the unlawful use or threatened use of force 
or violence against individuals or property in an attempt to coerce or intimidate 
governments or societies to achieve political, religious or ideological 
objectives
12.  Terrorist attacks generally create disproportionate effects on 
target population.  Terrorist tactics may range from individual assassinations to 
mass murder bombings, and some terrorists have avowed to obtain and employ 
weapons of mass destruction.  As stated in MC 472 NATO Military Concept 
for Defence against Terrorism (26 September 08), NATO's military 
contribution to defence against terrorism will be in the form of Antiterrorism 
(defensive measures used to reduce the vulnerability of forces, individuals and 
property to terrorism), Consequence Management (providing military support 
to national authorities in dealing with the consequences of the terrorist attacks), 
Counterterrorism (offensive measures used to reduce the vulnerability of 
forces, individuals and property to terrorism) and Military Cooperation 
(interaction with other nations and international organisations as well as 
national civil authorities). 
 
c. Criminality.  Criminality pervades those states where governance is weak to 
nonexistent, and it seeks monetary gains unhindered by authority.  It may 
coexist with other types of irregular activity.  Trafficing in narcotics, arms, and 
human beings, as well as piracy are significant forms of criminal activities in 
unstable regions.  The more blatant the criminal activity, such as piracy, the 
greater the requirement for an unstable haven from which to operate.  A careful 
analysis of major criminal activities will need to be made and incorporated into 
any theatre assessments. 
 
d. Disorder.  Civil disobedience is the refusal to obey civil laws in an effort to 
induce change in governmental policy or legislation.  It seeks to disrupt or 
challenge authority, or draws an issue to the attention of the authorities as a 
result of some form of discontent or perceived injustice.  Civil disobedience is 
characterised by the use of passive resistance or other nonviolent means such 
as protest marches and sit-ins.  If the authorities mishandle or overreact to the 
situation, it may lead to rioting and more violent forms of protest.  Such 
                                                      
12 This definition is from AAP-6, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-17 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
em
otions and demonstrations of disorder may provide excellent recruiting 
grounds for insurgents and extremists, especially when authorities overreact. 
 
e. Subversion.  Subversion undermines the military, economic, psychological or 
political strength or morale of a governing authority.  Subversion is most 
effective when consistently conducted over a long period.  Non-violent 
subversive efforts include the use of political fronts, propaganda, agitation, 
infiltration of government agencies, and non-violent civil unrest.  All wilful 
acts that are intended to be detrimental to the best interests of the government 
but do not fall into the categories of treason, sedition, sabotage, or espionage 
are generally considered as in the category of subversive activity.   
 
0257. Unlike common banditry, crime, or recreational brigandage and hooliganism , 
insurgent groups need popular support.  For an insurgency to mobilise and grow, it 
has to have a core grievance which is viewed as legitimate and which often has a 
source of ideological inspiration but could also be founded in criminal ambitions. 
0258. Many forms of other irregular activities enjoy a s
 ymbiotic relationship with 
insurgency.  Nonetheless, insurgents may well appear to conduct perfectly 
legitimate/legal activities whilst dissociating itself from irregular activity, 
undertaking such functions through a proxy.  Insurgency, like irregular activity, is 
not constrained by the rule of law, but is likely to share a common centre of gravity 
(COG) with those prosecuting COIN, namely, the consent and support of the 
population. 
0259. As such, insurgents take full advantage of the operational environm
 ent, seeking 
political change through persuasion and coercion of the population, focused on 
highlighting and exacerbating perceived or real core grievances, while both 
insurgents and other irregular activists fix the authorities through irregular 
activities such as terrorism, criminality, disorder, piracy and others.  It can be 
challenging to determine whether, in countering irregular activity one is dealing 
with a group motivated by an ideology or simply a tactic employed by groups, as 
criminality, disorder and terrorism may simply be a tactic employed by an 
insurgent. 
Section V - The Capability of Irregular Activists 
 
0260. General.  T he intellectual, physical and mo ral components of fighting power 
provide a useful framework for understanding the capabilities of insurgents and 
other groups engaged in irregular activities. 
0261. Intellectual.  It would be naïve to believe that irregular activists do not develop, 
espouse and practise their own doctrine.  They have becom
e astute practitioners of 
the propaganda of the deed and implementers of a strategy of provocation.  
Moreover, there are examples of insurgents applying doctrine and operational 
lessons from other insurgents, military organisations (even NATO), and sources 
available on the Internet.   
0262. Irregular activists have also demonstrated a soun
 d knowledge of the use of 
information to achieve wide-area and local objectives with selective targeting, in 
time and space, issuing communiqués, videos and bulletins via websites and 
mobile telephones, in some cases from their own media sections.  This propaganda 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-18 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
is intended to underm
ine the legitimacy of the government and is also designed to 
penetrate sub-cultures and communities within developed states, which are fertile 
grounds for support and recruits, especially in unassimilated, marginalised and 
resentful immigrant groups. 
0263. Networks of friendship, kinship and acquaintance stretch worldwide and are based 
on common cultural influences, id
eologies and shared experiences.  They are 
sometimes reinforced by specialised training, financial requirements and mutual 
obligations.  Many individuals move across ideologically mutually sympathetic 
organisations and increasingly move from conflict to conflict, taking with them 
experience in conducting operations. 
0264. Physical.  I
rregular activists will not generally prevail against disciplined regular 
forces through physical means alone and have to seek to exploit asymmetric 
opportunities by applying their strengths against their opponent’s weaknesses at a 
critical time and place.  They do not necessarily seek tactical victories, but 
maintain a strategic long-term perspective and often aim simply to outlast or wear 
down their adversaries.  Common interrelated themes have been identified as 
follows: 
a. Physical means for irregular activists include weapon capabilities which range 
from the sophisticated to the primitive, and which offer the potential for 
sensational effect and impact in the face of sophisticated defence, the ability to 
deploy a broad base of activist support and the use of asymmetric tactics to 
create shock and surprise as well as physical destruction.  The urban 
environment provides a concentration of targets for the irregular activist and 
insurgent: plenty of cover, a vulnerable population and a media presence.  This 
heightens the effect of the use of explosives, especially in the case of suicide 
bombings and other attacks directed at the civilian population. 
 
b. Irregular activists use a variety of conventional and informal channels to fund 
their activities through banking networks, often facilitated by the Internet, 
charities and NGOs.  There is also an element of private patronage and 
sponsorship, by individuals seeking vicarious involvement or states employing 
irregulars for proxy activity.  Evidence shows that irregulars frequently fund 
and support each other’s activities, often as a business arrangement, despite 
little ideological common ground. 
 
c. Irregular activists operate in groups, cells or networks.  Of the irregular 
activists, insurgents and terrorists have traditionally adopted a compartmented 
cell structure and have tended to operate in terrain that facilitates concealment 
of their presence and activities.  Irregular activists are keenly aware of the 
tactical advantages of an urban environment that provides underground 
facilities for protection, and a civilian populace for logistical and financial 
support, communication and “manoeuvre”.  Transnational terrorists can seek 
and gain sanctuary in either ungoverned space, in weak states or supportive 
states, and enter into ad hoc alliances with ideologically aligned organisations.  
From these sanctuaries, activists may either operate openly or remain passive 
and operate covertly as “sleeper cells” while planning future operations and 
maintaining a low profile, except for an occasional foray or communiqué.  
Some groups employ a version of “mission command” based on intent, ideas 
and ideology being passed both through cyberspace and by word of mouth.  

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-19 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Transnation
al terrorists have used their alliances to franchise irregular activity 
to both regional and local operators who are able to influence the local 
population, or an extremist element, to do their will.  In some cases, because of 
cultural similarities or tribal loyalties they resemble an extended family rather 
than a militaristic organisation. 
 
0265. Motivation.  The m otivations for irregular activists are based on the desire to effect 
or prevent change, for either personal or collective reasons.  They are characterised 
by a refusal to abide by the conventions of the global market and the rule of law, as 
well as by the readiness to threaten or employ violence as a means of persuasion or 
control.  The motivation is often complex and diverse, but will always relate to an 
insurgent’s cultural background and the context within which they choose to 
operate.  An irregular activist will seek to achieve the following: 
a. change the status quo for ideological motives by replacing the established 
authority through the threat or use of violence, offering an alternative basis for 
authority and allegiance, and promising physical and economic security for the 
community; and 
 
b. gain and retain control over power and resources unhindered by authority.  
Often these groups will wish to m
aintain a state of instability and disorder to 
facilitate their activities and reinforce the dependence of the population.  As 
such, they would generally oppose any re-establishment of state authority or 
control by intervening forces. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
2-20 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK) 
 
 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
CHAPTER 3 - INSURGENCY AND COUNTERINSURGENCY 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
0301. This chapter is divided into two parts.  Part I gives an overview of insurgency, 
insurgent groups and their vulnerabilities.  Part II develops a possible response to 
insurgency and analyses and establishes the attributes and criteria required for 
conducting a successful COIN, allowing military commanders to efficiently face an 
insurgency.  It is aimed at serving as a guide on “how to think” when addressing this 
phenomenon. 
 
PART I - INSURGENCY 
 
Section I - Overview 
 
0302. Definition.  For the purposes of this publication “insurgency” is defined as “the 
actions of an organised, often ideologically motivated, group or movement that seeks 
to effect or prevent political change of a governing authority within a region, focused 
on persuading or coercing the population through the use of violence and 
subversion”.  This publication also employs the term “insurgent” to describe those 
actors that plan and execute insurgency actions. 
 
0303. An insurgency is normally characterised by a protracted struggle based on political, 
economic, social or religious ideology, using violence and subversion.  Insurgents 
normally feel they cannot, or will not, attain their goals through their country’s 
established governing process.  They seek to undermine a HN government’s 
authority while reinforcing the legitimacy of the insurgency.  Key to undermining the 
HN government’s authority is gaining and retaining popular support through 
influence - using both persuasion and coercion.  Insurgents may achieve their goals 
through the use of tactics such as violence, subversion and propaganda.  An 
insurgency uses violence - the “armed struggle” - as well as economic and social 
influence, as a tool to apply political pressure (see Annex B).  Typically, an 
insurgency operates from its strengths and avoids the strengths of the government 
(e.g. direct armed confrontations).  Insurgents typically seek concealment and 
support within the population.  Insurgents will use subversion, propaganda and 
measured violence against the government and possibly the population.  Violence 
against the government will act to destabilise, reduce the perception of legitimacy, 
and potentially cause the HN government to overreact, further isolating it from the 
population, measured violence against the population may coerce it to remain neutral 
or provide tacit or material support.  However, violence against the population may 
backfire.  Terrorists, especially transnational terrorists, and leaders of major criminal 
enterprises may align with an insurgency, but not necessarily the ideology of the 
insurgents to take advantage of or foment instability.  It is important to distinguish 
between the true insurgents and their cause and the pure terrorists and their ideals (or 
the ardent criminal elements).  It should be noted that, in principle, the insurgents 
have the initiative, since they can select which sections of the population and the 
security forces against which to act. 
 
0304. Every insurgent movement is unique.  An insurgent organisation is usually a network 
of semi-autonomous cells, led at the local level and unified through a common 
purpose and/or ideology.  Typically insurgencies both learn and adapt quickly, as 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
they are constrained by neither hierarchical levels of comm
and nor organisational 
complexity.  They may also appear to undertake legitimate activities under the guise 
of economic and political activities.   
 
0305. Figure 3.1 helps contextualise and provide an understanding of the nature of 
insurgency.  Insurgencies are not constrained by regional or national boundaries and 
may be local, national, transnational or even international (global) in nature.  In the 
national scope, within the normal functioning of a state, a series of activities takes 
place, some of them irregular (as described in Chapter 2) and others regular.  The 
insurgency that emerges within a state will employ any activity (regular or irregular) 
to help achieve its goals.  Insurgents might employ irregular activities (criminality, 
terrorism, disorder and/or subversion) in order to obtain funds to inhibit the opposing 
population, disseminating instability and insecurity over the country, so that the 
state’s government cannot control it.  On the other hand, insurgents might also use 
certain regular activities (political, diplomatic, social, economic, religious, etc.) with 
the aim of gaining legitimacy and financing, spreading its ideology, recruiting 
supporters, mobilising certain sectors of the population, and obtaining external 
support.  But, for an insurgency to reach its ultimate goal, its actions need to extend 
to the international scope in order to gain external support and to legitimise the 
insurgents’ objectives and actions in the international environment.  Figure 3.1 
illustrates the generic interconnection between regular and irregular activities and 
insurgency. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1 - Nature of Insurgency  
 
0306. The size of the overlapping parts of the different circles and shapes in Figure 3.1 
does not categorically reflect the extent of the different interconnections between 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
insurgency and other activities.  Insurgents will reach their political objectives 
through th
e mastering of the specific art of mixing, according effective proportions to 
all the enabling fields: regular and irregular activities in national, international and 
transnational circles. 
 
0307. Will, Time and Space .  Insurgents seek to achieve their political aims by using will, 
time and space .  They normally accept temporary setbacks with respect to time and 
space in order to reach their long-term goals.   
 
a. Will.  The ideological nature and core grievances of insurgency often result in 
insurgents having a strong collective will.  This sense of collective will is often 
relatively much greater than that of the governments of fragile states.  The 
insurgent thus seeks to make the struggle a protracted “contest of wills”.   
 
b. Time.  Due to their relative strong will, insurgents can afford to be patient.  
When their relative weakness requires it, insurgents can erode their opponents’ 
will through various means, such as subversion, terrorism and propaganda.  
Thus, effective and capable insurgents manage time as a resource at all levels, 
especially the strategic level.   
 
c. Space.  Similar to their use of time, insurgents can use space to wear down 
their opponents’ will.  As occurs in conventional operations, they may seek to 
attack relatively weak areas.  However, capable insurgents will be fluid.  They 
will fight on ground of their choosing and wear down their opponents, yet 
avoid becoming decisively engaged or destroyed.  In this fashion, they will 
seek to force their opponents to react to their efforts.  Sanctuaries and porous 
border regions also offer insurgents transnational lines of communication 
(LOCs), escape routes, and havens in which to recuperate, train and plan future 
operations. 
 
Section II - Key Conditions for an Insurgency  
 
0308. An insurgency usually requires two key conditions in order to flourish: core 
grievances and prerequisites.   
 
0309. Core Grievances.  Core grievances are causes of distress affording reason for 
complaint or resistance from the point of view of some of the population.  These 
grievances may be real or perceived.  Some or all may fuel insurgency to varying 
degrees.  The importance of core grievances, or even their existence, can change over 
time.  Additionally, insurgents can be adept at manipulating or creating core 
grievances to serve their purpose.  The following represent common core grievances: 
 
a. Identity.  Many factors impact a person’s sense of identity, but identity is 
socio-cultural in character.  Strong feelings based on identity can be in conflict 
with the views of the HN government, potentially leading to insurgencies 
aimed at secession, border changes, or political overthrow.  External actors 
with similar identities to the insurgents may assist. 
 
b. Religion.  Religious extremism can become a core grievance of an insurgency.  
External groups with similar extremist religious views to those of the 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
insurgents often provide support. 
 
c. Economy.  Pervasive and desperate poverty often fosters and fuels widespread 
public dissatisfaction.  Y
oung people without jobs or hope are ripe for 
insurgent recruitment.  Additionally, a perceived disparity in people’s means 
can be an economic core grievance, for example, a gap between a large poor 
majority and a small wealthy minority. 
 
d. Corruption.  The corruption of national politics, the HN government, or key 
institutions or organisations can be a core grievance.  Institutional corruption is 
unfair or illegal actions or policies.  Political corruption is the dysfunction of a 
political system.  For example, corruption in government development 
programmes can cause resentment within the aggrieved group.  Corruption 
leads to a loss of HN legitimacy and is often a key core grievance. 
 
e. Repression.  Repression can take many forms, such as discriminatory policies, 
rights violations, police brutality or imprisonment.  Like corruption, repression 
can lead to popular dissatisfaction with the current government and leads to the 
reduction of HN legitimacy. 
 
f. Foreign Exploitation or Presence.  The perception of outsiders exploiting the 
HN, or of the HN government excessively pandering to foreigners, can be a 
core grievance.  For example, if foreign businesses dominate critical portions 
of the local economy, some of the population may feel that they or their 
country are being exploited by outsiders.  A foreign military presence or 
military treaty may also offend national sentiment.  Finally, the mere presence 
or specific actions of foreigners may offend local religious or cultural 
sensibilities. 
 
g. Occupation.  Foreign military forces’ occupation of another state is often a 
core grievance.  If groups within the population have the will to fight on after a 
regime change or occupation, they may form a resistance movement.   
 
h. Essential Services.  Essential services provide those things needed to sustain 
life.  Examples of these essential needs are the availability of food, law 
enforcement, emergency services, water, electricity, shelter, health care, 
schools, transportation, and sanitation (trash and sewage).  Stabilising a 
population requires these basic needs to be met.  People pursue essential needs 
until they feel they are met, at any cost and from any source.  People support 
the source that meets their needs. 
 
0310. Prerequisites.  For a root cause or core grievances to be sustainable there have to be 
specific prerequisites or conditions.  Without these conditions the insurgency will 
likely wither and die.  When a number of these conditions coexist, an insurgency can 
manifest and develop, gaining the support of the population, and become entrenched 
over time.  The prerequisites are as follows: 
 
a. Vulnerable Population.  The greater the expectation of the population, the 
more vulnerable it will become to alternatives for change.  Insurgents can 
exploit political, economic or social dissatisfaction with the HN or local 
government and offer the population hope for change.   

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-5 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
b. Leadership Available for Directio
n.  Exercising leadership in an insurgency 
is a complex issue and can be centralised or decentralised.  There may be a 
transition from one form of leadership to another.  Insurgency leadership has 
traditionally been perceived as centralised around a charismatic, persuasive and 
politically astute figure following a single narrative.  Contemporary leadership 
in a globalised environment, with increased use of information technology, has 
enabled greater decentralised execution. 
 
c. Lack of Government Control.  If insurgents operate with little or no 
perceived interference from security forces or other agencies, the population 
may feel the government lacks control and fear the potential for chaos, both 
undermining legitimacy of the government.  The greater the control the 
government has over the situation, the less likely are the chances for insurgent 
success.  The success of a government ultimately depends on the acquiescence, 
if not the active support, of the population.  The aim of both sides is to secure 
this, and here the insurgents’ task is easier, because they can choose the time 
and place for their actions and can orchestrate actions, including propaganda 
and measured violence, that will undermine the government more than they 
alienate the population.  Notwithstanding, some insurgents are prepared to use 
brutality and terror to meet their needs. 
 
Section III - Dynamics of Insurgency 
 
0311. Each insurgency has different dynamics depending on the country in which it 
develops, the actors and their cause; however, insurgencies will usually build around 
a perceived sense of relative deprivation.  Although each insurgency is unique, there 
are common dynamics or characteristics that can be used in assessing an insurgency 
and determining its strategy, as follows: 
 
a. ideology, 
b. cause, 
c. internal support, 
d. objective, 
e. leadership, 
f. environment and geography, 
g. external support, 
h. the phasing and timing of an insurgency, and 
i. organisational and operational patterns. 
 
0312. Ideology.  Ideology typically is the cornerstone of an insurgency.  Gaining and 
updating knowledge of this ideology is essential for understanding the rationale for 
insurgent actions.  Ideology provides psychological and political cohesion among the 
insurgents.  The central mechanism through which ideologies are disseminated is the 
narrative.  Narratives are central to representing identity, particularly the collective 
identity of religious sects, ethnic groupings and tribal elements.  Stories about a 
community’s history also may provide an explanation for insurgent actions and their 
consequences.  They often base their strategy on ideology.  An ideology has the 
capacity to affect a country’s domestic/foreign politics and public opinion through 
the use of violence and propaganda.  Ideology normally also provides the 
justification for violence, and this is particularly true for transnational terrorists.  If 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-6 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
the ideology within an insurgency is conflicted, a counterinsurgent can potentially 
exploit this conflict to divide and def
eat the insurgents. 
 
0313. The Cause.  Insurgent leaders try to adopt attractive/persuasive causes in order to 
mobilise population support.  These causes often stem from the unresolved 
contradictions existing within any society or culture.  Although contradictions are 
based on real problems, insurgents may create artificial contradictions using 
propaganda and misinformation.  By selecting an assortment of causes and tailoring 
them for various groups within society - political, religious, professional or social - 
they disseminate convincing ideas to which the population is most receptive.  
Without an attractive cause, an insurgent movement might not be able to sustain 
itself.  But a carefully chosen cause is a formidable asset; it can provide a fledgling 
movement with a long-term, concrete base of support.  Any country ruled by a small 
group without broad popular support provides a political cause for insurgents.  
Exploited or repressed social groups - be they entire classes, ethnic or religious 
groups, or small elites - may support larger causes in reaction to their own narrower 
grievances.  Economic inequities and racial persecution can nurture insurgency. 
 
0314. Internal Support.  Insurgencies are fragile in their infancy, and elements of the 
population must be mobilised to provide practical internal support and maintain 
momentum if an insurgency is to survive.  There are four groups within a population 
during an insurgency: those that support the government; those that are neutral; those 
that oppose the government without the use of violence and those that support the 
insurgency.  It is the neutral centre that usually is the tipping point that both sides 
target.  The government will attempt to gain the support of the neutral centre against 
the insurgency, while the insurgents will attempt to either gain their support or have 
them remain neutral and not support the government's legitimacy.  Support 
considerations are as follows: 
 
a. Level of Popular Support.  The reality of countering insurgencies is that 
neither side will ever enjoy the support of the entire population.  The support of 
the population will fluctuate due to many factors, and attempting to quantify 
why the populace favours the government or the insurgents is difficult.  
Measuring the population’s support is important, and asking the population 
directly or using surveys can produce valuable insight into popular support and 
attitudes.  However, it is important to remain cognizant of the fact that who 
conducts the surveys is as important as the questions asked.  Some people will 
tailor their responses based on who is asking the question.  Figure 3.2 depicts a 
simplified model of an insurgency’s range of popular support. 
 
b. Types of Popular Support.  Popular support can be either active or passive, 
and may come from only a small segment of the population or from a broad 
base of the population.  Support for an insurgency may also be open or hidden, 
depending on the overall situation.  Local insurgents normally exploit local 
grievances when recruiting.  Normally insurgents link their messages with 
tangible solutions and actions.  There are five common methods used to 
mobilise popular support: persuasion, coercion, reaction to co
 unterinsurgent 
abuses, foreign support and apolitical motivations.  These methods can be used 
individually or in various combinations.  For more information see Annex C. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-7 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2 - Range of Popular Support 
 
0315. Objective.  Effective analysis of an insurgency requires identifying its objectives; 
this analysis must be from the insurgent’s perspective, rather than that of the 
counterinsurgent.  It is often difficult to identify the objectives of an insurgency.  
Insurgent objectives may be vague or ill-defined, or there may be multiple insurgent 
groups with differing objectives.  Analysis of insurgency objectives requires 
consideration of many factors from the insurgents' perspective.  Insurgents’ use 
physical or psychological effects to connect strategic and operational objectives to 
tactical actions.  Insurgents create effects through lethal or non-lethal actions.  For 
instance, to achieve the strategic objective of discouraging support for the 
government, insurgents may conduct operations to assassinate government officials, 
or delegitimize the HN in the eyes of the population by damaging or seizing a key 
facility.  Understanding the insurgents’ objectives and identifying direct and indirect 
effects of insurgent actions within the operational environment is key to countering 
insurgent operations.  The insurgent’s overarching objective is to force a political 
change and often to implant an alternative state.  The supporting objectives are 
normally driven by the insurgent’s strategic approach (see Annex A).  There are 
generally four types of supporting insurgent objectives, including:  
 
a. seize power, overthrow existing social order and redistributing power within a 
state, be it through a revolutionary process or not;  
 
b. to undermine state control and create an autonomous entity or a space beyond 
government control - an independent territory based on religious and ethnic 
factors and the like; 
 
c. to undermine or destroy government legitimacy and its ability to rule.  This is 
one of the main motives driving the insurgent movement, and it is present in all 
its development stages; 
 
d. to gain popular support.  One insurgency objective is to persuade or intimidate 
a wide portion of the population to accept the changes proposed.  This is an 
essential aim for insurgents.  In fact, all their strategic plans will be focused on 
influencing public opinion, whether it is friendly, hostile or neutral.  In the case 
of neutral individuals or waverers, insurgents will use a combination of fear 
and hope, trying to persuade them as to the many benefits of supporting the 
insurgency, and the uncertain future if they support the other factions.  They 
will use terror to shape public opinion.  They will execute symbolic actions, 
which will be widely publicised, and will be persuasive about the impossibility 
of winning the conflict, the devastating consequences of a protracted conflict, 
and even the unfairness of the cause defended by the government.  At the same 
time, they will present an apparent solution to the problem, and thereby an 
opportunity to end the conflict. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-8 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0316. Leadership.  Leadership is essential to any insurgent group or m
ovement, especially 
in instilling and indoctrinating the insurgent ideology in its members.  It is easier to 
disseminate a cause when it is embodied by a leader who can inspire their followers, 
convert the uncommitted, and command the respect and certainly the fear of those 
who support the government.  Insurgents’ key tasks are to break the ties between the 
population and the government and to establish credibility.  They have to possess the 
sharpness of intellect to define political and strategic aims, and the nimbleness of wit 
and wisdom to adjust the immediate requirements and implement tactics to meet 
them.  They require the strength of character to impose decisions taken, especially 
when the insurgency is in its early stages.  Their education, familial/social ties and 
prestige can promote organisations and the recruitment and motivation of personnel.   
 
0317. Environment and Geography.  Although the operational environment is applicable 
to an insurgent and has already been described in Chapter 2, there will be specific 
environments that can be exploited by insurgents.  This knowledge could enhance 
their operations, especially in the early stages of an insurgency.  Contemporary 
insurgencies are conducted in rural and urban environments and their interfaces.  In 
order to achieve their political objectives, insurgents must ultimately control and 
have influence on the territory in which the target population resides.  Insurgent 
strategies are often based on the specific features and intricacies of specific 
environments. 
 
0318. External Support.  Access to external support enhances an insurgency’s 
effectiveness, capabilities and capacities.  Many insurgencies have received some 
degree of support from foreign powers or non-state groups.  Such support may 
involve the training of cadre staff, the use of facilities, financial support, and the 
provision of overt and covert military assistance, including intelligence and 
armaments.  Neighbouring states supporting insurgencies may also provide sanctuary 
in the form of resting, re-equipping and training.  The forms of external support can 
include: 
 
a. Moral Support.  The acknowledgement that insurgents or their cause are just 
and admirable can be vital for success.  Moral support often leads to political, 
resource and sanctuary support.  Support may come from the press, celebrities 
and politicians in foreign countries. 
 
b. Political Support.  Of importance to an insurgency is gaining international 
and/or political recognition for its cause.  Political support for insurgents in 
international forums such as the UN and the instigation of political discussion 
and support within some NATO countries could provide some adverse 
influence on COIN efforts by NATO.  However, failing to garner political 
support for the insurgency likely will lead to international support for the 
COIN effort. 
 
c. Logistic Support.  Logistic support is vital to the effectiveness of an 
insurgency.  Initially, equipm
ent, arms, and ammunition may be acquired from 
external sources.  The populace may provide food.  As the insurgency grows in 
strength, money and more sophisticated weaponry and equipment that cannot 
be provided from internal sources will be required. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-9 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
d. Personnel Support.  W
ithout the support of personnel, an insurgency would 
have little hope of success.  Insurgents trained externally can provide expertise 
in sophisticated weaponry.  From external sources come replacements for 
casualties and additional personnel to augment the existing force.  A neighbour 
state also can provide sanctuary. 
 
e. Sanctuaries.  Historically, sanctuaries have provided insurgents with a place to 
rebuild and reorganise without fear of interference.  Sanctuaries may be local 
“safe” areas (e.g. neighbourhoods), or an area across the border outside the 
country.   
 
 
0319. Sources of External Support.  External support comes from other nation states, 
emigrants, refugees and other non-state actors, as follows: 
 
a. Support from Other States.  State support for insurgencies is generally the 
most significant source of external support and may consist of military, 
financial, logistic, and political support.  There are a variety of reasons why 
states may choose to support an insurgency: 
 
(1) Regional Influence.  The main reason for states’ support of insurgencies 
is regional politics.  The particular aim may be to ensure the security of a 
border or to increase influence over a rival nation or area critical to the 
national interest. 
 
(2) Destabilisation.  Support for an insurgency provides a state with an 
opportunity to wage war without resorting to conventional forces.  This is 
usually referred to as a “proxy war”. 
 
(3) Regime Change.  State support may be provided for the purpose of 
overthrowing a rival government. 
 
(4) Retaliation.  A state’s support for an insurgency in another state may 
result in an adversary supporting an insurgency by the other state’s 
enemies. 
 
(5) Influencing Insurgent Objectives.  States may support an insurgency in 
a neighbouring country to ensure that the insurgent movement does not 
adopt goals or policies that are not in that state’s interests. 
 
(6) Support to Similar Ethnic or Related Groups.  A further reason for 
state support of insurgencies is a national affinity with ethnic groups 
beyond their borders. 
 
(7) Reclaiming Territory.  A state may support an insurgency in a 
neighbouring state in order to reclaim territory held by that state.   
 
(8) Acquisition of Wealth.  States may support an insurgency in another 
country in order to gain access to particular markets or natural resources. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-10 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
b. Emigrant Communities.  Em
igrant communities abroad are sources of 
support in areas such as funding, political influence, intelligence, weapons, 
recruitment and equipment and are therefore an important part of sustaining an 
insurgent movement.  However, in order to gain support from emigrant 
communities insurgents may use one or a combination of the following: 
 
(1) Religious or Ethnic Affinity.  Claiming religious or ethnic affinity is a 
popular means of gaining support. 
 
(2) Loyalty to the Homeland.  Insurgents will exploit an emigrant’s 
sympathy for their homeland nation and its population.  The inability of 
emigrants to integrate with their resident country can facilitate 
recruitment or support.  External regimes or groups may use the 
insurgency as a means to take control of territory claimed by that external 
source.  Active support of the insurgency can assist with that objective. 
 
(3) Second-generation Emigrant.  They present two factors: on the one 
side, they have not integrated into the host nation society.  On the other 
hand, due to the generational change, they do not feel linked to their 
parents’ country of origin.  This feeling makes them potential recruiting 
objectives for the insurgent. 
 
(4) Success.  Military and political success for insurgent movements often 
brings a wave of support from expatriate communities.  However, the 
opposite is also true: when insurgencies suffer defeat and humiliation in 
the theatre of operations, support can quickly diminish, as expatriates 
begin to view the insurgency as a lost cause. 
 
(5) Coercion.  Due to the closeness of most immigrant or expatriate 
communities, insurgents can often coerce an entire community into 
supporting their campaign if they target specific individuals or 
community leaders.   
 
(6) Political and Social Pressures.  Social and political pressures may be 
exerted, legal constraints or detentions may be imposed by the 
government among the emigrant population.  Similarly, emigrants 
collaborating with an insurgency can be camouflaged in this 
environment. 
 
c. Refugees.  Refugee camps provide insurgents with security and the 
opportunity to rest, plan, train and recruit, as well as to gain control of the 
refugee community.  There are a number of reasons why a refugee community 
may choose to support an insurgency:  
 
(1) a desire to return to their previous  status and life in their own homeland;  
 
(2) the need for protection.  Local ba ndits frequently operate in refugee 
camps; 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-11 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
(3) 
a conviction that military action and violence is the only way to get their 
grievance noticed and addressed; and 
 
(4) coercion.   
 
d. Other Non-state Groups.  Other non-state groups include: 
 
(1) Other Insurgent Groups.  Other insurgent groups can be a valuable 
source of support and advice to an insurgent movement.   
 
(2) Influential Individuals.  Wealthy and influential individuals motivated 
by religious, moral or ethnic considerations can be a source of funding 
and support. 
 
(3) Aid agencies and human rights organisations.  Commanders must 
understand that due to the impartiality and neutrality of aid agencies and 
human rights organisations, these organisations will make no distinction 
between actors in the conflict. 
 
(4) Religious Organisations.  Religious organisations outside the state have 
often been a source of financial and intellectual support.  Their spiritual 
support, disseminated through the modern global media, has been an 
important contribution in inspiring recruits and insurgent activists.  These 
organisations also provide a channel for their members to carry out their 
charitable obligations, allowing donations favouring insurgent 
movements. 
 
(5) Criminal Organisations.  Insurgencies attract criminal organisations 
and mercenaries.  Kidnapping, extortion, bank robbery and drug 
trafficking are very lucrative for insurgents in support of strengthening 
their financial resources, but also as a means to put pressure on HN 
authorities and the population.  Criminal organisations may use 
insurgents as their blanket, or their cover to support the achievement of 
their specific objectives, which may be various (money making, the 
attractiveness of having power in a region).  Criminal organisations will 
benefit from a persisting unstable situation. 
 
Phasing and Timing of an Insurgency   
 
0320. Mature insurgencies can rapidly shift, split, combine or reorganise - they are dynamic 
and adaptive.  Most insurgencies pass through three common phases of development: 
strategic defensive, strategic equilibrium and strategic offensive.  The constant 
feature in all phases of an insurgency is adhering to their strategic COG - gaining the 
support and consent of the population.  The phases of development are further 
described in Annex A.   
 
0321. Within their phases of development, insurgencies may evolve through radicalisation, 
popular unrest, civil disobedience, a variety of irregular activities and conventional 
armed conflict.  Alternatively, they may wither away to dormancy if effectively 
countered or if they fail to capture sufficient popular support.  Not all insurgencies 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-12 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
experience a phased or neatly evolving developm
ent, and linear progression is not 
required for insurgent success.   
 
0322. Moreover, a single insurgency may be in different phases in various parts of a 
country simultaneously.  Insurgencies may revert to an earlier phase when pressured 
and resume activities when conditions are favourable.  This flexibility is the key 
strength of a phased approach in that it provides fallback positions.  Movement from 
one phase to another does not end the operational and tactical activities typical of 
earlier phases; it incorporates them.  The phases in the protracted popular war model 
may not provide a complete template for understanding contemporary insurgencies; 
however, they do explain the shifting mosaic of activities usually present in some 
form.   
 
Organisational and Operational Patterns 
 
0323. Although each insurgency organisation is unique, there are often similarities, and 
being aware of general patterns and structures assists in predicting an insurgency’s 
methods of operation.  Other considerations include the operational environment, the 
level of success of the insurgency, and the length of time the insurgency has been 
operating.  Insurgent movements adopt a changing structure that evolves parallel to 
the changes within the insurgency.  In the initial stage there is no need to establish a 
detailed organisation.  In later stages it may be necessary for an insurgent movement 
to organise itself into groups, cells or networks in order to provide security to the 
members and resources.  Once an insurgency has obtained enough popular support, a 
well-functioning and flexible organisation will be essential for coordinating and 
executing insurgent activities, and for establishing a credible alternative that replaces 
the established power.  Organisational patterns reflect the following: 
 
a. Types of Insurgency Members.  An insurgency normally consists of six types 
of members.  The proportion of every element will depend on the objectives, 
development, capability and success of the insurgency.  The six types of 
members are:  
 
(1) Leaders.  Leaders provide direction and command an insurgency.  They 
can exercise leadership through the power of revolutionary ideas as well 
as charisma.  In some insurgencies a leader’s position may be as a result 
of religious, clan or tribal authority. 
 
(2) Armed elements. Armed elements  conduct operations, execute orders 
and actions, and maintain local control.  Armed elements also protect 
training camps and networks that facilitate funding, instruction and the 
recruitment of local and foreign fighters.   
 
(3) Cadres.  Cadres form the political core of an insurgency and are engaged 
in the struggle to accomplish insurgent goals.  They can compose a 
political party and implement guidance and procedures provided by the 
movement leaders.   
 
(4) Auxiliaries.  Auxiliaries
13 are active members and sympathisers who 
provide services that support an insurgency and do not participate in 
                                                      
13 For purposes of this publication the term “auxiliaries” refers to insurgents.  It does not include any friendly forces, such as paramilitary forces. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-13 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
direct actions.  Their activities m
ay be: 
 
(a)  to operate and maintain safe houses, 
 
(b)  to store weapons and supplies, 
 
(c)  to act as couriers, 
 
(d)  to provide passive intelligence collection, 
 
(e)  to give early warning of counterinsurgent movements, 
 
(f)  to provide funding from lawful and unlawful sources, and 
 
(g) to provide forged or stolen documents and access or introductions to 
potential supporters. 
 
(5) Underground.  The underground is a cellular organisation of active 
supporters of the insurgency which may contain an element that works in 
the HN government.  Keeping the nature of their work for the insurgency 
secret is often paramount.  They are more engaged than the auxiliaries 
and may at times act as an armed element, if they use weapons 
or conduct operations.  They operate in all areas; especially in areas 
denied to  and  not suitable for standing armed elements.  They conduct 
clandestine, covert, and overt operations, sometimes infiltrating the HN 
government.  Members of the underground often continue in their normal 
positions in society, but lead second, clandestine lives for the insurgent 
movement.  Some insurgencies are unique in that they conduct most 
of their political activities inside the underground while a different 
section trains recruits, maintains the propaganda campaign, and helps 
in population control. 
 
(6) Mass Base.  The mass base consists of the members of the population 
who support the insurgent movement.  These members are often recruited 
and indoctrinated by the cadre.  Mass base members continue in their 
normal positions as legal members in society as they develop clandestine 
activities and may, over time, become permanent members of the 
insurgency.   
 
b. Functioning in Operation.  The following are essential to the operational 
functioning of an insurgency: 
 
(1) Network.  Although networks are not an element of insurgency, 
insurgencies will often use them.  They will try to be resilient through the 
division of responsibilities into networked and compartmented cells.  
With this type of structure, the compromise of one cell will not greatly 
affect the operational security of the organisation as a whole.  
Compartmentalised organisations are difficult to destroy; they tend to 
heal, adapt and recover rapidly.  Such organisations are often represented 
within the local, regional, national and even international spheres.  There 
are groups with little physical presence in their target countries which 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-14 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
exist alm
ost entirely as compartmented networks.   
 
(2) Learning and Adapting.  All successful insurgencies are adaptive.  
Insurgency is not necessarily a tactic of choice, but a necessity of relative 
weakness.  Insurgents must be agile in order to circumvent the many 
obstacles they will encounter.  The path to a successful insurgency 
involves adaptation and learning, and insurgents who do not manage this 
will perish. 
 
(3) Recruiting.  The main recruiting sources are the disaffected segments of 
the population.  It is necessary to incorporate new personnel not only in 
the early stages but also during the development process, as the 
insurgency expands its efforts and loses members due to casualties or 
arrests.  In recent times, recruiting, among other activities, has taken 
place through the Internet, using virtual forums, websites and “blogs”.  
The general proliferation of news, information and commentary, coupled 
with increasingly responsive audiences, can provide a ready source for 
potential recruits. 
 
(4) Training.  In order to maximise their members’ competence, insurgent 
organisations need training on such subjects as weapons, 
communications, logistics, explosives and small-unit tactics, among 
others.  Although this is often provided by the insurgent organisation 
itself, trainers with operational training skills are not always available.  
Secure places in which to conduct training are difficult to find, 
particularly in urban areas.  On some occasions, insurgents have to rely 
on external support.  In the early days of a conflict, an insurgent group 
may lack a cadre of skilled, experienced fighters who can pass on their 
knowledge to new recruits.  This problem must be solved as the 
insurgency matures.  In addition, training is often required for more 
complex weapon systems, such as missiles and man-portable air defence 
systems. 
 
(5) Resources.  In order to maintain momentum and sustain operations, 
insurgents require constant and reliable access to supplies, weapons, 
ammunition and money.  Internal logistical support is vital, especially in 
the early stages of insurgency when external support may be limited.  As 
an insurgency develops and expands, the reliance on logistical support 
also increases, with more support being sought from external sources.  If 
an insurgency develops a conventional capacity, this external support 
normally increases in scope and importance.  The various resources 
required by insurgents are: 
 
(a) Weapons and Ammunition.  Insurgents will readily improvise 
weapons and explosives to increase their lethal effects.  Weapons, 
ammunition and explosives can be purchased on the black market, 
captured from government forces, or supplied and smuggled across 
porous borders by a sympathetic third party. 
 
(b) Funding.  Funding for an insurgency is essential and can be 
obtained through many sources and in today’s globalised and 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-15 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
internet connected, electronic world.  W
hile funding is often 
shipped to insurgents just like other supplies, it may also be moved 
and held by local financial institutions.  However, funding greatly 
influences an insurgency’s character and vulnerabilities.  Local 
supporters or international front organisations may provide 
donations.  Sometimes legitimate businesses are established to 
furnish funding.  In areas controlled by insurgents, confiscation or 
illegal taxation might be utilised.  Another common source of 
funding is criminal activity, especially the illegal trade of drugs.   
 
(c) Supply Lines.  To maintain momentum and meet the requirements 
of conducting all activities, insurgents require a system of internal 
and external supply lines, means of transportation and storage 
facilities.  These supply lines can provide vital information on 
insurgent forces and support, and can be detected and interdicted. 
 
(d) Bases.   Insurgents adapt easily and can use a variety of bases from 
which to operate.  Two such bases are safe houses and base camps.  
Safe houses are used to temporarily hide insurgents and are often 
part of a large system to secretly move members and materiel along 
selected routes between safe houses.  Like any other armed force, 
insurgents have requirements for command and control, rest, 
resupply, refit, and training.  The larger and more active the 
insurgent force, the more they will need established bases, both 
semi-permanent and temporary.  Base camps must be relatively 
safe and secure in areas where insurgents can rest, plan and train.  
In rural areas, base camps tend to be in remote areas characterised 
by rough, inaccessible terrain.  In urban areas, base camps tend to 
be located in areas where the insurgent has popular support.   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-16 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Section IV - Insurgent Vulnerabilities 
 
0324. Insurgents face numerous challenges in the course of their activities.  The following 
is a description of the common insurgent vulnerabilities:  
 
a. Security.  Any group operating from a position of weakness that intends to use 
violence to pursue its political aims must initially adopt a covert approach for 
its planning and activities.  This practice can become counterproductive once 
an active insurgency begins.  Excessive secrecy can limit insurgent freedom of 
action, reduce or distort information about insurgent goals and ideals, and 
restrict communication within the insurgency.  Furthermore, as an insurgency 
grows the number of potential informants increases.  There is an inherent 
tension between the need to grow popular support and the need to maintain 
organisational security.   
 
b. Decentralisation.  The decentralised nature of the cells that provide the 
insurgent operational security can also be a weakness, because information is 
passed very slowly.  The ability for insurgents to receive encouragement from 
superiors and members of the political wing, and direction in the face of 
counterinsurgent pressures, together with their lack of ability to openly call for 
reinforcements and logistics due to their operational security plan, can make 
the insurgents feel isolated, alone, confused and unsupported.   
 
c. Inconsistencies in the Insurgent Narrative.  The core logic of the narrative 
must remain consistent.  For example, if an insurgent movement continually 
changes its political objectives, the population will be less likely to be 
convinced. 
 
d. Insurgent Propaganda.  The frequent use of wrong, fake and distorted 
information by insurgent propaganda can be exploited to undermine the 
insurgents’ credibility and effectiveness, especially when offered with a clear 
proof of the correct information.  In the early stages an insurgency may be 
tempted to go to almost any extreme to attract followers.  During this process, 
insurgents use a combination of propaganda and intimidation, which may not 
achieve popular support and will ultimately lead to the population rejecting 
their legitimacy in favour of that of the constituted government.   
 
e. Need to Establish a Base of Operations.  Insurgents can experience serious 
difficulties in finding a viable base of operations.  A base too far from the 
major centres of activity may be secure but risks being out of touch with the 
populace.  It may also be vulnerable to isolation.  A base too near centres of 
government activity risks exposing the insurgency to observation and perhaps 
infiltration.  Bases close to national borders can be attractive when they are 
beyond the reach of counterinsurgents yet safe enough to avoid suspicion on 
the part of neighbouring authorities or populations. 
 
f. Reliance on Support.  Insurgencies usually cannot sustain themselves without 
substantial external support.  LOCs which require freedom of movement are 
then vulnerable.  In addition, finances are vulnerable to electronic interdiction, 
or the source of the funds may be unreliable.  An inability to gain external 
support may drive an insurgency to look inwards, which may impact on the 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-17 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
insurgents’ ability to sustain the cam
paign. 
 
g. Economic and Financial Weakness.  All insurgencies require funding.  
Criminal organisations are possible funding sources.  However, such 
cooperation may attract attention from security forces and become a target to 
be exploited through counterinsurgent information-based activities.  Controls 
and regulations that limit the movement and exchange of materiel and funds 
may compound insurgent financial vulnerabilities, especially when they 
receive funding from other countries. 
 
h. Internal Divisions.  Internal discontent may undermine an insurgency’s unity 
of effort, leading to factionalism within the leadership.  A key vulnerability 
relates to the unity of an insurgency as its operations are concluded, or prior to 
completion, as divisions may emerge or violence can occur among different 
groups while vying for power.  Thus, nothing is more demoralising for 
insurgents than to realise that people inside their movement or trusted 
supporters are deserting the insurgency or providing information to 
government authorities. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-18 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
PART II - COUNTERINSURGENCY 
 
Section V - Overview 
 
0325. Definition.  Counterinsurgency is defined as “the set of political, economic, social, 
military, law enforcement, civil and psychological activities with the aim to defeat 
insurgency and address any core grievances”.  This publication also employs the 
term “counterinsurgent” to include the set of actors executing COIN actions, whether 
they are part of the HN or members of the supporting countries or agencies. 
 
0326. Mindset.  Conducting successful COIN operations requires its practitioners to have 
an adaptive and flexible mindset.  First and foremost, the population is the critical 
dimension of successful COIN.  Understanding the population is to successful COIN 
what understanding physical terrain is to successful conventional land operations.  A 
key part of understanding the population is have an intimate knowledge of what 
causes and perpetuates insurgency.  Cultural awareness plays a key role.  A second 
aspect of the counterinsurgent mindset is being able to think like an insurgent - to 
think like capable insurgents in order to stay ahead of the actual insurgents’ decisions 
and actions.  Thirdly, successful counterinsurgents must understand that it is essential 
to establish an enduring presence within the population in order to provide 
continuous security and development efforts, which is vital to assuring the 
population’s sense of security and long-term outlook.  Finally, counterinsurgents 
must understand that the military instrument is only one part of a comprehensive 
approach for successful COIN, although the security situation may require the joint 
force to execute tasks that other organisations are better suited to conducting. 
 
0327. The aim of COIN is to defeat the insurgents and address any core grievances.  All 
insurgencies are unique in their political, social and historical contexts, and they 
demand that the counterinsurgent adapt with skill and knowledge to meet specific 
socio-political and military conditions.  COIN is a politically motivated, intelligence-
driven activity.  An appropriate and proportionate application of military force is 
required. 
 
0328. The strategic goal of the counterinsurgent is to promote legitimate governance by 
controlling violence and enforcing the rule of law.  As such, a comprehensive 
approach needs to be applied to coordinate all instruments of national power, 
including diplomatic, information and economic aspects and, when required, the 
military effort.  Priority should be given to addressing the political dimension of 
insurgency in which the military force of the counterinsurgent plays a vital but 
essentially supporting role.   
 
0329. Theories, strategies and tactics employed to counter insurgencies have evolved 
throughout history by adapting to aspects such as the operational environment, 
technology and the prevailing political conditions.  The effort made by the parties - 
insurgent and counterinsurgent - to gain and maintain popular support within the 
AOO and internationally has been a constant theme.   
 
0330. As depicted in Figure 3.1, insurgencies are not constrained by regional or national 
boundaries and may be local, transnational or even global in nature.  F
 igure 3.3 
illustrates this complex interrelationship and helps us to contextualise and understand 
the relationship between insurgency and COIN.  COIN may need to act globally 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-19 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
through th
e aspects of the operational environment, with the military contribution 
being part of but not the complete solution to countering insurgents.  In so far as 
insurgency takes benefit from different fields, COIN will have to address all these 
fields.
    Figure 3.3 - Nature of Counterinsurgency   
  
0331. NATO’s military achievements alone may not translate into political success.  The 
struggle between insurgency and COIN is a contest for the support of the population 
and, while military power is important in any COIN campaign, simply killing 
insurgents may not result in the defeat of an insurgency’s political cause.  NATO 
forces committed to a COIN effort are there to assist a HN government.  The long 
term goal is to ensure the HN government reaches an acceptable level of self-
sustainability, since in the end, it has to succeed on its own.  Achieving this requires 
development of viable local leaders and institutions.  NATO forces and agencies can 
help, but HN elements must accept responsibilities to achieve real victory.  While it 
may be easier for NATO military units to conduct operations themselves, it is better 
to work to strengthen local forces and institutions and then assist them.  HN 
governments have the final responsibility to solve their own problems.  Eventually 
all foreign armies are seen as interlopers or occupiers; the sooner the main effort can 
transition to HN institutions, without unacceptable degradation, the better.  A 
successful military campaign can only be achieved when NATO works by, with and 
through the HN’s political and military apparatus.  To be truly successful, NATO’s 
military campaign must “put the HN’s face on the operations”.   
 
0332. Although COIN and the range of military activities have been described in Chapter 1, 
the application of offensive and defensive activities is integral to fighting and 
physically defeating insurgents.  However, there is a need to apply a balanced 
military approach at the commencement of operations that also includes stability 
activities.  These activities are aimed at protecting the population and at bringing 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-20 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
about security and stability.  As they restore or create infrastructure and civil 
services, hum
anitarian aid is delivered, and governance is improved by reinforcing 
local governments’ authority and credibility.  A proper balance between stability and 
other military activities can demonstrate to the population tangible signs of progress 
within a legitimate context.  Thus one of the keys to success may be to gain the 
support of the population and deprive the insurgents from it.   
 
Section VI - Attributes in Counterinsurgency  
 
0333. In addition to the principles of allied joint and multinational operations, which apply 
to all operations, NATO has developed, from an analysis of recent operational 
experience and historical examples, the following attributes of COIN:  
 
a. political primacy (and a clearly-defined political objective); 
 
b. it is a struggle for the population, not against the population; 
 
c. the relevance of legitimacy; 
 
d. intelligence drives operations; 
 
e. unity of effort (the requirement of a coordinated government structure); 
 
f. neutralise the insurgency and isolate the insurgents from their support; 
 
g. prepare for a protracted campaign; 
 
h. security under the rule of law is essential; 
 
i. hand over responsibility to the local forces as soon as practicable; and 
 
j. learn and adapt quickly. 
 
Political Primacy 
 
0334. Before initiating a COIN, a clearly defined and achievable political objective must be 
established.  To ensure the success of the political objective, several intermediate 
objectives should be established, disseminated and publicised to inform the 
population of the HN government’s intentions. 
 
0335. The primacy of the political dimension will have an impact on all campaign aspects.  
In order to attain objectives and produce the desired effects a comprehensive 
approach (as described in Chapter 1) is required.  Accordingly, military campaign 
design must be in accordance with clearly stated and achievable political goals.   
 
0336. Closely related to political primacy is the requirement for political will to underpin 
military effort.  Political will in COIN is often regarded by insurgents as the Achilles 
heel of liberal democracies.  Typically, counterinsurgencies that have failed have 
done so because of an inability to sustain political will in protracted campaigns.  
Ultimately, insurgency and COIN are locked in a persistent “contest of political 
wills” both at home and in the theatre of operations. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-21 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
The Struggle Against th
e Insurgent is a Struggle for the Population, not Against It 
 
0337. The population is the main focus and arguably the COG of COIN.  Whenever 
possible, the population’s trust in the HN government’s legitimacy must be 
emphasised and reinforced.  To that end, effective HN government information 
activities such as public affairs should “vaccinate” or insulate the population against 
insurgent misinformation and disinformation.   
 
0338. Because the struggle in COIN is essentially political, the counterinsurgent must 
shape a narrative message with the aim of discrediting the insurgent’s cause.  This 
message or dominant narrative is crucial when attempting to anticipate and pre-empt 
insurgent propaganda.  This narrative must negate the insurgent message.  A counter-
narrative must articulate the goals and purposes of the legitimate political authorities, 
highlight military and political successes, and manage public expectations.  The 
COIN narrative must be transparent, timely, open, honest, verifiable and accessible.   
 
0339. Successful COIN largely depends on NATO forces quickly developing an 
understanding of the operational environment and determining the importance of 
particular environments within respective AOOs.  Through this enhanced 
understanding of the population and what affects it, NATO forces will be able to 
effectively execute all actions within the range of military activities.  However, an 
inability to deliver on promises to local authorities and the population damages the 
credibility of the force and ultimately undermines the HN government.   
 
0340. Unlike in conventional conflicts, counterinsurgent actions involve deeper integration 
of the military forces into the population; as a result, smaller self-contained and agile 
units have an essential role in COIN.  This will pose a dilemma for military 
commanders, since they will be forced to assume greater risks in order to establish 
the procedures required to achieve their objectives - the deployment of detachments 
throughout the population, unit dispersion, dismounted patrols and so on.  
Commanders will have to find a balance between force protection and mission 
accomplishment (for further information on these paradoxes see Section 5, Part III). 
 
0341. The significance of actions and activities planned or executed against the insurgent 
must be assessed in terms of the potential effects which they could cause on the 
population, not only on the insurgent. 
 
Relevance of Legitimacy 
 
0342. Legitimacy is an essential element in any COIN and involves the following two 
aspects: 
 
a. the population’s perception of the legitimacy of the HN government, including 
their security forces; and 
 
b. the perception of the legitimacy of the Allied security forces by international 
authorities, the HN and the contributing nation(s).   
 
0343. COIN efforts will be in vain if the HN government cannot gain and maintain 
legitimacy.  Promoting the establishment of an efficient, legitimate government is 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-22 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
essential, an
d commanders should ensure that the impact of military actions 
contributes to reinforcing the local HN government’s legitimacy.  The legitimacy of 
an HN government can also be enhanced by demonstrating to the population the 
capacity to provide security and ensure basic essential services.  Other indicators of 
legitimacy might be as follows:  
 
a. a high-level recognition and acceptance of the HN government by major social 
institutions; 
 
b. a culturally accepted level of political, economic and social development; and 
 
c. the majority of the population feels appropriately represented by the state 
government and its institutions. 
 
0344. Any insurgency will try to undermine the local government’s legitimacy and will 
question the legitimacy of foreign forces’ intervention by influencing local and 
NATO nations’ public opinion.  To counter this, HNs and NATO forces should 
adhere to the following: 
 
a. have international support or at least neutrality. 
 
b. undertake diplomatic actions to gain support from countries belonging to the 
HN’s area of interest and influence.  Efforts should be made to explain to the 
population and respective governments the objective of Allied forces’ 
intervention.  This may assist in securing control on the HN borders, which is 
an essential factor when it comes to denying external support to the insurgent; 
and 
 
c. consider support from intervening countries’ public opinion.  The withdrawal 
of troops once a nation is involved in a campaign can: 
 
(1) damage alliance cohesion; 
 
(2) be claimed as a success by the insurgency; and 
 
(3) undermine capabilities.  Deficiencies may result, and they can be 
exploited by the insurgency. 
 
Intelligence Drives Operations 
 
0345. COIN is an intelligence-driven activity.  In COIN, effective intelligence requires 
close engagement with, and understanding of, the target population, including its 
political, social and cultural organisation.  All sources of intelligence will be utilised, 
but there will be a special emphasis on human intelligence (HUMINT) and 
counterintelligence (CI).  Insurgents tend to use the cover of everyday life and the 
population to mask their activities.  This may reduce effectiveness of the more 
technological means of intelligence-gathering unless they are closely integrated with 
basic CI/HUMINT. 
 
0346. Intelligence is an essential pillar of COIN.  Accurate and actionable intelligence is 
key to defeating an insurgency.  An efficient HN intelligence architecture must be 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-23 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
developed and access
ible.  Ideally, all intelligence organisations and agencies should 
be unified, integrated and centralised for information management, and decentralised 
for information gathering.  For situational awareness and strategic level decisions, 
intelligence should be linked to high-level political decisions, and consist of civil and 
military personnel.  However, for effective operations in the field, because a great 
deal of actionable intelligence is very perishable (within minutes and hours) it must 
be analysed and fused at the lowest possible level of command that reasonably 
results in effective tactical action. 
 
0347. Intelligence and information activities should be closely coordinated to create the 
desired effect on the target population.  Intelligence gathering should be continuous 
and focused and should prioritise collection assets in direct contact with the local 
population.  In this respect, HN security forces, local intelligence organisations, 
HUMINT / COMINT (Communications Intelligence) sources and personnel 
frequently operating off-base have an important role. 
 
0348. In addition to such skills as linguistic ability and cultural understanding, a broader 
mission awareness should be emphasised when training military personnel prior to 
participating in COIN.  Some of the required topics are as follows: 
  
a. a clear understanding of the essential nature and nuances of the conflict; 
 
b. an understanding of the insurgent’s motives, strengths and weak points; and 
 
c. an understanding of the roles of other actors in the AOO. 
 
Unity of Effort 
 
0349. The complexity of building an alliance COIN effort from the various governments, 
organisations, nations and armed forces involved can be daunting.  The inherent 
“organisational friction” in such an alliance needs to be addressed through unity of 
effort at all levels. 
 
0350. Foremost in achieving unity of effort is the development of a COIN strategy based on 
a shared understanding of the problem.  This strategy should be comprehensive and 
fully coordinated by the HN government through a multifaceted approach combining 
political, economic and security solutions.  A successful COIN strategy requires 
close cooperation between civil and military authorities at all levels; otherwise well-
meaning but badly coordinated actions or statements will expose HN vulnerabilities 
that will be exploited by the insurgents. 
 
0351. Another method of enhancing unity of effort is to establish liaison elements among 
the various structures and echelons, which should facilitate, integrate and coordinate 
civil, military and other agency efforts.  Liaison should help ensure that actions and 
messages are coordinated and understood among all affected elements. 
 
Neutralise the Insurgent 
 
0352. In order to neutralise the insurgent, counterinsurgents m
 ust isolate the insurgent 
physically and psychologically from the population as well as addressing the core 
grievances of the insurgency.  NATO-led COIN should contribute to a 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-24 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
com
prehensive approach in addressing the core grievances of the conflict, focusing 
on the causes which have generated the insurgency and minimising its effects.  
Effectively addressing core grievances positively will facilitate HN legitimacy, and 
assist isolating the insurgents from the population.  Physically neutralising the 
insurgents will require involvement of NATO forces ranging from direct combat to 
support to HN security forces.  This requires that NATO forces match or surpass the 
mobility of the insurgents.  Psychologically neutralising the insurgent will require 
using military capabilities such as PsyOps, CIMIC and public affairs. 
 
0353. While the main focus of the military contribution to COIN is to protect the populace and 
secure access for HN agencies, another significant contribution should be neutralising the 
insurgents.  This will involve the application of appropriate force to detect, capture or 
combat insurgents and the imposition of population control measures.  Since insurgents do 
not require widespread active support from a population but only passive acquiescence, 
unnecessarily restrictive population control measures may be counterproductive.  
Similarly, killing insurgents can be counterproductive if these actions cause extensive 
collateral damage and resentment, generating martyrs and promoting recruitment and 
revenge. 
 
0354. COIN must promote all possible methods to separate insurgents from the population and 
create divisions within insurgent groups.  Several methods (which may involve military 
support provided by the counterinsurgent force) can be applied:  
 
a. Address reasonable economic, political or social grievances that fuel the insurgency. 
 
b. Implement initiatives promoting the switching of sides, offering them amnesty and 
promoting social reintegration and rehabilitation. 
 
c. Promote denunciation and betrayal by fellow insurgents or by the populace.  The 
offer of rewards may provide an additional incentive. 
 
d. Apply measures to isolate insurgents by discrediting and demoralising them, and 
deterring them through detention and imprisonment.  Ultimately the legal application 
of lethal force may be required. 
 
0355. Like any other adversary, insurgents must communicate.  In order to isolate the insurgents, 
their means of communication must be disrupted.  For example, insurgents often use the 
Internet to communicate and to engage in effective information activities, which NATO 
forces must effectively detect and disrupt.   
 
0356. The most dynamic insurgencies can replace casualties quickly.  Therefore, COIN should 
attempt to deny insurgents the ability to reinforce or regenerate by the following means: 
 
a. Physical Isolation.  Physical isolation involves sealing borders in order to prevent or 
at least hinder external support to the insurgents, and developing area control actions 
to hinder or prevent the flow of insurgents through the population.   
 
b. Economic Isolation.  Economic isolation involves legal and diplomatic actions at 
local and international level for eliminating or hindering financial and economic 
support from external actors. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-25 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
c. Psychological Isolation.  Psychological isolation involves the application of 
targeted constant and consistent m
essages, psychological operations (PsyOps), 
and mutual and reciprocal support of HN government and Alliance forces.   
 
Prepare for a Protracted Campaign 
 
0357. Insurgencies are protracted by nature, and history demonstrates that they often last 
for years or even decades.  As a result, COIN will normally demand considerable 
expenditure of time and resources, especially when conducted simultaneously with 
conventional operations in a protracted conflict. 
 
0358. COIN requires a high degree of political understanding and a recognition of the 
effect, in terms of the human and economic cost, of military operations.  Alliance 
nations should ensure that the appropriate level of effort is expended to maintain 
popular support.  This support should be directed toward the indigenous population, 
international interests and the home nations of the insurgents. 
 
0359. Military defeat of the insurgent is not the end of the COIN campaign.  Political, 
social and economic programmes must continue to be resourced to ensure popular 
support and eradicate the underlying causes that fuelled the insurgency in the first 
place. 
 
Security under the Rule of Law is Essential 
 
0360. One of the pillars of any COIN campaign is the establishment of a secure 
environment that meets the basic needs of the population.  Without a secure 
environment the insurgency could rekindle, and it would then be very difficult to 
sustain all the programs and reforms required to achieve the overall campaign 
objectives.   
 
0361. There will be times when military forces are the only elements with the ability to 
operate in an area until a secure environment is established and other actors can 
intervene.  In these cases, military commanders will require capabilities and 
resources which allow them to meet the basic needs of the population and restore 
normality.  The aim is to reduce the level of violence as soon as possible in order to 
allow police forces - HN security forces - to assume law enforcement tasks.   
 
0362. Similarly, government institutions - especially security forces and a law enforcement 
system - should be established, promoted and consolidated as soon as possible to 
maintain order and establish the rule of law.  The tendency to create or reform local 
institutions following foreign models should be resisted.  Local culture, tradition and 
idiosyncrasies should be respected.   
 
0363. The use of military forces for law enforcement tasks should only occur in 
extraordinary circumstances and for a short period, until government institutions and 
police forces can undertake the task.  The presence of military forces in the streets 
may help maintain a secure environment in the short term, but this role should be 
transferred to HN law enforcement agencies as soon as they are capable.  In normal 
conditions, it is a mistake to use a soldier as a police officer, and vice versa.   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-26 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0364. The struggle against organised crim
e must be developed by the police and justice 
authorities.  However, military commanders should always be willing to cooperate 
closely with civil authorities and security forces, especially where appropriate local 
resources are not available.  Systems, processes and procedures should be established 
at all levels through civil authorities, security (police) forces, and military forces to 
enable the passage of information and to deconflict military and civilian tasking.   
 
0365. It is essential that COIN forces reinforce the rule of law.  Undermining the rule of 
law in the name of military expediency is always counterproductive.  COIN must be 
conducted in such a way as to reassure the population that the law remains 
paramount.  Rectitude is a vital part of COIN campaigning. 
 
0366. Any illegal activity or human rights abuses by counterinsurgent forces will seriously 
hinder the attainment of COIN campaign objectives.  This has always been the case 
but, due to the speed and reach of today’s media, it can now be even more damaging.  
Accordingly, COIN forces of the HN and NATO must ensure the fast dissemination 
of their public affairs/information message through the media to counter any 
manipulation of insurgent propaganda alleging human rights abuses.   
 
Hand over Responsibility to the Local Forces as Soon as Practicable 
 
0367. Military commanders are focused on handing over responsibility to the HN 
government and its forces as soon as practicable in order to transition to the next 
phase of the COIN operation.  Achieving this requires the development of reliable 
local leaders and institutions, and capable police and military forces.  However, some 
nations are so vulnerable that there may be no other option but for NATO forces to 
lead operations for a protracted period. 
 
0368. While it may be easier for NATO forces to lead operations, a better approach would 
be to strengthen local forces and institutions and provide support when required.  
Ideally, NATO forces would not directly fight the insurgency, but would limit their 
support to the local regime - intelligence, helicopters, engineers, medical care, the 
training of local forces and so on.  Otherwise, the insurgency is likely to present its 
cause as a struggle against an occupation force. 
 
0369. Local civil, police and military institutions should assume the COIN effort at all 
levels as soon as possible.  Local forces have a deeper understanding of the local 
culture and environment.  This is clearly a positive outcome from the HN since it 
establishes the foundation to enable the nation to gain political momentum and 
avoids NATO units being considered to be occupying forces.  It also preserves 
NATO combat power - especially in terms of troops - in a situation where there may 
be scarce NATO forces.   
 
Learn and Adapt Quickly 
 
0370. An efficient counterinsurgent force is an organisation with the ability to learn and 
adapt more quickly than an insurgent.  In this context, the battle between the 
insurgent and the counterinsurgent represents an iterative action-reaction process; it 
is competitive learning.  The side which is qu
 ickest to adapt its techniques and 
understanding seizes the initiative and progressively wins control of the operational 
environment.  Counterinsurgent forces must possess mechanisms to identify and 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-27 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
im
plement appropriate changes.  Tactics, campaign plans and the overarching 
strategy must be flexible enough to account for shifts in government policy, public 
sentiment and insurgent methods, while resources must be readily available to 
implement decisions rapidly. 
 
0371. An efficient training program is essential, as well as the good management of lessons 
learned.  All units should be able to analyse, outline and implement lessons learned, 
and assess the results obtained.  Experiences and lessons identified and learned from 
recent NATO missions should be disseminated to units preparing for and while on 
operations. 
 
Section VII - Indicative Tasks and Activities in Counterinsurgency  
 
0372. Chapter 2 discussed those elements that comprise a stable state and how shortfalls 
and imbalances in these elements can cause state instability.  Figure 3.4 illustrates 
indicative activities and tasks within the three elements of building human security, 
stimulating economic development, and fostering HN governance and legitimacy.  A 
COIN campaign plan should address these three elements, especially with respect to 
the lines of operation (LOOs) that are introduced in Chapter 4.  Their execution 
should be guided by the attributes in COIN described in this chapter and the HN’s 
cultural perspective.  While it is accepted that the activities must fall under either a 
military or civil lead within a comprehensive approach, the military must plan to 
conduct or support all of these activities in the event that a non-permissive 
environment prevents civil actors from undertaking tasks best conducted by civilians.   
               
STIMULATE 
ECONOMIC & INFRASTRUCTURE  
DEVELOPMENT
Under-
Development
Absence of
Human
Security
Reform Security, Police & Justice Sectors
Support Engagement & Reconciliation Processes
Facilitate Political Processes
Re-establish Government Machinery
FOSTER HOST GOVERNMENT CAPACITY 
& LEGITIMACY
BUILD HUMAN SECURITY
Neutralise Hostile Groups
Provide Public Order (protect 
population & key assets)
Enforce Ceasefires
Ensure Territorial Integrity
Deliver & Sustain Essential 
Commodities
Restore Basic Services & 
Infrastructure
Rebuild Effective Economic & 
Financial Management
Begin Long-Term Social & 
Infrastructure Development
Weak 
Governance &
Rule of Law
Political        Settlement
 
 
Figure 3.4 - Indicative Activities and Tasks in Counterinsurgency 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
3-28 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK) 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
CHAPTER 4 - PLANNING FOR COUNTERINSURGENCY 
 
Section I Introduction 
 
0401. General.  This chapter focuses on planning for the NATO military contribution to COIN at 
the operational level.  The operational level links the tactical action with achievement of 
the strategic end state.  The general rules for the NATO operational planning process apply 
also to COIN planning.  The principles are described in the Allied Command Operations 
(ACO) Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive (COPD).  Operational art and 
design are the core of planning for the operational level.  Commanders use operational art 
and design to provide a framework to integrate the operational factors of time, space and 
purpose to achieve the conditions that make up the strategic end state.  For COIN, the 
operational level contributes to reaching the overall strategic end state by focusing on 
securing the population, neutralising the insurgents and addressing the core grievances of 
the insurgency. 
 
0402. Influencing the Future.  Planning involves thinking about ways to influence the future 
rather than merely responding to events.  This involves evaluating potential decisions and 
actions, and shaping conditions in advance.  Planning involves integrating individual 
decisions and tasks together into potential effects, as well as examining the implications of 
these decisions, tasks and effects.  Planning involves thinking through the conditions and 
how, by achieving the objectives, one will cumulatively reach the end state. 
 
0403. Time Horizons.  Planning time horizons refer to how far into the future plans attempt to 
shape events.  Uncertainty increases with the length of the planning horizon and the rate of 
change in the environment.  The further into the future plans reach, the wider the range of 
possibilities and the more uncertain the forecast of future conditions.  A fundamental 
tension exists between planning in detail and lack of certainty of future events.  Time 
horizons in COIN are normally longer than in traditional warfare. 
 
0404. Plans.  In order to prepare for and conduct military operations, it is necessary to develop 
operational plans that address all relevant factors applicable to the efficient and successful 
conduct of an operation.  Operational plans must be developed at all levels of the NATO 
military command structure.  An essential element of NATO’s operational planning 
process is the requirement for political control, guidance and approval, particularly in 
respect of planning and force activation, in response to an actual or developing crisis.  To 
this end, planning should be flexible enough to allow both frequent exchanges of political 
guidance and military advice as well as adaptation to political requirements. 
 
0405. Political Primacy and Unity of Effort.  Political considerations in COIN require special 
attention to achieve unity of effort.  The means to achieve unity of effort are a 
comprehensive approach - essentially all multinational, joint, intergovernmental, inter-
agency, non-governmental and other actors working towards a common purpose.  In its 
most basic terms, all actors should strive to counter an insurgency as a team.  The HN 
government and its strategy are at the centre of this team.   
 
0406. Comprehensive Approach.  As described in Chapter 1, a comprehensive approach refers 
to cooperative planning and execution by a range of actors, both national and international; 
including militaries, other departments of state, IOs, NGOs and the HN government.  A 
comprehensive approach to planning and execution is essential for successful long-term 
COIN. NATO’s military contribution supports the HN’s military efforts to neutralise the 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
insurgen
t’s military efforts, but the military contribution is only one part of a larger 
comprehensive approach to countering an insurgency.  
 
Section II - Levels of Operations and Counterinsurgency 
 
0407. Levels of Operations.  The levels of operations remain the same for any campaign theme, 
including COIN.  There is no clean transition between where one level of operations ends 
and another begins.  Brilliance at one level of operations may not overcome shortcomings 
at another.  Success at the lower levels of operations may be necessary but not sufficient to 
achieve lasting political results.  Strategic mistakes may squander operational and tactical 
successes.  By the same token, tactical and operational success cannot rescue a seriously 
flawed strategy.  The tactical and operational levels in COIN may be compressed due to 
the protracted nature of the conflict and the complexity of the operational environment.  
The levels of operations are not necessarily associated with echelons or headquarters (HQ); 
thus, a division may have to plan at the operational level if it is the HQ of the NATO COIN 
effort within an HN. 
 
0408. Strategic.  The strategic level is that level of operations at which NATO and individual 
nations determine multinational or national objectives and how to achieve those objectives.  
The strategic level of operations may be the most difficult to plan for because the strategic 
environment is often volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous.  This level of operations 
is the most important, as it establishes the framework for how operational and tactical 
efforts work to achieve the end state.  Because political factors have primacy in COIN, the 
strategic level is vital.  Additionally, the strategic level establishes the overall framework 
to counter an insurgency.  While operational and tactical actions can be successful, it is at 
the strategic level that core grievances are most often truly addressed.  For example, HN 
reform or political accommodation may be required to address the core grievances of an 
insurgency.   
 
0409. Operational.  The operational level links multinational, national and military strategic 
objectives to the tactical employment of forces, and the focus is on campaigns and major 
operations.  The operational level requires the use of operational art and design.  
Operational art is the application of creative imagination by commanders and staffs, 
supported by their skill, knowledge and experience.  The operational design is the 
framework for the commander’s efforts and includes operational objectives.  Operational 
objectives change a condition at the theatre level and are consequently broad in scale and 
size or space.  In COIN, actions at the operational level are normally protracted in nature, 
as successfully achieving operational objectives requires cumulative tactical successes over 
time.  Achieving strategic objectives similarly requires cumulative operational successes 
over time.  Long-range planning, complex situations, large spans of control, and working 
with other agencies are also indicators for operating at the operational level; however, it is 
the level of the objective that is the determining factor.   
 
0410. Tactical.  The tactical level focuses on planning and executing battles, engagements and 
activities to achieve tactical objectives.  The overall COIN campaign consists of a series of 
major tactical actions and operations of long duration.  Tactical action in COIN is the 
direct link with the relevant population, gaining counterinsurgent credibility and HN 
legitimacy.  The cumulative effect of tactical action translates to changing conditions.  The 
operational and strategic levels in COIN are extremely sensitive to tactical actions.  
Tactical commanders should be empowered with the authority and capabilities they need.  
Tactical COIN efforts are normally decentralised with a centralised vision and message.  

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
However, NATO co
mmanders must avoid having a “strategy of tactics”.  In other words, 
commanders must have an overarching framework and plans that tactical efforts nest 
within.  Additionally, NATO Commanders must ensure that tactics that win in combat but 
prevent operational or strategic success are not used. 
 
Section III - Intelligence 
 
0411. Population.  Intelligence in COIN is focused on the population.  Effective 
counterinsurgents must understand the population of the HN, the insurgents, and the HN 
government and military.  This level of understanding requires insight into the human 
environment. 
 
0412. Intelligence-Operations Dynamic.  Intelligence and operations dynamically support each 
other.  Effective intelligence is vital to effective operations.  In turn, effective operations 
tend to produce information which can generate actionable intelligence
, corroborated 
intelligence that is immediately useful, specific, and relevant enough to efficiently conduct 
action.  Similarly, ineffective or inaccurate intelligence tends to produce ineffective 
operations, which often have unintended and negative effects. 
 
0413. Local Focus.  Insurgencies vary greatly in time and space, in terms of their leaders, 
approaches, organisations and tactics.  The insurgency one unit faces will often be different 
from that faced by an adjacent unit.  The mosaic nature of insurgencies, coupled with the 
fact that all personnel are potential intelligence collectors, means that all echelons both 
produce and consume intelligence.  In COIN, much of the information and intelligence 
flows from the bottom up.  This pattern also means that tactical units require a lot of 
support for both collection and analysis, as their organic intelligence structure is often 
inadequate. 
 
0414. Intelligence Collaboration.  NATO COIN normally occurs in a multinational, joint and 
inter-agency environment at all echelons.  Commanders and staffs must consequently share 
intelligence with other militaries, intelligence services and other organisations, as 
applicable to their roles and missions in the COIN effort.  Depending on the duration and 
complexity of the COIN effort, the Joint Forces Command (JFC) may consider standing up 
a multinational intelligence cell to produce combined intelligence products.  Due to the 
imperative for operations-intelligence fusion in COIN, commanders may consider fusion 
cells and other solutions that enable operations and intelligence to work more closely in a 
dynamic relationship. 
 
0415. Determine Adversary Courses of Action.  After analysing the operational environment, 
assessing adversary approaches and tactics, and identifying adversary COGs, the next step 
is to develop a detailed understanding of the adversary’s campaign plan and probable 
courses of action (COAs).  The overall approach, or combination of approaches, that the 
insurgent senior leaders have selected to achieve their goals, and their recent tactics, are 
key indicators of their campaign plan.  From these indicators a model of the insurgent 
campaign plan can be constructed.  The final step is determining the COAs that the 
insurgency may use. 
 
0416. Insurgent Campaign Plan.  The insurgent campaign plan is the way in which the 
insurgent strategic approach is applied to create the conditions necessary to achieve the 
desired end state.  Insurgents can accomplish this goal by maintaining pre-existing adverse 
conditions or by creating those conditions.  While insurgents normally do not have a 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
cam
paign plan in the same sense that NATO does, constructing a model of their actions in 
this form adds to a counterinsurgent understanding of the insurgency, predicting insurgent 
COAs, planning a COIN campaign, seizing the initiative, execution and assessment.   
 
0417. Collaborative Effort.  Constructing a model of an insurgency’s campaign plan requires 
participation and input from the HN, joint force command (JFC), outside agencies and the 
entire staff.  Cultural understanding, as well as judgement, experience, education, 
intelligence, boldness, perception and character are required to effectively produce a useful 
and accurate model.  It is imperative that the entire process is based on open discussion and 
intellectual honesty.  Mirror-imaging or biasing this process will result not only in a 
skewed view of the insurgent campaign plan, but all friendly efforts based on it.   
 
0418. Model-making.  The process of constructing a model of an insurgency’s campaign plan is 
an inductive and intuitive one that requires detailed intelligence products.  These products 
are based on the insurgents’ actions, and building the model requires analysing these 
products holistically and then inductively determining the insurgents’ LOOs. 
 
0419. Graphic Example.  Figure 4.1 graphically depicts one example of insurgent campaign 
plans in terms of the end state and LOOs.  The insurgent ‘end state’ is the sum of several 
conditions that the insurgents must change from current conditions (see Chapter 2 for more 
information on the operational environment).  The LOOs are the insurgency’s operational 
ways to cause effects to change the current conditions.  Insurgents execute tactical actions 
simultaneously or sequentially along these LOOs.  These tactical actions strive to create 
certain effects in the overall operational environment.  These effects, or an accumulation of 
effects, may occur simultaneously or sequentially, depending on the situation and the 
effectiveness of insurgent and counterinsurgent efforts.  When tactical actions and their 
cumulative effects have successfully translated to the operational level to achieve insurgent 
objectives, the insurgency will have reached its end state.  It is important to note, however, 
that the operational environment is a complex and dynamic one which will often require 
changes in planning and execution or even the desired conditions. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-5 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
              
• Cause casualties among NATO Troops (Daily Deaths on Evening News)
• Build appearance of “Popular Revolt” of the theatre ‐ # of Attacks
• Undermine the legitimacy of Coalition –O c c u p a t i o n was/is illegitimate
• Shape perception of continued instability –a n d the inevitability of more
• Fracture HN Political Cooperation/Consensus
• Assassinate/Discredit/Intimidate HN Political Leaders
• Seize/Hold Sanctuary Enclaves –K e y Te rrain
• Disrupt Essential Services
• Disrupt Economy
• Exploit NATO collateral damage through media
• Portray collateral damage as attacks on cultural/religious sites or civilians
• Create perception of Popular Revolt Against the Occupiers
• Undermine the legitimacy of NATO countries political leaders Policy
• Conduct Info Ops to Create Perception of a Popular Insurgency
• Promote vi sion  of a better future or return to “Golden Age”
• Provide security and essential services: food, water, power
• Unite insurgent groups under political party
• Promote religious goals
EXHAUST THE WILL OF NATO PEOPLE
DELEGITIMIZE THE HN GOVERNMENT
SHAPE INTERNATIONAL OPINION AGAINST OCCUPATION
PROMOTE LEGITIMACY OF INSURGENT CAUSE
Example of Insurgent Lines of Operation
END
STATE:
NATO
Forces 
withdraw 
from the 
HN 
territory, 
leaving 
remaining 
groups to 
decide its 
future
 
Figure 4.1 Example of an Insurgent Campaign Plan 
 
0420. Multiple Insurgencies or Threats.  If there are multiple insurgencies, this process of 
model-making must be undertaken for each insurgency or adversary.  Once the models 
have been made for each adversary, they must be accounted for holistically or 
cumulatively.  Thus the intelligence community will incorporate this comprehensive view 
of adversarial end states, conditions and LOOs into the intelligence estimate.  The 
comprehensive view must be accounted for in the HN’s strategy and other subordinate 
COIN plans.   
 
0421. Assessment and Adjustment.  Any model must be continuously evaluated, and updated if 
necessary.  A change to the model may cause the overall strategy and supporting plans to 
be modified.  While the overall strategy may not require changes, operational and/or 
tactical adjustments may be necessary. 
 
0422. Insurgent Courses of Action.  The insurgency campaign plan model provides a 
disciplined methodology for analysing the set of potential adversary COAs.  However, 
insurgents may pursue many different tactical COAs within an operational area at any 
time.  Insurgents base their tactical COAs on their capabilities and intentions.  Evaluating 
the support, information, political, and violence capabilities of insurgent organisations has 
been discussed.  The intentions come from goals, motivations, approaches, culture, 
perceptions and leadership personalities.  However, insurgent tactical actions can have 
operational and strategic effects.  This is partly due to the fact that insurgent propaganda 
and media reporting can reach a wide and even a global audience. 
 
Section IV - Counterinsurgency Campaign Planning Overview 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-6 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0423. General.  N
ATO operational planning is oriented to the achievement of a political end 
state and strategic objectives established by NATO’s political-military authorities and 
carried out within the political limitations and resource constraints set by these authorities.  
For COIN the HN will play a key role in determining the end state and objectives.  
Operational planning will seek to translate strategic guidance and direction into a 
scheduled series of integrated military actions, carried out by joint forces to achieve 
strategic objectives efficiently and with acceptable risks.  It begins with an analysis of the 
situation and the mission to develop a clear appreciation of what must be accomplished, 
under what conditions and within what limitations.  Based on this appreciation, it then 
focuses on determining how operations should be arranged within an overall operational 
design.  The operational design provides the basis for subsequent development of the 
operational concept as well as a detailed plan (see Annex D).  Operational art is applied to 
determine how best to conduct operations (ways) using available forces and capabilities 
(means) to achieve the objectives (ends) efficiently and within acceptable risk parameters.  
Key to the application of operational art is the ability to envision the employment of forces 
and capabilities in time and space to create effects, to appreciate the realm of possibilities, 
and to anticipate probable outcomes and their implications. 
 
0424. Fundamentals of Operations Planning.  Operations planning may be carried out at 
different levels under varying circumstances and produce different outputs.  In any case, 
the basics outlined in the following paragraphs are fundamental to any operations planning 
effort, including COIN. 
 
0425. Direction and Requirements.  Operations planning involves concurrent activity at 
different levels of command in iterative cycles as planning matures from a basic idea to a 
concept and finally to a mature plan.  Guidance and direction are transmitted from higher 
to lower levels while requirements for resources and requests for information are 
transmitted for approval from lower to higher levels.  Operations planning at any level 
should take account of guidance two levels above and requirements two levels below; 
however, in COIN the lowest tactical levels (each individual military member) must 
understand the key strategic objectives. 
 
0426. Objective Oriented Planning.  Operations planning seeks to describe the sequence of 
actions that have the greatest likelihood of setting the military conditions required to 
achieve the objective and the desired end state.  Therefore, it is usually necessary to clearly 
describe the desired end state and work backwards to the initial entry or build-up of forces 
in the joint AOO, and even to consider preventive measures to determine the activities 
most likely to be required to establish conditions for success along the way. 
 
0427. Operational Approaches.  There are a range of possible operational approaches to COIN, 
depicted in Figure 4.2.  The proportion of effort that counterinsurgents use is the vital 
consideration.  For example, a direct approach will have a greater proportion of defence 
(military and law enforcement) efforts rather than development and diplomacy efforts.  
Conversely, an indirect approach will have more diplomatic and development efforts than 
defence efforts.  Careful consideration and coordination determines which initial approach 
is appropriate given the starting conditions; however, the earlier efforts can begin, the more 
likely an indirect approach is appropriate.  Commanders adjust their approach as 
circumstances change, especially the security situation.  COIN should strive to move to the 
right on the scale - from direct to balanced and from balanced to indirect.   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-7 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
Figure 4.2 Counterinsurgency Range of Responses 
 
0428. Direct.  A direct approach may be required where an HN government is losing ground in 
its struggle with an insurgency or there is no viable HN government.  The first task in this 
situation is to establish security and control in as wide an area and with as great an extent 
as possible.  Once security and control are established, the counterinsurgent approach 
should strive to become more balanced.  The direct approach may also be appropriate for 
the long term when facing an insurgency that is not concerned with the support of the 
population and when the population supports the HN government.  In this situation, the 
commander leads all NATO efforts in support of the HN’s strategy. 
 
0429. Balanced.  This approach is a more even blend of NATO political, development and 
military efforts.  The balanced approach is led by the commander and supported by the 
JFC, but all efforts support the HN’s strategy.  While the overall level of effort is balanced, 
military efforts are secondary and subordinate to political and development activities when 
using this approach.  Removing the fuel that keeps an insurgency going - the core 
grievances and narrative - is more effective in the long-term than attacking or destroying 
the military wing of the insurgency. 
 
0430. Indirect.  An indirect approach utilises more development and political efforts than 
military efforts to address an insurgency.  The ability to use the indirect approach is based 
on the security situation.  If the insurgency is at least in military stalemate, 
counterinsurgents can avoid direct military confrontation and instead focus on addressing 
the core grievances and combating the insurgency’s narrative.  The indirect approach also 
requires that the HN be viable.  If the HN is viable, NATO can support the HN’s COIN 
efforts.  Advisory efforts are normally an essential part of the indirect approach.  Finally, 
the indirect approach is best suited to early intervention and must be a holistic effort. 
 
0431. Progression.  Figure 4.3 is an example of how a COIN operation might move from a direct 
approach to a balanced approach and is currently using an indirect approach.  In other 
words, initial efforts have focused more on defensive efforts and, over time, successes and 
the operational environment in general have allowed for efforts to shift to more emphasis 
on diplomacy and development.  In this example, however, the COIN operation has not 
reached its end state and is consequently ongoing.  This reinforces the principle that NATO 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-8 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
long-term
 efforts should aim to be more developmental and political than military until the 
presence of NATO forces is no longer required.   
Defense
Improving Security
Proportion of Effort
Development
Diplomacy
Dip
Def
DevDef Dev
End stateStart
Dip
Defense
Improving Security
Proportion of Effort
Development
Diplomacy
Dip
Def
DevDef Dev
End stateStart
Dip
 
 
Figure 4.3 Example Progression of the Operational Approach 
 
0432. Coordination and Leadership.  In planning, permanent coordination between the civil 
and military authorities is paramount to ensure effectiveness and avoid prejudicial 
frictions.  Yet it is paramount to assess the results in order to decide the beginning of a new 
phase of the campaign.  Any transition has to be carefully managed if one does not want to 
lose the benefit of the previous phase.  For instance, the military will become the 
supporting element and the civilian the supported as the prominence of military activity 
reduces and the emphasis of the campaign transitions to civilian development and 
diplomacy.  This has to be prepared; otherwise an insurgency can develop quickly pending 
a decision.  Coordination requires leadership.  Indeed, it also requires the existence of one 
top theatre authority (either civilian or military, depending on the phase, but it must be one 
authority) that will define priorities and makes decisions, as the proportion of effort 
requires (see Figure 4.3).  One should keep in mind that the insurgent’s strategy often 
benefits in terms of time from the coexistence of equally high ranking leaders who may be 
unable to agree and are then unable or slow to trigger effort in given fields.  The 
subsequent lack of unity of effort can protract the insurgency.   
 
Section V - Operational Art 
 
0433. Operational Art.  Operational art is the skilful employment of military forces to attain 
strategic and/or operational objectives through the design, organisation, integration and 
conduct of campaigns, operations and battles.  While military art transcends the levels of 
operations, operational art is focused on the operational level - the link between the tactical 
and strategic levels of operations.  Operational art translates strategy into an operational 
design and, ultimately, tactical action, by integrating the key activities at all levels of 
operations.  It promotes unified action by facilitating the integration of other agencies and 
multinational partners toward achieving the national strategic end state which is essential 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-9 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
for long-term COIN suc
cess. 
 
0434. Understanding the Operational Environment.  Operational art involves considerations 
that must reflect more than just rote knowledge of doctrine and manuals.  It should be 
applied with a broad knowledge and understanding of the complicated relationships of all 
the factors influencing the planning and execution of a campaign.  In COIN, a deep 
understanding of the operational environment is fundamental, especially the population 
and the insurgency.  Operational art also requires broad vision, the ability to anticipate, a 
careful understanding of the relationship of “means” to “ends” and an understanding of the 
inherent and effective synergy that flows from properly coordinated joint operations. 
 
0435. Considerations.  When designing a campaign, the commander utilises operational art to 
consider the following four aspects: 
 
a. End State.  The end state that will achieve the strategic objective must first be 
identified.  Further, the military conditions that comprise the end state must be 
identified.  The military conditions and overall conditions for a COIN end state are 
interdependent (see Figure 4.4).  In other words, all participants in COIN must work 
towards one end state. 
 
 
Figure 4.4 - Example of Counterinsurgency Campaign End State and Lines of Operation 
 
b. Sequencing.  The ordering of activities, both sequentially and simultaneously, will 
lead to the fulfilment of the military conditions, which should lead to success. 
 
c. Resources.  The application of the military resources allocated to commanders, 
within the constraints and restraints imposed upon them, to sustain their sequence of 
actions. 
 
d. Risk.  The risks involved must be identified and the commander must have an 
appreciation of what is possible.  To achieve success commanders must be prepared 
to take risks, but they should also make some contingency plans to mitigate the risk 
involved. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-10 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0436. Concepts of Campaign Design.  In seeking to conduct operations, battles, and 
engagem
ents in pursuit of the strategic objective, operational level commanders will design 
the campaign around a number of planning tools that help them visualise how the 
campaign will unfold.  Thus the commander articulates a vision or concept of operational 
design, a statement of intent for the campaign plan, and a command structure for executing 
the plan. 
 
0437. Time, Space and Forces.  Operational art is largely a matter of imagination and skill in 
balancing the influences of time, space and forces in order to gain and maintain the 
initiative and set military conditions for success, as follows: 
 
a. Time-Space.  Time-space factors relate to the relative speed with which forces can 
reconnoitre, occupy, secure or control a given area.  These factors are critical in 
COIN, as insurgents normally attempt to protract a conflict in order to exhaust the 
counterinsurgents. 
 
b. Time-Force.  Time-force factors relate to the relative readiness and availability of 
forces and logistic support over time, including implications regarding their 
preparedness as well as the evolution of capabilities. 
 
c. Space-Force.  Space-force factors relate to the relative ability to control or dominate 
operationally significant areas, the concentration and dispersion of forces within 
(Joint) AOOs, including the consequences of over-extension, dislocation, and 
exposure and the ability to give up space in order to avoid becoming decisively 
engaged. 
 
d. Time-Space-Force.  Time-space-force factors relate to the relative capability to 
project forces into a region and the comparative speed with which they can build up 
decisive force capabilities. 
 
0438. The Adversary.  Regardless of the situation, the underlying premise for operational 
planning is that military operations are required to pre-empt and counter threats from an 
adversary or to contain violence and hostilities.  This pertains to COIN as well as other 
associated threats such as crime, ethnic violence and terrorism.  The insurgents, their 
leaders, and the population at large possess their own “will”, influenced by their own 
culture, perspectives and vital interests, to pursue goals in opposition to NATOs.  It is 
therefore imperative during all operational planning to attribute to the opponents and 
opposing factions the potential to willingly oppose NATO operations with their full 
potential when their aims conflict with our own. 
 
0439. Ends, Ways, Means and Risk.  Operational art requires that NATO commanders 
understand the relationship between ends, ways, means and risk.  Ends consist of the 
required conditions to achieve the overall objectives.  Ways are the required actions and 
sequence of actions that are most likely to bring about the ends.  Means are the required 
resources necessary to support the ways.  The risk includes both the likely cost in 
performing that sequence of actions and the overall probability of the ways and means 
being able to bring about the desired ends.  Because the ends are established at the strategic 
level, ends remain constant with respect to operational art.  If ways and means are 
insufficient for the ends, NATO commanders will have to address this with their superiors.  
Figure 4.5 depicts balanced ends, ways, means and risk on the left, and w
 ays that require 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-11 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
more m
eans than are currently available, with consequent risk, on the right. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.5 - Balancing Ends, Ways and Means 
 
Section VI - Operational Design 
 
0440. The development of an operational design is fundamental to operational planning.  It 
represents the formulation of an overarching idea for the operation, based on a general 
estimate of the situation and the mission analysis, and embodies the commander’s intent.  
Operational design provides design elements to help visualise and shape the operation to 
accomplish the mission.  Elements of operational design help to visualise the arrangement 
of joint capabilities in time, space and purpose to accomplish the mission.  The key to 
operational design involves understanding the strategic guidance, determining the end state 
and objectives, identifying the adversary’s principal strengths and weaknesses, and 
developing an operational concept.  Operational design for COIN should reflect a 
comprehensive approach applicable to each phase of the campaign.  Because there is only 
one strategy or campaign, there should be only one operational design.  This single design 
should incorporate all actors, especially the HN (see Annex D). 
 
Section VII - Planning Considerations 
 
0441. Air Command and Control.  The command and control relationships established for 
engagement operations should consider both the need for flexibility and the training level 
of forces to be employed.  For example, the training and competency required for precision 
strikes in COIN are more demanding than for traditional warfare.  Consequently, joint 
force commanders and component commanders must consider the command and control 
architecture that best suits the situation.  A highly responsive command and control 
architecture that allows the employment of the wrong weapon at the wrong place or time 
may be worse for the overall effort than a more rigid structure that causes delays but 
ensures appropriate weapons employment.  The key is striking a balance that suits the 
situation.  Air forces have historically provided capability to NATO-led ground forces with 
close air support (CAS) where a qualified forward air controller (FAC) is available.  Being 
especially cognisant of the fluid environment of COIN, we must be mindful of how and 
when to engage or use force.  Considerations  for air command and control are as follows: 
 
a. Command and control architecture.  COIN operations require a joint, 
multinational command and control architecture for air that is effective and 
responsive.  The command and control structure applies to more than just NATO 
forces; it involves coordinating all air assets, including those of the HN.  COIN 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-12 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
planning m
ust thus establish a joint and multinational air power command and 
control system, and policies on the rules and conditions for employing air power in 
the theatre.   
 
b. Planning.  During COIN operations, most planning occurs at lower echelons.  
Ideally, components at the operational level fully coordinate these plans.  Air 
planners require visibility of actions planned at all echelons to provide the most 
effective air support.  Furthermore, COIN planning is often fluid and develops along 
short planning and execution time lines, necessitating some degree of informal 
coordination and integration for safety and efficiency. 
 
0442. Information Activities Planning.  These activities are synchronised and nested within the 
communication strategy developed for each operation.  They should also reflect a 
dominant narrative agreed upon among Allies for both the civilian and military elements of 
the COIN operation.  Planners must coordinate information activities, conducted through 
capabilities, key tools and techniques to accomplish COIN objectives.  In this context, the 
Info Ops function will provide advice on and help to co-ordinate information activities 
throughout the planning process.  The successful execution of information activities also 
requires early detailed information activities planning, coordination and deconfliction with 
all appropriate participants in unified action.  Uncoordinated information activities can 
compromise, complicate, negate or harm other activities within operations.  Planners must 
also recognise that other agencies and nations will have various concepts concerning 
information activities and some have thorough and sophisticated doctrine, procedures and 
capabilities for planning and conducting information activities.  Planners should develop 
common, multi-echelon themes based on and consistent with HN government policies and 
the operation’s objectives. 
 
0443. Release and Execution Authority.  As part of the planning process, designation of release 
and execution authority is required.  Release authority provides the approval for 
information activities employment and normally specifies the allocation of specific 
offensive means and capabilities provided to the execution authority.  Execution authority 
is described as the authority to employ information activities and capabilities at a 
designated time and place.  Information activities may involve complex legal and policy 
issues requiring careful review and national level coordination and approval; however, it is 
imperative that information activities in COIN be as rapid and flexible as the insurgents’ 
use of information, since the population’s perception of events is vital. 
 
0444. Vision.  The vision of the role of information activities in an operation should begin before 
the specific planning is initiated; it is a vital component of the operational art and design 
for COIN.  COIN relies on information activities and capabilities, and the related priority 
intelligence requirements and requests for information must be given priority to enable the 
intelligence products to be ready in time to support the COIN planning, execution and 
assessment. 
 
0445. Legal Considerations.  Information activities may involve complex legal and policy 
issues requiring careful review.  NATO forces, whether operating physically from
  bases or 
locations overseas or from within the boundaries of NATO or elsewhere, are required to 
act in accordance with all appropriate law, especially legal agreements with the HN.   
 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-13 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0446. Contribution of PsyOps.  In COIN, PsyOps forces have a vital role in m
aximising the 
effects of conventional and Special Forces’ operations in the perception of the local 
audiences. It will always require action balanced with information activities to gain the 
support of the local population and containing the adversaries psychological and 
propagandistic outreach.  PsyOps forces are enhanced by their capability to analyse and 
assess audiences belonging to a foreign culture, advise joint planning and targeting and 
conveying culturally attuned messages to approved target audiences.  PsyOps forces are 
the single provider for military mass media capabilities (radio, print, TV/video, new media 
and direct communication and other activities, e.g. traditional communication, events, etc) 
in direct support and disposal of the theatre commander. The three basic aims of PsyOps 
are to: 
 
a. Weaken the will of the adversary (or potentially adversary) target audiences. 
 
b. Reinforce the commitment of friendly target audiences. 
 
c. Gain the support and cooperation of uncommitted or undecided audiences. 
 
0447. The considerable challenges of COIN will require robust PsyOps forces under the theatre 
commander as a Component Command or Task Force and attached support elements with 
tactical commanders to allow agile and direct engagement in the information domain.  
They will be competing with highly flexible adversaries not limited by legal, or ethical 
bounds.  PsyOps therefore is to be well integrated into the overall operational effort 
throughout the theatre in support of combined, joint operations mission accomplishment.  
Swift release of products and activities is vital, as is credibility and truthfulness with regard 
to the product content.  Co-ordination will be achieved through the PsyOps staff that is 
required for the operational and tactical headquarters, the InfoOps function and Strategic 
Communications.  PsyOps specialists may also be used to train and advise HN forces and 
agencies in their particular field of expertise to enhance domestic capabilities for the 
struggle against insurgents. 
 
0448. Planning Security Sector Reform (SSR).  Sustainable SSR depends on thorough 
planning and assessment.  Through unified action, the various actors consider the unique 
capabilities and contributions of each participant.  The ensuing plan aims for a practical 
pace of reform and accounts for the political and cultural context of the situation.  The plan 
accounts for available resources and capabilities while balancing the human capacity to 
deliver change against a realistic time line.  The SSR plan reflects HN culture, sensitivities 
and historical conceptions of security.  It does not seek to implement a Western paradigm 
for the security sector, understanding that a Western model may not be appropriate.  As 
with the broader campaign plan, the SSR plan seeks to resolve the underlying sources of 
conflict while preventing new or escalating future security crises.  The level of HN 
development - especially as it pertains to poverty and economic opportunity - is an 
important consideration in SSR planning.  Planning for SSR includes building or 
rebuilding culturally appropriate security forces, judicial systems, law enforcement and 
corrections.  Security force assistance builds or improves security forces. 
 
0449. Planning Disarmamen
 t, Demobilisation and Reintegration (DDR).  In NATO doctrine, 
DDR is part of SSR.  Planning for a successful DDR program requires an understanding of 
both the situation on the ground and the goals, political will and resources of actors and 
other organisations willing support.  Effective DDR planning relies on analysis of possible 
DDR beneficiaries, power dynamics and local society, as well as the nature of the conflict 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-14 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
and the ong
oing peace processes.  Assessments are conducted in close consultation with 
the local populace and with personnel from participating agencies who understand and 
know about the HN.  Joint forces and other actors may enter the DDR process at many 
different stages; therefore, assessment is a continuous process used to guide decision-
making throughout the DDR program. 
 
0450. Planning Detention Activities.   
 
a. As a matter of policy, the mandate and strategic operation plan (OPLAN) may 
confirm what, if any, powers of arrest, detention or internment the force may 
exercise, and how the exercise thereof reflects the oftentimes competing aims of 
providing a secure environment and facilitating the administration of criminal justice.  
To ensure the highest level of interoperability, commanders at all levels will have to 
give particular consideration to the question of whether such powers shall be 
discharged of either in a national capacity or as the responsibility of NATO.  
National decisions concerning transfer authority will determine whether troops or 
individual soldiers contributed to the counterinsurgent force may exercise the powers 
of arrest, detention or internment should they have been vested in NATO. 
 
b. Supplementing relevant decisions by higher authority, commanders must ensure that 
any individual apprehended, whether formally arrested, detained, interned or not, 
shall at all times be treated in accordance with the relevant principles and rules of 
international law.  This may involve, but is not limited to, appropriately resourced 
holding facilities, specialised training, and transparent periodic review of all cases 
where individuals are kept in custody, and independent external monitoring provided 
by impartial organisations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC).  At the same time, all Allied personnel are responsible for acting in 
conformity with any pertinent guidance concerning the treatment of individuals in 
the custody of the force.  Personnel must at all times be fully aware that disrespectful 
or ill treatment of persons held in custody will adversely affect their credibility (both 
in theatre and nationally/globally) and have similar repercussions on their ability to 
accomplish the mission.  It will, moreover, set a bad example for indigenous forces 
as well as law enforcement bodies supported and/or trained by, or otherwise 
cooperating with, the NATO force. 
 
c. Prudent use of the powers of arrest, detention or internment may also yield 
significant (and often actionable) intelligence, rehabilitate casual and reconcilable 
insurgents, and help spread fear and mistrust within the insurgency’s leadership.  
This, in turn, reduces the indigenous population’s risk of falling victim to violence 
inflicted by the insurgency, enables more precise targeting by the counterinsurgent 
force, and stimulates the perception of progress, restraint and legitimacy. 
 
d. Wherever possible and appropriate, those held in custody should be brought swiftly 
under due legal process to bolster perception of normality and the rule of law.  While 
the conditions and procedures for transferring individuals from NATO or national 
custody to the indigenous law enforcement system or judiciary will, as a rule, be 
determined by higher authorities, commanders at all levels have a responsibility to 
see that no transfer will expose the transferred individual to the danger of foreseeable 
torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.  To this end, they should 
duly consider all available information concerning the effectiveness of the 
indigenous police, the independence of the judiciary, as well as the correctional 
systems capacity and resolve to be effective.  In addition, any transfer of the 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-15 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
detainees to the host nation, be it directly to indigenous forces or law enforcem
ent 
bodies or through an intermediary, will have to comply with pertinent transfer 
agreements.  Such agreements may have been concluded by NATO or individual 
troop-contributing nations, as appropriate, and may require supplementation by 
military technical arrangements. 
 
e. To support indigenous law enforcement and judicial due process, the NATO force 
should also make its best efforts to collect and properly handle any items (e.g. 
weapons, equipment, drugs, etc.) document and information technology, including if 
exploited from an intelligence perspective, in light of its possible use as evidence, 
should charges be laid against an insurgent.  To this end, the commander should 
ensure he is familiar with the evidential requirements of the local justice system. 
 
f. In some cases, it may be appropriate to release individuals from custody and 
facilitate their return into local communities.  Such releases will carry significant 
political and symbolic importance both within the host nation and the wider 
international audience.  Getting local leaders to guarantee good behaviour mitigates 
risk, assists reintegration, and breaks adversarial control.  However, any such release 
must be with the approval of host nation authorities, and ideally, in conformity with 
their legal system. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
4-16 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
CHAPTER 5 - THE MILITARY CONTRIBUTION 
 
Section I - Introduction 
 
The Aim of the Military Contribution to Counterinsurgency 
 
0501. Military activities aim to protect the population and neutralise the insurgents.  These 
activities will create favourable conditions for HN and Alliance agencies and all other civil 
actors to gain access to the population and address core grievances.  They will also allow 
the HN government to broker a political solution which defeats the insurgency.  As stated 
in Chapter 3, however, the military contribution supports the political aims of the HN and 
the Alliance.  Destruction of insurgent military capabilities alone will not address the cause 
that is the driving force of an insurgency.  Thus, the use of force alone against insurgents 
does not guarantee a decisive success.   
 
Some thoughts about the military contribution and the commander’s environment 
 
0502. In a COIN environment, the commander is pivotal in orchestrating the efforts of a wide 
variety of agencies into a comprehensive approach.  This approach is achieved through 
consensus and compromise as well as with traditional command practices.  Commanders 
should promote the role and sovereignty of the HN.  Although NATO forces are endowed 
with immense military power, versatility and an enduring ability to manage and project 
firepower, they have to operate in close coordination with non-military actors.  This 
cooperative and collaborative effort is required to stabilise the environment and to 
contribute to the defeat of an insurgency.  Commanders must act as diplomats as well as 
soldiers. 
 
0503. NATO forces are, more than ever, operating where the human factor predominates and 
action on the ground and the capacity for discrimination in the use of force are vital for 
success.  In operations that take place “amongst the people”, NATO forces face opponents 
for whom asymmetric attack is the norm.  
 
0504. As every insurgency is unique, COIN will require the considered application of the full 
range of military activities.  Operations in a COIN campaign combine offensive, defensive 
and stability activities in order to achieve the stable and secure environment needed for the 
restoration of essential services and the further development of effective governance.  
While securing the HN population, NATO and HN forces must also neutralise the 
insurgent military wing.  This effort includes a spectrum of activities, including combating 
and capturing irreconcilable insurgents, combating terrorism and shaping perceptions 
through information activities.   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Structure o
f the Chapter 
  
0505. This chapter describes the military contribution to COIN.  While much of the information 
is contained within various other NATO publications
14, this publication consolidates and 
adds to this information within the context of COIN.  Section II details considerations in 
relation to that contribution, while Section III addresses a number of paradoxes inherent in 
COIN.  Section IV defines possible military objectives when facing an insurgency.  
Section V presents the clear, hold, build (CHB) approach that can be used by the military 
to shape their contribution to the defeat of an insurgency.  Section VI focuses on some of 
the military activities that need additional attention in the context of COIN.  As all 
components of NATO joint forces are essential for the overall military contribution to 
COIN, Sections VII through X discuss land, maritime, air and special operations forces 
(SOF) component contributions to COIN.  Finally, Section XI addresses the transfer of the 
governance and security responsibility.  
 
Section II - Considerations  
 
Be Coherent with the Political Direction 
 
0506. Military activities against an insurgency are part of a comprehensive approach and, 
consequently, are linked to the political strategy.  The political objectives are normally 
articulated within diplomatic, economic and security processes, which contribute to the 
implementation of the defined strategy. 
 
0507. The duration of NATO support to the HN, which is linked to the political acceptability of 
the intervention, may be difficult to forecast.  Nevertheless an estimate on the duration of 
the mission has to be made to help define military COAs, as this will influence the actions 
of the non-military instruments.  The details of the military approach should not be made 
public, as this knowledge would greatly assist the insurgents. 
 
0508. Despite the primacy of political considerations, Alliance policy and political guidance may 
be vague or incomplete.  The confusion and chaos caused by the instability of failing states 
may preclude timely and effective policy making and guidance by either the HN or 
Alliance governments.  In the extreme case of a failed state, the HN government may even 
be nonexistent.  However, the absence of a clear defined political end state should not 
dissuade commanders from working to gain the principal objective of securing the 
population. 
 
Focus on the Population 
 
0509. Since the actions of the population contribute to the ultimate success of the campaign, the 
population is the primary focus, making it is necessary to gain and retain influence.  The 
population affected by conflict includes opponents, allies and neutral elements which 
change over time.  NATO forces must therefore operate amongst, and be focused on, the 
population; and fully understand its culture and history. 
 
0510. Because the primary focus of COIN is on the population, holding or controlling physical 
terrain - particularly those areas which are centres of population - is also a major necessity.  
                                                      
14 AJP-3.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations; ATP-3.2.1, Allied Land Tactics; and ATP-3.2.1.1, Guidance for the Conduct of Tactical 
Stability Activities and Tasks. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Thus the AOO will be extrem
ely complex and difficult to work in.  Eliminating insurgency 
from the major centres of population will be a major endeavour.  However, because 
insurgents will blend into the population, the COIN force must exercise constraints on the 
use of force.  Excessive collateral damage caused by the perceived indiscriminate use of 
force can alienate the population and undermine the objectives of the COIN force. 
 
Understand the Insurgent 
 
0511. Gaining a clear understanding of the insurgents and their motivations, structures, strengths 
and weaknesses is a critical output of the analysis process.  Without a clear understanding 
of the insurgency on this level, COIN will be unsuccessful.  Counterinsurgents will need to 
possess cultural understanding as well as a more general understanding of the social, 
economic and political landscape of the affected country.  This will contribute to the 
development of a deeper level of situational understanding.   
 
0512. Insurgents will always seek to attack where they perceive weaknesses to exist.  Exploiting 
weaknesses in a state can take many different forms, and these will depend on the context 
of any given situation.  For example, some insurgents may concentrate on exposing 
political weaknesses, some may choose to stir up ethnic tensions, and others may choose 
crowd manipulation or violence intended to cause problems for the intervention force.  
Many successful insurgencies have developed a cellular structure which allows them to 
operate with great flexibility.  These will be difficult to dismantle by pure military 
operations alone, as the linkages between the cells are only loosely defined.  Others may 
have a more formal structure containing both political and military wings.   
 
0513. Insurgent tactical activities - which could include bombings, assassinations, hostage taking 
and attacks against the state, or manipulation of riots and demonstrations - directly 
influence the operational and strategic levels.  Insurgents will be looking to create strategic 
effects from tactical activity.  In these situations, military capabilities, especially lethal 
ones, may be ill-suited to responding to such insurgent activities and risk being used 
inappropriately and even counterproductively.  Insurgents will capitalise on such actions 
for propaganda purposes.  The military response to atrocities must be measured, 
proportionate and appropriate, while also being swift, precisely targeted and 
overwhelming. 
 
Intelligence 
 
0514. COIN is focused by intelligence and, as such, all military activity must be based on timely 
and accurate intelligence.  Understanding the insurgent and the environment requires 
emphasis on intelligence, which is an essential precondition for success in COIN.  
However, the successful collection and management and analysis of information to 
produce intelligence is complex when it comes to fighting insurgents while at the same 
time attempting to re-establish trust within the HN population. 
 
0515. NATO forces in COIN focus less on intelligence based on material indicators and more on 
subjective but systematic analysis.  Equipment, often unidentifiable and blended into the 
environment, no longer provides sufficient indicators to determine an opponent’s intent.  It 
is the mindset and the aims of the insurgent that have to be understood.  Accurate analysis 
is difficult, especially due to the need to properly select useful information in a complex 
human environment.  Additionally, language is a critical cons
 ideration for intelligence 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
gathering in COIN operations.   
 
0516. While technology is vital to intelligence collection, it only allows NATO forces to “know” 
rather than to “understand”.  As such, understanding requires CI/HUMINT specialists who 
have not only extens
ive military training but also a detailed knowledge of the operational 
environment and its complexities in such areas as the theatre of operations, the relevant 
societies and cultures, and the opposing groups. 
 
0517. By its very nature, insurgency conducts non-military activities that must be understood in 
the appropriate context for both current and future operations.  Intelligence gathering by a 
NATO force in COIN also has to rely on and fuse information from other actors, other 
networks and other services from a variety of other nations.  It will also involve enabling 
or accessing the intelligence structures of the HN.  This impacts the larger struggle, since 
the information gathered feeds demands other than those of the deployed force. 
 
Information Activities 
 
0518. The struggle for dominance in the cognitive domain is a constant necessity for the NATO 
forces in COIN, particularly where insurgents rely on the use of information to manipulate 
public opinion.  Paradoxically, the reality is that “what is believed is more important than 
what is true”.  In this way, hype and distortions can influence what the population believes 
to be true, and therefore the Alliance must successfully employ information activities that 
provide the population timely and accurate information as well as a competing narrative or 
interpretation of events.  Insurgents will use propaganda and attempt to manipulate the 
media and public perceptions to their own advantage, and this is one of the principal 
asymmetric elements of their activity.  Therefore, NATO forces need to be attuned to the 
insurgents’ use of the media and must be proactive and first with the truth, based on the 
campaign’s “dominant narrative” and current theme.  The key for the counterinsurgent is to 
be the first with the definitive version of the truth into the public domain.  Remaining 
silent, not reacting, not giving a version of events, or waiting for the truth to emerge will 
all be confounded by an agile opponent who is not necessarily bound by the truth.  This 
naturally gives the opponent the advantage, which must be countered by an agile, 
responsive and forward-leaning organisation. 
  
0519. The ability to operate with incomplete and at times inaccurate information, presenting 
one's own version and broadcasting one's own film of headline events, is a necessary 
element of success in COIN operations.  The adroit and timely handling of messages can 
sometimes help to prevent tactical successes from becoming strategic failures.  NATO 
forces need to be able to conduct offensive and defensive activities in the fields of 
information and communication.  Information activities must be actively employed and 
synchronised with intelligence to accomplish the following: 
 
a. creating favourable perceptions of the HN’s legitimacy and its capabilities; 
 
b. obtaining local, regional and international support for COIN operations; 
 
c. publicising insurgent violence and warning the population that they will be subject to 
insurgent propaganda; 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-5 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
d. discrediting insurgent propaganda and providing a m
ore compelling alternative to the 
insurgent ideology and narrative; and 
 
e. providing a favourable narrative that supports the legitimate role of the NATO-led 
forces. 
 
0520. Psychological Dimension.  Psychological Operations (PsyOps) are planned psychological 
activities using methods of communications and other means directed to approved 
audiences in order to influence perceptions, attitudes and behaviour, affecting the 
achievement of political and military objectives. The psychological dimension of an 
insurgency is as important as the physical. Conflict is a struggle of wills that takes place in 
people’s minds as well as on the battlefield. The attitudes and behaviour of people (friend, 
foe and the undecided or uncommitted) may be central to determining the outcome of 
conflict and the nature of the post-conflict environment. Therefore it is necessary to 
understand the motivation of various target audiences - leaders, opposing forces, 
populations - in order to shape their perceptions, affect their will and to persuade them to 
accept the outcome desired by NATO. PsyOps as a capability constitutes a key information 
activity of the military engagement in the information domain with regard to local and 
regional audiences. 
 
Combine the Legitimate Use of Force and Information to Defeat the Insurgent’s Ideology 
 
0521. Insurgents use violence to create effects by spreading fear through the local population, 
and they manipulate opinion by conducting aggressive propaganda.  In the conduct of these 
operations, they are unconstrained by the normal rules of war, legality or the need for 
truthfulness.  It is vital that counterinsurgents, through the legitimate use of force and 
information, strive first to contest and then to neutralise these insurgent efforts in both the 
physical and cognitive domains. 
  
0522. When NATO forces take part in COIN, they are engaged in a general battle of perception 
for two major considerations.  Firstly, they will be the target of the offensive actions of the 
insurgent, who will aim to weaken the legitimacy and the credibility of the cause and the 
HN government.  Secondly, counterinsurgent military action is valuable only if it reduces 
the legitimacy and credibility of the insurgent in the eyes of the population. 
  
0523. The battle for perception and the senses extends beyond the local area, and the insurgent 
therefore often enjoys a strategic advantage.  This stems from the capacity of insurgents to 
relate local issues to the outside world, where globalisation affords them accessibility with 
little or no constraint.  The worldwide reach of the media allows insurgents to spread their 
message rapidly and widely to a large number of target audiences, many of whom will be 
outside the joint operations area. 
 
0524. Any military action against an insurgent must be linked with countering an insurgent’s 
strategy and operational and tactical plans.  Military participation in efforts against the 
insurgent must be dynamic.  Counterinsurgents must exploit all the possibilities and 
contingencies to limit or defeat the efforts of the insurgent. 
 
0525. Although military actions may involve the use of force, the overarching aim is to secure 
the population.  Within this framework, when employing coercive actions, it is necessary 
to accurately determine limited objectives rather than large-s
 cale objectives.  Initially, it is 
necessary to estimate whether such actions will achieve a decrease in the number of 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-6 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
insurgents or unintentionally assist insurgent recruiting.  The use of lethal and non-lethal 
force should be tailored to the situation, with particular attention paid not only to the 
prevention of collateral dam
age but also to its repair. 
 
Be Aware that Insurgents Often Have the Advantage of Asymmetry 
 
0526. The asymmetry which often characterises the operational methods of insurgents confers on 
them a certain strategic impunity and other tactical advantages.  It affords insurgents the 
possibility of using both uncertainty and brutality in terms of space, time and information.  
These effects can be extended and amplified by the absence of a need to operate within any 
legal or ethical construct.  On the contrary, NATO forces may be restricted in utilising and 
applying the full spectrum of political and operational mechanisms against insurgents.   
 
Identify the Actors and Discriminate Between Them 
 
0527. When countering insurgents, it is crucial to create a clear picture of all actors in the 
operational environment in order to distinguish the insurgents from the other actors.  It is 
important to list in detail the opposing actors.  At first, this can be done by mapping 
structures at regional and local levels.  On this basis, the insurgents or the main actors must 
be identified and then designated.  The analysis process enables an understanding of all the 
issues and helps to identify opportunities for action against the insurgents, which may well 
be beyond the main areas in which violence originated.  These actions will need to be 
synchronised between military and non-military actors, especially politically. 
 
Requirement for a Highly Proactive Command 
 
0528. From a long-term perspective, the effective engagement of insurgents’ demands that 
NATO commanders develop an understanding of the local tolerance for violence, 
including the acceptability of and use of force employed by NATO and HN forces.  In 
these conditions, commanders must be flexible and have the ability to articulate their intent 
clearly and concisely.  To that end, the commander must be provided with a proactive and 
agile HQ. 
 
0529. Commanders have to create opportunities and seize them immediately.  To do this, 
command and control must be decentralised to allow for tactical initiative.  This facilitates 
agility at the tactical level, allowing junior commanders to work with their civilian 
counterparts to seize the initiative in rapidly developing situations.  In COIN, tactical 
activity, both military and non-military, often has strategic effects and, in order for junior 
levels of command to generate the effects sought, they must have access to the appropriate 
resources.  The delegation of resources and the appropriate authority to use them must 
form an intrinsic part of the command and control construct in which the NATO force will 
operate. 
 
Need for Flexible Military Action 
 
0530. It is a characteristic of insurgencies that they tend to change and evolve, sometimes quite 
rapidly, over time.  If an Alliance response is to be successful, the Alliance must 
understand its own multinational capabilities, con
 straints and limitations, in addition to 
understanding similar aspects of the insurgency.  Counterinsurgents must keep the 
insurgents off balance as they attempt to obtain influence through physical and 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-7 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
psychologic
al activity.  The use of the military instrument must remain flexible and 
adaptable over time as the insurgency changes shape and direction during its course. 
 
Need for Force Protection 
 
0531. When NATO forces face insurgents they must ensure the security of the population and 
assist in the maintenance of law and order.  Insurgents know that any human or materiel 
loss, of either real or symbolic value, can weaken political will to pursue a successful 
COIN.  To this end, NATO forces can expect to be the target in a variety of different 
attacks conducted by the insurgent.  These could take the form of suicide bombings, 
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) or stand-off weapons such as rockets or rocket 
propelled grenades.  When pressing home these attacks, insurgents may demonstrate little 
concern for either the consequences of their actions or the collateral effects on the civil 
population or the environment.  Therefore, the protection of NATO forces is an essential 
element of the freedom of action and, for this reason, has to be a permanent concern of the 
command without being considered as a purpose in itself.  However, its implementation 
has to avoid excessive security which would mean either refraining from the necessary 
actions, being perceived as cloistering itself from the HN population or wasting too much 
effort to the detriment of the main missions. 
 
Necessity to Continually Learn and Adapt 
 
0532. The struggle against an insurgency requires great agility from commanders and command 
systems in both planning and the conduct of operations.  The ability of counterinsurgents 
to continuously adapt is one of the keys to success, particularly considering the 
polymorphous nature of most insurgencies.  A cycle of adaptation usually develops 
between insurgents and counterinsurgents, with both sides striving to adapt in order to 
neutralise existing adversary advantages and develop new advantages of their own.  
Advantage is gained through adaptation that is beyond the other side’s ability to achieve or 
sustain.  Education facilitates learning and adaptation.  Successful counterinsurgents 
understand the theory and history of insurgency and COIN, as well as the appropriate 
culture, languages and history. 
 
0533. Forces need to adapt not only to the changes in the conflict over time, but also to changes 
in those they work with or those they fight.  Consequently, it is essential to have the 
capacity for flexibility, tolerance and openness that allows counterinsurgents to confront 
the unknown or the unusual.  Adapting to the local population requires cultural 
understanding.  It also means accepting that the objectives of the local actors may be far 
removed from those of the force, of their country or of the international community.  It 
means creating, even at the lowest levels, local solutions in keeping with the environment 
and the broad strategic approach.  This ability to adapt is principally based on a proximity 
which enables the understanding of fluctuations in situations and attitudes, and thus the 
complexity of reality. 
 
0534. Counterinsurgents need to develop innovative tactics and capabilities very quickly in 
response to the ever-changing situation that they might face.  The role of the lower tactical 
echelons, of those who are confronted with tactical problems on a daily basis and hence 
never cease to come up with the most appropriate solutions, is essential in this process.  
Initiative must be encouraged in order to facilitate the em
ergence of responses to 
asymmetric threats.  The work carried out in the field has to be supported by a central 
mechanism which controls the proliferation of ideas, focuses the gathering of experience 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-8 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
and provides the reactivity necessary to supply immediate answers when the situation 
dictates.  Lessons learned15 should therefore be rapidly disseminated throughout the force.  
It should be noted that discretion must be used, as solutions that work in one area may not 
be quite so successfully applied in another. 
 
                                                      
15 There are two types of lessons learned - the lessons learned from historical COIN cases and the lessons drawn from the contemporary COIN 
campaigns.  The latter will focus on enemy tactics (e.g. IEDs, ambush settings, and the use of recorded voices to divert attention during combat), 
equipment (newly purchased weapon systems), or other assets (e.g. psychological pressure on locals). 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-9 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
Win the Battle o
f Perception 
 
0535. In most cases, insurgents will have a well-established cause that exposes perceived 
weaknesses in the state.  By means of their own narrative, they will often attempt to 
demonstrate the inability of the state to provide for the population, and will offer 
themselves as a viable alternative.  They will seek to build in the minds of the population 
the impression that their alternative is better for the long-term prospects of the population.  
In a world where information is a means of action, this demands that intervention forces in 
support of the HN have the ability to act quickly and effectively in the psychological 
domain while denying the insurgent the ability to do the same.   
  
0536. Information and its effects are vital as insurgents find a way to gain advantage, often 
through distortion of events, exploitation of collateral damage or interviews with 
journalists.  Hype and distortions can influence operational decisions and the course of 
events in a manner contradictory to actual events on the ground.
16 Tensions in the veracity 
of information are characteristic of the asymmetric struggle in an insurgency.  Therefore, 
NATO forces need to develop the ability to engage and diminish the effects of the 
insurgent narrative and information activities.  Without exception, within COIN, 
information activities have a major role to play.  These activities should aim to influence or 
correct perceptions, representations and attitudes of the chosen audiences, to convince 
them to act in favour of the mission, or to incite them not to act in opposition to the action 
of the armed forces.  It is a question of shaping in the psychological, emotional or 
intellectual aspects of the information environment to exploit opportunities and create 
conditions to reach the desired end state.  This often requires counterinsurgents to 
communicate effectively with a wide variety of target audiences, and to always be the first 
with their version of events. 
 
Building Influence with the Local Population 
 
0537. The counterinsurgents’ battle for the population seeks to undermine the local support of 
insurgents and to reinforce HN legitimacy.  To win popular support and isolate the 
insurgents, it is advisable both to take into account the security expectations of the 
population and, simultaneously, to influence the insurgents.  Counterinsurgents seek to 
influence insurgents’ reactions and to destroy their credibility with friendly and neutral 
actors. 
 
0538. Undermining support for insurgents within the population is a key method to isolate them.  
Building influence with the population requires knowledge of the culture, clearly 
explaining counterinsurgent intentions, and aiming to take advantage of insurgent mistakes 
in terms of legitimacy and rationality.  Creating and establishing a “counter-cause” to the 
insurgents’ requires a comprehensive approach, unity of effort, and the ability to act 
decisively and effectively.   
 
Section III - Paradoxes 
 
0539. The considerations discussed in Section II demonstrate the complex operational 
environment normally associated with COIN.  History has shown that COIN is counter-
intuitive to more traditional warfare, and some of these paradoxes are presented in this 
                                                      
16 Often, for example, attacks by youths armed only with slings against heavily equipped soldiers only aim to show the world an unequal struggle and 
to make believe that their fight is just, since it is that of the oppressed . 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-10 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
section as ex
amples of the different mindset required of all military components to be 
successful in COIN.  These paradoxes are offered to stimulate thinking, not to limit it.  The 
applicability of the thoughts behind the paradoxes depends on the context faced by the 
commander in any given insurgency.  They are not intended to be applicable in all cases, 
and the list itself is not exhaustive. 
 
0540. The More You Protect a Force, the Less Secure You May Be.  Ultimate success in 
COIN is gained by protecting the populace and not exclusively the COIN force itself.  If 
military forces remain in their compounds, they lose touch with the population and then 
concede the freedom of action to the insurgents.  Even if the level of insecurity threatens 
the security of the force, commanders should find a balance between implementing 
restrictive force protection measures and the need to maintain close contact with the locals.  
Overly restrictive force protection measures tend to isolate and, over time, alienate, the 
force from the local population, denying them the vital “finger-tip feel” for what is 
happening on the ground.  They need this in order to protect the population, to understand 
their needs and to collect vital intelligence.  Operations conducted at the tactical level 
among the population, while attracting high levels of risk, will reflect a will to share that 
risk with the populace and consequently help to gain their support to defeat the insurgency. 
 
0541. The More Force is Used, the Less Effective it May Be.  Any use of force produces many 
effects, not all of which can be foreseen.  The greater the force applied, the greater the 
chance of collateral damage and mistakes.  Using substantial force also increases the 
opportunity for insurgent propaganda to portray lethal military activities as brutal.  In 
contrast, using force precisely and with restraint strengthens the rule of law that needs to be 
established.  The key point for counterinsurgents is to know when more force is needed - 
and when it might be counterproductive.  This judgement involves constant assessment of 
the security situation and the necessity of having information available on potential actions 
by the insurgent.  Generally obvious for commanders, it is sometimes forgotten at lower 
levels when self-defence is at stake.  It should be kept in mind that killing numerous 
insurgents will be seriously counterproductive if collateral damage kills peaceful civilians 
too.  That will create legitimacy for the insurgency and lead to increased support from the 
population.  For this reason commanders have to establish procedures to achieve a 
balanced use of force and to avoid any excessive use of force that leads to collateral 
damage. 
 
0542. The More Successful a Counterinsurgency Operation is, the Less Force Can be Used 
and the More Risk Must be Accepted.  This paradox is really a corollary to the previous 
one.  As the level of insurgency violence drops, the requirements of international law and 
the expectations of the populace lead to a reduction of the direct military actions by 
counterinsurgents.  More reliance is placed on police work, rules of engagement may be 
tightened, and troops may have to exercise increased restraint.  Soldiers may also have to 
accept more risk in order to maintain contact with the population. 
 
0543. If a Tactic Works Today, it Might Not be the Case on the Following Days; if it Works 
in a Given Area, it Might Not Work in Another One.  Efficient insurgents are adaptive 
and are often part of a network that communicates constantly.  Insurgents quickly adjust to 
COIN practices and rapidly disseminate information throughout the insurgency.  Indeed, 
the more effective a COIN tactic is, the faster it m
 ay become out of date because 
insurgents have a greater need to counter it.  Effective leaders at all levels avoid 
complacency and are at least as adaptive as their enemies.  Constantly developing new 
tactics, techniques and procedures is essential.  However, it is essential to have a common 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-11 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
doctr
ine and set of tactics to provide a common understanding on the planning and 
execution of military activities which creates a starting point for adaptation.  Consequently, 
commanders should always be on their guard when implementing proven methods.  There 
are no template solutions that can be universally applied - each situation demands a 
bespoke approach.   
 
0544. Tactical Success Alone Guarantees Nothing.  As important as they are, military actions 
by themselves cannot exclusively achieve success in COIN.  Sometimes a doctor or a 
teacher may locally be more efficient than one infantry company in undermining an 
insurgency.  Insurgents who never totally defeat counterinsurgents in combat may still 
achieve their strategic objectives, because they can win by not losing.  Tactical actions thus 
must be linked not only to strategic and operational military objectives but also to the HN’s 
essential political goals.  Without those connections, lives and resources may be wasted for 
no real gain. 
 
0545. Doing Nothing May be the Best Reaction.  Often insurgents carry out actions with the 
primary purpose of enticing counterinsurgents to overreact or at least to react in a way that 
insurgents can exploit - for example, using more force than appears appropriate in the 
circumstances or executing a clearance operation that creates more enemies than it takes 
off the streets.  If an assessment of the effectiveness of a potential COA determines that 
negative effects outweigh the positive effects, then no action may be the preferred COA. 
 
0546. Some of the Counterinsurgent’s Most Appropriate Weapons Do Not Shoot.  
Counterinsurgents often achieve the most meaningful success in garnering public support 
and legitimacy for the HN government with activities that do not systematically involve 
killing insurgents.  Arguably, the decisive battle is for the people’s minds; hence 
coordinating and synchronising information activities with efforts along the other LOOs is 
critical.  While security is essential to set the stage for overall progress, lasting victory 
comes from a vibrant economy, political participation and restored hope.  Depending on 
the state of the insurgency, therefore, Alliance forces should be prepared to execute the full 
range of military activities in support of COIN efforts, and make a valuable contribution to 
stabilisation and reconstruction. 
 
0547. The Host Nation Doing Something Tolerably is Often Better Than the Force Doing it 
Well.  It is just as important to consider who performs an operation as to assess how well it 
is done.  The HN must take ownership of the solution, and this is best done by empowering 
it to act purposefully, and increasingly to give it the lead as its capability improves.  This 
approach will ensure that the solutions arrived at have local buy-in and are culturally 
attuned to the HN.  It is accepted that, while some of these solutions may be sub-optimal 
from a NATO perspective, they do have HN ownership, and are therefore more likely to be 
enduring.  Where NATO is supporting an HN, long-term success requires the 
establishment of viable HN leaders and institutions that can carry on without significant 
Alliance support.  The longer that process takes, the more the troop-contributing nations 
(TCNs) domestic support is likely to wane and the more the local populace may doubt the 
ability of their own forces and their government to bring about substantive change.   
 
Section IV - Military Objectives during COIN  
 
0548. As stated, the aim of the military contribution to COIN is to secure the population and 
neutralise the insurgent.  Analysing this aim allows the commander to establish the 
following military objectives:  secure the population, isolate the insurgents from their 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-12 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
support, and neutralise the insurgent arm
ed organisation.  Achievement of these objectives 
will contribute to successful achievement of the political end state of defeating the 
insurgency and addressing core grievances. 
 
Secure the Population 
 
0549. The commander should identify what the military may be required to contribute to human 
security tasks, recognising that military provision is a last resort and that the main 
responsibility lies with international organisations and the host nation government. Failure 
to provide for the populations’ needs may undermine the foundations of stabilisation as the 
people struggle for survival. Political progress is unlikely to take place in the midst of 
chronic human insecurity. Focusing on the population does not mean ignoring the 
adversary; on the contrary, the contest for security will be fought amongst the population 
and for their support. The population may not like us, but our military aim is not the 
pursuit of popularity, although this is important for indigenous forces. International forces 
should seek to husband respect, to prevent the adversary from gaining influence and 
security control, and to re-connect the population with their government; this requires their 
government be perceived as credible.  
 
0550. Where the state lacks the capability or will to meet human security needs, individuals tend 
to transfer loyalty to any group that promises to meet those needs, including adversarial 
groups. These groups can exploit human insecurity by providing money, basic social 
services and a crude form of justice. Winning the contest for human security therefore, is 
fundamental to the development of host nation government authority and, ultimately 
security of the state.   
 
0551. Providing protection for the population stimulates economic activity and supports longer-
term development and governance reform.  Importantly, it generates confidence in local 
people about their own local security situation - their collective human security - and an 
economic interest in ongoing stability. It also denies adversarial groups one of their 
principal strategies for expanding their support base.   
 
Isolate the Insurgents from Their Support 
 
0552. Defeating an insurgency requires NATO forces to sever the insurgents from their support 
base by isolating them from their resources and the outside environment.  This helps to 
provide the counterinsurgents with freedom of action for subsequent military action.   
 
0553. Contain the Insurgent in a Broader Regional Context.  Denying insurgents access to 
safe havens and sanctuaries that may be present in the surrounding region will be an 
important element of any COIN, and this will need a high level of political as well as 
military involvement.  In complementing these actions, NATO forces may need to conduct 
operations to deny insurgent movement, possibly in partnership with neighbouring 
countries or international spaces.  This peripheral posture, which could contribute to 
regional stability, may be enhanced through regional actors’ situational awareness of 
insurgency issues, and in turn support the legitimacy of the military presence in the region. 
 
0554. Target the Insurgents’ Organisation.  Targeting the insurgent’s organisation places 
emphasis on neutralising the mechanisms, syste
 ms, methodologies and structures of the 
insurgency.  These efforts are aimed at neutralising the insurgent’s strategy and 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-13 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
organisation.17 It is vitally important to correctly determine the balance between actions 
focused on the population and the conduct of overt and covert actions focused on the 
insurgent’s organisation.  Effective targeting of the insurgents’ organisation enables the 
selection of the most effective approach, often times indirect rather than direct. 
 
Neutralise the Insurgent’s Armed Organisation 
 
0555. Neutralising the insurgent’s armed organisation stops the insurgent’s use of violence.  It is 
a long-term effort, is often more psychological than physical, and is often achieved by 
involving the population.  Depending on the situation, several approaches can be chosen or 
combined and should consider influencing or shaping key actors.  One approach is to 
create conditions in which insurgents must concentrate and attack friendly forces in a 
conventional manner, which will make them more vulnerable to the strengths of NATO 
military forces.  Another approach could be to defeat the insurgency in detail, after 
isolation had been achieved by an adapted task organisation of NATO forces committed to 
maintaining contact. 
 
0556. It is difficult for NATO forces to avoid being drawn by the insurgent into prepared 
operations conducted in complex terrain, which may include densely inhabited areas.  
These areas usually represent the seat of local, regional and national government as well as 
centres of key economic activity.  At the same time, it is necessary to generate a feeling of 
insecurity among the insurgents to reduce their freedom of action, which is key to their 
survival.  Finally, counterinsurgents should attempt to force the insurgents to regroup and 
then, by working in an “oil spot”
18, gradually to suffocate them, to undermine the internal 
linkages which unify their various constituents, to weaken them by increasing their internal 
dysfunctions, and even to decapitate their political-administrative organisation. 
 
0557. Building the capability and capacity of indigenous security forces is vital to effectively 
fighting an insurgency and should be seen as the optimal solution.  HN security forces 
must become capable of leading offensive actions in the most sensitive zones, even at 
night.
19  When HN forces are the lead agencies, supporting NATO forces must be discreet 
to avoid local resentment.  This contributes to avoiding the perception of NATO forces as 
being foreign invaders or occupiers.  Finally, it also helps to make the local populace take a 
hand or stake in their fate and to deprive the insurgents of their favoured targets.   
 
Section V – Operational Approach (Clear, Hold, Build) 
 
0558. This section discusses the NATO preferred operational approach to COIN using the CHB 
framework.  CHB is civil-military action taken in COIN which combines NATO, HN and 
civil actors.  CHB encompasses offensive, defensive, stability and enabling activities.  
CHB must be driven by an in-depth understanding of the operational environment.  Staffs 
perform COIN intelligence preparation of the operational environment and analyse the 
dynamic characteristics of insurgency to determine the nature of the insurgency.   
 
                                                      
17“ Organisation” refers to the different cells that insurgent have created to be effective: an intelligence cell, a political cell, a terrorist cell and a 
logistic cell. 
18 This consists of two phases.  Firstly, it demands that counterinsurgents completely control some isolated areas; then the purpose is to extend these 
areas to form bigger controlled areas. 
19 The possibility of tasking units for night missions will ensure continuous pressure on insurgents, reducing their freedom of action. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-14 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0559. CHB establishes control over the population and areas so that HN governance and internal 
developm
ent programmes can be pursued in a secure environment.  It also supports 
development operations by preventing insurgent interference.  Figure 5.1 depicts the 
phases of CHB in relation to all potential actors.  Although these phases are depicted in a 
linear fashion, they may not be sequential in practice, as insurgent efforts may require 
moving back to a previous phase.   
 
 
 
Figure 5.1 - Clear, Hold, Build Interconnected and Evolving Activities20 
 
0560. An effective CHB approach depends on the ability to carry out the following: 
 
a. physically and psychologically separate insurgents from the population; 
 
b. provide the conditions for economic, political and social reforms; 
 
c. safeguard the population and key infrastructure; 
 
d. provide training and opportunities for HN security forces to improve and take the 
lead in taking and maintaining control; 
 
                                                      
20 Paramilitary: within AJP-3.4.4, paramilitary forces refer to those forces or militias which have risen in some inhabited areas aiming at ensuring 
self-protection for the population and the rule of law.  These forces are under the control of the HN authorities and work closely with NATO forces. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-15 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
e. provide opportunities for the HN police and other governm
ental institutions to 
establish and maintain the rule of law; 
 
f. provide essential services and address the core grievances of the insurgency; 
 
g. assist with resettling displaced persons and refugees to their homes (this task is done 
by UNHCR, and only in extreme circumstances will the military be asked for 
assistance); 
 
h. use and train local workers and materials to rebuild and provide a sustainable 
economic and social system; 
 
i. deny the enemy active and passive support; and 
 
j. gain the support of the populace. 
 
0561. Phases of Clear, Hold, Build.  While the three primary phases are clear, hold, build, there 
is a total of four total phases to the successful execution of the CHB approach.  These 
phases are likely to be non-linear in progression and are linked to a series of decisive 
conditions that allows a transition of responsibility and authority to the HN.  These phases 
require a comprehensive approach and sufficient resources.  The four phases are as 
follows: 
 
a. Preparation Phase.  Typical activities of the preparation phase include: 
 
(1) an assessment of the situation and resources and the vetting of HN personnel; 
 
(2) conducting overall planning; 
 
(3) assigning responsibilities to civil and military elements; 
 
(4) conducting combined/joint training and rehearsals; 
 
(5) beginning information activities and/or information engagement operations; 
and/or 
 
(6) establishing temporary facilities for basic services to civilians being displaced 
in the area to be cleared. 
 
b. Clear Phase.  This primarily involves offensive activities.  Counterinsurgency forces 
focus on freeing  the area of insurgent’s control.  Typical activities of the clear phase 
include: 
 
(1) information activities, 
 
(2) cordon and search, 
 
(3) neutralising armed elements , and 
 
(4) removing those who have infiltrated the HN governm
 ent or security forces. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-16 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
c. Hold Phase.  This prim
arily involves defensive operations.  In the hold phase 
counterinsurgents ensure that areas that were freed from enemy control remain so.  
This requires the control of the HN government with an adequate HN security force 
presence.  Typical activities of the hold phase include: 
 
(1) information activities; 
 
(2) providing basic essential services and humanitarian assistance; 
 
(3) conducting  infrastructure assessment; 
 
(4) establishing combat outposts; 
 
(5) fortifying police stations; 
 
(6) cordon and search; 
 
(7) combined and joint dismounted presence patrols; 
 
(8) building intelligence networks; 
 
(9) identifying and neutralising remaining insurgent underground, auxiliary and 
leaders; 
 
(10) recruiting local police and security forces; and 
 
(11) reassessing the situation and the resources. 
 
(12) CIMIC activities, in particular establishing / holding  liaison network with local 
key leaders, reassessing the civil environment and initiating quick impact 
projects if required 
 
d. Build Phase.  This primarily involves stability operations.  In the build phase the 
focus is the capacity of local institutions to deliver services, advance the rule of law 
and nurture civil society.  Typical activities of the build phase include: 
 
(1) information activities; 
 
(2) promoting the legitimacy of the HN’s authority; 
 
(3) beginning the transition of authority to the HN government and security forces, 
shifting to advisory and support roles for NATO civil-military elements; 
 
(4) providing security for the reconstruction efforts; 
 
(5) providing security for infrastructure; and 
 
(6) training, equipping and advising police and civil defence forces. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-17 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
(7) CIMIC activ
ities, in particular keeping close contact with key leaders, the 
populace and agencies engaged in stabilisation activities and reconstruction 
efforts 
 
Transitions  
 
0562. Insurgency contexts are complex and multifaceted.  The scope and nature of the military 
contribution may vary.  In such circumstances, a key part of the planning process involves 
an analysis of the conditions required to enable the earliest practicable transition of tasks to 
capable civilian actors and the HN government.  The need to foster HN governance, 
authority and capacity must be a key driver in this process.  The particular points at which 
these transitions take place is a finely balanced judgement and must involve close 
consultation between commanders and the appropriate national, international and HN 
actors.   
 
0563. Campaigns will pass through a number of transitions as they progress.  Planning for them 
in advance is critical to the successful management of a campaign.  Transitions usually 
involve the progressive handover of responsibility from the intervention force to other 
actors.  This requires that they be tied to a particular set of decisive conditions which can 
be measured.  Only when these conditions have been met, and confirmed through 
assessment, can complete transition take place.  Supporting and developing the conditions 
which facilitate this is a key objective of the commander.  Progress on transitions is 
essential to campaign success as it meets the expectations of the HN government and its 
population, and demonstrates a momentum that underpins confidence in the overall 
operation.  The result should be the release of the military to focus on their primary tasks - 
elements of security and SSR.  Getting this right is fundamental to running a successful 
campaign.  Typical activities of transitions phase include: 
 
a. conducting assessments and transitioning authority and responsibility for service 
provision to appropriate HN government, law enforcement and security forces; and 
 
b. beginning the expansion into other areas.   
 
0564. Figure 5.2 is a representation of the evolution of CHB operations, especially the shifting 
predominance of offence, defence and stability activities during CHB phases.  CHB 
progresses based on the security situation; however, it should be noted that this is the ideal 
situation and the enemy will endeavour to unhinge the counterinsurgents’ efforts.  The 
diagram also depicts the level of effort or capacity of key actors. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-18 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
Figure 5.2 - Evolution of Roles during the Main Stages 
 
0565. Commanders will continue expanding controlled areas with CHB into contested and 
insurgent-dominated areas.  Operations are also conducted to locate and destroy insurgent 
forces in areas outside of the CHB operations by harassing them and keeping them off 
balance.   
 
Section VI - Execution of Military Activities 
 
Introduction 
 
0566. The full range of military activities21 is applicable when performing operations within a 
COIN campaign.  As already stated, within the framework of the CHB approach, 
offensive, defensive and stability activities will occur simultaneously.  Although the range 
of military activities is clearly described in various NATO doctrinal publications, the 
special circumstances that may occur within the COIN operational environment require, 
for some of the activities and underlying tasks, a short additional explanation.  The 
categorisation in Figure 5.3 may seem artificial, but is used as an example to show that 
some activities may be conducted more frequently in one of the phases. 
 
                                                      
21As described in AJP-3.2, ATP-3.2.1 and subsequently (stability activities) in ATP-3.2.1.1. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-19 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
Tactical Activities 
 
Attack  
Raid   Ambush 
Exploitation 
Pursuit 
Feint 
Demonstration  
 
Defence  
Delay 
 
Security and Control 
Support to Security Sector 
Reform (SSR) 
Building HN security 
forces capacity 
Initial Restoration of 
Services 
Initial Governance Tasks 
 
 
Tactical Tasks and Effects 
      (Not Inclusive List) 
 
 
Destroy 
Seize 
Secure  
Support by Fire 
 
 
Block  
Occupy 
Guard 
Fix  
Retain 
 
 
 
Cordon and Search 
Observe/Monitor 
Escort  
Patrolling 
Humanitarian Aid 
Delivery  
Train Indigenous Security 
Forces 
 Figure 5.3 - Examples of Typical Milita ry Activities during Clear, Hold, Build 
 
Offensive Activities 
 
0567. Attack and Raid.  These activities may be used locally to neutralise insurgents and to 
gather intelligence using joint assets.  This will often be conducted in urban areas amongst 
indigenous people, and therefore particular attention has to be paid to avoid collateral 
damage which will inevitably undermine the legitimacy of the force. 
 
Defensive Activities 
 
0568. Because reconstruction and transformation are antithetical to insurgency, soft targets and 
foreigners are usually in the crosshairs of insurgents.  The natural reaction is to conduct 
civil COIN where it is safe to do so, which means virtually writing off those areas where it 
could do the most material and political good.  The field-level security of civil COIN 
personnel and operations must be treated as a major mission of security forces.  Improved 
civil COIN capabilities may, but will not necessarily, reduce reliance on the use of force.   
 
Stability Activities22 Security and Control  
 
0569. Escort.  Many insurgents use multiple and asymmetric threats.  As such, convoys are often 
vulnerable targets that need armed escorts for their protection.  They can even be high-
                                                      
22 See ATP-3.2.1.1 RD1 (July 2009). 
 realised  
through…

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-20 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
value targets
 because of their crucial importance for the counterinsurgents, such as the 
provision of logistic supplies food, water, ammunition, petroleum, medical supplies and 
humanitarian relief supplies for civilians and the protection of transportation assets.   
 
0570. Although an escort is considered to be a stability task, the execution may occur in a 
dangerous and violent environment and will therefore have a “combat” character.  
Insurgents will not content themselves with blocking convoys but will seek to destroy 
them, even at times attempting to take hostages.  The vulnerability of those being escorted 
makes the mission even more difficult and, as a result, demands very detailed preparation 
and requires special training for military forces to react spontaneously to ambushes, 
obstacles, IEDs and attacks with indirect fire assets. 
 
0571. Cordon and Search.  The aim of cordon and search is to search for and capture insurgents 
and equipment that may be among the population or sheltered in favourable locations.  
This type of activity should be limited and requires a very high level of secrecy in order to 
generate surprise.  It is intelligence-led and triggered on the basis of accurate and targeted 
intelligence complemented by technological assets (such as unmanned aerial vehicles and 
electronic intelligence assets).  Advantage over insurgents is obtained through isolation by 
using forces as “sealing off” elements and through the freedom of action allowed by a 
“covering” element.  The activity is conducted as follows: 
 
a. The insurgents are isolated: mobile units, plus units earmarked to stay in the area 
after the operation, are rapidly concentrated around a targeted area.  They start 
operating from the outside in, aiming at catching the insurgents in a ring.  At the 
same time, units garrisoning the adjoining areas intensify their activity on the 
periphery of the selected area.   
 
b. The sweep is conducted from inside out, aiming to expel the insurgents. 
 
c. The overall operation is finally broken down into several small-scale ones.  All static 
units are assigned to permanent sectors.  A part of the mobile units operates as a 
body, centrally controlled, with the remainder being assigned support sectors.  The 
entire force works on what is left of the insurgents following the two earlier steps. 
 
d. The insurgents’ moral advantage is exploited, either by extracting some benefit from 
weakening the insurgency and rallying the population, which consequently 
undermines the insurgency’s organisation (human and material supply, moral and 
intelligence support) or by turning the local insurgency leaders to ensure the proper 
security of the locals. 
 
0572. The extent of the AOO depends on the intelligence about the type and attitude of the target, 
on the surrounding geographical and human features, and on the available forces.  
Preparation must be accurate and discreet, with quick conduct and very close cooperation 
with civil administration, especially when operating in urban areas.  A reserve is necessary 
(equipped with helicopters, boats and armoured vehicles) as well as specific assets such as 
radars and dog teams.   
 
0573. Cordon and search is supplemented by tactical information and psychological operations 
directed at various groups of actors: principally the insurgents but also the local population.  
The aim could be to challenge the military ability
  of the insurgents, which may make them 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-21 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
stay and fig
ht in order to save losing face and the advantages linked to their current level of 
freedom of action.  Such a decision would be an advantage for NATO forces. 
 
0574. Control of the Population The main objectives pursued are to re-establish the 
counterinsurgent’s authority over the population, to isolate the population as much as 
possible from the insurgents, and to gather the necessary intelligence leading to the 
elimination of the insurgent organisation.  Controlling the population requires conducting a 
census and even sometimes imposing a curfew, as follows: 
 
a. Census.  Every inhabitant has to be registered and given a foolproof identity card.
23 
Family booklets should be issued to each household in order to facilitate house-to-
house control, and heads of families should be made responsible for reporting any 
change in family circumstances, such as, births, deaths and marriages.  This is a 
useful measure, as it is essential to keep an up-to-date census and because placing the 
responsibility on the head of the family directly involves them in the struggle against 
the insurgency.  Since insurgents would envisage how a census limits their freedom 
of action, they may react either by destroying any identity card (or lead the locals to 
do so by threats but without a lot of success, since a person without identity card may 
be considered a suspect, thus triggering strong protest against the insurgent) or by 
attempting to be registered.  A countermeasure is then to request that a suspected 
claimant be vouched for by two guarantors from outside the claimant’s family, and 
that the guarantors be responsible under penalty for the veracity of their statements.  
Properly exploited, the census will provide a great deal of useful information on the 
relationship between members of the population (family ties are often the base for 
the recruitment of insurgents); who owns properties out of the cities and therefore 
has legitimate reasons to travel; and the source and amount of individual incomes, 
which may justify involvement in irregular activities more or less close to those of 
the insurgents.  The presence of soldiers among the local population may assist with 
the detection of unusual behaviour.  This is a reason why areas are normally divided 
into sub-sectors - to assist soldiers to become familiar with the inhabitants and their 
routine. 
 
b. Curfew.  Control is also achieved by enforcing a curfew and simple rules concerning 
the movements of persons that will limit the freedom of action of insurgents; for 
instance, that nobody should leave a village for more than a given duration and 
nobody may receive a stranger from outside the village without permission.  The 
purpose is not to prevent movement, unless there are specific reasons, but to check it.  
By making clandestine movement more difficult, the counterinsurgents provide the 
population with a necessary alibi for not supporting the insurgent.  This would work 
if supported by a strict and systematic enforcement and penalty system. 
 
 Stability Activities: Support to Security Sector Reform 
 
0575. Introduction. SSR is a much wider concept than rebuilding security forces alone.  SSR is 
not a purely military activity: the legal system, the judicial process, detention and prison 
services, and the police may all require assistance that is beyond military capability and 
will rely on other services or nations to provide the expertise.  This in turn requires a 
coordinated response and is part of a wider comprehensive approach.  An effective SSR 
can only be delivered with a very large investment through a comprehensive approach at 
international and in-theatre level.  In the early (and preparatory) stages of a campaign this 
                                                      
23 Electronic means have proven to be very effective and not easy to falsify. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-22 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
m
ay demand a high level of investment in security training.  Within that framework the 
military contribution will vary but, when required, will be essential.  SSR remains a major 
factor in any successful campaign.  Further details of activities and tasks related to SSR are 
described in ATP-3.2.1.1, ‘Guidance for the Conduct of Tactical Stability Activities and 
Tasks’. 
 
0576. Management and Questioning of Detainees
 .24 A clear distinction has to be made 
between the management of detainees in military custody, which is an operational 
responsibility, and their questioning, which is conducted by specially trained elements 
(except for general initial questions after capture).  The treatment and management of 
detainees in military custody follows internationally agreed standards and must be 
organised, planned and controlled.  The questioning of detainees has to be managed 
carefully, since captured insurgents may provide useful intelligence and soldiers, having 
captured them, may be tempted to question them immediately, which they are not trained 
to do in an adequate way, thus obtaining no information or even false information.  
Consequently, this task should be performed by intelligence officers specifically trained in 
the psychological and perception fields and accustomed to the conduct of tactical 
questioning and its subtleties. 
 
0577. Host Nation Forces Training.  The training of HN security forces is a vital aspect to 
defeat an insurgency using the domestic resources available and facilitating the rule of law.  
This is a core military function.  Advisers and trainers are often tasked with mentoring
25 
these forces by involving them in ongoing operations and, in time, handing over to them 
the lead for the planning and conduct of security operations.  Because relief of a NATO 
force can only really be carried out by adequately trained local forces, the task of bringing 
them up to the standards26 required to carry out their mission is a vital aspect for the COIN 
force. 
 
0578. Tasks.  Security force assistance aims to establish conditions that support the HN’s end 
state.  The security force assistance tasks are to organise, train, equip, rebuild and build, 
and advise and assist, as follows: 
 
a. Organise.  The training of HN security forces includes organising institutions and 
units, which can range from establishing a ministry to improving the organisation of 
the smallest manoeuvre unit.  Building capability and capacity in this area includes 
personnel, logistics, and intelligence and its support infrastructure.  Developing HN 
tactical capabilities alone is inadequate; strategic and operational capabilities must be 
developed also.  HN organisations and units should reflect their own unique 
requirements, interests and capabilities - they should not simply mirror existing 
external institutions. 
 
b. Train.  Training develops programmes and institutions to train and educate security 
forces.  These efforts must fit the nature and requirements of the security forces 
within the operational environment.   
 
c. Equip.  Equipping the HN is accomplished through traditional security assistance, 
foreign support and donations.  The equipment must be appropriate for the physical 
environment of the region and the HN’s ability to operate, maintain and sustain it. 
                                                      
24 Cf AJP-2.5. 
25 This is the mission of the operational mentoring liaison teams (OMLTs). 
26 This implies training in specific skills sometimes quite unknown in some countries, such as crowd/riot control. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-23 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
d. Rebuild and Build.  In m
any cases, particularly after major combat operations, it 
may be necessary to rebuild existing or build new infrastructure to support security 
forces.  This includes facilities and materiel but may also include other infrastructure, 
such as command and control systems and transportation networks. 
 
e. Advice and Assist.  Advising HN units and institutions is essential to the ultimate 
success of training HN security forces.  This benefits both the state and the 
supporting external organisations.  To be effective, advising requires specially 
trained personnel.  Advising establishes a personal and a professional relationship 
where trust and confidence define how well the adviser will be able to influence the 
HN security force.  Assisting is providing the required supporting or sustaining 
capabilities so HN security forces can meet objectives and the end state.  The level of 
advice and assistance is based on conditions and should continue until HN security 
forces can establish required systems or until conditions no longer require it. 
 
0579. Activities.  The training of HN security forces is inherently a developmental effort.  
Success is measured by the increase in the security forces’ capability, capacity, 
competency, commitment and confidence.  Training activities for HN security forces 
include how to plan and resource, generate, employ, transition, and sustain, as follows: 
 
a. Plan and Resource.  The plan and resource activity begins as commanders 
understand the operational environment and determine the requirements of security 
forces.  It also ensures that NATO provides training for HN security forces that 
achieves the objectives and end state of both the HN and NATO.  The HN and 
NATO should then analyse the resource requirements and efforts so that developing 
security forces have sufficient and appropriate resources. 
 
b. Generate.  The generate activity includes the generation of security forces, including 
the forces, leaders and joint function capabilities (movement and manoeuvre, 
intelligence, fires, sustainment, command and control, and protection) based on the 
desired end state. 
 
c. Employ.  The employ activity involves security forces transitioning from force 
generation to mission employment.  It does not rely on the maturity of the force or 
supporting institutions as a whole but is focused on the foreign element in question.  
Conditions determine when to use an element of security forces.  NATO 
commanders and HN security forces assess the risk associated with employment and 
mitigate that risk as much as possible. 
 
d. Transition.  The transition activity defines the transition between two security 
forces, when applicable.  This could be a transition of authority from a NATO force 
to a new HN security force.  It could also be from an HN military force to an HN 
police force, with or without NATO advisers. 
 
e. Sustain.  The sustain activity occurs when the institutional capacity of the HN 
security force has been developed to a point where it is self-sustaining.  It may 
continue to undergo training through combined exercises, educational opportunity 
exchange, intelligence sharing and foreign military sales. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-24 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0580. Types.  There are three types of training for HN security forces - advising, partnering and 
augm
enting.  These define the relationship between outside actors and HN security forces.  
They may be employed simultaneously, sequentially or in combination.  The progression 
and types are determined by the operational environment, the assessment of the HN 
security forces, and the resources available.  Each of these types requires decidedly 
different requirements, objectives and legal considerations, as follows: 
 
a. Advising.  Advising is the primary type of training conducted with HN security 
forces.  Advising is the use of influence to work by, with and through HN security 
forces.  This type of training relies on the ability of the adviser to provide relevant 
and timely advice to HN security forces.  Advisers may also provide HN security 
forces with joint and multinational capabilities, including but not limited to air 
support, artillery, medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) and intelligence.  Advisers are 
not partners.  Advising and partnering are complementary but inherently different 
activities.  Advising requires relationship building and candid discourse to influence 
the development of a professional security force.  Partnering incorporates training 
with combined operations to achieve the same goals.  Advisers perform partnership-
shaping functions, shape discussions with their counterparts and create opportunities 
for the partner units. 
 
b. Partnering.  Partnering attaches units at various levels to leverage the strengths of 
both NATO and HN security forces.  As an HN security force’s capabilities mature, 
the echelon and degree of partnering decrease.  As the HN security force conducts 
more autonomous operations, NATO forces still provide quick reaction forces and 
other assistance as appropriate.  Partner units should establish combined cells for 
intelligence, operations, planning, and sustainment.  While effective coordination is 
always required and initial efforts may require completely fused efforts, HNs should 
eventually build the capability and capacity to conduct all efforts autonomously.  
Unit partnerships do not replace advisory roles or functions.  If partnering and 
advising are used in combination, it forms a three-part relationship amongst HN 
security forces, advisers and the partner units.  Partner units should look to the 
adviser to identify, shape, and facilitate operational partnering opportunities and 
training events.  Advisers support the Alliance and partner unit objectives but, 
depending on the operational phase, the partner unit may support advisers or advisers 
may support the partner unit. 
 
c. Augmenting.  Augmenting is an arrangement whereby HN security forces provide 
individuals or elements to combine with NATO units, or NATO individuals or 
elements combine with HN security forces.  Augmentation improves the 
interdependence and interoperability of NATO and HN security forces.  
Augmentation can occur at many levels and in many different forms.  For example, a 
NATO squad can be augmented with HN individuals, a company can be augmented 
with an HN platoon, or a battalion can be augmented with a company from an HN 
security force.  Augmentation can be of short duration for a specific operation or of a 
longer duration for an enduring mission.  Augmenting assists HN and NATO forces 
to provide language assistance and cultural awareness of the operational 
environment. 
 
d. Combining Tasks and Activities.  The execution of successful training for HN 
security forces links its tasks and activities.  The tasks that support one HN security 
force training activity will normally continue throughout operations.  For example, 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-25 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
organise, train, equip, rebuild and build, and advise and assist tasks will continue 
throughout the training activities of employm
ent, transition and sustain. 
 
0581. Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration.27  The process of DDR is aimed at 
reducing the number of illegitimate armed groups by removing them from a specific 
context - disbanding their military structures, and equipping former combatants with 
appropriate civilian life skills and employment opportunities.  It involves disarming and 
demobilising armed groups and reintegrating former combatants who have not been 
absorbed into the armed or security forces of the HN back into civilian life, as follows:  
 
a. The disarmament of former combatants may occur very early in the operation or 
come as the result of a long and delicate process, the progress of which is linked to 
the development of the political situation or agreements between the parties.  It is 
always an essential step on the road to peace and often, therefore, is at the heart of 
the operation. 
 
b. Although emphasis is often placed on the tw o first steps, namely disarmament and 
demobilisation, because of their symbolic value, they make sense only if an effective 
and well-resourced process for reintegration is already in place.  Indeed, DDR as a 
process will only succeed if the former combatants are given life skills and 
employment opportunities that allow them to relinquish their weapons altogether.  If 
their standard of living drops as a result of going through the DDR process, the 
process itself will fail, as the insurgent is likely to return to the use of arms as a 
means of employment and of generating income. 
 
c. DDR requires significant logistic support and means, particularly on a financial level, 
and it relies on IOs or NGOs.  Therefore it should be planned early. 
 
d. DDR has to be developed with all part ies concerned, and encompasses areas as 
diverse as security, social reintegration, training, employment and health.  DDR is 
inherently multifaceted.  In this process the NATO forces will work with other actors 
with whom they need to establish a dialogue as early as possible.  HN security forces 
and civil agencies should be broadly involved. 
 
Stability Activities: Support to Initial Restoration of Services and Initial Governance 
 
0582. Protection of the Population.  The population must be protected from insurgents.  It is 
crucial to avoid a situation in which counterinsurgents are dominant during the day and the 
insurgents are dominant during the night.  NATO forces should communicate on the 
positive aspects of movement restrictions to the populace regarding their security, and of 
the patrolling in the villages that deny the insurgents any occasion to conduct retaliation 
actions against the locals, and securing the areas where locals are working (e.g. the 
rebuilding of roads and bridges).  Since the effective gathering of intelligence is paramount 
to defeating an insurgency, commanders should bear in mind the fact that the population is 
a principal source of actionable intelligence.  Correct and complete flows of information 
are essential to bring about an improvement in the perception of security.   
 
0583. Fostering National Reconciliation.  The HN government should foster reconciliation 
between the population and insurgents, including unknown, potential and captured 
insurgents.  The main actor in the process is the population.  Real efforts at reconciliation 
                                                      
27 Disarmament and demobilisation tasks are described in the current RD of the ATP-3.2.1.1. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-26 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
dem
onstrate the will to transcend temporary conflict and give hope to the population 
dealing with the daily consequences of insurgency.  In this way, the treatment of 
detainees28 has a crucial impact, especially with respect to future insurgent recruitment and 
the general undermining of the insurgents.  Once the loyalty of former insurgents is 
confirmed,29 their integration within the local armed forces will provide a useful 
knowledge of the insurgent system. 
 
0584. Reconstruction and Development.  An innovation is the introduction of provincial 
reconstruction teams (PRTs).30 The aims in each theatre are different, as are the command 
and control arrangements, but the underlying purpose is the same as coordinating 
reconstruction and development initiatives in individual provinces and extending the 
jurisdiction of state and local government.  At best, PRTs should be a reflection of a 
comprehensive approach and include not just military members but cross-government 
personnel, including those involved with agriculture, education, health, economy and 
industry.  A PRT should operate within the agreed comprehensive plan and should develop 
its local area in line with HN plans. 
 
Section VII - Land Component Contribution 
 
0585. As the population lives and works primarily on land, much of securing and protecting the 
population is accomplished by deploying manpower within the population with an 
enduring presence.  This includes both NATO and HN security forces.  However, HN 
forces can be the primary providers of manpower to maintain this enduring presence.  The 
current COIN operational approach - direct, balanced or indirect - will determine the size, 
footprint and roles of, and the relationship between, HN and NATO land forces. 
 
0586. Host Nation Military Forces.  HN military forces will be unique to their particular culture 
and location.  This includes their quantity, quality and effectiveness.  Regardless of their 
situation or status at the outset of COIN, indigenous forces will be indispensable in terms 
of the execution of COIN and, more importantly, creating enduring solutions.  Professional 
HN military forces will be invaluable for intelligence and understanding the operational 
environment, particularly when the joint force is new to the operational environment.  The 
following must be considered: 
 
a. Host Nation Military Forces and Legitimacy.  If NATO elements are working with 
or training HN security forces, care must be taken to ensure that the population 
perceives their nation’s security forces as capable, competent and professional.  
Failure to do so will generally undermine the HN government’s legitimacy. 
 
b. Security Sector Reform.  The training and development of HN security forces is a 
key part of SSR.  SSR requires unity of effort to develop not only military forces, but 
other aspects of security and governance, such as border police, prison services and 
the judiciary. 
 
                                                      
28 See also AJP 2.5 Captured Personnel and AJP 3.2.3.3 Military Police. 
29 Two criteria may serve to test their sincerity: a full confession of their past activity and a willingness to participate actively in the 
counterinsurgent’s struggle. 
30 For the time being in Afghanistan this is the name of the small units that are responsible for coordinating, and in some cases, enabling, a plethora 
of reconstruction tasks.  Each of these is dependant on context but may include such activities as building schools, well construction, or providing 
veterinary advice and support for local farmers.  The name may change in other theatres of operation.   

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-27 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0587. Host Natio
n Law Enforcement.  HN law enforcement forces play a valuable role in the 
conduct of COIN if these forces are competent and trustworthy.  If they are legitimate in 
the eyes of the population, they are likely to have access to detailed intelligence on 
insurgent leaders, networks and links to criminal elements.  The presence of indigenous 
law enforcement elements, particularly if they are perceived to be leading operations, will 
have a stabilising and normalising impact on the population.  The following must be 
considered: 
 
a. Coordination Between Law Enforcement and the Military.  Military forces must 
be closely coordinated with law enforcement forces.  Military forces will support law 
enforcement forces to provide security and protection.  This allows the law 
enforcement forces to perform their routine duties when the security situation 
requires.  Law enforcement forces may support the military as well.  For example, 
police may arrest insurgents captured and detained by military forces and cooperate 
in site exploitation to gather evidence to prosecute the insurgents.  Law enforcement 
forces and military forces may be co-located to conduct joint operations and to afford 
the police additional protection, based on the security situation.  This coordination 
will often provide valuable intelligence sources, and law enforcement and military 
intelligence should be shared within prudent classification restrictions.  As security 
improves, law enforcement forces should assume a greater role and profile amongst 
the population, thus allowing military forces to focus on subsequent operations.  
Such coordination will also often increase the sense of success and legitimacy. 
 
b. Proficiency .  The role of law enforcement in the HN and the level of employment of 
those law enforcement forces are often dependent on the proficiency of the police 
force and judiciary and the population’s perception of them.  For example, if a police 
force or judiciary is regarded as corrupt, the population will have little trust that the 
police have the best interests of the population in mind or that the force can provide 
real security. 
 
c. Training Police Forces.  Military forces may have to be used in some instances to 
train HN law enforcement, especially civilian police.  Ideally, this responsibility will 
be assumed by supporting police forces so that they receive proper mentoring and 
training in all aspects of police duties.  However, the military will continue to work 
closely with police forces and mentor them when necessary. 
 
d. Corruption.  Some law enforcement forces are not organised or controlled in a 
manner common to responsible governance.  Law enforcement forces may be corrupt 
or poorly organised, trained and equipped.  In fact, corrupt law enforcement or other 
security forces may be a core grievance of the insurgency or may be a driver of 
continuing conflict.  One must also understand the potential ramification of using 
former insurgents as members of the police force.  Efforts must be made to rectify 
any issues concerning corruption, especially as it is unlikely that a nation will be 
stable without a competent, professional law enforcement apparatus. 
 
0588. Host Nation Auxiliary Forces.  When the security situation requires it, counterinsurgents 
should organise and mobilise the local population to protect themselves by forming 
auxiliary forces.  This is a key policy decision that the HN must make.  These forces may 
augment military and/or law enforcement efforts.  The following should be considered: 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-28 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
a. Training and Roles.  When well organised, equipped, trained and led, auxiliary 
forces can play a vital role in COIN.  They can au
gment and assist professional 
military and law enforcement forces, especially with providing a permanent presence 
within the population.  A permanent presence within the population is vital to 
security but is manpower-intensive.  Auxiliary forces are best used to augment or 
execute defensive or stability operations.  The quality, quantity and presence of these 
forces determine the outcome of the overall COIN effort. 
 
b. Advantages.  Auxiliary forces are often local in nature, so they have inherent 
advantages in having an intimate and thorough knowledge of the local population.  In 
this capacity they can be invaluable intelligence assets; their understanding of the 
local operational environment is far superior to that of any outsider.  Auxiliary forces 
may also have specialised skills, developed as part of their culture that may 
complement those of other more professional forces.  These skills can include 
tracking, patrolling, an understanding of the terrain and wildlife, and local 
communications methods.   
 
c. Disadvantages.  Auxiliary forces can present disadvantages, but these can generally 
be overcome with oversight.  Auxiliary forces may be more prone to insurgent 
infiltration, and they may provide an informational operational and security 
challenge.  Alliance members should realise that some auxiliaries may be working 
for both sides in a conflict, most commonly the side they perceive to be winning at 
the moment.  Members of auxiliaries or their friends and family may be subject to 
insurgent coercion and violence.  The overall context will determine how vulnerable 
and therefore how useful the auxiliary forces may be. 
 
Section VIII - Maritime Component Contribution 
 
0589. For COIN, the maritime component plays a critical role in controlling the seas, which may 
be vital to isolating an insurgency physically and psychologically.  The maritime 
contribution to COIN will continue to be vital because much of the world’s population 
lives in littoral areas, including large coastal cities.  Demographic projections also indicate 
that the population of these areas will continue to grow in overall numbers and relative to 
inland populations.  A large proportion of this burgeoning population may live in poverty, 
which may be a key core grievance leading to insurgency.  Due to the rise in population 
and potential unrest, the likelihood of COIN being conducted in the littoral areas also 
increases.  COIN in littoral areas has important maritime considerations. 
 
0590. Maritime Security Operations.  Maritime forces perform maritime security operations 
(MSO) in maritime, littoral and riverine environments.  For COIN, MSO counters 
terrorism, insurgency and crime.  MSO protects the HN, the population and critical 
infrastructure from insurgent attack.  It also assures access to and the free flow of 
commerce and sustainment through the waterways.  MSO is vital to isolating insurgents 
from external support via waterways, especially with respect to littorals.  Riverine units 
provide security along inland waterways, which helps to isolate insurgents within the 
affected area or, if the river is an international border, from external support.  MSO also 
can assist in stopping piracy, which may assist in both stabilising the situation and 
undermining a source of funding as a focus of insurgent operations.  Piracy threatens 
freedom and safety of maritime navigation, undermines economic security, and contributes 
to the destabilisation of governance and the security situation. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-29 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0591. Intelligence
, Surveillance and Reconnaissance.  Naval forces provide the joint force with 
expeditionary ISR capabilities with global reach and persistence in support of COIN. 
 
0592. Deterrence and Patrols.  Naval support may consist of providing deterrence and presence 
patrols.  These may enforce sanctions or blockades.  Naval support demonstrates support 
for an ally or NATO partner, which may send a strong message to insurgents and their 
supporters.  The ability of naval forces to loiter over the horizon gives them a small 
footprint while maintaining the ability to quickly intervene. 
 
0593. Sustainment and Transport.  Maritime forces can provide land-based forces with key 
sustainment capabilities.  This includes commercial vessels providing the majority of bulk 
supplies.  Naval forces, however, may transport forces within the theatre as well.  Naval 
forces can also provide a forced entry capability for insurgent-controlled areas or bases 
bordering on waterways or in littorals. 
 
0594. Naval Aircraft.  Like ground-based aircraft, naval aircraft are flexible, provide rapid 
response capabilities, and are capable of conducting precision strikes.  Naval aircraft, 
however, have added flexibility in that aircraft carriers can be quickly repositioned within 
theatre.  Rapid repositioning may be vital in an austere theatre where the HN may not have 
a robust air power capability or sustainment capability.  Naval air power can thus provide 
the JFC with a potential source of surge air power within a relatively short travel time. 
 
0595. Precision Strikes.  Naval aircraft can execute precision strikes in the same way as the 
aircraft discussed in the air component considerations section.  However, naval forces also 
are capable of launching precision-guided munitions from surface or subsurface platforms.  
As with the air-launched precision-guided munitions, quality, actionable intelligence is 
required for these munitions to be effective.  As with any use of force in COIN, all of the 
potential desired and undesired effects must be considered. 
 
0596. Building Host Nation Maritime Capability.  Security Force Assistance (SFA) also 
applies to assisting the HN with building or improving its maritime capability and capacity.  
The maritime component of security forces includes naval, marine and coastguard 
elements.  SFA planners must develop a long-term plan to assist the HN in these areas.  As 
with the air power capability, the maritime elements of an HN must be appropriate for that 
nation’s requirements and sustainment base. 
 
Section IX - Air Component Contribution 
 
0597. Air forces play a vital role in the military contribution to COIN.  These forces are 
especially capable of countering different types of insurgency members, and of gathering 
information.  Air contributions include CAS, including precision strikes, air interdiction 
(AI); airborne intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR); communication; combat 
support; and air mobility.  Air, efforts in coordination with space forces and capabilities 
can provide considerable asymmetric advantages to counterinsurgents.  If insurgents 
assemble a conventional force, air assets can respond quickly with joint precision fires or 
the ability to airlift ground security forces to remote locations to track down and eliminate 
insurgents.  Air power enables counterinsurgents to operate in rough and remote terrain, 
areas that insurgents traditionally have used as safe havens.  The air component may be the 
supported component in COIN when attacking approved insurgent sanctuaries that are 
outside land or maritime forces’ operational areas. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-30 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
0598. Precision Engagement.  The air component can provide C
AS, air interdiction (AI) and 
strategic air attack, which in COIN often includes the use of precision-guided munitions, 
which both manned and unmanned aerial vehicles can provide.  These precision strikes are 
often based on corroborated HUMINT and are a surgical means of destroying the insurgent 
military wing, leaders, or assets with minimal collateral damage or risk to land forces.  The 
use of lethal fires, regardless of source, against insurgents must be carefully considered and 
targets confirmed in terms of their authenticity and value.  Additionally, insurgents may 
have signature reduction methods, deception methods and man-portable air defence 
systems that must be considered and addressed.  Considerations are as follows: 
 
a. Effects from Air Power.  The effects on the population from using air power strike 
operations against insurgents must be carefully considered during planning.  In 
determining the appropriate capability to create the desired effects, planners should 
look at the desired outcomes, duration and consequences to ensure that not only the 
direct but also the longer term indirect effects of the use of a capability are 
anticipated.  There is potential for collateral damage from the smallest weapons, 
ground or air, and civilian casualties can do much to undermine indigenous, domestic 
and international support.  Additionally, insurgents will exploit such incidents by 
using their own capabilities to deal with information.  However, strike operations 
have a vital role in COIN, especially given their ability to destroy targets throughout 
the operational area. 
 
b. Intelligence.  Just as in traditional warfare, attacks on key nodes usually reap greater 
benefits than attacks on dispersed individual targets.  For this reason, effective strike 
operations are inextricably tied to the availability of actionable intelligence, effective 
ISR, and detailed systems analysis that identifies and fully characterizes the potential 
targets of interest (networks, nodes and links).  Persistence is critical, as it will never 
be known in advance whether a particular node is key to a network or how long it 
will remain important to the network.  Planners may consider a greater use of 
airborne alert in COIN than during traditional warfare. 
 
c. Host Nation Precision Engagement.  If NATO forces conduct the strike, there may 
be the perception that the HN government is dependent for its survival on foreign 
forces.  This may have the indirect effect of delegitimizing the HN government in the 
public’s perception.  Precision engagement should be designed to employ HN air 
power resources to the greatest extent possible.  Properly trained and structured 
teams of air power advisers, ranging from planning and liaison to tactical operations 
personnel, offer the potential for HN unilateral and combined actions against high-
value targets.  The use of these options serves to enhance the legitimacy of the HN 
government while achieving important Alliance security objectives.  The use of 
assets controlled by non-military NATO agencies, but not directly affiliated with 
NATO, may also prove useful in providing precision strike capability. 
 
0599. Interoperability between Ground and Air.  Given its mobility, flexibility and precision, 
air power can be a critical enabler for COIN.  Air power’s ability to quickly support 
ground forces can lower the need for mutual support between ground units and therefore 
decrease overall manpower density.  This allows counterinsurgents to further disperse 
ground forces in areas and in numbers that would not be feasible without air power - 
mutual support can come from the air rather than from
  other ground forces or indirect 
ground fire.  The dispersion of ground forces facilitates the actual and perceived level of 
security.  However, NATO planners must carefully balance the risk of catastrophic tactical 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-31 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
surprise of dispersed ground forces with the benefits gained from
 dispersion. 
 
05100. Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance.  Air and space platforms have critical 
ISR roles in supporting COIN in general and particularly in destroying the military wing of 
insurgencies.  Air and space platforms can provide valuable input for each of the 
intelligence disciplines.  Given the challenges faced by human intelligence (HUMINT) and 
counterintelligence (CI) assets in finding and penetrating insurgent networks, 
counterinsurgents must effectively employ all available intelligence collection capabilities.  
A combination of unmanned aircraft systems, manned aircraft and space-based platforms 
can provide counterinsurgents with many collection capabilities. 
 
05101. Air Mobility.  Cargo aircraft provide the important support of inter-theatre and intra-
theatre transport.  This transport can include deployment to remote regions and deliver 
resources and personnel and can be used to rapidly deploy, sustain and reinforce ground 
forces in COIN.  Air mobility can be used to support political goals by extending effective 
governance to remote areas.  Sustainment tasks are enabled through air landing, airdrop 
and the aerial extraction of equipment, supplies and personnel.  Additionally, the type of 
aircraft to be used for each mission should be considered.  Fixed-wing and vertical-lift 
airlift provide a crucial capability in COIN.  In the military realm, fixed-wing transports 
are best suited for carrying ground forces into forward staging areas.  Vertical-lift 
platforms are ideal for carrying ground forces to remote sites that are unable to support 
fixed-wing operations.  Casualty evacuation should be integral to any operation involving 
the employment of personnel in hostile-fire situations, and vertical-lift assets are best 
suited for this task.  Considerations are as follows: 
 
a. Advantages.  Airlift provides a significant asymmetric advantage to COIN land 
forces, enabling commanders to rapidly deploy, reposition, sustain and redeploy land 
forces.  While land forces can execute these basic missions alone, airlift bypasses 
weaknesses that insurgents have traditionally exploited.  For example, airlift enables 
land forces to operate in rough and remote terrain and to avoid LOCs targeted by 
insurgents.  However, airlift is more costly than surface or maritime transportation.  
It is usually a small percentage of the overall transportation network during major 
combat operations; however, in particularly challenging situations, airlift may 
become the primary transportation mode for sustainment and repositioning. 
 
b. Sources.  Sources of airlift include multinational and HN rotary-wing and fixed-
wing assets.  SOF provide specialised airlift capabilities for Special Operations.  
Strategic inter-theatre airlift platforms can provide a logistic pipeline.  This pipeline 
moves large quantities of time-critical equipment, supplies and personnel into and 
out of a theatre.  Modern strategic airlift can often provide a direct delivery 
capability, landing at relatively short, austere fields formerly serviced only by intra-
theatre airlift. 
 
c. Modes.  The modes of airlift include airland and airdrop.  Each mode provides 
advantages and disadvantages, depending on the environment.  Airland missions 
carry greater payloads, resulting in less potential f
 or damage.  They also provide 
back-haul capability - critical for medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) - troop rotation, 
equipment repair, and the repositioning and redeployment of COIN forces.  Fixed-
wing assets on airland missions require longer and better prepared landing surfaces.  
Vertical-lift assets on airland missions can operate from much smaller, more austere 
fields; however, they fly at slower speeds and often have smaller payloads and 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-32 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
shorter ranges.  Airdrop m
issions require the least amount of infrastructure at the 
receiving end and allow for rapid build-up of forces - up to brigade size.  Equally 
importantly, airdrop can provide precision insertion and the sustainment of numerous 
small units.  Advances in precision-guided, steerable parachutes increase the 
capability of high-value airdrop missions. 
 
d. Special Operations.  Specifically trained airlift forces provide unique air, land and 
airdrop support to SO.  Since a limited number of airlift assets are dedicated to this 
mission, the principle of economy of force is particularly important.  HN aviation 
forces may support ground SOF in hostile or denied territory.  Air SO capabilities 
should be adaptive, fluid, and responsive to asymmetric or irregular threats and 
circumstances. 
 
05102. Basing.  NATO and other multinational air units, along with HN forces, are likely to use 
expeditionary airfields.  COIN planners must consider where to locate airfields, including 
those intended for use as aerial ports of debarkation and other air operations.  Air power 
operating from remote or dispersed airfields may present a smaller signature than large 
numbers of land forces, possibly lessening HN sensitivities to a foreign military presence.  
Commanders must properly protect their bases and coordinate their defence among all 
counterinsurgents. 
 
05103. Building Host Nation Air Power Capability.  NATO and other multinational SFA 
operations strive to enable the HN to provide its own internal and external defence.  
Planners therefore need to establish a long-term programme to develop an HN air power 
capability.  The HN air force should be appropriate for that nation’s requirements and 
sustainment base.  For conducting effective COIN operations, an HN air force requires 
aerial reconnaissance and surveillance, air transport, CAS, and interdiction for land forces, 
strategic attack capability, helicopter troop lift, MEDEVAC and counter-air.  Likewise, 
airlift supports the essential services, governance and economic development of LOOs.  
HN security forces thus should include airlift development as the HN’s first component of 
air power. 
 
Section X - Special Operations Forces Component Contribution 
 
05104. SOF input in COIN operation. When preparing for COIN, SOF can provide area 
assessments and an early command, control, and communications capability.  During 
COIN, SOF could conduct special reconnaissance and surveillance (SR), direct action 
(DA), military assistance (MA), or a suitable combination of these principal tasks, to 
support Allied joint operations in order to accomplish the defined political and 
military/strategic objectives. 
 
05105. Coordination between Special Operations Forces and Conventional Forces.  Although 
their tactical missions may be very different, joint SOF and conventional forces must 
coordinate their efforts. This is especially true between SOF units who are operating in 
land-owning ground units’ areas; coordination is essential for updated intelligence, as both 
SOF and the conventional purpose forces may have to deal with local negative 
consequences of SOF operations. When properly integrated during planning, conventional 
purpose forces and SOF can capitalise on their collective strengths to achieve the JFC’s 
intent. SOF are especially adept in providing cultural awareness and can help facilitate the 
introduction of conventional purpose forces into an area or region. Likewise, conventional 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-33 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
purpose forces can enable the introduction and support of SOF into denied areas, providing 
them
 logistical bases for operations, fire support and reinforcements. 
 
Section XI - Transfer of Security Responsibility  
 
05106. NATO forces should transfer the responsibility for security to HN authorities in the latter 
stages of a COIN campaign.  This process is enabled by the effective conduct of SSR and 
must be implemented when the HN security structures are sufficiently well developed.  
The process includes the transfer of both authority and responsibility for the provision of 
security to the HN’s security forces and will be part of an ongoing NATO or international 
operational transition process.  The need for this to occur will have been stated in the 
campaign plan, and the conditions required to achieve it will need to be developed as the 
campaign progresses.  Implementation is likely to be incremental.  The requisite conditions 
will not be solely concerned with the issue of security but will cover the whole range of 
security sector issues, including governance capacity, the rule of law and economic reform.  
Reform in these areas is usually the domain of other government departments (OGDs) and 
NGOs, and there will be a requirement to conduct coherent planning with these in order to 
coordinate military activities effectively.   
 
05107. Setting Conditions and Decision-making.  Generic conditions for the transfer should be 
set and agreed by the HN government with advice from NATO or the UN as part of a 
comprehensive planning process.  This should be based on the clearly expressed premise 
that the HN and its security forces will have the ability and competence to operate and that, 
when they do, they will operate within the rule of law.  It is critical that, when transitions 
occur, both authority and responsibility are migrated at the same time, as only this will 
allow the actual transfer of risk to the receiving entity.  These conditions will be linked to 
the campaign’s LOOs.  It is critical that the HN government is fully involved with the 
design of the conditions and considers that it has ownership of them.  Above all, the 
population must see that it is their government that takes the final decision, reflecting their 
own sovereignty, reinforcing the HN government’s credibility, and continuing to secure 
the population.  Conditions for re-intervention by NATO will also need to be agreed.   
 
05108. Support to Other Institutions.  The ability to conduct successful transition and transfer at 
the operational level depends as much upon the ability and capacity of HN government 
institutions to operate without support from NATO and other international government 
departments, as it does on capable and credible local forces.  Self-reliance in these areas is 
central to the draw-down and eventual withdrawal of NATO forces and to the maintenance 
of longer term security.  There may be a requirement to focus on supporting and 
facilitating fledgling elected bodies and governance while developing cross-ministry 
cooperation.  This should be conducted as part of a comprehensive approach in conjunction 
with civil agencies, such as national ministries and the UN, and in turn should be supported 
to improve their effectiveness in order to replace military assistance.  At the provincial 
level, the capacity for governance should complement national initiatives and take place 
concurrently.  It is normally appropriate to use PRTs in this coordinating role.  Where 
specific military teams operate in support of HN government departments at the 
local/provincial level, plans should be made to hand over remaining functions to, ideally, 
the HN’s governing bodies or other donors at an appropriate stage in accordance with the 
LOOs.  Civil-military cooperation, information activities and public information activity 
will be required in support of these activities. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-34 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
05109. Execution.  As operatio
nal transition progresses, the NATO force posture will evolve 
through a number of phases.  Changes in this context should be driven by improvements in 
local forces and HN institutional capability, and designed to promote and support 
responsibility for security at the provincial and, eventually, national levels.  The phases are 
as follows:31 
 
a. tactical overwatch, 
 
b. operational overwatch, and 
 
c. strategic overwatch. 
 
05110. Tactical Overwatch.  The major determinant for this phase is the ability of HN forces to 
take the lead for the provision of security at the provincial level with close support from 
NATO forces.  The likely conditions are as follows:  
 
a. Representative government at local level is capable and able to exercise political 
control over local forces’ activity and further capacity building, with advice from the 
NATO forces.   
 
b. Local forces are effective, operating with advice and assistance from NATO forces 
and dependent upon the tactical security situation. 
 
c. Essential services are acceptable or improving, and provide a reasonably sustained 
level of service sufficient to preclude widespread civil unrest. 
 
d. Operational mentoring and liaison teams and other military embedded trainers are 
widespread throughout the indigenous force structure. 
 
05111. Operational Overwatch and Transfer of Security Responsibility.  The following 
conditions should apply before a formal transfer to the provincial civil authorities is 
conducted : 
 
a. The HN is capable, linked to the appropriate national institutional structures, and 
able to exercise political control over local forces’ operations and further capacity 
building with very limited advice from international actors or NATO forces.   
 
b. The local forces are able to operate at this level without support, and re-intervention 
plans are agreed. 
 
c. The majority of opposition groupings are willing to support the government and their 
leaders advocate engagement with it.   
 
d. Assessed popular opinion indicates a reasonable degree of confidence in the 
sustained delivery of essential services, and there is a widespread belief that 
economic opportunities are sufficient or continuing to grow. 
 
                                                      
31 For progress to the next stage to be made, a pre-determined set of functional and environmental circumstances needs to apply.  Subjective 
judgement will be required to lead this process.   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP-3.4.4 
5-35 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
e. Reconstruction, econom
ic development and inward investment are led by the HN. 
 
f. NATO planning and coordination support to indigenous forces is continued.  The 
scale of military embedment is reduced, although some support continues to be 
guaranteed. 
 
g. NATO provides appropriate forces at readiness to provide support within agreed 
timescales.  Arrangements for this support are frequently practised. 
 
05112. Strategic Overwatch.  The conditions for strategic overwatch will be met when HN forces 
have assumed security and stabilisation tasks from NATO forces, and HN institutions have 
sufficient capacity to provide control of their security forces at a national level and to 
provide adequate municipal services to their population.  In effect normal bilateral military 
relations exist, although some specialist military support may continue to be provided by 
NATO (e.g. fixed-wing or rotary-wing support, or naval support).  The following 
conditions will need to be met:  
 
a. Provincial and national government is able to exercise political control over military 
operations and capacity building with very limited advice from NATO at the national 
level. 
 
b. The local forces can operate fully at strategic level in compliance with HN 
government wishes. 
 
c. An accountable system of national government has been established, with opposition 
groups being represented by political parties in the first instance. 
 
d. Assessed popular opinion indicates satisfaction with the degree of delivery of 
essential services and there is widespread belief that economic opportunities and 
growth exist. 
 
e. There is a national lead for economic development and inward investment. 
 
f. National government conducts bilateral relationships.   
 
g. NATO retains the ability and infrastructure to intervene in support of the HN on call. 
 
 



NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
A-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
ANNEX A - STRATEGIES OF INSURGENCY 
 
General 
 
A01. This annex supports Chapter 3.  Contemporary insurgents may use different approaches at 
different times and places, applying tactics that best take advantage of circumstances.  
They may also apply a composite approach that includes experiences drawn from other 
approaches.  From an analysis of experience, the following could be distinguished as the 
strategic models used by insurgents:  
 
a. conspiratorial,  
b. military-focused, 
c. urban approach, 
d. protracted popular warfare, 
e. identity-focused, and 
f. composite and alliances.   
 
Conspiratorial Approach.   
 
A02. This involves a few leaders and a militant cadre or activist party seizing control of 
government structures or exploiting a revolutionary situation.  Such insurgents remain 
secretive for as long as possible.  They emerge only when success can be achieved quickly.  
This approach usually involves creating a small, secretive, vanguard party or force. 
 
Military-focused Approach.   
 
A03. Those applying the military approach, aim to create revolutionary possibilities by applying 
military force.  They can use conventional forces to secure their independence or 
secession.  Further, they can employ armed elements in a rural environment to create a 
focus and gain revolutionary support that will enable them to seize power.  They spread 
control through the creation of combat forces rather than through political subversion.  
This approach was applied in the 60s and 70s and it is currently used in some parts of Sub-
Saharan Africa. 
 
Urban Approach.   
 
A04. Protracted urban terrorism waged by small, independent cells requires little popular 
support, so it is difficult to counter.  However, popular support could be gained in certain 
areas where the border between population and terrorists is unknown.  As societies have 
become more urbanised and insurgent networks more sophisticated, this approach has 
become more effective.  When facing security forces’ actions, these groups adopt a cellular 
structure recruited along lines of close association: family, religious, political party or 
social group.   
 
Protracted Popular Warfare.   
 
A05. This approach, where decisive combat is avoided, has been frequently employed, even by 
regular armies.  The most illustrative examples are those of the 20
th century in Asia 
(Chinese communist forces in the Civil War and the Vietcong  in the War of Vietnam).  
Mao Zedong’s Theory of Protracted War describes a three-phase, politico-military 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
A-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
approach.  E
ffectively applying Maoist strategy does not require a sequential or complete 
application of all three phases.  The aim is seizing political power.  The three phases are as 
follows: 
 
A06. Phase I Strategic Defensive (Latent and Incipient).  The first phase of an insurgency 
normally begins with the government having stronger forces than the insurgents, which 
means that the insurgency is on the strategic defensive.  In this situation insurgents must 
concentrate on survival and building support.  Although they share many of the same 
activities, there are two distinct common stages within the first phase: latent and incipient.  
Members of a latent or incipient insurgency conduct several linked, often interdependent, 
activities.  While not all insurgencies will conduct all of these activities or place the same 
emphasis on them, all insurgencies will use these activities to some degree: 
 
a. Latent.  A latent insurgency is not yet ready to begin significant subversive or 
violent activities.  A latent insurgency usually begins with a group of like-minded 
individuals discussing their grievances.  This exchange of ideas may occur through 
many mediums, including the Internet or recorded video.  The involved individuals 
may discuss challenging authority or correcting perceived grievances, which may 
lead to a conspiracy for action.  During this period an insurgency establishes an 
identity, a cause, a narrative, and a firm ideological or political base.  This period 
tends to be the most vulnerable and crucial time for the insurgents.  It can also be a 
period of frequent fractures into different groups due to ideological or other disputes.  
Due to their potential vulnerability, the insurgents often try to keep their activities 
hidden from the government and the majority of the population, secrecy is essential.  
There are two key tasks insurgents perform during the latent stage - recruitment and 
infiltration: 
 
(1) Recruitment.  Beginning in the latent stage, the insurgency will recruit, 
establish cadres and build underground agents.  Through planned recruitment 
the insurgents try to win members, supporters and sympathisers at all levels.  
Rival organisations are a key concern for the insurgents, as they can compete 
for new recruits or support.  This competition may become violent in nature if 
other organisations are impeding the insurgency. Infiltration.  Insurgents seek 
to identify power centres at different levels within an HN, including where 
decisions are made, and infiltrate them.  Insurgents will normally form a 
network of cells and agents to perform this infiltration.  A key aim of these 
efforts is to control elements that regulate national development and activities, 
especially established government agencies.  Infiltration can focus on a wide 
number of targets, including the armed forces, security forces, legal 
institutions, the media, trade unions and work organisations, education centres, 
student/professional associations, institutions, and the so-called “ruling class”. 
b. Incipient.  There is usually a period in which a latent insurgency can transform itself 
into an incipient insurgency.  During the incipient stage an insurgency is becoming 
active; however, many of the activities from the latent stage will continue throughout 
the incipient stage and beyond, for example, building and maintaining an ideological 
or political base.  Although the insurgents will continue these activities, they feel 
they have a sufficient foundation to begin violent activities and additional subversive 
activ
ities.  In addition to the tasks from the latent stage, there are two key tasks 
insurgents also perform in the incipient stage - preparation and manifestation: 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
A-3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
(1) Preparation.  There are several key tasks that in
surgents execute to prepare for 
major efforts.  Building the organisational structures and capabilities to 
perform subversion and violent activities is a key task.  Information activities, 
especially propaganda, are vital for the growth and long-term prospects of an 
insurgency.  In addition to having members and supporters, insurgents must 
acquire the materiel means to fight, such as weapons, funds and other supplies.  
Insurgents also continue to build an intelligence collection network, which may 
include coercion and blackmail.  Some insurgencies will organise support from 
the local population through networks of legal organisations.  An insurgency 
based on an existing organisation, such as a religious faction or tribe, can have 
a significantly reduced preparation time.  Regardless of the exact tasks or 
emphasis of the insurgency in the preparation phase, they must balance the risk 
between secrecy and open operations.  While an insurgency needs to promote 
the cause or narrative to gain popular support, overt operations make them 
vulnerable to penetration by counterinsurgents.  Finally, many insurgencies 
also turn to criminal organisations or efforts to provide funding. 
 
(2) Manifestation.  Manifestation may take many forms and is largely dependent 
on the insurgents’ strategy.  It may include a wide range of non-violent or 
violent activities that may be generally random and diffuse in form and effect: 
 
(a) Non-violent Means.  Non-violent efforts may include protest 
demonstrations at specific locales to obstruct infrastructure, disrupt work, 
distribute propaganda and have a political impact on the population.  
Large-scale marches may be used for similar purposes.  These non-
violent efforts may have an international impact, which may put more 
pressure on the HN government and counterinsurgents.  Insurgents may 
also use publicised boycotts, such as avoiding the use of specific goods 
or services, not purchasing particular countries’ goods, refusing to carry 
out civic actions such as paying taxes or striking.  As insurgencies 
become more adept, they will use non-violent methods in conjunction 
with violent methods.  For example, they may use a demonstration to 
cover an attack on security forces.  However, they may still use non-
violent means simply to gain the sympathy or support. 
 
(b) Violent Means.  Violent efforts may include terror attacks, occupation 
attacks, sabotage, street tactics, ambushes and raids: 
 
i. Terror Attacks may take the form of bombings, assassinations, 
and kidnappings.  Kidnapping targets may include foreign 
personnel, including attaches, ranking government officials and 
members of the commercial community.   
 
ii. Occupation Attacks are carried out to temporarily occupy an 
establishment such as a government office or communications 
facility for the purpose of gaining propaganda or psychological 
advantage. 
 
iii. Sabotage.  Insurgents sabotage installations of an economic or 
political nature such as factories, public or government office 
buildings, communications facilities, and power-producing 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
A-4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
equipm
ent of a critical nature. 
 
iv. Street Tactics.  Insurgents may use street tactics to involve the 
population in the insurgents’ efforts against the counterinsurgents 
security forces.  In fact, insurgents may take over existing peaceful 
demonstrations and turn them into violent ones.  Insurgents may 
also construct barricades to heighten or prolong the existing 
tensions or violence.  Rock throwing, sniping and other means may 
be used to incite police to attack a peaceful demonstration.  The 
purpose behind such activity is to cause material damage and a 
general breakdown in the morale of the populace, and to embarrass 
and undermine the government.  Professional agitators from the 
insurgent organisation may penetrate demonstrations in order to 
incite violence with propaganda.  The insurgents obscure their 
intentions by blending into the crowd and merging actions with 
those of the masses. 
 
v. Ambushes are generally used to kill key government or military 
forces and officials and inflict losses on police.  Ambushes are 
carefully planned and may employ blocking elements to prevent 
rapid reinforcement of the ambushed force.  Mines and IEDs may 
also be utilised as part of the ambush.  Snipers may be employed, 
and the insurgent will normally try to take advantage of the 
irregularities of the streets and buildings.  An ambush often has a 
devastating effect on security forces. 
 
vi. Raids.  These are armed assaults made to obtain funds or 
equipment; free detainees, capture arms, ammunition and 
explosives and destroy or overrun government or military 
installations.  The usual targets are foreign forces allied with the 
HN government, monetary and commercial centres, government 
buildings and police stations, penal institutions, military 
installations and arsenals, foreign embassies and installations, and 
communications and transportation facilities.  In Phase I a 
defensive position is adopted, since the correlation of forces is 
adverse.  It is a period of latent insurgency that allows time to wear 
down adversary strength while the insurgency gains support and 
establishes an efficient clandestine organisation.  Combat is 
avoided.  The primary armed activities are terrorist attacks.  They 
are executed to gain popular support, influence obstinate 
individuals and undermine morale. 
 
A07. Phase II—Strategic Equilibrium.  The second phase of an insurgency normally starts 
when force correlations approach equilibrium and the use of armed elements   of 
insurgency becomes the most important, pervasive activity.  This stage can begin with 
actions of armed elements  striking at a time and place of their own choosing and then 
disappearing back into the population.  The size and intensity of such attacks will depend 
on the situation and the goal of the insurgency.  If the intention is to impose a military 
defeat, the attacks may concentrate on causing military attrition, weakening the military 
power, and causing desertions, with a view to eventual conventional battles.  If the aim is 
to cause a level of harassment that is unendurable for the government, a wider range of 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
A-5 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
attacks m
ay be attempted.  If the intention is to force a repressive military response from 
the government, thus alienating it from the population, the application of organised crime 
and terrorism in a ruthless and systematic manner is likely.  Insurgent efforts in this phase 
may include: 
 
a. more actions by armed elements, which often aim to force counterinsurgents onto the 
defensive; 
 
b. an increased use of sabotage and terrorism; 
 
c. intensified propaganda; 
 
d. attempts to gain control of isolated geographic areas and develop bases for further 
operations; 
 
e. driving government officials out of areas with strong insurgent support; 
 
f. the establishment of local shadow governments; and 
 
g. increased efforts to gain international recognition and support. 
 
A08. Phase III Strategic Offensive.  The third phase of an insurgency begins when insurgents 
feel they that have superior strength and a portion of their military forces attempt to fight in 
a conventional manner.  Insurgent efforts may include: 
 
a. Some armed elements may combine and be trained to fight as conventional forces.  
Over time these conventional forces may form multiple echelons. 
 
b. More powerful and sophisticated weapons may be acquired through foreign 
assistance or capture. 
 
c. Insurgents may obtain support from external combat forces, such as Special Forces 
or conventional forces from a friendly border nation. 
 
d. Areas of insurgent control may expand and political activity may increase. 
 
A09. Protracted popular war approaches are conducted along multiple politico-military COAs 
and are locally configured.  Insurgents may employ different tactics in different regions.  
The result is more than just a “three-block war”; it is a shifting “mosaic war” that is 
difficult for COIN to envision as a coherent whole.   
 
Identity-focused Approach 
 
A10. The identity-focused approach mobilises support based on the common identity of 
religious affinity, clan, tribe or ethnic group.  These movements may be based on an appeal 
to a religious identity, either separately from or as a part of other identities.  This approach 
is common among contemporary insurgencies and is sometimes combined with the 
military-focused approach.   
 
Composite Strategy   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
A-6 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
A11. Contem
porary insurgents may use different approaches at different times and places, 
applying tactics that best take advantage of the circumstances.  They may also apply a 
composite approach that includes experiences drawn from other approaches.  In addition, 
different insurgent forces using different approaches may form coalitions when it serves 
their interests.  Within a single AOO there may be multiple competing groups, each 
seeking to maximise its survivability and influence.  This reality complicates the mosaic in 
such a way that it will be difficult for counterinsurgents to understand the type of actions 
necessary for victory.  They will have to carefully analyse the root of every action, since a 
single response will not suffice.   
 
Contemporary Insurgencies and Current Threats 
 
A12. Contemporary insurgencies develop in extremely complex scenarios.  There are many 
interrelated actors, and it is hard to clearly distinguish between two parties: insurgent and 
counterinsurgent.  Among these actors are militias, warlords, organised crime, drug 
dealers, private security companies, NGOs, the media, multinational companies, and 
foreign countries with strategic interests in the area.  A global and transnational nature is 
one of the main characteristics of contemporary insurgencies, since different insurgent 
movements can cooperate.  There may be a flow of volunteers who, after a war, join other 
wars, and share experiences, training, give logistic/financial support and so on.   
 
A13. All things considered, it can be stated that “new insurgencies” are characterised by their 
continuous adaptability, and their ability to adapt when developing strategies and 
procedures, which are inspired on three models, as follows: 
 
a. From the revolutionary strategy, they have taken the relevance of communication, 
psychological actions, mobilising the population and the use of time. 
 
b. From historical insurgencies and terrorism, they have taken their tactical procedures.  
They have adapted them to urban environments. 
 
c. From organised crime they have taken their command and control structure, and the 
networked structure, and the opportunities provided by new information 
technologies, globalisation
 and basic funding procedures. 
 
A14. The threat posed by new insurgencies is based on their ability to act in different areas, and 
their capacity to affect a country’s domestic/foreign politics and its public opinion through 
the use of violence and propaganda. 
 
A15. To sum up, at present there are different types of insurgency at different evolution stages, 
evolved or not, taken from former models.  New insurgencies are characterised by 
globalisation; the use of new technologies, propaganda and terrorism in urban scenarios; 
their connections with organised crime; and their relationships to other profitable irregular 
activities. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
A-7 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK) 



NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
B-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
ANNEX B - INSURGENT ACTIVITIES FOR ACHIEVING THEIR 
GOALS 
 
B01. General.  This annex supports Chapter 3.  Insurgents primarily use the following five 
activities or instruments for achieving their goals: 
 
a. violent activities, 
b. national and international propaganda, 
c. social assistance, 
d. social and political activism, and 
e. international relations. 
 
B02. Violent Activities.  Insurgent violent activities may take many forms, including actions of 
armed elements , terrorism, and riots. 
 
a. Actions of armed elements.  This is carried out by armed forces, generally small, 
organised into a military structure and commanded by a commander.  Their method 
is harassing and interfering with the adversary.  It normally starts with population 
support in a territory controlled by the adversary.  It is a form of combat that eludes 
direct engagement.  It also avoids being an identifiable target for the adversary.  
Consequently, armed elements primarily use surprise, mobility, and focused attacks 
followed by immediate dispersal and can occasionally include terrorist actions.  
Therefore, there is not a clear line distinguishing one method from another.  However 
activities of armed elements in an urban environment, have recently revived, for the 
following reasons: 
 
(1) accessibility to simple, lethal weapons for short distance in urban areas; 
 
(2) technological development in terms of communications and information 
systems.  They facilitate the tasks of gathering information, coordinating 
actions, and exchanging lessons learned; 
 
(3) concentration of large numbers of the population into urban areas; and 
 
(4) masking and hiding is easier.  In spite of contemporary technological assets, it 
is more difficult for security forces to locate, identify and act against armed 
elements  and their logistic support.   
 
b. Terrorism.  This is a set of violent actions aimed at subjugating the population, 
weakening and undermining the influence of legal authorities’ and interfering with 
their actions.  In order to achieve maximum propaganda and psychological impact - 
enormously facilitated by the globalised media - terrorists use surprise, provoking a 
chain of attacks in time, targeting symbolic entities.  Their aim is to create a climate 
of fear among the population without directly facing them, promoting groundless 
discouragement, undermining their morale, and making them feel helpless.  They 
seek to achieve the following objectives: 
 
(1) spread the feeling of a need for a drastic change in power, allowing  normalcy 
to be re-established; 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
B-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
(2) f
orce radical repressive measures by security or military forces.  This will 
facilitate later recruitment of activists/informers; 
 
(3) eliminate, prevent or interfere with peaceful reformist measures and force the 
government to use control measures which cause unrest; 
 
(4) provoke attrition and undermine security forces’ morale, causing casualties, 
forcing them to be continuously deployed, and adopting disturbing measures 
for the population; 
 
(5) eliminate unyielding adversaries who, with their roles and positioning, damage 
the insurgents’ “cause”, and prove that the insurgency has strength and 
capacity to act against any person, regardless of their protection; 
 
(6) prove the government’s inability to restore normality, show its loss of 
authority, and force it to impose restrictive measures on the population; and 
 
(7) attract international attention in order to influence public opinion and obtain 
funds. 
 
c. Riots.  A riot is a modality of violence aimed to intimidate the population or interfere 
with public order by destroying public/private material goods causing direct 
engagement with security forces.  Riots cause disturbances, and organised strikes and 
illegal demonstrations can have an attritional effect on government authority, 
presence and capacity.  The press and other media can have a multiplier effect in this 
sort of action.  Insurgency generally generates riots as a complementary form of 
irregular activities.   
 
B03. National and International Propaganda.  Insurgents need the local population and 
international public opinion to know and support their cause and to confront their 
adversary.  The globalisation of the world provides insurgents with multiple means (such 
as television, radio, audio and video recordings; the printed word; word-of-mouth; digital 
photographs; and the Internet) that have a multiplying effect on their propaganda.  As an 
example, current religious fundamentalists use the Internet to disseminate propaganda to 
groups in foreign countries.  The Internet significantly facilitates the purchase of goods and 
radical books, and the broadcast of sermons delivered in clandestine environments.   
 
B04. Social Assistance.  Through social assistance insurgents win local support and legitimacy, 
especially in those countries where the state government is weak, corrupt or failed.  Social 
assistance can include: 
 
a. raising funds inside and outside the country used for beneficial and non-beneficial 
aims; 
 
b. supporting education and medical facilities and activities; 
 
c. aiding workers by supporting labour unions and providing employment; and 
 
d. facilitating the provision of basic needs, such as the care of orphans and widows, and 
so on.   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
B-3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
B05. Political Activism.  Insurgent political activism
 often focuses on supporting the narrative 
and ideology.  An insurgency may form a political wing to support these efforts.  The 
success of insurgent activism may depend on the insurgents’ ability to create coalitions 
with other groups and actors.  Insurgents may organise demonstrations, protests, general 
strikes, boycotts and other types of political activities to support political activism.  
Additionally, they may use associations and even established political parties.  Although 
they may use legal political parties, the insurgents intend to use these parties to undermine 
and destroy the existing political system.   
 
B06. International Relations.  Local insurgencies can establish relations with other insurgent 
groups that are acting in other countries.  This may be a mutually beneficially agreement of 
“fellow travellers”.  They normally do this to receive training, exchange experiences, raise 
funds, receive arms and pose a united front.  Insurgents may also seek material support 
from other states, or moral support from individuals and NGOs or other organisations with 
worldwide influence (for example, a group which influences public opinion or an artist 
who publicizes a legitimate insurgent cause).   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
B-4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALL
Y BLANK) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
C-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
ANNEX C - MOTIVATION METHODS 
 
C01. General.  This annex supports Chapter 3.  The main motivation methods used by  
insurgent’s are as follows: 
 
C02. Persuasion.  In times of restlessness and turmoil, political, social, security and economic 
benefits may attract popular support for one or another party.  Persuasion can be used to 
win internal/external support through:  
 
a. a charismatic leader or group; 
 
b. appeal to a specific ideology or religion; 
 
c. promise to address grievances; 
 
d. demonstrations of potency such as large-scale attacks or effective social programs for 
the needy.  This can be the most effective technique because it can create the 
perception that the insurgency has momentum and will succeed; and  
 
e. providing security.  In this sense, insurgents will base their actions on the belief that, 
for the population, a government unable to secure the population loses its legitimacy.  
Most civilians will tend to support those who ensure their security, even to the 
detriment of their freedom. 
 
C03. Coercion.  Insurgents use coercion to intimidate the population.  Kidnapping and 
murdering local leaders or their relatives is a common practice among insurgents, which 
use it and other criminal activities to deter the population from supporting the government. 
 
C04. Provoking Disproportionate Reaction.  By provoking a disproportionate response from 
the security forces, the insurgent aims to alienate the government from the populace.  
Though firmness on the part of security forces is often necessary to establish a secure 
environment, a government that exceeds accepted local norms and abuse’s its power to the 
detriment of the population, or behaves in a tyrannical way, generates resistance to its rule.  
People who have been maltreated or have had close friends or relatives killed by the 
government, particularly by its security forces, may have a violent reaction or join an 
insurgency. 
 
C05. Foreign Support.  Foreign governments can provide the expertise, international 
legitimacy and money needed to start or intensify a conflict.  NGOs, even those whose 
stated aims are impartial and humanitarian, may be drawn into supporting the insurgents, 
either knowingly or unwittingly.  For example, funds raised overseas for professed 
charitable purposes may be redirected to insurgent groups. 
 
C06. Apolitical Motivation.  Apolitical insurgents can be attracted by non-ideological factors 
through economic incentives, promises of revenge, and the idealism of fighting a 
revolutionary war.  Insurgencies attract criminals and mercenaries.  Fighters who have 
joined for money will probably become bandits once the fighting ends.  This category also 
includes opportunists who exploit the lack of security to engage in economically lucrative 
criminal activities, such as kidnapping and theft.  Sustainm
 ent and funding requirements 
often drive insurgents into relationships with organised crime or into their own criminal 
activities.  Taxing a mass base usually yields low returns.  In contrast, kidnapping, 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
C-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
extortion, bank robbery and drug trafficking are very lucrative.  This is the reason why, 
throughout history, m
any insurgent movements have degenerated into criminal bands. 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
 ANNEX D - ELEMENTS OF OPERATIONAL DESIGN 
 
D01. General.  This annex supports Chapter 4.  The development of an operational design is 
fundamental to operational planning.  It represents the formulation of an overarching idea 
for the operation, based on a general estimate of the situation and the mission analysis, and 
embodies the commander’s intent.  Operational design provides design elements to help 
visualise and shape the operation in order to accomplish the mission.  Elements of 
operational design help to visualise the arrangement of joint capabilities in time, space and 
purpose to accomplish the mission.  The key to operational design involves understanding 
the strategic guidance, determining the end state and objectives, identifying the adversary’s 
principal strengths and weaknesses, and developing an operational concept.  Operational 
design for COIN should reflect a comprehensive approach applicable to each phase of the 
campaign.  Because there is only one strategy or campaign, there should be only one 
operational design.  This single design should incorporate all actors, including the HN. 
 
D02. Termination.  Termination will depend on political discourse between the HN and NATO 
members.  This focus of termination is normally based on the projected security 
environment.  The ends, core grievances, drivers of conflict and leadership of an 
insurgency are also important factors.  Insurgencies based on interest-based core 
grievances, such as economic disparity or political corruption, may be persuaded or 
coerced back into a political process.  Insurgencies based on ideology, ethnicity, or 
religious or cultural identities are value based, and their demands are more difficult to 
negotiate.  Some insurgencies or groups of insurgencies will be both value- and interest-
based.  Drivers of conflict also impact termination. 
 
a. Process.  Termination includes the resolution of a conflict as well as the mutual 
acceptance of terms and conditions to ensure a lasting settlement.  Political efforts 
are essential for termination of COIN, as well as economic, informational, and 
military instruments of national and Alliance power.  The political and diplomatic 
processes may continue well beyond the cessation of hostilities.   
 
b. Criteria.  NATO commanders must clearly understand the desired end state and 
termination criteria for the campaign.  Appropriate and well-conceived termination 
criteria are the key to ensuring that successful military operations result in conditions 
which allow conflict resolution on terms favourable to the Alliance.  In the event that 
termination criteria are not clearly articulated, the JFC should request, through the 
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe (SACEUR), further guidance or clarification, 
as appropriate. 
 
c. Considerations.  Termination must be integrated throughout the COIN operational 
planning process.  The commander must examine the desired end state and assess 
whether it is likely to eliminate or sufficiently reduce sources of further conflict.  On 
this basis they must determine what constitutes an acceptable military end state; 
however, the primacy of political issues in COIN often means the military and 
political end states are almost the same.  In formulating their plans, NATO 
commanders should ensure that these considerations are addressed. 
 
D03. Desired End State.  Before designing a COIN operation or campaign it is necessary to 
clearly identify the desired end state for the HN.  This will include statements on the 
Alliance and the insurgents.  The overall end state consists of the political and military 
conditions that need to exist for an operation to be terminated on favourable terms.  The 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
end state sh
ould be clearly established before military forces are committed to execution.  
The ability to plan and conduct operations for conflict termination depends on a clear 
understanding of the desired end state. 
 
D04. Determination of End State.  The Alliance’s strategic end state is established by the 
North Atlantic Council (NAC), based on advice from the NATO military authorities 
(NMA) and the relevant NATO senior committees prior to the initiation of operational 
planning.  It includes conditions that must be met.  These conditions can be very wide-
ranging in COIN and will give a clear indication of the relative importance of the military 
operations; military operations are only one contribution to COIN.   
 
D05. Objectives.  Joint multinational operations must be directed towards a clearly defined and 
commonly understood objective that contributes to the achievement of the desired end 
state.  In simple terms, an objective is an aim to be achieved.  Commanders establish 
objectives at their level to focus the actions of subordinates and to provide a clear purpose 
for their tasks.  Objectives are therefore established at each level. 
 
a. Alliance Objectives.  These will represent the Alliance’s overall political aims based 
on common vital interests and the desired end state.  They are determined through 
political consultation and establish a clear purpose towards which the HN and the 
Alliance will direct their collective efforts and resources.   
 
b. Military Strategic Objective.  Based on the HN’s and the Alliance’s desired end 
state for a crisis or conflict situation and advice from the NMAs, the SACEUR 
planning guidance will establish the military strategic objectives to be achieved by 
Alliance forces in a given situation.  The military strategic objectives establish the 
overall aims of the campaign for the NATO commander and other supporting 
commands with respect to adversaries and strategically important areas.  For COIN, 
the military strategic objectives will be defined with due regard for other non-
military strategic objectives and the political end state identified in the overarching 
political mandate.  This allows the NMAs, in coordination with the NATO 
commander, to develop military objectives in concert with the objectives of other 
agencies involved in the operation and to clearly appreciate the part that each will 
play in achieving the desired political end state.  The military strategic objective 
should reflect a realistic military strategic end state that allows withdrawal of NATO 
forces at an appropriate stage. 
 
c. Operational Objectives.  Based on his appreciation of the desired military end state 
and military strategic objectives, the NATO commander will establish operational 
objectives to be achieved by subordinate/component commanders.  Military 
operational objectives often describe conditions to be achieved at decisive points 
(DP) in terms of force (e.g. expel, defeat, destroy, contain, neutralise and isolate), 
space (e.g. seize, secure defend, control or deny) and/or time (e.g. gain time for the 
build up of own forces).  This helps define the purpose of the tasks to be 
accomplished by subordinate/component commands.  A similar process is used for 
COIN non-military activities. 
 
D06. Determining Centres of Gravity.  One of the most important steps in developing an 
operational design is to determine COGs for both opposing and friendly forces.  While an 
analysis of insurgents’ COGs determines how to defeat them, it is also necessary to 
determine Alliance COGs and assess their vulnerability to attack by adversaries in order to 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
provide for their protection.  The essence of operational art is to determ
ine an opponent’s 
COG and how best to neutralise it in order to prevent them from achieving their objectives 
while ensuring the protection of one’s own COG in order to achieve one’s own objectives. 
 
D07. Centres of Gravity.  AAP-6 defines a COG as “characteristics, capabilities or localities 
from which a nation, an alliance, a military force or other grouping derives its freedom of 
action, physical strength or will to fight”.  The friendly and adversary objectives must first 
be understood to conduct a COG analysis, as COGs are formed out of the relationships 
between the two adversaries; COGs do not exist in a strategic or operational vacuum.  Each 
entity in the operational environment has one strategic and one operational COG at one 
time.  At the strategic level, a COG might be a military force, an alliance, a political or 
military leader, a set of critical capabilities or functions, or national will.  At the 
operational level a COG is often associated with the adversary’s military capabilities - such 
as a powerful element of the armed forces - but could include other capabilities in the 
operational environment.  COGs are inherently complex and dynamic in that they change 
depending on each belligerent’s objectives and the operational environment.  Changes to 
COGs must be carefully analysed and planned for.  Changes to COGs often indicate a 
change in the nature of operations.  JFCs not only consider the adversary COGs, but also 
identify and protect their own COGs.  Counterinsurgents must similarly determine the 
friendly strategic and friendly operational COGs.  Critical factors analysis provides 
commanders with a detailed, systemic understanding of friendly and adversary COGs, and 
the knowledge to balance resources accordingly to protect them as the situation requires.   
 
D08. Analysis.  Thorough and detailed COG analysis helps commanders and staffs to 
understand the systemic nature of the operational environment and the actions necessary to 
shape the conditions that define the desired end state.  A thorough understanding of the 
insurgent’s ends, scopes, dynamics, approach and activities are required to begin an 
insurgent COG analysis.  The nature of the insurgent’s strategic ends is predominantly 
political and often more intangible than in traditional warfare.  As a source of power or 
strength, COGs are inherently complex and dynamic; they can change over time.  COGs 
consist of certain critical factors that may include intrinsic weaknesses.  These critical 
factors help commanders identify and analyse COGs, formulate methods to isolate or 
neutralise them, and prevent them from influencing events.  Insurgent COGs and critical 
factors also tend to be conceptual and moral, although an advanced insurgency that is able 
to engage in a struggle of movement and has a shadow government will have more 
tangible COGs and critical factors.   
 
D09. Insurgent Centres of Gravity.  The insurgent’s strategic COG is likely to be conceptual 
or moral, although the core grievances of the insurgency may well be physical.  A strategic 
COG analysis will therefore highlight the insurgent’s ideology, motivations and cause.  
This also makes it difficult to determine which of the enemy’s critical strengths represent 
the true COG.  The insurgent leaders or their followers might comprise a COG.  In some 
cases, ideology should be considered an important part of a COG.  The individual 
insurgent commanders and their forces in the countryside may in exceptional cases 
constitute an operational COG.  At the operational level, insurgents rarely mass large 
forces to constitute a tangible operational COG.  In determining COGs, it is important to 
appreciate that our opponents will act according to their own interests, perspectives an
 d 
values, which are likely to be significantly different from our own.  Asymmetric situations 
are a consequence of significant differences in the ends, ways and means of adversaries.  It 
may be useful to determine COGs for the different factions as well as IOs/NGOs that must 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
be protected rather than neutralised or destroyed. 
 
D10. Critica
l Factors.  Commanders and staffs consider COGs holistically, examining them 
from a broad perspective to determine the relationships between the conditions, resources 
and means that enable a COG to function.  Understanding the dynamic, complex nature of 
a COG is the key to exposing weaknesses and vulnerabilities, enabling friendly forces to 
establish the conditions for success.  Through critical factors analysis, commanders and 
staffs identify those systemic vulnerabilities that, when attacked, expose the enemy COG 
to paralysis, shock and, ultimately, total collapse.  Critical factors analysis considers three 
essential characteristics of a COG capabilities, requirements, and vulnerabilities as follows:  
 
a. Critical Capabilities.  Critical capabilities (CCs) are adversary means considered to 
be crucial enablers for the functioning of a COG, and are essential to the 
accomplishment of the adversary’s assumed objectives.  They are the attributes of a 
COG that can affect friendly force operations within the context of a given scenario, 
situation or mission.  CCs may vary between phases of an operation, function at 
various echelons, or change in character as an operation progresses.  At the 
operational and tactical levels, CCs represent a potential for action: they possess an 
ability to inflict destruction, seize objectives or create effects, or prevent adversaries 
from achieving mission success.   
 
b. Critical Requirements.  Critical requirements (CRs) are the essential conditions, 
resources and means required for a COG to be fully operational.  For example, CRs 
can include the resources necessary to deploy a force into combat, the popular 
support a national leader needs to remain in power, or the perceived legitimacy 
required to maintain popular support.  CRs are the lifeblood of the CC upon which a 
COG depends; they are also the primary means through which to isolate, dislocate, 
disintegrate, or destroy a COG. 
 
c. Critical Vulnerabilities.  Critical vulnerabilities (CVs) are aspects or components of 
those CRs that are deficient or vulnerable to direct or indirect attack in a manner that 
will create decisive or significant effects.  Commanders may neutralise, weaken or 
destroy an adversary’s COG by attacking through CVs.  Once designated as an 
objective, a CV becomes a decisive point. 
 
D11. Using Critical Requirements and Vulnerabilities.  CRs and CVs are interrelated.  The 
loss of one CR may expose vulnerabilities in other CRs, and may initiate a cascading effect 
that accelerates the eventual collapse of a COG.  The analysis of a COG and its critical 
factors will reveal these systemic relationships and their inherent vulnerabilities.  In 
situations where a COG possesses multiple CVs critical factors analysis helps commanders 
and staffs to prioritise the vulnerabilities as follows:  
 
a. Tactical Critical Requirements.  The CRs that sustain a strategic or operational 
COG function are independent of the respective level of war.  This exposes CVs to 
actions generated by any echelon.  For example, an operational COG may rely upon 
certain CRs that are vulnerable at the tactical level of war.  Once identified, these 
vulnerabilities become DPs at the operational level, and force-oriented or purpose-
based objectives at the tactical level. 
 
b. Focus.  Critical factors analysis may identify a single vulnerability that will isolate or 
neutralise a COG; however, ultimate success is usually attained by focusing on a 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-5 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
com
bination of CVs that can be defeated or neutralised through the simultaneous or 
sequential application of overwhelming combat power.  Effective critical factors 
analysis can determine the conditions required for successive operational advantages 
that attain the campaign objectives and reduce the associated risk.   
 
c. Targeting Critical Vulnerabilities.  In identifying and targeting CVs, commanders 
consider their accessibility, recuperative capability, vulnerability, redundancy, and 
influence on the operational environment.  They carefully balance these factors 
against friendly capabilities to affect these vulnerabilities.  The objective is to direct 
overwhelming, asymmetric friendly capabilities against these vulnerabilities to affect 
the enemy COG.  Critical factors are the key to protecting or neutralising COGs 
during a campaign or major operation.  To achieve success, the force must possess 
sufficient combat power and operational reach to defeat CVs. 
 
D12. Decisive Points.  DPs are a logical extension of COG critical factors.  Counterinsurgents 
should identify DPs to leverage friendly capabilities in order to exploit insurgent 
vulnerabilities.  A DP is a node, system or key event that allows a marked advantage over 
an insurgent and greatly influences the outcome of COIN.  DPs are not COGs; they are 
keys to attacking or protecting COG CRs.  In COIN, this may involve influential 
individuals in the population, and leader engagement and providing leaders with security 
may give the counterinsurgents an advantage over the insurgents.  When it is not feasible 
to attack a COG directly, commanders focus operations to weaken or neutralise the CRs 
and therefore CVs upon which it depends.  These CVs are DPs, providing the indirect 
means to weaken or collapse the COG.  DPs at the operational level provide the greatest 
leverage on COGs, where tactical DPs are directly tied to task and mission 
accomplishment. 
 
a. Prioritisation.  A situation typically presents more DPs than the joint force can 
control, destroy or neutralise with available resources.  Through critical factors 
analysis, commanders identify the DPs that offer the greatest leverage on COGs.  
They designate the most important DPs as objectives and allocate enough resources 
to achieve the desired results.  DPs that enable commanders to seize, retain or exploit 
the initiative are crucial.  Controlling these DPs during operations helps commanders 
gain freedom of action, maintain momentum, and dictate tempo.  If the adversary 
maintains control of a DP, it may exhaust friendly momentum, force early 
culmination or facilitate an adversarial counter-attack.  DPs shape the design of 
operations.  They help commanders select objectives that are clearly decisive relative 
to the end state; they ensure that vital resources are focused only on those objectives 
that are clearly defined, are attainable, and directly contribute to establishing the 
conditions that comprise that end state. 
 
b. Nature of Decisive Points.  Some DPs are geographic, such as sanctuaries and bases 
of operations.  Other physical DPs may include elements of an adversary, including 
key individuals.  Events, such as an election or a major insurgent effort to hold 
terrain, may also be DPs.  A common characteristic of DPs is their relative 
importance to the COG; the nature of a DP com
 pels the enemy to commit significant 
effort to defend or marginalise it.  The loss of a DP weakens a COG and may expose 
more vulnerabilities as it begins to collapse. 
 
c. Critical Factors and Decisive Points.  Critical factors and DPs are related.  CVs 
identified as objectives are DPs.  However, not all DPs are CVs.  Typically, CVs are 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-6 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
well protected and not susceptible to a direct approach; any effort to control, 
neutralise, or destroy a CV is likely to be successful only through an indirect 
approach.  T
his is accomplished through a series of DPs along a LOO, ultimately 
exposing the insurgent’s vulnerability to a direct attack. 
 
d. Stability Decisive Points.  DPs assume a different character during stability 
operations, which are a key part of COIN.  These DPs may be less tangible and more 
closely associated with critical events and conditions.  For example, they may 
include repairing a vital water treatment facility, establishing a training academy for 
HN security forces, securing a major election site, or quantifiably reducing crime.  
While most of these DPs are physical, all are vital to establishing the conditions for 
defeating an insurgency, addressing core grievances, and building HN capabilities, 
capacity and ultimately legitimacy. 
 
e. Designating Decisive Points as Objectives.  The commander should designate DPs 
as objectives within the campaign or operation and allocate resources to create 
desired conditions or effects to secure, protect, control, deny, destroy or neutralise 
them.  Operational art is applied in determining the condition or effects to be created 
at DPs, when, in what sequence and using which resources.  This will help in 
determining the most promising approach and LOO to adopt, in addition to possible 
alternatives. 
 
D13. Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs).  Establishing objectives requires the commander to 
make basic decisions about conditions or effects to be created at DPs.  Developing 
measures of effectiveness (MOEs) provide means for determining progress and successful 
achievement of the objective.  The commander should also determine MOEs for each 
objective to determine whether operations are producing the desired conditions or effects.  
MOEs typically describe predicted benchmark changes in physical or moral conditions or 
effects that indicate progress toward the accomplishment of the objective.  MOEs should 
allow the commander to evaluate whether the operation is creating the desired conditions 
and effects, as well as any undesired consequences that might jeopardise the 
accomplishment of his objective or mission.  MOEs are critical because their use in 
evaluating progress may influence decisions regarding the conduct of operations and the 
allocation of resources.  Measures of performance examine how well a task is being 
performed, which may prove useful in assessment.   
 
D14. Direct Versus Indirect Approach.  The next step in designing an operation is to 
determine the best approach for dealing with the opposing COGs.  Destruction or 
neutralisation of the adversary COG is the most direct path to success however, two 
alternative approaches to consider are the direct and indirect approaches, as follows:  
 
a. The direct approach is a linear, uninterrupted approach against an opposing force’s 
COG, often by way of DPs.  The direct approach is appropriate when a force has 
superior strength and the opposing force is vulnerable.  Conversely, when direct 
attack means attacking an opponent’s strength, JFCs should seek an indirect 
approach.   
 
b. The indirect approach seeks to exploit opposing force physical and m
 oral 
vulnerabilities, while avoiding its strengths.  The indirect approach is appropriate 
when a force is insufficient to operate directly against opposing COGs or critical 
capabilities in a single operation or coup de main, and instead must concentrate on 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-7 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
exploiting the adversary’s CVs in a series of ope
rations that eventually lead to the 
defeat of the COG.  In particular, the indirect approach may seek to exploit opposing 
vulnerabilities across the opponents fighting power.   
 
It is often difficult or impossible to attack an insurgency’s strategic COG or operational 
COG; thus, COIN often requires an indirect approach.  As a result, the insurgent’s CVs can 
offer indirect pathways to gain leverage over the insurgent’s COGs.  In this way, joint 
force commanders employ a synchronised combination of operations to weaken insurgent 
COGs indirectly and over time by attacking CRs that are sufficiently vulnerable. 
 
D15. Lines of Operation.  Having determined the best overall approach to the opposing COG, 
the next step in operational design is to determine primary and alternate LOOs.  LOOs link 
DPs in time and space on the path to the opposing COG.  They connect a force with its 
base of operations and its objectives.  Commanders use them to focus combat power 
towards a desired end state, applying combat power throughout the three dimensions of 
space, time and purpose in a logical design that integrates all the military capabilities of a 
joint force in order to converge upon and defeat the COG of the adversaries.  LOOs are a 
key tool for counterinsurgents to visualise the operational design.  Each LOO represents an 
element of the plan, stated as an outcome.  Together the LOOs define the necessary and 
sufficient objectives / outcomes necessary to achieve the overarching goal.  LOOs describe 
the linkage of various cross-sector actions on nodes and decisive points.  They also connect 
tasks and effects to nodes and decisive points related in time and purpose with an 
objective.  COIN requires the synchronisation of activities along multiple and 
complementary LOOs in order to attain tactical and operational objectives.  Figure D.1.1 
depicts a set of example LOOs, some working through the population and others focused 
on the insurgents.   
 
Figure D.1.1 Example Friendly Lines of Operation 
 
a. Main Effort.  Commanders may specify a LOO as the main effort.  In this case the 
other LOOs shape the operational environment for the main effort LOO’s success.  
This prioritisation may change as COIN creates or exploits insurgent vulnerabilities, 
insurgents react or adjust their activities, or the environment changes.  In this sense, 
commanders adapt their operations not only to the state of the insurgency, but also to 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-8 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
the oper
ational environment. 
 
b. Interdependence.  Success in one LOO reinforces successes in the others.  Progress 
along each LOO contributes to attaining a stable and secure environment for the HN.  
Stability is reinforced by popular recognition of the HN government’s legitimacy, 
improved governance, and progressive and substantive reduction of the core 
grievances of the insurgency.  There is no list of LOOs that applies in all COIN or all 
phases of COIN.  LOOs should be based on the holistic understanding of the 
operational environment and what must be done to achieve the end state.   
 
D16. Sequencing and Phases.  As in any operation, COIN planners must determine the best 
arrangement of actions or major operations to achieve objectives.  This arrangement will 
often be a combination of simultaneous and sequential actions or operations designed to 
achieve the desired end state.  However, it is normally impossible to attain all objectives of 
COIN in a single major operation.  As such, the design of a campaign of major operation 
normally provides for the sequencing of actions or the phasing of operations.  A variety of 
factors must be considered when determining this arrangement for COIN operations, 
including the population’s current view of counterinsurgent credibility, HN legitimacy and 
the insurgents in general.  The arrangement of COIN operations impacts the tempo of 
activities in time, space, and purpose, as follows: 
 
a. Sequencing.  Sequencing is the arrangement of actions designed to create desired 
conditions or effects at DPs within a major operation or campaign in an order that is 
most likely to produce the desired effect on opposing COGs.  Although simultaneous 
action on multiple LOOs may be ideal, a lack of resources may force commanders to 
sequence their actions; alternatively commanders may choose to sequence their 
actions in order to reduce the risks to an acceptable level.  This process assists in 
thinking through the entire operation or campaign logically in terms of available 
forces, resources and time, and helps to determine different operational phases. 
 
b. Phases.  While the phasing construct is a helpful planning tool, phases are not linear 
nor represent a clear-cut distinction in reality.  Conditions in the operational 
environment may force returning or regressing to earlier phases, and various 
geographic areas within the theatre may be in different phases at any given time, 
even within a single city.  JFCs and joint forces must be agile in recognising how 
conditions affect phasing.  Similarly, they must be prepared to shift from military to 
civilian control based on the operational environment. 
 
c. Counterinsurgency Considerations.  Reaching the end state for COIN requires the 
conduct of a wide array of operations over a protracted period.  Because COIN is 
often of long duration, it is often useful to arrange COIN in phases.  Consequently, 
the design of COIN operations normally provides for related phases implemented 
over time.  Phasing helps visualise and think through the entire COIN effort and to 
define requirements in terms of forces, resources, time, space and purpose. 
 
D17. Synergy.  Counterinsurgents integrate and synchronise operations, forces and capabilities 
in a manner that addresses the core grievances of insurgency, deals with the drivers of 
conflict, and neutralises insurgents.  This includes combining forces and actions to achieve 
concentration in various domains and the information environment, culminating in 
achieving the assigned objectives.  Synergy in COIN consists of physical and 
psychological aspects.  In the complex COIN environment, it is impossible to accurately 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-9 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
view the contributions of
 any individual organisation, capability, or the domains and 
information environment in which they operate in isolation from all others.  Each may be 
critical to success, and each has certain capabilities that cannot be duplicated. 
 
D18. Simultaneity and Depth.  Simultaneity refers to the simultaneous application of military 
and non-military power against an adversary’s key capabilities and sources of strength.  
Simultaneity in COIN contributes directly to an insurgency’s erosion and ultimate collapse 
by addressing core grievances and placing more demands on insurgent military forces and 
functions than they can successfully address.  Simultaneity also refers to the concurrent 
conduct of operations at the tactical, operational and strategic levels.  For COIN, depth 
applies to time as well as to space.  This reflects the fact that most insurgencies protract 
conflict by design.  Because of the inherent close relationships between the levels of 
operations in COIN, commanders cannot be concerned only with events in their respective 
echelon but must understand how their actions contribute to the military end state and the 
overall end state.   
 
D19. Culmination.  Culmination is that point in an operation when the force can no longer 
successfully continue its current operation.  Sequencing and phasing should be designed to 
ensure that operations by adversaries culminate well before they can achieve their 
objective while ensuring that our own operations achieve their objective well before any 
culmination.  The art is to achieve the objective of the operation before reaching the 
culminating point.  Therefore, the operational design should determine ways in which to 
speed the opponent’s culmination while precluding our own.  Culmination has both 
offensive and defensive applications.  Culmination during COIN or stability operations 
may result from the erosion of national will, the decline of popular support, questions 
concerning legitimacy or restraint, or lapses in protection leading to excessive casualties.  
A well-developed assessment methodology is crucial to supporting the commander’s 
determination of culmination, both for insurgent and friendly actions.   
 
D20. Anticipating Branches and Sequels.  An essential step in operational design is to 
anticipate eventualities that may occur in the course of a major operation or campaign and 
determine alternative LOOs and sequences of action that still achieve the overall objective.  
It must be recognised that for every action there are a range of possible outcomes that may 
or may not create the desired conditions or effects.  Outcomes that are more favourable 
than expected may present opportunities that can be exploited.  Outcomes that are worse 
than expected may pose risks that must be mitigated.  However, the ability to exploit 
opportunities and mitigate risks depends firstly on anticipating such situations and 
secondly on developing contingency options for effectively dealing with them.  
Commanders must anticipate possible outcomes and ensure that options are provided in 
their operational planning in order to preserve freedom of action in rapidly changing 
circumstances and to allow them to keep the initiative despite the actions of the enemy.  
This is achieved by developing branches and sequels within the overall operational design 
based on continuously exposing the operational design to “what if” situations which could 
possibly occur during or after each phase of the operation or campaign.  Many COIN 
operation plans require adjustment beyond the initial stages of the operation.  
Consequently, plans should be flexible by having branches and sequels.  B
 oth branches 
and sequels are plans associated with the base plan, and all are created using the initial 
problem frame.  When transitioning to a branch or a sequel, counterinsurgents should 
examine whether reframing the problem is required by the current conditions.   
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-10 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
a. Branches.  Branches a
re options built into the basic plan.  Branches may include 
shifting priorities, changing unit organisation and command relationships, or 
changing the very nature of COIN itself.  Branches add flexibility to plans by 
anticipating situations that could alter the basic plan.  Such situations could be a 
result of insurgent action, the availability of friendly capabilities or resources, or 
many other potential situations.  It is vital to prioritise COIN branch planning efforts 
with respect to the most likely and most dangerous branch plans.   
 
b. Sequels.  Sequels are subsequent operations based on the possible outcomes of the 
current operation - victory, defeat or stalemate.  In COIN, sequels can focus on 
different phases or on shifting the overall approach.  For example, unanticipated 
success might allow for a more indirect NATO approach, and defeat might require a 
more direct NATO approach to shore up HN security forces. 
 
D21. Operational Reach.  Operational reach is the distance and duration over which a joint 
force can successfully employ military capabilities.  Operational reach may be a factor in 
COIN if there are limitations set on the number, type or general footprint of forces that can 
support an HN’s COIN efforts.  Operational reach can also be a factor if the joint force 
faces insurgency when there is no HN. 
 
D22. Timing and Tempo.  The joint force should conduct operations at a tempo and point in 
time that best exploits friendly capabilities and inhibits the enemy.  However, the COIN 
intelligence operations dynamic ultimately determines the tempo that the counterinsurgents 
can maintain.  Good intelligence will allow for successful operations that may in turn result 
in more useable intelligence.  Given actionable, reliable intelligence and proper timing, 
counterinsurgents can dominate the action, remain unpredictable, and operate ahead of the 
insurgency’s ability to react. 
 
D23. Forces and Functions.  COIN should focus on addressing the core grievances and drivers 
of conflict in addition to defeating an insurgency as a military force.  Defeating an 
insurgency as a military force consists largely of neutralising the insurgent military wing. 
 
D24. Leverage.  Leverage is gaining, maintaining, and exploiting advantages in combat power 
across all domains and the information environment.  Leverage can be achieved through 
asymmetrical actions that pit joint force strengths against insurgent vulnerabilities and the 
concentration and integration of joint force capabilities.  Leverage allows 
counterinsurgents to impose their will on the insurgency, increase the enemy’s dilemma, 
and maintain the initiative.  Leverage can be achieved by focusing Allied joint force 
strengths against an opponent’s weaknesses at DPs in time and space.  For example, 
NATO COIN efforts may use air assets against insurgent ground assets. 
 
D25. Balance.  Balance is the maintenance of the force, its capabilities and its operations in such 
a manner as to contribute to freedom of action and responsiveness.  Balance refers to the 
appropriate mix of forces and capabilities within the overall counterinsurgent force as well 
as the nature and timing of operations conducted.  Balance also refers to a proper balance 
of
 offence, defence and stability operations.   
 
D26. Anticipation.  Anticipation is essential to effective planning for and execution of COIN.  
Counterinsurgents must use intelligence to ascertain the insurgents’ approach and 
campaign plan, which will assist in anticipating insurgent activities.  A shared, common 
holistic view of the operational environment aids counterinsurgents in anticipating 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
D-11 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
opportunities and challenges.  Knowledge of the population and friendly capabilities, and 
insurgen
t and other adversarial capabilities, intentions, and likely COAs, allows COIN to 
focus efforts on where they can best impact the situation.  However, anticipation is not 
without risk, especially if insurgent deception is effective. 
 



NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
Lexicon - 1 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
 
LEXICON  
 
PART I - ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AAP     Allied administrative publication  
AI     air interdiction  
AJP    Allied joint publication  
AOO    area of operations 
ATP    Allied t actical publication 
 
CAS    close air support 
CC    critical capability 
CHB    clear, hold, build 
CI    counterintelligence 
CIMIC    civil-military cooperation 
COA    course of action 
COG    centre of gravity 
COIN    counterinsurgency 
CR    critical requirement 
CV    critical vulnerability 
 
DDR    disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration 
DP    decisive point 
 
HN    host nation 
HUMINT   human intelligence 
 
IED    improvised explosive device 
Info Ops   information operations 
IO    internat ional organisation 
ISR    intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance 
 
JFC    joint force command  
 
LOC    line of communication 
LOO    line of operation 
 
MOE    measure of effectiveness 
MSO    maritime security operations 
 
NAC    North Atlantic Council 
NGO    non-governmental organisation 
NMA    NATO military authority 
 
PRT    provincial reconstruction team 
PsyOps   psychological operations 
 
SACEUR   Supreme Allied Commander, Europe 
SFA    security forces assistance 
SO    special operations 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
Lexicon - 2 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
SOF 
   special operations forces 
SOFA    Status of Forces Agreement 
SSR    security sector reform 
 
TCN    troop contributing nation 
 
UN    United Nations 
UNHCR    United Nations High Co mmissioner’s Office for Refugees 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
Lexicon - 3 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
PART II - TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
 
 
actors 
All parties and stakeholders that are part of the operational environment and either directly or 
indirectly has a share, takes part, or influences the outcome.  (AJP-3.4.4; a proposed new term and 
definition) 
 
centre of gravity 
COG  
Characteristics, capabilities or localities from which a nation, an alliance, a military force or other 
grouping derives its freedom of action, physical strength or will to fight.  (AAP-6) 
 
civil-military cooperation  
CIMIC  
The coordination and cooperation, in support of the mission, between the NATO Commander and 
civil actors, including the national population and local authorities, as well as international, national 
and non-governmental organisations and agencies.  (AAP-6) 
 
counterinsurgency 
COIN 
The set of political, economic, social, military, law enforcement, civil and psychological activities 
with the aim to defeat insurgency and address any core grievances.  (AJP-3.4.4; a proposed new 
term and definition) 
 
defeat 
To diminish the effectiveness of an individual, group or organisation to the extent that it is either 
unable or unwilling to continue its activities or at least cannot fulfil their intentions.  (STANAG 
2287) 
 
end state  
The political and/or military situation to be attained at the end of an operation, which indicates that 
the objective has been achieved.  (AAP-6 ) 
 
host nation  
HN  
A nation which, by agreement:  
a.  receives forces and materiel of NATO or other nations operating on/from or transiting through 
its territory;  
b.  allows materiel and/or NATO organisations to be located on its territory; and/or  
c.  provides support for these purposes.  (AAP-6) 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
Lexicon - 4 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
human inte
lligence  
HUMINT  
A category of intelligence derived from information collected and provided by human sources.  
(AAP-6) 
 
information activities 
Actions designed to affect information and/or information systems, performed by any actor.  (AJP-
3.10) 
 
information operations 
Is a military function to provide advice and coordination of military information activities in order 
to create desired effects on the will, understanding and capabilities of adversaries and other NAC 
approved parties in support of Alliance mission objectives.  (AJP-3.10) 
 
insurgency 
The actions of an organised, often ideologically motivated, group or movement that seeks to effect 
or prevent political change of a governing authority within a region, focused on persuading or 
coercing the population through the use of violence and subversion.  (AJP-3.4.4; a proposed new 
term and definition) 
 
international organisation  
IO 
An intergovernmental, regional or global organisation governed by international law and 
established by a group of states, with international juridical personality given by international 
agreement, however characterised, creating enforceable rights and obligations for the purpose of 
fulfilling a given function and pursuing common aims.   
Note: Exceptionally, the International Committee of the Red Cross, although a non-governmental 
organisation formed under the Swiss Civil Code, is mandated by the international community of 
states and is founded on international law, specifically the Geneva Conventions,32 has an 
international legal personality or status on its own, and enjoys some immunities and privileges for 
the fulfilment of its humanitarian mandate.(AAP 6) 
 
irregular activity 
The use or threat of force by irregular forces, groups or individuals, frequently ideologically or 
criminally motivated, to effect or prevent change as a challenge to governance and authority.  (AJP-
3.4.4; a proposed new term and definition) 
 
line of operation  
In a campaign or operation, a line linking decisive points in time and space on the path to the centre 
of gravity.  (AAP-6) 
 
                                                      
32 The provisions of Additional Protocols I and II of Geneva Conventions on the Law of War of 12 August 1949, neither bind nor apply for the States 
not party (including Turkey) to these Protocols. 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
Lexicon - 5 
ORIGINAL
 
NATO UNCLASSIFIE
D 
non-governmental organisation  
NGO  
A private, non-profit, voluntary organisation with no governm
ental or intergovernmental affiliation, 
established for the purpose of fulfilling a range of activities, in particular development-related 
projects or the promotion of a specific cause, and organised at local, national, regional or 
international level.  (ATP 3.2.1.1 RD1, a new proposed term and definition) 
Note:  
1.  A non-governmental organisation does not necessarily have an official status or mandate for its 
existence or activities.   
2.  NATO may or may not support or cooperate with a given non-governmental organisation.   
 
operational art  
The employment of forces to attain strategic and/or operational objectives through the design, 
organisation, integration and conduct of strategies, campaigns, major operations and battles.  (AAP-
6) 
 
reintegration  
Process through which former combatants, belligerents, and dislocated civilians receive amnesty, 
re-enter civil society, gain sustainable employment, and become contributing members of the local 
populace.  (ATP 3.2.1.1 RD1 proposed new term and definition) 
 
rules of engagement  
ROE  
Directives issued by competent military authority which specify the circumstances and limitations 
under which forces will initiate and/or continue combat engagement with other forces encountered.  
(AAP-6) 
 
terrorism  
The unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence against individuals or property in an attempt 
to coerce or intimidate governments or societies to achieve political, religious or ideological 
objectives.  (AAP-6) 
 

NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
AJP 3.4.4 
Lexicon - 6 
ORIGINAL 
NATO UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
 