22 Military Intelligence
Introduction
Prior to 9/11, Document and Media Exploitation 
(DOMEX) capabilities were neither well defined 
nor sufficiently developed or understood to ad-
equately support combat operations. Despite les-
sons learned from previous conflicts, U.S. forces 
entered the War of Terror without mechanisms 
to properly collect, process, and disseminate in-
telligence derived from DOMEX. In the past 18 
months, the volume of captured digital information 
from law enforcement, intelligence, and civil court 
cases has exploded. Recent investigations of Umar 
Farouk Abdulmutallab, the alleged terrorist who 
attempted to detonate plastic explosives on board 
a commercial airliner, and U.S. Army Major Nidal 
Malik Hasan, the man accused of killing Soldiers 
at Fort Hood, rely extensively on close examination 
of personal computer data by federal law enforce-
ment agencies. These are just two cases amid an 
avalanche of harvested digital media that create a 
national security issue which merits a system that 
can reliably sift intelligence and quickly share it in 
order to protect lives and preserve security. 
In response to a recent congressional inquiry, two 
respected leaders of the Intelligence Community (IC) 
commented that “there is no doubt that “DOMEX 
provides critical intelligence unavailable through any 
other discipline.”
1 Without question, our DOMEX ca-
pabilities have evolved into an increasingly special-
ized full-time mission that requires a professional 
force, advanced automation and communications 
support, analytical rigor, expert translators, and 
proper discipline to process valuable information 
into intelligence. 
This article will examine the historical roots of 
DOMEX operations to present day activities, explain 
why DOMEX should be an intelligence discipline, 
review how the Army improved DOMEX capabilities, 
and what steps can be taken to enhance operations, 
and then offer recommendations on how the IC and 
the Department of Defense (DOD) can better orga-
nize, train, man, and equip itself to meet DOMEX 
challenges in the future.  
Historical Context
The U.S. military and other branches of our govern-
ment relied on what was originally titled Document 
Exploitation (DOCEX) for as long as we have prac-
ticed the art of intelligence. Discovering the enemy’s 
intentions through examination and exploitation 
of captured documents was nothing new. In war-
fare, exploitation of adversary documents normally 
begins at the point of capture and progressively 
becomes more detailed and sophisticated as the 
document moves through a process of triage, trans-
lation, and promulgation.
2 
The Civil War provides many examples of troops 
capturing and attempting to exploit enemy doc-
uments. The assassination of President Lincoln 
caused a detailed review of captured Confederate 
documents once thought trivial or of little value for 
military operations, seeking proof that Southern 
leaders were linked to the assassination plot.
3 
By 1920, the U.S. Army War Department intelli -
gence regulation emphasized the value of DOCEX: 
“Experience has shown that the information derived 
from documents is second in value only to that se-
cured by the actual examination of prisoners. Too 
much stress cannot be laid upon the importance of 
the rapid and systematic examination of every doc-
ument captured.”
4 
Unfortunately, DOCEX was never a high priority 
in terms of training and resources as the Army en-
tered World War II. In Europe, the 1
st Army had a to-
tal of five personnel assigned to their DOCEX team 
for combat operations from January 1944 to May 
DOMEX: The Birth of 
a New Intelligence 
Discipline
by Colonel Joseph M. Cox
The views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Army, 
Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government.

April - June 2010 23
1945.5 This team would disseminate intelligence 
reports after documents were reviewed and trans-
lated, usually 48 hours after capture. But with the 
capture of between 250 to 1,000 pounds of docu-
ments each day, the organization was of marginal 
assistance to tactical operations. 
1st Army reached several conclusions about 
DOCEX intelligence: “documents arrived too late for 
operational exploitation” and “sufficient personnel 
were not trained to help Corps and Division levels”.
6 
Through the Korean War and into Vietnam, DOCEX 
remained relevant and necessary to gain intelligence 
on the enemy, but it was viewed as something tem-
porary in nature. When we needed it, we built or-
ganizations to meet the demand, then forgot about 
lessons learned after conflicts ended.  
Why was U.S. Army DOMEX Not 
Prepared for 9/11? 
The first problem was that after Vietnam, U.S. 
Army DOCEX missions and functions were doc-
trinally pinned to interrogators: “the first intel-
ligence specialists who could examine or exploit 
captured documents, in addition to interrogating 
prisoners of war, and will scan documents and ex-
tract information.”
7 Accordingly, DOCEX proce-
dures became firmly rooted within the interrogator 
Field Manual (FM) under the human intelligence 
(HUMINT) discipline. 
The second problem was the direct result of plac-
ing DOCEX responsibilities on interrogators within 
HUMINT. There simply weren’t enough collectors (CI 
and interrogators) to accomplish the DOCEX mis-
sion. As the Army reduced its force size in the early 
70s under a transformation initiative called “Army of 
Excellence (AOE),” it became apparent that an inter-
rogation force would not be a large one. Close study 
of the AOE with respect to interrogator strength re-
vealed early concerns that there weren’t enough in-
terrogators in Army inventories to conduct HUMINT 
missions and equally support DOCEX missions.
8 
What Were the Consequences of Not 
Being Prepared? 
One intelligence leader stated: “DOCEX didn’t 
work; we did our own DOCEX when we could. 
Otherwise, it was sent to some CJTF-76 DOCEX 
section for processing that was virtually a black 
hole because I never received any feedback from 
anything we sent forward. We just didn’t have the 
manpower at our level to conduct any type of ex-
tensive DOCEX.”9 From the outset of Operations 
Enduring Freedom/Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF), 
there was a shortage of trained HUMINT collec-
tors and they were a precious resource. Major 
General Barbara Fast, the Multi-National Corps-
Iraq C2, stated that “it became imperative once we 
were in Iraq to establish a strong HUMINT capa-
bility to understand the situation on the ground, 
but we lacked the number and some of the skills 
required to be as successful as we needed to be.”
10 
Predictably, the scant numbers of HUMINT collec-
tors were in high demand just for their core mis-
sion sets: tactical questioning, debriefings, source 
operations, and interrogation of detainees. DOCEX 
wasn’t a priority.  
DOMEX Goes National
As the military struggled with DOMEX activities 
between 2001 and 2003, the first tangible effort to 
institutionalize DOMEX at the National and strategic 
level came with the creation of Defense Intelligence 
Agency’s (DIA) National Media Exploitation Center 
(NMEC) in 2003.
11 The NMEC was created to serve 
as the lead government agency for the rapid pro-
cessing, exploitation, dissemination and sharing of 
all acquired documents and media between strate-
gic/national through tactical/local levels across the 
Intelligence, Counterintelligence (CI), military, and 
Law Enforcement (LE) communities to enhance the 
safety and security of the Nation.
12 
The swift expansion of DOMEX enterprise created 
many different efforts across the IC and DOD which 
required significant funding from congress. In 2005, 
the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
(SSCI) conducted an audit to review the practices 
of collecting, processing, translating, and reporting 
intelligence obtained from overtly captured and/or 
clandestinely acquired paper documents and elec-
tronic media.
13 The SSCI wanted to analyze and 
evaluate the intelligence value of DOMEX efforts 
and assess the budget implications for sustaining 
DOMEX over the long term. The SSCI audit findings 
concluded that:
DOMEX had become an integral source of valuable 
 Ê
intelligence information supporting both tactical 
operations in OEF/OIF and Iraq and strategic anal-
ysis in national intelligence agencies,14 but there 
was a perception of slight duplication of effort and 
redundancy in terms of reporting intelligence.

24 Military Intelligence
The IC allowed the DOMEX expertise to atrophy  Ê
after each major conflict which caused a rou-
tine “reinvention of the wheel” phenomenon. 
This proved insufficient, and allowed for an in-
formation vacuum to exist during periods when 
policy makers and military planners most need 
DOMEX data.
IC leadership needs to make tough decisions in  Ê
the near term in order to improve the efficiency 
and effectiveness of DOMEX activities.15
The Office of the Director of National Intelligence 
(ODNI), as the head of the IC, oversees and directs 
the implementation of the National Intelligence 
Program and, by extension, provides oversight to 
DOMEX intelligence activities. The ODNI published 
Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 302 in July 
2007 assigning national DOMEX oversight to the 
Assistant Deputy Director of National Intelligence for 
Open Source Intelligence (ADDNI/OS), the NMEC, 
and the IC agencies. 
One item within ICD 302 represents the center of 
gravity for the publication–NMEC became the DNI 
center for the national DOMEX enterprise and be-
came chartered to:  
Support the development of the ODNI’s 
 Ê
DOMEX strategy, policy, and programmatic 
recommendations. 
Ensure prompt and responsive DOMEX support 
 Ê
to meet the needs of intelligence, defense, home-
land security, law enforcement, and other U.S. 
Government consumer, to include provision of 
timely and accurate collection, processing, ex-
ploitation, and dissemination of DOMEX.
Implement policies and guidance on DOMEX in- Ê
cluding handling and dissemination polices.
Develop training and tradecraft programs  Ê
that expose all IC personnel to the benefits of 
DOMEX.
What the U.S. Army Fixed in DOMEX, 
What Can Be Improved, and What Can 
Other Services Learn? 
For over 50 years, and until recently, U.S. Army in-
telligence doctrine preserved the DOMEX function 
within the HUMINT discipline and failed to main-
tain sufficient capability to conduct the mission. A 
post-mortem appraisal of the U.S. Army’s OEF/OIF 
DOMEX experiences along the DOTMLPF framework 
offers lessons learned for other services:
Doctrine–DOCEX incorrectly resided under HUMINT 
with interrogators as lead.
Organizations–No Army units, to include intelligence 
units, were structured to conduct the function.
Training–Training was never formalized. Theaters 
established their own procedures and training. No 
effective blueprint existed for standardized DOCEX 
instruction.
Materiel–There was no family of systems to cover a 
DOCEX end-to-end approach.
Leadership–HUMINT staff directorates were 
overwhelmed.
Personnel–No professionalized force to accomplish 
the mission.
Facilities–Not applicable. DOMEX shortfalls were 
not caused by inadequate infrastructure.
The 2008 U.S. Army Training and Doctrine 
Command (TRADOC) and 2007-2009 Office of the 
Secretary of Defense overlapping studies assessed 
conventional and special operations forces and de-
termined that a relatively small number of core and 
enabling capabilities was essential to sustaining an 
intelligence campaign against a networked adver-
sary. The studies revealed one of the driving capa-
bilities of the “find, fix, finish, exploit, access, and 
disseminate” cycle was DOMEX.
16 
Here are some thoughts and recommendations 
within the DOTMLPF framework which require im-
mediate attention from the U.S. Army, and which 
other military services can digest, to capitalize on 
critical momentum generated by DOMEX over a rel-
atively short period of time:   
Doctrine. Figure 1 highlights that DOMEX spans 
all five steps of the Joint intelligence cycle and 
should be viewed as an intelligence discipline. JP 
1-02 states that an intelligence discipline is “a well 
defined area of intelligence collection, processing, 
exploitation, and reporting using a specific cate-
gory of technical or human resources.”
17 Without 
a doubt, DOMEX meets the doctrinal specifica-
tions outlined in the joint publication. 
It’s also noteworthy to point out that ICD 302 
states that “DOMEX activities support a wide range 
of intelligence activities, including all source anal-
ysis, Open Source Intelligence (OSINT), HUMINT, 
Signals Intelligence (SIGINT), Geospatial Intelligence 

April - June 2010 25
(GEOINT), and Measurements and Signatures 
Intelligence (MASINT)–DOMEX reporting and anal-
ysis are considered intelligence products”. 18 Aside 
from correct recognition of DOMEX as an intelli -
gence discipline, the U.S. Army must also correct 
several doctrinal disconnects to set a better course 
for the future. Below are four key doctrinal items 
that Army intelligence leaders must address:
The most recent final draft of FM 2-0 Intelligence 
1. 
incorrectly states that DOMEX is “an emerging 
capability” but goes into profound detail spell-
ing out the fundamentals of all other intelligence 
disciplines.
19 The FM misses a tremendous op-
portunity to devote a short chapter to DOMEX 
and bring together the central thoughts and 
themes thinly spread throughout the document 
into a single, concise framework that reinforces 
what DOMEX actually is–an intelligence disci-
pline. Recommendation: Use FM 2-0 to state that 
DOMEX is an intelligence discipline.
TRADOC’s Concept Capability Plan (CCP) for 
2. 
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
(ISR) for 2015-2024 fails to clearly articulate 
Army DOMEX capabilities required to suc-
ceed as we face future threats. The CCP barely 
mentions the term DOMEX and incorrectly 
states that DOMEX capabilities are required 
with HUMINT. 20 This doctrinal miscue makes 
it look as though TRADOC is out of step with 
current Army intelligence and ISR doctrine. 
Recommendation: TRADOC must develop a com-
prehensive DOMEX capabilities list in the CCP. 
FM 2-22.3 HUMINT Collector Operations incor-
3. 
rectly maintains that “DOCEX” vice DOMEX is a 
HUMINT collection function and mixes DOMEX in 
the core HUMINT missions of tactical questioning, 
debriefing, source operations, and interrogation.
21 
This must be changed immediately. We already 
know that Army DOMEX operations were not suc-
cessful in the early stages of OEF/OIF because 
we expected interrogators to conduct the mission 
based on our doctrine. Recommendation: Publish 
an interim change to the FM and clarify DOMEX 
functions and responsibilities.
The U.S. Army Intelligence Center of Excellence 
4. 
(USAICoE)  diligently worked the timely release 
of Training Circular (TC) 2-91.8 DOMEX Enabled 
Intelligence.22 The publication codifies DOMEX 
doctrine and general tactics, techniques, and pro-
cedures from tactical to strategic environments. 
Unfortunately, based on restrictions on the num-
ber of FMs, the TRADOC Commander limits MI 
Doctrine to only four FMs. A DOMEX FM could 
better serve as a blueprint for other military ser-
vices to follow as they develop their organization 
and training models. Recommendation: The U.S. 
Army should convert the TC into an FM and ti-
tle the FM “DOMEX Operations” not DOMEX–
Enabled Intelligence. Saying that there is 
DOMEX–enabled intelligence is akin to stat-
ing there is bullet-enabled infantry.
Organization.  The need for tactical DOMEX 
capabilities across the services has never been 
greater; the services must address this organi-
zational gap immediately. The Army learned that 
designating HUMINT Collection Teams (HCTs) 
for DOMEX missions was a poor strategy.
23 The 
Department of the Army (DA) G2 quickly recog-
nized this and established Multi-Functional Teams 
(MFTs) within the Army’s Battlefield Surveillance 
Brigade. The MFT task organization uses four 
intelligence military occupational specialty 
Figure 1.

26 Military Intelligence
(MOS) career fields: 35L CI Agent; 35M HUMINT 
Collector; 35N SIGINT Analyst; 35P Cryptologic 
Communications Interceptor/Locator, and 35S 
Signals Collector/Analyst. 24 
Each MFT fields sufficient personnel and equip-
ment to exploit captured enemy materials (doc-
uments, media, and personal electronic devices), 
link biometrics data within the collection effort, 
and fuse tactical all source intelligence efforts 
for battalion and brigade S2s. Recommendation: 
Other military services should develop a similar 
approach as the MFT model within their intelli-
gence organizations in order to provide a trained, 
tactically oriented, professionalized force to con-
duct DOMEX below National levels. 
Training. The Army and other services must 
bring order and discipline to our DOMEX train-
ing approaches to professionalize a DOMEX 
force that is responsive to global demands, not 
just the urgent needs in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
DOMEX collection is not a task limited to intelli-
gence Soldiers. Any Soldier can collect materials 
which require exploitation. Just as all Soldiers 
must be prepared to fight as infantry, they must 
also serve as information collectors. This is the 
premise for the “Every Soldier is a Sensor” model. 
Tactical collection skills are taught to Soldiers in 
all MOSs under the umbrella of Site Exploitation 
(SE) training. In SE, Soldiers enter and actively 
observe details at a site, use their cognitive skills 
to recognize information, materials, and per-
sonnel at the site that may help to answer the 
commanders’ information requirements.
25 The 
graphic below portrays the relationship of the 
SE functional capabilities within levels of com-
mand and highlights the use of the Distributed 
Common Ground System-Army.


April - June 2010 27
With respect to U.S. Army intelligence train-
ing, I recommend that a new MOS be designated 
that specifically covers DOMEX (exploitation of 
documents, media, and personal electronic de-
vices) or at a minimum, an additional skill identi-
fier (ASI). Currently, USAICoE provides baseline 
intelligence skills training for eight enlisted in-
telligence MOS career fields, the five MOSs men-
tioned in the MFT organization and MOSs 35F 
Intelligence Analyst and 35G/H Imagery/Common 
Ground Station Analyst.
26 Only MOSs 35M and 
35T Military Intelligence Systems Maintainer/
Integrator receive some DOMEX training. This is 
a start but it’s not enough. Recommendation: At a 
minimum, I recommend that the MOSs 35F, 35M, 
35L receive DOMEX training as well. Mobile train-
ing teams from the Defense Cyber Investigations 
Training Academy (DCITA) and National Ground 
Intelligence Center (NGIC) could also assist 
USAICoE to provide specialized computer forensic 
training to Soldiers.
27 
Materiel. Because DOMEX functions were 
historically linked to HUMINT as a function, a 
HUMINT reporting system 
was the only Program of 
Record (POR) to support 
DOMEX. The CI/HUMINT 
Automated Tool Set pro-
vided an HCT with a ca-
pability to collect, process 
and disseminate infor-
mation obtained through 
document exploitation.
28 
It wasn’t nearly capable 
enough to satisfy a broad 
range of DOMEX equipment and software re-
quirements to fully exploit information within 
computers, portable storage devices, video imag-
ery, and a host of other items. 
Today’s the Army’s DOMEX equipment suite of-
fers significant advances over what was available 
to theater forces three years ago. The U.S. Army 
Intelligence and Security Command, DA G2, and 
the Army DOMEX program manager worked hard to 
field a standardized set of DOMEX equipment that 
met operational needs in support of OIF/OEF across 
the Army and ensure that the equipment was com-
patible with inter-agency standards. The Army must 
align these QRC efforts into PORs which seamlessly 
integrate across existing core, collection, process-
ing, and dissemination intelligence systems.
29 
Leadership. From a tactical and operational staff 
perspective, G2/J2/C2 (HUMINT) staffs are in posi-
tion to supervise DOMEX. The 2X staff directorates 
are fully engaged in coordinating and managing nu-
merous HUMINT and CI collection activities across 
the areas of operation; they cannot be responsible 
for the management and integration of DOMEX 
assets on the battlefield. I believe that we should 
closely examine the pilot strategy, underway in U.S. 
Forces Afghanistan, which created a J2E–the “E” 
standing for exploitation. By separating DOMEX 
from the HUMINT organization and assigning an in-
telligence officer to manage the DOMEX intelligence 
cycle, we are better postured to provide quality con-
trol of the entire DOMEX system. We can also look 
at methods to fuse science and technology (biomet-
rics, crime scene forensics, etc.) along the DOMEX 
path to leverage opportunities to positively link in-
dividuals to networks. I expect lessons learned from 
the J2E concept will make a solid case for keeping 
DOMEX out of direct HUMINT management. 
Personnel. Each service must determine which 
personnel in their force will be the primary opera-
tors of DOMEX equipment and assess what support 
personnel are required to maintain their programs. 
Support personnel are required to cover mainte-
nance requirements and operate across the five 
functions of the Joint intelligence cycle. It’s also im-
portant that the services track their DOMEX trained 
personnel with an ASI or separate MOS. Military of-
ficer and enlisted personnel management systems 
need to recognize and codify the new skill sets. 
Perhaps now is the time to develop and codify the 
multi-functional intelligence staff officer that has 
training in DOMEX tasks. These leaders will help 
intelligence manage three additional tasks (analyze, 
disseminate, and assess) that continually occur. 
Thoughts on the Future of DOMEX 
The true significance of DOMEX lies in the fact 
that terrorists, criminals, and other adversaries 
never expected their material to be captured. The 
intelligence produced from exploitation is not 
marked with deception, exaggeration, and mis-
direction that routinely appear during live ques-
tioning of suspects.
30 As our adversaries continue 
to move from paper to digital-based technologies, 
the exploitation of digital media, personal elec-


28 Military Intelligence
tronic devices, and video will require even more 
personnel and resources to maintain decision 
advantage. The ODNI has outlined six DOMEX 
priorities for the IC in order to create, mature, 
and sustain an efficient national DOMEX capa-
bility with a global reach.
31 Within the framework 
of these priorities, I offer some thoughts and 
recommendations:
Effective Governance . I recommend that the 
ODNI establish DOMEX as an intelligence discipline 
via an ICD. ICD 302 states that DOMEX activities 
will support a wide range of intelligence activities.32 
Making DOMEX an intelligence discipline would be 
fully in line with the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Intelligence (USD-I) draft DOD DOMEX Directive.
33 
Collaborative and Integrated Planning/
Programming/Execution. If you search the 
Internet for the term “DOMEX,” a web page from 
the U.S. Department of Justice’s National Drug 
Intelligence Center (NDIC) will appear and read-
ers can learn how the center supports National 
level policymakers and the IC by preparing stra-
tegic analytical studies on the trafficking of ille-
gal drugs. NDIC provides real-time support to LE 
and ICs by conducting DOMEX associated with 
counterdrug and counterterrorism investiga-
tions. Like NDIC, the Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
and the DOD run their own DOMEX programs to 
support the missions and requirements of their 
unique organizations.  
Unfortunately, these organizations have many 
cultural and security firewalls which limit their 
ability to provide access to their intelligence 
holdings to the IC stakeholders. We must con-
tinuously work to open these barriers through 
improved cooperative arrangements that provide 
the right information to a wider audience in or-
der to reduce our intelligence gaps. 
ICD 302 created the DOMEX Executive Committee 
(DOMEXCOM)
34 which includes senior mem-
bers from the DIA, CIA, FBI, Defense Cyber Crime 
Center (DC3), U.S. Army, National Security Agency 
(NSA), Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 
and the Drug Enforcement Administration. The 
DOMEXCOM is great forum to hammer out agree-
ments and roadmap strategies to enhance effective-
ness of DOMEX across the IC. I recommend that the 
ADDNI/OS request that each military service provide 
a representative to the DOMEXCOM if the U.S. Navy, 
U.S. Marine Corps, and U.S. Air Force desire success-
ful DOMEX programs. 
Development of NMEC as our National DOMEX 
Enterprise CoE. I recommend that the DOD/USD-I 
convert the NMEC into a National DOMEX Agency 
(NDA) to become the Program and Mission Manager 
for the IC. By converting NMEC to the NDA to govern 
DOMEX, we would then follow the same approach 
used in the creation of the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency (NGA) to produce GEOINT; NSA 
to produce SIGINT,
35 and CIA to be the center of 
gravity for HUMINT.36 If there is no NDA, then NMEC 
will fail to meet its responsibilities as detailed in 
ICD 302 and not be in a position to “advise and as-
sist the ODNI in identifying requirements, develop-
ing budgets, managing finances, and evaluating the 
IC’s performance.”
37 
If we don’t commit ourselves to long overdue orga-
nizational changes, make DOMEX an intelligence 
discipline, and expand NMEC resources then the 
IC will not be able to achieve DOMEX goals and 
missions established by ODNI. One noteworthy 


April - June 2010 29
data point reveals that since Fiscal Year 2005, 
DOMEX data at NMEC has witnessed nearly a 
tenfold increase while government employees as-
signed to manage one of the most challenging in-
telligence missions in the IC has remained fairly 
flat (around 50 employees).  
With the ever increasing demands for DOMEX, 
flowing from homeland security LE activities (FBI, 
DHS, etc.), we are now at a critical junction to ei-
ther make a change to improve capacity to handle 
the volume of expected data or continue on course 
and risk not being in a position to thwart terrorist 
acts while in the early stages of planning.  
The FBI’s National Virtual Translation Center 
(NVTC) should be realigned within the newly cre-
ated NDA to gain more efficiency on the manage-
ment of translation resources not only for timely 
and accurate translations of foreign intelligence, 
but for DOMEX as well. The NVTC is currently the 
clearinghouse for facilitating interagency use of 
translators, partnering with elements of the U.S. 
Government, academia, and private industry to 
identify translator resources and engage their ser-
vices. NVTC is a DNI Center, and the FBI is its 
Executive Agent. 
38 
The USD-I should direct the establishment of a 
Military Support Branch in the NDA under the lead-
ership of a one-star general. The military support 
branch should include liaison officers from each 
combatant command (COCOM) in order to improve 
global mission management of DOMEX activities. 
The support branch could help COCOMs link their 
DOMEX priorities into the NDA and better harness 
national DOMEX holdings to consumers support-
ing host nation counterterrorist efforts. Creation 
of a military support branch at NDA would fol-
low similar constructs already in place at NSA and 
NGA. The lack of a military support branch assist-
ing NDA prevents traction to fully synchronize and 
leverage DOMEX collection capabilities across the 
services and align large-scale DOMEX procure-
ments and solutions for the services as research 
and development drives change. 
The USD-I should direct that the U.S. Army desig-
nate the Army DOMEX Office (ADO) as DOD lead for 
service DOMEX program procurement. DA G2 des-
ignated NGIC as the dedicated DOMEX Program 
Manager responsible for the development and train-
ing of Army tactical DOMEX teams. In this capacity, 
the NGIC/DOMEX PM worked closely with NMEC 
over the past three years to field and sustain an 
Army tactical DOMEX presence in OIF/OEF. To 
better support strategic through tactical DOMEX 
research, development, test and evaluation appro-
priation initiatives, the ADO should serve as the 
DOD lead and action arm for the NDA. The ADO 
would be for DOMEX what the Army Cryptologic 
Office is for SIGINT, placing it in an ideal position to 
assist the other services reach their DOMEX equip-
ment and standardization goals. 
Deployment of a Federated DOMEX IT 
Infrastructure. I recommend that the NMEC and 
ADO publish collection and processing standards 
to industry in order to select the best solutions for 
our DOMEX architecture. Clearly an advanced IT 
infrastructure is required at the National level to 
help quickly organize, process, and disseminate 
captured information in virtually all formats in 
many languages. If the National DOMEX architec-
ture is to truly be a “single, dynamic, integrated, 
and federated system, with cutting edge auto-
mation using the best-of-breed tools,”
39 then our 
collection and processing systems must tackle 
two distinct problems that Dr. Simon Garfinkel 
labels “deep” and “broad”.40
The deep DOMEX problem covers the kind of doc-
ument or data-storage device (a hard drive, DVD, or 
personal electronic device) that is captured and be-
comes available for analysis. The analytical goal is 
to find out everything possible about the data stor-
age device. The DOMEX operators and analysts who 
receive a laptop, for example, want to know every-
thing possible about it; not just the content, but the 
application programs, the configuration settings, 
the other computers with which these machines 
had come into contact, and so on.
41 
The broad DOMEX problem is the reverse. 
Instead of having unlimited resources to spend 
on a particular item, analysts are given a large 
number of digital objects and a limited amount 
of time to find something useful to their mission. 
In recent years the volume of captured digital in-
formation seized on the battlefield or within LE 
investigations has exploded. The landslide of digi-
tal media makes the broad problem quite compel-
ling from both a national security and commercial 
perspective, a system that can reliably find the 

30 Military Intelligence
“good stuff” can save money, time, and perhaps 
even lives. 42  
their needs and culture. Inconsistency in content, 
quantity, and quality of training across the DOMEX 
community persists through varied processes for 
developing training requirements and standards. 
The result is costly duplication of effort, uneven per-
formance during deployments, and significant un-
met training requirements, particularly with regard 
to DOMEX analysis and technology integration.
The military services and IC must maintain a pro-
fessionalized DOMEX force that follows a standard-
ized and certifiable training program. We also lack 
a single set of standards or roadmap that outlines 
which DOMEX skills are required to meet basic, in-
termediate, and advanced DOMEX requirements at 
every level (tactical through strategic). 
There are numerous training venues which are 
considered “accredited” to meet DOMEX mission 
requirements but there is no published commu-
nity directive or message that aligns the total IC.  
Successful DOMEX operations hinge on proper 
collection; all military services must be organized 
to conduct tactical collection in land or maritime 
operations. Most im-
portantly, the IC and 
DOD must be pre-
pared to assist other 
nations in under-
standing the value of 
DOMEX and aid in 
training their forces 
as well. The proper 
inventory and col-
lection of captured 
materials is no lon-
ger confined to intelligence personnel, anyone can 
collect. That cultural shift is based on lessons 
learned from combat operations. “It became clear 
that the existing intelligence gathering, analysis, 
and evidence collection methods were all inade-
quate for countering an insurgency, our ability to 
successfully prosecute intelligence operations was 
directly linked to the ability of our Soldiers to col-
lect, preserve, and exploit evidence.”
44 The organi-
zational requirements above tactical collection are 
primarily intelligence-based and make up the pro-
cessing, exploitation, and dissemination process. 
This is the layer that includes personnel from the 
Army’s Multifunctional Teams, the Marine Corps 
HUMINT Exploitation Teams, U.S. Air Force Office 
Future DOMEX collection systems (hardware and 
software) must provide solutions to cover the deep 
and broad DOMEX problems and minimize the 
number of stand-alone systems the operators must 
learn, use, and maintain. We should take advantage 
of equipment already fielded rather than providing 
more “boxes.” This is not to say that there will not be 
some need for unique stand-alone systems to ensure 
needed capabilities. Each military service must en-
sure their DOMEX systems (hardware) fit within their 
Command, Control, Communications, Computers, 
and Intelligence construct and integrate into a cohe-
sive and seamless entity within the national system.  
Global Presence. Global presence starts by link-
ing state and federal LE entities through Homeland 
Defense mechanisms and into our National ICs (CIA, 
DOD, and other government agencies). For example, 
we must be able to share and connect intelligence 
from a captured computer in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
to our federal LE efforts to opportunities for our adver-
saries to conduct successful attacks. 
NOTE: All DOMEX operations conducted by Army 
intelligence personnel must comply with the legal 
restrictions in AR 381-10, and be conducted within 
the guidelines of U.S. law and applicable policies.
DOMEX practitioners who posses linguistic skills 
or provide access to linguists, must be strategi-
cally positioned (forward based) throughout our 
COCOMs to capitalize on opportunities as the pres-
ent themselves. Ideally, the NDA could provide fly-
away teams who are trained to operate in austere 
environments and have ready access worldwide to 
essential equipment, communications, and imme-
diate reachback to the IC.
43
Professional Skills and Training. Despite heavy 
investment in DOMEX training programs since 
9/11, there has been uneven emphasis across or-
ganizational and training programs as ICs focus on 


April - June 2010 31
of Special Investigations, or sailors from the Office 
of Naval Intelligence. 
One thing is certain–all military services must 
identify DOMEX training requirements for their 
forces and develop an appropriate communica-
tions infrastructure to relay DOMEX intelligence 
laterally and upward into the national intelli-
gence system. I recommend that the ADDNI/OS 
or USD-I designate the Navy and Marine Corps 
Intelligence Training Center, and USAICoE as the 
primary DOMEX institutional training bases for the 
military services. The roles and functions of the 
Joint Military Intelligence Training Center and the 
DCITA as authorized training venues need to be 
clearly spelled out within an ICD or USD-I mes-
sage to clarify their interaction with the IC and 
DOD DOMEX education system. 
We must take several additional steps to strengthen 
each of the six ODNI priorities in order to achieve 
an enduring DOMEX capability across the national, 
military, intelligence, homeland security, and law 
enforcement communities, at all levels–strategic, 
operational, and tactical.
Conclusion 
We have reached the point where a national deci-
sion is required to designate DOMEX as an intel-
ligence discipline and to create a National DOMEX 
Agency. Similar conditions and decisions were made 
over 50 years ago as our government created agen-
cies for HUMINT and SIGINT. If the strategic objec-
tives are to extend intelligence to all who need it 
and to facilitate Homeland Defense through exten-
sive collaboration, then if we fail to create a National 
DOMEX Agency, then I believe DOMEX will return 
to its previous condition of atrophy across the IC 
and DOD and our nation will not be in a position to 
effectively safeguard itself from multiple threats. 
Endnotes
1 Response to Congressionally Directed Action, LTG Maples and Dr. 
Briscoe, 1 March 2009.
2 Kevin M. Woods, Captured Records–Lessons from the Civil War 
through World War II, Institute for Defense Analysis, 2009.
3. Ibid.
4. Intelligence Regulations, U.S. War Department, Washington, DC, 
1920, 39-40.
5. Jared B. Schopper, “The Collection and Processing of Combat 
Intelligence During Operations in Northern Europe,” Command and 
General Staff College Monograph, June 1964, 82.
6. Ibid., 84.
7. FM 30-15, Intelligence Interrogation, March 1969, 3-7.
8. Mark S. Partridge, “Asking Questions: Will Army Tactical 
Interrogation Be Ready For War?” School of Advanced Military 
Studies Monograph, 17 December, 1986, 37. 
9. Operational Leadership Experiences Project, Combat Studies 
Institute, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, Interview with CW3 Kenneth 
Kilbourne, February 2009, 8.
10. Donald P. Wright and Timothy R. Reese, On Point II, Transition 
to the New Campaign: Operation Iraqi Freedom, June 2008, 195. 
(Interview with MG Fast, CJTF-7 C2)
11. ODNI, 2009 DOMEX Annual Report.
12. NMEC Mission Statement, 2009.
13. U.S Senate, Select Committee on Intelligence. Report Number 
111-16, Period Covered–4 January 2007 to 2 January 2009, 42.
14. SSCI Audit of IC Domex, April 2007.
15. Dan Butler, Paula Briscoe, Roy Apselloff, ODNI, National 
Document and Media Exploitation Enterprise Vision Pamphlet, 
Message from DOMEX Seniors, April 2009.
16. Richard P. Zahner, “Rebalancing the Army Military Intelligence 
Force,” AUSA Green Book, October 2009, 186.
17. JP 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and 
Associated Terms, 31 August 2005.
18. ODNI Intelligence Community Directive 302, Document and 
Media Exploitation, 6 July 2007.
19. FM 2-0, Intelligence (Final Draft), March 2009, 1-30.
20. TRADOC Pam 525-7-9, Version 1.0, 12 August 2008, 40.
21. FM 2-22.3, Human Intelligence Collector Operations, September 
2006, 1-6.
22. TC 2-91.8, Document and Media Exploitation Enabled 
Intelligence (Final Draft), 25 July 2008. 
23. FM 2-22.3, 2-6.
24. U.S. Army MI BN (BFSB) MTOE, DOCNO 34105GFC18, Para 
206, Lines 02-17.
25. U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, Site Exploitation Concept of 
Operations (CONOPS), 2010-2016.
26. Army Enlisted Job Descriptions, About.com: US Military at 
http://usmilitary.about.com/od/enlistedjo2/a/35.-xiW.htm. 
27. DOD Cyber Crime Center at http://www.dc3.mil/dcita/
dcitaAbout.php. 
28.CHATS AN/PYQ-3(V)3 at http://chams.it.northropgrumman.
com/brochures/CHATS%20V3%20Factsheet.pdf.
29. Intelligence Programs and Systems, at http://www.globalsecurity.
org/intell/systems/index.html. 
30. NMEC, 2009 Resource Management Plan, 5.
31. ODNI, National DOMEX Enterprise Vision Pamphlet. 
32. ICD 302, DOMEX.


32 Military Intelligence
33. USD(I), DOD Directive 3300.aa, Document and Media 
Exploitation (DOMEX), Draft.
34. ICD 302, DOMEX.
35. Mission statement at http://www.nsa.gov/about/mission/
index.shtml.
36. Establishment of the National Clandestine Service, CIA, 13 
October 2005 at https://www.cia.gov/news-information/press-
releases-statements/press-release-archive-2005/pr10132005.
html.
37. Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Policy, Plans, and 
Requirements, 2009 National Intelligence: A Consumer’s Guide.
38. Ibid
39. ODNI, National Document and Media Exploitation Enterprise 
Vision Pamphlet, 
40. Simson L. Garfinkle, “Document and Media Exploitation,” 
Association for Computer Machinery, accessed at http://queue.
acm.org/detail.cfm?id=1331294.
41. Ibid. 
42. Ibid.
43. ODNI, National Document and Media Exploitation Enterprise 
Vision Pamphlet. 
44. Ralph O. Baker, “Developing Actionable Intelligence in the Urban 
COIN Environment,” Military Review, March-April 2007. 
Colonel Joseph Cox served as Commander, 519 th  MI 
Battalion (BfSB) during OIF 07-09 between September 
2007 and December 2008. He is a 1987 graduate of OCS 
and has also served in the 525 th MI Brigade; 82d Airborne 
Division; 75th Ranger Regiment; 205th MI Brigade, and 
the 525 th BfSB. He recently completed a U.S. Army Senior 
Service College Fellowship Program in Washington, D.C. 
and is now the Commander, 501
st MI Brigade, Korea. 
Colonel Cox may be reached at joseph.cox@us.army.mil.
