Russian Military  
Reconstitution: 2030  
Pathways and Prospects
Dara Massicot 
with Richard Connolly 
SEPTEMBER 2024   |   THE RETURN OF GLOBAL RUSSIA



Russian Military  
Reconstitution: 2030  
Pathways and Prospects
Dara Massicot 
with Richard Connolly 


This publication was funded by the Russia Strategic Initiative,  
U.S. European Command.
The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily represent the views of  
the Department of Defense, or the United States government. 
The information in this study is current as of June 29, 2024. 
© 2024 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. All rights reserved.
Carnegie does not take institutional positions on public policy issues; the views represented herein are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of Carnegie, its staff, or its trustees.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without permission in writing from 
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Please direct inquiries to:
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
Publications Department
1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
P: + 1 202 483 7600
F: + 1 202 483 1840
CarnegieEndowment.org
This publication can be downloaded at no cost at CarnegieEndowment.org.
Cover photo by RAMIL SITDIKOV/POOL/AFP via Getty Images


Summary 1
Introduction  5
Defining Military Reconstitution  7
What Must Be Reconstituted?  
Baselining Russian Losses From 2022 to 2024  12
Russia’s Reconstitution Plans Still In Flux 17
Russian Personnel Reconstitution   23
Russian Equipment and Materiel Reconstitution  36
Financial Considerations of Military Reconstitution,  
By Richard Connolly 45
Conclusion  59
About the Author 61
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 62
Notes 63
CONTENTS



CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   1
Summary 
Russia is poised to begin a long-term military reconstitution program designed to restore losses from 
its full-scale invasion of Ukraine and to potentially expand the force beyond 2022 levels. While the 
Kremlin has not yet decided on the future force design of its military, this paper highlights the near-
term policy choices, opportunities, and constraints that will likely shape Russia’s military reconstitu-
tion process through 2030. As the Kremlin’s antagonism toward Ukraine and the West sharpens, it 
will be critically important for policymakers and warfighters to anticipate, monitor, and respond to 
Russia’s military reconstitution progress in the years ahead. 
What is reconstitution, and how should it be thought of in practice? Broadly speaking, reconstitution 
is a process by which a military unit is restored to a sufficient level of combat capability after sustain-
ing losses in combat. Reconstitution is accomplished through replenishing a unit with personnel, 
equipment, and other critical enabling components. Reconstitution begins during wartime and 
continues in the postwar period, as military and civilian leaders make procurement and recruiting 
investments to restore wartime losses. 
Reconstitution should not be framed as a military force being in a binary state of “reconstituted” or 
“unreconstituted,” and nor should reconstitution be measured only through the restoration of prewar 
numbers of personnel and equipment. Conceptualizing reconstitution in such a manner is too 
imprecise to be beneficial for strategists and planners. Reconstitution is a process of regaining combat 
functions, proficiency, and capabilities that will allow a force to execute various types of combat 
missions. 
A more precise method of evaluating Russian reconstitution requirements and the Kremlin’s progress 
toward those goals involves identifying requisite force structures and proficiency levels for Russian 
forces to accomplish different types of missions. Reconstitution requirements vary based on the spe-
cific conflict scenario, whether it is a limited power projection into another neighboring country that 
is not a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), a second attempt at achieving 
2022 maximalist invasion goals for Ukraine, or a war against NATO. 
In the two years since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Kremlin has chosen to reconstitute 
its forces without setting the economy on a full war footing. It has done so through partial mobili-
zation, repairing on-hand equipment, purchasing ammunition and weapons from abroad, offering 
lucrative financial incentives for volunteer soldiers, and maximizing production at existing defense 
factories. Yet, apart from drone production, equipment production capacities have plateaued as of 
early 2024. Russia could generate more efficiency in the system by reducing corruption on the mar-
gins and reemphasizing innovation for certain technologies, but this would not result in a dramatic 
increase in available resources. 

2 
For Russia to reach a fundamentally higher level of weapons production or manpower availability 
compared to early 2024 levels, the government would need to activate additional mobilization 
authorities that would likely affect its economy, labor market, and population’s engagement with 
the war, putting the country on even more of a wartime footing than it is as of 2024. Thus far, the 
Kremlin’s calculus and political will have constrained Russia from taking such a step. 
While a precise vision of the future regenerated Russian military has not yet come into focus, it is 
clear from recent debates and actions that Russian leadership intends to enlarge the force. It is also 
likely that the acquisition of combat experience has raised the military’s proficiency. Still, Russia faces 
multiple financial and demographic factors that will constrain how far it can grow qualitatively and 
quantitatively by 2030. 
Key Findings
• Thus far, Russian leaders speak in euphemisms about their combat losses in Ukraine and 
cloak their considerable regeneration requirements by tying them to a need to counterbalance 
NATO expansion. This allows authorities to justify expenses and force expansion without 
admitting that these high requirements mostly stem from losses in Ukraine.
• Russia is reconstituting its force in the short term by refurbishing older equipment at suffi-
cient rates, mobilizing personnel, and recruiting volunteers. The majority of Russia’s equip-
ment delivered to the front lines is refurbished equipment. It is suitable for soldiers’ needs but 
is qualitatively worse than newer equipment. If early 2024 loss rates continue, Russia risks 
depleting available Soviet-era stockpiles for certain types of equipment possibly in 2026.
• Russian leaders have a few options for reconstituting the force in the medium term (through 
2030), and the path they choose will be determined by the Kremlin’s priorities. If reconsti-
tuting and expanding the force as quickly as possible is of paramount importance, Russia’s 
current reconstitution efforts, which have plateaued, will be insufficient. In this case, Russian 
leaders will likely be forced to take steps that they have so far resisted—for example, activat -
ing additional mobilization authorities to move society and the economy to expand domestic 
production capacity. 
• If managing domestic stability and economic concerns are more important than rapid 
reconstitution and force expansion, Russian leaders will likely continue to accept risk and 
produce equipment at the current 2024 capacity levels, or gradually expand production over 
time through the early 2030s. This pathway is probably only feasible for the Kremlin if the 
conflict in Ukraine freezes or ends and Russia is willing to temporarily rely on older Soviet 
equipment from reserves as it produces new equipment over time. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   3
• Presently, several structural factors limit the rate at which new Russian military equipment 
can be produced. Space at Russian defense factories is in high demand for multiple purposes 
(new builds, repairs, and exports) and cannot easily be converted to increase new domestic 
production without resulting in tradeoffs. Further, Russia’s production capacity cannot be 
expanded much beyond 2024 levels unless new factories are built or Russian leaders accept 
the risk in temporarily halting exports (which is unlikely) or halting production while fac-
tories can be retooled and updated (which is incompatible with production rates needed to 
sustain wartime demands).
• Other methods to expand defense industrial output include expanding powers to convert 
civilian factories into wartime production factories, which would be a signpost that mobiliza-
tion is expanding in Russia. Russia could opt to import armored equipment from other coun-
tries, although doing so would be a major departure from historical norms. Such a departure 
would suggest that Russia is unwilling to accept risk in the short term and plans to continue 
offensive action against Ukraine. 
• Reconstituting personnel and proficiency in the postwar years will also be a complex chal-
lenge for the Kremlin. Impacts of the war on military retention are currently masked due to 
wartime policies that prohibit servicemen from resigning. Russia is resorting to providing 
higher wages and social benefits to attract wartime recruits, but maintaining this high per 
capita spending in the postwar period would add more internal pressure on an already high 
defense budget. 
• Some officials are requesting a larger force—up to 1.5 million personnel, but so far the force 
remains capped at an elevated 1.3 million. Expanding the force would require significant 
investment in the production of new equipment, the recruitment of additional professional 
soldiers in a society that has recently grown accustomed to high wages and expensive social 
entitlements and benefits, as well as the construction of new military base infrastructure. 
These expenses would coincide with procurement pressures on an already bloated defense 
budget and an already strained male labor force. 
• Notably, Russia has large untapped human resources that so far have not been utilized to 
staff the war effort. Russia has not reached far into its large reserve officer cadre, and nor have 
they lifted restrictions on the types of positions Russian women can hold in the military or 
the defense industrial base. Instead, authorities have chosen other stopgap measures, such as 
condensing military training for new cadets or recruiting from prisons or abroad to fill its 
military billets and some defense industry jobs. Changes to these policies would be a signpost 
that Russia intends to expand the military or defense industry workforce.  

4 
• Excessive secrecy about casualties and equipment losses, along with expanded censorship laws 
that limit free speech on many topics related to the Russian military, are likely to hinder or 
distort reconstitution debates. Criticisms of the war effort, particularly of the high equipment 
and manpower costs, are increasingly taboo, criminalized, or classified. Such a closed envi-
ronment limits the discourse on reconstitution and the future design of the Russian military. 
This secrecy, self-censorship, and censorship are also at odds with the Kremlin’s directives to 
increase innovation in the private sector. 
• Groups of junior officers and experienced noncommissioned officers (NCOs) have sustained 
the heaviest casualties in the war, but the survivors will have extended combat experience and 
compressed formal military education. This combination may lead to rapid transformational 
change in the Russian military in the future, if the survivors’ experiences can be harnessed 
and introduced widely in the postwar years.
• Russia’s preferences for a larger force may not be entirely compatible with its demographic 
and financial realities, and the Kremlin may find that it is unable or unwilling to finance a 
larger professional standing army. Balancing these preferences and constraints may lead once 
again to a mixed readiness system for the military, where a smaller and financially manage -
able active-duty force of 1 million is maintained along with an expansive (and now combat 
experienced) strategic reserve of personnel and equipment that could be mobilized if neces-
sary. This path would allow Russia to maintain a larger force potential without incurring the 
significant financial costs and infrastructure requirements of maintaining a larger perma -
nently ready force. Such a force would resemble the return of the mixed readiness system of 
the late-Soviet and immediate post-Soviet era and would be a significant departure from the 
last twenty years of force posture and military thought. 
• The Russian military has historical experience with capturing lessons learned from wars 
and implementing them throughout the force. Specifically, the military may draw from 
experiences of the post–World War II learning period that rapidly ingested and disseminated 
lessons throughout the Soviet military. Formal learning organizations will likely be set up in 
the immediate postwar years to conduct analysis and disseminate the findings to influence 
concepts, operational art, and force design. This process will be impeded if the process is 
compromised due to political sensitivities or false reporting.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   5
Introduction 
Since its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the Russian military has sustained severe losses that 
exceed 15,000 thousand pieces of equipment and well over 350,000 casualties (wounded and killed 
in action) as of early 2024.1 The task of reconstituting the military will be a national challenge. 
Through words and deed, the Kremlin is signaling its intention to rebuild its military quickly and 
potentially even expand the force in the years to come. At the same time, Russia faces numerous 
structural challenges and domestic sensitivities that may impede lofty reconstitution goals. This 
paper evaluates Russia’s opportunities and constraints in reconstituting its military through 2030. 
Because Russian leaders have neither presented a long-term vision for the Russian military’s future, 
nor officially identified a course for Russian military reconstitution at the time of this paper’s writing, 
the paper considers near-term obstacles and opportunities that will remain constant no matter the 
course the Kremlin opts to take. 
What is military reconstitution, and how should it be thought of in practice? Broadly speaking, 
reconstitution is a process by which a military unit is restored to a sufficient level of combat capa-
bility after sustaining losses in combat. Reconstitution is achieved through replenishing a unit with 
personnel, equipment, and other critical enabling components. It is a process that begins during 
wartime and continues in the postwar period, as military and civilian leaders make procurement 
and recruiting investments to restore wartime losses. Military reconstitution should not be framed 
as being in a binary state of “reconstituted” or “unreconstituted,” and nor should reconstitution be 
measured only through the restoration of prewar numbers of personnel and equipment—although 
those inputs are important. Reconstitution is a process of regaining sufficient combat functions and 
capabilities that will allow a force to execute various types of combat missions. 
The reconstitution of the Russian military through 2030 and beyond will involve the restoration 
of capability and proficiency over time—not only the fulfillment of, for example, equipment and 
ammunition production quotas and personnel recruiting goals. While restoring sufficient tangible as-
pects of military capability like amounts of equipment, ammunition, and personnel is important for 
reconstitution, these are parts of a larger whole of combat capability and ability to execute missions. 
Thus, NATO planners should seek to answer a broader question: when will the Russian military 
reconstitute the capability to accomplish different types of missions, such as a limited power projec-
tion into another neighboring non-NATO country? A second attempt at achieving 2022 maximalist 
invasion goals for Ukraine? A large-scale war against NATO? 
Some Russian military capabilities will be reconstituted faster than others for many reasons. Russian 
leaders may be willing to accept risk in certain capabilities or geographical areas while prioritizing 
others. They might prioritize the regeneration of forces in western Russia near NATO allies or the 
faster regeneration of Russia’s traditional elite forces, the Special Forces and the Russian Airborne 
Forces (VDV), while forces elsewhere recover much more slowly.

6 
No matter the route Russia chooses to reconstitute the military, the process will be shaped by the 
severity of losses of equipment and manpower, the challenges that sanctions impose on aspects of the 
Russian economy and defense industrial base, and other structural problems that constrain available 
funds and labor. However, there are several enabling factors that will support Russia’s reconstitution 
process, namely historical experience with reconstitution, the institutional capture of lessons learned, 
and a track record of tailoring defense orders to requirements and strategy. Further, Moscow could 
accept risk and bring more of the economy onto a war footing, or it could reluctantly revise core 
policies to enable the military to reconstitute more quickly. For example, the Kremlin may borrow 
additional funds from abroad, import more major combat equipment, or allow more women in de-
fense industrial and combat roles to fill labor shortfalls. This paper will assess the interaction between 
Russia’s opportunities and constraints that will shape reconstitution. 
At present, Russia is reconstituting its forces while still engaged in high-intensity combat in Ukraine. 
By early 2025, the Russian government claims it will unveil a new ten-year defense plan, which 
will allow for long-term reconstitution and the potential expansion of the force.2 Russia’s ability to 
reconstitute, and to what end, will have global implications and must be considered carefully. This 
paper will be useful to policymakers seeking to adjust their own countries’ strategy and force posture 
in the years ahead.
Paper Structure and Scope 
This paper explores Russia’s ability to reconstitute its military through 2030, with a particular focus 
on key constraints and underappreciated aspects of the reconstitution process. The paper first defines 
what reconstitution is and is not, using U.S. terms and Russian terms, as there are some differences 
between how the two countries conceptualize reconstitution. The paper then briefly outlines losses 
of equipment and personnel from February 2022 to April 2024 (in other words, what must be 
regenerated). The third section outlines public conversations in Russia about strategy and future force 
posture for the Russian military. The paper addresses prospects and challenges for Russia as it replen-
ishes and reconstitutes military personnel, equipment, and materiel. In doing so, the paper considers 
structural factors such as demography, domestic labor policies, wartime defense industrial capacity 
for repairs and new production, and financial investments. It also discusses the degree to which 
financial constraints may hamper reconstitution and whether sufficient defense-industrial capacity 
exists to sustain the required rate of production through 2030 and beyond. Through analysis of these 
subjects, the paper identifies enduring factors that Russian leadership will likely consider as it looks 
to the future task of rebuilding its military. The discussion ends with conclusions and signposts of 
change for Russian military reconstitution through 2030. 
A roughly five-year analysis (through 2030) allows for the sufficient evaluation of current resources 
and near-term policy choices available to Russian leaders. The paper uses available open-source 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   7
information derived from Russian news media, officials, opposition media, and military science jour-
nals. It also uses Ukrainian materials and analysis of Russian military capabilities, as well as Western 
analysis on reconstitution. Of course, there are challenges inherent to using open-source information 
about Russia’s operations in Ukraine, as released information is often intended to influence, not just 
inform. Where possible, commercial satellite imagery was used to identify regeneration areas and to 
corroborate other open-source information about the rate of equipment drawdowns from Russia’s 
central storage. 
As of this paper’s writing, the war is ongoing, and Russian officials have not yet determined the 
military’s future form. Data availability and the reliability of many primary sources on Russian 
military topics have declined over time, as more defense topics have become classified (or prohibited 
to discuss) within Russia. Given these limitations, it is not possible to identify a most likely course of 
action for Russian military reconstitution. However, by illuminating opportunities, constraints, and 
tradeoffs, it is possible to evaluate realistic options that the Kremlin might select, as well as unexpect-
ed deviations, that could shape the pace and extent of Russian military reconstitution through 2030. 
Defining Military Reconstitution 
Reconstitution is a process by which a military unit is restored to a sufficient level of combat capa-
bility after sustaining losses in combat. Reconstitution is achieved through replenishing a unit with 
personnel, equipment, and other critical enabling components. It is a process that begins during 
wartime and continues in the postwar period, as military and civilian leaders make procurement and 
recruiting investments to restore wartime losses. Reconstitution is not a binary state of reconstituted 
or unreconstituted; reconstitution is a process of regaining combat capabilities over time that will 
allow a force to execute various types of combat missions. 
It is important to define what military reconstitution means to Russian officials, as the concept is 
used somewhat differently by Western officials. Because U.S. terms have more distinct definitions, 
this paper will use U.S. military doctrinal terms, while also including Russian terms and concepts for 
reference. 
U.S. Definitions of Reconstitution
According to U.S. military doctrine, military reconstitution is defined as “actions taken to rapidly 
restore functionality to an acceptable level for a particular mission, operation, or contingency after 
severe degradation.”3 In other words, reconstitution is a process by which a military unit restores 
an acceptable level of combat effectiveness after being damaged in combat. Reconstitution in U.S. 

8 
military doctrine consists of two elements: reorganization (actions local commanders can take during 
combat to address losses or degradation, including reallocating forces within their own unit) and 
regeneration (a more intensive process that involves removing a damaged unit to a separate site area 
away from combat and replenishing it with personnel and equipment over time with external re-
sources). Reorganization is used in lieu of unit rotation when the operational pace, mission, or time 
does not allow for a new unit to replace the damaged unit.4 Regeneration can only be initiated by 
higher echelons of the command chain, such as removing a unit from combat for recovery at a regen-
eration site, assessing its remaining combat effectiveness, and making resources available to improve 
that effectiveness. Other regeneration activities range from reestablishing unit command, training for 
future operations, and reestablishing unit cohesion after it is replenished with personnel. 
Reconstitution “involves actions taken to rapidly restore functionality to an acceptable level for a 
particular mission, operation, or contingency after severe degradation.” Those actions include reorga-
nization and regeneration, which “commanders plan and implement to restore units to a desired level 
of combat effectiveness, commensurate with mission requirements and available resources.”5 
Reorganization “includes actions that commanders take to restore degraded units to combat effec-
tiveness commensurate with mission requirements and available resources.”6 
• Immediate reorganization  is “the rapid and usually temporary restoration of attrited units 
to minimum levels of effectiveness,” typically in the combat position or as close as possible to 
them. 7
• Deliberate reorganization  is done “when more time and resources are available,” farther 
away from combat actions, and when more replenishment resources and repairs are available.8 
For example, a unit can be organized internally, a damaged army company can be replen-
ished from other companies in the battalion or brigade, or two or more damaged units can 
be combined to form a single mission-capable unit.9
Regeneration is a more intensive and large-scale action taken to restore combat effectiveness of 
an attrited unit. It involves the “large-scale replacement of personnel, equipment, and supplies,” 
possibly the chain of command, and essential training.10 Regeneration occurs after a unit has been 
ordered to disengage from combat and occurs in a designated regeneration site away from hostilities. 
Regeneration requires assistance from higher command echelons, external resources, and typically 
large quantities of personnel and equipment; and it can take days, weeks, or longer.11 
Force generation, in U.S. military doctrinal terms, “is the military force created from available 
resources and personnel to be projected and employed.”12 Peacetime force generation is the process by 
which a military recruits (or conscripts) personnel and trains them to create combat-ready units. In 
wartime, mobilization can be used to generate new units.  

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   9
Recovery is action “taken to physically gain custody of isolated personnel and return them to friend-
ly control,” as well as action “taken to extricate damaged or disabled equipment for return to friendly 
control or repair at another location.”13 
Russian Definitions of Reconstitution 
The Russian military uses different terms and concepts for what the U.S. military defines as reconsti-
tution. In Russian military doctrine, the closest term to military reconstitution is vosstanovleniye (in 
Russian, Восстановление ), which translates most directly in a military context as “recovery” (literal-
ly meaning rebuilding or restoration).14 The meaning of vosstanovleniye often shifts based on context. 
It is most often used to mean restoring combat capability (vosstanovleniye boyevoi sposobnosti) to a 
level of readiness sufficient to conduct operations and carry out missions as needed. Vosstanovleniye 
can also mean the recovery, repair, and restoration of damaged combat equipment (vosstanovleniye 
tekhniki), and it can also be used in the context of regenerating personnel from some sort of reserves 
within a unit or elsewhere (vosstanovleniye reserv). The verb vosstanovit’ (восстановить ) translates in a 
military context as “to regenerate” (literally meaning rebuild or restore). Table 1 defines key Russian 
terms and lists the most direct U.S. military terminology equivalent. 
Table 1. Comparison of Russian and U.S. Military Terminology for Reconstitution  
 Russian T erm Definition U.S. Military 
Equivalent 
Combat capability 
(Боевая Способность)
The state of forces characterizing their ability to success-
fully conduct combat operations in accordance with their 
intended purpose in any situation and to realize their 
combat capabilities. Levels are combat-capable (75 per-
cent or more of organizational structure), limited combat 
capable (50–75 percent), partially combat-capable 
(30–50 percent), and noncombat-capable (<30 percent).
Combat effectiveness 
Reconstitution or recov-
ery (Восстановление)
Restoring of an object to an operational state, often 
accompanied by an estimate of time to restore to full 
operational status.
Recovery 
Reconstitution of  
combat capability  
(Восстановление 
Боеспособности)
A set of measures to bring formations that have suffered 
heavy losses to a state of readiness to carry out combat 
missions. The set includes the identification of losses 
and remaining capabilities; withdrawal to a safe location 
to replenish personnel, weapons, and equipment; and 
maintenance of the psychological readiness of troops. 
Reconstitution, 
regeneration

10 
Reformation 
(переформирование)
A unit with severe loss of combat capability (more than 
70 percent of unit strength) must be withdrawn from 
combat to an area of regeneration and rest. The chain of 
command will determine whether the unit will be regener-
ated, consolidated, or disbanded and whether remaining 
elements will be sent to other units. 
Regroup 
Area for restoration of 
combat capability (район 
восстановления боевой 
способности)
An area away from the front line where combat capability 
can be restored. 
Regeneration site 
Restoration of equip-
ment (Восстановление 
Техники)
A set of measures to retrieve equipment and restore the 
combat effectiveness of weapons and military equipment. 
The process includes technical reconnaissance, evacua-
tion or transportation, and repair and return of equipment 
to combat units or to field restoration points.
Recovery (equipment)
Reequipment 
(Переоснащение 
Воинских частей, or 
перевооружение)
Reequipment of forces with modern equipment; rearma-
ment planned and implemented according to programs, 
research and development, and scientific development. 
Rearmament
Regrouping of forces 
(перегруппировка войск 
(сил))
Redeployment or transfer of existing formations in a 
theater of operations elsewhere to strengthen offensive 
actions, closing gaps in defense, or restoring reserves. Can 
be strategic, operational, or tactical, depending on goals. 
 Redeployment 
Relief, transfer of troops 
(смена; Перебросить)
Routine transfer or rotation of troops in combat.  Rotation, relief 
Replenishment 
(пополнении) 
Replenishment or resupply of a unit with needed supplies. Replenishment
Sources:“Boyevaya sposobnost’,” Encyclopedia of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2024, https:/ /encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclopedia/
dictionary/details.htm?id=3465@morfDictionary.  A. Nazarenko, “Kak vosstanovit’ boyesposobnost’ batal’yona,” Armeysky Sbornik 2017, 
No. 10, https:/ /dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/49865202. Dmitry Semyonov, “Budushcheye, kotoroye my vybirali. I 
zashchishchayem,” Ural’skiye voyennye vesti 2024, No. 13, https:/ /dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/96591265. “Pere -
gruppirovka voysk,” Encyclopedia of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2024, https:/ /encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.
htm?id=8647@morfDictionary. “Vosstanovleniye,” Russian Ministry of Defense Handbook of Military Terminology, 2024, https:/ /dictio -
nary.mil.ru/dictionary/Terminy-po-tematike-svyazi/item/139617/ .
There are many similarities between U.S. and Russian military doctrine on reconstitution. Like U.S. 
military doctrine, Russian military thought accounts for two aspects of reconstitution: reorganiza -
tion and regeneration. U.S. and Russian tactical reorganization is also defined similarly: when com-
bat losses are manageable, local commanders are expected to reorganize their units in place. Both 
U.S. and Russian unit commanders are expected to tactically reorganize with their own units’ assets 
if combat loss rates are around 15–20 percent of personnel and equipment and if the unit is still 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   11
considered combat capable.15 They will need higher echelon support for losses approaching 20–30 
percent of a unit’s structure.16 
Both U.S. and Russian forces use regeneration sites located far from combat zones, where units are 
evaluated and regenerated over time. Both countries’ systems require a higher command decision 
(typically two echelons higher) to regenerate a unit. Both systems determine when regeneration is suf-
ficient based on the ability to restore combat effectiveness, not on the ability to restore capacity to a 
fixed prewar number of personnel, weapons, or equipment. In both systems, many factors determine 
whether a unit is ready to execute a given mission. For example, a regenerated unit can be considered 
combat effective if it can accomplish a mission even if has manpower or equipment shortfalls or is 
using older equipment. In the Russian system, if an artillery unit can achieve a certain rate of fire 
missions within a specific time range, it can still be considered combat capable, even if it has lost 
personnel and artillery pieces.17
There are a few significant differences between Russian and U.S. reconstitution concepts. One key 
difference is what combat loss ratio would trigger the regeneration process. Regeneration for an 
American unit begins when a damaged unit cannot meet mission requirements by reorganizing with 
available resources. While there is not always a specific threshold for triggering regeneration and it is 
often highly scenario-dependent, in general terms, when a U.S. Army unit has sustained a 40-percent 
loss of personnel and a 30-percent loss of major weapons systems, it typically must be regenerated 
before its next mission.18
By comparison, Russian units require higher-echelon regeneration support when they lose between 
30 and 70 percent of their equipment and personnel.19 Russia defines combat capability in four 
general bands: units are considered fully combat capable if they have 75 percent or more of their 
organizational structure, limited or partially combat capable at 50–75 percent strength, and partially 
combat capable at 30–50 percent strength, and noncombat capable if less than 30 percent of their 
unit remains.20 The Russian military regenerates a unit by reorganizing and consolidating damaged 
subunits into one functional unit (for example, two understrength companies consolidate into one 
combat-capable company) or by replenishing from external sources.21 
Other than casualties or equipment losses, a Russian unit can also lose combat capability if enough 
of its personnel experience battle fatigue or psychological distress and cannot properly fulfil their 
combat duties (“loss of moral-psychological readiness”). In this case, troops may be sent to other 
facilities to rest or receive interventions, or in doctrinal terms, to restore their moral-psychological 
readiness.22 
Another difference between American and Russian doctrine on regeneration stems from Russia’s 
experience (and the United States’ recent inexperience) with destruction of units, or irrecoverable 
losses. According to U.S. doctrine, damaged units are expected to be moved to rear areas, where they 

12 
will eventually be regenerated. According to Russian doctrine, there is a third category for units that 
have been destroyed (defined at over 70 percent losses). Such units are classified as non-mission capa-
ble and withdrawn to regenerate sites when possible.23 Higher echelons of Russian command either 
decide to regenerate them to their original structures, consolidate their assets into a smaller echelon, 
or disband the units and send their remaining assets to replenish other forces. This latter option is 
taken if the Russian command determines the losses are too great to be regenerated.24 Russian units 
at times have faced these levels of attrition in Ukraine, and the Russian command has opted to 
regenerate them with mobilized or volunteer personnel. 
What Must Be Reconstituted? Baselining Russian Losses From 2022 to 2024
Russian personnel and equipment losses from two years of full-scale war are severe and will require 
national-level policies and attention to restore. To evaluate the weight of the reconstitution task 
ahead of the Russian government, first it is necessary to baseline combat losses of manpower and 
equipment using available open-source information. 
The Russian military has three categories for equipment losses: irrecoverable losses, recoverable 
losses, and “current repairs” (routine maintenance).25 Irrecoverable losses are permanent or otherwise 
irreversible, such as destroyed or captured equipment. Recoverable losses refer to equipment that can 
be returned to combat duty after major, intermediate, or light repairs. Current repairs refer to equip-
ment that is temporarily unavailable due to routine maintenance. 
Russia has lost over 15,000 pieces of equipment according to open-source research; and, for now, 
the Kremlin is relying on its strategic reserves of Soviet-era equipment to sustain its war effort. 
Open-source information on the number of irrecoverable or permanent losses of Russian combat 
equipment—including information from Western governments—indicates that losses (as of April 
2024) total up to around 3,000 tanks, over 5,000 armored vehicles, over 1,000 artillery systems, 100 
fixed-wing aircraft, 130 helicopters, 350 unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and over a dozen naval 
ships.26 Open-source information further indicates the loss of over 3,000 specialized trucks, and 
engineering and transportation vehicles.27 See Table 2 for a summary of major combat equipment 
losses from February 2022 to April 2024. 
To put these figures in perspective, as of April 2024, Russia has lost more tanks than it had in its 
entire prewar active-duty tank force and over 30 percent of its most advanced self-propelled artillery 
and multiple rocket launcher systems. The Black Sea Fleet has lost over 20 percent of its prewar order 
of battle, and it cannot be augmented from fleets outside the Black Sea or Caspian Sea, as Turkey 
implemented Montreux Convention restrictions in 2022. The Russian Air Force has lost less than 10 
percent of its prewar order of battle. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   13
Table 2. Visually Confirmed Russian Equipment Losses, February 2022–April 2024 
Equipment Type Losses as of 
April 8, 2024
Prewar Number 
in Active Duty 
(Reserves) 
Percentage of T otal  
Losses, Active Duty  
(Active Duty Plus Reserves) 
Main battle tanks 2,500–2,900 2,840 (10,200) >100 percent active prewar 
(18–21 percent) 
Armored personnel carriers and 
infantry fighting vehicles 
4,800–5,400 14,280 (15,500) 34–35 percent active prewar 
(16–17 percent)
 Self-propelled artillery and 
multiple rocket launchers
980–1,080 3,024 (7,480) 32–36 percent active prewar 
(9–10 percent) 
Air defense systems 220–290 2,234 10–13 percent
Helicopters 94–135 821 11–16 percent
Fixed-wing tactical aircraft 71–99 1,172 6–8 percent
Ships (Black Sea Fleet) 13 58 22 percent
Sources: Jakub Janovsky, naalsio26, Aloha, Dan, Kemal and Alexander Black, “Attack On Europe: Documenting Russian Equipment Losses 
During The Russian Invasion Of Ukraine ,” Oryx, February 24, 2022, https:/ /www.oryxspioenkop.com/2022/02/ attack-on-europe-document-
ing-equipment.html; Russo-Ukrainian Warspotting, https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20240409070200/https:/ /ukr.warspotting.net/; Ukraine 
Control Map [@UAControlMap], “Quick reference sheet for what’s still floating in the Black Sea atm” X.com, March 5, 2024, https:/ /twitter.
com/uacontrolmap/status/1765007607096324122?s=46; IISS, Military Balance, Chapter 5, Russia and Eurasia, 2021. 
Notes: Counts are current as of April 8, 2024. The air defense category includes tactical and strategic systems operated by the Russian 
Aerospace Forces and Russian Ground Forces. The ship losses refer to the Black Sea Fleet and its augmentation of four ships from the Caspian 
Flotilla only. Reserve numbers are a total count and do not account for serviceability rates, which vary.  
Casualties 
Like equipment losses, personnel losses in the Russian military fall into three categories: irrecoverable 
losses, recoverable losses, and sanitary losses.28 Irrecoverable losses refer to personnel killed or who died 
from wounds, personnel missing in action or captured, or personnel who are permanently disabled 
and no longer able to serve. Recoverable losses refer to severely wounded personnel who can return to 
combat duty after recovery or can resume duties with reduced functions. Sanitary losses refer to mildly 
wounded personnel or sick personnel who are convalescing. Reliable information about recoverable 
losses (soldiers who are wounded in action but who can return) is not widely available. 
Russian combat casualties from 2022 to 2024 are extensive; and as researchers note, Russia has lost 
more personnel from its war on Ukraine than were lost in all previous Russian conflicts since WWII 
combined.29 Between February 2022 and April 2024, at least 50,000 and possibly as many as 85,000 
Russian soldiers and paramilitary fighters were killed in Ukraine, a figure that is at least four times 
the number of combat deaths sustained by the Soviet Union from 1979–1989 during a lower-inten-
sity war in Afghanistan. 30 When adding wounded personnel to the tally, total casualties as of June 
2024 are estimated to be over 350,000.31

14 
Officially however, Russia claims to only have lost 5,937 personnel (with the last update in 
September 2022).32 Even though military cemeteries across Russia continue to expand with fresh 
graves, the Kremlin does not publicly acknowledge any deaths above the official total and has 
criminalized public discussion of combat deaths as either divulging state secrets or “discrediting the 
Armed Forces.”33 
In mid-April 2024, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and independent Russian media 
outlet Mediazona reported that over 50,000 Russian soldiers have been killed in Ukraine, with 
around 27,000 of them dying in the second year of war.34 When considering cases in Russian probate 
court and unexplained growth in military cemeteries, personnel killed in action could be as high 
as 85,000.35 This estimate is based on funeral or death announcements and increases in graves at 
military cemeteries in Russia. Ukrainian and Western open-source estimates of Russian casualties are 
summarized in Table 3. 
Table 3. Estimated Russian Casualties February 2022–April 2024
 Losses, as of September 2022 
(pre-mobilization)
T otal Losses, February 2022–April 2024
Killed in action 20,000–25,000 50,000–85,000 
 Wounded in action 50,000–55,000 285,000–300,000 
T otal casualties 70,000–80,000 335,000–385,000
Sources:  Olga Ivshina, Becky Dale and Kirstie Brewer, “Russia’s meat grinder soldiers – 50,000 confirmed dead,” BBC, April 17, 2024, https:/ /
www.bbc.com/news/world-68819853; Helene Cooper, “Heavy Losses Leave Russia Short of Its Goal, U.S. Officials Say,” New York Times, 
August 11, 2022, https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2022/08/11/us/politics/russian-casualties-ukraine.html; “Russian casualties in Ukraine,” 
Mediazona, May 20, 2022, updated April 2024, https:/ / en.zona.media/ article/2022/05/20/ casualties_eng; Sharon Braithwaite, “Russia 
has yet to achieve any of its strategic objectives in Ukraine’s invasion, UK defense secretary says,” CNN, September 5, 2022, Phil Stewart, 
“CIA director estimates 15,000 Russians killed in Ukraine war;” Reuters, July 20, 2022, https:/ /www.reuters.com/world/ europe/ cia-director-
says-some-15000-russians-killed-ukraine-war-2022-07-20/; Jim Garamone, “U.S. Will Not Back Down on Support for Ukraine,” DOD News, 
March 19, 2024, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/ Article/ Article/3711625/us-will-not-back-down-on-support-for-ukraine/;  
Dmytro Basmat, “Stoltenberg: Russia has lost over 350,000 troops in Ukraine,” Yahoo News, March 14, 2024; https:/ /www.yahoo.com/news/
stoltenberg-russia-lost-over-350-224514152.html.   
Disproportionate numbers of wartime recruits and deaths have come from poorer regions of Russia, 
with particularly high combat deaths among those personnel from Atlai, Buryatia, North Ossetia, 
a nd Tuva.36 An analysis of confirmed combat deaths by BBC also suggests that for the first six 
months of the war, non-Slavic Russians were dying at a rate disproportionate to their overall makeup 
of Russian society (25 percent of the total deaths, while making up 10–15 percent of the overall 
Russian population). However, after Russia’s partial mobilization of 300,000 personnel in September 
2022, and the joining of more volunteers, by spring 2023, Slavic Russians came to represent 85 
percent of combat deaths (up from 75 percent), which is proportional to Russia’s general population 
demographic trends.37 In particular, the BBC investigation found that names of the dead from the 
North Caucasus region dropped from 11 percent of the total in the opening months of the war to 
around 2 percent in 2023. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   15
It is not only the overall numbers of irrecoverable casualties and deaths that will have an impact on 
reconstitution, but how these losses are distributed across military ranks that will have long-lasting 
impacts on the Russian military moving forward. Most Russian combat deaths in Ukraine are 
among enlisted personnel—91 percent of confirmed deaths (41,000) from 2022 to April 2024, 
according to BBC analysis.38 Given that officers make up over 25 percent of the Russian military, 
enlisted deaths are disproportionate but not unexpected for a war of this type.39 Replenishing enlist-
ed personnel has been the focus of Russia’s wartime recruiting efforts. 
Among Russian officer deaths in Ukraine, company-level leadership (lieutenants and captains) has 
been especially impacted. According to Mediazona, around 3,500 officers have been confirmed 
as killed in Ukraine (actual numbers may be higher) as of April 2024, with around 400 of those 
deaths at the rank of lieutenant colonel (O5) or above, which are typically brigade or regimen -
tal commanders or deputy commanders and above. 40 A separate research group found officer 
casualties to be over 4,000 as of April 2024, with nearly 44 percent of the losses to be junior 
officers (lieutenants and captains). 41 See Figure 1 for the breakdown of officer losses by rank from 
February 2022 to April 2024. 
Figure 1. Russian Officers Killed in Action by Rank, February 2022–April 2024
Source: “KIU Russian Officers Killed in Ukraine — Public Full Data Sheet,” available at https:/ /docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/  
1InyFVmu1LoSjqcWTHe4iD9cR8CNiL-5Ke5Jiz_Mlvwc/edit#gid=1093884946; and KIU Russian Officers killed in Ukraine  
[@KilledInUkraine]. “At least 4 041 Russian officers have been eliminated in Ukraine…,” X.com, May 2, 2024, https:/ /x.com/  
KilledInUkraine/status/1786020183842140299.
Figure 1. Russian Oﬃcers Killed in Action by Rank, February 2022–April 2024
Source: “KIU Russian Oﬃcers Killed in Ukraine — Public Full Data Sheet,” available at https:/ / docs.google.com/ spreadsheets/
d/1InyFVmu1LoSjqcWTHe4iD9cR8CNiL-5Ke5Jiz_Mlvwc/ edit#gid=1093884946; and KIU Russian Oﬃcers killed in Ukraine 
[@KilledInUkraine]. “At least 4 041 Russian oﬃcers have been eliminated in Ukraine…,” X.com, May 2, 2024, https:/ / x.com/
KilledInUkraine/ status/1786020183842140299.
Senior lieutenant 
Lieutenant 
Junior lieutenant 
General oﬃcer
Reserve oﬃcer
Unknown
Colonel
Lieutenant colonel 
Major
Captain
4,055
T otal Oﬃcers
27%
3%
4%
11%
17%
11%
6%
19%
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.org

16 
Combat deaths among Russian field-grade officers (such as majors) occurred most frequently in 
the opening months of the war, before declining by the fall of 2022, according to BBC analysis of 
published Russian funeral notices.42 This pattern is consistent with Russian operations at the time. 
During this period, while Russian forces were on the offensive, field-grade and senior officers “led 
from the front” as they attempted to fight through coordination and communications problems 
that stemmed from the invasion plan being withheld from most of the force until a few days prior.43 
As Russia withdrew units and reconsolidated them into eastern Ukraine, senior officer casualty 
rates declined. By this time, they and their staffs were positioned in rear areas beyond the range of 
Ukrainian precision strikes, while their electronic warfare, logistics, and communications problems 
were being addressed. The leadership burden on the front line (and, as a result, casualties) began 
to fall increasingly on junior officers and NCOs—who continue to sustain comparitively heavier 
casualties today. 
What impact do all these officer losses have on Russia’s land combat forces, and how will Russia 
address this problem moving forward? It is possible to put these losses in the context of unit struc-
ture. A review of recovered Russian division and brigade rosters suggests that small Russian forma-
tions have been the most impacted by these losses. These small unit leadership losses are particuarly 
consequential because it is these unit organizations (platoons, squads, and some companies) that are 
responsible for Russia’s new approach to smaller assault squads on the offense. Russia is no longer 
able to mass large forces at the battalion or brigade level for attack in most cases, due to Ukraine’s 
persistent surveillance and targeting. Ukraine also faces this challenge from Russian surveillance. 
A review of recovered Russian personnel rosters from the war illustrates the sizeable junior officer 
losses from 2022 to 2024. For example, the roster of the 20th Guards Motorized Rifle Division 
(released by Ukraine as of March 2022) had over 500 officers. Of these officers, 190 were lieutenants 
or senior lieutenants who commanded platoons, 89 captains who commanded companies and filled 
headquarters staff, 55 majors who held battalion command or deputy regimental commands, 4 colo-
nels who held regimental command and division command, and 19 lieutenant colonels.44 Recovered 
rosters from a smaller unit, the 136th Motorized Rifle Brigade, show that as of March 2022 that it 
had 173 lieutenants (junior and senior lieutenants), 82 captains, 49 majors, and one commanding 
colonel.45 Assuming these officer manning levels are consistent across the army, available public fu-
neral notices suggest that in two years, Russia has lost, numerically, the equivalent of all lieutenants 
in 10 divisions or brigades. 
Rather than pull junior reserve officers from the strategic reserves to replace these losses, Russia has 
opted to condense cadet training from four years to three years. The loss of junior leaders of the 
Ground Forces was not replenished with reserve officers in 2022, as only certain specialists from the 
reserves were included in the mobilization order.46 Excluding reserve lieutenants from mobilization 
might seem counterintuitive, given Russia’s circumstances, but there is a long-standing negative 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   17
military cultural bias against those 
junior officers who graduated from 
a university program (similar to the 
U.S. Reserve Officers’ Training Corps 
(ROTC)), received a commission, and 
transferred immediately to the reserves 
without having held command.47 Then, 
there is the matter of replacing the 
NCOs, which have suffered large losses 
in the war. In the past, there was flexi-
bility in assigning junior lieutenants or 
NCOs to the role of platoon command-
er, depending on manning availability. 
The war and casualties at the platoon 
level have likely led to variability at 
platoon command levels, as both pools 
of small unit leaders are under strain. 
Russia does not release information on 
the number of its wounded personnel. Data that can be used to estimate numbers, such as payments 
to medically discharged personnel, have not been released since the summer of 2022.48 Most public 
estimates of Russian casualties from various Western government and intelligence services do not 
describe subcategories of wounded personnel (recoverable or irrecoverable). Many wounded personnel 
are returned to service. Personnel with moderate to severe injuries are treated in military and civilian 
hospitals, as well as military sanitariums (vacation areas for military personnel that have very limited 
ability to provide care for complex medical or psychological needs).49
Russia’s Reconstitution Plans Still In Flux 
The future shape of Russia’s military is being decided at the time of this paper’s writing. Most details 
about future procurement plans or updates to military strategy are not occurring in public view due 
to secrecy and political sensitivity. Nevertheless, it is possible to infer strategy development based on 
available statements and the revealed preferences of actions taken. Multiple battlefield adaptations 
from the war in Ukraine will also inform the future military’s posture. 
This section highlights the findings of a literature review of ongoing strategy and force posture 
related to the Russian military’s future, as discussed by senior Russian officials, strategists in military 
science organizations, defense industrial publications, and reactions and alternatives discussed by 
Newly mobilized Russian troops in Rostov, October 2022.  
(Photo by Arkady Budnitsky/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images)


18 
think tanks or popular Russian military blogger social media accounts. Particular attention is paid 
to discussions of personnel strength, defense industrial strategy, and future force posture. A caveat is 
in order, however: whatever plans are indicated could change while the war is underway or after the 
war concludes, particularly given changes to Russia’s defense minister and other senior defense staff 
in May 2024.
Cloaking Reconstitution in Euphemisms 
Russian officials have thus far carefully avoided using words such as “reconstitution” or “regenera-
tion” or “recovery” when discussing modifications to the Russian military in the years ahead. In fact, 
a review of officials’ speeches, think tank publications, military science publications, and defense 
journalist pieces from 2022 to 2024 reveals an absence of the terms reconstitution or regeneration. 
The lack of public discourse on losses and damage is not unexpected, however, and can be attributed 
to three factors: First, it reflects Russia’s policy to avoid publicly discussing the full extent of combat 
losses or other sensitive problems stemming from the war in Ukraine, partly to conceal them from 
domestic and foreign audiences. Second, the Kremlin is carefully managing public perceptions and 
engagement with the war and is legally penalizing those who critique the government’s handling of 
the war as “disparaging of the Armed Forces.” Changes to the legal code have contributed to censor-
ship, media blackouts of certain topics, and other forms of self-censorship on losses.50 
Instead, Russian officials try to accentuate the positive and focus on increased weapons deliveries, 
how many volunteers have joined the ranks, or plans to restore combat strength—without any 
discussion of why such urgent replenishment has been needed. When Russian officials speak about 
required changes to the force, the conversations are couched in euphemisms and sensitive topics are 
omitted. 
President Vladimir Putin adheres closely to military terminology when discussing changes to the 
force, referring to, for example, the need to “increase defense capability” or “solve all problems related 
to the provision of Armed Forces involved in the special military operation.” And he does so without 
mentioning losses of equipment or personnel.51 Other officials express the need to “improve the 
combat and numerical strength” of the military to address emerging threats, instead of regeneration.52 
Former defense minister Sergei Shoigu has discussed needing to increase the pace of construction 
of weapons and ammunition for “ensuring the increase of combat strength” for forces in the future, 
without noting why combat strength has been lost.53 At his most direct, in the context of raising pro-
duction rates, Shoigu said that more weapons are needed to support offensives. He also announced 
the Kremlin’s plan to create “nine reserve units” to be shared across Russian operational commands 
in occupied Ukraine and spoke of replenishing personnel for wartime needs. But this has been the 
extent of public acknowledgment.54 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   19
Russian officials also cloak extensive reconstitution requirements under the umbrella of force expan-
sion and NATO’s expansion in particular. Some Russian officials have said that the Kremlin will 
need a larger force to counteract NATO expansion or to counterbalance the West, which, according 
to Moscow’s claims, is using Ukraine to wage a hybrid war against Russia.55 Other Russian officials 
claim that expansion is needed due to more general threats: they say, due to the “threats posed by the 
United States and its Allies, we will continue to improve the composition and structure of the Armed 
Forces and increase the production of the most popular weapons and military equipment.”56 Because 
Russia seems likely to make some force posture changes on the border of Finland in the years ahead 
(even absent a war in Ukraine), couching the extensive equipment and personnel replenishment in 
the context of responding to NATO expansion is a more politically acceptable route than tying the 
replenishment to losses in Ukraine. 
Other ways that Russian officials talk around the problem of combat losses include focusing on 
weapons or equipment deliveries to troops. For example, in December 2023, in his annual briefing to 
attaches, Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces Valery Gerasimov noted that 1,500 
tanks, 3,000 armored vehicles, and 230 aircraft and helicopters had been provided to the troops 
in 2023.57 These numbers are more than double the 2020–2021 deliveries, inadvertently revealing 
losses, and the majority of the equipment he listed was pulled from storage. When one senior official, 
Sergey Chemezov, the long-time director of the state-owned corporation Rostec, used the word “re-
generate” in the context of combat losses, it was in reference to rebuilding new A-50 reconnaissance 
aircraft, after two crashed in the span of months—one of them in Russia proper. 58
Very rarely do Russian officials publicly critique operations in Ukraine. If they do, they tend to 
blame the problems on the New Look reforms spearheaded in 2008–2012 by former defense minister 
Anatoly Serdyukov and former chief of the general staff General Nikolai Makarov. Duma member 
and former head of the VDV Vladimir Shamanov—a retired general with enough connections 
and clout to discuss these matters—wrote a scathing rebuke of how the VDV were misused in the 
opening days of the war. Shamanov offered a pointed critique of Russia’s prewar force structure (and 
justified his own decisions as VDV commander in the 2000s). He noted that the New Look reforms 
were designed for smaller local wars against a weaker opponent and that this approach is no longer 
appropriate for the challenges Russia faces now.59 Shamanov also took defense leadership to task and 
claimed that out of hubris, VDV paratroopers at the critical battle of Hostomel Airport in February 
2022 were given rubber bullets for one of their three days of on-hand supplies. The assumption 
was, according to Shamanov, that the war would be over by day three, and they would need rubber 
bullets for crowd control.
A similar pattern of euphemisms and indirect critique was found in Russian defense journals and 
publications from 2022 to 2024. In 2021, the Russian government tightened laws regarding the 
public discussion of several topics related to the military. These laws classify or penalize discussions 

20 
of many topics related to military force posture, strategy, and the war’s direction. As a result, Russian 
citizens, news outlets, defense publications, and think tanks only obliquely discuss reconstitution 
needs and do not publish directly on these topics. Instead, they use carefully worded euphemisms 
such as “replenish our troops with provisions” and discuss equipment repair processes in very antisep-
tic or generic terms.60 
Currently, Russian military journals indirectly critique the current war by writing about past wars, 
including, for example, the Soviet war in Afghanistan or WWII. 61 Some Russian psychologists have 
studied the psychological rehabilitation of combat veterans and their mental health problems from 
previous wars as a way to note that problems remain unresolved to this day (in this case, diagnostic 
criteria for subclinical adaptation disorders are not yet addressed in today’s military and must be 
fixed, in the view of the authors).62 In another example, Russian strategists have written about how 
in 1946, the Soviet Army urgently established structures to capture lessons learned while experiences 
were still fresh.63 Based on a review of Russian military science journals, it seems that using histor-
ical case studies to indirectly comment on issues arising from a current war is a way to continue to 
publish articles on topics in Ukraine that are off limits and that the studies provide indirect policy 
recommendations to officials in a politically safe way, without running afoul of new laws. 
The Kremlin’s continued unwillingness to discuss the true extent of damage and losses from the war 
could hamper its ability to reconstitute the force in the postwar period. First, Russian citizens do not 
know the full extent of the losses, nor the level of resources needed to replace these losses. Likewise, 
they are not participants in discussions on the future development of the military. Yet the costs 
of reconstitution will likely affect the population through changes to the federal budget, changes 
to the mobilization base, or changes to conscription policies to accommodate a larger force. The 
population’s future willingness to support these social changes is unknown. Second, by prohibiting 
discourse on many aspects of military 
affairs, the Russian government is 
limiting the marketplace of ideas to 
those inside the Ministry of Defense 
or a small subset of outside experts 
in closed or classified sessions. It is 
possible, however, that some of these 
wartime restrictions on discussion 
will be removed after the war’s active 
phase concludes, or under new 
management with Defense Minister 
Andrey Belousov—particularly as the 
implementation of a new procurement 
program begins and costs become hard 
to hide. 
New Defense Minister Andrei Belousov sits with his predecessor,  
former Defense Minister and current Security Council Secretary  
Sergei Shoigu.(Photo by Vyacheslav Prokofyev/Pool/AFP  
via Getty Images)


CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   21
Interim Concepts for Reconstitution 
Presumably, Russian reconstitution plans are being discussed behind doors, either in closed or clas-
sified sessions. As of this paper’s writing, there is no publicly available, cohesive organizing principle 
for the future reconstitution or force design of the Russian military, and there has been no public 
update to Russian military doctrine. But both the force design and updated doctrine are likely to 
materialize in the next few years, after the new State Armaments Program (SAP) is allegedly released 
in early 2025 and lessons from the war in Ukraine have been fully analyzed and digested. In the 
interim, Russian officials have discussed the need to expand the Russian military, learn and integrate 
lessons from the war in Ukraine, and rapidly adapt and integrate emerging technology such as drones 
or other unnamed combat equipment. 
The SAP will likely set forth long-term production plans for the period 2025–2034 and be informed 
by reconstitution requirements, lessons learned from Ukraine, and the changing character of warfare. 
Details about the program are unavailable, but Putin has said that it will take into account sanc-
tions, NATO expansion, growth in the size of the Russian military, “implementation of the Special 
Military Operation” (that is, expenditures and losses), and economic pressures in the federal budget.64
Thus far, Russian officials have discussed the broad contours of an expanded force for 2030 and 
beyond. Shoigu announced some plans in 2023 and early 2024. His plans are likely to be revised by 
the new defense leadership team in some respects, but it is still worth considering them. Before his 
departure, Shoigu advocated for a force expansion to 1.5 million active-duty personnel (with a lofty 
goal to maintain around 700,000–735,000 personnel in contract service positions).65 But no public 
decree includes the 1.5 million number, and the official number of personnel remains at 1,320,000 as 
of July 2024.66
Shoigu and Gerasimov have announced several changes to the force since 2022. First, with respect 
to the accession of Sweden and Finland into NATO, Shoigu claimed that Russia would respond in 
kind to the estimated additional 33,000 NATO military personnel, 300 tanks, and 800 armored 
vehicles on Russia’s border.67 He announced plans in late 2022 to form an army corps near Finland, 
and while it is unclear what precisely that would entail, it could amount to a force size of around 
25,000–30,000 personnel, created by expanding existing brigades to divisions. 68
In addition, Russian officials have announced that three motorized rifle divisions will be added to 
Russian Ground Forces in occupied Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in Ukraine,69 that the VDV will grow 
by two new regiments, that three brigades will be converted into divisions, and that each existing VDV 
division will gain an extra regiment (three per division) effective as of early 2024.70 The Ground Forces 
will continue their decade-long reversal of the Serdyukov-Makarov reforms, which downsized Russian 
divisions into smaller brigades. Under Shoigu’s plan, seven motorized rifle brigades will be converted 

22 
into larger divisions in central and eastern Russia.71 Each Ground Forces’ Combined Arms Army 
(CAA) will be given an army aviation brigade of around 80–100 combat helicopters.72 
In March 2024, Shoigu claimed that a CAA had been formed (possibly the 25th CAA in Ukraine); 
that a Dnieper Flotilla had been created in occupied Ukraine; and that, by 2026, the Ministry of 
Defense would create two CAAs, fourteen divisions, and sixteen brigades (but it is not clear whether 
they will be new units or expanding existing units or a mix).73 74 Regardless of what has been formed, 
the Russian military has a track record of creating new units but then not fully resourcing them. 
For example, when the military announced the expansion and creation of multiple units in Russia’s 
Southern Military District and Western Military District in 2016, most of them were left under-
manned until late 2021.75 
It is unclear whether Belousov’s new defense team will retain Shoigu’s plans, and if so, how large 
the fourteen divisions will be. Some Russian analysts suggest a return to Soviet-strength divisions, 
which had up to 20,000 personnel each. But contemporary Russian divisions are smaller (around 
8,000–10,000 personnel).76 To create fourteen divisions fully from scratch, Russia would need an 
additional 140,000–280,000 soldiers and officers (assuming 10,000–20,000 personnel per division). 
If this force was created by enlarging existing brigades, then the additional personnel requirements 
would likely be less but still substantial (at 84,000–224,000). Before his May 2024 transfer to the 
Security Council, Shoigu sought an increase of 188,000 billets to accommodate his force expansion 
plans (to become 1.5 million overall).
The military has also reorganized aspects of its command chain. It has divided the unwieldly Western 
Military District back into two districts, the Moscow and Leningrad Military Districts, as they were 
known before 2010.77 Russia has also returned operational command of its naval fleets back to the 
Navy command in Moscow from the military district headquarters.78 The Aerospace Forces will be 
restructured and the Air Force will be reorganized into “nine new aviation regiments, including eight 
bomber regiments and one fighter regiment.”79 The Aerospace Forces will gain three formations as well.80 
Unofficial conversations online or in defense publications about reconstitution of the Russian mil-
itary have been somewhat critical. For example, Russian military bloggers who are critical of the 
war’s management have said that Shoigu’s plan is impossible financially, given personnel and training 
capacity constraints, and that it could not be implemented without major policy and financial 
adjustments. Other military bloggers offer that Shoigu’s plan is more of a statement of intent or is 
“for show,” rather than something that can be achieved concretely: “This is either a PR campaign to 
intimidate our NATO partners, or a mirage for our people.”81 Some influential military bloggers on 
Russian social media believe the new plan is only possible for a mobilization-based army.82
Even among camps known to express frequent agreement with Ministry of Defense narratives, 
there seems to be a consensus that the prewar military structure—for the Army in particular, made 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   23
of brigades and organized into battalion tactical groups—was unsuitable for Russia’s needs; most 
advocate a larger, heavier army.838485 Other prominent military analysts have argued that the future 
Russian military should not be using refurbished Soviet-era equipment, calling such practices “cheap 
and palliative political, military, and industrial solutions,” when modern technology is needed in 
terms of high precision, unmanned systems and new electronic warfare systems.86
Given the level of censorship in Russia, it is legally and politically safer for Russia-based defense 
analysts to discuss or recommend future modifications to Russian military strategy than it is for 
them to discuss problems with the Ukraine war. In the view of some, the war appears to be a hybrid 
battle—a “local conflict” in geographic scale, but with high-tech tools and foreign support on both 
sides and much in common with larger high-intensity wars.87 Others note the challenges of multiple 
generations of combat equipment being present on the battlefield at once. In their view, the nature of 
warfare is changing rapidly, and Russia’s military strategy must change to adapt to numerous devel-
opments: for example, precision strikes in depth; modern weapons capable of speed, mass, and high 
degrees of destruction; the ubiquitous presence of UAVs, loitering munitions, and reconnaissance 
strike complexes; a complex battlespace with irregular and mercenary groups, and in the near future, 
AI or autonomous vehicles.88 
Russian Personnel Reconstitution 
Personnel reconstitution is a critical and understudied component and can be thought of in two 
ways. Short-term personnel reconstitution at war is a process meant to replenish forces by reorganiz-
ing, regenerating, and retraining units that have sustained severe combat losses. Long-term personnel 
reconstitution is a process meant to accelerate after the war’s active phase concludes, when Russia 
demobilizes its personnel, retains the force, and recruits the future force. Considering Russia’s severe 
casualties and demonstrable command deficits revealed in Ukraine, what are Russia’s prospects for 
replenishing its manpower base through 2030? How will Russia retain and recruit personnel and 
improve proficiency in the postwar period? What structural factors and regulations will influence 
how Russia replenishes its manpower? 
From 2022 to 2024, Russia has conducted short-term wartime reconstitution through the partial 
mobilization of 300,000 personnel; the recruitment of volunteers, foreign fighters, and convicts; and, 
based on anecdotal evidence, the coercion of conscripts to sign contracts. This regeneration occurs 
at multiple locations in Russia and inside occupied Ukraine. When Russian units need to be rotated 
and rested, they move out of strike range to regeneration sites inside occupied Ukraine to rest, recon-
stitute, and do light training (see Figure 2). But when units are damaged and need to be withdrawn 
and regenerated, they are pulled farther back in rear areas of occupied Ukraine (see Figure 3 and 
Figure 4) to more complex training areas, or within Russia. 

24 
Figure 2. Russian Training and Regeneration Site, Southeast of Henichesk, 
Kherson Oblast, Occupied Ukraine   
The training site was created after 2022 and features multiple styles of trenches, training revetments, and targets for 
infantry. Nearby (not pictured) is a vehicle driving range. 
TRAINING RANGES
VEHICLE REVETMENTS
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.org
© 2024 MAXAR
Figure 2. Russian Training and Regeneration Site, Southeast of Henichesk,  
Kherson Oblast, Occupied Ukraine   
The training site was created after 2022 and features multiple styles of trenches, training revetments, and targets  
for infantry. Nearby (not pictured) is a vehicle driving range. 
Figure 3. Large-Scale Training Range and Regeneration Facility Located East of Donetsk, Ukraine   
A rudimentary version of this facility was constructed after 2014. However, after the 2022 invasion, Russian forces expanded it to 
add barracks for personnel, helipads, additional driving ranges, and several training trenches for infantry. 
Figure 3. Large-Scale Training Range and Regeneration Facility Located East 
of Donetsk, Ukraine 
 
A rudimentary version of this facility was constructed after 2014. However , after the 2022  invasion, Russian forces 
expanded it to add barracks for personnel, helipads, additional driving ranges, and several training trenches for infantry. 
NEW BARRACKS
NEW
HELIPAD
EXPANDED 
TRAINING 
AREA
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.org
© 2024 MAXAR

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   25
Figure 4. Second Large-Scale Training Range and Regeneration Facility  
This second large-scale training and regeneration facility is also located east of Donetsk city. Modifications to this facility were 
made incrementally between 2021 and 2023, with dramatic expansion after the September 2023 mobilization order. This facility 
likely receives mobilized or volunteer Russian personnel and provides additional training before personnel move to the frontline. 
The facility was expanded to include several driving ranges, multiple types of trenches and target practice ranges,  helipads, 
barracks, and administrative buildings.  
Figure 4. Second Large-Scale Training Range and Regeneration Facility 
This second large-scale training and regeneration facility is also located east of Donetsk city. Modiﬁcations to this facility 
were made incrementally between 2021 and 2023, with dramatic expansion after the September 2023 mobilization order . 
This facility likely receives mobilized or volunteer Russian personnel and provides additional training before personnel move 
to the frontline. The facility was expanded to include several driving ranges, multiple types of trenches and target practice 
ranges,  helipads, barracks, and administrative buildings.  
NEW BARRACKS AND ADMINISTRATIVE BUILDINGS
EXPANDED
TRAINING
RANGES
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.org
© 2024 MAXAR
In Russia, regeneration sites are located near the border, at nearby established training centers, and at 
military bases elsewhere in Russia.89 New units of volunteers are also trained in these training centers 
and at bases as well. Initially, in late 2022, Russia was also training mobilized personnel in Belarus, 
but this process appears to have been abandoned by late 2023 as training capacity within Russia was 
avaiable once the first wave of mobilized soldiers were deployed to Ukraine. 
Charles Bartles and Lester Grau, experts on Russian tactics, have noted that in conflicts prior to 
the full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Russian military preferred to either downsize damaged units 
into smaller units (for example, battalion to company and company to platoon) or remove units and 
regenerate them with repaired equipment and personnel. The military preferred not to add personnel 
piecemeal to units.90 But in 2022, Russia had to reconstitute somewhat differently due to several per-
sonnel shortfalls in the first year of the war. In 2022 and early 2023, Russia temporarily abandoned 
its preferences and committed personnel in piecemeal to stabilize depleted units. 
Since early 2023, the Russian military has been able to more efficiently rotate units and has improved 
its regeneration process inside occupied Ukraine and in Russia. The military now trains or regener-
ates units in Russia and deploys them to occupied Ukraine with a mobilized or reserve unit. Other 

26 
Russian units that have suffered heavy attrition have been reconstituted multiple times.91 These units 
are technically regenerated but often have lost cohesion, experience, and combat potential. 
Long-term personnel reconstitution is likely to be a complicated and expensive challenge for the 
Russian military. Russia’s losses are extensive both in quantitative and qualitative terms. While 
Russia has stabilized its manpower over the last year for limited offensives, this stabilization has 
largely been possible through wartime “stop-loss” policies that prohibit personnel from leaving the 
service in most cases (until the “special military operation” is declared over) and through volunteers 
enticed by high wages and other social benefits. Once stop-loss policies are lifted, the Russian mili-
tary will face an uncertain recruiting and retention environment. It is currently unclear how many 
personnel will choose to stay in service after the war. Some Russian defense analysts have voiced 
concerns that one of the most challenging aspects of future force expansion will be retaining and 
recruiting officers.92 
Long-term Personnel Regeneration Strategy and Challenges
Russia’s long-term regeneration challenges will also be shaped by the amount of available financial 
resources to attract and retain personnel, who have grown accustomed to high wartime wages and 
benefits. The Russian defense budget will be under significant strain to handle the problem of 
procurement, let simultaneously fund the growth of a larger professional force, and this tension may 
force Russian policymakers into uncomfortable tradeoffs. Both recruiting and retention will also be 
influenced by the outcome of the war in Ukraine (whether it is viewed as a success or failure within 
Russia) and what the Russian population understands about military life as revealed by the war and 
explained by its veterans upon their demobilization. 
Combat experience from the war in Ukraine is likely to have a generational impact on Russian mili-
tary culture—both in ways that improve combat effectiveness and ways that are toxic to the culture, 
if negative trends are not addressed. Unlike in the Afghanistan and Chechnya conflicts, where only a 
small segment of the army was deployed into combat, the vast majority of Russia’s deployable ground 
combat power is deployed to occupied Ukraine, fighting a war of a different character and inten-
sity. Some Russian psychologists forecasted early in the war that up to 100,000 veterans will have 
moderate to severe post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and will need clinical support to cope.93 
Currently, Russian soldiers receive inadequate mental health support, in large part because there are 
insufficient facilities to treat them or they are not granted leave long enough to receive available care.94 
For those personnel who remain in service after the war, untreated mental health issues from combat 
stress, stigma around discussing combat experiences or problems in the war, and growing evidence 
that Russian soldiers are self-medicating with alcohol or drugs could all combine to create a situation 
ripe for violent hazing within the Russian military, particularly within the Ground Forces and VDV.95 
Systemic hazing and violence are incompatible with retaining and expanding a professional force. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   27
Further, the potential resurgence of violent hazing also could once again increase draft dodging or 
desertion rates among conscripts, which could significantly affect a population that is already also 
showing signs of wariness about veterans or soldiers on leave.96 Public perceptions that the Russian 
military is a violent and unsafe place will have negative impacts on future drafts and a suppressing 
effect on future contract service recruiting. The Russian government is already attempting to craft 
narratives to counteract negative perceptions of the military.97 
Unlike in the 1990s, when hazing was borne from poverty and the social collapse following the end 
of the Soviet Union, future postwar hazing within the Russian military could emerge as a byproduct 
of troubled or alienated personnel—the result of an emerging class of “Ukraine syndrome” veterans 
(much like the Soviet veterans who experienced an “Afghan syndrome”).98 Social alienation and 
poverty were two of the main factors that drove veterans of Afghanistan and Chechnya into orga-
nized crime in the 1980s and 1990s. Russian veterans of the war in Ukraine may find brotherhood 
and employment in one of the many mercenary groups that operate abroad. For domestic stability 
reasons, the Russian government may actually prefer that some of these veterans find employment 
abroad, rather than return home and struggle with reintegration.
Structural Constraints and Opportunities for Personnel Regeneration 
As the Russian military reconstitutes in the years ahead, it is likely to remain a force staffed with pro -
fessional enlisted personnel (contract service personnel, or contractniki) and conscripts. In the 2010s, 
senior defense officials underscored that Russia was too large of a country to abandon this mixed 
manning system and that while Russia needed conscription and a large mobilization base, its stand-
ing army would be staffed by a majority 
of professional contract servicemen.99 If 
the Russian military expands over the 
next six years, it is likely to expand the 
number of conscripts and maintain a 
strategic mobilization reserve. Structual 
factors that will influence personnel 
reconstitution include whether Russia 
is successful at retaining experienced 
personnel after the war in Ukraine ends, 
whether enough citizens want to enlist 
in the future, whether it can expand 
training outputs at military education 
institutions, and whether it can afford 
expensive salaries and social benefits. 
Mobilized Russian soldiers in Rostov, October 2022.  When the war 
in Ukraine ends, demobilized soldiers and those who leave service by 
resigning will be discharged into the reserves. (Photo by Arkady  
Budnitsky/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images)


28 
The last decade of leadership under Shoigu and Gerasimov led to mixed results for many policies that 
supported professionalism and retention. When the two leaders assumed their posts in 2012, they in-
heritied a comprehensive reform plan initiated by their predessors. Most of the hardest reorganization 
and force reductions were completed prior to their appointment through a massive reorganization 
and consolidation of the force, ensuring all that remained were at the highest readiness levels; the 
securing of sufficient funding to reequip the force with modern equipment; the establishment of new 
professoinal enlisted training programs and revisions to professional military education (PME) pro-
grams; and improvements in salaries and housing.100 Under their leadership, the military prioritized 
the rearmament and modernization of Russian equipment and force structure, instituted a policy of 
“snap exercises” to test readines, and made some progress in increasing wages and improving living 
and service conditions.101 While Shoigu and Gerasimov’s Ministry of Defense prioritized rearmament 
and readiness, they halted Soviet-era equipment dismantlement, largely ignored the mobilization 
base and stopped the new training program for NCOs in 2012 (noting it was not necessary because 
junior lieutenants could fill the role, reflecting an older Soviet mentality).102  
Preparing for Postwar Retention and Recruiting 
Postwar personnel reconstitution includes the retention and recruitment of skilled personnel. Russia’s 
specific retention challenges are not yet known, as military personnel have been prohibited from 
resigning from service since the fall of 2022. All Russian military personnel in Ukraine serve “on 
contract”—regardless of whether they were mobilized or recruited from prison or were compelled 
to sign a new contract while deployed to receive benefits.103 Russia claims it has been recruiting 
around 30,000 personnel a month since 2023, but these claims are difficult to verify, particularly as 
recruiters have incentives to inflate their numbers at multiple stages of the recruiting process to meet 
quotas.104 Even if the recruiting numbers may be lower in reality, the numbers have been sufficient 
for Russia to maintain its offensives in Ukraine as of April 2024 and regenerate new units. 
Because Russia plans on maintaining a larger force postwar than it began with in 2022, and because 
they do not know how many personnel will resign when stop-loss policies have ended, it is unlikely 
that the Kremlin will conduct a mass demobilization all at once, or allow mass contract terminations 
or resignations, absent strong popular pressure to do so. To keep the size of the force stable postwar, 
particularly if they seek to maintain a larger size, the military could recommend a phased demobi -
lization to the Kremlin. This would mean demobilizing veterans at the rate they can replace them 
with new contract service personnel. Shoigu seemed to hint at this phased demobilization process 
in January 2023, when he suggested that the plan for Russian force expansion will be calibrated to 
match equipment delivery, and to increased availability of training ranges and military education 
capacity. There would be little point in retaining and recruiting a larger number of personnel without 
facilities or serviceable equipment to use.105 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   29
When Russian personnel are discharged into the reserves upon demobilization, the Kremlin’s stra-
tegic reserves will be considered highly experienced, and their proficiency will be retained by the 
system overall (at least for a few years before the skills degrade or become outdated). Other demobili-
zation options include facilitating the transfer of veterans into the National Guard, or into Ministry 
of Defense–controlled mercenary groups abroad. The latter option might prove to be an attractive 
option for personnel that the Kremlin may not want to return home or considers a risk, such as 
Wagner fighters who participated in the June 2023 rebellion, violent convicts, veterans who show 
signs of severe adaptation disorders, or others who could cause trouble at home. 
Shoigu’s plan to expand the force to between 1.312 and 1.5 million, including 700,000 contract 
service personnel, would not only be expensive in terms of wages and social benefit expenditures, 
but it would also effectively require a doubling of the military infrastructure currently available in 
Russia. To put the figure in context, in the prewar period, the Russian military never come close to 
having 700,000 contract personnel. Prior to the full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Russia downsized its 
target from 475,000 to 425,000, suggesting that higher numbers were unattainable in the late 2010s, 
at least with the benefits offered at that time.106 Russia is still working on building housing for some 
prewar contract service personnel and their families. 
To increase to 700,000 contract personnel, Russia would need to refurbish old bases by building 
additional modern facilities, such as barracks, family housing, schools, on-base amenities, and so 
on. And this would be an expensive endeavor. For each new division, Russian analysts forecast the 
need for five four-story barracks, five-to-ten family housing buildings, and other on-base amenities 
and wages that contract service personnel have come to expect.107 The associated costs could end up 
being prohibitive, as they would put even more strain on a defense budget already trying to finance 
rearmament. Furthermore, the recent arrests of defense ministry officials—on charges of corruption 
and failure to construct housing in a timely manner—suggest that the gap between what is promised 
and what is delivered remains large. 
Perceptions of military prestige and social trust are also important components of military recruiting 
and retention in Russia.108 Putin, Russian media, and various organizations are trying to shape how 
Ukraine war veterans are perceived by society at large to assist with postwar retention, postmilitary 
care for veterans, and recruiting. Part of the strategy is suppressing negative news about military 
operations in Ukraine. Russian authorities have also sought to create a positive impression of veterans 
and the appearance of providing care to them, by establishing regional Defenders of the Fatherland 
Fund centers (which nominally are supposed to help reintegrate veterans into local Russian areas). 
Russian state television and other media portray soldiers and veterans positively and eschew negative 
reporting. The Kremlin has also surged spending on military-patriotic education since 2022, and has 
instituted more military education or instructional blocks into Russian public schools. Putin has said 
in various public engagements that he wants veterans to be considered a new elite group in Russian 
society; within the military, commanders are to receive priority for promotion, a customary practice.109 

30 
However, it is unclear how Russian society will embrace these veterans. Historical trends and cur-
rent anecdotes suggest that the veterans may not come back to a warm embrace. In the past, Soviet 
and Russian civilians have been wary of Russian veterans that exhibit signs of adaptation disorders 
or severe PTSD. Some Russian mercenaries and soldiers who have returned home since 2022 and 
committed violent crimes upon discharge or home leave are certainly not helping the reputation 
of veterans. Anecdotal encounters on Russian social media, as well as insights from doctors and 
other medical professionals who prefer to remain anonymous, suggest that many war veterans are 
struggling psychologically and some are self-medicating with alcohol or other drugs.110 Negative 
impressions of veterans and the military writ large are threats to future recruiting and retention, and 
the Kremlin’s initial policies and actions suggest they are aware of this threat. 
Addressing Limitations on Military Training Capacity 
Force reconstitution will also be shaped by Russia’s capacity to produce trained personnel in a timely 
manner—both during and after the war. The training system is facing multiple pressures that at 
times are contradictory. Russian military and civilian leaders want training programs updated as 
soon as possible to improve battlefield performance in Ukraine. They want a comprehensive revision 
to training programs to reflect changes in modern warfare and to address shortcomings revealed 
in the Ukraine war. These requests are reasonable, but are also in tension with an education system 
already operating at capacity to replenish casualties to its junior officer and NCO cadres. Russia’s 
military training pipeline is currently configured for a force size of around 1 million and has several 
constraints that will challenge the desired expansion to about 1.3 million. As of April 2024, the 
expansion of output capacity for PME had not yet begun.
While Russia faces structural challenges in increasing the capacity of training and military education 
at present, they do have institutional knowledge of running a larger system. Russia inherited the 
Soviet Union’s sprawling military education system and network of training facilities, and then it 
gradually reduced the number, consistent with force reductions over the course of twenty years. In 
1991, the Soviet Union’s military education system could produce 60,000 officers a year from 166 
military education institutes to support a force size of around 4 million.111 The consolidation of PME 
and force size occurred in increments until 2009, when the Ministry of Defense consolidated the 
remaining sixty-nine institutes to sixteen and cut educator staff by around seven times as part of the 
New Look reforms.112 The education system and training manuals were overhauled. To cope with 
major reductions and revisions, some services, such as the Russian Air Force, stopped admitting any 
new cadets around 2010–2012. This created a temporary deficit of junior Air Force officers, which 
had to be addressed with larger classes (the deficit was allegedly overcome by 2018).113 Serdyukov’s 
reductions proved too extreme, and under Shoigu, the military increased the number to forty 
institutes.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   31
From 2020 to 2023, there were around 43,000 total cadets in military academies and 17,000 in 
military departments of civilian universities.114 Other services like the Navy and Air Force, are better 
postured to regenerate trained personnel because their casualties have been much lower. According 
to BBC analysis, 216 Russian Air Force pilots have been killed in action but the Air Force is able to 
graduate 100–200 pilots annually.115As of 2018, Russia was maintaining thirteen schools for NCOs.116 
Russia has not opened more academies to increase the cadet pipeline, but rather shortened their 
instructional period to churn out more graduates. By 2019, the military reduced combined arms 
training for Ground Forces and Airborne cadets from five years to four years to increase the number 
of junior officers in command positions.117 Since 2022, cadets have only been receiving three years 
of training because lieutenants are so urgently needed on the front line, and in the years prior to the 
war, five years of training was compressed into four years to generate more officers. Shoigu claimed 
the number of new first-year enrolled cadets at academies reached 18,000 in 2023, nearly a 30 
percent increase from the prewar capacity of 13,000–14,000 annually, because of the reconfiguration 
within the academies.118
And what of reserve officers who study in military education departments of civilian universities? 
Russian universities maintain a military department (военные  кафедры ) where students either 
join the reserves (to be discharged into the reserve after graduation and eligible for mobilization if 
needed) or are put on active duty, where they will be commissioned and then command units after 
graduation.119 In 2021, Shoigu announced that the number of military departments would expand to 
128, as they are important for maintenance of the mobilization reserve.120 
However, when Russia mobilized in 2022, military commissariats specifically turned away reserve 
lieutenants who had never had any command experience.121 Some reserve officers received summons, 
only to be turned back because they had no prior military experience; only certain specialists were 
needed.122 Turning reserve officers away might seem odd, considering Russia’s need for junior officers, 
but it is consistent with the long-standing bias within the military that officers from military academies 
are superior to those who attended civilian universities and then transferred straight into the reserve.123 
The military plans to increase the number of training grounds in Russia and in occupied Ukraine, 
increase training of specialists in training centers to accommodate a larger force size, and has said it 
plans on expanding training centers and building new ones.124 Russia also has future plans to up-
grade its training areas to accommodate brigade-level training.125 Modifications have been detected 
at Russian training ranges (additional driving ranges and trench networks) since the start of the war, 
according to analysis of commercial imagery.
Shoigu claimed that the experiences of the war in Ukraine will be used to update Russian field 
training programs, modeling, planning cycles, and fire solutions for Russian weapons.126 The war 
has created new officer and enlisted specialty positions for assault reconnaissance units, particularly 

32 
for drone and first person view (FPV) operators.127 The increasing role of drones and FPVs in wars 
will likely require expanding educational facilities for these specialties, as well as developing training 
courses and identifying instructors. Russia, like Ukraine, might be able to increase the number of 
instructors by hiring combat veterans, perhaps those who were medically discharged, to instruct 
cadets or to join research staffs at these specialty institutions. 
Improving Personnel Quality and Proficiency
The war in Ukraine has revealed command deficits; some of them were known in advance, while 
others were not. Shamanov said in 2023 that the “special military operation” has shown that the 
Russian military needs to improve PME and introduce a new code of honor into the troops and that 
raising officer quality will be the most important task for the Russian military.128 Shamanov opined 
that raising the quality of officers and simultaneously raising their numbers was mutually exclusive.129 
Reducing the number of education facilities, as described in the section above, had negative impacts 
on Russian military proficiency. These institutions’ staff members not only train cadets, but also 
conduct specialized research, test tactics, and update operational art.130 By reducing these staffs, the 
Russian military lost an important source of military learning. One longtime (and hard-line) Russian 
military analyst suggested that it will take a decade to reverse the negative impacts of these cuts on, 
for example, tank officer training. He blamed tanks’ crude slat armor (sometimes referred to in the 
West as “cope cages”) on the decline of military research: “I’ll probably write a seditious thought, 
but if the Armored Academy had not been dissolved into the Combined Arms Academy, tanks in 
Ukraine would not have been protected from Javelin by bars on the turrets.”131 
Cutting these educational facilities 
has also had effects on combat med-
icine and mobilization in the war in 
Ukraine. After the number of military 
medical institutes was cut, there were 
fewer specialists to advocate proper 
tactical medicine training and proper 
first aid kits. In the words of one 
Russian military analyst, “The fewer 
specialists lobbying for the promotion 
of a particular solution (for example, a 
modern first aid kit for a soldier), the 
less likely it is to appear at the front.”132 
This proved to be the case in Ukraine, 
as Russian soldiers were provided with 
Destroyed Russian tank with cage armor, Kharkiv 2022. Russian 
armor modifications continue to evolve as the war goes on.  
(Photo by Juan Barreto/AFP via Getty Images)


CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   33
expired or outdated medical kits in the first year of the war, and there is evidence that soldiers were 
given insufficient tourniquet training, leading to avoidable deaths or amputations.133 
In 2010, the Military Institute for Advanced Training of Specialists of Mobilization was closed 
as part of larger consolidations in the military. After WWII, the institute was created to harness 
wartime best practices and retain knowledge of the complexities of maintaining a large mobilization 
base (for example, the appropriate mix of officers and tactics).134 A current lack of these practices 
and knowledge, and the neglect of the mobilization system throughout the 2010s, was apparent in 
Russia’s chaotic early months of mobilization in 2022; there were errors in call-ups, field training 
was of poor quality, and some gear for soldiers was missing.135 If Russia reinstitutes this organization 
or something like it after the war in Ukraine, it will be an indicator that they intend to create a 
well-preserved mobilization base for future contingencies.
In recent years, Russian cadets have received consolidated training to graduate faster into command 
roles for the war effort. They claimed the training covered the same material in a shorter amount 
of time. However, in 2021, Russian military psychologists noted that there were major command 
deficits among lieutentants in the Western Military District, noting that “a lack of command literacy 
of junior command staff does not allow them to effectively build individual and group work with 
subordinates.”136 With the training reduced by a full year since that assessment, it is unlikely that 
cadets are prepared to lead in present circumstances. 
The implications of junior officer training will shape the military’s future in several ways. It means 
that surviving lieutenants (in the Ground Forces and VDV) from the war will have had less formal 
training steeped in the Soviet military educational experience and more trial-by-fire combat experi-
ence. Like the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Russian junior officers and field grade officers who survive 
the war and remain in service will be in positions to improve and modify training programs in their 
future command roles from 2024 onward, as long as their lessons are retained and disseminated. 
Finding Additional Personnel for a Larger Force
One way to staff a larger force would be to expand the draft’s size or lengthen conscription from 
one year to two years. However, Russian demography and labor shortages make draft expansion a 
difficult proposition. For example, Russia has already expanded the draft pool in 2023 by raising 
the eligible conscription age range from eighteen to twenty-seven to eighteen to thirty.137 Further, 
Russian society has become accustomed to the one-year conscription period, and lengthening it is 
likely to be unpopular. During the 2010s, draft dodging declined significantly from its 1999 peak of 
44,000 draft dodgers a year, due to an improvement in service conditions and shorter service time.138 
It also appears that Putin is unlikely to relax his long-standing policy on no conscripts in warzones. 
In the opening days of the war, Putin publicly ordered all conscripts who had accidentally deployed 
to Ukraine to return home immediately; and since that time, conscripts are still not serving in 

34 
occupied Ukraine, even in rear areas. However, coercion against conscripts by their commanders or 
by their peers to sign contracts to fight in Ukraine continues.139 
Russia could also reconsider its policy toward women in the military to generate additional person-
nel. Allowing women in combat roles is a complicated topic in Russia, and therefore, women remain 
an underutilized labor source that could be used to fill personnel shortfalls. Russian women distin-
guished themselves in WWII, but today, they are prohibited from many combat roles. The percent-
age of women in the Russian military declined from 10 percent in the 1990s to around 4.5 percent in 
2018.140 Yet military training in civilian schools is offered to both teenage boys and girls, and girls are 
active participants. Russia is even experimenting with allowing women in some combat roles, such 
as pilots. But so far, women’s interest in serving is higher than the space that the Ministry of Defense 
is willing to allocate—even as they acknowledge that for some specialties, they receive seventeen 
female applicants for each available slot.141 A major revision to this policy would be a sign that Russia 
is willing to pursue new avenues to staff a larger force. For now, Russia prefers to drop recruiting 
standards to allow felons or those with severe mental health problems to serve. Foreign men have 
been able to serve in the Russian military since 1998, and this process has accelerated to staff Russian 
units. Volunteers from Africa, Asia, Cuba, and the Middle East are fighting for Russia in Ukraine.142
Capturing Combat Experience for the Future Force
Another important component of reconstitution will be the military’s ability to institutionalize 
lessons learned from its combat experience to modernize and improve proficiency. Such lessons could 
inform tactics and field manuals, training programs, PME, research and development, and procure-
ment needs. The task before the Russian military to identify lessons and implement changes will be 
far more qualitatively and quantitatively complex than it was during the reform era in 2008, after 
Russia’s brief war against Georgia. Russia was able to quickly launch comprehensive reforms within 
one year of that conflict, but major aspects of the reforms they initiated had already been on the shelf 
or attempted several times in the years prior.143 In the aftermath of the war in Ukraine, a comprehen-
sive learning and analysis program—akin to what the Soviet military initiated after WWII—is likely 
to occur but will take several years to implement throughout the force. 
The Russian military already has a template for how to ingest and institutionalize lessons learned, 
formed during the post–WWII years of 1946–1953. During these seven years, the Soviet military 
worked quickly to ingest and disseminate lessons learned and to improve operational concepts, force 
design, and training. It created a new directorate in the General Staff for this purpose (the study of 
tactics and operational art), and this directorate partnered with other command elements to integrate 
lessons into the force. Important postwar learning tasks included materials conservation (materials 
such as commanders’ logs, reports, orders, and interviews); analysis; dissemination; and knowledge 
sharing via presentations and symposiums. An important part of this learning process was capturing 
the military history of the war.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   35
To ensure that these lessons were absorbed, learning organizations sponsored multiday conferences, 
specialized field training, papers, lectures, exhibitions, and discussions between veterans and cadets 
(or inexperienced commanders or personnel). The first year after the war ended was a particularly im-
portant, according to Russian military historians, to capture the freshest lessons before soldiers were 
demobilized or before they forgot details. The aim was to share this knowledge as quickly and widely 
as possible.144 According to modern Russian military historians, the Soviets felt that conference-based 
retreats for staff and commanding officers were the most effective methods for rapid knowledge 
transfer.145 In subsequent years, deeper analysis became possible from wartime materials, and this 
analysis became the basis for change in operational art and for the projection of future trends in war-
fare. After completion of the analysis, changes can be permanently introduced to training programs 
and PME curriculum, according to the recommendations of Russian military historians.146 
Russian forces in Ukraine are currently sharing adaptations at the tactical and operational level. 
Learning is evident on the battlefield, whether through changes in tactics or modifications to air 
and ground platforms or some type of ammunition. While some modifications may look crude, 
such as additional armor welded onto tanks or nets attached to motorcycles, they suggest that local 
commanders from the Operational Group of Forces level and below are empowered to experiment 
and are collaborating with regional repair centers near the front line as they try to develop solutions 
to FPVs and other drones. These lessons are disseminated horizontally to other parts of the front line 
and are conveyed vertically to the General Staff. 
However, because the war is ongoing, it is not yet feasible for the Russian military to conduct a com-
prehensive analytic postmortem of the war that could inform long-term doctrine and force posture 
changes. Further, the military has not publicly announced the creation of a lessons learned center 
within the General Staff. Battlefield adaptations are likely to remain more short term and technical, 
designed to increase lethality in Ukraine and improve survivability. Long-term changes from in-
depth analysis will be possible once the conflict freezes or ends. 
While the Kremlin has not yet set up a comprehensive lessons learned center, Russian leaders 
have called for the integration of combat experience and have taken steps to disseminate learning.147 
Presently, service academies have made adjustments in their training programs for essential updates 
(not defined publicly), and more in-depth learning is likely to occur after the active phase of the 
war concludes. For example, seminars for knowledge transfer are taking place now, as veterans from 
Ukraine share lessons learned. In addition, operational lessons learned are being included in Russian 
Air Defense textbooks and manuals,148 and training problems in military institutes were being 
upgraded as of late 2022,149 some with a special focus on UAVs and combat robotics, according to 
Gerasimov.150 Still, the learning process is far from complete. Russian military strategists continue to 
discuss how to absorb lessons learned systematically, which suggests that a postwar learning structure 
has not yet been agreed on.151

36 
Russian Equipment and Materiel Reconstitution 
As of April 2024, the Russian military was supplying a stable amount of equipment to the war 
effort through accelerating production capacity at existing defense factories and refurbishing older 
Soviet-era equipment at accelerated rates. This process will buy the Russian government at most a 
few years to implement a larger rearmament plan. Reconstituting lost equipment will be a critical 
long-term task. This section will evaluate Russia’s short-term reconstitution activities (refurbishment 
and repair of equipment) and long-term reconstitution capabilities through 2030 and beyond. It will 
also consider the Russian defense industrial base’s advantages, constraints, and policy trade-offs in 
light of the reconstitution task before it. The majority of the Russian military’s reconstitution needs 
are concentrated in its land combat forces (Ground Forces, VDV, and Naval Infantry), so this section 
will focus on constraints and policy trade-offs in that area in particular. 
In early 2024, when senior U.S. officials remarked that the Russian military is almost fully recon-
stituted, they were not implying that the force is almost restored to what it was in 2022.152 They 
were most likely referring to the doctrinal definition of reconstitution—the restoration of sufficient 
or acceptable combat capability. The Russian military in 2024 can therefore be considered reconsti-
tuted quantitatively via mobilized soldiers and volunteers who received truncated training and via 
refurbished Soviet-era equipment from strategic reserves. The military can also field new capabilities 
that did not exist before 2022, especially in relation to UAV and FPV use. Qualitatively, the force 
remains uneven in many respects. 
Russia’s Reconstitution Lifeline: Equipment Refurbishment and Repair
To consider how the Russian military will reconstitute through 2030, it is first essential to evaluate 
how Russia is repairing and refurbishing older equipment for combat deployment to Ukraine. 
Western think tanks have estimated that 75 percent of Russian equipment sent to Ukraine as of 
2023 and 2024 was repaired or refurbished and 25 percent was newly produced.153 Russia’s ability 
to replenish the force allows the military to maintain operations at a sufficient level for now. The 
Kremlin has an extensive network of repair facilities and a limited number of storage facilities and 
factories that specialize in restoring equipment from the reserves. But the mismatch between the level 
of monthly equipment losses (while conducting offensive operations) and the level of new production 
is unsustainable, given finite remaining reserves.
Damaged equipment is triaged according to three major repair categories, and that classification 
determines where the repairs are made. Minor repairs (or “current repairs” in Russian) are carried 
out at field restoration points inside Ukraine and include the repairing of broken parts, oil changes, 
or engine repair. Minor repairs are completed by the crew or engineers within a unit. Moderate 
repairs are done by transporting damaged vehicles to new wartime repair facilities on the Russian 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   37
side of the border, or deep within occupied Ukraine, and include repairing specific systems that fail 
on a piece of equipment. Major repairs are carried out at factories or specialized repair facilities well 
inside Russia to extend the equipment’s service life by addressing major structural damage or critical 
systems failures.154 
Russian officials claim they have created an estimated 270 facilities of varying sizes to repair equip-
ment quickly and send it back to the front line in Ukraine.155 Some of these facilities are located 
inside occupied Ukraine (see Figure X). Officials from the Southern Military District (adjacent to 
Ukraine) claim that 95 percent of retrieved weapons are repaired and sent back to the front, with a 
goal of being done within five days or less, and the average time taking two to three days. Russian 
media claim that field restoration points are only 9 to 12 miles (15 to 20 kilometers) from the front 
line and can handle tasks from oil changes to engine replacement.156 As is the case with Russian 
forces in Syria, defense industry specialists are deployed to these sites to make repairs, learn about 
equipment performance, and assist with solutions for repair or modification.157 Russian logisticians, 
specifically the recovery crews, are the first to document observations about how different foreign 
technology impacts the equipment, and this information is shared with Russia’s network of equip-
ment repair and restoration points across Russia.158
Figure 5. Russian Vehicle Repair Facility, Kherson Oblast, June 2023 
After invading Ukraine, Russian forces modified this facility with a secure perimeter and vehicle berms. It was likely used  to repair 
vehicles in sheds and store them temporarily. Vehicles under camouflage netting can be seen in this graphic.   This facility was 
destroyed by Ukrainian forces in August 2023, according to imagery analysis.

38 
As of April 2024, most equipment sent to Ukraine is refurbished Soviet-era equipment withdrawn 
from strategic reserves in centralized storage bases across Russia. Russia’s vast strategic reserves of 
military equipment, most of it dating back to the 1970s or earlier, are based in multiple locations. 
The Kremlin has around five dozen central tank reserve bases, armament and equipment reserve 
storage bases, and bases for artillery systems of various types. 159 See Figure 6 for the locations of these 
bases. According to prewar estimates by the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), Russia 
had around 10,000 tanks in various conditions in strategic reserve, ranging from derelict (turret-less 
and rusted) to good working order, with room for a maximum of 2,000 tanks to be kept in covered 
storage (minus workshop space). Russia also kept the following armored equipment in storage prior 
to the war: 18,500 armored vehicles (BMP-series infantry fighting vehicles and BTR-series and 
MT-LB armored personnel carriers); 4,200 self-propelled artillery and 12,400 towed artillery; and 
3,200 multiple rocket launcher systems.160
Figure 6. Russian Equipment Reserve Storage Bases  
/gid00140/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00132/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006/gid00132/gid00131/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00134/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006/gid00132/gid00133/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00134/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00136/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00136/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00135/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00136/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00137/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00138/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00139/gid00131/gid00198
/gid00134/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00135/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00138/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00139/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00132/gid00137/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006 /gid00132/gid00138/gid00131/gid00198/gid00024/gid00132/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00131/gid00198
/gid00133/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00135/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00136/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006/gid00139/gid00131/gid00198/gid00006
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00137/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00139/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00139/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00137/gid00131/gid00198/gid00015
/gid00002/gid00045/gid00030/gid00047/gid00036/gid00030/gid00001/gid00004/gid00036/gid00045/gid00030/gid00039/gid00032
/gid00001/gid00013/gid00028/gid00038/gid00032
/gid00003/gid00028/gid00036/gid00038/gid00028/gid00039
/gid00013/gid00028/gid00038/gid00032
/gid00003/gid00028/gid00039/gid00038/gid00035/gid00028/gid00046/gid00035/gid00002/gid00045/gid00028/gid00039
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028/gid00001/gid00042/gid00033
/gid00016/gid00038/gid00035/gid00042/gid00047/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00003/gid00032/gid00045/gid00036/gid00041/gid00034
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028/gid00001/gid00042/gid00033/gid00001/gid00011/gid00028/gid00043/gid00028/gid00041
/gid00187/gid00006/gid00028/gid00046/gid00047/gid00001/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028/gid00188
/gid00026/gid00032/gid00039/gid00039/gid00042/gid00050
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00003/gid00028/gid00045/gid00032/gid00041/gid00047/gid00046/gid00001/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028/gid00015/gid00042/gid00045/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00012/gid00028/gid00045/gid00028
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00013/gid00028/gid00043/gid00047/gid00032/gid00049
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00006/gid00028/gid00046/gid00047/gid00001/gid00001/gid00020/gid00036/gid00029/gid00032/gid00045/gid00036/gid00028/gid00041
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00003/gid00032/gid00045/gid00036/gid00041/gid00034/gid00001/gid00020/gid00047/gid00045/gid00028/gid00036/gid00047
/gid00002/gid00019/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00004/gid00001/gid00001/gid00016/gid00004/gid00006/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00017/gid00002/gid00004/gid00010/gid00007/gid00010/gid00004
/gid00016/gid00004/gid00006/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00002 /gid00021 /gid00013 /gid00002 /gid00015 /gid00021 /gid00010 /gid00004 /gid00001 /gid00001 /gid00016 /gid00004 /gid00006 /gid00002 /gid00015
/gid00004 /gid00028 /gid00046 /gid00043 /gid00036/gid00028 /gid00041 /gid00001/gid00001/gid00001/gid00001/gid00001/gid00001/gid00020 /gid00032 /gid00028
/gid00003/gid00039/gid00028/gid00030/gid00038
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00028
/gid00003 /gid00028 /gid00039 /gid00047 /gid00036 /gid00030 /gid00001 /gid00020 /gid00032 /gid00028
/gid00012/gid00035/gid00028/gid00029/gid00028/gid00045/gid00042/gid00049/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00023/gid00039/gid00028/gid00031/gid00036/gid00049/gid00042/gid00046/gid00047/gid00042/gid00038
/gid00023/gid00042/gid00039/gid00034/gid00042/gid00034/gid00045/gid00028/gid00031
/gid00005/gid00042/gid00041/gid00032/gid00047/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00020/gid00042/gid00030/gid00035/gid00036
/gid00012/gid00045/gid00028/gid00046/gid00041/gid00042/gid00052/gid00028/gid00045/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00010/gid00045/gid00038/gid00048/gid00047/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00016/gid00040/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00020/gid00028/gid00040/gid00028/gid00045/gid00028
/gid00015/gid00036/gid00053/gid00035/gid00041/gid00036/gid00052/gid00001/gid00015/gid00042/gid00049/gid00034/gid00042/gid00045/gid00042/gid00031
/gid00015/gid00042/gid00049/gid00042/gid00046/gid00036/gid00029/gid00036/gid00045/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00014/gid00042/gid00046/gid00030/gid00042/gid00050
/gid00020/gid00047/gid00163/gid00001/gid00017/gid00032/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00046/gid00029/gid00048/gid00045/gid00034
/gid00026/gid00032/gid00038/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00036/gid00041/gid00029/gid00048/gid00045/gid00034
/gid00012/gid00035/gid00028/gid00029/gid00028/gid00045/gid00042/gid00049/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00023/gid00039/gid00028/gid00031/gid00036/gid00049/gid00042/gid00046/gid00047/gid00042/gid00038
/gid00023/gid00032/gid00045/gid00038/gid00035/gid00042/gid00052/gid00028/gid00041/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00014/gid00028/gid00034/gid00028/gid00031/gid00028/gid00041
/gid00026/gid00028/gid00038/gid00048/gid00047/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00015/gid00042/gid00045/gid00036/gid00039/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00023/gid00042/gid00039/gid00034/gid00042/gid00034/gid00045/gid00028/gid00031
/gid00005/gid00042/gid00041/gid00032/gid00047/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00020/gid00042/gid00030/gid00035/gid00036
/gid00012/gid00045/gid00028/gid00046/gid00041/gid00042/gid00052/gid00028/gid00045/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00010/gid00045/gid00038/gid00048/gid00047/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00014/gid00048/gid00045/gid00040/gid00028/gid00041/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00016/gid00040/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00020/gid00028/gid00040/gid00028/gid00045/gid00028
/gid00015/gid00036/gid00053/gid00035/gid00041/gid00036/gid00052/gid00001/gid00015/gid00042/gid00049/gid00034/gid00042/gid00045/gid00042/gid00031/gid00012/gid00052/gid00036/gid00049
/gid00015/gid00042/gid00049/gid00042/gid00046/gid00036/gid00029/gid00036/gid00045/gid00046/gid00038
/gid00014/gid00042/gid00046/gid00030/gid00042/gid00050
/gid00020/gid00047/gid00163/gid00001/gid00017/gid00032/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00046/gid00029/gid00048/gid00045/gid00034
/gid00026/gid00032/gid00038/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00036/gid00041/gid00029/gid00048/gid00045/gid00034
/gid00137/gid00132/gid00046/gid00047
/gid00138/gid00132/gid00046/gid00047
/gid00133/gid00133/gid00041/gid00031
/gid00134/gid00138/gid00133/gid00041/gid00031/gid00138/gid00131/gid00132/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00133/gid00041/gid00031
/gid00132/gid00137/gid00134/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00132/gid00131/gid00134/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00140/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00134/gid00140/gid00047/gid00035/gid00138/gid00131/gid00131/gid00138/gid00047/gid00035/gid00138/gid00131/gid00133/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00135/gid00134/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00139/gid00132/gid00046/gid00047
/gid00132/gid00135/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00134/gid00135/gid00140/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00131/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00139/gid00138/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00134/gid00132/gid00132/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00137/gid00131/gid00132/gid00139/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00135/gid00136/gid00137/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00136/gid00135/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00137/gid00133/gid00140/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00132/gid00132/gid00047/gid00035 /gid00133/gid00134/gid00131/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00133/gid00140/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00135/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00133/gid00131/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00137/gid00140/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00132/gid00139/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00131/gid00135/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00138/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00132/gid00137/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00137/gid00132/gid00046/gid00047
/gid00138/gid00132/gid00046/gid00047
/gid00133/gid00133/gid00041/gid00031
/gid00134/gid00138/gid00133/gid00041/gid00031/gid00138/gid00131/gid00132/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00133/gid00041/gid00031
/gid00132/gid00137/gid00134/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00132/gid00131/gid00134/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00140/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00134/gid00140/gid00047/gid00035/gid00138/gid00131/gid00131/gid00138/gid00047/gid00035/gid00138/gid00131/gid00133/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00135/gid00134/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00139/gid00132/gid00046/gid00047
/gid00132/gid00135/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00134/gid00135/gid00140/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00131/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00139/gid00138/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00134/gid00132/gid00132/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00132/gid00137/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00137/gid00131/gid00132/gid00139/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00135/gid00136/gid00137/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00136/gid00135/gid00135/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00137/gid00133/gid00140/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00132/gid00132/gid00047/gid00035 /gid00133/gid00134/gid00131/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00133/gid00140/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00135/gid00136/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00133/gid00131/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00137/gid00140/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00132/gid00131/gid00140/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00138/gid00131/gid00132/gid00139/gid00047/gid00035
/gid00133/gid00131/gid00135/gid00045/gid00031
/gid00019 /gid00022 /gid00020 /gid00020 /gid00010 /gid00002
/gid00012/gid00002/gid00027/gid00002/gid00012/gid00009/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00022/gid00027/gid00003/gid00006/gid00012/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00021/gid00022/gid00019/gid00012/gid00014/gid00006/gid00015/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015/gid00012/gid00026/gid00019/gid00008/gid00026 /gid00027/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00021/gid00002 /gid00011/gid00010/gid00012/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00002/gid00027/gid00006/gid00019/gid00003/gid00002/gid00010/gid00011/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00008/gid00006/gid00016/gid00019/gid00008/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00012/gid00002/gid00013/gid00010/gid00015/gid00010/gid00015/gid00008/gid00019/gid00002/gid00005
/gid00187/gid00019/gid00022/gid00020/gid00020/gid00010/gid00002/gid00188
/gid00003/gid00006/gid00013/gid00002/gid00019/gid00022/gid00020
/gid00021/gid00083/gid00019/gid00012/gid00010/gid00026/gid00006
/gid00014/gid00016/gid00013/gid00005/gid00016/gid00023/gid00002
/gid00007/gid00010/gid00015/gid00013/gid00002/gid00015/gid00005
/gid00020/gid00024/gid00006/gid00005/gid00006/gid00015
/gid00015/gid00016/gid00019/gid00024/gid00002/gid00026
/gid00017/gid00016/gid00013/gid00002/gid00015/gid00005/gid00013/gid00010/gid00021/gid00009/gid00163
/gid00013 /gid00002/gid00021 /gid00023/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00006/gid00020/gid00021/gid00016/gid00015/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00005/gid00006/gid00015/gid00014/gid00002/gid00019/gid00012
/gid00008/gid00006/gid00019/gid00014/gid00002/gid00015/gid00026
/gid00012/gid00022/gid00024/gid00002/gid00010/gid00021
/gid00010/gid00019/gid00002/gid00018
/gid00010/gid00019/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00002/gid00007/gid00008/gid00009/gid00002/gid00015/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00014/gid00016/gid00015/gid00008/gid00016/gid00013/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00011/gid00002/gid00017/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00004/gid00009/gid00010/gid00015/gid00002
/gid00015/gid00016/gid00019/gid00021/gid00009
/gid00012/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00002
/gid00020/gid00016/gid00022/gid00021/gid00009
/gid00012/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00002
/gid00002/gid00019/gid00014/gid00006/gid00015/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00019 /gid00022 /gid00020 /gid00020 /gid00010 /gid00002
/gid00012/gid00002/gid00027/gid00002/gid00012/gid00009/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00022/gid00027/gid00003/gid00006/gid00012/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00021/gid00022/gid00019/gid00012/gid00014/gid00006/gid00015/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015/gid00012/gid00026/gid00019/gid00008/gid00026 /gid00027/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00021/gid00002 /gid00011/gid00010/gid00012/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00002/gid00027/gid00006/gid00019/gid00003/gid00002/gid00010/gid00011/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00008/gid00006/gid00016/gid00019/gid00008/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00012/gid00002/gid00013/gid00010/gid00015/gid00010/gid00015/gid00008/gid00019/gid00002/gid00005
/gid00187/gid00019/gid00022/gid00020/gid00020/gid00010/gid00002/gid00188
/gid00003/gid00006/gid00013/gid00002/gid00019/gid00022/gid00020
/gid00021/gid00083/gid00019/gid00012/gid00010/gid00026/gid00006
/gid00014/gid00016/gid00013/gid00005/gid00016/gid00023/gid00002
/gid00007/gid00010/gid00015/gid00013/gid00002/gid00015/gid00005
/gid00020/gid00024/gid00006/gid00005/gid00006/gid00015
/gid00015/gid00016/gid00019/gid00024/gid00002/gid00026
/gid00017/gid00016/gid00013/gid00002/gid00015/gid00005/gid00013/gid00010/gid00021/gid00009/gid00163
/gid00013 /gid00002/gid00021 /gid00023/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00006/gid00020/gid00021/gid00016/gid00015/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00005/gid00006/gid00015/gid00014/gid00002/gid00019/gid00012
/gid00008/gid00006/gid00019/gid00014/gid00002/gid00015/gid00026
/gid00012/gid00022/gid00024/gid00002/gid00010/gid00021
/gid00010/gid00019/gid00002/gid00018
/gid00010/gid00019/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00002/gid00007/gid00008/gid00009/gid00002/gid00015/gid00010/gid00020/gid00021/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00014/gid00016/gid00015/gid00008/gid00016/gid00013/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00011/gid00002/gid00017/gid00002/gid00015
/gid00004/gid00009/gid00010/gid00015/gid00002
/gid00015/gid00016/gid00019/gid00021/gid00009
/gid00012/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00002
/gid00020/gid00016/gid00022/gid00021/gid00009
/gid00012/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00002
/gid00002/gid00019/gid00014/gid00006/gid00015/gid00010/gid00002
/gid00022/gid00012/gid00019/gid00002/gid00010/gid00015/gid00006
0 250 500 Miles
0 250 500 Kilometers
0 250 500 Miles
0 250 500 Kilometers
/gid00020/gid00032/gid00039/gid00032/gid00030/gid00047/gid00032/gid00031/gid00001/gid00030/gid00036/gid00047/gid00036/gid00032/gid00046/gid00001/gid00028/gid00041/gid00031/gid00001/gid00047/gid00042/gid00050/gid00041/gid00046
/gid00015/gid00028/gid00047/gid00036/gid00042/gid00041/gid00028/gid00039/gid00001/gid00030/gid00028/gid00043/gid00036/gid00047/gid00028/gid00039/gid00046
/gid00002/gid00045/gid00040/gid00042/gid00045/gid00032/gid00031/gid00001/gid00019/gid00032/gid00043/gid00028/gid00036/gid00045/gid00001/gid00007/gid00028/gid00030/gid00036/gid00039/gid00036/gid00047/gid00052
/gid00006/gid00044/gid00048/gid00036/gid00043/gid00040/gid00032/gid00041/gid00047/gid00001/gid00028/gid00041/gid00031/gid00001/gid00020/gid00047/gid00042/gid00045/gid00028/gid00034/gid00032/gid00001/gid00003/gid00028/gid00046/gid00032
/gid00004/gid00032/gid00041/gid00047/gid00045/gid00028/gid00039/gid00001/gid00021/gid00028/gid00041/gid00038/gid00001/gid00019/gid00032/gid00046/gid00032/gid00045/gid00049/gid00032/gid00001/gid00003/gid00028/gid00046/gid00032
/gid00002/gid00045/gid00047/gid00036/gid00039/gid00039/gid00032/gid00045/gid00052/gid00001/gid00020/gid00047/gid00042/gid00045/gid00028/gid00034/gid00032/gid00001/gid00003/gid00028/gid00046/gid00032
/gid00016/gid00029/gid00039/gid00028/gid00046/gid00047/gid00001/gid00029/gid00042/gid00048/gid00041/gid00031/gid00028/gid00045/gid00036/gid00032/gid00046
/gid00010/gid00041/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00041/gid00028/gid00047/gid00036/gid00042/gid00041/gid00028/gid00039/gid00001/gid00029/gid00042/gid00048/gid00041/gid00031/gid00028/gid00045/gid00036/gid00032/gid00046

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   39
Before 2009, Russia had an even larger storage and repair network. During the New Look reforms 
in 2009–2012, the Ministry of Defense began consolidating and privatizing these repair facilities 
to conserve funding. When Shoigu and Gerasimov came to office, they halted the closures. But it 
was not until 2023 that Shoigu said the privatization plan was a mistake and had “had a negative 
impact on the serviceability of weapons” and announced plans to expand repair facilities and build 
three new repair plants.161 Serdyukov put forward a plan to scrap, between 2011 and 2020, about 
10,000 derelict or old pieces of equipment in strategic reserve, as senior military leaders stated that 
a large-scale land war would be unlikely. In 2017, Shoigu and Gerasimov halted this process as well, 
preventing around 6,000 pieces of equipment from being destroyed.162 These stockpiles are now very 
likely being refurbished or stripped for repair parts for the war in Ukraine. 
To prepare a well-maintained tank in the strategic reserves for deployment takes less than one week.163 
However, between thirty and sixty days of work are required to prepare a tank that has been in long-
term storage and has not undergone regular maintenance.164 In addition to specialized tank reserve 
bases, three factories can repair tanks. For example, Uralvagonzavod, which produces all of Russia’s 
new tanks, refurbishes them as well. This factory’s prewar rate was around 96–125 refurbished tanks 
per year, but this number has likely increased to 200–250 annually, due to additional shifts and 
recent mobilization directives.165166 
Ukrainian analysts have used commercial imagery and monitored activity at Russian tank repair 
facilities during the war. Their work suggests that since 2023, Russia has been able to refurbish 
between thirty and seventy-seven tanks each month on average to send to Ukraine—largely the same 
as the rate of withdrawal from storage bases, during this period.167 When combining refurbished 
monthly rates, in addition to the twenty or so new tanks that Russia produces each month, Russia’s 
tank deliveries to the front meet or slightly exceed combat loss rates of fifty to seventy tanks per 
month (while conducting offensive operations).168 The Center for Strategic and International Studies 
(CSIS) has noted that, if accurate, the numbers provided by Russian officials on procurement in 
2023 would suggest that 125 new and refurbished tanks can be supplied each month, which is 
enough to cover losses.169 These views are consistent with those of the IISS, which estimated that 
in 2023, Russia had the capacity to reactivate 1,180–1,280 tanks and 2,470 armored vehicles from 
storage. Further, according to Ukraine analysts, if battlefield loss rates remain constant, Russia could 
sustain the war for two to three years before some types of serviceable equipment runs out.170 The 
United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defence also suggests that Russia could continue the war with loss 
rates at this level until 2026.171 
Russia also has specialized facilities for the refurbishment of other armored vehicles. For major 
overhaul or severe combat damage, BMP-1, BMP-2, BTR-70, and BTR-80 vehicles are sent to repair 
sites and factories. Prewar refurbishment rates are thought to be around 100 per year for older BMPs, 
based on observing activities at these repair facilities via commercial satellite imagery.172 The more 

40 
modern BMP-3 is produced and repaired at the same factory, Kurganmashzavod, which claims that 
it has increased its outputs from 100 new and 100 refurbished BMP-3s per year to 300 new and 200 
repaired BMP-3s annually. Other Russian factories report that they can repair 120 modern BMP-2s 
per year and an estimated 300–400 new or modernized BTR-82A/AM armored personnel carriers.173
The Russian Air Force has been able to use modified FAB-series modified glide bombs to devastating 
effect in Ukraine. The military has been able to increase the modernization and production rates of 
FAB-500 and FAB-1500 glide bombs and has started large-scale production of the latest variant, the 
FAB-3000. To do this, Russian leaders claim that they have modernized up to 45,000 square meters 
of production space at the factory that produces the bombs, instituted triple shifts, raised wages by 
20 percent, and hired over 1,000 workers. Reportedly, a similar approach was carried out to increase 
production at 122mm and 152mm artillery shell factories.174
New Production 
In the years prior to the war, Russia did not increase the production of new tanks, infantry fighting 
vehicles, or armored personnel carriers. This suggests that either the war was not planned far enough 
in advance to modify production plans or that Russian leaders did not believe they would sustain such 
severe losses to the force, instead assuming the Ukrainian government would flee or capitulate quickly. 
Since partially mobilizing the war economy in 2022, Russia has been able to raise production capacity 
at several factories. As some observers have noted, Russia has also begun implementing other important 
changes to speed up production, such as simplifying contracts, shortening timelines in the R&D cycle, 
and creating coordination centers.175 Some civilian factories have been partially converted into military 
production. For example, some factories that produced bread now make drones, and some factories that 
produced oil or gas drilling equipment now make artillery gun tubes.176
Overall, the production of new equipment may have reached a plateau with Russia’s current capacity. 
First, the production of new tanks and armored vehicles is constrained by the number of factories 
currently operating. And, second, those same factories are urgently needed for vehicle repair, further 
limiting new production output capacity.177 To build more quickly, Russia would either need to build 
or convert new factories, take existing factories temporarily offline to retool them, or import armored 
equipment from abroad. 
Until 2023, Russia had only one tank company, Uralvagonzavod, which also produces exports.178 At 
peak Soviet production, Uralvagonzavod produced 1,559 T-72 tanks in 1985, according to Russian 
military bloggers. However, a Rostec official reported in late 2022 that its current capacity is 
200–250 annually, which includes refurbished T-72s as well as smaller numbers of new T-90Ms and 
even smaller numbers of T-14s. Russia did restore the dormant T-80BMV tank engine line at the 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   41
Omsktransmash factory, which produces 120 refurbished tanks per year.179 This facility has also been 
converting the old T-72 tank chassis into the TOS-1A thermobaric multiple rocket launcher system.180 
Prewar, Russia was producing an estimated several hundred new armored vehicles a year: 300–400 
BMP-3 and BMD-series vehicles and 130 new BTR-82A vehicles.181 
One area of new construction and growth is Russia’s investment in drones, UAVs, and FPVs. Russian 
military experts and leaders alike have noted that the Geran-2 (Iranian Shahed), Zala, Orlan, Eleron, 
and Supercam drones; Lancet FPVs; and 2K25 Krasnopol precision rounds have proven themselves 
operationally and should be mass produced as soon as possible.182 To accelerate the production of 
Geran-2 drones, Russia has built a new factory in Alabuga, with a goal to produce 6,000–10,000 
a year.183 Both the Russian and Ukrainian forces are using Chinese commercial drones, such as the 
DJI. Russian defense industrial leaders have noted they would like to increase the percentage of do-
mestically produced drones to 70 percent and produce 32,000 unmanned aerial systems per year by 
2030.184 For this purpose, Russia has allegedly allocated 713 billion rubles (8 billion dollars) through 
2030 as part of a federal plan to mass produce unmanned aerial systems.185 Shoigu has also said that 
the Kremlin is pleased with the operational performance of the Pantsir air defense missile system and 
plans to double its orders.186
Labor Shortages 
Russia faces significant labor challenges across key industries, including the defense industry.187 Labor 
shortages are occurring in multiple industries and regions. Russia is facing its worst labor shortage 
since 1996, estimated in December 2023 to be 4.8 million unfilled jobs, according to Russian 
officials. And this is occurring at a time when mobilization has created thousands of new jobs in the 
defense industry.188 Labor shortages in nonpriority sectors of the economy have been made worse by 
the increase in demand and creation of thousands of new defense industrial jobs.189 Russia also has 
deployed some of its defense factory specialists to forward repair facilities near Ukraine, which puts 
further strain on remaining workers and limits production. 
Labor pools tapped in the past to resolve these shortages, such as migrants, prisoners, and students, 
are needed as volunteers for the war.190 Most factories are now working round the clock, and some 
use prison labor to cover shifts, including at Kurganmashzavod.191 Russia has been recruiting from 
abroad to fill some of its defense industrial positions, particularly at new factories. For example, the 
Alabuga Polytechnic College, co-located with the facility that produces Geran-2 and other drones, 
has both foreign students (for instance, from Africa and Central Asia, particularly from Tajikistan, 
for those who also speak Farsi) and students from across Russia ostensibly attending the college but 
they are also employed for drone construction.192 

42 
Russian women are an underutilized labor source for the defense industry. Women have been exclud-
ed since the 1970s from most defense industry jobs due to the Russian labor code, which prohibits 
women from 100 professions that could harm their fertility or a pregnancy. Women are prohibited 
from certain occupations deemed physically dangerous, such as those that deal with hazardous 
chemicals or heavy metals (essentially eliminating many defense industrial jobs like welding or re-
pairs).193194 Women are prohibited from underground work, such as mining; jobs requiring lifting and 
heavy exertion above a certain weight, including the operation of heavy machinery; jobs requiring 
the handling of some chemicals or many petroleum products; most metallurgy (ferrous and nonfer-
rous) professions; and firefighting.195 In 2023, the Putin government announced policy plans to focus 
on family and childbearing, making the cultural change needed to overturn these laws complicated.196 
Changes to the labor code that would allow women to hold these positions would require not only 
a cultural shift but also an amendment to Russian labor laws; it would be an indicator of Russia’s 
intention to expand production capacity and acknowledgment of severe labor deficits. 
Production Options and Trade-Offs 
Russian defense leaders have choices for achieving equipment reconstitution through 2030. As Russia 
continues to shuffle top defense officials in 2024 and prepares for the new SAP (2025–2034), they 
are likely weighing several options. If they pursue a conservative route, they may judge that the cur-
rent capacity is suitable (roughly 250–300 tanks per year and so on) and are willing to accept risk on 
delivery timelines in exchange for more manageable costs and less investment risk. Such a course of 
action would rest on assumptions that older refurbished equipment and other capabilities like air or 
sea power, or Russia’s nuclear weapons, will be sufficient to satisfy Russian defense or offensive needs 
until newer equipment can be phased in over the next decade. The Kremlin might select this course 
of action if they feel unable or do not want to make lasting and expensive increases to the defense 
industrial base, including the construction of additional factories. Such a course is sustainable finan-
cially and would also take into account persistent labor shortages in the defense industrial base and 
manufacturing sector more broadly. But in reality, for such a plan to work, the conflict in Ukraine 
would have to freeze or shift into a low-intensity stalemate by 2025, when the level of remaining 
Soviet-era equipment is likely to become critically low. 
In taking another course of action, Russian leaders could attempt to ramp up new production before 
2030 via substantial capital investments in new factories or the reconfiguring of lines in existing 
factories to increase outputs. Russian leaders might choose this route if they feel that a modernized 
army must be restored as quickly as possible for various defensive or offensive operational needs. 
Labor shortages and financial investment risks are likely to be the biggest challenges to this course of 
action. Retooling existing factories to make them more efficient would cause a temporary pause or 
decline in production while they are being overhauled—which is incompatible with Russia’s current 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   43
wartime needs. Russian factories are working at full capacity to sustain the war effort, so this course 
is likely too much of a risk. Building new factories would sidestep that issue, but expansion assumes 
that Russia could purchase needed tools from China or other partners.  
Even in the immediate postwar period, as Russia takes stock of its losses, an expansion of the defense 
industrial base might prove politically unpalatable unless the Kremlin is willing to make a perma -
nent commitment to financing the expansion at the expense of other areas of the federal budget. 
To execute an ambitious retooling or expansion of production capacity, Russia would most likely be 
heavily dependent on China for machine tooling. The Kremlin’s shift away from Europe to China for 
these critical materials accelerated after the 2022 sanctions on Russia, according to CSIS analysis.197 
China’s support to the Russian war effort also allegedly includes propellants, space sector support, 
and commercial imagery over Ukraine, as Russia’s own domestic satellite constellation is aging and 
insufficient for the operational tempo.198
Another method to boost equipment numbers, but one that Russian defense policy has not contem-
plated since WWII, is importing large numbers of ground forces equipment from abroad. If by 2025 
or 2026, Russian equipment stockpiles are running out (assuming the war continues at the same 
intensity levels as the first two years), they could purchase equipment from partners such as China 
or scale back on exports and risk losing market share. CSIS found that since the 2022 sanctions, 
Russia has been shifting its imports for key electronic components, machinery, and other mechanical 
appliances away from European companies to Chinese companies and other shell companies in 
Hong Kong, India, Turkey, Vietnam, and other locations.199 To expand its forces, Russia will also 
need to scale up imports of semiconductors and ball bearings for armored vehicles (often sourced 
from Belarus).200 
The timely identification of innovative ideas and their rapid integration into the force represent 
another way forward, but persistent problems impede this course. While mobilization authorities 
have given the Kremlin and Rostec increased ability to reduce red tape for research, development, 
and production, many problems remain. It would appear that the problem is not a shortage of ideas 
or start-up companies willing to create innovative solutions for the Russian defense industry, but 
rather persistent bottlenecks in early-state investment and contracting with the state-controlled 
defense industry. Tech start-ups face challenges in breaking into the Russian defense industry, a 
critical problem for the innovation that Kremlin leaders claim is so direly needed. Investment into 
tech start-ups, particularly at the early phase of their product development, is low, especially in the 
areas of combat robotics, unmanned aerial system (UAS) technology, and other FPV technology. The 
venture capital market for military technology start-ups has shrunk since 2022—decreasing year on 
year by 56 percent for investments, while increasing by 10 percent in terms of purchases. The chief 
executive officer of a Russian company that makes UAV detection equipment described his market as 
“sorely lacking early-stage systemic investments.”201 

44 
Further, members of the Russian military-scientific community claim that the Ministry of Defense 
is flush with patent proposals for counter-UAS technology, new forms of camouflage, and signature 
reduction (reducing electronic emissions, visual, noise, or thermal signatures) but that patent offi-
cer numbers have not grown, existing staff are overwhelmed with paperwork, and organizational 
links to Russia’s patent office remain weak.202 There also are few mechanisms for obtaining “seed 
money” or financial investments in the early phases of development. If a soldier or officer identifies 
an innovation, their commander can recognize them with a rather meager cash award of up to 800 
rubles (around $9)—not because more funding isn’t available, but because the regulations guiding 
this award have not been updated in many years. The Russian research and development system is 
in need of reorganization, in the view of Russian strategists.203 Russia’s new defense minister Andrei 
Belousov is focusing on these particular bottlenecks.
Finally, another choice of action would be to address the secrecy, opacity, and counterintelligence 
concerns that hamper multiple aspects of Russia’s defense procurement cycle. Growing classification 
and lack of security clearances among different governmental organizations charged with oversight 
creates an environment where graft, underperformance, and quality control issues thrive. RAND 
researchers have identified problems with Russian oversight processes at multiple levels.204 As the 
defense budget and most aspects of Russia’s military capabilities or defense industrial base (partic-
ularly related to the war effort) have become increasingly classified over time, having a clearance 
is necessary to review procurement plans and state defense orders, recruit personnel, and conduct 
audits.205 However, there are no indications that the number of security clearances has grown since 
the war; not all Duma members even held clearances before the Ukraine war.206 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   45
Financial Considerations of Military Reconstitution  
By Richard Connolly, June 2024
This section considers how Russia’s economy will shape reconstitution and the revitalization of the 
defense industrial base through 2030. It will consider which financial aspects are constraining factors 
and where the main uncertainties and potential chokepoints lie. To evaluate Russia’s ability to fund 
reconstitution, two scenarios were developed to estimate future expenditures: (1) a partial mobili-
zation scenario, which reflects current resource allocations and decisions as of 2024; and (2) a full 
mobilization scenario, where more money, manpower, and priority are allocated to the Ministry of 
Defense and the defense industrial base.  
Financing Military Reconstitution 
With the defense burden soaring to levels last seen under the Soviet Union, Russia might soon be 
competing with China for its position as the world’s second-largest country by military spending 
in absolute terms. Doing this with an economy less than 20 percent the size of China’s might seem 
impossible.207 However, prudent management of the budget and an unprecedented surge in federal 
government revenues have enabled Moscow to do this without running a significant budget deficit. 
The Budget at War
Initially, the war in Ukraine put Russia’s public finances under substantial pressure. However, 
soaring commodity prices came to Moscow’s rescue. Elevated prices for oil and gas exports meant 
that total exports soared from $550 billion in 2021 to $636 billion in 2022.208 Imports, by contrast, 
fell by 9 percent (from $380 billion to $351 billion). The trade balance surged to $285 billion, which 
in turn caused the current account surplus to reach $233 billion, nearly double the previous record 
($122 billion in 2021).
Enormous trade and current account surpluses meant that there was plenty of money, as well as new 
restrictions on capital outflows in the economy that could be mobilized by the government to main-
tain fiscal discipline. Aggregate revenue for the federal budget grew by 10 percent on the previous 
year to reach a record level of $285.5 billion. This was driven by record-high oil and gas revenues 
(₽11.6tn).209 
Expenditure also grew briskly, rising 25 percent on the previous year and reaching a record level 
of ₽31.1tn. This was over 30 percent higher than the planned spending of ₽23.7tn outlined in the 
2022 budget, passed into law only months before the war began. Overall, federal spending exceeded 

46 
income by ₽3.3tn in 2022 (2.3 percent of GDP). Most of this was financed through the release of 
₽3tn from the National Welfare Fund (NWF). The NWF was tapped again last year to finance the 
budget deficit of 1.9 percent of GDP.210 
The Federal Budget for 2024–2026
Military spending at the current level is likely to be sustainable to 2026. The Federal Budget Law for 
2024–2026 passed last year envisages another year of fiscal expansion in 2024.211 Federal expendi-
ture is set to rise from ₽30.5tn in 2023 to ₽36.7tn in 2024. This increase in spending is driven by a 
planned hike in the “national defense” portion of the budget, which is scheduled to rise from ₽6.4tn 
to ₽10.8tn. Other areas of the budget, such as the “domestic security and law and order” portion, 
are also used to finance military expenditure. Total defense spending is likely to exceed ₽13tn. Social 
spending will rise by close to 20 percent in nominal terms from ₽6.5bn this year to ₽7.7bn; however, 
it will remain far below military expenditure. Other categories of spending are only expected to 
increase slightly, with most expected to rise in line with inflation. 
Success in Raising Federal Budget Revenues
Increases in expenditure are difficult to support without a corresponding rise in revenues. However, 
Moscow has performed exceptionally well in this respect. Federal budget revenues are projected to rise 
from ₽28.7tn last year to ₽35.1tn in 2024, bringing down the budget deficit to 0.9 percent of GDP. 
Oil and gas-related revenues are forecast to increase by close to 30 percent from ₽8.9tn to ₽11.5tn, 
backed by rising global oil prices, a weaker ruble, and completion of the ongoing “tax maneuver” 
that will eliminate export duties on both oil and oil products while raising the rate of the mineral 
extraction tax (MET) as well as taxes on additional income for oil companies. The increase in MET 
will likely add an extra ₽2tn in revenues, causing it to rise from ₽7.7tn in 2023 to ₽9.7tn in 2024. 
The MET for natural gas is expected to grow from ₽1.2tn to ₽1.6tn. 
Importantly, non-oil and gas-related revenues are also projected to grow by nearly 20 percent, from 
₽19.8tn in 2023 to ₽23.6tn in 2024. Value-added tax (VAT) will account for more than half of 
these revenues. Economic growth and inflation are expected to push up domestic VAT collection, 
while the recovery in imports and the devaluation of the ruble should also boost VAT charged on 
imported products. 
Two other sizeable additions to the non-oil and gas federal revenue stream in 2024 include the 
imposition of higher fees for vehicle recycling—which will bring an estimated extra ₽300bn to the 
budget—and the introduction of new export duties, which is expected to add a further ₽600bn. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   47
The budget for 2024 is based on GDP growth of 2.3 percent and an oil export price of $71.3 per 
barrel. Revenues could fall short if economic performance is less robust than expected or if Russia’s 
export revenues decline, perhaps due to a deceleration of global economic growth. Because expendi-
ture is forecast to remain close to current record levels until 2026 and probably beyond, Moscow’s 
revenue projections will require continued economic growth. Despite recording a faster-than-expect-
ed rate of expansion of 3.6 percent last year, the momentum must be maintained. 
In the first half of this year, the economy continued to expand at a brisk rate. Growth of 5.4 percent 
in the first quarter was followed by expansion of 4 percent in the second quarter. The Central Bank 
of Russia (CBR)—usually conservative in its forecasts—revised its forecast for growth in 2024 up 
from the 2.5–3.5 percent projected in its April forecast to 3.5–4 percent in its end of July forecast.212 
However, the bank warned that faster growth this year could end abruptly if supply-side constraints 
cause inflation to soar and the economy to overheat. To engineer a controlled slowdown, the CBR 
raised the key rate from 16 percent to 18 percent at the end of July, indicating that it may need to 
raise rates further to dampen inflation.213 Whether the CBR can prevent the economy from overheat-
ing without inducing a severe slowdown or recession will be key to Russia’s growth prospects over the 
next year. 
Growth Projections
The good news for the Kremlin (and the bad news for Ukraine and its NATO allies) is that the 
consensus among most forecasters—both inside and outside Russia—is that the economy will keep 
growing for the foreseeable future. Where there is disagreement is over the pace of this growth. 
Table 4 outlines growth projections from Russia’s Ministry for Economic Development, which are 
used for budget planning in Moscow and by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Bank 
of Finland’s Institute for Emerging Economies (BOFIT). Because each entity only provides forecasts 
for the next three to four years, a trend line is extrapolated until 2030. 
Table 4. Growth Forecasts for the Russian Economy, 2024–2026
2024 2025 2026 2027 Trend 2028–2030
Minekon 2.8 2.3 2.3 2.4 2.4
IMF 3.2 1.8 1.2 1.3 1.4
BOFIT 2 1 1 - 1
Source: Russian Ministry for Economic Development, IMF, and Bank of Finland Institute for Emerging Economies. 

48 
The ministry’s forecast is, perhaps unsurprisingly, the most optimistic. If Russia grows at this rate, 
Moscow would comfortably be able to afford its current level of military spending, which would 
mean the partial mobilization scenario of spending would be manageable. Federal revenues are 
forecast to peak at 19.5 percent of GDP in 2024.214 If the share of federal revenues in GDP remains 
at around this level until the end of the decade, the growing economy would result in more financial 
resources being available to the Kremlin, potentially making room for even more military spending, 
if needed. 
The IMF’s forecast, while lower, nevertheless yields a similar conclusion. The lower forecast from 
BOFIT would mean that maintaining existing levels of defense spending would prove less comfortable. 
Other areas of federal government expenditure—such as pensions for Russia’s rapidly aging population, 
large-scale infrastructure, development programs under the aegis of “national projects,” and financial 
transfers to poorer regions—would all likely suffer. Health and education, by contrast, might not suffer 
as much because they are principally funded by regional budgets rather than federal spending. But if 
the Kremlin were to prioritize defense spending, the resources would likely be found. 
These forecasts would, however, mean that a shift toward a full mobilization scenario would place the 
budget under much greater strain. The Kremlin would be forced to increase taxation to finance the 
significant expansion of military spending entailed under this scenario, pushing total federal reve-
nues to closer to 25 percent of GDP. Raising these taxes would draw financial resources away from 
households and enterprises, suppressing the potential for growth in consumption and investment, 
which in turn would probably slow the rate of growth. Spending on other areas of the federal budget 
would also be squeezed. 
Other Sources of Revenues
If the economy does not grow at a rate sufficient to generate the required tax revenues, how might 
Moscow fund its military reconstitution ambitions? There are three obvious ways to do this: (1) draw 
funds from the NWF, (2) raise taxes, and (3) increase borrowing. 
The value of NWF assets stood at about $135.7 billion on April 1, 2024, or 7 percent of GDP.215 Of 
this, only the liquid assets can be used to finance deficits because the nonliquid component is invest-
ed in long-term projects managed by VEB.RF, the state development bank. The fund’s liquid assets 
totaled $55.1 billion, or 2.8 percent of projected GDP. This amount could be used to finance one or 
two years of budget deficits, depending on their size. 
Taxes also could be raised. Over the last two years, growth in revenue collections was mainly 
driven by one-off adjustments, while base tax rates (for example, VAT and corporate and personal 
income taxes) were left intact. In the event of any new external shocks, such as a sustained collapse 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   49
in oil prices, the government could raise some of these taxes. Indeed, this looks to be exactly what 
the Kremlin is planning. Putin told an audience of business leaders at the annual Congress of the 
Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs (RSPP) in April 2024 that taxes would rise.216 The 
Ministry of Finance submitted proposals to the government at the end of May that will see increases 
in the rate of both corporate and personal income taxes.217 Proposed changes to the tax system are 
expected to yield an additional $44 billion per year, which would comfortably eliminate the budget 
deficit of ₽1.6tn anticipated for this year. 
The oil industry and the banking sector have both generated considerable profits that have been 
retained and could be accessed by “one-off” levies. The banking sector—dominated by state-owned 
banks such as Sber and VTB—is an obvious potential source of funds. It is estimated that soaring 
interest rates enabled the sector to generate around ₽2.5tn profits in 2022 and ₽3.3tn in 2023.218 
Together with profits retained from before the war, this leaves state-owned banks with a substantial 
cash pile that could be taxed if needed. 
Finally, the state could borrow more. Since clearing its national debts in the 2000s, the Russian 
government has sought to avoid borrowing abroad. At around 15 percent of GDP, federal govern-
ment debt is very low by international standards, compared to an average 65.3 percent of GDP for 
emerging market and middle-income economies. There would be no need to borrow abroad, either. 
The domestic banking system—dominated by state-owned banks—could buy government bonds. 
It is already the case that state bonds are largely held by residents rather than foreigners. The share 
of nonresidents in the OFZ (state ruble-denominated bonds) market fell from 20 percent in January 
2022 to less than 8 percent at the end of 2023.219 
Debt securities accounted for 13 percent of the aggregate banking sector portfolio at the end of 2023, 
or around ₽19.4tn.220 This percentage has not changed since the start of the war and is much lower than 
the average for emerging-market economies, which suggests that there is considerable scope for domes-
tic (mainly state-owned banks) to buy more government debt. For comparison, the IMF has noted that 
holdings of government debt by emerging-market banks reached 17 percent of total assets in 2021.221 
Government debt amounted to 25 percent of bank assets in some emerging-market economies. 
If Russian banks were to increase their holdings of state bonds to 17 percent of current total assets 
from the current level of 13 percent of total assets, it would mean that total exposure could rise 
from approximately ₽19.4tn to ₽30.6tn, using estimated GDP for 2024.222 This alone would give the 
government an additional ₽11.2tn, which would be enough to fund several years of deficits. 
Instead of pursuing these three funding methods, Moscow might revise its ambitions downward, 
perhaps seeking to spend enough to maintain a credible military but not enough to build the much 
larger, better-equipped military set out by Shoigu at the end of 2022. This, however, would ultimate-
ly be a political decision rather than an economic one. There would likely need to be a significant 

50 
change in political orientation for the Kremlin to consider scaling its ambitions back. If Russia 
remains hostile to Ukraine and NATO, such an outcome is even less likely. In this scenario, Moscow 
would likely resort to a combination of drawing down on its savings, tax hikes, and increased bor-
rowing to ensure that the military receives the financial resources it needs. Given Russia’s strong 
public sector balance sheet, this could well prove sufficient, at least until 2030. 
Economic Constraints on Military Reconstitution
Although the forecasts for Russia to 2026 and beyond suggest that it will experience growth of 
some kind—and with it a relatively stable flow of revenues to the federal budget that should support 
elevated military spending for the foreseeable future—there are risks that could change this trajec -
tory between now and the end of the decade. There are two principal supply-side constraints that 
could hamper economic growth and with it federal government tax revenues: (1) shortages of human 
capital, and (2) an inability to generate sufficiently fast growth in physical capital to support a higher 
rate of economic expansion. 
Human Capital
Russia is likely to face considerable challenges in generating the manpower necessary to engage in 
the type of military buildup described above—either in an partial mobilization scenario or in a full 
mobilization scenario—and sustain a healthy rate of economic growth. 
The most important constraint is the size of the labor force. The reasons for this lie in the profound 
demographic transformation that has been underway since the collapse of the Soviet Union. The 
Russian population shrank between 1991 and 2010, falling from 148.6 million in 1993 to 142.7 mil-
lion in 2009. This decline was caused by a sharp decline in birth rates and a corresponding increase 
in the death rate. Both these trends began in the late 1980s and caused natural population growth to 
decline from 1994 onward. 
Natural population growth resumed in 2011, facilitated by a high net inflow of immigration from 
ex-Soviet states, a decline in the death rate, and a modest yet sustained increase in the fertility rate. 
However, the most important factor driving population growth was the annexation of Crimea in 
2014, which added around 2.5 million to the total Russian population. Russia’s population before 
the full-scale invasion of Ukraine was 146 million.223 
The most recent United Nations Population Division’s median variant forecast, published before 
the war, envisages that the Russian population will shrink to 142 million by 2030 and 138 million 
by 2040.224 Although the population is likely to decline, life expectancy is likely to rise. As Russia’s 
older people live longer, the average age has increased. Over a fifth of the population is now age sixty 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   51
or older. As this has taken place at the same time that the low birth rate in the 1990s has become 
evident in the working-age population, the labor force (in other words, the number of people of 
working age) in Russia has been shrinking since 2007 (see Figure 7). 
The data, which are produced by Rosstat and therefore include the regions of Ukraine annexed in 
2022, reveal a steady decline in the labor force since 2007. It was only the annexation of new territo-
ries in 2022 that resulted in a temporary increase. Over 1.3 million people ages twenty-one to twen-
ty-nine were estimated to have left Russia in 2022, which exacerbated an already negative trend.225 
Without the addition of illegally annexed Ukrainian regions, the picture would be even worse. 
Figure 7. Number of People Ages 16–59 in the Labor Force, 2002–2023 (Millions)
Source: Rosstat (2023)
The decline in Russia’s labor force has been forecast to continue uninterrupted until 2040, and this 
was even before the COVID-19 pandemic, the war, and the exodus of young people. Because many 
of these people have already been born, the forecast is subject to a reasonably high degree of confi-
dence. Even if Russia’s birth rate rises sharply in the decade ahead, which it is not expected to, the 
impact on the size of the labor force will not be observed until the 2040s. 
The trends outlined here do not bode well for Russia. Its population is getting smaller and older, and 
its labor force is shrinking. The war has accelerated these trends. Because demographic change is so 
intractable, Russia is experiencing labor shortages across the country. This has resulted in record-low 
levels of unemployment. As shown in Figure 8, the economic adjustment that began in the summer 
of 2022 has resulted in a sharp rise in demand for labor, causing unemployment to fall after it rose 
slightly following the full-scale invasion of Ukraine. 
75
80
85
90
95
100
20232021201920172015201320112009200720052002
Size of labor force
(millions)
Figure 7. Number of People Ages 16–59 in the Labor Force, 2002–2023 (Millions)
Source: Rosstat (2023)
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.org

52 
Figure 8. Number of Unemployed and the Unemployment Rate, 2017–2024 
Source: Rosstat (2023)
The demographic challenge has been deepened by the number of workers who have left the labor 
market either due to being mobilized, volunteering to fight, or leaving the country altogether. 
According to conservative estimates, wartime emigration and military mobilization have cost the 
work force about 600,000 working-age males. The emigrants include significant numbers of skilled 
workers. According to the Central Bank, in 2023, every second enterprise lacked specialists, and 
every third workplace suffered from a shortage of qualified workers.226
Russia therefore already faces stark challenges in its labor force today. Sustaining its current rate of 
economic growth and generating a larger military force will only exacerbate these tendencies. The 
Armed Forces alone will require at least half a million additional personnel—mostly men—above its 
prewar level to reach a force of 1.3 to 1.5 million. Given the high numbers of killed and wounded in 
Ukraine, this figure is probably an underestimate. 
And this only considers the military’s needs. The defense industry and associated suppliers would also 
need to expand their workforces. Russia already has a comparatively labor-intensive defense industry, 
which employed around 2.5 million people before the war and has reportedly added 500,000 workers 
since 2022.227 As a result, an expansion of production is likely to require a further influx of labor. 
It is difficult to conceive how the Kremlin could solve these problems without dragging labor from 
other sectors of the economy and causing both sectoral labor shortages and political discontent. 
Russia is already close to full employment. Those who are not working are unlikely to either be 
willing to or capable of performing the roles required by them for the military and wider economy. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of unemployed
(millions)
Unemployment rate
(%)
Figure 8. Number of Unemployed and the Unemployment Rate, 2017–2024
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of unemployed
(millions)
Unemployment rate
(%)
Source: Rosstat (2023)
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
January–March
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.orgCARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.org

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   53
Insufficient Investment
Russia is already undertaking an enormous effort to produce the required volume of equipment and 
munitions for the war in Ukraine. And its economy is expanding at a much faster rate than many 
analysts had expected. This has caused the use of existing industrial capacity across the economy to 
soar. However, to sustain the current pace of economic growth and expand defense-industrial capacity 
to equip the planned new force, Russia will need to rapidly increase and sustain investment. Expanding 
production will require the construction of new facilities or the upgrading of existing ones. 
Significant investment in fixed capital (for example, new factories, machinery, and infrastructure) 
will be necessary. However, currently, investment in Russia remains too low, both in the defense 
industry and the wider economy. Investment has averaged just 20 percent of GDP since 2009.228 To 
support elevated military production and economic expansion, investment will need to reach around 
30 percent of GDP for a sustained period (in other words, at least a decade). This investment share 
is also necessary for middle-income countries such as Russia to become a high-income country. The 
extra investment in capital—whether in new factories, machinery, or infrastructure—is what is 
needed to boost the productivity of the population and push incomes higher. 
Investment has increased some since the Ukraine war began. According to Rosstat, the aggregate 
rate of fixed investment grew by 6.7 percent in 2022 and 9.8 percent in 2023.229 This contrasts 
sharply with an annual average of 0.2 percent growth between 2011 and 2019. As a result, the share 
of investment in GDP has reached 22.2 percent in 2023, the highest level since 2011. However, 
although these figures might encourage policymakers in Moscow, the details show that the headline 
data conceal significant problems.230 
First, investment growth was concentrated in “transport, mainly land and overland, professional 
activities of all kinds, warehousing and logistics, construction, and wholesale trade.231” This is a result 
of firms restructuring their foreign trade routes away from Europe. Although this type of investment 
helps the economy adjust to sanctions, it is unlikely to boost productivity. 
Second, rapid growth was also observed in chemicals and petrochemicals; metals production; and 
subsectors associated with military production, such as optical and electronic equipment; and trans-
portation. This type of investment is likely to boost military production but is unlikely to generate 
economy-wide productivity growth. 
Third, investment in machinery and equipment—essential for any expansion of the defense industry 
and for upgrading existing capacity more broadly—declined in real terms (in other words, adjusted 
for inflation) in 2022 and only grew modestly in 2023.232 What growth did take place will have 
merely made up for the previous year’s contraction in investment. This means that the broader 

54 
investment growth achieved to date might only be increasing the volume of capacity, rather than 
modernizing it. 
This point is further reinforced by the fact that the share of modernization and reconstruction of 
existing facilities in total investment was 13.9 percent in 2022, its lowest level on record.233 This is 
a particularly important indicator given the role that the upgrading of existing facilities will play in 
any expansion of capacity within the defense industry. In 2023, the share remained at close to this 
record-low level. It will need to rise to a much higher level and remain there if Russia is to meet its 
more ambitious reconstitution targets.
Russia has been able to increase output at existing defense factories, but given the difficulties that the 
Kremlin appears to be encountering in boosting capacity beyond this new level—even after over two 
years of intense combat—it is difficult to see how Russia can achieve the required increase in invest -
ment to support a much larger military and sustained economic expansion. Such expansion may be 
possible at the end of the 2020s and beyond, but only if a concerted and sustained effort is made 
to expand capacity by building new factories and reequipping existing ones with new machinery. 
If such investments are made over the next few years, this would also leave Moscow well placed to 
maintain high production levels years into the future. A decision to embark on this type of invest-
ment spree could be made within the framework of the SAP (2025–2034), which should be approved 
in the near future. 
So far, the increase in defense output observed in Russia is being driven by utilizing existing capacity, 
both in terms of factories and stockpiles of Soviet-era equipment and munitions. This has yielded 
some positive results to date, but it will only provide a short-term fix. Reaching production levels 
required for large-scale force reconstitution will require significantly more investment than appears 
to be taking place today. 
It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of investment growth to Moscow’s plans. If the leadership 
can unleash a sharp and sustained increase in investment, it will go a long way to solving Russia’s 
labor shortage challenge (by replacing labor with capital) and ensuring a broader modernization of 
productive capacity across the economy. Crucially, faster investment growth could enable Moscow to 
overcome the mounting supply-side constraints that present the biggest threat to growth. 
However, if investment does not grow at a sufficiently fast rate, Russia will struggle to produce the 
equipment needed for its planned new force structure and will fail to deal with the wide range of 
other problems confronting the Kremlin, including demographic decline, creaking infrastructure, 
and low productivity growth. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   55
In sum, notwithstanding the risks to growth identified above, it appears unlikely that finances will 
have an overriding constraint on reconstitution between now and 2030, at least if current levels of 
military spending are maintained. If, however, Moscow moves to a full mobilization footing, the 
strain on the budget would likely grow. Signs that full economic mobilization might be underway 
would probably include the increased nationalization of private property, the widespread use of 
administrative measures to allocate resources across the economy, price controls, and the prioritiza-
tion of defense-industrial production over all other types of economic activity, resulting in shortages 
of labor and other inputs across the economy. 
Military Expenditure 
The increase in manpower, equipment, and munitions required by either of the partial or full recon-
stitution scenarios will cost a lot of money. Military expenditure has already surged well above the 
prewar average. In the five years before the war, military expenditure (using the broad NATO defi-
nition) fluctuated between ₽4–5tn annually, or 3–4 percent of GDP. At market exchange rates, this 
amounted to $60–70 billion.234 According to purchasing power parity (PPP)—a more appropriate 
exchange rate for comparing military expenditure across countries—this meant that Russia’s prewar 
level of military spending ranged between $155 billion and $175 billion.235 
Figure 9. Russian Defense Budget Market Exchange Rates v. Purchasing Power Parity 2005-2024
Source: Data for 2005–2023 are taken from the SIPRI Military Expenditure database, at https:/ /www.sipri.org/databases/milex; and the 
IMF World Economic Outlook database (April 2024), at: https:/ /www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/weo-database/2024/April. Data 
for 2024 are based on the Ministry of Finance projection contained in the budget, the IMF’s PPP forecast, and on the author’s calculations. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2024202220202018201620142012201020082006
Billions of U.S. dollars
Market exchange rate PPP
Source: Source: Data for 2005–2023 are taken from the SIPRI Military Expenditure database, at https:/ /www.sipri.org/
databases/milex; and the IMF World Economic Outlook database (April 2024), at: https:/ /www.imf.org/ en/Publications/
WEO/weo-database/2024/ April. Data for 2024 are based on the Ministry of Finance projection contained in the budget, 
the IMF’s PPP forecast, and on the author’s calculations. 
Figure 9. Russian Defense Budget Market Exchange Rates v. 
Purchasing Power Parity 2005-2024
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE CarnegieEndowment.org

56 
Although this was a higher defense burden than most NATO countries had during this time, it was 
not exceptionally high. It was scheduled to reach ₽4.9tn in 2022, but the demands of the war meant 
that these plans were abandoned.236 Estimating precisely how much Russia now spends on the mili-
tary is difficult because the Ministry of Finance ceased publishing detailed data on expenditure after 
the war began. However, it is likely that defense spending reached somewhere in the region of ₽6-8tn 
in 2022 (5–6 percent of GDP), depending on the measure used.237 Last year, it surged to ₽9.3 –11tn 
(6–7 percent of GDP).238 At PPP, this was more than $300 billion. 
Military spending is scheduled to stay at an elevated level in 2024. The budget for 2024–2026 
envisages spending on chapter 2 (‘national defense’) of the budget to reach at least ₽10.7tn, or over 
$350 billion at PPP.239 In practice, once additional military-related expenditure is included, defense 
spending is more likely to reach ₽13tn (over $375 billion at PPP). This could push the defense burden 
over 7 percent of GDP, accounting for nearly 40 percent of total federal budget expenditure. Russian 
military spending has not been this high since the late Soviet period. This was confirmed in May 
2024 by Dmitry Peskov, the spokesman for Putin, who stated that defense spending accounted for 
6.7 percent of GDP in 2023, coming close to the 7.4 percent recorded in the Soviet Union in the 
mid-1980s.240
The increase in defense spending is likely to have been caused by soaring costs for procurement (the 
reconstitution of equipment), operations (principally for the war in Ukraine), and personnel. The 
burden of personnel costs has traditionally been comparatively lower for the Russian military than 
armies in the West. A high proportion of conscripts, as well close-to-average wages for professional 
soldiers, ensured that personnel costs were unlikely to have exceeded 30–40 percent of total military 
expenditure.241 
However, the war in Ukraine and the leadership’s reluctance to order a second mobilization for the 
front line has prompted the Kremlin to hike levels of pay and other benefits (including signing-on 
bonuses, social benefits, and payments for death in service) to levels not seen before in Russian 
military history. As a result, where contract soldiers were paid on average around ₽300,000–400,000 
per year before the war, new recruits in 2024 are paid closer to ₽2.5mn per year.242 Once other pay-
ments are taken into account, such as signing-on bonuses, soldiers could earn close to ₽10mn over a 
three-year period. They could “earn” even more if they are killed on the battlefield, with payments to 
families in excess of ₽5mn. 
This means that the personnel bill is much higher in 2024 than it has ever been before. If Moscow 
uses the current payment model to attract around half of the high target force of 1.5 million, with 
conscripts paid 10 percent of this level, the basic annual salary bill would reach approximately 
₽2–2.5tn at current prices. With other personnel-associated costs, such as housing, training, and 
other benefits, it is plausible that maintaining such a force would cost well in excess of ₽3tn each 
year, which is around double the prewar personnel bill. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   57
Maintaining current pay levels for a larger force over a sustained period of time would mean that 
staffing costs could crowd out financial resources intended either for procurement of new equipment 
and munitions or for operations and training. This may not be a binding constraint in the immediate 
future due to Moscow’s strong balance sheet. However, if the war drags on at its current level of 
intensity for years to come, and if the Kremlin continues to build a larger force, it is plausible that 
the personnel bill could surpass procurement spending. Combined with elevated expenditure on 
operations (the war) and training, it would be difficult for the Ministry of Defense to reduce overall 
military spending. If the war ends or declines in intensity, however, it is unlikely that the military 
will maintain these salaries, as many entitlements are linked to combat pay and conditions. 
Future Scenarios for Military Expenditure
What level of spending would be required under the scenarios outlined in this report? 
For Russia to continue on a similar path of partial mobilization, this course of action would probably 
entail maintaining spending at around its current share of GDP (6–7 percent). If the economy grows, 
there would likely be modest growth in the absolute volume of defense spending. Given that around 
₽4–5tn is probably being spent on military procurement annually—around three times more than 
the ₽1.5tn spent in the prewar period—defense-industrial output would likely remain at a historically 
high level. However, the demands of reconstitution would become even higher, meaning that either 
full-spectrum reconstitution would take longer at existing rates of production, or Moscow would be 
forced to prioritize producing certain types of equipment to quickly bring the most important units 
up to their desired strength.
The duration of the war in Ukraine will also be crucial in determining the speed at which this 
volume of spending would result in reconstitution. If the war continues at its current level of inten-
sity, it is unlikely that annual new output will be able to replace annual battlefield losses for certain 
types of equipment, such as armored vehicles, artillery systems, and many types of munitions (for 
example, artillery shells). This would mean that it could take over a decade to replace these categories 
of equipment. If, however, the war ended, or at least diminished in intensity due to some form of 
ceasefire, reconstitution targets could be reached sooner. 
In short, at the current level of spending, and with the existing productive capacity of the defense-in-
dustrial base, reaching the targets assumed in the partial mobilization scenario would prove difficult, 
especially in those areas where Russia’s wartime losses are highest. Russia’s military would be large, 
but the standard of equipment would vary dramatically across units. 

58 
The full mobilization scenario, by contrast, would require a much more concerted financial and 
industrial effort. Reaching the targets quickly would require a sharp and sustained increase in the 
capacity of the defense-industrial base well beyond its existing level, especially if the war in Ukraine 
drags on. Defense procurement would probably need to account for up to 15 percent of total annual 
manufacturing output. To put this in context, it would mean that Russia’s industrial system would 
be as, if not more, militarized than that of the Soviet Union, which was one of the most militarized 
economies of the last century. In the late Soviet period, defense output accounted for 11–12 percent 
of total manufacturing output.243 
Financing this expansion and equipment of the armed forces would be very expensive. Procurement 
alone would probably reach double the level of the already-elevated levels observed since the full-
scale invasion of Ukraine. In practice, this would mean in the region of ₽8–10tn (at current prices) 
allocated to the production of equipment and munitions, as well as the research and development of 
new systems. Personnel costs would become at least double the pre-2022 level, if not much higher. 
If the war in Ukraine continues, additional costs will be incurred. In total, military spending in 
this scenario might reach up to twice that planned for 2024, resulting in an annual outlay of up to 
₽20tn, or around $550 billion at the current PPP exchange rates. 
The approximate calculations presented here give a sense of the level of military expenditure that 
Moscow would need to reach its objectives under the two broad reconstitution scenarios outlined in 
this paper. However, whether Russia is able to mobilize this scale of financial resources will depend 
on the size of the economy and the pool of available budgetary resources, the rate of inflation, the 
size of the available labor force, and the availability of industrial capacity to produce the required 
equipment and munitions. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   59
Conclusion
The Russian military will almost certainly not be reconstituted or rebuilt back into what it looked 
like prior to the 2022 invasion of Ukraine. New capabilities, tactics, and battlefield realities have 
permanently altered what the Russian military will become to 2030 and beyond. The Russian gov-
ernment has claimed that in 2025, it will announce a new long-term procurement program to 2034, 
and the contours of that new program will provide important clues on the future force that Russia 
wants to reconstitute. While the force has already begun the process of structural changes, a truly 
comprehensive lessons-learned process can only be completed after the war’s end.
In the two years since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Kremlin has regenerated its forces 
through partial mobilization, repairing on-hand equipment, purchasing equipment from abroad, 
offering lucrative financial incentives for volunteer soldiers, and ramping up production at existing 
factories. However, with the exception of drone production, these efforts have reached a plateau as 
of early 2024. To reach a fundamentally higher level of production or manpower availability over 
2024 levels, ostensibly to reconstitute as quickly as possible, Russia would need to activate more 
mobilization authorities that would likely put its economy, labor market, and population’s involve-
ment further onto a wartime footing. Russia has more of these resources available; thus far, domestic 
political considerations have constrained the Kremlin from taking such further steps. 
Military expenditure is already very high, approaching levels last seen during the Soviet era. At the 
current level, expenditure is likely to be sustainable in the near term due to Russia’s strong public 
finances and expected continued economic expansion. In the medium to long term, elevated military 
expenditure will impose opportunity costs. For instance, state support for other national develop-
ment goals might be lower than desired. The allocation of huge resources toward the military will 
distort other parts of the economy. Despite the current record-high level of spending, the scale of 
investment in productive capabilities appears to be relatively low. To meet ambitious modernization 
and reconstitution targets for equipment, Russia will need to increase investment in its defense 
industrial complex and maintain this high level for years to come. 
Russia is likely to face challenges in recruiting and retaining a professional force in the aftermath of 
the war, and is already taking steps now to try to shore up the recruiting challenge in particular. The 
Russian defense budget is also likely to face competing internal pressures to maintain high personnel 
spending levels, even after the war concludes. These pressures will worsen if the Kremlin attempts to 
expand the force or is forced to maintain high salaries and entitlements to stabilize postwar recruit-
ing and retention. Much will depend on the conclusion of the war and how the authorities manage 
demobilization. 
The Russian military has historical experience in ingesting, analyzing, and disseminating lessons 
learned after a major war. This process is already occurring in the form of adaptation and increased 

60 
lethality on the battlefield in Ukraine. Longer-term force posture and doctrinal modifications are 
likely to occur in the years after the war freezes or concludes. The military’s learning process could 
be hampered by the current lack of transparency and public discussion over the reality of the war in 
Ukraine. The potential for distorted analysis and decisions is more likely if discourse is limited or 
suppressed because of political sensitivities. In contrast, a sudden public shift to being transparent 
about the war’s losses or mistakes made could be a signpost not only of a major new defense reform 
effort, but also a potential precursor to a large force expansion. 
In conclusion, when considering the Russian military’s long-term reconstitution capabilities, it will 
be important to keep in mind that Russia does not possess the Soviet Union’s population, economy, 
and defense industrial base, which will limit the military’s quantitative growth potential. Nor does 
Russia have easy access to the most modern technology due to sanctions and domestic innovation 
shortfalls—which will ultimately limit the type of innovation it is able to achieve. However, the 
Russian military has gained relevant high intensity combat experience and is adapting technologies 
and tactics that in many ways are shaping modern warfare. As an organization, it is gaining a unique 
form of resilience, and motivation to evade or bypass sanctions or other restraints, as its antagonistic 
views of Ukraine and the West sharpen and intensify. Reconstitution, and the future capability of 
the Russian military, will be influenced and shaped by all of these factors. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   61
About the Author
Dara Massicot is a senior fellow in the Russia and Eurasia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace. Her work focuses on defense and security issues in Russia and Eurasia.
Prior to joining Carnegie, Massicot was a senior policy researcher at the RAND Corporation and 
senior analyst for Russian military capabilities at the Department of Defense. She has published 
extensively on Russian military capabilities, modernization efforts, and strategy, and is a preeminent 
expert on the Russo-Ukrainian War.
Acknowledgments 
The author would like to express her gratitude to Jasmine Alexander-Greene, Nicole Gonik, and Sean 
Eriksen of Carnegie’s Russia and Eurasia Program for their intrepid sleuthing and research support, 
Tatyana Pyak also of Carnegie’s Russia and Eurasia Program for her encouragement, and Richard 
Connolly for his analytic acumen on Russian budget matters. Finally, the author would also like to 
thank the Russia Strategic Initiative for its sponsorship of this research. 

62 
About the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
In a complex, changing, and increasingly contested world, the Carnegie Endowment generates strate-
gic ideas, supports diplomacy, and trains the next generation of international scholar-practitioners to 
help countries and institutions take on the most difficult global problems and advance peace. With 
a global network of more than 170 scholars across twenty countries, Carnegie is renowned for its 
independent analysis of major global problems and understanding of regional contexts.
About the Russia Strategic Initiative
The Russia Strategic Initiative (RSI) is a U.S. Department of Defense organization that works with 
structures throughout the U.S. Government and with public and private think tanks around the 
world to develop a common understanding of Russian decision-making and way of war that supports 
the Coordinating Authority’s integration that leads to integrated planning, assessments, and action 
recommendations.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   63
Notes
1 “Austin Underscores Commitment to Ukraine Security at Brussels Meeting,” U.S. Department of Defense, 13 June 2024,  
https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3806394/austin-underscores-commitment-to-ukraine- 
security-at-brussels-meeting/.
2 “Putin Zajavil, Chto Ob’em Proizvodstva Bronetehniki V RF Vyros Vdvoe, Interfax, 19 September, 2023, https://www.interfax.
ru/russia/921596.
3 “Corps and Division Planner’s Guide to Reconstitution Operations,” U.S. Army Center for Army Lessons Learned, January 31, 
2023, https://api.army.mil/e2/c/downloads/2023/01/31/5bdfe452/20-01.pdf.
4 “ADP 4-0 Sustainment,” US Army, July 2019, https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN18450_
ADP%204-0%20FINAL%20WEB.pdf.
5 “Corps and Division Planner’s Guide to Reconstitution Operations,” U.S. Army Center for Army Lessons Learned, January 31, 
2023, https://api.army.mil/e2/c/downloads/2023/01/31/5bdfe452/20-01.pdf. 
6 “Corps and Division Planner’s Guide to Reconstitution Operations,” U.S. Army Center for Army Lessons Learned, January 31, 
2023, https://api.army.mil/e2/c/downloads/2023/01/31/5bdfe452/20-01.pdf. 
7 “Corps and Division Planner’s Guide to Reconstitution Operations,” U.S. Army Center for Army Lessons Learned, January 31, 
2023, https://api.army.mil/e2/c/downloads/2023/01/31/5bdfe452/20-01.pdf. 
8 “ADP 4-0 Sustainment,” U.S. Army, July 2019, https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN18450_
ADP%204-0%20FINAL%20WEB.pdf.
9 “Corps and Division Planner’s Guide to Reconstitution Operations,” U.S. Army Center for Army Lessons Learned, January 31, 
2023, https://api.army.mil/e2/c/downloads/2023/01/31/5bdfe452/20-01.pdf. 
10 “ADP 4-0 Sustainment,” U.S. Army, July 2019, https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN18450_
ADP%204-0%20FINAL%20WEB.pdf. 
11 “Corps and Division Planner’s Guide to Reconstitution Operations,” U.S. Army Center for Army Lessons Learned, January 31, 
2023, https://api.army.mil/e2/c/downloads/2023/01/31/5bdfe452/20-01.pdf. 
12 Force Generation – Sustainable Readiness.” U.S. Army Center for Army Lessons Learned, October 1, 2019, https://armypubs.
army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN9412_AR525_29_FINAL.pdf#page=78.
13 “DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated T erms.” U.S. Department of Defense, March 2017, https://www.tradoc.army.mil/
wp-content/uploads/2020/10/AD1029823-DOD-Dictionary-of-Military-and-Associated-T erms-2017.pdf
14 “Vosstanovleniye,” Russian Ministry of Defense Handbook of Military T erminology, 2024, https://dictionary.mil.ru/dictionary/
T erminy-po-tematike-svyazi/item/139617/. 
15 Konstantin Sivkov, “Kak ponimat svodki Minoborony Rossii,” Vzglyad, August 14, 2022, https://vz.ru/soci -
ety/2022/8/14/1172350.html.
16 A. Nazarenko, “Kak vosstanovit’ boyesposobnost’ batal’yona,” Armeysky Sbornik 2017, No. 10, 
https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/49865202. 
17 Konstantin Sivkov, “Kak ponimat’ svodki Minoborony Rossii,” Vzglyad, August 14, 2022, https://vz.ru/soci-
ety/2022/8/14/1172350.html.
18 “Reconstitution,” U.S. Department of the Army Headquarters, January 13, 1992, https://www.bits.de/NRANEU/others/
amd-us-archive/FM100-9%2892%29.pdf; and “Operational T erms and Graphics,” US Department of the Army Headquarters, 
September 2004, https://army.rotc.umich.edu/public/resources/FM1-02OperationalT erms.pdf.
19 Aleksandr Sapronov, “Kto lechit ranenyye tanki?” Voyenny vestnik yuga Rossii 2023, No. 14, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.
oclc.org/browse/doc/85332878.
20 “Boyevaya sposobnost’,” Encyclopedia of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2024, https://encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictio -
nary/details.htm?id=3465@morfDictionary.
21 A. Nazarenko, “Kak vosstanovit’ boyesposobnost’ batal’yona,” Armeysky Sbornik 2017, No. 10, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.
idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/49865202.
22 “Vosstanovleniye boyesposobnosti,” Encyclopedia of the Russian Ministry of Defense, 2024, https://encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclo -
pedia/dictionary/details.htm?id=4641@morfDictionary.

64 
23 Aleksandr Sapronov, “Kto lechit ranenyye tanki?” Voyenny vestnik Yuga Rossii 2023, No. 14, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.
oclc.org/browse/doc/85332878.
24 Konstantin Sivkov, “Kak ponimat’ svodki Minoborony Rossii,” Vzglyad, August 14, 2022, https://vz.ru/soci-
ety/2022/8/14/1172350.html.
25 Dmitry Rogozin, Voina et Mir Slovar, “Boyevie Poteri [Combat Losses],” 2007, https://1319.slovaronline.
com/67-боевые_потери .
26 George Allison, “Britain estimates 450,000 Russian troops killed or wounded,” UK Defence Journal, April 27, 2024, https://
ukdefencejournal.org.uk/britain-estimates-450000-russian-troops-killed-or-wounded/.
27 Russo-Ukrainian Warspotting, https://ukr.warspotting.net/, as of April 1, 2024, 
28 Dmitry Rogozin, Voina et Mir Slovar, “Boyevie Poteri [Combat Losses],” 2007, https://1319.slovaronline.
com/67-боевые_потери .
29 Seth G. Jones, Riley McCabe and Alexander Palmer, “Ukrainian Innovation in a War of Attrition.” CSIS, February 27, 2023, 
https://www.csis.org/analysis/ukrainian-innovation-war-attrition.
30 “Russian casualties in Ukraine,” Mediazona, May 20, 2022, updated April 2024, https://en.zona.media/article/2022/05/20/
casualties_eng;
31 “Austin Underscores Commitment to Ukraine Security at Brussels Meeting,” U.S. Department of Defense, 13 June 2024,  
https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3806394/austin-underscores-commitment-to-ukraine- 
security-at-brussels-meeting/.
 32 “Shoygu zayavil o 5,9 tys pogibshikh rossiiskikh voyennykh v khode operatsii na Ukraine,” Interfax, September 21, 2022, https://
www.interfax.ru/russia/863189.
33 Anton T roianovski, Valeriya Safronova, “Russia Takes Censorship to New Extremes, Stifling War Coverage,” New York Times, 
March 4 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/04/world/europe/russia-censorship-media-crackdown.html.
34 Olga Ivshina, Becky Dale and Kirstie Brewer, “Russia’s meat grinder soldiers – 50,000 confirmed dead,” BBC, April 17, 2024, 
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-68819853.
35 “Russian casualties in Ukraine,” Mediazona, May 20, 2022, updated April 2024, https://en.zona.media/article/2022/05/20/
casualties_eng; Olga Ivshina, “Counting Russia’s dead in Ukraine. More than 45,000 confirmed killed,” BBC, February 22, 2024, 
https://bbcrussian.substack.com/p/counting-russias-dead-in-ukraine?utm_source=publication-search.
36 Olga Ivshina, “Ukraine war: T uva and Buryatia pay the highest price, but latest BBC Russian casualty figures show 
poverty not ethnicity the key factor,” BBC News Russian, November 30, 2023, https://bbcrussian.substack.com/p/
ukraine-war-tuva-and-buryatia-pay-highest-price?utm_source=publication-search.
37 Olga Ivshina, “Counting Russia’s dead in Ukraine. More than 45,000 confirmed killed,” BBC News Russian, February 
22, 2024, https://bbcrussian.substack.com/p/counting-russias-dead-in-ukraine?utm_source=publication-search; 
Olga Ivshina, “Ukraine war: T uva and Buryatia pay the highest price, but latest BBC Russian casualty figures show 
poverty not ethnicity the key factor,” BBC News Russian, November 30, 2023, https://bbcrussian.substack.com/p/
ukraine-war-tuva-and-buryatia-pay-highest-price?utm_source=publication-search.
38 Olga Ivshina, “Counting Russia’s dead in Ukraine. More than 45,000 confirmed killed,” BBC News Russian, February 22, 2024, 
https://bbcrussian.substack.com/p/counting-russias-dead-in-ukraine?utm_source=publication-search.
39 Andrew Radin et al, The Future of the Russian Military, RAND Corporation, RR3099 June 18, 2019, https://www.rand.org/
pubs/research_reports/RR3099.html.
40 “Russian casualties in Ukraine,” Mediazona, May 20, 2022, updated April 2024, https://en.zona.media/article/2022/05/20/
casualties_eng.
41 KUI Russia Officers Killed in Ukraine, https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1InyFVmu1LoSjqcWTHe4iD9cR8CNiL-5Ke -
5Jiz_Mlvwc/edit#gid=1093884946; KIU Russian Officers killed in Ukraine [@KilledInUkraine], “At least 4 041 Russian officers 
have been eliminated in Ukraine…” X.com, May 2, 2024, https://x.com/KilledInUkraine/status/1786020183842140299.
42 Olga Ivshina, “Lost battalions: calculating Russia’s casualties in six months of war in Ukraine,” BBC News Russian, August 22, 
2022, https://bbcrussian.substack.com/p/lost-battalions-calculating-russias.
43 Dara Massicot, “What Russia Got Wrong,” Foreign Affairs, February 8, 2023, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/
what-russia-got-wrong-moscow-failures-in-ukraine-dara-massicot.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   65
44 “Spyso osobovoho skladu 20-yi kvardiiskoi motostriletsikoi dyvizii ZS RF ,” Ukraine Main Intelligence Directorate, March 2, 
2022, https://gur.gov.ua/content/spysok-osobovoho-skladu-20yi-hvardiiskoi-motostriletsikoi-dyvizii-zs-rf.html.
45 “Voyennye prestupniki – voyennosluzhashchiye 136 otdel’noy motostrelkovoy brigady sovershayushchiye voyennye prestupleniya 
protiv mirnogo naseleniya Ukrainy,” Ukrainian Main Intelligence Directorate, March 18, 2022, https://gur.gov.ua/content/voen-
nosluzhashchye-136-otdelnoi-motostrelkovoi-bryhady.html.
46 Zoya Sheftalovich, “Full T ext of Putin’s Mobilization Decree, T ranslated,” Politico, September 21, 2024, https://www.politico.eu/
article/text-vladimir-putin-mobilization-decree-war-ukraine-russia/.
47  Yuri T urkul, “Ministr skazochnik ili trezvomyslyashchy chelovek?” Newsland, June 21, 2023, https://newsland.com/
post/7679163-ministr-skazochnik-ili-trezvomyslyaschiy-chelovek.
48  “Bring out your dead: A joint investigation by Meduza and Mediazona reveals the true number of Russian soldiers killed so far in 
the invasion of Ukraine,” Meduza, Jul 10, 2023, https://meduza.io/en/feature/2023/07/10/bring-out-your-dead.
49  Meduza, “He Survived War but not Rehabilitation,” March 18, 2023, https://meduza.io/en/feature/2023/03/18/
he-survived-war-but-not-rehabilitation.
50  Anton T roianovski, Valeriya Safronova, “Russia Takes Censorship to New Extremes, Stifling War Coverage,” New York Times, 
March 4 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/04/world/europe/russia-censorship-media-crackdown.html.
51 “Putin: Budem povyshat’ oboronnosposobnost’, polnost’yu obespechim potrebnosti VS RF ,” Interfax, January 11, 2023, https://
www.interfax-russia.ru/main/putin-budem-povyshat-oboronosposobnost-polnostyu-obespechim-potrebnosti-vs-rf.
52 “Shoygu zayavil o sozdanii novogo armeyskogo korpusa v Rossii,” RBK, March 20, 2024, https://www.rbc.ru/
politics/20/03/2024/65faca599a7947610732c795.
53 Laura Keffer, “Shoygu prizval narastit’ postavki v armiyu dlya podderzhaniya tempov nastupleniya,” Kommersant, May 1, 2024, 
https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/6679586.
54 “Shoygu zayavil o formirovanii devyati rezervnykh polkov dlya SVO,” Interfax, October 5, 2023, https://www.interfax.ru/
russia/924239.
55 Viktor Sokirko, “Glava Genshtaba: takogo urovnya voyennykh deystviy sovremennaya Rossiya ne znala,” Argumenty I fakty,  
January 25, 2023, https://aif.ru/society/army/glava_genshtaba_takogo_urovnya_voennyh_deystviy_sovremennaya_rossiya_ne_
znala.
56 “V Moskve sostoyalos’ zasedaniye Kollegii Minoborony Rossii,” Russian Ministry of Defense, April 23, 2024, https://function.
mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12510122@egNews.
57 “Gerasimov: v Rossii poetapno narashchivayutsya sostav I chislennost’ Vooruzhennykh sil,” Interfax, December 21, 2023, 
https://www.interfax-russia.ru/main/gerasimov-v-rossii-poetapno-narashchivayutsya-sostav-i-chislennost-vooruzhennyh-sil 
“Prodolzhit’ sistemnoye razvitiye vooruzhennykh sil,” Voyennyye komissariaty Rossii 2022, No.1, https://dlib.eastview.com/
browse/doc/74121266;  “I vpred’ dostoyno reshat’ stoyashchiye pered nami zadachi,” Voyennye komissariaty Rossii 2021, No. 1, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/64766426 Andrey Gavrilenko, “Rossiyskaya Federatsiya prodolzhayet planovuyu deya-
tel’nost’ po ukrepleniyu oboronosposobnosti,” Suvorovsky natisk 2022, No. 50, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/82718947; 
“Gerasimov: v Rossii poetapno narashchivayutsya sostav I chislennost’ Vooruzhennykh sil,” Interfax, December 21, 2023, https://
www.interfax-russia.ru/main/gerasimov-v-rossii-poetapno-narashchivayutsya-sostav-i-chislennost-vooruzhennyh-sil.
58 “Rostekh nameren vosstanovit’ vypusk samoletov DRLO A-50,” TASS, February 29, 2024, https://tass.ru/ekonomika/20114219.
59 V .A. Shamanov, V .V . Kulakov, O.Y. Kashirina, “Napravleniya Sovershenstvovaniya Boevo Primeneniya Vooruzhennyh SIL 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii po Obespecheniyu Vypolneniya Boevyh Zadach v hode Special’’noy Voennoi Operatsii,” Isvestiya Rossiiskoi 
Akademii Rocketnikh I Artilleriskikh Nauk, 2023, No.2. https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/article/86584428/.
60 “Shoygu zayavil o formirovanii devyati rezervnykh polkov dlya SVO,” Interfax, October 5, 2023, https://www.interfax.ru/
russia/924239.
61 S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/viewer?udb=6&page=106; A.V . Lobachev, A.A. Marchenko, V .K. Shamrey 
and O.S. Vinogradova, “Problemy diagnostiki rasstroystv adaptatsii u voyennosluzhashchikh Vooruzhennykh Sil,” Voyenno-
meditsinskii zhurnal 2023, No. 5, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/85690208.
62 A.V . Lobachev, A.A. Marchenko, V .K. Shamrey and O.S. Vinogradova, “Problemy diagnostiki rasstroystv adaptatsii u voy-
ennosluzhashchikh Vooruzhennykh Sil,” Voyenno-meditsinskii zhurnal 2023, No. 5, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/
browse/doc/85690208.

66 
63 S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/viewer?udb=6&page=106. 
64 “Putin zayavil, chto ob’yom proizvodstva bronotekhniki v RF vyros vdvoye,” Interfax, September 19, 2023, https://www.interfax.
ru/russia/921596.
65 Dmitry Makarov, “Chislennost’ Vooruzhyonnykh Sil Rossii uvelichat do 1.5 milliona voyennosluzhashchikh,” Flag Rodiny 2023, 
No. 2, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/83185750.
66 “Podpisan Ukaz ob ustanovlenii shtatnoy chislennosti Vooruzhyonnykh Sil RF ,” Kremlin.ru, December 1, 2023, http://kremlin.
ru/acts/news/72891.
67 “V Moskve sostoyalos’ zasedaniye Kollegii Minoborony Rossii,” Ministerstvo oborony Rossiyskoy Federatsii, April 23, 2024, 
https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12510122@egNews.
68 “Russian Military Announces Plan to Expand, Create New Units,” AP , December 21, 2022, https://apnews.com/article/
putin-finland-sergei-shoigu-ee953abf7f9bf217ccdaa61ec1b35ddd.
69 “V RF namereny sozdat’ tri novyye divizii, v tom chisle v Khersonskoy I Zaporozhskoy oblastyakh,” Interfax, 
December 21, 2022, https://www.interfax.ru/russia/878051; Viktor Sokirko, “Glava Genshtaba: takogo urovnya voy-
ennykh deystviy sovremennaya Rossiya ne znala,” Argumenty I fakty, January 25, 2023, https://aif.ru/society/army/
glava_genshtaba_takogo_urovnya_voennyh_deystviy_sovremennaya_rossiya_ne_znala.
70 Anna Yolkina, “Pod Yaroslavlem razmestyat parashyutno-desantny polk Minoborony,” 76.ru, January 11, 2017, https://76.ru/
text/gorod/2017/01/11/61790871/.
71 Dmitry Makarov, “Chislennost’ Vooruzhyonnykh Sil Rossii uvelichat do 1.5 milliona voyennosluzhashchikh,” Flag Rodiny 2023, 
No. 2, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/83185750 .
72 “Shoygu soobshchil o planakh sozdat’ novye aviatsionnye divizii, brigady I polki,” Interfax, December 21, 2022, https://www.
interfax.ru/russia/878058.
73 “V Moskve proshlo zasedanie Kollegii Ministerstva oborony Rossiiskoy Federatsii,” Ministerstvo oborony Rossiyskoy Federatsii, 
March 20, 2024, https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12505485@egNews.
74 “Shoygu zayavil o sozdanii novogo armeyskogo korpusa v Rossii,” RBK, March 20, 2024, https://www.rbc.ru/
politics/20/03/2024/65faca599a7947610732c795.
75 Samuel Charap, Dara Massicot, et al, Grand Strategy: Rhetoric and Reality, RAND Corporation, RR428, August 21, 2021, 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR4238.html; “Shoygu zayavil o sozdanii novogo armeyskogo korpusa v Rossii,” 
RBK, March 20, 2024, https://www.rbc.ru/politics/20/03/2024/65faca599a7947610732c795.
76 Anton Lavrov, Aleksey Ramm and Roman Kretsul, “Ukrepleniye pozitsii: kak izmenitsya rossiyskaya armiya s 
uchetom opyta SVO,” Izvestiya, February 21, 2023, https://iz.ru/1473786/anton-lavrov-aleksei-ramm-roman-kretcul/
ukreplenie-pozitcii-kak-izmenitsia-rossiiskaia-armiia-s-uchetom-opyta-svo.
77 “Putin re-establishes Moscow and Leningrad Military Districts — decree,” TASS, February 26, 2022, https://tass.com/
politics/1751693.
78 “Four fleets re-subordinated directly to Navy’s commander-in-chief — source,” TASS, December 1, 2023, https://tass.com/
defense/1714927.
79 Valius Venckunas, “Nine new aviation regiments to be created in major Russian army restructuring,” Aerotime Hub, December 
22, 2022, https://www.aerotime.aero/articles/nine-new-aviation-regiments-to-be-created-in-major-russian-army-restructuring.
80 Valius Venckunas, “Nine new aviation regiments to be created in major Russian army restructuring,” Aerotime Hub, December 
22, 2022, https://www.aerotime.aero/articles/nine-new-aviation-regiments-to-be-created-in-major-russian-army-restructur-
ing;  Yuri T urkul, “Ministr skazochnik ili trezvomyslyashchy chelovek?” Newsland, June 21, 2023, https://newsland.com/
post/7679163-ministr-skazochnik-ili-trezvomyslyaschiy-chelovek.
81 Yuri T urkul, “Ministr skazochnik ili trezvomyslyashchy chelovek?” Newsland, June 21, 2023, https://newsland.com/
post/7679163-ministr-skazochnik-ili-trezvomyslyaschiy-chelovek.
82 GREY ZONE [@grey_zone], “Dobavlyayu paru slov k razmyshleniyam Alekseya Sukonkina…” T elegram, August 2, 2023, 
https://t.me/s/vladlentatarsky?q=%D1%88%D0%BE%D0%B9%D0%B3%D1%83.
83 Kotsnews [@sashakots], “Opros,” T elegram, May 17, 2024, https://t.me/s/sashakots?q=%D1%88%D0%BE%D0%B9%D0%B3
%D1%83.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   67
84 “ZERGULIO,” TGStat, n.d. https://tgstat.ru/en/channel/@SergeyKolyasnikov.
85 Anton Lavrov, Aleksey Ramm and Roman Kretsul, “Ukrepleniye pozitsii: kak izmenitsya rossiyskaya armiya s 
uchetom opyta SVO,” Izvestiya, February 21, 2023, https://iz.ru/1473786/anton-lavrov-aleksei-ramm-roman-kretcul/
ukreplenie-pozitcii-kak-izmenitsia-rossiiskaia-armiia-s-uchetom-opyta-svo.
86 Ruslan Pukhov, “Ot ‘spetsial’noy’ k ‘voyennoy’. Uroki dvukh let operatsii na Ukraine,” Rossiya v global’noy politike, February 23, 
2024, https://globalaffairs.ru/articles/ot-speczialnoj-k-voennoj/.
87 Anton Lavrov, Aleksey Ramm and Roman Kretsul, “Ukreplenie pozitsii: kak izmenitsya rossiyskaya armiya s uchetom 
opyta SVO,” Izvestiya, February 21, 2023, https://iz.ru/1473786/anton-lavrov-aleksei-ramm-roman-kretcul/
ukreplenie-pozitcii-kak-izmenitsia-rossiiskaia-armiia-s-uchetom-opyta-svo.
88 V .G. Tsil’ko and A.A. Ivanov, “T endentsii razvitiya obshchevoyskovogo operativnogo iskusstva,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2022, No. 11, 
https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/81205208.
89 Commercial imagery reviewed by author, as of April 2024. A review of one new regeneration site on satellite imagery near Kursk in 
Russia shows a training area equipped with different types of trenches, target practice setups, and driving ranges to allow units to gain 
practice and familiarity before onward movement that has expanded since 2022, Bartles, Russian Way of War, 2017, PP 330, https://
www.armyupress.army.mil/portals/7/hot%20spots/documents/russia/2017-07-the-russian-way-of-war-grau-bartles.pdf.
90 Bartles, Russian Way of War, 2017, PP 330, https://www.armyupress.army.mil/portals/7/hot%20spots/documents/russia/2017-
07-the-russian-way-of-war-grau-bartles.pdf.
91 David Axe, “The Ukrainian Marines Hit the Russian Marines so hard they blew the Russians 
back to 1980,” Forbes, January 31, 2024, https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2024/01/31/
the-ukrainian-marines-hit-the-russian-marines-so-hard-they-blew-the-russians-back-to-1980/.
92 Aleksandr Khramichkin, “Moskva zadumala provesti voyennuyu reformu,” Nezavisimoye voyennoye obozreniye 2023, No. 2, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/83142589.
93 “Expert predupredila o vozhmozhhikh psykholohicheskikh problemakh uchastnikov SVO,” December 12, 2022, https://www.
mk.ru/social/2022/12/02/ekspert-predupredila-o-vozmozhnykh-psikhologicheskikh-problemakh-uchastnikov-svo.html.
94 “Dara Massicot believes that Russia faces twin personnel crises in its armed forces,” The Economist, May 31, 2023, https://www.
economist.com/by-invitation/2023/05/31/dara-massicot-believes-that-russia-faces-twin-personnel-crises-in-its-armed-forces.
95 Andrei Krasno, “‘Muting the Horrors’: Experts Warn of Addiction Crisis as Russian Soldiers Return from Ukraine,” Radio Free 
Europe/Radio Liberty, June 18, 2023, https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-soldiers-addiction-ukraine-war-alcohol-drugs/32464317.
html.
96 Paul Goble, “Returning Veterans of War in Ukraine Greater Threat to Russia than Afgantsy Ever Were,” 
Jamestown Eurasia Daily Monitor Vol 21, Issue 8, January 19, 2023, https://jamestown.org/program/
returning-veterans-of-war-in-ukraine-greater-threat-to-russia-than-afgantsy-ever-were/.
97 Dara Massicot, “Russian Military Wartime Personnel Recruiting and Retention 2022-2023”, RAND Corporation, RRA2061-4, 
July 16, 2024. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA2061-4.html.
98 “Dara Massicot believes that Russia faces twin personnel crises in its armed forces,” The Economist, May 31, 2023, https://www.
economist.com/by-invitation/2023/05/31/dara-massicot-believes-that-russia-faces-twin-personnel-crises-in-its-armed-forces.
99 “Sergey Shoygu: nasha armiya dolzhna ponyat’, na chto sposobna,” Vest, November 9, 2013, https://www.vesti.ru/
article/1884821.
100 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
101 Anika Binnendijk, Dara Massicot et al., “Russian Military Personnel Policy and Proficiency: Reforms and T rends, 1991-2021,” 
RAND Corporation, August 15, 2023, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1233-6.html.
102 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
103 “Mobilizovannye rossiyane budut imet’ status kontraktnikov,” Interfax, September 21, 2022, https://www.interfax.ru/
russia/863233.

68 
104 “Kontraktniki v perspective zamenyat prizvannykh v ramkakh chastichnoy mobilizatsii,” Interfax, December 21, 2022, https://
www.interfax.ru/russia/878050.
105 “Ministr oborony Rossii provyol soveshchaniye po voprosam uvelicheniya chislennosti VS RF ,” Tikhookeanskaya vakhta 2023, 
No. 2, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/83166868/%.
106 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
107 “My rabotayem na nashu oboronu,” Ofitsial’ny sayt Administratsii Belgorodskogo munitsipal’nogo okruga, July 
6, 2022, http://www.belraion.ru/index.php/2014-12-18-23-22-39/2014-12-19-03-29-19/obesp/obesp-npa/
item/6491-my-rabotaem-na-nashu-oboronu.
108 Anika Binnendijk, Dara Massicot et al., “Russian Military Personnel Policy and Proficiency: Reforms and T rends, 1991-2021,” 
RAND Corporation, August 15, 2023, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1233-6.html.
109 Anton Lavrov, Aleksey Ramm and Roman Kretsul, “Ukrepleniye pozitsii: kak izmenitsya rossiyskaya armiya s 
uchetom opyta SVO,” Izvestiya, February 21, 2023, https://iz.ru/1473786/anton-lavrov-aleksei-ramm-roman-kretcul/
ukreplenie-pozitcii-kak-izmenitsia-rossiiskaia-armiia-s-uchetom-opyta-svo.
110 “Dara Massicot believes that Russia faces twin personnel crises in its armed forces,” The Economist, May 31, 2023, https://www.
economist.com/by-invitation/2023/05/31/dara-massicot-believes-that-russia-faces-twin-personnel-crises-in-its-armed-forces.
111 Yevgeny Fedorov, “’Pereizbytok ofitserskikh kadrov’: kak razrushali vyssheye voyennoye obrazovanie Rossii,” Voyennoye obozre-
nie, October 9, 2022, https://topwar.ru/202900-pereizbytok-oficerskih-kadrov-kak-razrushali-vysshee-voennoe-obrazovanie-ros-
sii.html.
112 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
113 Aleksey Ramm, “V 2018 godu v voyska pribudet polnotsenny vypusk leytenantov,” Izvestiya, February 15, 2017, https://iz.ru/
news/664833.
114 Aleksandr Tikhonov, “Nashey armii po silam mnogoye,” Suvorovsky natisk 2023, No. 34, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.
oclc.org/browse/doc/87746167; Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobili-
sation in the light of Russia’s war in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
115 Olga Ivshina, “Counting Russia’s dead in Ukraine. More than 45,000 confirmed killed,” BBC News Russian, February 22, 2024, 
https://bbcrussian.substack.com/p/counting-russias-dead-in-ukraine?utm_source=publication-search; Valentyna Romanenko, 
“Russia won’t run out of pilots but their quality will diminish – Ukraine’s Air Force;” Ukrainska Pravda, May 15, 2023, https://
www.pravda.com.ua/eng/news/2023/05/15/7402257/.
116 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
117 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
118 Aleksandr Tikhonov, “S pritselom na budushcheye,” Voyevaya vakhta 2023, No. 8, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/
browse/doc/84477764/; “Rossiiskie voyennye uchilishcha primut 18 tysyach kursantov I slushateley v 2023 godu,” Vechernyaya 
Moskva, April 10, 2023, https://dzen.ru/a/ZDPDnPQJFQ31yK47.
119 Aleksandr Astafov, “Prizovut li vypusknikov voyennoy kafedry vo vremya chastichnoy mobilizatsii?” BFM, September 21, 2022, 
https://www.bfm.ru/news/509288.
120 “Kolichestvo voyenno-uchebnykh tsentrov pri vuzakh RF uvelichat do 128,” Interfax, September 26, 2023, https://www.interfax.
ru/russia/922730.
121 Roman Golovitsky, “Podlezhat li mobilizatsii vypuskniki voyennykh kafedr,” Evropeyskaya yuridicheskaya sluzhba, September 15, 
2022, https://els24.com/article/951-podlezhat-li-mobilizatsii-vypuskniki-voennykh-kafedr/.
122 Anastasiya Yakupova, “Prizyvayut li pri mobilizatsii vypusknikov voyennoy kafedry? Real’naya istoriya 41-letnego ural’tsa,” E1.ru, 
September 29, 2022, https://www.e1.ru/text/gorod/2022/09/29/71696207/.
123 My rabotayem na nashu oboronu,” Ofitsial’ny sayt Administratsii Belgorodskogo munitsipal’nogo okruga, July 6, 2022, 
http://www.belraion.ru/index.php/2014-12-18-23-22-39/2014-12-19-03-29-19/obesp/obesp-npa/item/6491-my-rabo-
taem-na-nashu-oboronu; Andrew Radin et al, The Future of the Russian Military, RAND Corporation, RR3099 June 18, 2019, 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR3099.html.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   69
124 Dmitry Makarov, “Chislennost’ Vooruzhyonnykh Sil Rossii uvelichat do 1,5 milliona voyennosluzhachshikh,” Flag Rodiny 2023, 
No.2, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/83185750.
125 “Voyenny poligon v Krasnodarskom kraye moderniziruyut s uchetom opyta spetsoperatsii,” TASS, March 16, 2023, https://tass.
ru/armiya-i-opk/17284445.
126 Aleksandr Tikhonov, “Nashey armii po silam mnogoye,” Suvorovsky natisk 2023, No. 34, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/
doc/87746167/.
127 Anton Lavrov, Aleksey Ramm and Roman Kretsul, “Ukrepleniye pozitsii: kak izmenitsya rossiyskaya armiya s uchetom opyta 
SVO,” Izvestiya, February 21, 2023.
128 Aleksandr Khramchikhin, “Moskva zadumala provesti voyennuyu reformu,” Nezavisimoye voyennoye obozreniye 2023, 
No.2, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/83142589. V .A. Shamanov, V .V . Kulakov, O.Y. Kashirina, “Napravleniya 
Sovershenstvovaniya Boevo Primeneniya Vooruzhennyh SIL Rossiiskoi Federatsii po Obespecheniyu Vypolneniya Boevyh Zadach 
v hode Special’noy Voennoi Operatsii,” Isvestiya Rossiiskoi Akademii Rocketnikh I Artilleriskikh Nauk, 2023, No.2, https://dlib-
eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/article/86584428/.
129 V .A. Shamanov, V .V . Kulakov, O.Y. Kashirina, “Napravleniya Sovershenstvovaniya Boevo Primeneniya Vooruzhennyh SIL 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii po Obespecheniyu Vypolneniya Boevyh Zadach v hode Special’’noy Voennoi Operatsii,” Isvestiya Rossiiskoi 
Akademii Rocketnikh I Artilleriskikh Nauk, 2023, No.2, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/article/86584428/.
130 “V Rossii nabor v boyennie VUZi b 2010 r – otmenen,” Hvilya, June 12, 2010, https://hvylya.net/news/digest/2010-60.html.    
In 2010, a deputy of the St. Petersburg Legislative Assembly Vladimir Zuikov feared that years of cancelling enrollments would 
inevitably create not only a shortage of officer personnel in 4-5 years, but would have follow-on challenges to loss of expertise: 
“reduction in enrollment in higher military educational institutions will cause a reduction in teaching staff, lead to losses for 
military science, and the loss of a significant part of the material base of educational institutions,” according to Zuikov. 
 131 Yevgeny Fedorov, “’Pereizbytok ofitserskikh kadrov’: kak razrushali vyssheye voyennoye obrazovanie Rossii,” Voyennoye 
obozrenie, October 9, 2022, https://topwar.ru/202900-pereizbytok-oficerskih-kadrov-kak-razrushali-vysshee-voennoe-obrazo -
vanie-rossii.html.
132 Yevgeny Fedorov, “’Pereizbytok ofitserskikh kadrov’: kak razrushali vyssheye voyennoye obrazovanie Rossii,” Voyennoye obozre-
nie, October 9, 2022, https://topwar.ru/202900-pereizbytok-oficerskih-kadrov-kak-razrushali-vysshee-voennoe-obrazovanie-ros-
sii.html.
133 “Artem Katulin: Umeniye Okazat’ pervuyu pomosh’ delaet vas chelovekom,” RIA Novosti, .April 27, 2023, https://ria.
ru/20230427/katulin-1868046639.html.
134 Yevgeny Fedorov, “’Pereizbytok ofitserskikh kadrov’: kak razrushali vyssheye voyennoye obrazovanie Rossii,” Voyennoye obozre-
nie, October 9, 2022, https://topwar.ru/202900-pereizbytok-oficerskih-kadrov-kak-razrushali-vysshee-voennoe-obrazovanie-ros-
sii.html
135 Pavel Aksyonov, Ilya Abishev, Yekaterina Sedlyarova and Svyatoslav Khomenko, “Iz Sibiri na front. Kak budut voyevat’ ne 
derzhavshiye v rukakh Avtomat soldaty I pochemu mobilizatsiya ne pomozhet Putinu,” BBC Russian Service, October 5, 2022, 
https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-63141919.
136 Anton Garkavenko and Olga Vinokurova, “Obespechit’ psikhologicheskuyu gotovnost’ prizvany voyennyye psikhologi,” Na 
strazhe Rodiny 2021, No. 50, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/73313108 .
137 “Nizhny predel prizyvnogo vozrasta v Rossii reshili ne povyshat’ do 21 goda,” Interfax, July 21, 2023, https://www.interfax.ru/
russia/912619.
138 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
139 “I Can’t Believe Them’: Young Russian Conscript’s Father Suspects Son May Have Been Beaten T o Death For Refusing T o Fight 
In Ukraine,” RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty, November 26, 2023, https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-conscript-lazhyev-beaten-death-
ukraine-war/32700547.html.
140 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
141 “Rossiyskiye voyennyye uchilishcha primut 18 tysyach kursantov I slushateley v 2023 godu,” Vechernyaya Moskva, April 10, 
2023, https://dzen.ru/a/ZDPDnPQJFQ31yK47.

70 
142 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
143 Anika Binnendijk, Dara Massicot et al., “Russian Military Personnel Policy and Proficiency: Reforms and T rends, 1991-2021,” 
RAND Corporation, August 15, 2023, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1233-6.html.
144 S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/viewer?udb=6&page=106.
145 S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/viewer?udb=6&page=106.
146 S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/viewer?udb=6&page=106.
147 “Putin prizval shiroko ispol’zovat’ poluchenny v SVO opyt dlya obucheniya voysk,” Izvestiya, December 19, 2023, https://
iz.ru/1622883/2023-12-19/putin-prizval-shiroko-ispolzovat-poluchennyi-v-svo-opyt-dlia-obucheniia-voisk.
148 “Opyt SVO zakladyvayetsya v uchebniki dlya voysk PVO, zayavili v Minoborony,” RIA Novosti, April 10, 2023, https://ria.
ru/20230410/pvo-1864125799.html.
149 Ivan Petrov, “Opyt boyev na Ukraine voshyol v programmu voyennykh vuzov RF ,” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, September 1, 2022, 
https://rg.ru/2022/09/02/opyt-boev-na-ukraine-voshel-v-programmu-voennyh-vuzov.html.
150 “Programmy obucheniya v rossiyskikh voyennykh vuzakh obnovleny s uchyotom opyta spetsial’noy voyennoy operatsii na 
Ukraine,” Ministerstvo Oborony Rossiyskoy Federatsii, n.d. https://structure.mil.ru/structure/forces/ground/structure/tank/
address/more.htm?id=12436457@egNew.
151 R.S. Kabirov and S.D. Semukhin, “Problemnyye voprosy ispol’zovaniya opyta voyskovoy praktiki pri podgot-
ovke kursantov voyennogo uchebnogo tsentra,” Ural’sky federal’ny universitet, 2023, https://elar.urfu.ru/bit-
stream/10995/128241/1/978-5-8295-0887-6_2023_021.pdf; S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya 
opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/
viewer?udb=6&page=106.
152 Connor O’Brien, “Russian Military Replaced Ukraine Battlefield Losses ‘far faster’ than expected, general warns,” April 11, 2024, 
https://www.politico.com/news/2024/04/11/christopher-cavoli-russian-military-losses-00151718;  Noah Robertson, “Russian 
Military ‘almost completely reconstituted,’ US official says. April 3, 2024, https://www.defensenews.com/pentagon/2024/04/03/
russian-military-almost-completely-reconstituted-us-official-says/. 
153 Yohann Michel and Michael Gjerstad, “Equipment losses in Russia’s war on Ukraine mount,” IISS Military Balance 
Blog, February 12, 2024, https://www.iiss.org/online-analysis/military-balance/2024/02/equipment-losses-in-russias-
war-on-ukraine-mount/.   Jack Watling and Nick Reynolds, “Russian Military Objectives and Capacity in Ukraine 
Through 2024,” RUSI, February 13, 2024, https://www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/
russian-military-objectives-and-capacity-ukraine-through-2024.
154 Dmitri Rogozin, Voina I Mir Slovar, “VVST remont I vostanovleniye,” Voyna I mir v terminakh I opredeleniyakh, 2007, 
https://1319.slovaronline.com/109-ввст_ремонт_и_востановление .
155 Aleksandr Tikhonov, “Rossiyskaya armiya – samaya podgotovlennaya I boyesposobnaya v mire,” Voyevaya vakhta 2023, No. 49, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/doc/94584084.
156 Rossiyskiye voyennosluzhashchiye razvernuli punkt remonta,” Ministerstvo oborony Rossiyskoy Federatsii, April 17, 2022, 
https://z.mil.ru/spec_mil_oper/news/more.htm?id=12417677@egNews.
157 Aleksandr Sapronov, “Kto lechit ranenyye tanki?” Voyenny vestnik Yuga Rossii 2023, No. 14, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.
oclc.org/browse/doc/85332878.
158 Aleksandr Sapronov, “Kto lechit ranenyye tanki?” Voyenny vestnik Yuga Rossii 2023, No. 14, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.
oclc.org/browse/doc/85332878.
159 Yohann Michel and Michael Gjerstad, “Equipment losses in Russia’s war on Ukraine mount,” IISS 
Military Balance Blog, February 12, 2024, https://www.iiss.org/online-analysis/military-balance/2024/02/
equipment-losses-in-russias-war-on-ukraine-mount/.
160 IISS Military Balance, 2021, Chapter 5: Russia and Eurasia. 
161 Voyennyye komissariaty Rossii 2023, No. 1, https://voenkom.ric.mil.ru/upload/site188/V8qXzmhNaD.pdf.

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   71
162 Jonas Kjellén, “Bringing the soldier back in: Russian military manning, manpower, and mobilisation in the light of Russia’s war 
in Ukraine,” FOI, March 2023, https://www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--5461--SE.
163 Institute Action Resilience, How Many Tanks are Left For Russia Now? August 31, 2023, https://institutactionresilience.fr/
publications.php.
164 Institute Action Resilience, How Many Tanks are Left For Russia Now? August 31, 2023, https://institutactionresilience.fr/
publications.php.
165 Institute Action Resilience, How Many Tanks are Left For Russia Now? August 31, 2023, https://institutactionresilience.fr/
publications.php.
166 Georgy Aleksandrov, “Dulo dryan’. Vse problemy rossiyskogo oruzheynogo kompleksa,” Novaya Gazeta, October 31, 2022, 
https://novayagazeta.eu/articles/2022/10/31/dulo-drian; Institute Action Resilience, “How Many Tanks are Left For Russia 
Now?” August 31, 2023, https://institutactionresilience.fr/publications.php. 
167 “Pidrahunok ta analiz tankovoho potentsialu Moskovii na pochatku 2024 r,” Viiskovii vishchun, n.d. https://www.vishchun.com/
post/pidrakhunok_ta_analiz_tankovoho_potentsialu_moskovii_na_pochatku_2024.
168 Maria Snegovaya, Max Bergmann et al., “Back in Stock? The State of Russia’s Defense Industry after T wo Years of the War,” CSIS, 
April 22, 2024, https://www.csis.org/analysis/back-stock-state-russias-defense-industry-after-two-years-war.
169 Maria Snegovaya, Max Bergmann et al., “Back in Stock? The State of Russia’s Defense Industry after T wo Years of the War,” CSIS, 
April 22, 2024, https://www.csis.org/analysis/back-stock-state-russias-defense-industry-after-two-years-war. 
170 Yohann Michel and Michael Gjerstad, “Equipment losses in Russia’s war on Ukraine mount,” IISS 
Military Balance Blog, February 12, 2024, https://www.iiss.org/online-analysis/military-balance/2024/02/
equipment-losses-in-russias-war-on-ukraine-mount/.
171 Ministry of Defence [@DefenceHQ], “Latest Defence Intelligence update on the situation in Ukraine – 29 January 2024,” X, 
January 29, 2024, https://x.com/DefenceHQ/status/1751898118436655191.
172 Institut Institute Action Resilience, “How Many Tanks are Left For Russia Now? “August 31, 2023, https://institutactionresil-
ience.fr/publications.php. e Action Resilience  
173 Institute Action Resilience, “How Many Tanks are Left For Russia Now?” August 31, 2023, https://institutactionresilience.fr/
publications.php; “Russia T rying to Install ERA on the BMP-3 and Reports about the Production Rate, Defense Express, May 
6 2023, https://en.defence-ua.com/industries/russia_trying_to_install_era_on_the_bmp_3_and_reports_about_the_produc-
tion_rate-6621.html; Dmitry Levichev, “Skol’ko I kakikh tankov, BMP I BTR proizvedeno v Rossii v 2021, 2022 I 2023, Tsifry I 
analitika, May 2, 2023, dzen.ru/a/ZFFSVGvfazETpurC.
174 “Prioritet gosoboronzakaza,” Ural’skiye voyennyye vesti 2024, No. 12, https://dlib-eastview-com.ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/
doc/96467327.
175 Maria Snegovaya, Max Bergmann et al., “Back in Stock? The State of Russia’s Defense Industry after T wo Years of the War,” CSIS, 
April 22, 2024, https://www.csis.org/analysis/back-stock-state-russias-defense-industry-after-two-years-war.
176 BMPD Livejournal blog, “Preobrazovaniye Vooruzhyonnykh Sil Rossii v 2022-2024 godakh. Chast’ 2: vooruzheniye I tekhnika,” 
April 17, 2024, https://bmpd.livejournal.com/4818118.html.
177 Roman Skomorokhov, “Kto dast Rossiyskoy armii bronyu,” Voyennoye obozreniye, April 1, 2023, https://topwar.ru/213985-kto-
dast-rossijskoj-armii-bronju.html.
178 Thomas Malmlöf, “Russia’s defence industry at war.” FOI, September 25, 2023, https://www.foi.se/report-summary?reportNo=-
FOI%20Memo%208231; Roman Skomorokhov, “Kto dast Rossiyskoy armii bronyu,” Voyennoye obozreniye, April 1, 2023, 
https://topwar.ru/213985-kto-dast-rossijskoj-armii-bronju.html.
179 Dmitry Levichev, “Skol’ko I kakikh tankov, BMP I BTR proizvedeno v Rossiii v 2021, 2022 I 2023,” Tsifry I analitika, May 2, 
2023, https://dzen.ru/a/ZFFSVGvfazETpurC.
180 “Sergey Shoigu Monitors Performance at a Tank Factory and Declares All is Well – Is It?” Kyiv Post, April 19, 2024, https://www.
kyivpost.com/post/31366.

72 
181 “Russia T rying to Install ERA On the BMP-3 And Reports About the Production Rate,” Defense Express, 
May 6, 2023, https://en.defence-ua.com/industries/russia_trying_to_install_era_on_the_bmp_3_and_re-
ports_about_the_production_rate-6621.html; “BTR-82A (M) production results,” T opWar, March 2, 2021. 
https://en.topwar.ru/180450-rezultaty-proizvodstva-btr-82am.html; Dzevenislava Moshovskaya, “Srazu posle voz-
vrasheniya iz Moskvy: kakiye pereustanovki ustroil Lukashenko,” 24 kanal, May 11, 2024, https://24tv.ua/ru/
lukashenko-otpravljaet-v-otstavku-svoih-voennyh-gulevicha-uvolili-po-zhelaniju-putina-24-kanal_n2553490.
182 Anton Lavrov, Aleksey Ramm and Roman Kretsul, “Ukrepleniye pozitsii: kak izmenitsya rossiyskaya armiya s uchy-
otom opyta SVO,” Izvestiya, February 21, 2023, https://iz.ru/1473786/anton-lavrov-aleksei-ramm-roman-kretcul/
ukreplenie-pozitcii-kak-izmenitsia-rossiiskaia-armiia-s-uchetom-opyta-svo.
183 Sam Skove, “Russia May Be T rying to Build 10,000 Attack Drones a Year for Use in Ukraine,” Defense One, February 7, 2024, 
https://www.defenseone.com/threats/2024/02/russia-may-be-trying-build-10000- attack-drones-year-use-ukraine/394015/.
184 Vladislav Noviyy, “Bespilotny proekt: gosudarstvo sokraset budzet na razvitiye industrii dronov,” April 12, 2024, https://www.
forbes.ru/tekhnologii/510123-bespilotnyj-proekt-gosudarstvo-sokrasaet-budzet-na-razvitie-industrii-dronov.
185 “Voyenny poligon v Krasnodarskom kraye moderniziruyut s uchyotom opyta spetsoperatsii,” TASS, March 16, 2023, https://tass.
ru/armiya-i-opk/17284445.
186 “V Moskve sostoyalos’ zasedaniye Kollegii Minoborony Rossii,” Russian Ministry of Defense, April 23, 2024, https://function.
mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12510122@egNews.
187 “A thread on how Russian aircraft manufacturers are doing when it comes to staffing,” X.com, March 16, 2024, https://x.com/
delfoo/status/1768987955710804204;   Inna Degot’kova, “Uroven’ kadrovogo goloda v promyshlennosti ustanovil novy record,” 
RBC, August 3, 2023, https://www.rbc.ru/economics/03/08/2023/64ca54369a7947ee430b0975?from=from_main_3; “Pochti 
90% rossiyskikh kompaniy zayavili, chto ne mogut nayti rabotnikov,” The Moscow Times, January 17, 2024, https://www.
moscowtimes.ru/2024/01/17/pochti-90-rossiiskih-kompanii-zayavili-chto-nemogut-naiti-rabotnikov-a118607.
188 Inna Degot’kova, “Uroven’ kadrovogo goloda v promyshlennosti ustanovil novy record,” RBK, August 3, 2023, https://
www.rbc.ru/economics/03/08/2023/64ca54369a7947ee430b0975?from=from_main_3; “Pochti 90% rossiyskikh kompaniy 
zayavili, chto ne mogut nayti rabotnikov,” The Moscow Times, January 17, 2024, https://www.moscowtimes.ru/2024/01/17/
pochti-90-rossiiskih-kompanii-zayavili-chto-nemogut-naiti-rabotnikov-a118607.
189 Alina Nikolayeva, “Na ‘Aviastare’ otkryto 780 vakansiy, na UAZe – 368,” 73online, March 6, 2024, https://t.co/k8tbYYVwFz.
190 Anna Kaledina, “Ne prishli na smenu: v 67 regionakh vyrosla potrebnost’ v rabotnikakh,” Izvestiya, December 26, 2023, https://
iz.ru/1626248/anna-kaledina/ne-prishli-na-smenu-v-67-regionakh-vyrosla-potrebnost-v-rabotnikakh.
191 Andrew Roth, “A lot higher than we expected’: Russian arms production worries Europe’s war planners,” The Guardian, February 
15, 2024, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/feb/15/rate-of-russian-military-production-worries-european-war-plan-
ners; “’Kurganmashzavod” increased the output of the infantry fighting vehicle BMP-3, which was highly appreciated during 
the NMD,” T opWar, September 4, 2023, https://en.topwar.ru/225306-kurganmashzavod-uvelichil-vypusk-poluchivshej-vy-
sokuju-ocenku-v-hode-svo-boevoj-mashiny-pehoty-bmp-3.html.
192 “’Mulatki’, peyntbol I bespilotniki rukami podrostkov. ‘Protokol’ vypustil vtoruyu chast’ rassledovaniya o proizvodstve dronov v 
‘Alabuge,’” Ideal.Realii, July 24, 2023, https://www.idelreal.org/a/32515442.html.
193 Mary Chestnut, “Women in the Russian Military,” CSIS, September 18, 2020, https://www.csis.org/blogs/post-soviet-post/
women-russian-military.
194 Francesca Visser, “In Russia, It’s a Woman’s Job to Challenge Soviet-Era Labor Laws,” The 
Moscow Times, September 20, 2017, https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2017/09/20/
captain-svetlana-medvedeva-paved-way-for-russian-women-to-enter-mens-professions-a58973.
195 Svetlana Frolova, “Spisok zapreshchyonnykh dlya zhenshchin professiy v 2024 godu,” Aktion Okhrana T ruda, February 18, 2024, 
https://www.trudohrana.ru/article/104063-spisok-zapreshchennyh-professiy-dlya-jenshchin-v-rossii#acor2.
196 Javier G. Cuesta, “Abortion Restrictions and discouragement of female university students: Moscow wants Russian women 
to focus on childbearing,” El Pais, December 8, 2023, https://english.elpais.com/international/2023-12-08/abortion-restric-
tions-and-discouragement-of-female-university-students-moscow-wants-russian-women-to-focus-on-childbearing.html.
197 Maria Snegovaya, Max Bergmann et al., “Back in Stock? The State of Russia’s Defense Industry after T wo Years of the War,” CSIS, 
April 22, 2024, https://www.csis.org/analysis/back-stock-state-russias-defense-industry-after-two-years-war. 

CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE    |   73
198 Henry Foy, Felicia Schwartz et al. “Janet Yellen warns China of ‘significant consequences’ if its companies support Russia’s war,” 
Financial Times, April 6, 2024, https://www.ft.com/content/ba524406-ee6c-4c39-9ac2-110a2549569a; https://www.reuters.
com/world/us-says-china-is-boosting-russias-war-machine-ukraine-2024-04-12/.
199 Maria Snegovaya, Max Bergmann et al., “Back in Stock? The State of Russia’s Defense Industry after T wo Years of the War,” CSIS, 
April 22, 2024, https://www.csis.org/analysis/back-stock-state-russias-defense-industry-after-two-years-war.
200 Maria Snegovaya, Max Bergmann et al., “Back in Stock? The State of Russia’s Defense Industry after T wo Years of the War,” CSIS, 
April 22, 2024, https://www.csis.org/analysis/back-stock-state-russias-defense-industry-after-two-years-war.
201 Tatyana Isakova, “Venture capital has flowed into military technologies,” Kommersant, April 5, 2024, https://dlib-eastview-com.
ceip.idm.oclc.org/browse/doc/96519488.
202 S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/viewer?udb=6&page=106.
203 S.V . Zhurin, “Osobennosti organizatsii obobshcheniya opyta voyny v poslevoyenny period,” Voyennaya mysl’ 2024, No. 3, 
https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/issue/13401762/viewer?udb=6&page=106.
204 Megan McKernan, Stephanie Young et al. “Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution in Comparative Organizations: 
Vol 1 Case Studies of Russia and China,” RAND Corporation, RRA2195-1, January 23, 2024, https://www.rand.org/pubs/
research_reports/RRA2195-1.html.
205 “Russia Bans Public Discussion of Army Strategy, T roop Morale, and Mobilization,” 
The Moscow Times, December 1, 2022, https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2022/12/01/
russia-bans-public-discussions-of-army-strategy-troop-morale-mobilization-a79555.
206 Megan McKernan, Stephanie Young et al. “Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution in Comparative Organizations: 
Vol 1 Case Studies of Russia and China,” RAND Corporation, RRA2195-1, January 23, 2024, https://www.rand.org/pubs/re-
search_reports/RRA2195-1.html.    As RAND researchers noted, “because the government recently classified many topics about 
the Armed F state secrets, uncleared personnel in the government will have no ability to audit the military’s personnel billets and 
confirm these staffing claims.”
207 IMF , World Economic Outlook Database, as of April 2024, https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/weo-database/2024/
April. 
208 “Russia Statistics,” Bank of Finland Institute for Emerging Economics (BOFIT), n.d. https://www.bofit.fi/en/monitoring/
statistics/russia-statistics/.
209 Russian Federation State Duma, 2023, https://sozd.duma.gov.ru/download/1CF44682-3334-4E55-8BD0-366863538A2C.
210 “Statistics,” Russian Federation Ministry of Finance, n.d.,  https://minfin.gov.ru/en/policy_issues/nationalwealthfund/. 
211 Russian Federation State Duma, 2023, https://sozd.duma.gov.ru/download/1CF44682-3334-4E55-8BD0-366863538A2C.
212 “Minekonomrazvitiya soglasno c TsB RF b ostenke perspecktiv rosta ekonomiki RF v 2024 gody,” Interfax, July 26, 2024,  
https://www.interfax.ru/business/972702.
 213 “TsB Povyisil klyuchevuyu stavku do 18%,”  Kommersant, July 26, 2024,  https://www.kommersant.ru/
doc/6852695?from=top_main_1.  
 214 Russian Federation State Duma, 2023, https://sozd.duma.gov.ru/download/1CF44682-3334-4E55-8BD0-366863538A2C.
215 “Statistics,” Russian Federation Ministry of Finance, n.d., https://minfin.gov.ru/en/policy_issues/nationalwealthfund/. 
216 Andrey Kolesnikov, “Bylo by sest’ predlozheno,” Kommersant, April 26, 2024, https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/6666214.
217 Pyotr Buzlayev, “Minfin predlozhil uvelichit’ stavku naloga na pribyl’ do 25%,” Kommersant, May 28, 
2024, https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/6729567;   Anna Narayeva, “Minfin vnyos v pravitel’stvo poprav-
ki po sovershenstvovaniyu nalogovoy sistemy,” Vedomosti, May 28, 2024, https://www.vedomosti.ru/economics/
articles/2024/05/28/1040091-minfin-vnes-pravitelstvo-popravki-po-sovershenstvovaniyu-nalogovoi-sistemi.
218 “TSB RF povysil prognoz po pribyli bankov na 2023 god do 3,2-3,4 trln rublyoy,” Interfax, December 7, 2023, https://www.
interfax.ru/business/935088.
219 “Macroeconomic statistics,” Central Bank of Russia, 2023, https://www.cbr.ru/statistics/macro_itm/svs/#a_71502.
220 “Macroeconomic statistics,” Central Bank of Russia, 2023, https://www.cbr.ru/statistics/macro_itm/svs/#a_71502.

74 
221 “Emerging-Market Banks’ Government Debt Holdings Pose Financial Stability Risks,” IMF 
Financial Sector Stability blog, April 18, 2022, https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2022/04/18/
blog041822-gfsr-ch2-emerging-market-banks-government-debt-holdings-pose-financial-stability-risks. 
222 “Prognoz sotsial’no-ekonomicheskogo razvitiya Rossiyskoy Federatsii na 2024 god i na planovy period 2025 i 2026 godov,” 
Ministry of Economic Development, September 2023, https://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_457874/. 
223 “Chislennost’ postoyannogo naseleniya na 1 yanvarya,” Rosstat, 2024, https://showdata.gks.ru/report/278928/.
224 “World Population Prospects 2019, Vol 1: Comprehensive Tables,” UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population 
Division, 2019, https://www.un.org/development/desa/pd/sites/www.un.org.development.desa.pd/files/files/documents/2020/
Jan/un_2019_wpp_vol1_comprehensive-tables.pdf.
225 Yekaterina Vinogradova, “Eksperty soobshchili o «vymyvanii» molodyozhi s rynka truda. Chislo rabotnikov do 35 let dostiglo 
istoricheskogo minimuma,” RBC, April 11, 2023, https://www.rbc.ru/economics/11/04/2023/6433e7499a7947356c70a065.
226 “Regional’naya ekonomika: kommentarii GU,” Central Bank of Russia, February 1, 2023, http://www.cbr.ru/Collection/
Collection/File/43707/report_01022023.pdf.
227 Richard Connolly and Cecilie Senstad, “Russia’s Role as an Arms Exporter,” Royal Institute for International Affairs, 2017, “S 
nachala SVO na oboronnyye predpriyatiya prishli rabotat’ bol’she 0,5 mln chelovek.” Interfax, February 1, 2024, https://www.
interfax.ru/russia/944057.
228 “Russia Statistics,” Bank of Finland Institute for Emerging Economics (BOFIT), n.d. https://www.bofit.fi/en/monitoring/
statistics/russia-statistics/.
229 “Investitsii v nefinansovyye aktivy,” Rosstat, n.d. https://rosstat.gov.ru/investment_nonfinancial.
230 Investment data available at Rosstat, Indicators for T echnological Development, n.d., https://rosstat.gov.ru/folder/11189.
231 “Russia’s 4.6% investment growth in 2022 caused by sanction panic, “ Intellinews, March 15, 2023, https://www.intellinews.
com/russia-s-4-6-investment-growth-in-2022-caused-by-sanction-panic-272917/.
 232 Investment data available at Rosstat, Indicators for T echnological Development, n.d., https://rosstat.gov.ru/folder/11189 Only 
nominal data are currently available for 2023. 
233 Investment data available at Rosstat, Indicators for T echnological Development, n.d., https://rosstat.gov.ru/folder/11189.
234 “Milex Database,” SIPRI, n.d., https://www.sipri.org/databases/milex. 
235 Richard Connolly and Michael Kofman, “Why Russian military expenditure is much higher than commonly understood 
(as is China’s),” War on the Rocks, December 16, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/12/why-russian-military-expendi-
ture-is-much-higher-than-commonly-understood-as-is-chinas/; Richard Connolly, “Russian military expenditure in comparative 
perspective: A purchasing power parity estimate,” CNA, October 2019, https://www.cna.org/reports/2019/10/russian-mili-
tary-expenditure; Peter Robertson: https://militaryppp.com/.
236 “O federal’nom byudzhete na 2022 god i na planovyy period 2023 i 2024 godov,” Federal T reasury of Russia, December 6, 2021, 
https://roskazna.gov.ru/ispolnenie-byudzhetov/.
237 On the different methods that can be used to estimate Russian military expenditure since 2022, see: B. Grozovsky, “Tsena 
agressii: voyennyye raskhody Rossii vyrosli na 2,9 trln rubley,” iStories.ru, June 1, 2023, https://storage.googleapis.com/istories/
opinions/2023/06/01/tsena -agressii-voennie-raskhodi-rossii-virosli-na-29-trln-rublei/index.html.
238 Julian Cooper, “Another Budget for a Country at War: Military Expenditure in Russia’s Federal Budget for 2024 and Beyond,” 
SIPRI Insights on Peace and Security 2023, No. 11, https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2023-12/sipriinsights_2312_11_rus-
sian_milex_for_2024_0.pdf.
239 A. Boyko, D. Mosolkina, D. Grinkevich, “Osnovnyye napravleniya raskhodov budut svyazany s obo-
ronoy i sotsial’noy politikoy,” Vedomosti, September 26, 2023, https://www.vedomosti.ru/economics/
articles/2023/09/26/997085-osnovnie-napravleniya-rashodov-v-2024-g. 
240 “Byudzhet Minoborony I silovogo bloka RF priblizhayetsya k 6.7% VVP ,” Finmarket, May 13, 2024, https://www.finmarket.ru/
news/6174709.
241 Richard Connolly, “Russian military expenditure in comparative perspective: A purchasing power parity estimate,” CNA, 
October 2019, https://www.cna.org/reports/2019/10/IOP-2019-U-021955-Final.pdf.
242 Irina T umakova, “Smertonomika,” Novaya Gazeta, July 25, 2023, https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2023/07/25/smertonomika.
243 Julian Cooper, “The Soviet Defence Industry: Conversion and Reform,” London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1991.



1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW  |  Washington, DC 20036  |  P: + 1 202 483 7600 
CarnegieEndowment.org