Attacking Iran's Nuclear Program: The Complex Calculus of Preventive Action | The Washington Institute
Skip to main content
Policy Analysis
Policy Notes 157
Attacking Iran's Nuclear Program:
The Complex Calculus of Preventive Action
by
Michael Eisenstadt
Mar 11, 2025
About the Authors
Michael Eisenstadt
Michael Eisenstadt is the Kahn Senior Fellow and director of The Washington Institute's Military and Security Studies Program.
In-Depth Reports
Should a negotiated deal prove elusive, policymakers will need to consider how to define a successful strike, Iran’s potential responses, and whether a strategy of prevention can be sustained.
Iran’s nuclear program is one of the most pressing foreign policy challenges facing the Trump administration. While the president has expressed his preference for a diplomatic solution to the crisis, many Israeli officials believe that Iran’s current weakness provides a unique opportunity to destroy or at least set back its nuclear program through a military strike. Should a negotiated deal prove elusive, policymakers will need to weigh the pros and cons of military action and answer several questions, including: How does one define a successful strike? What challenges need to be addressed in planning a campaign to destroy or degrade Iran’s nuclear weapons program? How sustainable is a strategy of prevention? And how might Iran respond to such a campaign?
In this Policy Note, military expert Michael Eisenstadt explains that a preventive attack likely won’t be a one-off but rather the opening round of a lengthy campaign employing military strikes, covert action, and other elements of national power. Such a campaign, he writes, could presage either a more stable order for the region or a new, danger­ous phase in one of its most volatile conflicts.
View/Print Page as PDF
Share
Email Alerts
Sign Up
To top
Recommended
Brief Analysis
Deniable, Disposable, Disruptive: Iran’s Hybrid Warfare in Europe Demands a Proactive Response
May 4, 2026
◆
Adrian Shtuni
Articles & Testimony
The U.S. Shouldn’t Lose Sight of the Real Terrorist Threats
May 4, 2026
◆
Michael Jacobson
Articles & Testimony
Is There a China Strategy Behind the Iran War?
May 4, 2026
◆
Michael Sobolik
Grant Rumley
Topics
Iran's Foreign Policy
Military & Security
Proliferation
U.S. Policy
Regions & Countries
Iran
Israel
Stay up to date
Sign up for email alerts