Boko Haram | Mapping Militants Project
Skip to main content
Key statistics
2002
First Recorded Activity
2003
First Attack
2024
Profile Last Updated
Download PDF
LOGIN to download this file
How to Cite
Crenshaw, M., & Robinson, K. (2025). Mapping Militants Project. Rice University. https://doi.org/10.25613/G0K4-WF70
Mapping Militants Project. “Boko Haram.” Last modified
June 30, 2024
. https://mappingmilitants.org/node/352/
Profile Contents
Narrative
Narrative of the Organization's History
Organization
Leadership, Name Changes, Size Estimates, Resources, Geographic Locations
Strategy
Ideology, Aims, Political Activities, Targets, and Tactics
Major Attacks
First Attacks, Largest Attacks, Notable Attacks
Interactions
Foreign Designations and Listings, Community Relations, Relations with Other Groups, State Sponsors and External Influences
Maps
Mapping relationships with other militant groups over time in regional maps
Global Al Qaeda
Global Islamic State
Main Tabs Group
Overview
Formed:
January 1, 2002
Formed:
2002
Disbanded:
Group is active.
First Attack:
July 26, 2009: Over the course of five days, Boko Haram militants carry out attacks across Borno, Bauchi, Yobe, and Kano states in northeast Nigeria.The militants destroyed police stations and churches across the area, and even overtook a prison in Maiduguri. The uprising claimed the lives of over 800 people, including the group’s leader—Mohammed Yusuf—who was killed in police custody.
Last Attack:
May 24, 2024: Boko Haram is suspected to have killed 10 people and committed a mass abduction of at least 160 villagers from Kuchi Village during a civilian raid, according to reports by the BBC.
[1]
Boko Haram is an armed group that primarily operates in northeastern Nigeria, but it has also carried out operations in Chad, Cameroon, and Niger. It was formed in 2002 as a Salafi Islamist sect to oppose Western education and establish an Islamic state in Nigeria. Boko Haram initially did not use violence to achieve its goals, but it came to embrace violence in 2009 and has since carried out numerous attacks and kidnappings against both civilian and military targets. Boko Haram was designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) by the United States Department of State on November 14, 2013. In March 2015, Boko Haram became an affiliate of the Islamic State. Internal conflict has always been a challenge for the group leadership to manage, and the organization has splintered on several occasions. Most recently, a 2016 leadership struggle led to a split within Boko Haram that divided the group into two separate militant organizations: the Islamic State’s West Africa Province (ISWAP) and Jama’atu Ahl al-Sunnah lil-Dawa wal-Jihad (JAS). Though they operate independently, both of these groups are often referred to as Boko Haram in media reports. Internal conflict has also generated a series of internal coups targeting group leadership.
Narrative
Boko Haram was established in 2002 by Mohammed Yusuf, a well-known Salafi preacher in the Maiduguri, Nigeria.
[2]
In 2002, Yusuf opened a religious complex with an Islamic school in Maiduguri, which attracted students from poor Muslim families across the country.
[3]
Yusuf attacked the Nigerian government in his preaching and called for Nigeria to adopt an Islamic style of governance to preserve the morality of its citizens. He rejected Western-style education and democracy as un-Islamic.
[4]
Initially, Yusuf did not seek to achieve these goals through violence. Instead, Yusuf relied on his lectures to spread his beliefs and develop a large following among students, the poor, and the local elite.
[5]
A hardline faction upset with the moderate nature of Yusuf’s teachings broke away in 2002-2003 to establish their own separatist Islamic commune near Kanamma, Nigeria. The group was partially composed of former members of the Nigerian Taliban and led by Muhammad Ali until his death in 2004. In 2005, the group became embroiled in a conflict with the local community, which resulted in Nigerian authorities destroying their camp.
[6]
In retaliation, the hardliners attacked several towns but were eventually defeated by the Nigerian military. This was the first act of violence perpetrated by Yusuf’s followers.
[7]
To avoid being associated with this episode, Yusuf fled to Saudi Arabia, where he remained until a Nigerian government official helped him to return about a year later.
[8]
Upon Yusuf’s return to Maiduguri, the group expanded into neighboring states like Yobe, Bauchi, and Gombe.
[9]
Maiduguri locals then nicknamed the group “Boko Haram,” with “boko” meaning “western education” in Hausa, and “haram” which is an Islamic term designating a forbidden act.
[10]
Between 2006-2009, Yusuf grew more radical in his teachings. Despite Yusuf’s initial popularity among Salafis, the mainstream Salafi movement came to reject him and his aversion to democracy and Western-style education.
[11]
Tensions between Yusuf and the Nigeran government also began to grow. Authorities arrested Yusuf on several occasions, but these arrests only caused Yusuf to gain popularity among Salafis.
[12]
In June of that year, Boko Haram members violently clashed with the Nigerian police after being pulled over for violating a new law that required motorcyclists to wear helmets. Group members, who were participating in a funeral procession, viewed this action as provocative and responded with violence. In July 2009, Nigerian police raided the home of one of Yusuf’s followers, who had been making bombs. The group responded to this raid by attacking a police station five days later.
[13]
Militant violence soon spread throughout Bauchi, Borno, Yobe, and Kano states.
[14]
Nigerian security forces responded by targeting the group’s headquarters in Maiduguri and arresting Yusuf and other group members. Over 800 people were killed in the violence, including Yusuf who died in custody.
[15]
After suffering severe losses in the raid, it is believed that the group fled to a hideout in northern Cameroon. Boko Haram then regrouped in Maiduguri in mid-2010 under the leadership of Abubakar Shekau, Yusuf’s second-in-command.
[16]
The frequency, lethality, and sophistication of Boko Haram’s attacks increased dramatically under Shekau, allegedly because of increased cooperation with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM).
[17]
According to reports, Shekau reached out to AQIM, which later provided training, financial, and material support to Boko Haram.
[18]
To protest the election of Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian from southern Nigeria, Boko Haram carried out a series of bombings during Jonathan’s presidential inauguration in May 2011.
[19]
The escalation of violence continued throughout the year, including an attack on the United Nations compound in Abuja, Nigeria in August, which served as Boko Haram’s first foreign target.
[20]
The attack, which killed 23 and wounded dozens, launched Boko Haram into the world news spotlight as a highly capable militant organization.
[21]
President Jonathan declared a state of emergency later that year due to attacks by Boko Haram, closing parts of Nigeria’s border with Chad, Cameroon, and Niger in order to “crush” the group.
[22]
As Boko Haram grew increasingly violent, tensions grew within Boko Haram over operational tactics. In January 2012, members who opposed killing Muslims split off from Boko Haram to form a faction named “Ansarul Muslimina Fi Biladis Sudan,” meaning “Vanguards for the Protections of Muslims in Black Africa,” known commonly as Ansaru.
[23]
The group, led by Khalid al-Barnawi, painted itself as the humane alternative to Boko Haram that would only attack Christians and the Nigerian government.
[24]
Analysts suggested that Boko Haram and Ansaru were operationally linked, with one describing Ansaru as the “external operations unit” of Boko Haram.
[25]
Al-Barnawi and other Ansaru members reportedly received training and support from AQIM.
[26]
The group conducted numerous attacks against foreigners in northern Nigeria and its neighbors between 2012 and 2014, launching it into the international spotlight.
[27]
The U.S. State Department designated Ansaru as a foreign terrorist organization in late 2013, and the U.N. Security Council followed suit in June of 2014.
[28]
However, Ansaru stopped its attacks in late 2014, and authorities captured Khalid al-Barnawi in 2016, effectively ending its campaign.
[29]
In April 2014, Boko Haram kidnapped over 300 young girls from a secular school in Chibok, Nigeria. Just over 50 girls were able to escape immediately after the attack. The Twitter hashtag #BringBackOurGirls inspired several other campaigns on various social media websites in hopes of pressuring the Nigerian government to do more to recover the girls.
[30]
In October 2014, the government announced that it had negotiated a ceasefire with Boko Haram and that the schoolgirls would be released shortly. However, within two weeks of the announcement, Boko Haram released a video in which Shekau repudiated the ceasefire and claimed that the missing girls had already been converted to Islam and were married to Boko Haram members.
[31]
The Chibok kidnappings prompted the United States to deploy additional counterterrorism resources to assist Nigerian law enforcement agencies.
[32]
As of January 2018, 106 girls had been rescued. Kidnapped students were released in exchange for Boko Haram militants in the custody of the Nigerian government.
[33]
The girls rescued were found living as wives and mothers among Boko Haram fighters. On January 15, 2018, Boko Haram released a video featuring kidnapped women and the remaining Chibok girls.
[34]
In January 2015, Boko Haram assaulted the villages of Baga and Doron Baga in Borno State and claimed control over the area. Local officials suggested that as many as 2,000 people were killed in these attacks, but the Nigerian government estimated the death toll to be 150.
[35]
A few weeks later, militants tried to attack Maiduguri, Borno’s capital city, but government troops prevented the planned takeover.
[36]
Between May 2011 and December 2015, more than 13,000 people were estimated to have been killed by Boko Haram. An additional 13,000 people died during the same period in clashes between Boko Haram and government security forces.
[37]
Boko Haram also extended its operations into neighboring countries. In 2013 and 2014, Boko Haram conducted attacks, kidnapped civilians, and recruited soldiers in Cameroon, Chad, and Niger. The group also used these cross-border areas as safe havens to escape the reach of Nigerian security forces.
[38]
By January 2015, some observers estimated that Boko Haram controlled about 20,000 square miles of territory in northeastern Nigeria, a space that represented about 20% of Nigeria’s total territory.
[39]
On February 7, 2015, Nigeria’s Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) announced that national elections would be postponed for six weeks while security forces launched an offensive to regain territory controlled by Boko Haram.
[40]
Attacks on civilians continued, including across borders in both Chad and Cameroon.
[41]
On March 28, the Nigerian Election Day, Boko Haram killed 41 people in an attempt to keep voters from the polls, but millions still voted.
[42]
Several countries – Benin, Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria – banded together to counter the growing international threat posed by Boko Haram. In 2014-2015, they strengthened the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), a previously under-resourced military coalition created for counter-terrorism purposes.
[43]
The coalition, authorized by the African Union on March 3, 2015, was formed to stabilize the Lake Chad region in the face of increasing cross-border Boko Haram attacks. Initially the force consisted of a majority of Chadian troops, and to a lesser extent, troops from Cameroon, Niger, and Nigeria.
[44]
Financial issues burdened the MNJTF from the beginning of its operations, due to the slow arrival of EU funds and the lack of support from the U.N. Security Council.
[45]
Despite this setback, the coalition served to enhance cross-border cooperation between the Lake Chad countries.
[46]
The MNJTF weakened Boko Haram by taking back parts of the group’s territory, freeing prisoners, and through securing some border areas between Nigeria and other Lake Chad countries.
In early March 2015, Boko Haram pledged allegiance to the Islamic State (IS) in an audio message posted online.
[47]
Reportedly, Boko Haram militants were traveling to train at IS military camps at that time. When IS accepted the pledge in late March, Boko Haram renamed itself Islamic State’s West Africa Province (ISWAP).
[48]
IS also encouraged Muslims to join Boko Haram and other West African militant groups.
[49]
Some analysts argued that the affiliation between Boko Haram and IS was a desperate move by Boko Haram “to boost its members’ morale, image and attract local support,” especially after the MNJTF drove the group from certain areas it once held.
[50]
However, the MNJTF’s achievements have been short-lived, partially due to the militants’ resiliency. The coalition struggled to consolidate gains because of poor foresight, planning, and internal communication.
[51]
Despite these shortcomings, a Nigerian government spokesman told media in April of 2015 that the MNJTF was closing in on the “heart of Boko Haram’s operation” in the Sambisa Forest. The coalition quickly retreated to the outskirts of the forest, however, due to traps and landmines set by Boko Haram, allowing the militants to regroup.
[52]
Moreover, the group began receiving ideological, operational, and material support from IS following Shekau’s pledge in March, allowing the group to further strengthen.
[53]
Despite pledging his loyalty, Shekau allegedly disobeyed IS orders to not kill Muslims. This, along with his dictatorial leadership style and use of child suicide bombers, caused a rift between Shekau and IS leaders.
[54]
After months of building tension, IS announced in August 2016 that Abu Musab al-Barnawi, son of the founder of Boko Haram, would assume leadership of the group.
[55]
Al-Barnawi, who once praised IS activities in 2015, previously served as one of Boko Haram’s media spokesmen.
[56]
Two days after the IS announcement, Shekau responded that Barnawi’s followers were manipulating IS leaders. Shekau accused Barnawi of attempting a coup against him, and he asserted that he and his followers would not accept Barnawi as Boko Haram’s new leader. This dispute reportedly led to splits within Boko Haram.
[57]
According to military reports, “about half of Boko Haram broke off to a separate group” in 2016, leading to two factions: one known as ISWAP led by Barnawi, and the other known as Jama’atu Ahl al-Sunnah lil-Dawa wal-Jihad (JAS) led by Shekau.
[58]
These two organizations have operated independently of each other with distinct leadership. In February 2020, the U.N. Security Council officially designated ISWAP as a “splinter group of JAS.”
[59]
This profile treats ISWAP as a splinter group of Boko Haram. The members of Boko Haram remaining after the split adopt the name JAS.
Both JAS and ISWAP employed violence to achieve their goals, but they did so against a differing set of targets. The two groups held contrasting beliefs about the appropriateness of targeting Muslims and using child suicide bombers.
[60]
JAS focused on soft civilian targets like universities and churches, while ISWAP conducted large-scale attacks on military and government installations.
[61]
Additionally, the groups largely operated in their own areas of Nigeria. JAS concentrated its efforts in areas close to Nigeria’s eastern border with Cameroon. In contrast, ISWAP operated in north-eastern Nigeria, with core operations surrounding Lake Chad.
[62]
However, the proximity of some JAS and ISWAP operations has made the attribution of certain attacks difficult, and the two groups have often been referred to interchangeably under the name of Boko Haram in many media reports. For this reason, this profile uses ‘Boko Haram’ to refer to JAS or ISWAP militants after 2016 when responsibility for their specific operations cannot be reliably credited to one organization over the other.
In late 2016 and early 2017, the number of killings attributed to Boko Haram declined. Severe food shortages in Nigeria and deadly clashes between splinters JAS and ISWAP appeared to have negatively affected the group’s operations.
[63]
However, as the MNJTF pulled out of the region, Boko Haram militants returned to their former levels of violence.
[64]
Between April and September 2017, the group killed an estimated 400 people.
[65]
The group remained active in northeast Nigeria, using suicide bombers to attack markets, universities, displacement camps, and villages. Most attacks were credited to Barnawi and occurred within Nigeria, such as the 2017 ambush of an oil exploration team from the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
[66]
Boko Haram continued to face internal divisions in 2017-2019. In August of 2018, Mamman Nur, an ISWAP military commander, was assassinated by his lieutenants after he released the Dapchi schoolgirls (kidnapped in February 2018) without receiving ransom from the Nigerian government. Nur’s so-called “soft approach” angered his associates who accused him of not being as rough as rival Shekau.
[67]
Infighting continued into September when Ali Gaga, another ISWAP military commander, was assassinated by his own men.
[68]
Gaga reportedly planned to release over 300 hostages and surrender to Nigerian troops. Analysts suggested that these assassinations signaled a hardline leadership takeover within ISWAP that shared commonalities with JAS, including similar assault and abduction tactics.
[69]
However, ISWAP continued to treat Muslim civilians better than JAS.
[70]
In March 2019, ISWAP announced that Abu Abdullah Ibn Umar al-Barnawi – known as Ba Idrissa – would assume leadership over the group.
[71]
ISWAP’s then-leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi was demoted within the group.
[72]
Reports suggest that he was forced to step down from his position in a “bloodless coup.”
[73]
Although neither ISWAP nor IS offered an explanation for the leadership change, the move coincided with other organizational changes by IS in Africa. In March 2019, Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS) was reportedly incorporated under the umbrella of Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP).
[74]
In subsequent media publications, IS used the term ISWAP to describe the attacks of both of its affiliates in the Sahel and the Lake Chad region.
[75]
Despite this organizational change by Islamic State, the two groups are easily distinguishable in terms of geography and operation. ISGS operates in Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso, while ISWAP mainly operates around Lake Chad. As a result, Mapping Militants considers ISWAP and ISGS to be separate militant groups. For more information on ISGS, please see our
ISGS profile
.
By early 2020, ISWAP far exceeded JAS in operational capacity and size, making them one of the most active IS affiliates.
[76]
The Nigerian military’s strategy of establishing concentrated “super camps,” rather than spreading troops out over a large area, allowed ISWAP to gain control of rural territory surrounding Lake Chad. This allowed ISWAP to recruit militants and further strengthen its forces.
[77]
Once an area where ISWAP exclusively operated, JAS began operating in the Lake Chad region by this time while maintaining its headquarters in the Sambisa Forest.
[78]
For example, Shekau and his followers killed nearly 100 troops on March 25, 2020 in Bohoma in what the President of Chad described as “the worst ever attack on the country’s military.”
[79]
Also in March 2020, ISWAP leader Ba Idrissa was purged in what some have called “the most bloody and extensive move in the history of the group,” due to the nature of his assassination.
[80]
Analysts suggested that Ba Idrissa was removed on direct orders from IS because they wanted to “clean house” and exercise more direct authority over ISWAP’s activities.
[81]
Al-Barnawi was reappointed as the leader of ISWAP following Ba Idrissa’s death. After allegedly receiving direct orders from Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurashi, leader of Islamic State, in early 2021, Al-Barnawi launched an operation targeting JAS in the Sambisa Forest. Reports suggest that IS had finally had enough with Shekau’s “indiscriminate targeting of believers” that undermined IS efforts to further expand across Africa.
[82]
Shekau refused to surrender to ISWAP after being pursued through the forest for five days and killed himself via suicide vest around May 18, 2021. On June 6th, Al-Barnawi released a statement encouraging JAS militants to fight on and absorb into ISWAP’s ranks.
[83]
In the aftermath of Shekau’s suicide, many members of the JAS faction of Boko Haram surrendered by August 2021. A wave of these militants surrendered in unprecedented numbers at a disarmament center on Cameroon's northern border with Nigeria during this time. Overwhelmed by the influx, the National Committee for Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration (DDR) in Meri became home to about 750 former fighters. Dieudonne Nkollo Zanga, an administrator at the DDR center, reported that more than 450 militants have sought refuge since May 2021, including 155 in the week of August 3rd. With the current facility stretched to its limits, plans were underway to construct a new center in Meme, capable of hosting 1,500 former JAS combatants.
[84]
However, these surrenders did not result in a period of peace. On August 21, 2021, in an overnight assault, hundreds of Boko Haram militants launched an attack on a military outpost in southeastern Niger, near the village of Baroua, resulting in the deaths of 16 soldiers and wounding at least nine others. The group attacked this outpost with overwhelming numbers but was eventually repelled by the Nigerian military, which reported killing 50 militants during the confrontation.
[85]
The death of Shekau did not end hostilities between JAS and ISWAP. In 2022, these groups continued to engage in hostilities. For example, in Bama LGA of Borno state, ISWAP engaged in a clash with JAS insurgents on September 16th. It is indicated that ISWAP forces, led by a member named Ba’ana Chigori, launched a surprise attack on JAS strongholds in the Gaizuwa area, which resulted in 29 insurgents dead. The ISWAP fighters eventually overpowered JAS fighters and forced a retreat of the insurgents.
[86]
This instance is one of many attacks between the Boko Haram splintered groups.
The conflict between JAS and ISWAP weakened both groups. For example, in March 2022 approximately 7,000 members of ISWAP and JAS surrendered in one week alone in the northeast region of Nigeria.
[87]
The infighting between ISWAP and JAS intensified throughout 2023, leading to substantial losses for both groups. Early in the year, a Lake Chad-based ISWAP subgroup defected to JAS which further weakened ISWAP's position. This internal fighting proved to be more destructive than some battles with the government as well. Former fighters from both factions indicated that the internal fighting had caused more casualties than their engagements with state militaries.
[88]
ISWAP, struggling with internal dissent and the pressures of JAS's offensive, shifted its focus to consolidating its hold in Borno, temporarily halting its operations in central Nigeria. The conflict's root lies in their differing approaches to civilians; ISWAP's attempts to integrate and tax Muslim civilians contrasts with JAS's goal of plundering and raiding their civilian victims. This ideological clash has driven a wedge between the groups, leading to violence and multiple defections from both sides.
[89]
Despite significant internal strife and defections, ISWAP and JAS have continued to conduct military operations. In 2022, ISWAP began their first campaign in central Nigeria, executing a serious attack on a prison near Abuja, the federal capital of Nigeria.
[90]
ISWAP made tactical adjustments, shifting from large-scale assaults to smaller, more elusive operations, employing roadblocks, complex ambushes, and improvised explosive devices. This tactical pivot allowed ISWAP to maintain a high operational tempo. By February 2022, the group claimed 44 attacks in a single month, marking its second-highest monthly total ever. Expanding its reach, ISWAP also extended its operations into southern Borno, northern Adamawa, and even the Mayo Sava and Mayo Tsanaga regions of Cameroon.
[91]
On May 2nd , Abu Umaimata
[92]
JAS’s leader, in a video showcasing several hundred armed fighters pledging their loyalty to him. The video, featuring militants in disheveled attire, starkly contrasted ISWAP’s well-choreographed and uniformed media presentations. A subsequent video on May 12 reiterated their allegiance to Umaimata, with fighters speaking various regional languages, confirming their location around Lake Chad. ￼ While the true identity of Abu Umaimata remained ambiguous in 2022, he embodied the continuity of leadership post-Shekau. It has been speculated that Umaimata is the pseudonym for Bakura Doro, the current leader of JAS.
In the Nigeria territory of Kuje, more than 400 prisoners went missing following a Boko Haram-led raid on a medium-security prison near Nigeria's capital, Abuja. The attack, which occurred in July 2022, resulted in the deaths of four inmates, a security guard, and several attackers. Loud explosions and gunfire were heard during the raid, which resulted in nearly 1,000 inmates initially escaping, with 443 recaptured afterward. The Defense Minister confirmed that 64 jailed jihadists had escaped, orchestrated by Boko Haram. President Muhammadu Buhari attributed the breach to a failure in the security forces' intelligence system.
[93]
Violence against civilians has also continued despite the split between ISWAP and JAS. In April 2023, officials on Cameroon's northern border reported that Boko Haram militants launched large-scale attacks over a week, destroying hundreds of homes, killing at least six villagers and two soldiers, and leaving thousands homeless. In retaliation, Cameroonian troops killed at least 12 militants.
[94]
In late March 2023, ISWAP fighters massacred over 30 fishermen in Mukdolo village, Borno State,  which starkly undermined the Nigerian government's claims that Boko Haram’s violence had decreased. The victims, including internally displaced people from Dikwa LGA and local residents, were gruesomely executed after being bound with their own fishing nets. This attack not only drew condemnation from the United Nations but also prompted calls for justice and adherence to humanitarian laws from UN coordinator Matthias Schmale.
[95]
[96]
Four months laterBoko Haram once again attacked farmers in Borno State. Over a two-week period from June 14 to June 30, the insurgents carried out four major assaults, killing at least 36 people and injuring many more. These attacks targeted farmers in their fields, with the most recent attack killing seven farmers in the Damboa Local Government Area. Similar brutality was reported on June 14, when 15 farmers were killed and some beheaded near Molai. Further violence erupted on June 22, when eight young workers were killed in Mafa, and on June 30, when mortar bombs fired by the militants killed six and injured 21 in Damboa.
[97]
InJuly, 2023, ISWAP imposed a ban on farming, fishing, and herding in Marte, punishing communities they accused of spying for the military. This punitive measure followed coordinated airstrikes from the government that killed many ISWAP commanders, forcing them to relocate. The insurgents have vowed to kill anyone found engaging in agricultural activities in the areas they control, further straining the local population.
[98]
Boko Haram’s violent surges continued into November 2023. In the first week of the month, they conducted attacks inside Nigeria's Yobe state which resulted in 37 deaths.  It is unknown whether this attack was made by the JAS or ISWAP splinter, only stating the report as “Boko Haram.” The first attack occurred when militants raided Gurokayeya village, killing 17 residents who had refused to pay a harvest tax. The following day, 20 mourners returning from the victims' burial fell victim to an explosive device planted by the insurgents, killing 10 instantly and another 10 at a nearby health center.
[99]
In March 2024, Boko Haram's ongoing insurgency in northeastern Nigeria continued with the abduction of dozens of displaced people, primarily women, from a camp in Gamboru Ngala town. The victims, who had previously fled their homes due to Boko Haram attacks, were taken while collecting firewood. The United Nations estimated that over 200 people were taken. This incident highlighted the severe impact of the Boko Haram crisis on women and girls in the region. Despite claims from Borno's state government that 95% of Boko Haram fighters are either dead or have surrendered, this recent kidnapping showcases the persistent threat posed by the group and its offshoot, the Islamic State of West Africa Province (ISWAP), which has been blamed for the kidnappings by local militia leader Shehu Mada.
[100]
JAS and its counter splinter ISWAP have been locked in a stalemate with the Nigerian military as of June 2024. Boko Haram remains unable to penetrate fortified military "super camps," and the army avoids deep raids into Boko Haram territory due to the threat of mines and ambushes. ISWAP has achieved some of its founder Muhammed Yusuf’s goals, establishing a partial "Islamic state" under sharia law in northeastern Nigeria. The group's current strategy in the second half of 2024 appears focused on preserving the status quo rather than provoking major military offensives.
[101]
Organization
Vertical Tabs
Leadership
Mohammad Yusuf
(2002 to July 30, 2009): In the early 2000s, Yusuf developed a following as a Salafi preacher in Maiduguri, Nigeria.
[102]
Yusuf criticized called for Nigeria to adopt an Islamic style of governance to preserve the morality of its citizens. He rejected Western-style education and democracy as un-Islamic.
[103]
Initially, Yusuf did not seek to achieve these goals through violence. However, between 2006-2009, Yusuf grew more radical in his teachings. Though Yusuf was initially very popular among Salafis, the mainstream Salafi movement came to reject him and his aversion to democracy and Western-style education.
[104]
Yusuf’s core group of followers came to be known as Boko Haram for their characteristic antipathy toward Western education. Yusuf also grew more willing to use violence to push back against the Nigeran state. Yusuf was captured by state security forces during the July 2009 uprisings, and he was killed soon after being taken into custody.
[105]
Abubakar Shekau
(2010 to May 18, 2021): Shekau was the second leader of Boko Haram, and leader of the JAS faction until mid-2021. The Nigerian military previously declared him dead at least four times since 2009, but he mocked these claims in jihadist videos released by his group.
[106]
Around May 18 2021, Shekau killed himself with explosives after being attacked by ISWAP in the Sambisa Forest. Allegedly, IS leader Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Quraishi ordered ISWAP to assassinate him because of his controversial killing of Muslim civilians.
[107]
Abu Musab al-Barnawi
(unknown to August 2021): Al-Barnawi initially served as a spokesman for Boko Haram. In 2013, he defected and joined Ansaru, a splinter group of Boko Haram. Al-Barnawi reportedly rejoined Boko Haram in 2015. After IS accepted Boko Haram’s pledge of allegiance in mid-2015, IS announced that Al-Barnawi would assume leadership of the group on August 3, 2016. However, two days later, Boko Haram leader Shekau released statements that claimed Al-Barnawi was an infidel and that the leadership change was a coup on part of IS. The leadership split resulted in the splintering of Boko Haram. Al-Barnawi led a faction known as the Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP), and Shekau regrouped the remaining Boko Haram members under the name Jama’atu Ahl al-Sunnah lil-Dawa wal-Jihad (JAS). After serving as the leader of ISWAP for nearly three years, reports suggest that Al-Barnawi was forced to step down from his position in a “bloodless coup.”
[108]
ISWAP announced that Abu Abdullah Ibn Umar al-Barnawi – known as Ba Idrissa – would assume leadership over the group.
[109]
Neither ISWAP nor IS offered an explanation for the leadership change, but Al-Barnawi reassumed leadership of ISWAP following Ba Idrissa’s death in March of 2020.
[110]
In August 2021, al-Barnawi was killed. Nigeria's military confirmed the death of Abu Musab al-Barnawi on October 14, 2021, with Chief of Defence Staff General Lucky Irabor asserting, "He is dead and remains dead," without providing further details.
[111]
Mamman Nur
(2002 to 2018): Nur was third-in-command of Boko Haram under Yusuf and second-in-command under Shekau. Nur reportedly directed Boko Haram’s 2011 attack of the United Nations headquarters in Abuja.
[112]
Frictions within the group over Shekau’s operational choices lead to the formation of a splinter group called Ansaru in January 2012. Although unconfirmed, Nur may have been a leader in Ansaru before later joining ISWAP around late 2016.
[113]
In mid-2018, Nur was assassinated by hardline ISWAP lieutenants who were frustrated with his “soft approach” as a military commander.
[114]
Abu Abdullah Ibn Umar al-Barnawi
(Ba Idrissa) (March 4, 2019 to March 3, 2020): Without an explanation of their decision, ISWAP announced in a March 2019 press release that Abu Abdullah Ibn Umar al-Barnawi (known as Ba Idrissa) would become leader of ISWAP.
[115]
The group’s previous leader, Al-Barnawi, was demoted within the group.
[116]
Reports suggest that he was forced to step down from his position in a “bloodless coup.”
[117]
In March 2020, Ba Idrissa was assassinated in “the most bloody and extensive move in the history of the group.”
[118]
The Shura Council ISWAP
(December 2021-Present)
:
Following the death of Abu Al-Barnawi, the ISWAP removed the traditional one-leader hierarchy in favor of a multi-head commander system with the Shura Council. Multiple top commanders assumed leadership positions in this non- “Wali” (translated as main guardian leader) group leadership dynamic.
[119]
Bakura Doro (
November 2022-Present): Doro gained leadership of the smaller JAS splinter group from Boko Haram after the suicide of Shekau. Born and raised in Doron Baga, a bustling market town in northern Borno, he initially participated in the informal economy before joining the Yusufiyya movement prior to the 2009 uprising. Despite lacking extensive religious knowledge, he quickly rose through the ranks due to his independence, becoming a mid-level commander, or munzir. When Boko Haram split in 2016, he chose not to follow Habib Yusuf into ISWAP, instead establishing himself on the northern shores of Lake Chad and earning Shekau's recognition as amir ul-fiya, or zone commander, for that area.
[120]
Rising through the ranks as an experienced leader, Bakura Doro has a very different leadership style when compared with Shekau. He declines media appearances and speeches/writing to the public. Instead, he fights alongside other militants in operations like raids on villages or attacks on ISWAP and the Nigerian Military.
[121]
Size Estimates
2013: 100s-1,000s (U.S. State Department)
[125]
2014: 15,000-20,000 (Combating Terrorism Center at West Point)
[126]
2024:
Boko Haram or JAS: 1,500-2,000 (U.S. Department of Defense)
[127]
ISWAP:  Around 5,000 (Australian National Security)
[128]
Name Changes
Boko Haram has never been the official name of the militant organization founded by Mohammad Yusuf. The group was given this nickname sometime in the 2000s by locals in Maiduguri, the group’s main headquarters at the time. The translation of “Boko Haram” means “Western education is forbidden” in Hausa and serves as a reference to the group’s strong aversion to not just education, but all aspects of Western culture.
[122]
Most observers use Boko Haram to refer to the organization. Even after the group splintered into ISWAP and JAS in 2016, both factions are often called Boko Haram in media reports.
2003-2010: Ahl al-sunna wa’l jama’a ala minhaj al-salaf (Association of the People of the Sunnah for the Implementation of the Salafs’ Model).
[123]
2010- 2015: Jamā‘atu ahl al-Sunna li’l-Da‘wa wa’l-jihād (Association of Sunnah People for Proselytization and Armed Struggle). Renamed after the violent uprisings in 2009 to further stress the division from the original Izala movement and reflecting the group’s violent logic.
[124]
2015-2016:  Islamic State’s West Africa Province (ISWAP). Renamed after Shekau pledged loyalty to the Islamic State in 2015.
2016-present (as of June 2024):
Jama’atu Ahl al-Sunnah lil-Dawa wal-Jihad (JAS). Faction formed within Boko Haram by Shekau after he was ejected from ISWAP by IS leadership in 2016. Now led by former chief commander, Bakura Doro.
Islamic State’s West Africa Province (ISWAP). Other faction formed within Boko Haram, originally led by Abu Musab al-Barnawi, following disputes between Shekau and IS.
Resources
Boko Haram began as a religious movement headed by Salafi preacher Mohammad Yusuf. Yusuf reportedly received funding from Salafi sources, including Osama Bin Laden who dedicated about $3 million in the early 2000s to the organization of Salafi jihadists in Nigeria.
[129]
After Yusuf’s death in 2009, Shekau took over the organization and forged ties with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), which further amplified the group’s resources. AQIM reportedly gave Boko Haram with $250,000 worth of funds in 2012. Additionally, AQIM provided training for Boko Haram militants in kidnapping and ransoming as a means of funding the group.
[130]
By 2014, Boko Haram had raised several million dollars from its own kidnapping operations. For example, the kidnapping of a French family traveling in Cameroon in 2013 yielded a $3.15 million ransom for the group.
[131]
U.S. officials estimate that Boko Haram receives at least $1 million in ransom payments for each wealthy Nigerian they abduct.
[132]
In January 2015, it was estimated that Boko Haram’s net annual income was about $10 million.
[133]
Boko Haram has skirted the negative effects of international sanctions by avoiding banks and limiting financial ties to other international actors.
[134]
Instead, Boko Haram relied on couriers and the
hawala
network – a system that operates independently of banks and relies on money brokers disturbing funds within the same network – to move money within Nigeria and across borders.
[135]
The group’s efforts to maintain a low-cost of operation have also protected it from state efforts to undercut its funding streams. Boko Haram does not use sophisticated weaponry and has stolen much of its arms and ammunition from the Nigeran army.
[136]
In mid-2016, Boko Haram split into two major factions: JAS and ISWAP. This organizational change led to occasional infighting between the splinters, restricting the group’s ability to effectively combine resources.
[137]
These struggles were exacerbated in the context of the severe Nigerian food crisis from 2016-2017 – that Boko Haram helped create – leaving the group unable to feed a large number of its troops.
[138]
In addition, the Nigerian government temporarily shut down the lucrative cattle trade in Maiduguri to restrict funding to the group. Security officials estimated that Boko Haram’s involvement in the trade was so extensive that a majority of the cattle in Maiduguri belonged to the group.
[139]
A combination of these factors reportedly caused Boko Haram to be unable to pay all their fighters by the start of 2017.
[140]
In addition to kidnappings, Boko Haram has used a variety of tactics to extort money from targeted towns and individuals. The group has robbed hundreds of banks and threatened business owners, politicians, and other officials with kidnapping if they do not pay bribes.
[141]
Boko Haram has also relied on donations, theft, and smuggling to raise money.
[142]
In some cases, Boko Haram offered no-interest loans and gifts to local businesses, and then pressured those who accepted these funds to smuggle or donate to the group or conscripted them when they could not pay back their loans.
[143]
Additionally, the group has raised money by collecting a security tax from local government officials in exchange for not attacking their districts.
[144]
In areas controlled by ISWAP in the Lake Chad region, civilians live their normal lives as they are provided security by the group. In exchange for food or cash, ISWAP secures trade routes and provides security for local pastoralists, fishermen, and traders.
[145]
The proceeds generated from Boko Haram’s engagement in other licit activities, like farming, fishing, and social service provision are estimated to be millions of dollars annually.
[146]
The group imposes taxes on the public toilets, potable water boreholes, and health clinics it builds in rural areas it controls, gaining support from local populations.
[147]
As it continues to exploit the gaps left by governments, Boko Haram’s economic strategy has made the group resilient.
JAS, under Bakura's leadership, has also adapted its tactics by beginning to implement a taxation system similar to ISWAP's in August 2023. Recent months have seen increased regulation of civilians by JAS, but the ISWAP's model remains more sustainable due to its structured governance, taxation system, and guidance from ISIS.
[148]
Locations
Disclaimer
: This is a partial list of where the militant organization has bases and where it operates. This does not include information on where the group conducts major attacks or has external influences.
Boko Haram was founded in Maiduguri, the capital of the northeastern state of Borno, Nigeria.
[149]
Most of the violence perpetrated by the group has taken place in Borno state, though it has carried out operations in neighboring northern states, such as Adamawa and Yobe.
[150]
Boko Haram also conducted more limited operations across Nigerian borders in Cameroon, Chad, and Niger.
[151]
In 2015, the Multinational Joint Task Force coalition pushed Boko Haram back from its expansive area of operations in northern Nigeran and into the 23,000 square mile Sambisa Forest in northeastern Nigeria.
[152]
Following the JAS/ISWAP split within Boko Haram in 2016, JAS has remained active in northeast Nigeria, though its primary stronghold has not expanded past the Sambisa Forest.
[153]
From 2017-2021, ISWAP operated in border zones surrounding Lake Chad, primarily operating in northeast Nigeria.
[154]
By occupying numerous Lake Chad villages, ISWAP has established state-like structures in the Nigerian areas of Abadam, Kukawa, Marte, and Monguno.
[155]
Expanding its reach, ISWAP extended its operations into southern Borno, northern Adamawa, and even the Mayo Sava and Mayo Tsanaga regions of Cameroon.
[156]
In 2024, Boko Haram remains a significant threat to civilians in Borno state, affecting 1.8 million people since 2020. The insurgency continues to spread to neighboring countries including Cameroon, Chad, and Niger in the Lake Chad region. Boko Haram continues to hold territories in the Sambisa Forest and Lake Chad Basin islands, and has extended its operations to northwest Nigeria, likely as a response to the ongoing military efforts by the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) in northeastern Nigeria and surrounding areas of the Lake Chad Basin.
[157]
Strategy
Vertical Tabs
Ideology and Goals
Boko Haram is a Salafi Islamist militant organization that opposes Western education and influence in Nigeria. Its founder Mohammad Yusuf was heavily influenced by the opinions of Ibn Taymiyyah, a fourteenth century scholar of Islamic fundamentalism. Yusuf originally followed and preached the Izala doctrine, which advocates the establishment of a Muslim society that follows the lessons of its pious salafs ­– meaning ancestors in Arabic – that lived at the same time of the prophet Muhammad.
[158]
Yusuf’s ideology evolved and radicalized into a philosophy that rejected all Western and secular aspects of Nigerian society.
[159]
Boko Haram originally advocated a doctrine of withdrawal from society but did not aim to overthrow the Nigerian government. Yusuf’s death and increased conflict with the Nigerian government in 2009 sparked the group’s vehement political opposition and turn to violence. When the group reemerged under the leadership of Abubakar Shekau in 2010, they were bent on challenging the Nigerian state for control of northeast Nigeria. For Shekau, Boko Haram was the victim of state-sponsored aggression and the voice of a larger Muslim constituency.
[160]
Like other Salafi militant groups, Boko Haram claims the right to declare any Muslim a heretic, rebel against infidel politicians, and use whatever force necessary to impose its interpretation of Islam.
[161]
However, Shekau’s indiscriminate violence against Muslim civilians angered the Islamic State, which Boko Haram pledged allegiance to in 2015. The ensuing ideological struggle between IS leadership and Shekau led to the splintering of the group in mid-2016, creating two factions: JAS and ISWAP. Although both factions seek to establish an Islamic caliphate in the Lake Chad area, ISWAP – under the leadership of Abu Musab al-Barnawi – has engaged in more state-building than their JAS counterparts. Under the leadership of Shekau, JAS has made little effort to institutionalize schools, Islamic courts, or provide services to the citizens in areas it controls.
[162]
Political Activities
Boko Haram has long opposed working within the Nigerian political system or cooperating with the government. Alex Badeh, Nigeria’s Chief of Defense Staff, announced on October 17, 2014, that the government had negotiated a ceasefire with Boko Haram. He also claimed that the group agreed to release the 300 schoolgirls who had been abducted in the Chibok kidnapping in April 2014. However, Shekau denied claims that the group had reached a truce with government forces in a video released on October 31, 2014.
[163]
Following Boko Haram’s internal split in 2016, opposition to the group’s cooperation with the government grew violent. In August of 2018, Mamman Nur, an ISWAP military commander, was assassinated by his lieutenants after releasing the Dapchi schoolgirls without receiving ransom from the Nigerian government. Nur’s leniency in government negotiations angered his associates who considered his actions disloyal.
[164]
Ali Gaga, an ISWAP military commander, was also killed by his own men in 2018 because of his plans to release over 300 hostages and surrender to Nigerian troops.
[165]
According to Colonel Timothy Antigha of the MNJTF, these assassinations portray the group as well-policed and intolerant of eccentricity from anyone.
[166]
In December of 2020, Boko Haram kidnapped more than 300 boys from a school in Katsina state. Six days later, allegedly due to government negotiations, Boko Haram released the schoolboys. In an announcement on Nigerian state TV, the governor of Katsina state, Aminu Bello Masari, claimed that the negotiations took place with “bandits,” not Boko Haram. He did not reveal if ransom payments were made for the exchange.
[167]
In August, 2023, Boko Haram kidnapped 49 women in Maiduguri, northeastern Borno State, Nigeria. The government, alongside the military, engaged in intense negotiations resulting in the release of the hostages. Initially, the kidnappers demanded a ransom of approximately $130 per woman. However, through persistent negotiation efforts, the ransom was reduced. The government maintained a firm stance against paying high ransoms to avoid encouraging such criminal activities. Despite the captors' brutal treatment of the women to pressure negotiators, the government's persistence eventually led to the release of the women.
[168]
Targets And Tactics
Boko Haram was largely peaceful in its beginning years and did not turn to violence until the July 2009 riots. In these riots, Boko Haram primarily targeted state and federal buildings, including police stations and prisons.
[169]
After Yusuf’s death and Abubakar Shekau’s assumption of leadership, Boko Haram turned towards civilian targets, destroying schools, religious institutions, markets, and entire towns. While the group relied mostly on arson and small arms, it also used improvised explosive devices (IEDs), vehicle-borne IEDs (VBIEDs), and suicide tactics after 2011.
[170]
Since August 2011, Boko Haram has utilized almost weekly suicide bombings against civilian and government targets.
[171]
Between 2011 and 2013, the group’s suicide bombings were carried out by male bombers largely against government targets. After 2014, Boko Haram relied heavily on female and child suicide bombers and deployed them against more civilian targets. As a result of media attention and global prominence, Boko Haram realized after the Chibok girls kidnapping that female participation in terrorist violence could stimulate additional shock, horror, and thus media value. Women were often less likely to be searched and could easily hide suicide vests in loose, billowy clothing, making them exceedingly valuable assets.
[172]
The group’s other goals, aside from direct revenge on the Nigerian state, include targeting other representations of Western authority. Boko Haram conducted its first attack on a Western interest in August 2011 ­­–­ using a VBIED at the UN headquarters in Abuja – killing at least 23 and injuring 87.
[173]
The following May, Boko Haram killed over 41 civilians in an attack on
ThisDay
newspaper in Abuja, Nigeria.
[174]
The group has also attacked foreign commercial interests, such as the 2018 attack on a Foraco water well site in southeastern Niger that killed 8 French nationals.
[175]
In August 2016, Boko Haram split into two factions. While both these factions, JAS and ISWAP, employed violence to achieve their goals, but they did so against a differing set of targets. The two groups held contrasting beliefs about the appropriateness of targeting Muslims and using child suicide bombers.
[176]
In 2017 for example, Shekau’s faction used four times more children in attacks than in the previous year. While ISWAP prefers to conduct large-scale attacks on military and government installations, JAS focuses on soft civilian targets like universities, churches, and especially displaced persons camps.
[177]
The number of attacks on these camps has risen since 2017, which helps turn governments against refugees and turns victims in suspects. Analysts argue that JAS’s focus on soft targets creates a high-profile media response that reinforces the group’s credibility as a threat.
[178]
Following the 2016 split, ISWAP’s technological capabilities surged ahead of its JAS counterparts. Videos released by the group picture up-armored suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosives devices (SVBIEDs), which Shekau’s faction did not have access to. Reports from 2019 indicate that ISWAP’s drones were more sophisticated than those of the Nigerian Army. These drones helped ISWAP to detect Nigerian military movements and conduct effective ambushes against them. Unlike their parent organization, ISWAP has refrained from using their drones to conduct complex attacks on urban areas or civilian targets, likely due to their long-term goal of governing the Lake Chad region.
[179]
ISWAP tactics contributed to a trend in lowered civilian casualties in the northeast and a rise in military deaths between 2018 and 2019.
[180]
As of 2024, both factions of the JAS and ISWAP continue to use hit-and-run tactics, leveraging the difficult terrain of northern Nigeria and the Lake Chad islands to evade and raid military forces.
[181]
Attacks
Disclaimer
: These are some selected major attacks in the militant organization’s history. It is not a comprehensive listing but captures some of the most famous attacks or turning points during the campaign.
July 27, 2009
: Boko Haram launched a series of attacks in Maiduguri and surrounding areas, following a Nigerian police raid at the home of one of Yusuf’s followers. The group responded to this raid by attacking a police station five days later.
[182]
Militant violence soon spread throughout Bauchi, Borno, Yobe, and Kano states, where the group set fire to churches, government buildings, and a prison.
[183]
Nigerian security forces responded by targeting the group’s headquarters in Maiduguri and arresting Yusuf and other group members. Over 800 people were killed in the violence, including Yusuf who died in custody (800+ killed, unknown wounded).
[184]
August 26, 2011
: A suicide bomber from Boko Haram crashed a car filled with explosives into the main building of the United Nations headquarters in Abuja (23 killed, 87 wounded).
[185]
January 20, 2012
: Boko Haram coordinated a series of bomb attacks and shooting sprees in the city of Kano, mainly targeting police stations (187 killed, 50 wounded).
[186]
September 17, 2013
: Boko Haram raided the town of Benisheik. Members disguised in military uniforms set up checkpoints just outside of the town and shot all those who tried to flee (142 killed, unknown wounded).
[187]
April 14, 2014
: Boko Haram kidnapped more than 300 girls between 16-18 years old from a secular school in Chibok in Borno State, Nigeria.
[188]
Dozens of girls escaped immediately after being taken by the group.
[189]
In November 2014, Boko Haram claimed that the remaining abducted girls had been converted to Islam and married.
[190]
After negotiations with the Nigerian government, Boko Haram released 21 girls in 2016. In 2017, the group traded 82 girls for the release of Boko Haram militants being held in Nigerian prisons.
[191]
Girls have also escaped on their own throughout the years.
[192]
As of January 2021, 112 girls remained unaccounted for and potentially still in Boko Haram’s custody (unknown killed, unknown wounded).
[193]
July 27, 2014
: Boko Haram kidnapped the wife of Cameroon Deputy Prime Minister, Amadou Ali, in an attack on the town of Kolofata in northern Cameroon. Akaoua Babiana, along with 27 others who had been kidnapped by Boko Haram on other occasions, were freed in October 2014 (3 killed, unknown wounded).
[194]
January 3-8, 2015
: Boko Haram attacked the towns of Baga and Doron Baga in the northern state of Borno, Nigeria over four days. Boko Haram shot indiscriminately from armored vehicles and set numerous buildings on fire. On January 12, the Nigerian government reported that 150 people had died in the attacks. However, other reports suggest that up to 2,000 people were killed. Satellite images released by Amnesty International provide evidence that an estimated 3,700 structures damaged or destroyed in the attacks (150-2,000 killed, unknown wounded).
[195]
January 18, 2015
: Boko Haram kidnapped 80 civilians from northern Cameroon, including many children. The Cameroonian army freed 24 hostages and pursued Boko Haram back to Nigeria (3 killed, 0 wounded).
[196]
February 6, 2015
: Boko Haram militants attacked Bosso in the first major attack in Niger, killing 57 and injuring 7 (57 killed, 7 wounded).
[197]
February 13, 2015
: Boko Haram attacked the village of Ngouboua in Chad and set a majority of homes in the village on fire before the Chadian military intervened. This was Boko Haram’s first attack in Chad. Observers suggest that the violence may have been carried out in revenge for Chad’s decision to join the Multinational Joint Task Force targeting Boko Haram (10 killed, 4 wounded).
[198]
March 28, 2015
: Boko Haram killed 41 people in an attempt to keep civilians from the polls on Nigerian Election Day (41 killed, unknown wounded).
[199]
October 10, 2015
: Five suicide bombers targeted a village in Chad in a series of coordinated attacks on a market and near a refugee camp. The bombers were identified as two women, two children, and one man. Their affiliation with Boko Haram was not confirmed, though authorities suspect that the group was responsible (36+ killed, 53+ wounded).
[200]
January 30, 2016
: Militants attacked Dalori, Nigeria with suicide bombs and allegedly burned children alive (86 killed, unknown wounded).
[201]
February 9, 2016
: Two women, aged between 17-20 years old, detonated suicide bombs at a displaced persons camp in Dikwa, Nigeria, near the border with Cameroon. The attack was reportedly meant to include three more suicide bombers. One female bomber chose not to set off her explosives when she realized her family had taken refuge at the camp. The other two did not detonate their bombs for unknown reasons. After being taken into custody, the surviving female bomber admitted that she and the others had been sent by Boko Haram to target the camp (58 killed, 78 wounded).
[202]
December 9, 2016
: Two school-aged girls simultaneously detonated suicide bombs in a market in Madagali, Nigeria. Boko Haram did not claim responsibility, but the attack was highly characteristic of the group’s approach to suicide bombings (56 killed, 57 wounded).
[203]
August 15, 2017
: Three female suicide bombers targeted civilians in Mandarari, Nigeria. One bomber set off her explosive belt near a camp constructed by internally displaced persons who had fled Boko Haram’s violence. Soon afterwards, the other two bombers targeted a nearby market. As with other suicide attacks, Boko Haram did not claim responsibility for the violence. However, it is widely suspected that the group was behind the attack (30 killed, 80+ wounded).
[204]
November 21, 2017
: A male teenage suicide bomber detonated explosives during services at a mosque in Mubi, Nigeria, near the border with Cameroon. Though Boko Haram did not claim the attack, officials blamed the group for the violence (50+ killed, unknown wounded).
[205]
January 17, 2018
: Two suicide bombers attacked a market near an internally displaced persons camp in Maiduguri, Nigeria. A woman detonated a suicide bomb inside the market, while a male bomber remained outside the market and only killed himself. Though Boko Haram did not claim responsibility for the attack, the group’s involvement is suspected (12 killed, 48+ wounded).
[206]
February 21, 2018
: Boko Haram seized 110 schoolgirls from a school in Dapchi, Nigeria.
[207]
March 2, 2018
: Boko Haram militants killed at least 11 people including three aid workers in an attack on a military barracks in the town of Rann, in northeastern Borno state near the Cameroon border. Two aid workers were contractors with the International Organization for Migration, and the third was a doctor employed as a consultant for UNICEF (11+ killed, unknown wounded).
[208]
November 22, 2018:
Boko Haram militants killed 8 French nationals in an attack on a Foraco water well site in southeastern Niger (8 killed, 5+ wounded).
[209]
November 22, 2018:
ISWAP militants killed at least 100 Nigerian soldiers in an attack on a military base in Metele, a village in northeast Borno (100+ killed, 96+ wounded).
[210]
February 1, 2019:
Boko Haram militants killed over 60 civilians in the northeast town of Rann, Nigeria, just one day after Nigerian military forces abandoned the area (60+ killed, unknown wounded).
[211]
February 12, 2019:
ISWAP militants attacked the 85-vehicle convoy of Borno’s state governor Kashim Shettima whilst he was on his way to a presidential rally in Maiduguri, Nigeria. Although precise figures were unavailable, one survivor told Reuters that they saw as many 100 bodies, with around 200 civilians taken captive (100+ killed, 60+ wounded).
[212]
March 22, 2019:
Boko Haram militants killed at least 23 U.S.-trained Chadian soldiers in what
Reuters
described as “the deadliest attack inside Chad by Boko Haram” (23 killed+, unknown wounded).
[213]
October 30, 2019:
Suspected Boko Haram militants killed 12 soldiers in an attack on a military position in the Diffa region of Niger (12 killed, 8 wounded).
[214]
December 12, 2019:
ISWAP militants executed four out of five humanitarian workers after kidnapping them from northeast Nigeria in July of 2019. Action Against Hunger says that the fifth aid worker remains at large (4 killed, 0 wounded).
[215]
December 26, 2019:
ISWAP militants killed 11 members of the Christian Association of Nigeria in a video released to the media. The group described their killings as revenge for the death of Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi (11 killed, 0 wounded).
[216]
January 6, 2020:
Boko Haram killed at least 30 people after detonating an improved explosive device in Camboru, Nigeria on a crowded bridge that leads into neighboring Cameroon (30+ killed, 35 wounded).
[217]
March 25, 2020:
JAS militants killed almost 100 Chadian soldiers in what the President of Chad, Idriss Deby, described as “the worst ever attack” on the country’s military (98 killed, dozens wounded).
[218]
June 13, 2020:
Over the course of three days, ISWAP militants killed at least 20 soldiers and more than 40 civilians in attacks in northeast Nigeria’s Borno state. The attacks, in the Monguno and Nganzai areas, targeted military facilities and hubs for international NGOs (60+ killed, hundreds wounded).
[219]
July 22, 2020:
ISWAP militants executed four aid workers and a private security guard in an attack in Maiduguri, Nigeria. Two aid workers were with International Rescue Committee, and the others were from Action Against Hunger (5 killed, unknown wounded).
[220]
August 2, 2020:
Boko Haram killed at least 16 people in a grenade attack on a refugee camp in the northern village of Nguetchewe, Cameroon (16+ killed, 20+ wounded).
[221]
December 11, 2020
: Boko Haram kidnapped more than 300 boys from a school in Katsina state. Six days later, allegedly due to government negotiations, Boko Haram released the schoolboys (0 killed, unkown wounded).
[222]
February 24, 2021:
Boko Haram militants killed at least 10 people by firing rocket-propelled grenades at the University of Maiduguri in northeastern Nigeria (10+ killed, unknown wounded).
[223]
March 10-14, 2021:
Boko Haram killed at least 37 Nigerian soldiers across four days between Monguno and Kukawa in Northeast Nigeria. Military and civilian sources said that at least 27 soldiers and 10 members of the Civilian Joint Task Force were killed in the attacks (37 killed, unknown wounded).
[224]
March 31, 2021:
Boko Haram shot down a Nigerian Air Force (NAF) Alpha Jet 475. Military officials reported that 2 NAF pilots were killed (2 killed, unknown injured).
[225]
August 21, 2021
[226]
: In an overnight assault, hundreds of Boko Haram militants launched an attack on a military outpost in southeastern Niger, near the village of Baroua, resulting in the deaths of 16 soldiers and wounding at least nine others. The group attacked this outpost with overwhelming numbers but was eventually repelled by the Nigerien military, which reported killing 50 militants during the confrontation (16 killed, 9+ wounded).
[227]
July 6, 2022
: In the Nigerian territory of Kuje, more than 400 prisoners went missing following a Boko Haram-led raid on a medium-security prison near Nigeria's capital, Abuja. The attack resulted in the deaths of four inmates, a security guard, and several attackers. Loud explosions and gunfire were heard during the raid, which saw nearly 1,000 inmates initially escaping, with 443 recaptured afterward. The Defense Minister confirmed that 64 jailed jihadists had escaped, orchestrated by Boko Haram. (5+ killed, unknown wounded).
[228]
March 22, 2023
: ISWAP fighters killed at least 30 fishermen in Mukdolo village, Ngala LGA, Borno State. The victims included internally displaced persons and members of the neighboring Dikwa LGA community. The terrorists wrapped the victims in their fishing nets, tortured them, and then opened fire. The United Nations condemned the attack, noting several were injured and others missing. (30 killed, several wounded).
[229]
November 2, 2023
: Boko Haram killed 20 mourners returning from the burial of victims of an earlier attack by the jihadists in Yobe State, northeastern Nigeria. The mourners died after their vehicle drove over an explosive device planted by the insurgents. Earlier, the militants had shot dead 17 people in a raid on Gurokayeya village after the villagers refused to pay a so-called harvest tax. Yobe police spokesman Dungus Abdulkarim stated that 10 members of the burial group died on the spot, while another 10 died at a health center where they were rushed for treatment (37 killed, unknown wounded).
[230]
May 24, 2024
: Ten people were killed and at least 160 villagers kidnapped from Kuchi village in Nigeria's central Niger State. Those kidnapped were mostly women and children, while those killed included local hunters providing security. The gunmen reportedly rode into Kuchi on motorbikes, spent time cooking food, making tea, and looting houses before leaving over two hours later. (10 killed, 160+ kidnapped).
[231]
Interactions
Vertical Tabs
Designated / Listed
U.K. List of Proscribed Groups: July 12, 2013 to Present
[232]
U.S. State Department Foreign Terrorist Organizations: November 13, 2013 to Present
[233]
United Nations Security Council:
Boko Haram: May 22, 2014 to Present
[234]
ISWAP: February 23, 2020 to Present
[235]
EU Designated Terrorist Organizations: May 28, 2014 to Present
[236]
Community Relations
Mohammed Yusuf, the founder of Boko Haram, first started to cultivate a following when he established a religious complex in Maiduguri. There, provided a variety of social services and public goods for the local community, including welfare handouts and a dispute settlement system. Yusuf’s complex grew to be “a state within a state,” with its own cabinet, religious police, and farm.
[237]
While Boko Haram was relatively popular under Yusuf, the group’s indiscriminate targeting of Muslims after Yusuf’s death diminished its popular support. Jama’ata Nasril Islam, a moderate group representing Nigeria’s Muslims, condemned Boko Haram’s actions as inhumane and “un-Islamic.”
[238]
Under Abubkar Shekau’s leadership, women and children were particularly vulnerable to recruitment or kidnapping. Women were often linked to Boko Haram militants through marriage or were otherwise coerced into suicide bombing missions by threats of violence or promises of eternal salvation.
[239]
In fact, Shekau’s treatment of women as well as his approval of child suicide bombings factored in a series of bitter internal disputes between Shekau and IS leadership. When the group later broke into two factions in August 2016 – JAS and ISWAP – the latter strengthened their position in the battle for hearts and minds.
[240]
In addition to focusing on military targets rather than civilian ones, ISWAP has provided amenities, security, and social justice in the areas it controls. For example, the group has built health clinics, public toilets, and potable water boreholes in several communities in the Lake Chad region.
[241]
They further exploit the gaps left by the Nigerian government by securing trade routes and creating an environment where locals can do business. ISWAP remains resilient by treating Muslim civilians better than its parent organization, better than JAS, and in many ways better than the Nigeria government has done since Boko Haram turned violent in 2009.
[242]
Relationships With Other Groups
From its founding in 2002 to Yusuf’s death in 2009, Boko Haram largely operated independently. The group did not engage in significant acts of violence; rather, it was primarily a religious organization with limited relations to outside militant groups. In the early 2000s, Yusuf reportedly received funds from Osama Bin Laden, though the nature of Yusuf’s direct ties to Al Qaeda, if any, is unclear.
[243]
After Shekau took over Boko Haram in 2009, the group forged ties with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). AQIM reportedly gave Boko Haram with $250,000 worth of funds in 2012. Additionally, AQIM provided training for Boko Haram militants in kidnapping and ransoming as a means of funding the group.
[244]
The frequency, lethality, and sophistication of Boko Haram’s attacks increased dramatically under Shekau, allegedly because of increased cooperation with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM).
[245]
In January 2010, Abdel Malek Droukdel, emir of AQIM, stated that AQIM would provide weapons, equipment, and men to the group.
[246]
After pledging allegiance to the Islamic State in 2015 and rebranding itself as ISWAP, Boko Haram ceased to receive funding or other support from AQIM. Following the organizational split in 2016, there is no evidence that JAS or ISWAP cultivated ties with AQ.
In January 2012, members who opposed killing Muslims split off from Boko Haram to form a faction named “Ansarul Muslimina Fi Biladis Sudan,” meaning “Vanguards for the Protections of Muslims in Black Africa,” known commonly as Ansaru.
[247]
The group, led by Khalid al-Barnawi, painted itself as the humane alternative to Boko Haram that would only attack Christians and the Nigerian government.
[248]
Analysts suggested that Boko Haram and Ansaru were operationally linked, with one describing Ansaru as the “external operations unit” of Boko Haram.
[249]
Al-Barnawi and other Ansaru members reportedly received training and support from AQIM.
[250]
The group conducted numerous attacks against foreigners in northern Nigeria and its neighbors between 2012 and 2014, launching it into the international spotlight.
[251]
However, Boko Haram’s relationship with Ansaru appeared to cease when authorities captured Khalid al-Barnawi in 2016.
[252]
In early March 2015, Boko Haram pledged allegiance to the Islamic State (IS).  Boko Haram militants were allegedly already traveling to train at IS camps.
[253]
In late March, IS accepted Boko Haram’s pledge and started to refer to Boko Haram as the Islamic State's West Africa Province (ISWAP).
[254]
IS also encouraged Muslims to join Boko Haram. Some analysts have argued that Boko Haram’s alliance with IS was a desperate move “to boost [Boko Haram] members’ morale, image and attract local support” after the Multinational Joint Task Force drove the group into the Sambisa Forest.
[255]
On August 3, 2016, IS announced that Abu Musab al-Barnawi, son of the founder of Boko Haram, would assume leadership of the group. Two days later, Shekau announced that Barnawi’s followers were manipulating IS leaders in order to undermine his power. Shekau asserted that he and his followers would not follow Barnawi, leading to the splintering of Boko Haram into ISWAP and JAS.
[256]
These two organizations have operated independently of each other with distinct leadership. In February 2020, the U.N. Security Council officially designated ISWAP as a “splinter group of JAS.”
[257]
However, as stated previously, the proximity of some JAS and ISWAP operations has made the attribution of certain attacks difficult, and the two groups have often been referred to interchangeably under the name of Boko Haram in many media reports.
Immediately following the splintering of Boko Haram, JAS and ISWAP began to clash numerous times through the end of 2016. According to reports, dozens of militants were killed on both sides. Since the beginning of 2017, infighting has reduced in intensity, but IS and ISWAP remained critical of Shekau.
[258]
IS levelled criticisms at Shekau, accusing him of mistreating Muslim civilians, misappropriating funds, and behaving in a dictatorial manner.
[259]
In June 2018, ISWAP even published a 120-page treatise in which it called Shekau “a tumor to be removed.”  Despite their clashes, Shekau continued to associate with IS. He never renounced his 2015 pledge to IS leader al-Baghdadi, and since early 2017, has used IS logos in media messages and produced high-quality videos “done in IS-style.” While Shekau could have been mimicking IS without prior approval, 2019 reports suggest that Shekau was attempting to court IS, with the latter keen on reunification between ISWAP and JAS. However, consistent fighting between the two Boko Haram factions rendered full reunification under the umbrella of IS unlikely.
[260]
In March 2019, ISWAP announced that Abu Abdullah Ibn Umar al-Barnawi – known as Ba Idrissa – would assume leadership over the group.
[261]
ISWAP’s then-leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi was demoted within the ranks.
[262]
Although neither ISWAP nor IS offered an explanation for the leadership change, the move coincided with other organizational changes by IS in Africa. In March 2019, Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS) was reportedly incorporated under the umbrella of Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP).
[263]
In subsequent media publications, IS used the term ISWAP to describe the attacks of both its affiliates in the Sahel and the Lake Chad region.
[264]
Despite this organizational change by Islamic State, the two groups are easily distinguishable in terms of geography and operation. ISGS operates in Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso, while ISWAP mainly operates around Lake Chad. For more information on ISGS, please see our
ISGS profile
.
In March of 2020, ISWAP leader Ba Idrissa was purged in what some have called “the most bloody and extensive move in the history of the group,” due to the nature of his assassination.
[265]
Analysts suggested that Ba Idrissa was removed on direct orders from IS because they wanted to “clean house” and exercise more direct authority over ISWAP’s activities.
[266]
Abu Musab Al-Barnawi was reappointed as the leader of ISWAP following Ba Idrissa’s death. After allegedly receiving direct orders from Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurashi, leader of Islamic State, in early 2021, Al-Barnawi launched an operation targeting JAS in the Sambisa Forest. Reports suggest that IS had finally had enough with Shekau’s “indiscriminate targeting of believers” that undermined IS efforts to further expand across Africa.
[267]
Shekau refused to surrender to ISWAP after being pursued through the forest for five days and killed himself via suicide vest around May 18, 2021. On June 6th, Al-Barnawi released a statement encouraging JAS militants to fight on and absorb into ISWAP’s ranks.
[268]
It is unclear what will happen to JAS following Shekau’s death. Some analysts suggest that Shekau’s followers will create a new faction, while a video released in June 2021 shows former JAS fighters pledging allegiance to ISWAP.
[269]
In 2023, there was a substantial reduction in ISWAP's claimed attacks, dropping from an average of 38 attacks per month in 2022 to just 21 in the first nine months of 2023. The group's activities outside northeastern Nigeria dwindled, with only four attacks reported throughout the year. This decline in operations coincided with a rise in ISWAP militants surrendering to authorities in both Nigeria and neighboring Niger, a shift from the previous years when JAS fighters primarily defected after Shekau's death in 2021. Notably, the defection of Kaila, a significant figure within ISWAP, underscored the internal pressures and challenges facing the group.
[270]
Conversely, JAS experienced a resurgence in 2023. The rate of defections from JAS decreased significantly, and Bakura Doro, the group's leader, successfully reestablished ties with a splinter group based near Gazuwa, known as the Shekau-Bakura Faction.  This consolidation increased JAS's strength, particularly in the Lake Chad region, where repeated ISWAP offensives failed to move them in the second half of the year. Despite these setbacks, ISWAP managed to reinforce its dominance in areas between Lake Chad and the Sambisa forest, continuing operations in Borno and eastern Yobe states. The group's activity surged towards the end of 2023, with a notable increase in attacks in November and December. ISWAP also demonstrated its reach beyond Borno, conducting multiple raids in Cameroon and resuming operations in central Nigeria by January 2024, including a deadly attack in Nasarawa state near Abuja.
[271]
State Sponsors And External Influences
There is no observable evidence that this group receives external support from foreign governments or third parties.
Footnotes
Footnotes:
[1]
Ewokor, Chris and Mackintosh, Thomas. “At least 160 Villagers Reported Taken in Deadly Raid” BBC News. May,26, 2024.
https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/ce55ylp7xxmo
.
[2]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 84-88.
[3]
Chothia, Farouk. “Who are Nigeria’s Boko Haram Islamists?” BBC News. May 20, 2014.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-13809501
.
[4]
Thurston, Alex. “‘The disease is unbelief’: Boko Haram’s religious and political worldview.” The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World, Analysis paper no. 22, January 2016, pg. 11-12.
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/brookings-analysis-paper_alex-thurston_final_web.pdf
; Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 106-112.
[5]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 88-92.
[6]
John Campbell, “Case Not Quite Closed on the Assassination of Nigerian Salafi Scholar Shaikh Jaafar Adam” (Council on Foreign Relations, April 10, 2020),
https://www.cfr.org/blog/case-not-quite-closed-assassination-nigerian-sa...
.
[7]
Pérouse de Montclos, Marc-Antoine.
Boko Haram: Islamism, Politics, Security and the State in Nigeria
. (2014), 215-216; Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 92-97.
[8]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 92-97 ; Thurston, Alex. “‘The disease is unbelief’: Boko Haram’s religious and political worldview.” The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World, Analysis paper no. 22, January 2016, pg. 11.
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/brookings-analysis-paper_alex-thurston_final_web.pdf
[9]
Walker, Andrew.
Special Report 308: What is Boko Haram
?. United States Institute of Peace. June 2012.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
[10]
Jideofor Adibe, “Explaining the Emergence of Boko Haram,” (Brookings, July 9, 2018),
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/africa-in-focus/2014/05/06/explaining-the...
.
[11]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 97-106.
[12]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 132-134.
[13]
Friedman, Uri. “The Bike-Helmet Law That Helped Trigger an Insurgency in Nigeria.” The Atlantic, May 22, 2014.
https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2014/05/the-bike-helme...
[14]
Sergie, Mohammed Aly and Toni Johnson. “Boko Haram.” Council on Foreign Relations. Updated Oct. 7, 2014.
https://web.archive.org/web/20170601154425/https://www.cfr.org/backgroun...
; Associated Press. “Nigeria accused of ignoring sect warnings before wave of killings.” The Guardian, August 2, 2009.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/02/nigeria-boko-haram-islamis...
[15]
Associated Press. “Nigeria accused of ignoring sect warnings before wave of killings.” The Guardian, August 2, 2009.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/02/nigeria-boko-haram-islamis...
[16]
Walker, Andrew.
Special Report 308: What is Boko Haram
?, United States Institute of Peace. June 2012.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
[17]
Fanusie, Yaya J. and Entz, Alex. “Boko Haram Financial Assessment.” Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance, Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, May 2017.
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/defenddemocracy/uploads/documents/CSIF_Boko_Haram.pdf
[18]
Joscelyn, Thomas. “
Osama bin Laden’s files: AQIM commander recommended training Boko Haram’s members
.”
FDD’s Long War Journal
. February 18, 2017.
https://www.longwarjournal.org/archives/2017/02/osama-bin-ladens-files-a...
[19]
“Nigeria attacks claimed by Islamist sect Boko Haram.” BBC News.  June 1, 2011.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-13618775
.
[20]
Murray, Senan and Adam Nossiter. “Suicide Bomber Attacks U.N. Building in Nigeria.” New York Times. Aug. 26, 2011.
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/27/world/africa/27nigeria.html?pagewanted...
[21]
Walker, Andrew.
Special Report 308: What is Boko Haram
?, United States Institute of Peace. June 2012.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
[22]
“Boko Haram attacks prompt Nigeria state of emergency.” BBC News. Jan. 1, 2012.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-16373531
.
[23]
“Boko Haram : Splinter Group, Ansaru Emerges,”
Vanguard Nigera
, February 1, 2012,
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2012/02/boko-haram-splinter-group-ansaru-eme...
.
[24]
Jacob Zenn, “Leadership Analysis of Boko Haram and Ansaru in Nigeria,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 2 (February 2014): pp. 23-29,
https://www.ctc.usma.edu/leadership-analysis-of-boko-haram-and-ansaru-in...
.
[25]
Jacob Zenn, “Leadership Analysis of Boko Haram and Ansaru in Nigeria,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 2 (February 2014): pp. 23-29,
https://www.ctc.usma.edu/leadership-analysis-of-boko-haram-and-ansaru-in...
.
[26]
Jacob Zenn, “Ansaru: Who Are They And Where Are They From?,” Council on Foreign Relations (Council on Foreign Relations, July 1, 2013),
https://www.cfr.org/blog/ansaru-who-are-they-and-where-are-they
.
[27]
Blanchard, Lauren. “Nigeria’s Boko Haram: Frequently Asked Questions.” Congressional Research Service. June 10, 2014.
http://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R43558.pdf
. Zenn, Jacob. “Nigerian al-Qaedaism” The Hudson Group. March 11, 2014.
https://www.hudson.org/research/10172-nigerian-al-qaedaism-
.
[28]
“Security Council Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee Adds Abubakar Mohammed Shekau, Ansaru to Its Sanctions List ”(United Nations Security Council, June 26, 2014),
https://www.un.org/press/en/2014/sc11455.doc.htm
.; “Individuals and Entities Designated by the State Department Under E.O. 13224,” (U.S. Department of State, November 13, 2013),
https://www.state.gov/executive-order-13224/
.
[29]
United States Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2016 - Foreign Terrorist Organizations: Jama'atu Ansarul Muslimina Fi Biladis-Sudan (Ansaru), July 19, 2017.
http://www.refworld.org/docid/5981e3d313.html
.
[30]
Kristof, Nicholas. “Bring Back Our Girls.” New York Times. May 3 2014.
[31]
“What now after Nigeria’s Boko Haram ceasefire fiasco?” BBC News. Nov. 3, 2014.
[32]
Blanchard, Lauren. “Nigeria’s Boko Haram: Frequently Asked Questions.” Congressional Research Service. June 10, 2014.
http://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R43558.pdf.
[33]
Nigeria Chibok abductions: what we know” BBC News, May 8, 2017. "Chibok Girls: Kidnapped Schoolgirl Found in Nigeria." BBC News, May 18, 2016.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-32299943
[34]
Searcy, Dionne. “Boko Haram Video is Said to Show Captured Girls from Chibok” New York Times, Jan. 15, 2018.
https://nyti.ms/2FEQmNp
; "Chibok Girls: Kidnapped Schoolgirl Found in Nigeria." BBC News, May 18, 2016. “Boko Haram: Frequently Asked Questions.” Congressional Research Service. June 10, 2014.
http://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R43558.pdf
.
[35]
Nigeria’s Boko Haram: Baga Destruction ‘shown in images’.” BBC News. Jan. 15, 2015.
[36]
Ola, Lanre and Ardoo Abdullah. “Nigeria repels suspected Boko Haram attack on Maiduguri City.” Reuters. Jan. 25, 2015.
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/01/25/us-nigeria-violence-maiduguri-idUSKBN0KY08720150125
.
[37]
Campbell, John. “Nigeria Security Tracker.” Council on Foreign Relations, last updated April 12, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/nigeria/nigeria-security-tracker/p29483
[38]
International Crisis Group. “What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?” Africa Report no. 291, July 7, 2020, pg. 2.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/291-what-role-multination...
[39]
Blair, David. “Boko Haram is now a mini-Islamic State, with its own territory.” The Telegraph. January 10, 2015.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/nigeria/11337722/Boko-Haram-is-now-a-mini-Islamic-State-with-its-own-territory.html
; “Boko Haram May Control Up To 20 Percent Of Nigeria.” All Things Considered, NPR, January 13, 2015.
https://www.npr.org/2015/01/13/377024729/boko-haram-may-control-up-to-20...
[40]
Nossiter, Adam. “Nigeria Postpones Elections, Saying Security is a Concern.” New York Times. Feb. 7, 2015.
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/08/world/africa/nigeria-postpones-elections-citing-security-concerns.html?_r=0
.
[41]
"Boko Haram Goes on Deadly Rampage after Chad Offensive." Al Jazeera America. February 4, 2015.
[42]
“Boko Haram Kills 41 as Millions of Nigerians Vote in Close Presidential Election." CTVNews/AP. March 28, 2015.
[43]
International Crisis Group. “What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?” Africa Report no. 291, July 7, 2020, pg. 4-7.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/291-what-role-multination...
[44]
International Crisis Group. “What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?” Africa Report no. 291, July 7, 2020, pg. 8.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/291-what-role-multination...
[45]
International Crisis Group. “What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?” Africa Report no. 291, July 7, 2020, pg. 7.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/291-what-role-multination...
[46]
International Crisis Group. “What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?” Africa Report no. 291, July 7, 2020, pg. 13.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/291-what-role-multination...
[47]
"Islamic State 'accepts' Boko Haram's Allegiance Pledge." BBC News. March 13, 2015.
[48]
Ruth Maclean, “Isis Tries to Impose New Leader on Boko Haram in Nigeria,”
The Guardian
, August 4, 2016,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/isis-tries-to-impose-new-l...
.
[49]
"Analysis: Islamic State Strengthens Ties with Boko Haram." BBC News. April 24, 2015.
[50]
Chandler, Adam. "The Islamic State of Boko Haram?" The Atlantic. Mar. 9, 2015.
[51]
International Crisis Group. “What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in Fighting Boko Haram?” Africa Report no. 291, July 7, 2020, pg. 13-21.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/291-what-role-multination...
[52]
Jack Moore, “Nigerian Military Enter 'Final Stages' of Boko Haram Offensive,”
Newsweek
, April 23, 2015,
https://www.newsweek.com/nigerian-military-enter-final-stages-boko-haram...
.
[53]
Vincent Foucher, “The Islamic State Franchises in Africa: Lessons from Lake Chad,” International Crisis Group, October 29, 2020,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/islamic-state-fra...
.
[54]
Vincent Foucher, “The Islamic State Franchises in Africa: Lessons from Lake Chad,” International Crisis Group, October 29, 2020,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/islamic-state-fra...
.
[55]
Ruth Maclean, “Isis Tries to Impose New Leader on Boko Haram in Nigeria,”
The Guardian
, August 4, 2016,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/isis-tries-to-impose-new-l...
.
[56]
Ludovica Laccino, “Boko Haram Splits as Abubakar Shekau and Abu Musab Al-Barnawi Fight for Leadership,”
International Business Times
, October 17, 2016,
https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/boko-haram-splits-abubakar-shekau-abu-musab-al...
.
[57]
Gartenstein-Ross, Daveed, and Jacob Zenn. "Boko Haram’s Doomed Marriage to the Islamic State." War on the Rocks, Aug. 26, 2016.
[58]
U.S. Congress, Senate. Committee on Armed Services,
Hearing to Consider the Nominations of: Lieutenant General Thomas D. Waldhauser, USMC, to be General and Commander, United States Africa Command; and Lieutenant General Joseph L. Lengyel, Ang, to be General and Chief of the National Guard Bureau
, June 21, 2016, 64-65,
https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/16-62_06-21-16.pdf
[59]
United Nations Security Council. “United Nations Security Council Consolidated List.” February 23, 2020.
https://scsanctions.un.org/consolidated/
[60]
“Boko Haram Breaks Up.”
The Economist
, August 11, 2016.
https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2016/08/11/boko-haram-breaks-up
.
[61]
Omar S Mahmood and Ndubuisi C Ani, “Factional Dynamics within Boko Haram,” (Africa Center for Strategic Studies, August 16, 2018),
https://africacenter.org/security-article/factional-dynamics-within-boko-haram/
.
[62]
Paul Carsten, “Nigerian Military Struggles against Islamic State in West Africa: Sources,”
Reuters
, September 19, 2018,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-security-military-idUSKCN1LZ1IF
.
[63]
Adam Withnall, “Boko Haram Descends into in-Fighting as Reports Emerge of Deadly Clashes between Rival Islamist Factions,”
The Independent
, September 8, 2016,
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/boko-haram-descends-fighting-reports-emerge-deadly-clashes-between-rival-islamist-factions-a7231726.html
; Dionne Searcey, “Boko Haram Falls Victim to a Food Crisis It Created,”
The New York Times
, March 4, 2016,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/05/world/africa/boko-haram-food-crisis.html
.
[64]
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Nigeria Situation, Situational Update - 01-30 November 2017, November 30, 2017.
[65]
“Nigerians fear 'no end in sight' to Boko Haram fight.”  Al Jazeera News, Oct. 1, 2017.
https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2017/10/nigerians-fear-sight-...
[66]
Human Rights Watch, World Report 2018 - Nigeria, January 18, 2018.
[67]
“Boko Haram Leader Mamman Nur 'Killed By His Closest Lieutenants' For Releasing Dapchi Girls,”
Sahara Reporters
, September 14, 2018,
http://saharareporters.com/2018/09/14/boko-haram-leader-mamman-nur-kille...
.
[68]
“Boko Haram Kills Commander over Plan to Release 300 Hostages and Surrender,”
The Defense Post
, September 30, 2018,
https://www.thedefensepost.com/2018/09/30/boko-haram-kill-commander-ali-gaga-plan-release-hostages-surrender-nigeria/
.
[69]
“Boko Haram Kills Commander over Plan to Release 300 Hostages and Surrender,”
The Defense Post
, September 30, 2018,
https://www.thedefensepost.com/2018/09/30/boko-haram-kill-commander-ali-...
.
[70]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” (International Crisis Group, May 23, 2019), pg. 1,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/273-facing-challenge-islamic-state-west-africa-province
.
[71]
“ISIS-Backed Boko Haram Faction Allegedly Gets New Leader.”
Punch
, March 5, 2019.
https://punchng.com/isis-backed-boko-haram-faction-allegedly-gets-new-le...
.
[72]
Jacob Zenn. “Islamic State in West Africa Province’s Factional Disputes and the Battle With Boko Haram.” Terrorism Monitor, Jamestown Foundation, March 20, 2020.
https://jamestown.org/program/islamic-state-in-west-africa-provinces-factional-disputes-and-the-battle-with-boko-haram/
[73]
“Boko Haram Leader, Al-Barnawi, Replaced in a Bloodless Coup.”
Vanguard
, March 16, 2019,
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2019/03/boko-haram-leader-al-barnawi-replaced-in-a-bloodless-coup/
.
[74]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” (International Crisis Group, May 23, 2019),
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/273-facing-challenge-islamic-state-west-africa-province
.
[75]
John Campbell, “Where Exactly Is the Islamic State in West Africa?,” Council on Foreign Relations, May 24, 2019,
https://www.cfr.org/blog/where-exactly-islamic-state-west-africa
.
[76]
Tomás F. Husted,
Boko Haram and the Islamic State’s West Africa Province
, CRS Report No. IF10173 (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2020),
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF10173.pdf
.
[77]
Jacob Zenn, “ISWAP Launches Hearts and Minds Strategy to Counter Nigerian Army Offensive,” Jamestown Foundation, June 4, 2021,
https://jamestown.org/program/iswap-launches-hearts-and-minds-strategy-t...
.
[78]
Jacob Zenn, “Boko Haram's Expansionary Project in Northwestern Nigeria: Can Shekau Outflank Ansaru and Islamic State in West Africa Province?,” Jamestown Foundation, July 28, 2020,
https://jamestown.org/program/boko-harams-expansionary-project-in-northw...
.
[79]
“Boko Haram Militants Kill Nearly 100 Chadian Soldiers in Attack.”
Reuters
. March 25, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN21C0VA
.
[80]
Bassim Al-Hussaini, “New ISWAP Boss Slays Five Rebel Leaders, Silences Clerical Tones,”
The Premium Times
, March 3, 2020,
https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/379975-new-iswap-boss-slays-five-rebel-leaders-silences-clerical-tones.html
.
[81]
Vincent Foucher, “The Islamic State Franchises in Africa: Lessons from Lake Chad,” International Crisis Group, October 29, 2020,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/islamic-state-fra...
.
[82]
Jason Burke, “Boko Haram Leader Killed on Direct Orders of Islamic State,”
The Guardian
, June 7, 2021,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jun/07/boko-haram-leader-abubakar...
.
[83]
Libby George and Paul Carsten, “Boko Haram Cleric Confirms Shekau's Death, Urges Fighters' Loyalty,” ed. Philippa Fletcher,
Reuters
, June 19, 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/boko-haram-cleric-confirms-shekaus-...
.
[84]
Kindzeka, Moki. ”Cameroon Says Hundreds Boko Haram Members Surrendering After Abubakar Shekau’s Death” VOA News. August 3, 2021.
https://www.voanews.com/a/africa_cameroon-says-hundreds-boko-haram-fight...
.
[85]
Mamane, Dalatou. “Boko Haram Militants Kill 16 Soldiers in Niger Attack” Military.com. August 26, 2021.
https://www.military.com/daily-news/2021/08/26/boko-haram-militants-kill...
.
[86]
The Cable. “‘29 insurgents’ killed as ISWAP, Boko Haram clash in Borno”
The Cable.
September 18th, 2022.
https://www.thecable.ng/29-insurgents-killed-as-iswap-boko-haram-clash-i...
.
[87]
Aljazeera. ”Nigeria: 7000 Boko Haram, other fighters surrender in a week” Ajazeera News. March 24, 2022.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/3/24/nigeria-7000-boko-haram-other-t...
.
[88]
International Crisis Group. “JAS vs. ISWAP: The War of the Boko Haram Splinters” International Crisis Report. March 28, 2024.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/b196-jas-vs-iswap...
.
[89]
International Crisis Group. “JAS vs. ISWAP: The War of the Boko Haram Splinters” International Crisis Report. March 28, 2024.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/b196-jas-vs-iswap...
.
[90]
International Crisis Group. “JAS vs. ISWAP: The War of the Boko Haram Splinters” International Crisis Report. March 28, 2024.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/b196-jas-vs-iswap...
.
[91]
International Crisis Group. ”After Shekau: Confronting Jihadists in Nigeria’s North” Crisis Group. March 29, 2022.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/after-shekau-conf...
.
[92]
Zenn, Jacob. “Boko Haram Pledges Loyalty to Mysterious New Leader: Abu Umaimata” The Jamestown Foundation. June 6, 2022.
https://jamestown.org/brief/boko-haram-pledges-loyalty-to-mysterious-new...
.
[93]
Khalid, Ishaq. “Nigeria Kuje prison break: More than 400 missing from Abuja jail” BBC News. July 6, 2022.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-62069753
[94]
Kindzeka, Moki. “Cameroon’s Large-Scale Boko Haram Attacks Leave Thousands Homeless” VOA News. April 19, 2023.
https://www.voanews.com/a/cameroon-s-large-scale-boko-haram-attacks-leav...
.
[95]
"The Killing of 30 Borno Fisherman” Sun News. March 22, 2023.
https://sunnewsonline.com/the-killing-of-30-borno-fishermen/
.
[97]
Matazu, Hamisu. “Farmers On The Run As Boko Haram Killings Return” Daily Trust. July 19, 2023.
https://dailytrust.com/farmers-on-the-run-as-b-haram-killings-return/
[98]
Matazu, Hamisu. “Farmers On The Run As Boko Haram Killings Return” Daily Trust. July 19, 2023.
https://dailytrust.com/farmers-on-the-run-as-b-haram-killings-return/
[99]
Aradi, Gloria. “Boko Haram kills 37 in Nigeria's Yobe state - police” BBC News. November 2, 2023.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-67272908
.
[100]
Abubakar, Mansur. “Nigeria's Boko Haram crisis: Dozens of women feared abducted in Gamboru Ngala” BBC News. March 6, 2024.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-68490001
.
[101]
Zenn. Jacob. “Brief: Is Boko Haram Bracing for Another ‘Quiet’ Year in 2024?” The Jamestown Foundation. January 12, 2024.
https://jamestown.org/program/brief-is-boko-haram-bracing-for-another-quiet-year-in-2024/
.
[102]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 84-88.
[103]
Thurston, Alex. “‘The disease is unbelief’: Boko Haram’s religious and political worldview.” The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World, Analysis paper no. 22, January 2016, pg. 11-12.
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/brookings-analysis-paper_alex-thurston_final_web.pdf
; Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 106-112.
[104]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 97-106
[105]
Walker, Andrew. “What is Boko Haram?” Speical Report 308, United States Institute of Peace, June 2012.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
; “Nigeria sect head dies in custody.” BBC News. July 31, 2009.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8177451.stm
.
[106]
Cocks, Tim. “Boko Haram ‘leader,’ killed repeatedly, continues to threaten Nigeria.” Reuters.  September 25, 2014.
[107]
Jason Burke, “Boko Haram Leader Killed on Direct Orders of Islamic State,”
The Guardian
, June 7, 2021,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jun/07/boko-haram-leader-abubakar...
.
[108]
“Boko Haram Leader, Al-Barnawi, Replaced in a Bloodless Coup.”
Vanguard
, March 16, 2019,
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2019/03/boko-haram-leader-al-barnawi-replaced-in-a-bloodless-coup/
.
[109]
“ISIS-Backed Boko Haram Faction Allegedly Gets New Leader.”
Punch
, March 5, 2019.
https://punchng.com/isis-backed-boko-haram-faction-allegedly-gets-new-le...
.
[110]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” (International Crisis Group, May 23, 2019),
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/273-facing-challenge-islamic-state-west-africa-province
.; Jason Burke, “Boko Haram Leader Killed on Direct Orders of Islamic State,”
The Guardian
, June 7, 2021,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jun/07/boko-haram-leader-abubakar...
.
[111]
BBC News. “Nigeria says Iswap leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi is dead” BBC News. October 14, 2021.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-58576635
.
[112]
U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Homeland Security. “Boko Haram: Growing Threat to the U.S. Homeland.”  Sep. 13, 2013.
http://homeland.house.gov/sites/homeland.house.gov/files/documents/09-13...
.
[113]
John Campbell, “New Audio Offers Potential Window Into ISWA Decision-Making,” Council on Foreign Relations, June 13, 2019,
https://www.cfr.org/blog/new-audio-offers-potential-window-iswa-decision...
.
[114]
“Boko Haram Leader Mamman Nur 'Killed By His Closest Lieutenants' For Releasing Dapchi Girls,”
Sahara Reporters
, September 14, 2018,
http://saharareporters.com/2018/09/14/boko-haram-leader-mamman-nur-kille...
.
[115]
“ISIS-Backed Boko Haram Faction Allegedly Gets New Leader.”
Punch
, March 5, 2019.
https://punchng.com/isis-backed-boko-haram-faction-allegedly-gets-new-le...
.
[116]
Jacob Zenn. “Islamic State in West Africa Province’s Factional Disputes and the Battle With Boko Haram.” Terrorism Monitor, Jamestown Foundation, March 20, 2020.
https://jamestown.org/program/islamic-state-in-west-africa-provinces-factional-disputes-and-the-battle-with-boko-haram/
[117]
“Boko Haram Leader, Al-Barnawi, Replaced in a Bloodless Coup.”
Vanguard
, March 16, 2019,
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2019/03/boko-haram-leader-al-barnawi-replaced-in-a-bloodless-coup/
.
[118]
Bassim Al-Hussaini, “New ISWAP Boss Slays Five Rebel Leaders, Silences Clerical Tones,”
The Premium Times
, March 3, 2020,
https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/379975-new-iswap-boss-slays-five-rebel-leaders-silences-clerical-tones.html
.
[119]
Samuel. Malik. ”Islamic State fortifies its position in the Lake Chad Basin” Institute for Security Studies” July 13. 2021.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/islamic-state-fortifies-its-position-in-...
.
[120]
International Crisis Group. “JAS vs. ISWAP: The War of the Boko Haram Splinters” International Crisis Report. March 28, 2024.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/b196-jas-vs-iswap...
.
[121]
Zenn. Jacob. ”Brief: Three Years After Death of Shekau, Boko Haram Appears to Gain on ISWAP Under Leadership of Bakura” Jamestown Foundation. May 30, 2024.
https://jamestown.org/program/brief-three-years-after-death-of-shekau-bo...
!
[122]
Walker, Andrew. “What is Boko Haram?” Speical Report 308, United States Institute of Peace, June 2012.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
[123]
Perouse de Montclos, Marc-Antoine, editor.  “Boko Haram: Islamism, politics, security, and the state in Nigeria.” West African Politics and Society Series, Vol. 2. African Studies Center 2014.
[124]
Perouse de Montclos, Marc-Antoine, editor.  “Boko Haram: Islamism, politics, security, and the state in Nigeria.” West African Politics and Society Series, Vol. 2. African Studies Center 2014.
[125]
U.S. Department of State. “Foreign Terrorist Organizations.” 2013 Country Reports on Terrorism. April 2014.
http://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2013/224829.htm
.
[126]
Zenn, Jacob. “Boko Haram: Recruitment, Financing, and Arms Trafficking in the Lake Chad Region.” CTC Sentinel, Vol. 7, Issue 10.  October 2014.
[127]
Department of Defense.
East Africa Counterterrorism Operation and North and West Africa Counterrorism Operation Lead Inspector General Report to the United States Congress.
Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2020.
https://media.defense.gov/2020/Nov/25/2002541626/-1/-1/1/LEAD%20IG%20EAST%20AFRICA%20AND%20NORTH%20AND%20WEST%20AFRICA%20COUNTERTERRORISM%20OPERATIONS.PDF
.
[128]
Australian National Security. ”Islamic State West Africa Province” Australian Government. July 3, 2023.
https://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/what-australia-is-doing/terrorist-or...
.
[129]
“Curbing Violence in Nigeria (II): The Boko Haram Insurgency.” International Crisis Group, Africa Report no. 216, April 3, 2014, pg. 23.
https://d2071andvip0wj.cloudfront.net/curbing-violence-in-nigeria-II-the-boko-haram-insurgency.pdf
[130]
Cocks, Tim. “Boko Haram too extreme for 'al Qaeda in West Africa' brand.” Reuters, May 28, 2014.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-bokoharam-analysis/boko-haram-too-extreme-for-al-qaeda-in-west-africa-brand-idUSKBN0E81D320140528
[131]
Stewart, Phil, and Lesley Wroughton. “How Boko Haram is beating U.S. efforts to choke its financing.” Reuters, June 30, 2014.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-nigeria-bokoharam-insight/how-boko-haram-is-beating-u-s-efforts-to-choke-its-financing-idUSKBN0F636920140701
[132]
Phil Stewart and Lesley Wroughton, “How Boko Haram Is Beating U.S. Efforts to Choke Its Financing,”
Reuters
, July 1, 2014,
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN0F636920140701
.
[133]
Chothia, Farouk. “Boko Haram crisis: How have Nigeria's militants become so strong?” BBC News, January 26, 2015.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-30933860
; Weber, Peter. “Who's financing Boko Haram?” The Week, January 8, 2015.
https://theweek.com/articles/447032/whos-financing-boko-haram
[134]
Stewart, Phil, and Lesley Wroughton. “How Boko Haram is beating U.S. efforts to choke its financing.” Reuters, June 30, 2014.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-nigeria-bokoharam-insight/how-boko-haram-is-beating-u-s-efforts-to-choke-its-financing-idUSKBN0F636920140701
[135]
Stewart, Phil, and Lesley Wroughton. “How Boko Haram is beating U.S. efforts to choke its financing.” Reuters, June 30, 2014.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-nigeria-bokoharam-insight/how-boko-haram-is-beating-u-s-efforts-to-choke-its-financing-idUSKBN0F636920140701
[136]
Stewart, Phil, and Lesley Wroughton. “How Boko Haram is beating U.S. efforts to choke its financing.” Reuters, June 30, 2014.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-nigeria-bokoharam-insight/how-boko-haram-is-beating-u-s-efforts-to-choke-its-financing-idUSKBN0F636920140701
[137]
Yaya J Fanusie and Alex Entz, “Boko Haram Financial Assessment,”
Center on Sanctions & Illicit Finance: Foundation for Defense of Democracies
, May 2017, pg.4,
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/defenddemocracy/uploads/documents/CSI...
.
[138]
Dionne Searcey, “Boko Haram Falls Victim to a Food Crisis It Created,”
The New York Times
, March 4, 2016,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/05/world/africa/boko-haram-food-crisis.html
.
[139]
Yaya J Fanusie and Alex Entz, “Boko Haram Financial Assessment,”
Center on Sanctions & Illicit Finance: Foundation for Defense of Democracies
, May 2017, pg.10,
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/defenddemocracy/uploads/documents/CSI...
.
[140]
United Nations Security Council, “Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat,” February 2, 2017, pg. 7,
https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/858378?ln=en
[141]
Chothia, Farouk. “Boko Haram crisis: How have Nigeria's militants become so strong?” BBC News, January 26, 2015.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-30933860
[142]
United Nations Security Council, “Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat,” February 2, 2017.
http://www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D27-4E9C-8CD3-C...
[143]
Fanusie, Yaya J. and Entz, Alex. “Boko Haram Financial Assessment” Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance, Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, May 2017.
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/defenddemocracy/uploads/documents/CSI...
[144]
Fanusie, Yaya J. and Entz, Alex. “Boko Haram Financial Assessment” Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance, Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, May 2017.
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/defenddemocracy/uploads/documents/CSI...
[145]
Paul A. Onuh et al., “Engagement in Licit Ventures by Terrorist Organisations and Terrorism Financing in the Lake Chad Region,”
Cogent Social Sciences
7, no. 1 (January 2021), pg. 8,
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311886.2021.1920708
.
[146]
Paul A. Onuh et al., “Engagement in Licit Ventures by Terrorist Organisations and Terrorism Financing in the Lake Chad Region,”
Cogent Social Sciences
7, no. 1 (January 2021), pg. 10,
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311886.2021.1920708
.
[147]
Malik Samuel, “Economics of Terrorism in Lake Chad Basin,” Institute for Security Studies Africa, July 10, 2019,
https://issafrica.org/amp/iss-today/economics-of-terrorism-in-lake-chad-...
.
[148]
Iyorah, Festus. ” Rivalry among Boko Haram factions compounds violence in northern Nigeria” Aljazeera. September 8, 2023.
https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2023/9/8/rivalry-among-boko-haram-factions-compounds-violence-in-northern-nigeria
.
[149]
Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 84-88.
[150]
Campbell, John. “Nigeria Security Tracker.” Council on Foreign Relations, last updated April 12, 2021.
https://www.cfr.org/nigeria/nigeria-security-tracker/p29483
[151]
“Boko Haram.” Counterterrorism Guide, National Counterterrorism Center, U.S. Director of National Intelligence.
https://www.dni.gov/nctc/groups/boko_haram.html
[152]
Withnall, Adam. “Boko Haram renames itself Islamic State's West Africa Province (Iswap) as militants launch new offensive against government forces.”  The Independent, April 26, 2015.
[153]
Fanusie, Yaya J. and Entz, Alex. “Boko Haram Financial Assessment” Center on Sanctions & Illicit Finance: Foundation for the Defense of Democracies. May 2017.
http://www.defenddemocracy.org/content/uploads/documents/CSIF_Boko_Haram.pdf/
.
[154]
Tomás F. Husted,
Boko Haram and the Islamic State’s West Africa Province
, CRS Report No. IF10173 (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2020),
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF10173.pdf
.
[155]
Malik Samuel, “Economics of Terrorism in Lake Chad Basin,” Institute for Security Studies Africa, July 10, 2019,
https://issafrica.org/amp/iss-today/economics-of-terrorism-in-lake-chad-...
.
[156]
International Crisis Group. ”After Shekau: Confronting Jihadists in Nigeria’s North” Crisis Group. March 29, 2022.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/after-shekau-conf...
.
[157]
ACLED Data. “A Decade After Chibok: Assessing Nigeria’s Regional Response to Boko Haram” ACLED. April 16, 2024.
https://acleddata.com/2024/04/16/a-decade-after-chibok-assessing-nigeria...
.
[158]
Thurston, Alex. “‘The Disease Is Unbelief’: Boko Haram’s Religious and Political Worldview.”
The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World
, no. 22 (January 2016),
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Brookings-Analysis-...
[159]
Perouse de Montclos, Marc-Antoine, editor.  “Boko Haram: Islamism, politics, security, and the state in Nigeria.” West African Politics and Society Series, Vol. 2. African Studies Center 2014.
[160]
Thurston, Alex. “‘The Disease Is Unbelief’: Boko Haram’s Religious and Political Worldview.”
The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World
, no. 22 (January 2016), pg. 17,
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Brookings-Analysis-...
[161]
Thurston, Alex. “‘The Disease Is Unbelief’: Boko Haram’s Religious and Political Worldview.”
The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World
, no. 22 (January 2016), pg. 9,
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Brookings-Analysis-...
[162]
Thurston, Alex. “‘The Disease Is Unbelief’: Boko Haram’s Religious and Political Worldview.”
The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World
, no. 22 (January 2016), pg. 21,
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Brookings-Analysis-...
[163]
“Boko Haram denies ceasefire claim by Nigeria’s government.” BBC News. Nov. 1, 2014.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-29859587
.
[164]
“Boko Haram Leader Mamman Nur 'Killed By His Closest Lieutenants' For Releasing Dapchi Girls,”
Sahara Reporters
, September 14, 2018,
http://saharareporters.com/2018/09/14/boko-haram-leader-mamman-nur-kille...
.
[165]
“Boko Haram Kills Commander over Plan to Release 300 Hostages and Surrender,”
The Defense Post
, September 30, 2018,
https://www.thedefensepost.com/2018/09/30/boko-haram-kill-commander-ali-gaga-plan-release-hostages-surrender-nigeria/
.
[166]
Timothy Antigha, “Counter – Insurgency: The Broader Implications Of Recent Execution Of Boko Haram Commanders,”
Sahara Reporters
, October 8, 2018,
http://saharareporters.com/2018/10/08/counter-%E2%80%93-insurgency-broad...
.
[167]
Paquette, Danielle. “Boko Haram claims kidnapping of over 300 boys in Nigeria, marking an alarming move West.” The Washington Post, December 16, 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/boko-haram-nigeria-300-boys-kidnap/2020/12/15/98a4bf32-3eaf-11eb-b58b-1623f6267960_story.html
; Carley Petesch and Haruna Umar, “Nigerian Official: More than 300 Abducted Schoolboys Freed,”
AP News
, December 17, 2020,
https://apnews.com/article/science-africa-nigeria-west-africa-315870ac37...
.
[168]
Kingimi, Ahmed. “Boko Haram frees 49 women kidnapped in Nigeria's Borno state” Reuters. August 25, 2023.
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/boko-haram-frees-49-women-kidnapped-nigerias-borno-state-2023-08-25/
.
[169]
Associated Press. “Nigeria accused of ignoring sect warnings before wave of killings.” The Guardian, August 2, 2009.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/02/nigeria-boko-haram-islamis...
[170]
Walker, Andrew.
Special Report 308: What is Boko Haram
?, United States Institute of Peace. June 2012.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
[171]
Walker, Andrew.
Special Report 308: What is Boko Haram
?, United States Institute of Peace. June 2012, pg. 6.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
[172]
Warner, Jason and Hilary Matfess. “Exploding Stereotypes: The Unexpected Operational and Demographic Characteristics of Boko Haram’s Suicide Bombers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point Report. August 9, 2017.
https://ctc.usma.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Exploding-Stereotypes-1.pdf
[173]
Murray, Senan and Adam Nossiter. “Suicide Bomber Attacks U.N. Building in Nigeria.” New York Times. Aug. 26, 2011.
[174]
“Nigeria's Boko Haram Militants Claim ThisDay Attacks,”
BBC News
, May 2, 2012,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-17926097
.
[175]
“Eight Killed in Attack on Foraco Well Site in Niger.”
Reuters
, November 22, 2018.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1NR0QY
.
[176]
“Boko Haram Breaks Up.”
The Economist
, August 11, 2016.
https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2016/08/11/boko-haram-breaks-up
.
[177]
Omar S Mahmood and Ndubuisi C Ani, “Factional Dynamics within Boko Haram,” (Africa Center for Strategic Studies, August 16, 2018),
https://africacenter.org/security-article/factional-dynamics-within-boko-haram/
.
[178]
Aimee-Noel Mbiyozo, “How Boko Haram Specifically Targets Displaced People,”
Institute for Security Studies
, December 6, 2017,
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/policybrief109...
.
[179]
“IntelBrief: The Islamic State in West Africa Province Is Growing in Strength and Sophistication,” The Soufan Center, October 1, 2019,
https://thesoufancenter.org/intelbrief-the-islamic-state-in-west-africa-...
.
[180]
Iyorah, Festus. ” Rivalry among Boko Haram factions compounds violence in northern Nigeria” Aljazeera. September 8, 2023.
https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2023/9/8/rivalry-among-boko-haram-factions-compounds-violence-in-northern-nigeria
.
[181]
ACLED Data. “A Decade After Chibok: Assessing Nigeria’s Regional Response to Boko Haram” ACLED. April 16, 2024.
https://acleddata.com/2024/04/16/a-decade-after-chibok-assessing-nigeria...
.
[182]
Friedman, Uri. “The Bike-Helmet Law That Helped Trigger an Insurgency in Nigeria.” The Atlantic, May 22, 2014.
https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2014/05/the-bike-helme...
[183]
Sergie, Mohammed Aly and Toni Johnson. “Boko Haram.” Council on Foreign Relations. Updated Oct. 7, 2014.
https://web.archive.org/web/20170601154425/https://www.cfr.org/backgroun...
; Associated Press. “Nigeria accused of ignoring sect warnings before wave of killings.” The Guardian, August 2, 2009.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/02/nigeria-boko-haram-islamis...
[184]
“Boko Haram timeline: From preachers to slave raiders.” BBC News. May 15, 2013.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-22538888
.  “Incident Summary.” Global Terrorism Database. Version GTDIS: 200907270029. University of Maryland.
http://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/search/IncidentSummary.aspx?gtdid=200907270029
.; Associated Press. “Nigeria accused of ignoring sect warnings before wave of killings.” The Guardian, August 2, 2009.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/02/nigeria-boko-haram-islamis...
[185]
Murray, Senan and Adam Nossiter. “Suicide Bomber Attacks U.N. Building in Nigeria.” New York Times. Aug. 26, 2011.
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/27/world/africa/27nigeria.html?pagewanted...
[186]
Oboh, Mike. “Islamist insurgents kill over 178 in Nigeria’s Kano.” Reuters. Jan. 22, 2012.
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/01/22/us-nigeria-violence-idUSTRE80L0A020120122
.
[187]
“Nigeria’s Boko Haram Unrest: Scores dead in Benisheik raid.” BBC News.  September 19, 2013.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-24169992
.
[188]
“Chibok abductions in Nigeria: More than 230 seized.” BBC News. April 21, 2014.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-27101714
.
[189]
Busari, Stephanie. “Several remaining missing Chibok schoolgirls escape from Boko Haram.” CNN, January 29, 2021.
https://www.cnn.com/2021/01/29/africa/nigeria-chibok-girls-escape-intl/index.html
[190]
“Missing Nigerian schoolgirls ‘married off.’” Al Jazeera, November 1, 2014.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2014/11/1/missing-nigerian-schoolgirls-ma...
[191]
Busari, Stephanie. “Several remaining missing Chibok schoolgirls escape from Boko Haram.” CNN, January 29, 2021.
https://www.cnn.com/2021/01/29/africa/nigeria-chibok-girls-escape-intl/index.html
[192]
Maclean, Ruth. “Kidnapped Boko Haram girls make long walk to freedom.” The Times, October 12, 2014.
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/kidnapped-boko-haram-girls-make-long-walk-to-freedom-793qjjfnzgk
; Winsor, Morgan, and James Bwala. “More Chibok girls have escaped from Boko Haram almost 7 years later, parents say.” ABC News, January 21, 2021.
https://abcnews.go.com/International/chibok-girls-escaped-boko-haram-yea...
[193]
Busari, Stephanie. “Several remaining missing Chibok schoolgirls escape from Boko Haram.” CNN, January 29, 2021.
https://www.cnn.com/2021/01/29/africa/nigeria-chibok-girls-escape-intl/index.html
[194]
Musa, Tansa. “Boko Haram Kidnaps wife of Cameroon’s vice PM, kills at least three.” Reuters.  July 27, 2014.
http://in.reuters.com/article/2014/07/27/uk-cameroon-violence-boko-haram-idINKBN0FW0CK20140727
; “Cameoon flies freed Boko Haram hostages to capital.” BBC News. Oct. 11, 2014.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-29581495
.
[195]
Abdullah, Ardo. “Boko Haram kills dozens in fresh raids in Nigerian town.” Reuters. Jan. 8, 2015.
http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/01/08/uk-nigeria-violence-toll-idUKKB...
“Nigeria’s Boko Haram: Baga Destruction ‘shown in images’.” BBC News. Jan. 15 2015.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-30826582.}
}
[196]
Nzouankeu, Anne and Tansa Musa. “Suspected Boko Haram Fighters kidnap around 80 in Cameroon.” Reuters. Jan. 18, 2015.
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/01/18/us-nigeria-violence-cameroon-idUSKBN0KR0R420150118
; Farge, Emma. “Cameroon frees 24 hostages after suspected Boko Haram kidnapping.” Reuters. Jan. 19, 2015.
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/01/19/us-nigeria-violence-cameroon-i...
.
[197]
Hama, Boureima. “'109 Boko Haram fighters dead' after first attack on Niger.” Agence France Presse, February 6, 2015.
https://news.yahoo.com/first-boko-haram-attack-niger-witnesses-000757903.html
.
[198]
“Nigeria’s Boko Haram militants attack Chad for the first time.” BBC News.  Feb. 13, 2015.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-31453951
.
[199]
"Boko Haram Kills 41 as Millions of Nigerians Vote in Close Presidential Election." CTVNews. March 28, 2015. Reported by Michelle Faul and Haruna Umar, Associated Press.
[200]
Winsor, Morgan. "Boko Haram Claims Responsibility For Suicide Bombings Near Nigeria's Capital Abuja." International Business Times, Oct. 5, 2015; "Suspected Boko Haram Suicide Attacks Kill Dozens in Chad." France 24, Oct. 10, 2015.
[201]
Onyanga-Omara, Jane. "Survivor Claims Boko Haram Burned Kids Alive in Attack That Kills 86."  USA Today, Feb. 1, 2016.
[202]
Abubakar, Aminu, Don Melvin, and Stephanie Busari. “Female suicide bombers kill 58 in a Nigerian camp meant to be a haven.” CNN, February 11, 2016.
https://www.cnn.com/2016/02/11/africa/nigeria-suicide-bombing-boko-haram...
[203]
Ande, Emmanuel, and Adro Hazzard. “Schoolgirl suicide bombers kill 56 in Nigerian market: official.” Reuters, December 6, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-security-idUSKBN13Y1QR?il=0
[204]
McKirdy, Euan and Abubakar, Aminu. “Dozens killed in northern Nigeria triple suicide attack.” CNN News. Aug. 16, 2017.
https://www.cnn.com/2017/08/15/africa/nigeria-triple-suicide-attack/index.html
[205]
Akinwotu, Emmanuel. Searcery, Dionne. “Nigeria Mosque Targeted in Deadly Suicide Bombing.” The New York Times. Nov. 21, 2017.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/21/world/africa/nigeria-bombing-mosque.html
[206]
Abdulrahim, Ismail Alfa. “Suicide attack at market in Nigeria’s Maiduguri kills 12.” Associated Press, January 17, 2018.
https://apnews.com/article/a6e4daa4be6440ef81c5f300118aa756
; Kingimi, Ahmed, and Ola Lanre. “Suspected Boko Haram suicide bombers kill 12, injure 48.” Reuters, January 17, 2018.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-security/suspected-boko-haram-suicide-bombers-kill-12-injure-48-idUSKBN1F627C
[207]
Searcey Dionne, and Emmanuel Akinwotu.  “Boko Haram Storms Girls’ School in Nigeria, Renewing Fears,” The New York Times, Feb. 21, 2018; Gopep, Jonathan, Dionne Searcey, and Emmanuel Akinwotu. “Boko Haram’s Seizure of 110 Girls Taunts Nigeria, and Its Leader.”  The New York Times, March 18, 2018.
[208]
Carsten
,
Paul
.
“
Suspected Boko Haram militants kill 11 including three aid workers in Nigeria
,”
Reuters
World News
, March 2, 2018.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-security/suspected-boko-haram-militants-kill-11-including-three-aid-workers-in-nigeria-idUSKCN1GE14Z
.
[209]
“Eight Killed in Attack on Foraco Well Site in Niger.”
Reuters
, November 22, 2018.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1NR0QY
.
[210]
“Militants Kill around 100 Nigerian Soldiers in Attack on Army Base: Sources.”
Reuters
, November 22, 2018.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1NR1SR
.
[211]
“After Nigerian Army Abandoned Town, Boko Haram Slaughtered at Least 60.”
Reuters
, February 1, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1PQ55I
.
[212]
“Attack on Nigeria Governor's Convoy Deadlier than Government Said: Witnesses, Security Officials.”
Reuters
, February 12, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1QB1KG
.
[213]
“Boko Haram Militants Kill 23 Chad Soldiers: Security Sources.”
Reuters
, March 22, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1R3131
.
[214]
“Twelve Niger Soldiers Killed in Probable Boko Haram Attack: Ministry.”
Reuters
, October 30, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN1X92J2
.
[215]
“Armed Group Claims Killing Four Humanitarian Hostages in Nigeria, Aid Organization Says.”
Reuters
, December 13, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN1YH2AT
.
[216]
“Islamic State Says It Beheaded Christian Captives in Nigeria.”
Reuters
, December 27, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN1YV14J
.
[217]
“Thirty Killed in Northeast Nigeria Bomb Blast on Crowded Bridge.”
Reuters
. January 6, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN1Z526J
.
[218]
“Boko Haram Militants Kill Nearly 100 Chadian Soldiers in Attack.”
Reuters
. March 25, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN21C0VA
.
[219]
“Militants Kill 20 Soldiers, 40 Civilians in Northeast Nigeria Attacks.” World News. Reuters, June 13, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN23K0VT
.
[220]
Adler, Leslie. “Islamist Militants in Northeast Nigeria Execute Four Aid Workers.” Emerging Markets. Reuters, July 22, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN24N2UY
.
[221]
“Suspected Boko Haram Militants Kill 16 in Northern Cameroon.” Middle East & Africa. Reuters, August 2, 2020.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN24Y0B3
.
[222]
Paquette, Danielle. “Boko Haram claims kidnapping of over 300 boys in Nigeria, marking an alarming move West.” The Washington Post, December 16, 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/boko-haram-nigeria-300-boys-kidnap/2020/12/15/98a4bf32-3eaf-11eb-b58b-1623f6267960_story.html
[223]
Jones, Mayeni. “Nigeria's Boko Haram Crisis: Maiduguri Rocket Attack Kills 10.” BBC News. BBC, February 24, 2021.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-56184033
.
[224]
“Islamist Attacks Kill about 30 Soldiers in Northeast Nigeria in Four Days.” Emerging Markets. Reuters, March 14, 2021.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN2B60KQ
.
[225]
“Boko Haram Claim Shooting down of Nigerian Air Force Jet.” Emerging Markets. Reuters, April 2, 2021.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN2BP1FE
[227]
Mamane, Dalatou. “Boko Haram Militants Kill 16 Soldiers in Niger Attack” Military.com. August 26, 2021.
https://www.military.com/daily-news/2021/08/26/boko-haram-militants-kill...
.
[228]
Khalid, Ishaq. “Nigeria Kuje prison break: More than 400 missing from Abuja jail” BBC News. July 6, 2022.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-62069753
[229]
“The Killing of 30 Borno Fisherman” The Sun News. March 22, 2023.
https://sunnewsonline.com/the-killing-of-30-borno-fishermen/
[230]
Aradi, Gloria. “Boko Haram kills 37 in Nigeria's Yobe state - police” BBC News. November 2, 2023.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-67272908
[231]
Ewokor, Chris. “At least 160 villagers reported taken in deadly raid” BBC News. May 26, 2024.
https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/ce55ylp7xxmo
[232]
“Proscribed Terrorist Groups or Organisations.” United Kingdom Home Office. gov.uk, April 23, 2021.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/proscribed-terror-groups-or-organisations--2/proscribed-terrorist-groups-or-organisations-accessible-version
.
[233]
U.S. Department of State. Bureau of Counterterrorism. “Foreign Terrorist Organizations” Nov. 13, 2013.
https://www.state.gov/foreign-terrorist-organizations/
.
[234]
United Nations Security Council. “United Nations Security Council Consolidated List.” May 22, 2014.
https://scsanctions.un.org/consolidated/
[235]
United Nations Security Council. “United Nations Security Council Consolidated List.” February 23, 2020.
https://scsanctions.un.org/consolidated/
[236]
Official Journal of the European Union. “Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 583/2014.” May 28, 2014.
[237]
Walker, Andrew. “What is Boko Haram?” Speical Report 308, United States Institute of Peace, June 2012.
https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/resources/SR308.pdf
; Thurston, Alexander.
Boko Haram: The History of an African Jihadist Movement
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 87-90.
[238]
Mazen, Maram. “Bloodshed corrodes support for Boko Haram.” Al Jazeera. May 25, 2014.
http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2014/05/bloodshed-corrodes-sup...
[239]
Warner, Jason and Hilary Matfess. “Exploding Stereotypes: The Unexpected Operational and Demographic Characteristics of Boko Haram’s Suicide Bombers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point Report. August 9, 2017.
https://ctc.usma.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Exploding-Stereotypes-1.pdf
.
[240]
Paul A. Onuh et al., “Engagement in Licit Ventures by Terrorist Organisations and Terrorism Financing in the Lake Chad Region,”
Cogent Social Sciences
7, no. 1 (January 2021), pg. 6,
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311886.2021.1920708
.
[241]
Malik Samuel, “Economics of Terrorism in Lake Chad Basin,” Institute for Security Studies Africa, July 10, 2019,
https://issafrica.org/amp/iss-today/economics-of-terrorism-in-lake-chad-...
.
[242]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” Geneva Centre for Security Sector Governance (International Crisis Group, 2019),
https://issat.dcaf.ch/fre/Apprendre/La-bibliotheque-des-ressources/Reche...
.
[243]
“Curbing Violence in Nigeria (II): The Boko Haram Insurgency.” International Crisis Group, Africa Report no. 216, April 3, 2014, pg. 23.
https://d2071andvip0wj.cloudfront.net/curbing-violence-in-nigeria-II-the-boko-haram-insurgency.pdf
[244]
Cocks, Tim. “Boko Haram too extreme for 'al Qaeda in West Africa' brand.” Reuters, May 28, 2014.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-bokoharam-analysis/boko-haram-too-extreme-for-al-qaeda-in-west-africa-brand-idUSKBN0E81D320140528
[245]
Fanusie, Yaya J. and Entz, Alex. “Boko Haram Financial Assessment.” Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance, Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, May 2017.
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/defenddemocracy/uploads/documents/CSIF_Boko_Haram.pdf
[246]
Felipe Pathe Duarte, “Maghrebian Militant Maneuvers: AQIM as a Strategic Challenge,” Center for Strategic & International Studies, September 28, 2011,
https://www.csis.org/analysis/maghrebian-militant-maneuvers-aqim-strateg...
.
[247]
“Boko Haram : Splinter Group, Ansaru Emerges,”
Vanguard Nigera
, February 1, 2012,
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2012/02/boko-haram-splinter-group-ansaru-eme...
.
[248]
Jacob Zenn, “Leadership Analysis of Boko Haram and Ansaru in Nigeria,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 2 (February 2014): pp. 23-29,
https://www.ctc.usma.edu/leadership-analysis-of-boko-haram-and-ansaru-in...
.
[249]
Jacob Zenn, “Leadership Analysis of Boko Haram and Ansaru in Nigeria,”
CTC Sentinel
7, no. 2 (February 2014): pp. 23-29,
https://www.ctc.usma.edu/leadership-analysis-of-boko-haram-and-ansaru-in...
.
[250]
Jacob Zenn, “Ansaru: Who Are They And Where Are They From?,” Council on Foreign Relations (Council on Foreign Relations, July 1, 2013),
https://www.cfr.org/blog/ansaru-who-are-they-and-where-are-they
.
[251]
Blanchard, Lauren. “Nigeria’s Boko Haram: Frequently Asked Questions.” Congressional Research Service. June 10, 2014.
http://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R43558.pdf
. Zenn, Jacob. “Nigerian al-Qaedaism” The Hudson Group. March 11, 2014.
https://www.hudson.org/research/10172-nigerian-al-qaedaism-
.
[252]
United States Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2016 - Foreign Terrorist Organizations: Jama'atu Ansarul Muslimina Fi Biladis-Sudan (Ansaru), July 19, 2017.
http://www.refworld.org/docid/5981e3d313.html
.
[253]
"Islamic State 'accepts' Boko Haram's Allegiance Pledge." BBC News. March 13, 2015.
[254]
"Analysis: Islamic State Strengthens Ties with Boko Haram." BBC News. April 24, 2015.
[255]
Chandler, Adam. "The Islamic State of Boko Haram?" The Atlantic. March 9, 2015.
[256]
Gartenstein-Ross, Daveed, and Jacob Zenn. "Boko Haram’s Doomed Marriage to the Islamic State." War on the Rocks, Aug. 26, 2016.
[257]
United Nations Security Council. “United Nations Security Council Consolidated List.” February 23, 2020.
https://scsanctions.un.org/consolidated/
[258]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” (International Crisis Group, May 23, 2019), pg. 7,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/273-facing-challenge-islamic-state-west-africa-province
.
[259]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” (International Crisis Group, May 23, 2019), pg. 8,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/273-facing-challenge-islamic-state-west-africa-province
.
[260]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” (International Crisis Group, May 23, 2019), pg. 9,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/273-facing-challenge-islamic-state-west-africa-province
.
[261]
“ISIS-Backed Boko Haram Faction Allegedly Gets New Leader.”
Punch
, March 5, 2019.
https://punchng.com/isis-backed-boko-haram-faction-allegedly-gets-new-le...
.
[262]
Jacob Zenn. “Islamic State in West Africa Province’s Factional Disputes and the Battle With Boko Haram.” Terrorism Monitor, Jamestown Foundation, March 20, 2020.
https://jamestown.org/program/islamic-state-in-west-africa-provinces-factional-disputes-and-the-battle-with-boko-haram/
[263]
“Facing the Challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa Province,” (International Crisis Group, May 23, 2019),
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/273-facing-challenge-islamic-state-west-africa-province
.
[264]
John Campbell, “Where Exactly Is the Islamic State in West Africa?,” Council on Foreign Relations, May 24, 2019,
https://www.cfr.org/blog/where-exactly-islamic-state-west-africa
.
[265]
Bassim Al-Hussaini, “New ISWAP Boss Slays Five Rebel Leaders, Silences Clerical Tones,”
The Premium Times
, March 3, 2020,
https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/379975-new-iswap-boss-slays-five-rebel-leaders-silences-clerical-tones.html
.
[266]
Vincent Foucher, “The Islamic State Franchises in Africa: Lessons from Lake Chad,” International Crisis Group, October 29, 2020,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/islamic-state-fra...
.
[267]
Jason Burke, “Boko Haram Leader Killed on Direct Orders of Islamic State,”
The Guardian
, June 7, 2021,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jun/07/boko-haram-leader-abubakar...
.
[268]
Libby George and Paul Carsten, “Boko Haram Cleric Confirms Shekau's Death, Urges Fighters' Loyalty,” ed. Philippa Fletcher,
Reuters
, June 19, 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/boko-haram-cleric-confirms-shekaus-...
.
[269]
“Abubakar Shekau: Nigeria's Boko Haram Leader Is Dead, Say Rival Militants,”
BBC News
, June 7, 2021,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-57378493
; Paul Carsten, “ISWAP Militant Group Says Nigeria’s Boko Haram Leader Is Dead,”
Reuters
, June 7, 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/world/islamic-state-west-african-province-says-n...
Libby George, “Boko Haram Fighters Pledge to Islamic State in Video, Worrying Observers,” ed. Nick Zieminski,
Reuters
, June 28, 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/boko-haram-fighters-pledge-islamic-...
.
[270]
International Crisis Group. “JAS vs. ISWAP: The War of the Boko Haram Splinters” International Crisis Report. March 28, 2024.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/b196-jas-vs-iswap...
.
[271]
International Crisis Group. “JAS vs. ISWAP: The War of the Boko Haram Splinters” International Crisis Report. March 28, 2024.
https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/b196-jas-vs-iswap...
.