 
 
Islamic State in Khorasan Province  (ISKP)   AT A GLANCE Overview Organization Strategy Major Attacks Interactions Maps  HOW TO CITE Mapping Militants Project (MMP). !Islamic State in Khorasan Province (ISKP).” Last modified August 2024.   SUMMARY  Formed: January 26, 2015  Disbanded: Group is active.  First Attack: April 18, 2015: ISKP conducted a suicide bombing outside a bank in Jalalabad, Afghanistan (33 killed, 100+ wounded).  Last Attack: March 22, 2024: At a rock concert at Crocus City Hall in Moscow, four Tajik gunmen opened fire on a crowd of Russian civilians. After the attack, ISKP said its soldiers had killed “a lot of Christians,” as well as blamed Russia for the “blood of Muslims on its hands” (referring to Russia’s military operations in Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Syria). (144 killed, 551 wounded).   OVERVIEW The Islamic State in Khorasan Province (ISKP, also referred to as IS-K or ISIS-K) is a branch of the Islamic State (IS).1 ISKP"s main goal is to establish and maintain Khorasan as a wilayat (province) of the global IS caliphate.2 ISKP"s primary adversary is the Afghan Taliban, which it frequently battles for territorial control over Afghanistan.3 The hostility between the two groups stems both from ideological differences and competition for resources. ISKP is strongest in the Nangarhar Province of eastern Afghanistan, but the group has recently been expanding its operations beyond Afghanistan, focusing on targets in Russia, Turkey, Pakistan, India, and other countries in the region. To achieve this goal, the group has also broadened its propaganda efforts and increasingly concentrates on recruiting new members both within and outside of the region.4 

 
 
 NARRATIVE SUMMARY  Islamic State in Khorasan Province (ISKP, also referred to as IS-K or ISIS-K) is a branch of the Islamic State (IS) that seeks to establish an Islamic state in “Khorasan Province,” which includes regions of Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran. The group was formed by members of several existing militant organizations – including Al Qaeda, the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan – who began defecting to the Islamic State in late 2014. IS Central officially announced the formation of ISKP in January 2015.5 This Narrative Summary is organized chronologically with subheadings that outline each phase of ISKP’s development.  2010-2015: ISKP’s beginnings Before 2010, many ISKP militants had fought for other militant organizations, such as the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP). In 2010, the majority of these militants fled Orakzai Agency in Pakistan to the Nangarhar province in Afghanistan to escape the Pakistan Army"s major anti-terror operation, Khwakh Ba dee Sham.6 After arriving in Nangarhar with their families, the militants claimed to be refugees, or muhajerin, and demanded hospitality from the local Pashtun population. However, as they settled into their new home, the muhajerin continued to carry weapons and display their allegiance to Pakistani militant groups such as the TTP. After TTP leader Hakimullah Mehsud died in November 2013, the TTP fragmented. As a result, many of the muhajerin militant groups in Nangarhar began to operate autonomously from the TTP, splitting into smaller, more ruthless factions.7 Throughout 2014, these groups operated in Afghanistan and Pakistan as apolitical armed gangs, engaging in extortion and kidnappings for ransom. The mujaherin"s predatory behavior further strained their relationship with the TTP and the Taliban. In 2014, leaflets encouraging militants to defect to IS were found in multiple rural provinces, as well as in cities such as Kabuland Jalalabad.8 One sign of IS"s growing influence in Afghanistan came in March 2014, when nine former Yemeni and Saudi Al Qaeda leaders defected to IS.9 Shortly thereafter, several other militant groups operating in Pakistan and Afghanistan – including the Al Tawhid Brigade, Ansar ul-Khilafat Wal-Jihad, and Jundullah – pledged allegiance to IS.10 The IS position in Afghanistan solidified in July 2014, when Afghan national Rahim Muslim Dost, a former Guantanamo Bay detainee with connections to Al Qaeda and the Taliban, publicly declared his allegiance to IS.11 This announcement coincided with the release of a booklet called Fata (victory), which advocated the violent establishment of an IS in Nangarhar and Kunar provinces.12 
In the months to follow, the Khorasan chapter grew in strength as TTP commanders defected from the TTP to join IS, following the contentious appointment of Mullah Fazlullah as the leader of the TTP.13 For example, in October 2014, Hafiz Saeed Khan (who was originally considered most likely to succeed the TTP"s Hakimullah Mehsud) and Shahidullah Shahid (the main spokesman of the TTP) both pledged allegiance to IS. Additionally, the TTP chiefs of Kurram Agency, Khyber Agency, Peshawar, and Hanugu district – who collectively maintained TTP control over the central FATA – defected to IS. This loss for the TTP was an extremely valuable 

 
 
victory for IS, as it provided the group control over Afghanistan’s strategic travel and trade routes stretching from Peshawar to Khyber Pass.14 
On January 10, 2015, Kahn, Shahid, and the four former TTP chiefs of the central FATA released a video in conjunction with an expanded group of former Taliban commanders and leaders from other jihadi groups in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The video reaffirmed their allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the then-caliph of IS, and declared themselves to be the new administrators of the official IS province in Afghanistan. The men, who had appointed Hafiz Saeed Khan as their leader, also claimed to be backed by an even broader network of groups in Khyber, Kunar, and Dir. Immediately after the release of the video, 50 militants from the Amr Bil Maroof group joined the ranks of Kahn"s group. On January 26, senior IS leader and spokesman Abu Muhammad al-Adnani backed this statement, and subsequently named Kahn as the emir for the Islamic State in Khorasan Province (ISKP).15 Adnani encouraged all militants in Khorasan (a historic name for the region including Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Central Asia) to unite under ISKP.16 Kahn and his deputy, Mullah Abdul Rauf Khadim, utilized their existing connections to recruit from the eastern and southern provinces of Afghanistan. ISKP quickly attracted new recruits, due to the appeal of its international reputation.17 2015: ISKP expansion in Afghanistan The official establishment of ISKP spurred IS and the Afghan Taliban to officially declare war on one another in January 2015.  IS accused the Taliban of relying on a small ethnic and nationalist base for its support, which lacked a widespread Islamic appeal.18 Concurrently, the Taliban’s base continued to degrade as large numbers of its militants defected from the Taliban to join ISKP.19 Within Nangarhar, Afghanistan, the ISKP franchise first took root in the Mamand area of Achin district near the strategically advantageous Tirah Valley corridor, a popular and relatively unregulated militant crossing between Afghanistan and Pakistan. However, by February 2015, locals were flying the black IS flag from residences in seven districts in southeastern Nangarhar. In the following month, ISKP also expanded into Afghanistan’s Logar province, establishing a training base and attacking multiple Sufi shrines.20 Meanwhile, about five hundred miles southwest of Nangarhar, Abdul Rauf Khadim was leading a parallel effort to establish an IS front in Helmand province. Although Khadim"s cell was well-financed and approximately three hundred men strong, the Taliban surrounded its position. Without access to open supply routes and safe havens in Pakistan, the cell fell to the Taliban by early February 2015.21 As the Taliban began to realize the potential threat ISKP posed to its control over the Nangarhar region, it attempted to shut down muhajerin educational institutions and confiscated a shipment of weapons in Mamand. In March and April 2015, the Taliban entered a brief period of inconclusive negotiations with ISKP. By mid-May 2015, the Taliban had become the minority group in the Mamand Valley, Achin, Deh Bala, Kot, and Nazian districts, and was forced to withdraw and regroup.22 

 
 
In May 2015, ISKP established its headquarters in Mamand under the supervision of visiting IS leaders.23 From mid-May to early July 2015, villagers viewed the group as a benign and positive alternative to the Taliban. Unlike the Taliban, ISKP provided its own food and shelter and did not impose a tax. It also initially allowed both male and female schools to remain open.24 Furthermore, ISKP commanders claimed that the group had no quarrel with the Afghan government and was instead focused on opposing the Taliban and its link to the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), the Government of Pakistan’s intelligence and covert action agency. With ISKP in power, Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) and government personnel enjoyed newfound freedom of movement. Viewing ISKP as a valuable counterweight to its longtime enemy, the Taliban, the Afghan government refrained from challenging ISKP for its first two formative months in Nangarhar. In return, ISKP did not attack ANSF or government personnel during May and June 2015.25 By the end of June 2015, ISKP had captured or contested much of the Taliban"s territory in Nangarhar and was in control of eight of Nangarhar’s 22 districts. ISKP subsequently attempted to expand and consolidate its control through a variety of cruel tactics, including summary justice, forced displacement, and executions of clerics and elders.26 Despite attempts by the Taliban to convince IS to leave Afghanistan, local and top-level leadership insisted that the Taliban disband itself and pledge allegiance to the IS caliphate. The Taliban then issued a fatwa and gathered new support from local tribal elders and political elites in order to launch a defensive campaign against ISKP in late June 2015. On July 16, 2015, after killing a dozen Taliban soldiers and detaining 80 locals, ISKP slaughtered an additional ten tribal elders accused of supporting the Taliban.27 This execution, during which the men were blindfolded and then blown up in a field of explosives, brought international attention when ISKP released the gruesome footage from the attack in a propaganda video.28 As ISKP grew more violent, villagers not aligned with ISKP fled their homes for safer locations, such as Jalalabad or Taliban-controlled areas in western Nangarhar. Once the original residents had been displaced, ISKP confiscated abandoned property and allowed ISKP affiliated militants from Kunduz and Helmand to resettle in the area.29 As a result, ISKP became so entrenched in Nangarhar that it was virtually impossible for the Government of Afghanistan and its security forces to control the area.  ISKP"s ranks continued to grow as Afghan and Pakistani Taliban militants defected to the group in order to escape the pressure of their respective countries’ counterinsurgency operations, such as the Pakistani military"s operation Zarb-e-Azb. Many of the militants in Afghanistan and Pakistan had grown dissatisfied with their own organizations’ nationalist aims and sought a more extreme and global group. The Islamic State attracted Salafi militants in particular, who identified with the ideology and goals of the group.30 ISKP also partnered with jihadist militant group Lashkar-e-Islam (LeI), which increased its operational capacity and broaden its base of its support in Pakistan.31 2015-2020: ISKP’s mounting external threats In July 2015, the Afghan government decided to combat ISKP. The government"s new strategy coincided with U.S. airstrikes against three top ISKP leaders in July 2015, for which it claimed 

 
 
to have provided intelligence support. The Afghan government subsequently announced its official plan to join the United States in combating ISKP. It also established a new unit tasked with fighting the group. In turn, ISKP shifted its policy of tolerance toward the Afghan government to one of open aggression, particularly given its now secure position in Nangarhar.  ISKP condemned the Afghan Government for its persecution of Pakistani militants; cooperation with the Pakistan Army and ISI; and support of local, Taliban-backed uprisings against ISKP. Even so, most of its resources were directed at combating the Taliban.  By early autumn of 2015, ISKP was losing favor with Nangarhari locals. Citizens became disillusioned with the group as it engaged in violent tactics and enforced Sharia law with brutal punishments. Examples included school and clinic closures, public executions, killings of tribal elders, kidnappings for ransom, destruction of Sufi shrines, and cigarette bans.32 One of ISKP"s most unpopular policies was its ban on poppy cultivation, which was an extremely important source of income for many families in Nangarhar. Additionally, rumors began to circulate that local families would be forced to provide ISKP militants with brides, without dowry payments or consideration for tribe and family lineage. Ultimately, this ISKP repression increased public support for the return of the Taliban.33 Recognizing this opportunity to strike, the Taliban launched counter-offensives during summer and autumn of 2015. Throughout late 2015 and into 2016, the Taliban and ISKP groups battled for control in Nangarhar, each banishing or brutally executing the losing group"s fighters and sympathizers. Districts such as Chaparhar changed hands multiple times.34 On January 4, 2016, the Taliban initiated a large-scale operation against ISKP and succeeded in expelling ISKP from Chaparhar and Bati Kot in only three days. Ultimately, from December 2015 through February 2016, the combined effectiveness of Taliban attacks, local uprisings, U.S. drone strikes, and ANSF and government-aligned militia operations halted ISKP"s territorial expansion. Although ISKP still controlled Achin, Deh, Bala, Kot, and Nazian, the group"s power significantly diminished.35 By March 2016, a large number of ISKP fighters and their families had begun to retreat into Pakistan"s Khyber and Orakzai agencies. Afghan President Ashraf Ghani announced to the Afghan Parliament that ISKP had been defeated in eastern Afghanistan. However, toward the end of March, it was reported that ISKP fighters had begun to return to Nangarhar.36  In late June 2016, ISKP used its strongholds in Achin, De Bala, and Pakistani sanctuaries to launch a large offensive against ANSF in central Nangarhar. With approximately 600 fighters, ISKP overran six ANSF posts in Kot. However, it sustained severe casualties (estimates ranging from 50 to 250 killed) from both ANSF ground forces and U.S. airstrikes. In July 2016, the ANSF launched a series of offensive operations against ISKP in partnership with local militias. Some attacks reclaimed territory from ISKP, while others yielded little gain.37  Throughout the remainder of 2016, ISKP dug into its remaining districts in Achin, Kot, Nazyan and Deh Bala. They held firm until mid-March 2017, when U.S. and Afghan special forces intensified their offensives against ISKP. In April 2017, the combined special forces launched Operation Hazma, which targeted ISKP in both Nangarhar and Kunar provinces.38 The 

 
 
combination of ground offensives and night raids with heavy air strikes was particularly effective. In particular, in their 2017 campaign, Afghan and U.S. forces were almost completely successful in clearing Kot of ISKP forces. This was a major blow to ISKP"s territorial control and severed one of ISKP"s main supply routes.39 However, Afghan and U.S. forces were less effective in Mamand and Pekha, where ISKP was entrenched in caves and mountainous terrain.40  In addition to territorial losses, ISKP suffered increased casualties. On April 13, 2017, the United States dropped the most powerful conventional bomb in its arsenal on an ISKP cave complex, reportedly killing four commanders and 94 militants.41 Then, on April 27, 2017, U.S. and Afghan special forces launched a operation of bombings and commando raids that killed over 30 militants in the heart of ISKP territory. Although the U.S. and Afghan forces were successful in removing several high-value ISKP targets, ISKP managed to exaggerate the raid’s #collateral damage for propaganda purposes.42 Despite these setbacks, on April 2, 2017, ISKP captured nearly half of Chaprarhar in a coordinated offensive against the Taliban while retaining control over most of the Nazyan and Deh Bala districts.43 Beginning in October 2017, ISKP and Taliban forces fought for control of the northern Afghan province of Jowzjan. In 2015, Taliban commander Qari Hekmat had defected with his fighters to the Islamic State, taking control of his home district of Darzab in southern Jowzjan.44 Qari Hekmat overran neighboring Taliban forces in early October 2017. In response, the Taliban mobilized hundreds of fighters in a series of offensives against the northern ISKP enclave.45 ISKP forces held their ground from December until July 2018 when the Taliban launched a massive offensive and a U.S. drone strike killed Qari Hekmat. Darzab was overrun within weeks, and IS presence was fully quashed by August 2018.46 Nevertheless, the group continued launching major assaults in Kabul, Heart, and Jalalabad in 2018, particularly on high-profile targets, including voter registration centers and Shiite religious and cultural centers. 2019 was a year of harsh setbacks for ISKP. Following its defeat in Jowzjan and intense fighting across the rest of Afghanistan, the frequency and lethality of the group"s attacks fell sharply.47 Additionally, in May, IS central announced new provinces in India (al-Hind) and Pakistan: areas where attacks had previously been attributed to the Khorasan branch.48 In November 2019, U.S., ANSF, Taliban, and local forces succeeded in ousting ISKP from Naganhar  province. Both the Taliban and local tribal leaders claimed that without their parallel efforts against ISKP, the ANSF operation would not have been possible.49 The Afghan government, however, took full credit for the victory and proclaimed that the Islamic State had been !obliterated” in Afghanistan.50 However, this optimism was misplaced: by the end of the year, many ISKP fighters had evaded capture and withdrawn to Kunar Province or Pakistan. A United Nations Security Council report from January 2020 asserted that 2100 fighters remained in Kunar, and that the Islamic State branch !has proved resilient and continues to pose a threat.” 51  However, by 2020, ISKP had lost its remaining territory in Afghanistan. After the fall of ISKP in Nangarhar, the Taliban began an advance toward Kunar to eliminate its presence there. In late March 2020, after a month of heavy fighting, the Taliban successfully ousted ISKP from its last territorial stronghold in Afghanistan. Shortly thereafter, the Afghan National Directorate of Security (NDS) captured Aslam Farooqi, the leader of ISKP.52 He would not be officially 

 
 
replaced until June 2020, when IS central leadership appointed Shahab al-Muhajir to head the Khorasan branch.53 Despite these territorial losses, ISKP maintained the capacity to execute sophisticated attacks in Afghanistan and was able to continue its brutal terrorist attacks. For example, the group allegedly killed 24 in a Kabul maternity ward in May 2020, and claimed responsibility for attacks on a tutoring center and Kabul University in October and November respectively.54 ISKP demonstrated a renewed capacity for sophisticated attacks in a raid on a Nangarhar provincial prison in August 2020. A group of ISKP gunmen freed dozens of IS and Taliban prisoners—killing 30 and wounding 50 Security Force personnel in the process.55  ISKP"s modus operandi remained focused on sporadic terrorist attacks throughout the next year. Despite losing its territorial holdings, a May 2021 UN Security Council report found a remaining presence in Kunar and Nangarhar provinces of 1500 to 2200 !core” fighters and many in decentralized cells. ISKP also attempted to refill its ranks by encouraging hardline Taliban members (who were disillusioned by the prospect of negotiated peace with the US) to defect.56  2021-2024: Shifts in ISKP strategy under Taliban rule In August 2021, the United States began withdrawing its forces from Afghanistan. Despite an agreement between the United States and the Taliban about the distribution of power in Afghanistan post-withdrawal, the Taliban immediately began to regain territorial control, eventually toppling the Afghan government and taking political control of the country. Amid the chaos, thousands of people – including U.S. citizens and Afghans– scrambled to evacuate from Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul.57 ISKP targeted the airport in a terrorist attack, killing over 150 Afghan civilians and 13 U.S. military personnel.58  The transition to Taliban rule likely aided ISKP’s operations and recruitment. Over the course of 2021, ISKP increased its attacks from 60 in 2020 to 334 in 2021, gaining ground across the Khorasan region. Throughout early 2022, ISKP continued its strategy of one-off attacks against Shiite civilians and Taliban personnel.59  ISKP successfully increased its presence in Kabul, northern Afghanistan, and eastern Afghanistan, particularly the Nangarhar and Kunar provinces. However, the group still lacked overall territorial control in the country. Despite maintaining a strong presence in some areas, ISKP did not have enough widespread power to pose a viable challenge to the Taliban government.60 During early 2022, ISKP expanded attacks to several cities in Afghanistan for the first time, including Kandahar, Charikar, and Kunduz. These new attacks, combined with continued attacks in Kabul and Jalalabad, aimed to undermine the Taliban its claim that it was in full control of Afghanistan. ISKP violence also sought to destabilize the Taliban and pressure it to invest resources and capabilities to protect targeted cities. While these attacks were initially effective, ISKP cells remained weak and were ulimately eliminated by the Taliban.61  Under Taliban rule, ISKP shifted its strategy in two ways. First, the group began conducting fewer but more impactful attacks. As the Taliban targeted ISKP-held areas, the montly average of ISKP attacks decreased from twenty-three per month during the Taliban’s first year in control of Afghanistan to four per month between September 2022 and June 2023.62 Despite this decline, 

 
 
ISKP continued to target high-profile individuals (including foreign actors on Afghan soil) and carry out successful suicide missions, reflecting a shift to more impactful attacks.63 Second, ISKP strategy began to look beyond Afghanistan and adopt a more global focus. ISKP amplified its propaganda campaign by establishing an independent media structure and generating content in several languages, including English, Arabic, Farsi, Pashto, and Urdu.64 These publication languages signaled a new broadening of ISKP’s targets for propaganda. Rather than just focusing on the Taliban and Afghanistan, ISKP content now could reach neighboring countries, including India and Iran; prominent actors in the Middle East, including Israel and Saudi Arabia; and major global adversaries, including China, Russia, and the United States.65   Additionally, ISKP began expanding its operations abroad. The group planned violence against a new set of targets, including citizens and diplomats from countries it considered to be supporters of Taliban rule in Afghanistan. This included an attack on the Russian embassy in Kabul in September 2022; transnational attacks in Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan; and an attack on a Russian concert hall in March 2024. In general, these attacks have inflicted mass casualties against primarily civilian targets.66  ISKP also expanded its foreign logistics and financial networks. According to reports from the United Nations, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, and Turkish judicial documents, ISKP has allegedly used Turkey as a hub for moving fighters, coordinating logistics, and finding targets.67 In particular, ISKP operatives capitalized on sleeper cells in Turkey and the influx of Afghan refugees entering the country via Iran to conduct financial transfers through Turkey.68   ISKP also sought to increase its presence in India. For example, ISKP aimed to capitalize on controversy surrounding remarks made by Indian politicians about the Prophet Mohammad. As a result, the group released statements denouncing the Taliban’s June 2022 bilateral talks with the country. ISKP attacked a Sikh temple in Kabul in June 2022, and the group claimed responsibility for attacks in Tamil Nadu and Mangalore in late 2022. Although the IS branch based in India – known as Islamic State Hind Province –  had not made inroads in the country, ISKP remained committed to recruiting Indian Muslims and inspiring violence in India.69   Looking ahead, ISKP faces major challenges in carrying out attacks in South Asia. ISKP and its networks in South Asia lack a dedicated structure for planning and executing external operations. Moreover, security pressure from the Taliban makes it difficult for ISKP to organize complex external attacks from its base of power in Afghanistan. ISKP has attempted to increase its recruitment in the region nonetheless.70 By March 2024, Iraqi security officials believed that ISKP was actively working to build a local network of jihadist cells aimed at facilitating violence abroad..71  ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE  A. LEADERSHIP  ISKP has had seven leaders since its formation in 2015. They are listed in order below:  

 
 
Hafiz Saeed Khan (2015 – July 2016): Hafiz Saeed Khan served as the first leader of ISKP. Khan was a member of the TTP and was originally considered to be a successor of TTP leader Hakimullah Mehsud. On October 15, 2014, he defected from the TTP and pledged allegiance to IS, along with five other TTP commanders.72 On January 10, 2015, the former commanders released a video appointing Kahn as their leader. On January 26, 2015, senior IS leader and spokesman Abu Muhammad al-Adnani backed this statement, officially naming Kahn as the emir of ISKP.73 Kahn was killed along with his top commanders and fighters in a U.S. drone strike on July 26, 2016, in Kot, Afghanistan.74  Abdul Haseeb Logari (2016 – April 2017): Abdul Haseeb Logari was the second leader of ISKP. According to Afghan president Ashraf Ghani, Logari was responsible for ordering the March 8, 2017, attack on a military hospital in Kabul. Logari was killed in a combined raid by Afghan and U.S. special forces in April 2017.75  Abu Saeed Ghaleb (June 2017 – July 11, 2017): Abu Saeed Ghaleb (also known as Mawlawi Abdul Rahman Ghaleb) was the third leader of ISKP. He was an experienced militant and had served as former deputy chief commander of the TTP. After the death of Khan, Ghaleb served as the Nangarhar emir for ISKP and was reportedly a deputy to Logari. After a month-long succession dispute following the death of Logari, Ghaleb was appointed ISKP"s third leader. Ghaleb was reportedly killed less than three weeks later, on July 11, 2017, in a U.S. drone strike in Kunar Province, Afghanistan.76  Abu Saad Erhabi (July 2017 – August 2018): Abu Saad Erhabi served as the fourth leader of ISKP. He took control of ISKP after the death of Abu Sayed and led the group until he was killed in a U.S. air strike in August 2018.77  Abu Omar Khorasani (August 2018 – April 2019): Abu Omar Khorasani (also known as Mawlawi Zia ul-Haq) served as the fifth leader of ISKP. In April 2019, he was “dismissed and replaced […] reportedly due to poor performance in the context of ISIL-K setbacks in Nangarhar in the second half of 2018.”78 Mawlawi Abdullah Orokzai then took over as ISKP leader. Afghan security forces arrested Khorasani in 2020.79  Abdullah Orokzai (July 2019 – April 2020): Abdullah Orokzai (also known as Aslam Farooqi) was appointed as the sixth leader of ISKP in July 2019.80 He replaced Abu Omar Khorasani after he was dismissed following ISKP setbacks in Nangarhar. The United Nations reports that Orokazi’s nomination for the leader position “was made during a visit by an ISIL core delegation, underscoring the direct relationship between ISIL-K and the ISIL core.” 81 Orakzai reportedly had several positions in ISKP in both Pakistan and Afghanistan prior to becoming its leader. He surrendered to NDS forces during the 2020 Taliban assault on Kunar.82 In 2021, Orokzai was released from prison but was later killed in January 2022.83  Shahab al-Muhajir (June 2020 – Present): Shahab al-Muhajir succeeded Aslam Farooqi as ISKP’s seventh leader. Before joining the Islamic State, al-Muhajir reportedly worked for the Haqqani Network and Al Qaeda. He managed ISKP"s territorial decline and steered its strategy to focus on sporadic attacks on security and civilian targets across Afghanistan. In early 2024, he was the leader of ISKP, targeted by the Taliban government.84 Furthermore, 

 
 
following ISKP’s 2021 bombing at the Kabul airport, the United States offered $10 million bounty for information about Muhajir.85  Other notable ISKP commanders include:  Abdulrazaq Mehdi (Unknown – November 30, 2017): Abdulrazaq Mehdi was the deputy chief of ISKP. On November 30, 2017, ISKP spokesman Quari Yousef Ahmadi announced that Mehdi had defected from IS to the Taliban. Mehdi denounced IS"s cruel actions in Afghanistan, calling the group !anti-Islam” and anti-Muslim.86   B. NAME CHANGES There are no recorded name changes for this group.  C. SIZE ESTIMATES ● 2016: 7,000-8,500, including both fighters and support elements (Royal United Service Institute)87 ● 2016: 1,000-3,000 (United States Department of Defense)88 ● April 2017: 600-800 (United States Department of Defense)89 ● November 2017: 9,000-11,500, including both fighters and support elements (Australian National Security)90 ● June 2021: 1,500-2,200 (United Nations Security Council)91 ● July 2023: 4,000-6,000 (United Nations Security Council)92  D. RESOURCES E.  Financial resources The extent of ISKP"s early reliance on IS central is unclear. According to a September 2015 report by the United Nations, IS central sent relatively few militants from Iraq and Syria to fight for ISKP.93 IS also sent several hundred thousand dollars to ISKP to boost the group"s operations and ability to attract new recruits.94 American and Afghan officials in 2017 reportedly believed that ISKP was not engaging in regular contact with IS central.95  In recent years, Turkey has served as the primary financial center for ISKP. The Afghan community in Turkey supported the growth of informal financial networks that ISKP could exploit. IS central also channeled funds through Turkey, and transfers between IS and ISKP were relatively easy. 96 In 2022, Turkish authorities targeted IS financial networks in the country and hampered ISKP’s ability to channel funds to its fighters.97  The Taliban’s heightened monitoring of financial flows and warnings to hawala (informal) traders in Afghanistan also created financial strain for the group. Ultimately, ISKP had difficulty paying the salary of their personnel in Afghanistan during early 2023. 98 ISKP partially circumvented Taliban monitoring by avoiding large transfers and successfully maintained the ability to transfer funds – albeit fewer funds than in previous years – in the face of mounting pressure from actors like the Taliban and Turkey.99 

 
 
Recruitment ISKP recruited former Taliban fighters and other Afghan Salafists through appeals to hardline Salafist ideology and extensive media presence.100 ISKP claimed exclusive legitimacy as a jihadist organization through strict adherence to radical Salafism and opposition to any non Salafist groups— particularly the Taliban and former Afghan governments. This made ISKP particularly attractive to radical Taliban members who became disillusioned with perceived failures or compromises made by their group. For example, after the August 2021 fall of the Afghan national government, the U.S. Congressional Research Service warned that “Taliban hardliners may defect to ISKP if Taliban leaders compromise on certain issues as they begin governing.”101 In addition, ISKP has found support among urban members of the middle-class. With traditional social structures fractured by war, the appeal of ISKP"s “pure” Salafi ideology and the promise of a proper caliphate attracted support. For example, many members of the ISKP “Kabul Cell” were radicalized in Afghan universities by hardline Salafi students and faculty.102 To reach potential recruits, ISKP broadcast its uncompromising vision via FM radio throughout Nangarhar and Kunar provinces, as well as through social media platforms such as Facebook and Telegram.103 ISKP propaganda was marked by distinct phases. From 2015 to 2019, the group focused on anti-Taliban rhetoric and presented idealized portrayals of life under its self-proclaimed caliphate. From 2020 to 2021, the group’s emphasis shifted to demonstrating resilience in the face of territorial losses and instilling fear of ISKP power among local populations. After 2021, ISIS-K adopted more extensive outreach efforts characterized by high production of media and a multilingual approach to  propaganda, indicating the group's ambition to expand its reach beyond Afghanistan.104 In attempts to recruit from a larger pool of countries, the group's media operations utilized a various local languages, including Persian and Uzbek.105  In 2022, ISKP began publishing an English-language magazine, Voice of Khorasan, in an attempt to reach audiences beyond Khorasan and gain popularity among young, well-educated, and disaffected populations.106 In particular, Voice of Khorasan was addressed to IS supporters across South Asia and was translated into Pashto, Persian, and Arabic. ISKP has attempted to capitalize on regional conflict dynamics and existing militants by blending local grievances with its global agenda.107 These publications have helped mobilize new militants in Afghanistan and Pakistan.108 In later years, ISKP further expanded its recruitment strategies to capitalize on the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan and to attract disgruntled IS fighters.109 After the 2017 collapse of the IS caliphate in Iraq and Syria, many militants fled to Afghanistan to join ISKP. These fighters were experienced in guerilla tactics and helped improve IKSP’s ability to launch terrorist attacks at home and abroad, including in Afghanistan, Iran, and Turkey.110  In addition to its ideological propaganda, ISKP has provided monetary and material incentives to encourage young men to join. Specifically, ISKP has provided its fighters with laptops, trucks, and paychecks.111 F. GEOGRAPHIC LOCATIONS 

 
 
Disclaimer: This is a partial list of where the militant organization has bases and where it operates. This does not include information on where the group conducts major attacks or has external influences. During its height in 2015, ISKP formally controlled territory across Afghanistan. According to a 2015 United Nations Report, ISKP was present in at least 25 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces.112 ISKP reached the peak of its territorial control in the summer of 2015, when it controlled eight of the 22 districts in Nangarhar province.113  Throughout 2015, several other groups also attempted to establish ISKP franchises in other areas of Afghanistan. Former Taliban commander Abdul Rauf Khadem briefly established an ISKP cell in Helmand province in January 2015. However, Khadem was killed in a drone strike on February 9, 2015. The Taliban ultimately destroyed the cell in September 2015.114 Another reportedly well-financed ISKP cell emerged in Farah, led by two estranged Taliban commanders. However, the Taliban defeated the group in May 2015, when the cell attempted to expand into other areas. The third failed cell emerged in Logar province, also under the leadership of an estranged Taliban commander. The group was active in April and June 2015, but it was eradicated shortly thereafter by the Taliban in July 2015. A fourth ISKP cell emerged in Zabul and was comprised of approximately 200 militants from the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) who had resettled in Zabul with the help of the Taliban following the Pakistan Army"s 2014 operations in North Waziristan. In spring 2015, these IMU militants pledged allegiance to IS. In the next few months, some of these newly branded IS militants left Zabul to fight with ISKP in Nangarhar. In November 2015, the Taliban destroyed the remaining IS militants in Zabul.115 
The longest lasting cell – which ultimately failed – first emerged in Jowzjan province in 2015. Taliban commander Qari Hekmat defected with his fighters to the Islamic State and took control of his home district of Darzab in southern Jowzjan.116 His cell assaulted and overran neighboring Taliban forces in early October 2017. In response, the Taliban mobilized hundreds of fighters in a series of offensives against the northern ISKP enclave.117 ISKP forces held their ground from December 2017 until July 2018 when the Taliban launched a massive offensive and a U.S. drone strike killed Qari Hekmat. Darzab was overrun within weeks, and ISKP presence was fully quashed by August 2018.118 ISKP"s core territorial presence in eastern Afghanistan proved more durable. From 2015, the group maintained a significant presence in Nangarhar province. The group’s grip on Nangarhar was loosened in November 2019 only with the combined efforts of U.S., ANSF, Taliban, and local forces.119  In 2020, ISKP lost its remaining territory in Afghanistan. After the fall of ISKP in Nangarhar, the Taliban advanced toward Kunar to eliminate its presence there. The Taliban offensive was supported by U.S. airstrikes against IS fighters, and Taliban soldiers were granted passage and logistical support from the ANSF. The mounting pressure led many ISKP commanders and hundreds of their fighters to surrender to ANSF forces. The Taliban successfully ousted ISKP from its last territorial stronghold in late March, leaving behind only a small contingent of decentralized cells in Kunar and Nangarhar.120 As of May 2024, ISKP maintained its training 

 
 
camps and strongholds predominantly in the northern, northeastern, and eastern provinces of Afghanistan, with at least five new bases built in 2022.121  STRATEGY A. IDEOLOGY AND GOALS  ISKP identifies with Salafism, a distinct ideological movement in Sunni Islam. In particular, the group associates with an extreme branch of Salafism known as Wahhabism.122 ISKP"s ideology is predicated on an extremist interpretation of Islamic scripture and anti-Shiite sectarian views.123  In general, the Islamic State adheres to !the Prophetic methodology” – a term it has coined in its press, billboards, and propaganda – meaning that the group follows the prophecy and example of Muhammad.124 The grand strategic aim of the Islamic State is to rule all historically Muslim lands in a caliphate that ultimately defeats the West. As an affiliate, ISKP supports this objective by facilitating the group’s military expansion outside of Iraq and Syria and legitimizing its status as a trans-regional organization.  ISKP also aimed to challenge Al Qaeda and the Taliban as the leaders of the global jihadist movement. In particular, ISKP has asserted that it is the true successor of the global jihad, which Al Qaeda has forsaken. ISKP has also claimed that the Taliban was merely a nationalist movement, not a proponent of global jihad. ISKP’s main goal is to maintain Khorasan as a Wilayat (province) of the global IS caliphate, rather than challenge IS central leadership for dominance over the jihadist movement.125   B. POLITICAL ACTIVITIES  Although ISKP does not directly participate in politics, the group does have overarching political goals. IKSP seeks to establish “Khorasan Province,” a region in Afghanistan in which the Islamic State movement would have full territorial and political control akin to another caliphate.126  C. TARGETS AND TACTICS To attract more recruits and reinforce its brand in Afghanistan, ISKP incorporated many of the brutal tactics employed by the Islamic State (IS).127 IS often used suicide bombers to clear a path for other militants, and ISKP similarly has carried out several attacks with combined suicide bombers and shooters. For example, in July 2017, ISKP conducted an inghimasi attack against the Iraqi embassy in Kabul. Inghimasi refers to well-trained commandos who are prepared both to fight conventionally and to carry out suicide missions. In this specific attack, one of the two militants detonated his suicide vest, while the other fired on the embassy.128  ISKP’s primary militant adversary is the Taliban. ISKP fought the Taliban for territorial control over Afghanistan and thus frequently targeted the group in its attacks.129 The hostility between the two groups stems both from ideological differences and competition for resources. IS 

 
 
accused the Taliban of relying on a small ethnic and nationalist base for its support, which lacked a widespread Islamic appeal.130 ISKP"s harsher rhetoric and its opposition to peace talks with the United States drew militants to defect from the Taliban.131  Before their respective withdrawal and collapse, ISKP was also a staunch enemy of the United States and the Republic of Afghanistan. ISKP and the Afghan government initially refrained from challenging one another. However, once ISKP had secured power in Nangarhar, the Afghan government started working to halt the spread of ISKP in July 2015.132 In return, ISKP changed its policy of tolerance toward the Afghan government to one of open aggression.   The government"s new strategy coincided with the series of lethal U.S. airstrikes against three top ISKP leaders in July 2015, for which the Afghan government claimed to have provided intelligence support. The Afghan government subsequently announced its official plan to unite with the United States in combating ISKP and unveiled a new unit tasked with fighting the group. IKSP blamed the Afghan government for this increased targeting. ISKP also condemned the government for its persecution of Pakistani militants, its cooperation with the Pakistan Army and ISI, and its support of local, Taliban-backed uprisings against ISKP.   Despite ISKP"s declared hostility against the Afghan government, most of its resources were directed at combating the Taliban. Throughout late 2015 and into 2016, the two groups battled for control over territory in Nangarhar, each time brutally executing and banishing the fighters and sympathizers of the losing group. Certain districts, such as Chaparhar, changed hands multiple times, as the Taliban and ISKP took turns executing elaborate counterattacks.133  ISKP has also promoted sectarian violence and targeted civilians who do not adhere to its strict interpretation of Islam and jihadist ideology. Shia civilians are frequent targets of ISKP attacks, including shootings and suicide bombings in Shia neighborhoods.134 In extreme instances, ISKP has allegedly executed its own fighters. For example, on November 23, 2017, Afghan officials reported that ISKP beheaded more than a dozen of its own fighters in Achin.135  Facing growing external pressure, ISKP lost significant territory in 2019. Starting in 2020, ISKP shifted its focus from territorial consolidation to urban warfare campaigns. The group aimed to undermine the legitimacy of adversaries, such as the Taliban, by exposing their vulnerabilities with attacks in Afghanistan’s urban centers. Following this strategy, ISKP militants conducted suicide bombings during a funeral in Nangarhar and attacked students at Kabul University.136  The current leader of ISKP, Shahab al-Muhajir, has written a series of books on ISKP strategy. The challenges associated with taking and holding territory made territorial control a difficult strategy. In a 2021 book, Muhajir outlined how groups can gradually grow from hit-and-run attacks to controlling strategic pieces of territory. A group first prioritizes low-cost, high-impact attacks while it focuses on improving its capabilities. Once it is strong enough, a group can begin to seek control over remote territories and eventually establish itself as the main authority over roads and towns. 137  In a 2023 book, Muhajir advocates for conducting high-impact attacks in enemy strongholds, especially against targets that maximize publicity, such as local officials or foreigners. This 

 
 
strategy is reflected in ISKP operations after August 2021, which attacked large cities in Afghanistan and Pakistan and targeted rival religious figures, minority communities, and foreigners.138  MAJOR ATTACKS Disclaimer: These are some selected major attacks in the militant organization's history. It is not a comprehensive listing but captures some of the most famous attacks or turning points during the campaign. April 18, 2015: ISKP conducted a suicide bombing outside a bank in Jalalabad, Afghanistan (33 killed, 100+ wounded).139 May 13, 2015: 6 gunmen allegedly associated with ISKP attacked a bus in Karachi, Pakistan. Although IS claimed the attack, Jundullah (a group allegiant to IS) and the TTP also claimed responsibility. If ISKP"s claim is accurate, this attack would be its first in Pakistan (45 killed, 13 wounded).140 July 23, 2016: ISKP conducted a dual suicide bombing in Kabul, Afghanistan, on a group of demonstrators from Afghanistan"s Shiite Hazara minority. The bombing was one of the deadliest attacks in Afghanistan since the invasion of the United States in 2001 (80+ killed, 230+ wounded).141 August 8, 2016: ISKP conducted a suicide bombing at a civil hospital in Quetta, Pakistan. The attack took place after several lawyers and journalists had gathered at the hospital to mourn the death of the president of the Balochistan Bar Association in a separate shooting incident earlier that day. Although the attack is attributed to ISKP, Jamaat-ul-Ahrar (JA) also claimed responsibility (93 killed, 120 wounded).142 October 24, 2016: Three ISKP militants attacked 700 unarmed, sleeping cadets at a police training center in Quetta, Pakistan. At least 260 cadets were rescued by Special Services Group commandos in a counter-offensive against the attackers. Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LeJ) also claimed responsibility for the attack (61 killed, 165 injured).143 February 16, 2017: ISKP conducted a suicide bombing at a Sufi shrine in Sehwan, Pakistan, where hundreds of devotees had gathered to perform a religious ritual. The attack appeared to be concentrated on the portion of the shrine reserved for women (100 killed, 250 wounded).144 March 8, 2017: ISKP militants dressed as doctors stormed the largest military hospital in Kabul, Afghanistan. The militants, armed with guns and grenades, opened fire on staff and patients after detonating explosives at the hospital gate. After several hours of fighting, Afghan commandos killed all four ISKP attackers (49 killed, 90 wounded).145 April 22, 2018: An ISKP militant attacked a voter registration center in Kabul, Afghanistan using a suicide bomb. The casualties were all identified as civilians, most of whom had been waiting to apply for state-issued IDs to register to vote in the upcoming elections (57 killed, 119 injured).146 

 
 
August 17, 2019: An ISKP suicide bomber detonated and explosive in the men"s section of a heavily attended wedding in Kabul. Other ISKP militants detonated an explosives-laden vehicle when emergency services arrived at the scene. Most of the attendees were members of the Shia Hazara minority, whom ISKP doctrine considers !apostates” (63 killed, 180+ injured).147 August 2, 2020: ISKP demonstrated a renewed capacity for sophisticated attacks in a raid on a Jalalabad prison in August. The militants detonated an explosive vehicle at the prison"s main gate, then stormed the building. The gunmen freed hundreds of prisoners (though many were later recaptured) and executed several Taliban members who were detained at the prison. It took nearly 24 hours for Afghan security forces to fully repel the attackers (29 killed, 50 wounded).148 August 26, 2021: An ISKP suicide bomber detonated an explosive at the Kabul Airport during the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan. Following U.S. withdrawal from the country, the entrance to the airport was guarded by U.S. military personnel and was crowded with Afghans attempting to flee the country. The bomber was able to use the crowd as cover and force their way to the gate, where the explosion could kill U.S. personnel and Afghan civilians. The deadliness of the blast raised questions about the cause of death for those killed in the attack – in particular, the possibility that U.S. and coalition forces killed some civilians after the explosion. A Pentagon report claims that U.S. fire after the attack comprised only warning shots and that any apparent bullet wounds were inflicted by ball-bearings in the explosive (183+ killed, unknown wounded).149 April 18, 2022: ISKP launched ten rockets from northern Afghanistan over the Amu Darya river into a military base in Termez, Uzbekistan. Both the Uzbek government and the Taliban denied that an attack occurred.150 If the ISKP claim of the attack is true, it would mark ISKP’s first venture beyond its conventional area of operations.151 The bomber reportedly trained in Afghanistan and was an Afghan refugee (60+ killed, unknown wounded).152 July 30, 2023: ISKP carried out a suicide bombing that targeted an election rally in Bajaur District, Pakistan. The rally was for the for a religious political party active in Pakistan, known as Jamiat Uleme-e-Islam-Fazal. The attack confirmed that ISKP had survived the Taliban’s attempts to eliminate the group (60+ killed, 100+ wounded).153 January 3, 2024: Two ISKP militants conducted a suicide bombing at a memorial service in Kerman, Iran. The targeted crowd had gathered to commemorate Iranian military commander Qassem Soleimani, who was assassinated in Iraq in 2020 by a U.S. drone.154 (94 killed, unknown wounded).155 January 28, 2024: Two militants with ties to the Islamic State opened fire on civilians in the the Roman Catholic Church of Santa Maria in Istanbul, Turkey. The militants were believed to have ties to ISKP.156 After the attack, the Islamic State’s media agency issued a statement claiming responsibility and asserting that the violence was part of a new campaign in response to Israeli military actions in Gaza.157 (1 killed, 0 wounded). 

 
 
March 22, 2024: At a rock concert at Crocus City Hall in Moscow, Russia, four Tajik gunmen fired on a crowd of Russian civilians. After the attack, ISKP said its soldiers had killed “a lot of Christians,” as well as blamed Russia for the “blood of Muslims on its hands.” This referred to Russia’s military operations in Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Syria158 (144 killed, 551 wounded).159 INTERACTIONS  A. DESIGNATED/LISTED ● January 14, 2016: The U.S. Secretary of State designated ISKP as a foreign terrorist organization in accordance with section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.160 ● November 2, 2017: The Australian Government designated ISKP as a terrorist organization under its Criminal Code Division 102.161 ● June 21, 2018: The Indian Home Ministry designated ISKP as a terrorist organization under the anti-terror law and the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act of 1967.162  B. COMMUNITY RELATIONS During the initial months of ISKP"s rule in Nangarhar, villagers viewed the group as a benign and positive alternative to the Taliban. Unlike the Taliban, which forcibly took from the local population, ISKP sourced its own food and shelter and did not impose a tax. It also allowed both male and female schools to operate.163 Initially, ISKP commanders claimed that the group had no quarrel with the Afghan government and was instead focused on opposing the Taliban and its link to the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI).164  As ISKP grew in strength throughout 2015, it attempted to expand and consolidate its control through a variety of cruel tactics, including summary justice, forced displacement, and executions of clerics and elders.165 By early autumn of 2015, ISKP had lost much of its popularity among Nangarhar locals. Although the leniency of ISKP"s early rule was initially promising, citizen support dropped as the group began to engage in violent guerilla tactics and enforce Sharia law. ISPK closed schools and clinics; engaged in public executions; killed tribal elders; organized kidnappings for ransom; destroyed of Sufi shrines; and enforced cigarette bans.166 One of ISKP"s most unpopular policies was its ban on poppy cultivation, which was an extremely important source of income for many families in Nangarhar. Finally, rumors also began to circulate that local families would be forced to provide ISKP militants with brides without dowry payments or consideration for tribe and family lineage. Ultimately, the threats ISKP posed to the physical, economic, and social wellbeing of the citizens of Nangarhar drove public support for the return of the Taliban.167  In 2016, the Afghan government attempted to harness local opposition to ISKP by partnering with local militias.168 However, ISKP pointed to and exaggerated the collateral damage inflicted by U.S. and Afghan military attacks to maintain their dominance.169 The US and ANSF employed this tactic with more success in 2019, during the assault on ISKP in Nangarhar, where local militias fought to push ISKP out of the province.170  ISKP has also found support among urban members of the middle-class. With traditional social structures fractured by war, new recruits were attracted by ISKP"s !pure” Salafi ideology and the 

 
 
promise of a proper caliphate. Many members of the ISKP !Kabul Cell” were radicalized by hardline Salafi students and faculty while enrolled in Afghan universities.171 During a National Directorate of Security interrogation, an ISKP prisoner claimed that his organization had recruited !many” students from Kabul University who have gone on to engage in militant activities in Nangarhar, Kabul, and even Iraq and Syria.172 Over the course of 2023, ISKP sought to sow distrust among local populations by targeting humanitarian international organizations. In particular, ISKP amplified the production and dissemination of various anti-humanitarian books, articles, and pamphlets that explicitly labeled humanitarian international organizations as legitimate targets for violence. For example, two key books –  “Rules about Helping the Infidels and Its Harm” and “Rules of Jihad” –  provide a doctrinal justification for civilians to reject international aid (even explicitly naming some international organizations) and enact violence against humanitarian workers. ISKP has also used its supporters to organize harassment and violence against humanitarian staff to isolate communities from international organizations and Taliban social services, creating a more conducive environment for ISKP’s propaganda and recruitment efforts. The ISKP has tied this with its anti-Taliban campaign by portraying the Taliban as a weak and corrupt government that relies on foreign powers to provide basic services due to an inability to protect their people. Ultimately, ISKP aims to bolster its jihadist identity and credibility and potentially spur defections from the Taliban.173  C. RELATIONSHIPS WITH OTHER GROUPS  Rivalry with the Afghan Taliban  Since its emergence in 2015, ISKP has maintained a rivalrous relationship with the Afghan Taliban, which has remained the group’s biggest challengers in Afghanistan. IKSP views the Taliban as ideologically weak and illegitimate, and it has been engaged in a violent competition with the group for resources, recruits, and territorial control.   ISKP has argued that the Taliban relies on a small ethnic and nationalist base for its support and is not a proponent of global jihad.174 ISKP has criticized the Taliban’s ideological purity, including its recent failure to enforce the strict Sharia punishments; its efforts to establish diplomatic ties with non-Muslim countries; its tolerance of non-Muslims and international organizations operating within Afghanistan; and its reluctance to take action against countries like China (which ISKP accuses of committing atrocities against Muslims). Overall, ISKP portrays the Taliban as having abandoned their religious objectives in favor of political power.175 Ultimately, ISKP has sought to distinguish its own brand of jihad from rival organizations and assert leadership of the global jihad movement by establishing its own extremism.176 ISKP has highlighted the Taliban’s departure from ideological purity as a propaganda tool in an attempt to appeal to disaffected Taliban fighters.  In addition to this ideological battle, ISKP and the Taliban have been in constant competition for territory and recruits in Afghanistan and Pakistan. ISKP’s ability to attract recruits – including defectors from the Taliban – has posed a direct threat the Taliban’s dominance in Afghanistan.177 Following the confirmation in July 2015 of Taliban leader Mullah Omar’s death, a significant 

 
 
number of Taliban members defected and joined ISKP. This news also spurred the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) to pledge its forces to the Islamic State.178   The enmity between ISKP and the Taliban has endured, especially after the Taliban secured control over the Government of Afghanistan following the withdrawal of the United States. ISKP has spent recent years conducting a series of attacks across Afghanistan in an effort to depict the Taliban government as incapable and increase international pressure on the new government. ISKP regularly targeted Taliban checkpoints and areas with ethnic minorities, including Hazara neighborhoods, mosques, and schools.179 To emphasize the Taliban’s weaknesses and its inability to secure Afghanistan, ISKP attacked foreign targets in the country. In 2022, ISKP attacked foreign embassies in Kabul, including an attempt to assassinate the Pakistan Head of Mission in Pakistan’s embassy and a suicide attack against the Russian embassy in Kabul.180 ISKP has also launched attacks abroad, demonstrating that the Taliban has been unable to prevent the country from being used as a launchpad for external terrorist attacks.181  Conflicts with the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan  In the early days of its formation, ISKP recruited militants directly linked to groups such as the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU), and other Central Asian groups.182 ISKP’s extensive recruitment from the TTP created underlying tensions between the two groups, but conflicts did not become public until July 2020. The TTP accused ISKP of being a puppet of regional intelligence agencies and claimed ISKP was created to undermine the jihadist movement in the Khorasan region. After the Taliban’s takeover in August 2021, the TTP reaffirmed its allegiance to the Taliban. ISKP retaliated by accusing the TTP of collaborating with Indian intelligence to carry out attacks in Pakistan. Over the following year, these verbal disputes often escalated into armed confrontations.183   Alliance with Lashkar-e-Islam  One of ISKP"s closest allies is Laskhar-e-Islam (LeI). Although LeI has not officially merged with ISKP, the two groups act in such close coordination that many locals in Nangarhar view LeI as a wing of ISKP.184 By partnering with ISKP, LeI has improved its ability to influence the cross-border land conflicts in which it is engaged, and to gain control of strategic smuggling routes. In return, this relationship has allowed ISKP to broaden its support base and increase its operational capacity.185  Ties to other militant organizations in Afghanistan and Pakistan  Furthermore, there are several groups in Afghanistan and Pakistan that bolster the ISKP network. These groups publicly pledged allegiance to the Islamic State’s former leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi but have yet to be formally acknowledged by IS leadership.186 Ansar-ul-Khilafat Wal-Jihad (AKWJ) is the first Pakistan-based militant organization to have publicly pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. AKWJ, formally known as Tehrik-e-Khilafat-o-Jihad, first pledged allegiance to IS in July 2014, and then again in September 2017. In January 2015, AKWJ pledged allegiance specifically to ISKP leader Hafiz Saeed Khan. The group has 

 
 
allegedly conducted a number of small-scale attacks in Hyderabad and Karachi, targeting state officials and Shiites. AKWJ claims to conduct these attacks in the interest of helping the caliphate and avenging the killings of mujahedeen in Karachi and Khyber Agency.187 Another group that actively supports IS is the Pakistani Jundullah. The Pakistani Jundullah, a splinter group of the TTP, allegedly pledged allegiance to IS in 2014. The group has conducted limited attacks against Shiite shrines and medical workers in Quetta.188 Finally, representatives of Lal Masjid (Red Mosque), a mosque widely associated with jihadism, openly support the expansion of the IS caliphate.   There are also several militant groups that have not publicly pledged allegiance to IS, but are supportive of IS and its agenda in Afghanistan and Pakistan. For example, although Jamaat-ul-Ahrar (JA) remains outwardly loyal to the TTP, the group praises IS and mirrors its messaging.189 In addition, 2015, there was unconfirmed speculation that IS encouraged all anti-Shiite militant groups in Pakistan to support the caliphate and proposed that elements of Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LeJ) and Ahl-e-Sunnat Wai Jamat (ASWJ) collaborate in Pakistan.190  Finally, according to a UN Security Council report, current ISKP leader Shabab al-Muhajir may have ties to the Haqqani militant network. Although the group is part of the Taliban, some member states of the UNSC reported !tactical or commander-level collaboration” between it and ISKP. Other member states !strongly deny” these claims, and the official report stresses that any such relations are based on personal rather than organizational relationships. Regardless, the report concludes that the Haqqani network likely tacitly allowed ISKP personnel movements to attack the former Afghan government.191 The leader of the Haqqani network, Sirajuddin Haqqan, is the acting Interior Minister of Afghanistan.192 It is unclear what this means for the future of ISKP-Haqqani relations.  D. STATE SPONSORS AND EXTERNAL INFLUENCES  ISKP maintains ideological ties and its formal affiliation with the Islamic State central organization. Though ISKP initially received some aid from IS central (see the “Resources” section of this profile), American and Afghan officials in 2017 reportedly believed that ISKP was not engaging in regular contact with IS central.193   MAPS ● Global Islamic State ● Pakistan  1 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 2“ Islamic State Khorasan Province. Australian National Security, n.d., https://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/Listedterroristorganisations/Pages/Islamic-State-Khorasan-Province.aspx. 3 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/; Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 

 
 
 4 Hummel, Kristina. “The Enduring Duel: Islamic State Khorasan’s Survival under Afghanistan’s New Rulers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, August 30, 2023. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-enduring-duel-islamic-state-khorasans-survival-under-afghanistans-new-rulers/. 5 Jadoon, Amira, Abdul Sayed, and Andrew Mines. "The Islamic State Threat in Taliban Afghanistan: Tracing the Resurgence of Islamic State Khorasan." CTC Sentinel 15.1 (2022): 33-35. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-islamic-state-threat-in-taliban-afghanistan-tracing-the-resurgence-of-islamic-state-khorasan/ ; “ISIS-KHORASAN.” Counter Terrorism Guide, National Counterterrorism Center, Office of the Director of National Intelligence. December 2022. Accessed June 24, 2024. https://www.dni.gov/nctc/ftos/isis_khorasan_fto.html ; Eggink, Kees. “ICCT Snapshot: Islamic State - Khorasan Province.” International Centre for Counter-Terrorism, January 12, 2024. https://www.icct.nl/publication/icct-snapshot-islamic-state-khorasan-province  6 Shah, Tayyab Ali. “Pakistan’s Challenges in Orkazai Agency.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 3 July, 2010, https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/pakistan%E2%80%99s-challenges-in-orakzai-agency; Osman, Borhan. “The Islamic State in ‘Khorasan’: How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar.” Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/. 7 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 8 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 9 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan;  Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 10 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 11“ Abdul Rahim Muslim Dost.” Counter Extremism Project, n.d., https://www.counterextremism.com/extremists/abdul-rahim-muslim-dost; Roggio, Bill. “Ex-Gitmo ‘poet ’and committed jihadist denounces Islamic State for attacks on civilians.” FDD’s Long War Journal, 20 July, 2016. https://www.longwarjournal.org/tags/abdul-rahim-muslim-dost. 12 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 13 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 14 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan; Shah, Tayyab Ali. “Pakistan’s Challenges in Orkazai Agency.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 3 July, 2010, https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/pakistan%E2%80%99s-challenges-in-orakzai-agency; “The Khyber Pass.” National Geographic, n.d., https://www.nationalgeographic.org/media/khyber-pass/. 15 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan. 16 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 17 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf 18 Pillalamarri, Akhilesh. “Revealed: Why ISIS Hates the Taliban.” The Diplomat, 29 Jan. 2016, https://thediplomat.com/2016/01/revealed-why-isis-hates-the-taliban/. 19 Dawood, Azami. “Why Taliban special forces are fighting Islamic State.” BBC News, 18 Dec. 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-35123748. 

 
 
 20 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 21 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf 22 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/; Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf; Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 23 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 24 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 25 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 26 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 27 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 28 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 29 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 30 Sayed, Abdul, and Tore Refslund Hamming. “The Growing Threat of the Islamic State in Afghanistan and South Asia.” United States Institute of Peace, Special Report no. 520, June 2023. https://www.usip.org/publications/2023/06/growing-threat-islamic-state-afghanistan-and-south-asia 31 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 32 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf; Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf 33 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf 34 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 35 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 

 
 
 36 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 37 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 38 Osman, Borhan. “The Battle for Mamand: ISKP under strain, but not yet defeated.” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 May, 2017, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-battle-for-mamand-iskp-under-strain-but-not-yet-defeated/ 39 Osman, Borhan. “The Battle for Mamand: ISKP under strain, but not yet defeated.” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 May, 2017, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-battle-for-mamand-iskp-under-strain-but-not-yet-defeated/. 40 Osman, Borhan. “The Battle for Mamand: ISKP under strain, but not yet defeated.” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 May, 2017, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-battle-for-mamand-iskp-under-strain-but-not-yet-defeated/. 41 Cooper, Helene, and Mujib Mashal. “U.S. Drops ‘Mother of All Bombs ’on ISIS Caves in Afghanistan.” The New York Times, 13 Apr. 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/13/world/asia/moab-mother-of-all-bombs-afghanistan.html; Popalzai, Ehsan. “’Mother of all bombs ’killed 94 ISIS fighters, Afghan official says.” CNN, 15 Apr. 2017, http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/15/asia/afghanistan-isis-moab-strike/index.html. 42 Osman, Borhan. “The Battle for Mamand: ISKP under strain, but not yet defeated.” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 May, 2017, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-battle-for-mamand-iskp-under-strain-but-not-yet-defeated/. 43 Osman, Borhan. “The Battle for Mamand: ISKP under strain, but not yet defeated.” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 May, 2017, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-battle-for-mamand-iskp-under-strain-but-not-yet-defeated/. 44 Ali, Obaid. “Qari Hekmat’s Island: A Daesh enclave in Jawzjan?” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, November 11, 2017. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/qari-hekmats-island-a-daesh-enclave-in-jawzjan/. 45 Ali, Obaid. “Qari Hekmat’s Island: A Daesh enclave in Jawzjan?” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, November 11, 2017. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/qari-hekmats-island-a-daesh-enclave-in-jawzjan/. 46 Ali, Obaid. “Qari Hekmat’s Island Overrun: Taleban defeat ‘ISKP ’in Jawzjan.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, August 4, 2018. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/qari-hekmats-island-overrun-taleban-defeat-iskp-in-jawzjan/. 47 Doxsee, Catrina, Jared Thompson, and Grace Hwang. “Examining Extremism: Islamic State Khorasan Province (ISKP).” Center for Strategic & International Studies, September 8, 2021. https://www.csis.org/blogs/examining-extremism/examining-extremism-islamic-state-khorasan-province-iskp. 48 The Defense Post. “ISIS Announces New India and Pakistan Provinces, Casually Breaking up Khorasan,” May 15, 2019. https://www.thedefensepost.com/2019/05/15/islamic-state-pakistan-province-al-hind/. 49 Ali, Obaid. “Hit from Many Sides 1: Unpicking the recent victory against the ISKP in Nangrahar.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, March 1, 2020. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/hit-from-many-sides-1-unpicking-the-recent-victory-against-the-iskp-in-nangrahar/. 50 Seldin, Jeff. “Islamic State Staggers in Afghanistan, but Survives.” VOA, November 29, 2019. https://www.voanews.com/a/south-central-asia_islamic-state-staggers-afghanistan-survives/6179837.html. 51“ Twenty-Fifth Report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team Submitted Pursuant to Resolution 2368 (2017) Concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and Associated Individuals and Entities.” United Nations Security Council, January 20, 2020. https://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/2020/53. 52 Obaid, Ali. “Hit from Many Sides (2): The demise of ISKP in Kunar.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, March 3, 2021. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/hit-from-many-sides-2-the-demise-of-iskp-in-kunar/. 53 “Twelfth Report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team Submitted Pursuant to Resolution 2557 (2020) Concerning the Taliban and Other Associated Individuals and Entities Constituting a Threat to the Peace Stability and Security of Afghanistan.” United Nations Security Council, May 20, 2021. https://www.undocs.org/pdf?symbol=en/S/2021/486. 54 Gannon, Kathy, and Tameem Akhgar. “US Blames Brutal Attack on Afghan Maternity Hospital on IS.” AP NEWS, August 20, 2021. https://apnews.com/article/europe-religion-islamic-state-group-eebcd4af6c821e5530f3795352542f9f; Adili, Ali Yawar. “A Community Under Attack: How successive governments failed west Kabul and the Hazaras who live there.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, January 17, 2022. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/a-community-under-attack-how-successive-governments-failed-west-kabul-and-the-hazaras-who-live-there/; BBC News. “Kabul University: 22 

 
 
 Dead, More Wounded as Gunmen Storm Campus,” November 2, 2020, sec. Asia. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-54750839. 55 Noorzai, Roshan. “IS Khorasan Able to Stage Attacks Despite Depleted Leadership, Experts Say.” VOA. Accessed January 28, 2022. https://www.voanews.com/a/extremism-watch_khorasan-able-stage-attacks-despite-depleted-leadership-experts-say/6194686.html. 56“ Twelfth Report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team Submitted Pursuant to Resolution 2557 (2020) Concerning the Taliban and Other Associated Individuals and Entities Constituting a Threat to the Peace Stability and Security of Afghanistan.” United Nations Security Council, May 20, 2021. https://www.undocs.org/pdf?symbol=en/S/2021/486. 57 Caroline Newman. “Q&A: Long-Term Foreign Policy Effects of a Chaotic Withdrawal From Afghanistan.” UVA Today, August 30, 2021. https://news.virginia.edu/content/qa-long-term-foreign-policy-effects-chaotic-withdrawal-afghanistan. 58 Hashemi, Sayed, Lolita Baldor, Kathy Gannon, and Ellen Knickmeyer. “American Forces Keep up Airlift under High Threat Warnings | AP News.” AP NEWS, August 27, 2021. https://apnews.com/article/bombings-evacuations-kabul-bb32ec2b65b54ec24323e021c9b4a553. 59 Hussain, Tom. “Isis-K Ups Attacks in Afghanistan, Pakistan to Show Fight against Taliban.” South China Morning Post, December 8, 2021. https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/article/3158929/isis-k-escalates-terror-attacks-afghanistan-and-pakistan-show-resistance. 60 European Union Agency for Asylum. “1.4. Islamic State Khorasan Province (ISKP),” April 2022. https://euaa.europa.eu/country-guidance-afghanistan-2022/14-islamic-state-khorasan-province-iskp. 61 Giustozzi, Antonio. “How Much of a Threat Is the Islamic State in Khorasan?” Royal United Services Institue, March 28, 2022. https://rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/how-much-threat-islamic-state-khorasan  62 Giustozzi, Antonio. “How Much of a Threat Is the Islamic State in Khorasan?” Royal United Services Institue, March 28, 2022. https://rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/how-much-threat-islamic-state-khorasan.; Hummel, Kristina. “The Enduring Duel: Islamic State Khorasan’s Survival under Afghanistan’s New Rulers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, August 30, 2023. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-enduring-duel-islamic-state-khorasans-survival-under-afghanistans-new-rulers/. 63 Hummel, Kristina. “The Enduring Duel: Islamic State Khorasan’s Survival under Afghanistan’s New Rulers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, August 30, 2023. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-enduring-duel-islamic-state-khorasans-survival-under-afghanistans-new-rulers/. 64 Zelin, Aaron. “ISKP Goes Global: External Operations from Afghanistan.” The Washington Institute, September 11, 2023. https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/iskp-goes-global-external-operations-afghanistan. 65 Zelin, Aaron. “ISKP Goes Global: External Operations from Afghanistan.” The Washington Institute, September 11, 2023. https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/iskp-goes-global-external-operations-afghanistan. 66 Hummel, Kristina. “The Enduring Duel: Islamic State Khorasan’s Survival under Afghanistan’s New Rulers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, August 30, 2023. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-enduring-duel-islamic-state-khorasans-survival-under-afghanistans-new-rulers/. 67 Bozkurt, Abdullah. “ISIS-K Exploits Turkey for Logistics, Fighter Transfers and Terror Attacks.” Middle East Forum, February 12, 2024. https://www.meforum.org/65554/isis-k-exploits-turkey-for-logistics-fighter. 68 Matamis, Joaquin. “What Does a Recent ISIS-K Terror Attack Mean for Turkey? • Stimson Center.” Stimson Center (blog), March 14, 2024. https://www.stimson.org/2024/what-does-a-recent-isis-k-terror-attack-mean-for-turkey/. 69 Hummel, Kristina. “The Enduring Duel: Islamic State Khorasan’s Survival under Afghanistan’s New Rulers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, August 30, 2023. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-enduring-duel-islamic-state-khorasans-survival-under-afghanistans-new-rulers/. 70 Sayed, Abdul, and Tore Refslund Hamming. “The Growing Threat of the Islamic State in Afghanistan and South Asia.” United States Institute of Peace, Special Report no. 520, June 2023. https://www.usip.org/publications/2023/06/growing-threat-islamic-state-afghanistan-and-south-asia 71 Yawar, Mohammad Yunus, Mushtaq Ali, and Y. P. Rajesh. “How ISIS-K Leader Forged One of Islamic State’s Most Fearsome Groups.” Reuters, March 26, 2024, sec. World. https://www.reuters.com/world/leader-isis-group-linked-moscow-attack-has-global-ambitions-2024-03-25/. 72 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan; Shah, Tayyab Ali. “Pakistan’s Challenges in Orkazai Agency.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 3 July, 2010, https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/pakistan%E2%80%99s-challenges-in-orakzai-agency 

 
 
 73 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan. 74“ Afghanistan-Pakistan ISIL’s Hafiz Saeed Khan killed.” Al Jazeera, 13 Aug. 2016, http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/08/report-isil-leader-hafiz-saeed-killed-strike-160812175040690.html 75 ISIS dealt series of serious blows in Afghan stronghold.” CBS News, 8 May, 2017, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/afghanistan-isis-airstrikes-commander-abdul-haseeb-logari-killed-us-raid/. 76 Osman, Borhan. “Another ISKP leader ‘dead’: Where is the group headed after losing so many amirs?” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 July, 2017. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/another-iskp-leader-dead-where-is-the-group-headed-after-losing-so-many-amirs/. 77 Aljazeera. “ISIL Leader in Afghanistan Killed in Air Raids,” August 28, 2018. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2018/8/26/isil-leader-in-afghanistan-killed-in-air-raids. 78 United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 15 July 2019 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities addressed to the President of the Security Council.” August 30, 2019, S/2019/570. Pg. 15.  79 “IS regional leader Sheikh Khorasani 'arrested in Afghanistan.’” May 11, 2020, BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-52623291   80 Government of Australia. “Islamic State Khorasan Province.” Australian National Security, accessed August 5, 2024. https://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/what-australia-is-doing/terrorist-organisations/listed-terrorist-organisations/islamic-state-khorasan-province  81 United Nations Security Council. “Letter dated 15 July 2019 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities addressed to the President of the Security Council.” August 30, 2019, S/2019/570. Pg. 15.  82 Aljazeera. “Afghan Forces Announce Arrest of Local ISIL Leader,” April 4, 2020. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/4/4/afghan-forces-announce-arrest-of-local-isil-leader. 83 Bill Roggio. “U.S. offers $10 million reward for leader of Islamic State Khorasan Province.” Long War Journal, February 16, 2022. https://www.longwarjournal.org/archives/2022/02/u-s-offers-10-million-reward-for-leader-of-islamic-state-khorasan-province.php  84 Schmitt, Eric. “ISIS Branch Poses Biggest Immediate Terrorist Threat to Evacuation in Kabul.” The New York Times, August 25, 2021, sec. U.S. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/25/us/politics/isis-terrorism-afghanistan-taliban.html. 85 U.S. Department of State. “Rewards for Justice – Reward Offer for Information on ISIS-K Leader Sanaullah Ghafari and Kabul Airport Attack.” February 7, 2022. https://www.state.gov/rewards-for-justice-reward-offer-for-information-on-isis-k-leader-sanaullah-ghafari-and-kabul-airport-attack/  86 Zahid, Noor. “Taliban Says IS Deputy Leader Has Joined Its Ranks.” VOA News, 30 Nov. 2017, https://www.voanews.com/a/afghan-taliban-says-islamic-state-deputy-leader-has-/4144740.html. 87 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 88 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 89 Bengali, Shashank. “Islamic State has fewer than 1,000 fighters in Afghanistan. So why did Trump drop the ‘mother of all bombs’?” Los Angeles Times, 14 Apr. 2017, http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-afghanistan-islamic-state-explainer-20170414-story.html. 90“ Islamic State Khorasan Province. Australian National Security, n.d., https://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/Listedterroristorganisations/Pages/Islamic-State-Khorasan-Province.aspx. 91“ Twelfth Report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team Submitted Pursuant to Resolution 2557 (2020) Concerning the Taliban and Other Associated Individuals and Entities Constituting a Threat to the Peace Stability and Security of Afghanistan.” United Nations Security Council, May 20, 2021. https://www.undocs.org/pdf?symbol=en/S/2021/486. 92 “Seventeenth Report of the Secretary-General on the Threat Posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to International Peace and Security and the Range of United Nations Efforts in Support of Member States in Countering the Threat.” United Nations Security Council, July 31, 2023. https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n23/210/07/pdf/n2321007.pdf. 

 
 
 93 Gerard van Bohemen. “Letter Dated 25 September 2015 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee Pursuant to Resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) Concerning Al-Qaida and Associated Individuals and Entities Addressed to the President of the Security Council.” United Nations Security Council, September 25, 2015. https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n15/291/97/pdf/n1529197.pdf. 94 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 95 Mashal, Mujib. “In Tangled Afghan War, a Thin Line of Defense Against ISIS.” The New York Times, The New York Times, 25 Dec. 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/12/25/world/asia/eastern-afghanistan-isis.html. 96 Antonio Giustozzi. “The Islamic State in Khorasan between Taliban Counter-Terrorism and Resurgence Prospects.” International Centre for Counter-Terrorism - ICCT. Accessed June 3, 2024. https://www.icct.nl/publication/islamic-state-khorasan-between-taliban-counter-terrorism-and-resurgence-prospects. 97 Antonio Giustozzi. “The Taliban’s Campaign Against the Islamic State: Explaining Initial Successes.” Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, 2023. https://static.rusi.org/op-taliban-campaign-against-islamic-state.pdf  98 Antonio Giustozzi. “The Taliban’s Campaign Against the Islamic State: Explaining Initial Successes.” Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, 2023. https://static.rusi.org/op-taliban-campaign-against-islamic-state.pdf  99 Antonio Giustozzi. “The Islamic State in Khorasan between Taliban Counter-Terrorism and Resurgence Prospects.” International Centre for Counter-Terrorism - ICCT. Accessed June 3, 2024. https://www.icct.nl/publication/islamic-state-khorasan-between-taliban-counter-terrorism-and-resurgence-prospects. 100“ Islamic State Khorasan Province. Australian National Security, n.d., https://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/Listedterroristorganisations/Pages/Islamic-State-Khorasan-Province.aspx.; Osman, Borhan. “ISKP’s Battle for Minds: What are its main messages and who do they attract?” Afghanistan Analysts Network, December 12, 2016. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/iskps-battle-for-minds-what-are-their-main-messages-and-who-do-they-attract/. 101“ Terrorist Groups in Afghanistan.” Congressional Research Service, August 17, 2021. https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjn6pHW8eryAhWUGs0KHU-TCmsQFnoECAgQAw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fcrsreports.congress.gov%2Fproduct%2Fpdf%2FIF%2FIF10604&usg=AOvVaw1YaDb23MLIvCef6w0LBF-c. 102 Osman, Borhan. “Bourgeois Jihad: Why Young, Middle-Class Afghans Join the Islamic State.” United States Institute of Peace, June 1, 2020. https://www.usip.org/publications/2020/06/bourgeois-jihad-why-young-middle-class-afghans-join-islamic-state. 103 Osman, Borhan. “ISKP’s Battle for Minds: What are its main messages and who do they attract?” Afghanistan Analysts Network, December 12, 2016. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/iskps-battle-for-minds-what-are-their-main-messages-and-who-do-they-attract/. 104 Jadoon, Amira, Andrew Mines, Aaron Y. Zelin. “The Next Afghan Jihad? Taliban Efforts to Contain ISKP.” The Washington Institute, October 2, 2023. https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/next-afghan-jihad-taliban-efforts-contain-iskp. 105 The Economist. “What Is the Islamic State Khorasan Province?,” March 25, 2024. https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2024/03/25/what-is-the-islamic-state-khorasan-province. 106 Hummel, Kristina. “The Enduring Duel: Islamic State Khorasan’s Survival under Afghanistan’s New Rulers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, August 30, 2023. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-enduring-duel-islamic-state-khorasans-survival-under-afghanistans-new-rulers/. 107 Jadoon, Amira, Abdul Sayed, Lucas Weber, and Riccardo Valle. “From Tajikistan to Moscow and Iran: Mapping the Local and Transnational Threat of Islamic State Khorasan.” CTC Sentinel. Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, May 30, 2024. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/from-tajikistan-to-moscow-and-iran-mapping-the-local-and-transnational-threat-of-islamic-state-khorasan/. 108 Sayed, Abdul, and Tore Refslund Hamming. “The Growing Threat of the Islamic State in Afghanistan and South Asia,” June 2023, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/2023-06/sr-520-growing-threat-islamic-state-afghanistan-south-asia.pdf.  109 The Economist. “What Is the Islamic State Khorasan Province?,” March 25, 2024. https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2024/03/25/what-is-the-islamic-state-khorasan-province. 

 
 
 110 Yawar, Mohammad Yunus, Mushtaq Ali, and Y. P. Rajesh. “How ISIS-K Leader Forged One of Islamic State’s Most Fearsome Groups.” Reuters, March 26, 2024, sec. World. https://www.reuters.com/world/leader-isis-group-linked-moscow-attack-has-global-ambitions-2024-03-25/. 111 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf; McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf 112 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 113 Osman, Borhan. “The Battle for Mamand: ISKP under strain, but not yet defeated.” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 May, 2017, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-battle-for-mamand-iskp-under-strain-but-not-yet-defeated/. 114 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf.}} {{Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 115 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/ 116 Ali, Obaid. “Qari Hekmat’s Island: A Daesh enclave in Jawzjan?” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, November 11, 2017. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/qari-hekmats-island-a-daesh-enclave-in-jawzjan/. 117 Ali, Obaid. “Qari Hekmat’s Island: A Daesh enclave in Jawzjan?” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, November 11, 2017. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/qari-hekmats-island-a-daesh-enclave-in-jawzjan/. 118 Ali, Obaid. “Qari Hekmat’s Island Overrun: Taleban defeat ‘ISKP ’in Jawzjan.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, August 4, 2018. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/qari-hekmats-island-overrun-taleban-defeat-iskp-in-jawzjan/. 119 Ali, Obaid. “Hit from Many Sides 1: Unpicking the recent victory against the ISKP in Nangrahar.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, March 1, 2020. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/hit-from-many-sides-1-unpicking-the-recent-victory-against-the-iskp-in-nangrahar/. 120 Obaid, Ali. “Hit from Many Sides (2): The demise of ISKP in Kunar.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, March 3, 2021. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/hit-from-many-sides-2-the-demise-of-iskp-in-kunar/. 121 Mukhtar, Ahmad. “Moscow Attack Fuels Concern over Global ISIS-K Threat Growing under the Taliban in Afghanistan - CBS News,” March 28, 2024. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/moscow-attack-isis-k-threat-growing-under-taliban-in-afghanistan/. 122 Hassan, Hassan. “The Sectarianism of the Islamic State: Ideological Roots and Political Context.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 13 June 2016, https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2016/12/the-sectarianism-of-the-islamic-state-ideological-roots-and-political-context  123 Bunzel, Cole. “From Paper State to Caliphate: The Ideology of the Islamic State.” Brookings, Brookings Institute, 28 July 2016, www.brookings.edu/research/from-paper-state-to-caliphate-the-ideology-of-the-islamic-state 124 Wood, Graeme. “What ISIS Really Wants.” The Atlantic, Atlantic Media Company, Mar. 2015, www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/03/what-isis-really-wants/384980/. 125 Gambhir, Harleen. “ISIS in Afghanistan.” Institute for the Study of War, ISW, 3 Dec. 2015, https://www.understandingwar.org/sites/default/files/ISIS%20in%20Afghanistan_2.pdf  126 Khan, Muhammad Nawaz. “South Asia’s 4 Competing Jihads. The Diplomat, 10 Nov. 2017, https://thediplomat.com/2017/11/south-asias-4-competing-jihads/. 127 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 128 Joscelyn, Thomas. “Islamic State’s Khorasan ‘province ’assaults Iraqi embassy in Kabul,” FDD’s Long War Journal, 31 July, 2017. https://www.longwarjournal.org/archives/2017/07/islamic-states-khorasan-province-assaults-iraqi-embassy-in-kabul.php. 

 
 
 129 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/; Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 130 Pillalamarri, Akhilesh. “Revealed: Why ISIS Hates the Taliban.” The Diplomat, 29 Jan. 2016, https://thediplomat.com/2016/01/revealed-why-isis-hates-the-taliban/. 131 Dawood, Azami. “Why Taliban special forces are fighting Islamic State.” BBC News, 18 Dec. 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-35123748. 132 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 133 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/ 134 Adili, Ali Yawar. “A Community Under Attack: How successive governments failed west Kabul and the Hazaras who live there.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, January 17, 2022. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/a-community-under-attack-how-successive-governments-failed-west-kabul-and-the-hazaras-who-live-there/. 135 ISIS Beheads 15 of Its Own Fighters in Afghanistan.” Newsweek, 23 Nov. 2017, http://www.newsweek.com/isis-beheads-15-its-own-fighters-afghanistan-720749. 136 Sayed, Abdul, and Tore Refslund Hamming. “The Growing Threat of the Islamic State in Afghanistan and South Asia.” United States Institute of Peace, Special Report no. 520, June 2023. https://www.usip.org/publications/2023/06/growing-threat-islamic-state-afghanistan-and-south-asiafghanistan-and-south-asia  137 Jadoon, Amira, Abdul Sayed, Lucas Weber, and Riccardo Valle. “From Tajikistan to Moscow and Iran: Mapping the Local and Transnational Threat of Islamic State Khorasan.” CTC Sentinel. Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, May 30, 2024. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/from-tajikistan-to-moscow-and-iran-mapping-the-local-and-transnational-threat-of-islamic-state-khorasan/. 138 Jadoon, Amira, Abdul Sayed, Lucas Weber, and Riccardo Valle. “From Tajikistan to Moscow and Iran: Mapping the Local and Transnational Threat of Islamic State Khorasan.” CTC Sentinel. Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, May 30, 2024. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/from-tajikistan-to-moscow-and-iran-mapping-the-local-and-transnational-threat-of-islamic-state-khorasan/. 139 Popalzai, Masoud, and Saleem Mehsud. “ISIS militant bomber on motorbike kills 33 at bank in Afghanistan.” CNN, 19 Apr. 2015, http://edition.cnn.com/2015/04/18/asia/afghanistan-violence/index.html. 140“ Pakistan gunmen kill 45 on Karachi Ismaili Shia bus.” BBC News, 13 May, 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-32717321. 141 Harooni, Mirwais. “Islamic State claims responsibility for Kabul attack, 80 dead.” Reuters, 23 July, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-afghanistan-protests/islamic-state-claims-responsibility-for-kabul-attack-80-dead-idUSKCN1030GB?il=0. 142 Dua, Ruchi. “93 killed, over 120 injured in bomb attack at hospital in Pakistan’s Quetta. India Today, 8 Aug, 2016. http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/quetta-bomb-explosion-civil-hospital-balochistan/1/734741.html; Shas, Syed Ali. “70 dead as blast hits Quetta Civil Hospital after lawyer’s killing. Dawn, 8 Aug. 2016, https://www.dawn.com/news/1276183/70-dead-as-blast-hits-quetta-civil-hospital-after-lawyers-killing. 143 Zafar, Mohammad. “61 killed, at least 165 injured as militants storm police training centre in Quetta. The Express Tribune, 24, Oct. 2016, https://tribune.com.pk/story/1208735/militants-attack-police-training-centre-quetta/; Shah, Syed Ali. “61 killed in twin suicide attacks as terrorists storm police training college in Quettta.” Dawn, 24 Oct. 2016, https://www.dawn.com/news/1291999/60-killed-in-twin-suicide-attacks-as-terrorists-storm-police-training-college-in-quetta. 144 Latief, Samiya. “Pakistan: 100 killed in bombing at Shahbaz Qalandar shrine; US, UN condemn attack.” India Today, 16 Feb. 2017, < http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/12-dead-50-injured-in-suicide-attack-on-sufi-shrine-in-pak/1/884637.html>. 145“ Afghanistan: IS gunmen dressed as medics kill 30 at Kabul military hospital. BBC News, 8 Mar. 2017, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-39202525; “Death toll from Kabul hospital attack rises to 49.” Reuters, 9 Mar. 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-afghanistan-blast/death-toll-from-kabul-hospital-attack-rises-to-49-idUSKBN16G0RO. 

 
 
 146“ Afghanistan: Kabul Voter Centre Suicide Attack Kills 57.” BBC News, BBC, 22 Apr. 2018, www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-43855884. 147 BBC News. “Afghanistan: Bomb Kills 63 at Wedding in Kabul,” August 18, 2019, sec. Asia. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-49383803. 148 Noorzai, Roshan. “IS Khorasan Able to Stage Attacks Despite Depleted Leadership, Experts Say.” VOA. Accessed January 28, 2022. https://www.voanews.com/a/extremism-watch_khorasan-able-stage-attacks-despite-depleted-leadership-experts-say/6194686.html.; CBS News. “ISIS-Claimed Attack on Afghan Prison Leaves Dozens Dead and Sets Hundreds Free,” August 3, 2020. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/isis-claimed-attack-afghanistan-prison-leaves-dead-hundreds-free/. 149 Hashemi, Sayed, Lolita Baldor, Kathy Gannon, and Ellen Knickmeyer. “American Forces Keep up Airlift under High Threat Warnings | AP News.” AP NEWS, August 27, 2021. https://apnews.com/article/bombings-evacuations-kabul-bb32ec2b65b54ec24323e021c9b4a553; “Pentagon Releases Report on Kabul Airport Bombing That Killed 13 U.S. Troops in Afghanistan,” February 4, 2022. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/afghanistan-kabul-airport-bombing-us-troops-pentagon/. 150 Abubakar Siddique. “IS-K Ramps Up War Against The Taliban By Attacking Central Asian Neighbors.” RadioFreeEurope RadioLiberty, May 11, 2022. https://www.rferl.org/a/islamic-state-khorasan-taliban-central-asia-attacks/31844898.html. 151 The Economist. “What Is the Islamic State Khorasan Province?,” March 25, 2024. https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2024/03/25/what-is-the-islamic-state-khorasan-province. 152 Gul, Ayaz. “Islamic State Khorasan Claims Rocket Attack on Uzbekistan.” Voice of America, April 18, 2022. https://www.voanews.com/a/islamic-state-khorasan-claims-rocket-attack-on-uzbekistan-/6534866.html. 153 Hummel, Kristina. “The Enduring Duel: Islamic State Khorasan’s Survival under Afghanistan’s New Rulers.” Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, August 30, 2023. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/the-enduring-duel-islamic-state-khorasans-survival-under-afghanistans-new-rulers/. 154 Reuters. “Iran Arrests 11 Suspects over Bomb Blasts, Mourners Demand Revenge - State TV,” January 5, 2024. https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/iran-leaders-vow-revenge-funeral-bomb-attack-victims-state-media-2024-01-05/. 155Strachota, Krzysztof. “Islamic State-Khorasan: Global Jihad’s New Front.” OSW Centre for Eastern Studies, March 29, 2024, https://www.osw.waw.pl/en/publikacje/osw-commentary/2024-03-29/islamic-state-khorasan-global-jihads-new-front.  156 Aaron Zelin. “The Islamic State Hits Turkey After Years of Plotting.” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, January 30, 2024. https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/islamic-state-hits-turkey-after-years-plotting  157 Botobekov, Uran. “Fratricidal Jihad: Assessing the Central Asian ISKP Attacks on Turkey.” The Diplomat, February 23, 2024. https://thediplomat.com/2024/02/fratricidal-jihad-assessing-the-central-asian-iskp-attacks-on-turkey/. 158 Stanly, Johny. “Watch | What Is the Islamic State-Khorasan and Why Did They Attack Russia?” The Hindu, April 2, 2024, sec. World. https://www.thehindu.com/news/international/watch-what-is-the-islamic-state-khorasan-and-why-did-they-attack-russia/article68018833.ece. 159 Walters, Joanna, Martin Belam. “Some Victims of Moscow Shooting in Critical Condition, Authorities Say – as It Happened.” The Guardian, March 24, 2024, sec. World news. https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2024/mar/23/moscow-concert-attack-crocus-city-hall-shooting-russia-live-updates. 160“ Foreign Terrorist Organizations.” U.S. Department of State, n.d., https://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/other/des/123085.htm. 161“ Islamic State Khorasan Province. Australian National Security, n.d., https://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/Listedterroristorganisations/Pages/Islamic-State-Khorasan-Province.aspx. 162 Correspondent, Special. “Centre Bans Affiliates of Al-Qaeda, Islamic State.” The Hindu, The Hindu, 21 June 2018, www.thehindu.com/news/national/india-bans-offshoots-of-al-qaeda-islamic-state-under-anti-terror-law/article24219767.ece. 163 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 164 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 

 
 
 165 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 166 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf; Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf 167 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 168 Osman, Borhan. "The Islamic State in 'Khorasan': How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar." Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, <https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/>. 169 Osman, Borhan. “The Battle for Mamand: ISKP under strain, but not yet defeated.” Afghan Analysts Network, 23 May, 2017, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-battle-for-mamand-iskp-under-strain-but-not-yet-defeated/. 170 Ali, Obaid. “Hit from Many Sides 1: Unpicking the recent victory against the ISKP in Nangrahar.” Afghanistan Analysts Network - English, March 1, 2020. https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/reports/war-and-peace/hit-from-many-sides-1-unpicking-the-recent-victory-against-the-iskp-in-nangrahar/. 171 Osman, Borhan. “Bourgeois Jihad: Why Young, Middle-Class Afghans Join the Islamic State.” United States Institute of Peace, June 1, 2020. https://www.usip.org/publications/2020/06/bourgeois-jihad-why-young-middle-class-afghans-join-islamic-state. 172 Mehrdad, Ezzatullah. “How Islamic State Infiltrated Kabul University.” The Diplomat, August 12, 2019. https://thediplomat.com/2019/08/how-islamic-state-infiltrated-kabul-university/. 173 Mines, Andrew. “‘Refuting the Lying Tongues’: Unpacking the Islamic State Khorasan Province’s Campaign against Humanitarians in Afghanistan.” GW Program on Extremism, February 15, 2023. https://extremism.gwu.edu/islamic-state-khorasan-targeting-humanitarians. 174 Pillalamarri, Akhilesh. “Revealed: Why ISIS Hates the Taliban.” The Diplomat, 29 Jan. 2016, https://thediplomat.com/2016/01/revealed-why-isis-hates-the-taliban/. 175 Jadoon, Amira, Abdul Sayed, Lucas Weber, and Riccardo Valle. “From Tajikistan to Moscow and Iran: Mapping the Local and Transnational Threat of Islamic State Khorasan.” CTC Sentinel. Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, May 30, 2024. https://ctc.westpoint.edu/from-tajikistan-to-moscow-and-iran-mapping-the-local-and-transnational-threat-of-islamic-state-khorasan/. 176 Goldbaum, Christina. “ISIS-K, Group Tied to Moscow Attack, Has Grown Bolder and More Violent.” The New York Times, March 24, 2024, sec. World. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/03/24/world/europe/isis-k-moscow-attack.html. 177 Dawood, Azami. “Why Taliban special forces are fighting Islamic State.” BBC News, 18 Dec. 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-35123748. 178 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 179 Goldbaum, Christina. “ISIS-K, Group Tied to Moscow Attack, Has Grown Bolder and More Violent.” The New York Times, March 4, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/03/24/world/europe/isis-k-moscow-attack.html ; “Afghanistan: ISIS Group Targets Religious Minorities.” Human Rights Watch, September 6, 2022. https://www.hrw.org/news/2022/09/06/afghanistan-isis-group-targets-religious-minorities  180 Goldbaum, Christina. “Pakistan Condemns ‘Assassination Attempt’ on Its Kabul Embassy.” The New York Times, December 22, 2022. https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/02/world/asia/pakistan-kabul-embassy-militants.html; Goldbaum, Christina. “Suicide Attack Hits Russian Embassy in Afghanistan, Killing 2 Employees.” The New York Times, September 5, 2022. https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/05/world/asia/kabul-russian-embassy-suicide-attack.html   181 Abdul Sayed and Tore Refslund Hamming. “The Growing Threat of the Islamic State in Afghanistan and South Asia.” Special Report no. 520 (June 2023), United States Institute of Peace. https://www.usip.org/publications/2023/06/growing-threat-islamic-state-afghanistan-and-south-asia; Goldbaum, Christina. “ISIS-K, Group Tied to Moscow Attack, Has Grown Bolder and More Violent.” The New York Times, March 4, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/03/24/world/europe/isis-k-moscow-attack.html 

 
 
 182 McNally, Lauren, Alex Amiral, Marvin Weinbaum, and Antoun Issa. “The Islamic State in Afghanistan: Examining Its Threat to Stability.” Middle East Institute Policy Focus Series 2016-11, May 2016, http://www.mei.edu/sites/default/files/publications/PF12_McNallyAmiral_ISISAfghan_web.pdf. 183 Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of Shanghai Cooperation Organisation. “The Islamic State’s Origins in South Asia,” March 7, 2023. https://ecrats.org/en/security_situation/analysis/4773/. 184 Osman, Borhan. “The Islamic State in ‘Khorasan’: How it began and where it stands now in Nangarhar.” Afghanistan Analysts Network, 27 July, 2016, https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-islamic-state-in-khorasan-how-it-began-and-where-it-stands-now-in-nangarhar/. 185 Johnson, Casey Garret. “The Rise and Stall of the Islamic State in Afghanistan.” United States Institute of Peace: Special Report 395, 16 Nov, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf. 186 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan. 187 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan. 188 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan. 189 Rassler, Don. “Situating the Emergence of the Islamic State of Khorasan.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 18 Mar. 2015. https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/situating-the-emergence-of-the-islamic-state-of-khorasan. 190 Shah, Tayyab Ali. “Pakistan’s Challenges in Orkazai Agency.” Combatting Terrorism Center at West Point, 3 July, 2010, https://ctc.usma.edu/posts/pakistan%E2%80%99s-challenges-in-orakzai-agency. 191“ Twelfth Report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team Submitted Pursuant to Resolution 2557 (2020) Concerning the Taliban and Other Associated Individuals and Entities Constituting a Threat to the Peace Stability and Security of Afghanistan.” United Nations Security Council, May 20, 2021. https://www.undocs.org/pdf?symbol=en/S/2021/486. 192 BBC News. “Hardliners Get Key Posts in New Taliban Government,” September 7, 2021, sec. Asia. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-58479750. 193 Mashal, Mujib. “In Tangled Afghan War, a Thin Line of Defense Against ISIS.” The New York Times, The New York Times, 25 Dec. 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/12/25/world/asia/eastern-afghanistan-isis.html. 