WWW.MEI.EDU
SAEID GOLKAR & KASRA AARABI    MAY 2022
IRAN’S REVOLUTIONARY GUARD 
AND THE RISING CULT OF MAHDISM: 
MISSILES AND MILITIAS FOR THE 
APOCALYPSE 


Cover photo: A member of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) stands guard next to two Iranian Kheibar Shekan ballistic 
missiles in downtown Tehran as demonstrators wave Iranian and Syrian flags during a rally commemorating the International Quds 
Day on April 29, 2022. Photo by Morteza Nikoubazl/NurPhoto via Getty Images.
ABOUT THE MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE
The Middle East Institute is a center of knowledge dedicated to narrowing divides between the peoples of the Middle East and 
the United States. With over 70 years’ experience, MEI has established itself as a credible, non-partisan source of insight and 
policy analysis on all matters concerning the Middle East. MEI is distinguished by its holistic approach to the region and its deep 
understanding of the Middle East’s political, economic and cultural contexts. Through the collaborative work of its three centers — 
Policy & Research, Arts & Culture, and Education — MEI provides current and future leaders with the resources necessary to build a 
future of mutual understanding. 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Saeid Golkar is a Senior Fellow at the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change and an Assistant Professor in the Department of 
Political Science and Public Service at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga.
Kasra Aarabi is a senior analyst at the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change who specializes in Iran and Shi’a Islamist extremism. 
He is also a non-resident scholar with MEI’s Iran Program.


4    Ex ecutive Summary
5
 
Introduction
5
 The De
velopment of the IRGC: From Militia to 
  
 P
arallel State 
6
 I
deology & Indoctrination: Manufacturing a 
  
 Mor
e Radical Generation
 
6
 IR
GC Ideological Worldview
7
 Wha
t is Mahdism?
8
 Quietis
t Shi’a Political Doctrine: From the 
  
 Safa
vids to the Pahlavis
8
 Ir
an’s Islamic Revolution: Preparing for 
  
 Mahdi’
s Return
8
 Khamenei and the Mahdism Doctrine
9
 Ahmadinejad: The “
Government of Mahdi”
10
 The Emer
gence of the Cult of Mahdi
11
 The IR
GC and Mahdism
11
 Mahdism and the Er
adication of Israel 
13
 The IR
GC’s “War Footing” to Prepare to Aid 
  
 Mahdi’
s Army
14
 
Conclusion
CONTENTS
3

• As the U .S. administration seriously considers whether to remove the IRGC as an FTO, understanding its nature, 
development, and ideology could not be more important to making an informed decision. There is much about it 
that differentiates it from a conventional armed force. 
•
 Indoctrina
tion has become an increasing focal point in the Guard. Khamenei and his hardline circle have sought 
to nurture a more radical IRGC generation by dedicating more time to ideological indoctrination of its members.  
•
 Mahdism has been giv
en increasing priority within the IRGC’s ideology, as a main prism through which the IRGC 
and affiliated hardline clerics understand the world around them and the IRGC’s actions.  
•
 Ther
e has also been a greater emphasis on viewing the IRGC as the military vehicle to prepare the foundations 
for the reappearance of the 12th Imam, with policy objectives such as hostility toward the U.S. and the 
eradication of Israel being understood through this prism. 
•
 The IR
GC’s younger generations are becoming more radical and extreme, in line with efforts by Khamenei and 
the Guard’s Ideological-Political Organization to nurture greater radicalism. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

5
the IRGC’s principal mission is to protect the Shi’a clergy and 
advance the Islamic Revolution at home and abroad.  
 
The Iran-Iraq War (1980-88) resulted in the IRGC expanding 
its remit and professionalizing as a military organization, 
moving toward becoming an institutionalized militia. In 1985 
it expanded into three main branches: a ground force, an 
air force, and a navy. The end of the eight-year conflict with 
Saddam Hussain in 1988 and the death of Supreme Leader 
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in 1989 would accelerate the 
IRGC’s growth. Upon assuming the mantle of supreme leader, 
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei added a new extraterritorial branch, 
the Quds (Jerusalem) Force, to double down on exporting the 
Islamic Revolution and promoted the volunteer civil militia, the 
Basij, as a separate branch under the IRGC’s purview.
The early 1990s would propel the IRGC into economic 
activities. Its newly established Khatam al-Anbiya Construction 
Headquarters, an engineering and building conglomerate, 
would lead Iran’s post-war reconstruction efforts and over 
time carve out an economic empire. In parallel, the IRGC 
also became involved in the provision of social services for its 
own members after it became closely affiliated with several 
ideological-charitable organizations (bonyads). Later on, these 
bonyads would become deeply entrenched in the Iranian 
economy, from the stock market to the oil and gas industry. The 
late 1990s and early 2000s gave rise to the IRGC’s involvement 
in politics and “elected” roles in the regime. It served as the 
hardline clergy’s vanguard against the liberalization of Iranian 
society and the so-called reformist President Mohammad 
Khatami, with the IRGC even threatening to remove Khatami 
from power over his soft response to anti-regime student 
protests. An election boycott by many Iranians in response to 
the failure of “reformists” to support the people’s aspirations 
would see a surge in IRGC members being elected across 
city councils in 2003 and the Iranian parliament in 2004. The 
election of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in 2005 — a Basij member 
— as president further entrenched the Guard across the Iranian 
government, including in ministerial positions.  
 
The anti-regime Green Movement unrest, which emerged 
after Iran’s fraudulent elections in 2009, would see the IRGC 
further expand its remit in the intelligence field. In October 
2009, upon Khamenei’s orders, its Intelligence Directorate 
was upgraded to the Intelligence Organization of the IRGC, 
directly challenging the authority of the Ministry of Intelligence 
Introduction
 
As negotiations between world powers and the Islamic 
Republic of Iran continue over the  revival of the 2015 nuclear 
agreement, the last barrier to a deal is Tehran’s demand for the 
U.S. to remove its Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) 
from the foreign terrorist organization (FTO) list. Naturally, 
this demand has triggered a heated debate in Washington 
between proponents and opponents. Proponents of such a 
move — including Khamal Kharrazi, former Iranian foreign 
minister — claim the IRGC does not belong on the FTO list as 
it is a “national army” that is no different from “Saudi Arabia’s 
National Guard.” By contrast, opponents argue that removing 
the IRGC from the FTO list would “legitimize” an entity that has 
the characteristics of a terrorist organization and engages in 
“widespread acts of terrorism.” 
As the U.S. administration seriously considers whether 
to remove the IRGC as an FTO, understanding its nature, 
development, and ideology could not be more important 
to making an informed decision. Much is to be understood 
about the IRGC’s system of beliefs to differentiate it from a 
conventional armed force. However, one fundamental aspect of 
its ideology that until now has been overlooked is the doctrine 
of Mahdism. There are signs today that the preparations for the 
return of the 12
th divinely ordained Shi’a imam are becoming of 
pivotal importance to the IRGC’s lens on the world. The rise of 
a militaristic Mahdist cult among the senior ranks of the IRGC is 
now not inconceivable and the repercussions far-reaching.   
The Development of the IRGC: From 
Militia to Parallel State
  
The development of the IRGC is fundamental to 
understanding its DNA. It began as an umbrella of Islamist 
militias that acted as the clergy’s bodyguards and helped 
them consolidate power in post-revolutionary Iran. Since 
its inception the IRGC has also been the main organ for 
advancing the clergy’s objective of exporting the Islamic 
Revolution abroad. This is confirmed by Iran’s 1979 
constitution, which establishes the IRGC as an “ideological 
army” and mandates it with “an ideological mission of jihad 
in God’s way; that is extending sovereignty of God’s law 
throughout the world.” Unlike the regular Iranian army (the 
Artesh), whose primary objective is to protect Iran’s borders, 

6
and Security. The election of so-called “moderate” Hassan 
Rouhani as president in 2013 would not impede the IRGC’s 
rising trajectory. This period would see it streamline its focus 
on monopolizing culture in the Islamic Republic, investing 
heavily in social and cultural programs, especially in rural 
areas. The IRGC’s increasing representation within the 
clerical regime (IRGC-ization) also resulted in a significant 
influx of Guard members seizing seats in the February 2021 
parliamentary elections, which were boycotted en mass by the 
Iranian people. Today, the IRGC is the foundation of the Raisi 
administration, with its members occupying key ministerial 
roles and many of the 874 political appointee positions.  
 
All of these developments have contributed to the IRGC’s 
growing prominence within the Islamic Republic over the past 
four decades. What began as an armed Islamist militia in 1979 
with fewer than 500 members transformed itself into a state 
within a state with its own economic, political, intelligence, and 
cultural arms. Tracking the development of the IRGC reveals 
that it is anything but a conventional state armed force and any 
discussion about it should start by acknowledging this.  
Ideology & Indoctrination: 
Manufacturing a More Radical 
Generation
Another unconventional feature of the IRGC that is consistent 
with its Islamist militia DNA is the emphasis it places on 
ideological indoctrination. Since its inception, the Guard has 
had a formal program of “ideological-political” training that 
seeks to radicalize its members, recruits, and their families. 
Over time the scope of this training has significantly increased 
and today it accounts for more than half of the required training 
for both incoming recruits and existing members.  
 
Indoctrination in the IRGC became a key focal point for 
Khamenei following the 1997 Iranian presidential election 
after reports emerged that 73% of IRGC members had voted 
for the so-called “reformist” Khatami, despite the supreme 
leader endorsing hardline Islamist Ali Akbar Nategh-Nouri. 
Khamenei interpreted this as a sign that the Guard’s second 
generation (1990-2000) was less loyal to his authority 
and less ideologically committed. In response, in 2002, 
indoctrination for all Guardsmen and their families was 
rapidly increased to 20% of overall training in the IRGC. This 
figure would increase to 30% by 2007-08 and would account 
for around 50% after the 2009 anti-regime protests. It is 
worth noting that ideological assessments are at the core of 
the IRGC’s promotion system, with preference being given 
to ideological commitment (tahhod) rather than technical 
expertise (takhasos).  
This investment in increasing indoctrination has paid dividends 
for Khamenei and his hardline followers as the third (2000-10) 
and forth generations (2010-20) of IRGC members are among 
the most ideologically radical in the Guard. This extreme zeal 
has been demonstrated both outside and inside of Iran. The 
majority of Iranian volunteers who fought in the Syrian civil 
war to uphold the Assad regime, for example, were third- and 
fourth-generation IRGC members. The fact that the number 
of volunteers surged after Khamenei transformed Iranian 
intervention into a Shi’a jihad to “Defend the Holy Shi’a 
Shrines” is a strong indication of the ideological commitment 
of this younger IRGC cohort. Similarly, the unprecedented use 
of violence against protestors in Iran by the IRGC and Basij 
in the November 2019 anti-regime protests, which resulted 
in the killings of as many as 1,500 civilians over several days, 
compared to the Green Movement protests in 2009, when only 
100 were killed over a month, also indicates that the IRGC is 
becoming more extreme. 
 
IRGC Ideological Worldview 
 
So what are the core tenets of the IRGC’s ideology and 
indoctrination program? The Shi’a Islamist concept of 
velayat-e faqih (clerical rule) and clerical superiority 
underpins the IRGC’s worldview. Tied to this is the key 
ideological pillar of exporting the Islamic Revolution to 
neighboring Muslim nations (ummah) through what is 
described as “jihad in the path of God.” The IRGC rejects  
the concept of the nation-state as a Western construct and 
instead divides territories between the dar al-Islam (land 
of Muslims) and dar al-Kufr (land of infidels). The ummah 
must be under the authority of the Imam or in his absence, 
his deputy: the supreme leader, thus legitimizing efforts 
to export the Islamic Revolution. A quick examination of 
the IRGC’s ideological-political textbooks also reveals the 
way in which it views the U.S.: as an evil regime hellbent 
on world domination. This worldview sees the U.S. as the 

7
the result — into Iran’s militia doctrine through a belief in 
acting on a religious commandment regardless of potential 
outcomes (taklifgarai). These ideological doctrines have been 
incorporated into the IRGC’s overarching military strategy, in 
part to make up for its lack of advanced military technology and 
its reliance on human capital. 
While all of these pillars of the IRGC’s belief system have been 
assessed to varying degrees, one fundamental value of its 
ideology that makes up a significant aspect of its indoctrination 
has yet to be explored: the concept of Mahdism. Mahdism 
in the IRGC remains a complete blind spot for Western 
policymakers and experts, and yet its implications could have 
major consequences. 
 
What is Mahdism? 
As a Shi’a Islamist force the IRGC’s worldview hinges on 
Mahdism: the return of the 12 th divinely ordained Shi’a imam, 
Muhammad al-Mahdi (or the Hidden Imam), whom Shi’a 
Muslims believe was withdrawn into a miraculous state of 
occultation (hiddenness) by God in 874 CE. The concept of 
Mahdism is rooted in the belief that Imam Mahdi will one 
day return to rid the world of evil and injustice. His coming 
will bring about “one final apocalyptic battle” between two 
armies, in which Shi’as believe that Mahdi and his forces will 
prevail over evil.  
 
The concept of Mahdism and the occultation of the 12th 
Imam emerged during the rule the Abbasid Caliphate (Al-
Muʿtamid ʿalā ‘llāh) from the Shi’a ulema (clergy) primarily 
based in modern-day Iraq, Bahrain, and Lebanon. Muhammad 
al-Mahdi would assume the mantle of imam over the Shi’a 
ummah after his father, the 11th imam, Hasan al-Askar, was 
killed by the Sunni Abbasid Caliphate in 873 CE. Imam Mahdi 
was withdrawn into a state of occultation to protect him from 
suffering the same fate as his father. During this period (874-
941) — known as the Minor Occultation (gheybat-e soghra) 
— Mahdi would appoint four special deputies (navab-e khas), 
representation of all that is evil (jebeh-e batel) and puts 
the Islamic Republic of Iran on the side of everything good 
(jebeh-e hagh). Linked to this notion is the IRGC’s other 
key ideological pillar of eradicating the State of Israel 
and Zionism. Like other Islamist ideologies, the IRGC’s 
Shi’a Islamist worldview regards Israel as an illegitimate, 
oppressive, and usurping entity created in the heartland of 
the Muslim world to enable the West to achieve its supposed 
colonial goals. The “liberation” of Palestine through the 
destruction of Israel remains one of the IRGC’s main 
objectives, and antisemitism pervades every aspect of its 
ideology. The IRGC itself has been explicit about its identity 
and what its members represent. A March 2022 publication  
entitled “what is identity of the Revolutionary Guard” outlined 
three characteristics in order of preference: 1) “Guardians of 
Islam”; 2) “Soldiers of the Velayat (supreme leader)”; and 3) 
“Sacrifices for the Revolutionary People.” On the latter, the 
IRGC is clear that it serves the revolutionary people — namely, 
pro-regime supporters — and not ordinary Iranians. 
It is important to note that the IRGC’s Islamist ideology has 
also practically shaped its military tradition, doctrines, and 
strategy. More specifically, the Alavi and Ashurai pillars of 
the clerical regime’s Islamist ideology have served as the 
foundation of the IRGC’s overarching military strategy since 
its inception. Alavi refers to Ali, the first divinely ordained 
Shi’a imam, whose forces lost the Battle of Siffin in 657 CE 
against Muawiyah, the first caliph of the Umayyad empire. 
The Shi’a critique suggests that Ali was defeated because his 
army did not display loyalty to his orders. This is manifested in 
the IRGC’s military doctrine as a demand for total obedience 
to the supreme leader and his orders (velayat-e madari). 
The Ashurai pillar is derived from the date on which Imam 
Hussein, the third Shi’a imam, led his small band of fighters 
against the massive army of the Umayyad Caliph Yazid at the 
Battle of Karbala in 680 CE. Although Hussein knew defeat 
was preordained, he sacrificed himself and his men to defend 
true Islam by taking on the Umayyads. The IRGC adopted 
this logic — that oppressors must be challenged, whatever 
“Since its inception, the Guard has had a formal program of ‘ideological-
political’ training that seeks to radicalize its members, recruits, and their 
families.”

8
who would act as his representatives and through which he 
would communicate and rule. In 941 CE, however, the fourth 
deputy would announce that after his death there would be 
no more specific deputies — a message he claimed to have 
received from Imam Mahdi. The death of the fourth deputy 
in 941 CE would trigger the Major Occultation (gheybat-e 
kobra), whereby Mahdi would no longer have a specific 
deputy but all Shi’a clerics would become his representatives 
(nayeb-e aam).  
Quietist Shi’a Political Doctrine: From 
the Safavids to the Pahlavis
 
Shi’a Islam was formally recognized as Iran’s official state 
religion during the Safavid Dynasty in 1501. Determined to 
attain religious legitimacy for their rule, the Safavids invited 
Shi’a clerics from Iraq, Bahrain, and Lebanon to consolidate 
Shiism in Iran and bless their leadership. However, even 
after the Safavids made Shi’a Islam the official state religion, 
the Shi’a political doctrine followed by the majority of the 
clergy ruled that any form of government during the Major 
Occultation was illegitimate. According to this notion, the 
only form of legitimate government was an Imamate (Shi’a 
Islamic state) and this could only exist under the leadership 
of the divinely ordained infallible imams. The consensus 
among the clergy was that the 12th Imam (or Lord of the 
Age) would appear upon his own accord, when injustice and 
evil captures the world. He would be accompanied by 313 
special fighters, who would defeat evil in an apocalyptic 
battle, and act as the Shi’a ummah’s savior against the 
non-believers. During the occultation, however, the clergy’s 
role would be to uphold Shi’a Islam’s interests only in the 
spiritual and religious realm, refraining from any political 
activism. This quietist political Shi’a doctrine, which began 
during the Safavid period, would last up until the fall of 
Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi’s rule in 1979.  
 
Iran’s Islamic Revolution: Preparing for 
Mahdi’s Return 
 
The 1979 Islamic Revolution in Iran led by Ayatollah 
Khomeini would fundamentally change the Shi’a political 
doctrine and Mahdism. 
 
In the years leading up to Iran’s revolution, then exiled cleric 
Khomeini developed a theory of Islamic government that 
would transfer all political power to the Shi’a clergy. Khomeini 
outlined his plans for the creation of an Islamic state by 
reconceptualizing the doctrine of velayat-e faqih to legitimize 
clerical guardianship of the state. The ayatollah claimed that 
God had made Islam for it to be implemented as shown by the 
creation of divine law (sharia). Given that no one knew Islam 
better than the clergy (Islamic jurists), Khomeini argued, it 
was natural that they should rule as guardians of the state 
until the return of the 12th Imam. In the absence of the 12th 
Imam, velayat-e faqih would transfer all political and religious 
authority to a supreme clerical leader (mujtahid), who would 
have custody over the Shi’a ummah as the imam’s deputy 
(nayeb-e Imam) and God’s representative on Earth.
Khomeini’s theory also reconceptualized Mahdism, reversing 
centuries of clerical quietism during the Major Occultation. 
Rather than silently waiting for the 12th Imam’s return, 
Khomeini argued, the 12th Imam was waiting for Shi’a Muslims 
to prepare the ground for his arrival. Shi’a Muslims, in turn, 
had to be politically active and form an Islamic government to 
prepare for Mahdi’s global revolution. After the 1979 Islamic 
Revolution, velayat-e faqih would be enshrined into Iran’s 
constitution and would underpin the Iranian state, with Iran’s 
supreme leader ruling as the 12th Imam’s deputy. Under this 
interpretation, the Islamic Revolution in Iran marked the first 
stage before the return of the 12th Imam.  
 
 
Khamenei and the Mahdism Doctrine 
Preparations for the return of Mahdi became more serious 
after Ayatollah Khamenei assumed the mantle of supreme 
leader in 1989. This appetite was initially shaped by the 
influence of Ayatollah Mohammed-Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi, a 
hardline Islamist cleric who was one of the main proponents 
and theorists of Khomeini’s reinterpretation of Mahdism. 
This influence began to manifest itself in the late 1990s 
where Khamenei developed a doctrine around Mahdism. To 
prepare for the 12th Imam’s return, the ayatollah claimed it 
was necessary to create an ideal Islamic society based on 
Mahdism (jaameh-e mahdavi). Khamenei further developed 
this thesis a few years later. To lay the ground for the 12th 
Imam’s return, the supreme leader outlined five necessary 
revolutionary stages: an Islamic Revolution, an Islamic 

9
regime, an Islamic government, an Islamic society, and an 
Islamic civilization. According to Khamenei and his allies, 
Iran had only achieved the first two stages and was stuck on 
completing an Islamic government. 
 
Ahmadinejad: The “Government of 
Mahdi” 
The election of the hardliner Ahmadinejad as president in 
2005 turbocharged Mahdism across the Islamic Republic. 
Ahmadinejad — a member of the Basij — was obsessed with the 
doctrine of Mahdism and finding ways to speed up the return of 
the 12th Imam. This is perhaps unsurprising given the fact that 
his spiritual leader was none other than Mesbah-Yazdi. As the 
new president declared, “We have a mission — to turn Iran into 
the country of the Hidden Imam.”
Ahmadinejad would give special importance to the 
Jamkaran Mosque, which hosts the Well of Jamkaran, 
where some Shi’a Muslims believe the 12th Imam will 
return. Ahmadinejad’s administration would allocate $17 
million in state funds to Jamkaran Mosque as well as 
expand its facilities, transforming it from a small mosque 
to a multimillion-dollar shrine. His administration would 
also spend around $8 million on refreshments for pilgrims 
visiting the Jamkaran Mosque for the celebration of Mahdi’s 
birthday. Ahmadinejad would go as far as constructing the 
Jamkaran Highway to connect Jamkaran Mosque directly 
to Imam Khomeini Airport in Tehran. In a meeting with 
the supreme leader, the president reportedly insisted on 
its construction so that “in case Imam Mahdi reappears 
he could travel directly from Jamkaran to Tehran’s airport 
without getting stuck in traffic.” 
Photo above: IRGC Quds Force Commander Esmail Qaani gives a speech on April 14, 2022, the one-year anniversary of the death of IRGC  
Quds Force Deputy Commander Mohammad Hejazi. Photo by Morteza Nikoubazl/NurPhoto via Getty Images.

10
While Ahmadinejad’s assertions were perhaps comical for 
audiences beyond Iran’s Islamist support base, the number 
of pilgrims to Jamkaran would reach in the millions during his 
presidency. The Ahmadinejad period would also result in the 
significant growth of grassroots heyats (Islamist institutions) 
and ideological preachers (maddahs or eulogists) across 
Iranian society. Maddahs are usually not clerics and have no 
religious education; rather, they are individuals who perform 
Shi’a mourning processions — such as self-flagellation 
ceremonies — and are known for their ability to evoke religious 
emotion. After the Islamic Revolution, maddahs became a 
central component of the ideological radicalization of IRGC and 
Basij members, and were instrumental in preparing Iranian 
soldiers — often volunteers — to launch “martyrdom-seeking,” 
human-wave attacks during the Iran-Iraq War (1980-88). 
Whereas the traditional Shi’a clerical establishment devotes 
more attention to Imam Ali and Imam Hussain, the maddah 
culture and class are fixated on Mahdism and praise for the 
Hidden Imam. The apocalyptic and revolutionary environment 
is fundamental to heyati and maddah culture. After the 
2009 unrest period, the IRGC began to organize, mobilize, 
and promote maddahs by establishing the Basij Maddahs 
Organization, with the goal of monopolizing the heyat network 
across Iran. 
The combination of increasing poverty and desperation 
would provide fertile ground for the emergence of a new form 
of state-backed radicalism among Iran’s hardline Islamist 
constituency, not least the youth. This new form of radicalism 
can be described as a “Cult of Mahdism.” This would go as 
far as proclaiming that Ahmadinejad was Shu’ayb bin Salih 
and Khamenei was Seyed Khorasani — two individuals, who, 
according to historic Shi’a Islamic narrations, appear before 
Imam Mahdi’s return. 
 
The Emergence of the Cult of Mahdi 
 
The aftermath of Iran’s 2009 anti-regime protests, triggered 
by the rigging of that year’s presidential elections, would 
result in the Islamic Republic doubling down on its hardline 
Islamist ideology. To mitigate against future waves of protests, 
it was believed that the regime needed to nurture a more 
ideologically zealous generation of youth. This would provide 
fertile ground for radical proponents of Mahdism to fill. The rise 
of Ali Akbar Raefipour, the anti-Semitic conspiracy theorist and 
staunch advocate of Mahdism, would be a direct consequence 
of this. Raefipour’s extreme interpretation of Mahdism would 
gain huge traction among Iran’s Islamist youth (javanan-e 
hezbollahi) — the core constituency from which the IRGC 
recruits. The rise of Raefipour was the direct result of support 
from the Ahmadinejad government and the IRGC. Today, his 
organization, the Masaf Institute, which states it has a goal of 
“acquainting Muslims with Mahdist topics and teachings,” is 
the direct recipient of IRGC financial support.  
 
Perhaps more importantly, the post-2009 landscape also 
injected a new dose of radicalism about Mahdism into 
Khamenei’s close circle. This inner elite of hardline clerics 
began to view, understand, and communicate all contemporary 
world events in the context of Mahdism and its apocalyptic 
“end of the times” worldview (akhar al-zaman). Hojatoleslam 
Alireza Panahian, a hardline cleric in the Office of the Supreme 
Leader, close confident of Khamenei’s son Mojtaba, and an 
ideological trainer for the IRGC, would be instrumental in this 
regard. Like a younger version of Mesbah-Yazdi, Panahian 
would become one of the regime’s key propagandists about 
Mahdism, placing particular emphasis on the warning signs 
of the nearing of the end of the occultation. For example, in 
2020, he claimed the outbreak of the Coronavirus pandemic 
was the “preamble to the reappearance of Mahdi,” drawing 
parallels between COVID-19 and the “all encompassing 
plague” that Islamic scripture describes as a sign of the 
nearing of the end times. Such predictions were by no means 
restricted to Panahian though. In fact, in March 2022, Ayatollah 
Golpayegani, the head of the Office of the Supreme Leader, 
asserted support for Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and described 
it as a “prelude to the reappearance of the Lord of the Age 
(Imam Mahdi).”  
“The doctrine of Mahdism would become one of the main prisms through which 
the IRGC ... would understand the world around them and the IRGC’s actions, 
as well as communicate those understandings. “

11
the world around them and the IRGC’s actions, as well as 
communicate those understandings.  
 
The Syrian uprising in 2011 and the rise of ISIS, for example, 
were understood and communicated in the context of 
Mahdism. According to historic Shi’a hadiths, as a prelude to 
the nearing of Mahdi’s return and the apocalyptic wars (jang-e 
akhar al-zaman), a “sedition” will take place in Syria, and this 
will give rise to the emergence of Sufiyani — an evil tyrant and 
descendent of the Sunni Umayyad caliphs — in Syria and Iraq. 
Iran’s hardline clergy affiliated with the IRGC viewed the rise 
of ISIS through this lens. For example, Ayatollah Mohammad 
Ali Mousavi Jazayeri, the supreme leader’s representative to 
Khuzestan Province, declared that “the presence of ISIS and 
the followers of the Umayyads in Iraq as well as the creation of 
chaos and sedition in this country are signs of the emergence 
of Sufiyani.” The involvement of the IRGC Quds Force in 
fighting in Syria was also seen as a way of preparing for the 
reappearance of the 12th Imam. As the supreme leader’s 
representative to the IRGC, Saeedi, asserted, “The role that 
the IRGC is playing in Syria today is to lay the international and 
regional ground for the emergence of the Imam of the Age.” 
In fact, this became one of the main rallying calls for IRGC 
and Basij volunteers to pick up arms to fight in Syria and Iraq 
as “Defenders of the Holy Shi’a Shrines” — something that 
resulted in an influx of younger IRGC generations traveling to 
Syria and Iraq. 
Similarly, the IRGC’s role in supporting the Houthis in Yemen 
has also been contextualized in light of historic Shi’a scriptures 
that claim the development of a “reform movement in Yemen” 
is “one of the definite signs of the emergence of Imam Mahdi.” 
These historic Shi’a narrations claim that “Yemeni and Iranian 
forces will take action to confront Sufiyani” and that after the 
fight against Sufiyani the “rule of Yemen, the Hejaz, and the 
Persian Gulf states must be in the hands of the Yemeni forces 
and followers of Imam Mahdi.”  
Mahdism and the Eradication of Israel 
Mahdism has also become an increasing focus in IRGC 
indoctrination and has come to underpin other pillars of its 
ideology. It is being used to explain the Guard’s system of 
beliefs, in which the world is seen as divided between good 
(jebeh-e hagh) and evil (jebeh-e batel). As Saeedi has asserted, 
the current era represents the final period of history ahead 
The IRGC and Mahdism 
The clerical regime’s increasing emphasis on Mahdism from 
the Ahmadinejad period onwards — not least post-2009 — was 
absorbed by the IRGC, which began to more vocally embrace 
its role in preparing for Mahdi’s return. 
In 2012 Hojatoleslam Ali Saeedi, the supreme leader’s 
representative to the IRGC, delivered a major intervention in 
this regard. Saeedi, who was also in charge of indoctrination in 
the Guard, asserted: 
“The IRGC is one of the tools for paving the way for the 
emergence of the Imam of the Age (Mahdi) in the field of a 
regional and international awakening, and the IRGC Quds 
Force plays the primary role in this regard.”
Saeedi’s intervention is of particular significance as it 
explicitly overlayed a military dimension to Mahdism during 
the occultation — a proactive responsibility designated to the 
IRGC and specifically its extraterritorial Quds Force. In the 
same speech, Saeedi stated that the presence of the U.S in 
Iraq is a barrier to the reappearance of Imam Mahdi and that 
the “Middle East must change.” The clerical regime’s appetite 
for changing the international order also began to surface 
in the context of Mahdism, with Saeedi contending that an 
“awakening of the kind that took place in the Middle East [is 
required] in the international arena in Europe and among the 
American people.” The military responsibility for achieving all 
of these factors as steps toward the reappearance of Mahdi 
laid specifically with the Quds Force. 
While the doctrine of Mahdism has always been a part of the 
IRGC’s system of beliefs and indoctrination, it began to flourish 
under Ahmadinejad, in particular from the post-2009 unrest 
period onwards. Indeed, the opposition of some of Iran’s 
clerical establishment toward the superstitious nature of the 
radical form of Mahdism that emerged during the Ahmadinejad 
period had restricted the mainstreaming of this doctrine in the 
Guard. However, the post-2009 unrest period would result 
in Khamenei’s regime “purifying” the ranks of Iran’s clerical 
establishment, silencing dissident clerics, and elevating the 
most ideologically extreme voices. Coupled with the ramping 
up of indoctrination in the Guard, the doctrine of Mahdism 
would become one of the main prisms through which the IRGC 
and the hardline clerics affiliated with it would understand 

12
of the reappearance of the 12th Imam, with the world being 
divided between the “will of the essence of transcendence” 
and “the arrogant powers.” The former — according to Saeedi — 
is led by “the people and the leadership of Iran” and the latter 
include “Zionism, Wahhabi Zionism, and Christian Zionism.”
The IRGC is increasingly understanding and communicating 
its official policy of eradicating Israel and Zionism through the 
doctrine of Mahdism. While the destruction of Israel has been 
the IRGC’s working objective since its inception, like other 
Islamist groups this hostility was borne out of viewing the 
Jewish state an illegitimate, oppressive, and usurping entity 
for the West to achieve its supposed colonial goals across the 
Muslim world. More recently, however, the existence of Israel 
is being viewed and understood as the “greatest barrier” to the 
reappearance of the 12th Imam. According to the doctrine of 
Mahdism, part of preparing for the reappearance of the 12th 
Imam is removing all obstacles and barriers to his return.  
Against this backdrop, Iran’s hardline clergy affiliated with 
the IRGC claim religious hadiths state that the “Jewish state 
will be destroyed before Mahdi’s arrival.” According to these 
accounts, which are legitimized through religious scripture, 
“Sh’ia Muslims will be on the side of the war against Jews” 
prior to the reappearance of Mahdi. As such, the collapse of 
“Israeli regime and Zionist Jews” at the behest of “Iran and 
the Resistance Axis” will take place “prior to the emergence 
of Mahdi.” Such accounts even claim that the “Shi’as’ war with 
Israel” will take place after a world war. Against this backdrop, 
Ayatollah Golpayegani’s assertion that Putin’s war against the 
Ukraine and the West was a “prelude to the reappearance of 
the Lord of the Age (Imam Mahdi)” can be better understood. 
Indeed, the ideological belief that the eradication of Israel 
is a necessary step for the reappearance of the 12th Imam 
is increasingly being mainstreamed in the IRGC. As senior 
hardline cleric Mehdi Taeb, commander of the Ammar 
Photo above: Hojatoleslam Alireza Panahian, a hardline cleric in the Office of the Supreme Leader, is one of the regime’s key propagandists about 
Mahdism. Image courtesy of Mostafameraji, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

13
Headquarters and brother of Hossein Taeb, the head of the 
IRGC’s Intelligence Organization, asserted during a speech to 
the IRGC’s Basij members in 2015, “Observers must remove 
the obstacles to the emergence of the Imam of the Age, the 
most important of which is the existence of the usurper regime 
of Israel.” This relatively new ideological phenomenon has 
incorporated the IRGC’s goal of eradicating Israel as part of the 
necessary steps for the reappearance of Mahdi. This ideological 
conviction helped to convince large numbers of young IRGC 
and Basij volunteers, as well as transnational Shi’a fighters, 
to pick up arms for the Islamic Republic’s intervention in the 
Syrian civil war. Hundreds of first-hand accounts reveal that a 
desire to enter a “final battle with the Zionists” was the primary 
motivating factor for these men to fight in Syria. In the same 
speech Taeb explained that the “U.S. is doing everything in its 
power to ensure the security of the Israeli regime” and that 
the Islamic Republic must therefore ensure “this security is 
destroyed.” Seven years on, today, the IRGC’s primary objective 
of expelling the U.S. forces from the Middle East is viewed as 
facilitating the isolation of Israel and removing its security 
guarantees. As senior IRGC commander Mohammad Reza 
Naghdi asserted in January this year, “Our hard revenge will be 
the expulsion of the U.S. from the region and the eradication of 
the Zionist regime.” 
The IRGC’s “War Footing” to Prepare to 
Aid Mahdi’s Army 
A decade on from Saeedi’s 2012 speech, in March 2022, 
Hojatoleslam Haji-Sadeghi, Khamenei’s new representative 
to the IRGC, reaffirmed the IRGC’s role in facilitating the 
reappearance of Imam Mahdi. In a speech to IRGC members, 
Haji-Sadeghi declared, “The IRGC’s last responsibility is to 
prepare the world for the emergence of Imam of the Age.” 
  
Just weeks after Haji-Sadgehi’s speech, on March 2022, 
the IRGC released a publication on the militaristic concept 
of Mahdism, entitled “Waiting means that we must prepare 
ourselves for soldiering in the army of Imam of the Age.” The 
IRGC has redefined waiting for the reappearance of Imam of the 
Age as being about proactively preparing to aid Mahdi establish 
the rule of justice throughout the world (entezar-e faraj). Based 
on Khamenei’s statements on the “duty of those waiting,” this 
is not about “sitting down and mourning” — a cultural custom 
in Shi’a Islam — but about being on a “war footing” (amadeh 
baash). The IRGC must “prepare for the army of Imam of 
the Age, which wants to fight all the centers of power and 
international corruption.” According to this doctrine, however, 
this does not mean “because the Imam of the Age will come 
and fill the world with justice, we have no duty today.” Rather 
the IRGC is mandated as having a “duty today to move in that 
direction and prepare for Mahdi’s emergence.” This is presented 
as fighting “oppression, injustice, discrimination, and coercion 
everywhere in the world.”  
 
In practical terms, “not accepting and rejecting” the liberal 
international rule-based order — what is described as the 
“current situation that rules humanity based on ignorance/
barbarism (jahiliyyah)” is presented as one of the actionable 
measures to pave the way for the reappearance of Mahdi. 
Against this backdrop, the IRGC’s actions — from regional 
destabilization to disrupting the international system and its 
militia network — are being understood and communicated as 
part of the plan to prepare for the return of Mahdi. Likewise, 
the Guard’s permanent conflict with America is increasingly 
being tied to preparing for Mahdi’s emergence, with the U.S. 
viewed as a barbaric force the “Imam of the Age will come to 
fight against.” Indeed, in a speech in February 2022 where 
Khamenei lent his support for Vladimir Putin’s invasion 
of Ukraine, the supreme leader asserted that Islam was 
in a permanent war with the age of barbarism/ignorance 
(jahiliyyah) and that the modern form of this was the “American 
mafia regime.” It is important to note that Khamenei’s 
worldview on jahiliyyah derives from Sayyid Qutb, the so-called 
“father of Salafi-Jihadism,” with the ayatollah being the first 
person to translate Qutb’s works into Persian.  
 
Based on Islamic hadiths and historic Shi’a narrations, the 
militaristic doctrine of Mahdism also calls on Shi’a populations 
to take up arms in preparation for the end times. As another 
publication on “IRGC and Mahdism” asserts, “Since the 
foundation of [the Islamic Republic] is bound to the Lord of 
the Age (Imam Mahdi) in order to truly connect with the Lord 
of the Age, various tasks have been assigned to us” not least 
“regarding the military readiness of the Shi’as.” In this light, the 
IRGC’s involvement in the Middle East — including its weapons 
proliferation, ballistic missile program, and support for arming, 
financing, and training Shi’a militias — is consistent with 
Mahdist doctrine to pave the way and remove the barriers to 
the reappearance of Mahdi. Until now, most Western observers 
have viewed all of the IRGC’s activities through the lens of 

14
national-interest, but its involvement in the Middle East is more 
consistent with the Mahdist doctrine. 
Conclusion 
 
As the U.S. administration assesses whether to delist the 
IRGC as an FTO, the nature of the Guard reveals that it is not a 
conventional state armed force and should not be treated as 
such. The IRGC is an ideological organization that shares key 
characteristics with other designated Islamist organizations, 
including its quest for an expansionist Islamic state, a 
global Islamic order, forceful imposition of sharia law (Shi’a 
interpretation), militaristic concept of jihad, and anti-American 
and anti-Semitic ideology.  
 
The finding of this research paper reveals three visible trends 
in the IRGC. The first relates to indoctrination becoming an 
increasing focal point in the Guard. Khamenei and his hardline 
circle have sought to nurture a more radical IRGC generation 
by dedicating more time to ideological indoctrination of its 
members. The promotion system within the ranks of the IRGC 
also favors ideological conviction over technical expertise, 
ensuring the most zealous members rise up within the chain 
of command. The second trend relates to the increasing 
priority given to Mahdism within the IRGC’s ideology. From 
the post-2009 period onwards, the doctrine of Mahdism has 
become one of the main prisms through which the IRGC and 
affiliated hardline clerics would understand the world around 
them and the IRGC’s actions, as well as communicate that 
understanding. In turn, there has been greater emphasis 
on viewing the IRGC as the military vehicle to prepare the 
foundations for the reappearance of the 12th Imam, with 
policy objectives such as hostility toward the U.S. and the 
eradication of Israel being understood through this prism. 
This is consistent with the goal of Khamenei and his hardline 
allies, such as Ayatollah Alamalhouda, the supreme leader’s 
representative to Khorasan and President Ebrahim Raisi’s 
father-in-law, to transform the concept of Mahdism from a 
set of feelings into an “ideological belief .” The third and final 
trend relates to the IRGC’s younger generations becoming 
more radical and extreme. In this regard, efforts by Khamenei 
and the Guard’s Ideological-Political Organization to nurture 
a more radical generation among the IRGC has paid, and is 
paying, dividends.  
Against this backdrop, the rise of devout followers of the 
militaristic doctrine of Mahdism among the senior ranks of 
the IRGC is not inconceivable and should not be ruled out. 
While there is hope that the IRGC’s senior leadership will act 
pragmatically, internal structures within the Guard — including 
its indoctrination and promotion system — certainly open up 
the possibility that devoted Mahdists could occupy senior 
leadership positions. Such a scenario could have far-reaching 
consequences as it would bring the three pillars of the IRGC’s 
foreign policy — militias, ballistic missiles, and the nuclear 
program — under their control. Even if a small number of 
devout Mahdists occupy senior positions in the Guard, it is 
possible that they may seek to facilitate and speed up the 
return of Mahdi. This would have major implications for some 
of the policies that are being understood through the prism 
of Mahdism, such as Israel’s existence being the “greatest 
barrier” to the reappearance of the 12th Imam. 
At present the doctrine of Mahdism in the IRGC remains a 
complete blind spot for Western policymakers, yet it could have 
major implications for the Islamic Republic’s militia network, 
ballistic missile program, and even its nuclear program. Of 
course, no one knows for sure if devout adherents of the 
ideology will attain senior command positions in the IRGC. The 
objective of this paper, however, is simply to point out that it 
would be unwise not to prepare for this scenario given the huge 
implications it would have for U.S. and global security. 



WWW.MEI.EDU
