WWW.MEI.EDU
THE MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE
 
 
FARZIN NADIMI
NOVEMBER 2021
THE IRGC AND THE PERSIAN GULF 
REGION IN A PERIOD OF CONTESTED 
DETERRENCE

Cover photo: IRGCN IPS18 torpedo boats. Credit: DefaPress.
ABOUT THE MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE
The Middle East Institute is a center of knowledge dedicated to narrowing divides between the peoples of the Middle East and 
the United States. With over 70 years’ experience, MEI has established itself as a credible, non-partisan source of insight and 
policy analysis on all matters concerning the Middle East. MEI is distinguished by its holistic approach to the region and its deep 
understanding of the Middle East’s political, economic and cultural contexts. Through the collaborative work of its three centers — 
Policy & Research, Arts & Culture, and Education — MEI provides current and future leaders with the resources necessary to build a 
future of mutual understanding. 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Farzin Nadimi is a defense and security analyst, author, Middle East and Iran scholar, military historian, frequent media 
commentator, and an associate fellow with the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.


4 Introduction
5 Geogr aphical Advantages
 
6 Strategy
7 Weaponry
9 Mine w arfare 
10 Mis siles, rockets and artillery batteries
12 Submarine block ade
14 F ast inshore patrol craft and robot boats
15 Aircraft
 
15 Cyberattack
15 Organization 
20 Or ganizational Values and Training
 
21 Training
21 The Final W ord
 
23 Endnotes
CONTENTS
SUMMARY
The Strait of Hormuz is one of the world’s most important 
maritime chokepoints, vital to the global supply of both oil 
and liquefied natural gas. The issue of freedom of navigation 
in the strait has long been a source of tension, but until 
recently any attempt by Iran to physically close it looked 
highly implausible, unless it resulted from either a major 
embargo or total blockade of Iranian ports by the West, or 
a large-scale military confrontation. However, the events of 
the past three years showed Iran can still ensure a major 
disruption of the flow of energy without a formal blockade and 
without an increased risk of military confrontation with the 
West. Iran has a variety of means at its disposal, especially 
through its Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps naval forces, 
including thousands of sea mines, shore batteries, heavily 
armed speedboats, and midget submarines. The Iranians 
make no secret of their desire to be recognized as the 
dominant military power in the Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz, 
and the guarantor of the world’s energy security, but Iran now 
sees its interests in the region in direct conflict with those of 
the West, and especially the United States. A combination of 
strengths, weaknesses, and challenges defines Iran’s current 
stance in the Persian Gulf region.
3

4
Introduction
The Strait of Hormuz plays a strategic and psychological role in 
the world energy market. At the mouth of the Persian Gulf and 
overlooked by a series of Iranian islands, this narrow waterway 
is one of the world’s most important maritime chokepoints, vital 
to the global supply of both oil and liquefied natural gas (LNG). 
But even though Hormuz is as important to Middle Eastern 
countries as it is to industrialized nations, the issue of freedom 
of navigation there has been a source of tension for at least the 
past four decades, and remains in a legal limbo. While Western 
powers consider it an international strait under the 1982 U.N. 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Iran adheres only 
to its own national maritime law, which does not recognize the 
Strait of Hormuz as such. This greatly affects the type of control 
and maritime passage through it from the Iranian point of view.
1 
Such differences of opinion only add to the regional complexity 
that, together with Iran’s nuclear file, Tehran’s long-time stance 
Photo above: The IRGCN uses a mixture of well-armed, high-end fast missile boats such as Zolfaghars (pictured here) armed with two Zafar/
Kowsar anti-ship missiles with a range of 25 km, and lightly armed lower-end Ashura boats (not pictured here) armed with a 12.7-mm machine 
gun and a 107-mm rocket launcher or two floating mines. Credit: DefaPress.
The Iranians make no 
secret of their desire 
to be recognized as 
the dominant military 
power in the Gulf and 
the Strait of Hormuz, 
and the guarantor of 
the world’s energy 
security. 

5
“Iran is one of the two best positioned countries in the Persian Gulf 
region. It enjoys the longest coastline … giving it de facto control of almost 
all shipping routes leading to and from the Strait of Hormuz.” 
toward Israel and foreign military presence in the region, and its 
ideological drive to export its revolution and establish an ideal 
“Islamic civilization” have time and again prompted Iran to play 
the defiant card and renew its threat to choke off the strait.  
Considering what is at stake, any attempt by Iran to physically 
close the strait looked highly implausible, unless it resulted 
from either a major embargo or total blockade of Iranian ports 
by the West, or a large-scale military confrontation. However, 
the events of the past three years showed Iran can still ensure 
a major disruption of the flow of energy through the region 
without a formal blockade of the Strait of Hormuz and without an 
increased risk of military confrontation with the West. Iran can 
even be more assertive once the Jask export terminal east of the 
strait is fully operational. 
Iran often showcases its military hardware and tactics by 
conducting highly publicized field exercises mixed with coercive 
rhetorical threats from unofficial or quasi-official sources, but 
it has also embarked on a continuous endeavor to back up its 
rhetoric with real capabilities. Such increasingly credible rhetoric 
is designed to boost Iran’s deterrence posture and reinforce its 
position of authority in the Persian Gulf. Nevertheless, one should 
not dismiss the risks of the ongoing trend of preparedness and 
growing confidence among Iran’s military junta, which could lead 
to preemptive military action by Iran. Within this context, possible 
scenarios range from a limited disruption of navigation in and out 
of the Gulf to a full-blown preemptive strike by Iran in response 
to certain regional developments. The relocation of the Islamic 
Revolutionary Guard Corps Navy (IRGCN) headquarters to Bandar 
Abbas from Tehran was designed to facilitate operational control 
over the fielded forces and simplify the chain of command. 
Despite its dominant role in “material” aspects of economic, 
intelligence, social, and military life, the IRGC is first and foremost 
a religious body, and in the Iranian version of Shiite Islam, after 
God, the Velayat-e Faqih (the presiding rule of the righteous 
theologian jurist, aka Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei) should be 
obeyed without question, and executive decisions on matters as 
strategic as closing the Strait of Hormuz are made directly by him. 
During the period of heightened tensions in the Persian Gulf in 
the 1980s, events were micromanaged by the Supreme Defense 
Council and the House of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. This 
means the government, including the Foreign Ministry, barely has 
any role in making decisions of such magnitude. 
The Iranians make no secret of their desire to be recognized 
as the dominant military power in the Gulf and the Strait of 
Hormuz, and the guarantor of the world’s energy security. 
Ironically, being the “policeman of the Persian Gulf” is not a 
new aspiration, and Iran had been associated with the term 
since the 1970s. While throughout its revolutionary history the 
Islamic Republic has been anxious to denounce the former 
shah’s role as the protector of this vital energy transit route, 
the Iranian leadership and military commanders today want to 
once again promote their role as the guardians of the entrance 
to the Gulf.
2 Yet contrary to the past, Iran now sees its interests 
in the region in direct conflict with those of the West and 
especially the United States. 
Geographical Advantages
Geographically speaking, Iran is one of the two best 
positioned countries in the Persian Gulf region. It enjoys 
the longest coastline (5,800 km, including islands), which 
encompasses the entire northern Persian Gulf, the Strait of 
Hormuz, and the Gulf of Oman (also known in Iran as Sea 
of Makran), giving it de facto control of almost all shipping 
routes leading to and from the Strait of Hormuz. This position 
is roughly comparable with Saudi Arabia’s, which besides its 
880-km coastline in the Gulf, has 1,760 km of coastline in 
the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aqaba that offers proximity to the 
Suez Canal and a unique opportunity for Riyadh to diversify its 
energy outlets using trans-Saharan pipelines. 
Iran, by contrast, borders Central Asia and its deepwater ports 
on the Gulf of Oman can serve as transit points for Afghanistan 
and the former Soviet republics. In July 2021, Iran commenced 
export of its crude oil from a new terminal off the shores of 

6
by Iran can be categorized as tactical and strategic. Tactical 
threats include harassment, disruption of shipping (such as 
impoundments), temporary blockade of the passageway, and 
limited covert sabotage operations. Any long-term closure 
of the strait or kinetic use of force ending in casualties or 
major loss of property would constitute a strategic threat. 
However, so far Iran has managed to maintain a high threat 
threshold in the Persian Gulf region by avoiding major 
escalations and loss of life. The Mercer Street attack of July 
30, 2021 in the northern Arabian Sea, carried out by an 
Iranian suicide drone originating from either Iran or Houthi-
controlled regions of Yemen, set a precedent by causing the 
first confirmed human deaths.
Compared with the Cold War era when the United States 
was prepared to resort to nuclear weapons to keep the strait 
open, events in the past few years, including the drone and 
cruise missile attacks targeting Saudi Arabia’s most strategic 
oil production facilities in September 2019, also showed a 
substantially higher tolerance threshold on the part of the 
Western powers. This could be caused partly by the waning 
U.S. commitment to the region following the shift in focus 
to great power competition, and partly by the increasingly 
effective Iranian military deterrent.
However, it is by no means certain whether Iran can sustain 
a long-term disruption of the freedom of navigation in the 
strait, because any such disruption or closure could alienate 
China, one of Iran’s two most important international allies, 
in addition to Russia, given Beijing’s heavy reliance on 
energy imports from the region. 
Having said that, to undertake any level of disruption, Iran 
has a variety of means at its disposal, including thousands of 
sea mines, shore batteries, heavily armed speedboats, and 
midget submarines. 
The IRGC is at the forefront of Tehran’s ideological war 
against the United State and its allies, and to achieve its 
aims it has created and continually expanded a naval arm 
with unique capabilities and responsibilities. Some say 
this naval arm has a guerilla style of fighting, while others 
consider it unconventional and asymmetric. The fact is, 
along with other branches of the IRGC, the naval arm has 
used a combination of conventional and unconventional, 
symmetric and asymmetric methods and capabilities fueled 
the Gulf of Oman near the Strait of Hormuz, realizing a long-
standing dream of bypassing the strait. 
In the Gulf, Iran possesses 38 islands, large and small, 
ownership of three of which — Abu Musa and Greater and 
Lesser Tunbs — are disputed by the UAE. Iran also operates 
numerous oilfields and gas fields in the Persian Gulf. 
More than 54.5% of the world’s proven oil reserves and 
39.2% of the natural gas reserves are located in the Persian 
Gulf region. In 2019 Iran had estimated gas reserves of 34 
trillion cubic meters (mostly in its South Pars field), giving it 
the world’s second-largest gas reserves (16.4%). Iran is also 
currently the third-largest gas producer but only ranks 26th 
in terms of exports because Iranians are the fourth-largest 
consumers of natural gas in the world.
3 Domestic natural gas 
consumption constitutes 62% of Iran’s total energy use, and 
it grows by more than 10% per year, making Iran one of the 
world’s most prolific gas consumers, at about five times the 
global average.
While the navigation channels through the Strait of Hormuz 
itself fall entirely within Omani waters, the navigation 
channels and their separation zones immediately inside the 
Persian Gulf run through Iran’s territorial waters and are 
under control of the IRGC surveillance posts and marine 
units on the Iranian islands of Abu Musa, Greater and Lesser 
Tunbs, Sirri, Hengam, and Qeshm. Iran operates a network 
of electro-optical, radar, and acoustic sensors, in addition 
to a growing fleet of drones; together these are capable of 
detecting and identifying any traffic to and from the Gulf with 
relative ease. This and other information can then be fused 
and used for targeting purposes.
On numerous occasions, such as during the 2019 Stena 
Impero or 2021 Hankuk Chemi incidents, Iranian naval 
or commando units stopped ships outside Iranian waters 
and forced them to change course to their anchorages for 
impoundment or inspection. 
Strategy
Given its advantageous geographical position, Iran can 
pose both tactical and strategic threats to Gulf shipping. 
Threats to the freedom of navigation in the Strait of Hormuz 

7
“The [IRGC’s] naval arm has used a combination of conventional and 
unconventional, symmetric and asymmetric methods and capabilities 
fueled by religious motives to fulfill its missions.”
by religious motives to fulfill its missions for more than three 
decades, mainly with the following aims:
• Guard Iran’s territorial waters, offshore resources, 
fisheries, and sea lines of communications in the Persian 
Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz, while also maintaining a 
presence in the Gulf of Oman and the northern Arabian 
Sea, to include medium-range ballistic missiles in 
conjunction with the IRGC Aerospace Force (IRGCASF);
• Defend Iranian Persian Gulf coastline and islands by 
constructing elaborate fortified shore defenses and 
underground bases;
• Maintain an offensive combat capability by creating and 
expanding a large arsenal of relevant weapons, small 
to medium-size boats, aerial drones, and surveillance 
equipment;
• Help fulfil the regime’s principal objective of uprooting 
the United States and other Western powers from 
the region and boost Iran’s deterrence against those 
powers; and
• Lead the naval aspect of the Islamic Revolution’s 
decades-long struggle to “fulfil its religious duties” 
as put forward by the Quran, the Islamic Republic’s 
constitution, and Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei, 
while also supporting the so-called “Axis of Resistance” 
across the region and beyond in achieving its “anti-
American and anti-Israeli” objectives by developing 
aggressive tactics and techniques and training members 
of affiliated militant groups. 
Weaponry
The IRGCN began its armament efforts in the mid-1980s 
with a four-pronged arming strategy by focusing on rocket-
firing speedboats, shore-to-ship/shore missiles, sea mines, 
and unmanned explosive boats. This core capability has 
since been maintained and expanded with a large number 
of faster, more seaworthy vessels now approaching the 
maximum speeds of 70 to 80 kts or capable of firing anti-ship 
cruise missiles to ranges exceeding 300 km, more advanced 
mines, armed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and loitering 
drones, armed assault helicopters, ground-effect aircraft, and 
more recently small, unmanned submarines, large missile 
catamarans, and converted sea bases. In fact, in June 2020 
IRGCN Cdr. Ali Tangsiri revealed his outfit had been directed 
by the supreme leader to establish a “permanent base in the 
Indian Ocean” by March 2021 to “stop harassment of Iranian 
mariners by pirates and foreign [naval] vessels in the Gulf of 
Oman and the mouth of Indian Ocean” — the Iranian term for 
the Arabian Sea — “and to protect Iranian commercial fishing 
in the Indian Ocean.”
4 
The IRGCN’s generic capabilities can also be enhanced with 
a shore assault capability offered by its own marine units and 
IRGC ground forces’ mechanized units, as well as with anti-ship 
ballistic missiles, attack drones, and Sukhoi Su-22 and Su-25 
ground attack aircraft operated by the IRGCASF. The IRGCN 
practiced such “combined arms” maneuvers with the former 
during the Great Prophet-12 exercise in December 2019, and 
with the air force on numerous occasions, including during the 
more recent Great Prophet-14 in July 2020. 
The main weapon categories in the service of the IRGCN include: 
• Sea mines (bottom-laying, acoustic, mooring, remote-
controlled, and limpet)
• Rocket systems and anti-ship and cruise missiles 
• Ballistic anti-ship and anti-radiation missiles (ARM) 
designed to target ships and aircraft carriers
• Fast attack craft and other types of speedboats to include 
water-borne improvised explosive devices (WBIEDs)
• Supply vessels, converted sea bases and corvette-type 
missile catamarans 
• Submarines (manned, unmanned, and submersibles) 
• Aviation capabilities: Fixed wing, helicopters, and UAVs, 
including surveillance and attack drones, now also 
equipped with synthetic aperture radar in addition to 

8
“The simplest and most effective way to block shipping lanes and 
waterways with disproportionate deterrent and psychological effects is 
to lay (or even to threaten to lay) sea mines.” 
Photo above: Both the Iranian national and revolutionary navies regularly practice mining the Gulf waters. Here an IRIN speedboat is rigged to rapidly dispense 
four floating mines, two from each side. IRGCN boats usually carry two mines. Credit: FarsNews.

9
“Some observers believe it takes only 300 mines to close the Strait 
of Hormuz for up to several years, with the U.S. Navy being ‘quite 
powerless’ to deal with this threat in the near- to mid-term.”
optical sensors
• Cyberattack
Mine warfare 
The IRGCN considers minelaying to be one of its most 
important missions. The simplest and most effective way to 
block shipping lanes and waterways with disproportionate 
deterrent and psychological effects is to lay (or even to 
threaten to lay) sea mines. Iran has had experience with 
floating and moored mines going back to the Iran-Iraq War 
era, using fast boats hugging the Iranian shores and islands, 
but since then it has also developed techniques to dispense 
smaller mines using shore-based missiles and rockets, or 
submersibles. The coastal and shallow waters of the southern 
Gulf offer a favorable environment for saturation mining using 
rockets and ballistic missiles with dispensing warheads.
In the more recent episodes in the region of covert mining by 
attaching limpet mines to the hulls of cargo ships and tankers 
using small boats or submersibles, the Iranians have enjoyed 
a high degree of deniability while keeping the damage to large 
vessels to a minimum. 
Even a single mine-laying sortie could disrupt shipping for 
days, and unless minesweeping is protected from continuous 
harassment of shore batteries and midget submarines or is 
conducted using robotic means such as Sea Fox naval mine 
hunter drones, the strait could remain closed indefinitely. The 
IRGC simulated mining of the Strait of Hormuz with 30 small 
boats and Basij frogmen in 2010, although it is unlikely that 
Iran will restrict its mining attempt to the strait and the Persian 
Gulf. The Iranian navy’s submarines can lay large offensive 
minefields, the so-called mine barrages, in the Gulf of Oman 
and the Arabian Sea as well. Some observers believe it takes 
only 300 mines to close the Strait of Hormuz for up to several 
years, with the U.S. Navy being “quite powerless” to deal with 
this threat in the near- to mid-term.
5 
However, intensive mining of the strait is indiscriminate and 
even Iran’s own ships could fall victim to it, unless modern 
programmable mines are used. It is also highly unlikely 
that Iran will be able to enjoy the element of deniability 
usually associated with mine warfare, and therefore avoid 
its consequences, which could include mining of Iran’s own 
ports, terminals, and shipping channels from the air by the 
Western powers.
To guarantee safe minesweeping and convoy protection 
operations, an extensive and aggressive air and sea operation 
will be required, assuming the U.S. and other Western militaries 
do not hesitate to escalate the situation, or worse they will 
have to prepare themselves for some form of presence on the 
ground. They might need to physically occupy the northern 
shores and rugged mountains overlooking the strait, which 
could expose ground forces to protracted combat. 
Mines vary in shape and size, weighing 0.5 to 1 ton, and small 
Iranian boats can carry between one and four mines each. 
While a powerful mine can seriously damage a warship, it will 
take more to disable an oil tanker for any long period of time. 
Strong tidal streams of three to four kts in the strait make it 
a difficult place for mine warfare, unless mines are bottom-
lying or moored to the bottom, which are suitable choices for 
the shallow waters of the strait.
6 Therefore, while the most 
commonly used mines will still be moored mines, with floating 
mines also expected in shipping channels, Iran will likely use 
a combination of influence bottom mines, which are almost 
impossible to sweep as well.
7 Iranian military commanders are 
potentially alluding to the possible use of such programmable, 
or “controlled,” influence mines when they talk of “smart 
control” of the strait. While a deputy of the Iranian commander 
of the IRGCN recently boasted about having a monopoly on 
mine warfare in Iran, the regular national navy — known as the 
Islamic Republic of Iran Navy (IRIN) — also widely employs 
small speedboats as well as its few operational Sikorsky RH-
53D helicopters to fulfil mine-laying duties. 

10
missiles. They are more lethal compared to guns and can 
theoretically commandeer the strait more efficiently. 
A good part of the Iranian coastline allows for deployment of 
missile batteries and their associated fire-control radars with 
relative ease at higher grounds. However, even if mobile and 
relatively autonomous, such batteries are vulnerable to orbiting 
manned or unmanned aircraft, and unless effectively concealed 
or protected, shore batteries are vulnerable to aerial attacks. 
To that end the IRGC’s increasingly varied fleet of mobile air 
defense systems usually accompany shore missile batteries. 
The Iranians are known to have been using nanotechnology 
to develop radar-absorbing material, fabricated in the form of 
camouflaged netting. They have also made extensive use of 
their tunneling skills to build tunnels for hiding their launchers 
and associated sensors, some of which are literally buried 
underground and remotely controlled and operated out of so-
called “missile farms.”
9 In March 2021 the IRGCN also unveiled 
its latest so-called “underground missile city,” showing off 
large stashes of anti-ship missiles and Fajr rockets inside a 
tunnel complex near the southern shores of Qeshm island.10 
Believed to be mainly used as support and staging facilities, the 
IRGCN claims to have additional similar complexes along Iran’s 
southern shorelines.
Iran’s interdiction capability using missiles consists of several 
overlapping layers, spanning from short- to long-range guided 
missiles, covering ranges from 5 km to over 300 km. This 
flexibility allows Iran to target vessels in the Persian Gulf, the 
Strait of Hormuz, and the Gulf of Oman from as far inland as 
Shiraz and Baft, with the help of remote sensors. 
Iran’s missile arsenal consists of the short-range Kosar class 
of electro-optically (EO)/radar-guided missiles with ranges of 
15 km to 25 km; the C-704 Nasr-1 and Zafar medium-range 
anti-ship missiles with ranges of about 35 km; Noor (C-802) 
anti-ship cruise missiles and its extended Ghader and Ghadir 
versions with ranges in excess of 120 km, 200 km, and 300 
km respectively; and the larger HY-2G Seersucker and the jet-
powered Ra’d missiles reaching as far as 85 km and 300 km 
respectively. Several newer missiles include Nasr-e Basir and 
Nasir, which are EO-guided and jet-powered versions of Nasr 
with ranges of 35 km and 130 km, respectively. The availability 
of a wide array of EO-guided weaponry makes jamming their 
guidance more difficult. 
Missiles, rockets, and artillery batteries
The IRGC has gone to great lengths to develop and field guns 
with sufficient range and mobility to cover most of the Strait 
of Hormuz and its approaches. By using tactics taken from the 
1864 Battle of Mobile Bay in the U.S. Civil War, the Iranians 
will exercise the option of planting mines to force maritime 
and naval traffic into channels better covered by their shore 
batteries. In fact, since at least November 2006, the IRGC has 
frequently practiced blockading the strait using artillery and 
rocket saturation fire spread over an area of 30 km by 50 km 
from as far away as 180 km.
For its supply of rockets Iran depends on the Fajr Industrial 
Complex in Shiraz. These unguided weapons range from gyro-
stabilized 107-mm multiple rocket launchers with an 8.5-
km range,
8 mounted on speedboats, to shore-launched Fajr 
rockets with ranges of up to 180 km, reportedly also equipped 
with submunitions warheads. In 2016 Iran fielded a guided 
version of its largest Fajr-5 rocket, called Fajr-5C, with a range 
of 75 km. A boosted two-stage version of Fajr-5 reportedly 
stretches its range to 180 km. 
Iran has developed several versions of its highly mobile truck-
mounted 155-mm Hadid HM-41 howitzer gun, which can fire 
base-bleed or Basir laser-guided projectiles as far away as 
42 km and 20 km respectively. It might therefore not be long 
before Iran can also deploy laser-guidance technology on its 
rockets as well, although to be really effective, they would then 
require additional target illuminating systems and dedicated 
communications links, making them susceptible to detection 
and jamming. Iran also has several North Korean 170-mm 
“Koksan” self-propelled (SP) guns with a firing range of some 
60 km, which makes them suitable for targeting the Gulf 
shipping channels from the mainland. In addition, the IRGC can 
use its mobile Russian-made 2S1 Gvozdika SP howitzers (and 
similar indigenous versions), which can fire rocket-assisted 
122-mm projectiles to a range of 21 km. This tracked gun 
is fully amphibious and can easily negotiate the creeks and 
estuaries of the Iranian shoreline. The IRGC has also fielded 
two own-developed Raad-1 and Raad-2 SP guns with calibers 
of 122 and 155 mm, respectively. 
But arguably the main menace in the Persian Gulf is Iran’s 
arsenal of increasingly versatile and longer-range anti-ship 

11
“Arguably the main menace in the Persian Gulf is Iran’s arsenal of increasingly 
versatile and longer-range anti-ship missiles.” 
Those missiles can cause extensive damage to small to 
medium-size naval vessels, as well as offshore facilities. 
Ghader and Ghadir offer longer lethal reach to the platforms 
that already use the Noor missile, including regular navy 
warships, Tondar (Houdong) missiles boats, BH-7 hovercraft, 
Mil Mi-171 helicopters, and the autonomous and semi-
autonomous shore batteries. It also reportedly offers a 
better electronic counter-countermeasure (ECCM) capability 
compared to Noor. Nasr and Zafar missiles, on the other hand, 
offer a greater punch for the smaller platforms, such as C14M 
Azarakhsh and IPS-16 Zolfaghar missile speedboats. The 
small Zafar is claimed to be one of the fastest sea-skimming 
anti-ship missiles in the Iranian arsenal. In addition, Iran 
has indigenously developed a small single-seat helicopter 
prototype, dubbed Shahed 285, equipped with a small 
commercial search radar under its nose, and the ability to 
carry two Zafar or Kosar missiles. The IRGC also tested an air-
launched version of Nasr from a Bell JetRanger helicopter in 
2016 with a claimed range of 130 km. 
While radar-guided missiles are susceptible to jamming, 
they can be used in any weather conditions. In fact, the 
phenomenon of ducting of electromagnetic energy common in 
the Persian Gulf, as warm dry air flows from the desert over the 
cooler waters of the Gulf, can improve the associated surface 
search radar performance. The EO-guided missiles, by contrast, 
are less vulnerable to disruptive measures, but are not all-
weather and in certain Persian Gulf temperatures and humidity 
levels might not function properly. The addition of imaging 
infrared capability, or combining EO and radar guidance, can 
allow penetration of haze and increase performance in poor 
visibility. In the future Iran will probably employ combined 
guidance anti-ship missiles to further increase its versatility. 
Arguably the most lethal and worrying threat against Western 
naval assets in the region are the Khalij-e Fars (Persian Gulf) 
and Fateh-Mobin ballistic kinetic-hit missiles with a range 
of 300 km and a 450- to 650-kg warhead. Operated by the 
IRGCASF, they make Iran the only country, besides China, 
known to have fielded an anti-ship ballistic missile capability. 
A 700-km-range version, called Zolfaghar-e Basir, was also 
unveiled in September 2020. Then in March of the following 
year the IRGCN unveiled its own Fat’h tactical ballistic missile 
truck launcher, capable of carrying two, four, or six missiles, 
each inside a cylindrical canister. Fat’h is a miniaturized version 
of the venerable Fateh family of precision-guided tactical 
ballistic missiles, with a range estimated to approach 150 km.
So far three versions of the terminally guided derivative of 
the highly regarded solid-fuel Fateh-110 missile have been 
sighted: EO and active- and passive-radar guided versions.
11 
The original Fateh-110 is the most accurate “unguided” 
ballistic missile in the Iranian arsenal with a claimed circular 
error probable (CEP) — a circle around the aim point within 
which 50% of missiles will land — of only 5 meters.
12 For 
comparison, the terminally-guided Pershing II ballistic missile 
had a reported CEP of 30 to 50 meters, although at six times 
the range. Iran has also converted some of its Tondar surface-
to-surface missiles (itself a derivative of the Chinese HQ-2J 
surface-to-air missile) to anti-ship missiles with a range of 
around 150 km. 
A precision-guided anti-ship ballistic missile (ASBM) capability 
gives Iran an enormous time-to-target advantage and on the 
other side further strains the limited naval ballistic missile 
defense assets in the region. The Khalij-e Fars can reportedly 
travel four times the speed of sound and is difficult to counter, 
except probably with the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System 
and its associated SM-2/-3 interceptors already deployed to 
the Persian Gulf region. 
Such a threat will be limited to the Persian Gulf and the Gulf 
of Oman only, and can be launched from a floating platform 
or converted cargo ship. Furthermore, the additional risk of 
ARM threat, such as from Hormuz-1, can induce naval radars 
to shut down or interrupt their emissions, which could in turn 
enhance the chances of other coordinated swarm attacks by 
suicide drones and loitering munitions. 

12
any such missile launches can automatically trigger a nuclear 
exchange with the United States if Iran is known to have fielded 
nuclear weapons by then. 
Iran might also resort to more daring, or desperate, measures 
depending on which way you look at it. In a repeat of the 
Japanese airborne raid on Yontan airfield in Okinawa during 
the Pacific War in 1945, a specially-modified Iranian Antonov 
An-74 transport plane could suddenly deviate from an 
international corridor and attempt to land a small squad of 
martyrdom-seeking IRGC commandos on Diego Garcia, if it can 
dodge any existing defenses, and blow up a few B-52s and B-2 
hangars on the main ramp. 
Such spectacular attempts, or weapons such as Khalij-e Fars, 
or Hoot (Shkval-E) rocket torpedo, can serve one important 
purpose of asymmetric warfighting, which is to achieve 
disproportionate psychological results using perhaps a 
single “silver bullet.” Symbols of the United States’ military 
might will attract determined asymmetric attacks: The 
asymmetric warfighter goes after icons to shatter the West’s 
image of invincibility and destroy their strategic advantage 
through isolated tactical actions, with little worry about the 
consequences. Such icons include aircraft carriers, special-
mission aircraft such as AWACS, large transport planes and 
aerial refueling tankers, stealth bombers, missile defense sites, 
and Navy SEAL teams. 
Submarine blockade
As the saying goes, when the going gets tough, the tough get 
going; when there is little room for maneuver on the surface, 
you can always take the fight beneath it. The Strait of Hormuz 
and its approaches offer both an ideal and a challenging 
environment for submarine warfare. 
Midget submarines and smaller submersibles can sneak 
into undefended harbors, inlets, and marinas, and damage 
important naval vessels or blow up expensive royal yachts. 
They can also damage submarine oil pipelines and single-buoy 
mooring (SBM) facilities, although with a risk of causing an 
environmental catastrophe. Iran is known to have developed 
several types of submersible “human torpedoes.” 
Photo right: An Iranian Navy 2,300-ton Project 877EKM Kilo-class submarine on its delivery voyage in 1991. Iran operates three of the 
Russian-made submarines, and currently has the capability to overhaul and upgrade them in a shipyard in Bandar Abbas. Credit: U.S. 
Department of Defense.
In February 2011, Iran launched two ballistic missiles into 
the Arabian Sea opposite the Omani island of Masirah, an 
American logistical base, from its Semnan missile range 
1,900 km inland. The IRGC also recently announced that it 
was testing ballistic missiles with “proximity warheads” — 
which seems to allude to submunitions dispensing and/or 
proximity fusing capability — for use against very large naval 
targets such as American carrier strike groups.
13 However, 
the existing long-range Iranian ballistic missiles can hardly 
be effective against moving naval targets unless they are 
also terminally guided. Carriers are tough targets and, unless 
their magazine takes a direct hit, to destroy them requires 
numerous successful engagements. 
For Shahab-3, various reports suggest a CEP of 100 meters up 
to 4 km, but the fact is that Shahab-3’s baseline CEP is 12% 
of its range, so if we assume a range of 1,100 km between its 
launch site and Tel Aviv, the CEP of the missile is supposed 
to be around 130 meters. For a 1,900-km range, this CEP 
increases to around 200 meters. The latest Shahab and Sedjil 
models, however, are said to be about twice as accurate, and 
some reports even suggest Sedjil II has a CEP of 50 meters. 
While insufficient to attack naval targets, such weapons can 
menace air or naval bases within their range if they get a 
chance to reach them. 
If Iran manages to fit some form of terminal guidance into the 
new intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM) it is reported 
to be developing, it might look beyond the U.S. bases in the 
vicinity of its borders and set its eyes on strategic air and naval 
bases farther away, such as the one in Diego Garcia — Iran’s 
likely new favorite target. Iran is known to have been working 
on numerous over-the-horizon (OTH) radar and intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance projects that could benefit its 
future IRBM targeting.
14 One such IRGC OTH radar site, called 
Ghadir, is located 12 km northwest of Ahvaz in southwest Iran 
and 10 km to the west of a major IRGCN base, but should 
theoretically cover the entire Middle East.
Iran will have to overcome many serious technical hurdles 
and even put advanced tracking satellites in orbit to achieve a 
credible very-long-range targeting capability. Such a capability 
may be only a few years away after the IRGC inaugurated its 
own satellite launch capability in April 2020.
15 Furthermore, 

“If Iran manages to fit some form of terminal guidance into the new IRBM 
it is reported to be developing, it might look beyond the U.S. bases in the 
vicinity … and set its eyes on strategic air and naval bases farther away.” 
The Iranians are giving an added level of priority to submarine 
operations in recent years, and with their three Russian-made, 
2,300-ton Kilo-class boats unable to operate in waters shallower 
than 200 meters (650 feet),16 they had to design and build a 
fleet of nimbler and smaller submarines. This effort includes 
development of the 29-meter IS-120 Ghadir-class of a North 
Korean design, of which more than 20 are in service with Iran’s 
national navy. This sonar-equipped submarine displaces 120 
tons submerged, is very maneuverable, and can sit silently on 
the bottom and wait for its prey. It can then attack with its two 
indigenous Valfajr 533-mm torpedoes. It is claimed that on 
several occasions Ghadir midget submarines have surprised U.S. 
Navy vessels by surfacing unexpectedly close to them. 
Now added to the Ghadir lineup is the more advanced 
48-meter Fateh (“victorious”) indigenous submarine with a 
displacement of 593 tons that can operate in waters as deep 
as 200 meters. Two more designs are also in the works as well: 
the even larger 1,200-ton Be’sat (“birth”); and finally Qaem 
(“risen”) with a reported 3,000-ton designed displacement and 
equipped with air-independent propulsion (AIP). 
The first Fateh was commissioned in February 2019, with at 
least two more to follow.
17 With four launch tubes, Fateh can 
carry six 533-mm torpedoes and eight sea mines. It can travel at 
14 kts when submerged and has a reported seagoing time of 35 
days. Fateh is reportedly equipped with both active and passive 
sonars and carries torpedo missiles and anti-surface missiles of 
Iranian and Russian origin. In late 2018, the Iranian navy also 
reported arming its Ghadir submarines with anti-ship missiles.
18 
It was later announced the weapon in question was an upgraded 
version of the Nasr anti-ship missile.19 Considering the trend 
of innovative weaponry the Iranians have been interested in, 
it would not be long before Iran and China also co-developed 
The Strait of Hormuz and 
its approaches offer both 
an ideal and a challenging 
environment for submarine 
warfare. 

14
quantitative terms, the IRGCN has not forgotten about the 
qualitative aspects of its power. They see prestige in speed, 
with their latest reverse-engineered armed boats boasting 
top speeds of up to 70 kts. Named Seraj-1, it is a copy of 
the composite Bladerunner 51 racing boat, armed with a 
machine gun and rocket launcher. At least one Seraj is based 
at Samen al-Hojaj base on the Caspian coast. A slightly slower 
aluminum-hull speedboat, dubbed Zolfaghar, is armed with 
two Nasr-1 missiles. 
Beside speed, Iran has also tried to improve the ability of its 
rocket-firing swarm boats to survive enemy suppression fire 
by making them “stealthier” and even unmanned. Ever since 
the late 1980s, Iran has been developing and fielding remote-
controlled “suicide” boats packed with explosives and is said 
to have prepositioned no less than 1,500 high-speed “drone 
boats,” each armed with 500 kg of explosives, along the 
key Persian Gulf coastline. Iran has even exported specially 
developed GPS-assisted guidance kits to Yemen’s Houthi 
fighters for converting speedboats into WBIEDs.
21 Originally 
designed to ram warships and cause significant damage 
alongside their aerial and submarine counterparts, these robot 
boats have progressively been made more sophisticated with 
the provision of various sensors and datalinks. 
However, even low-profile unmanned boats are still vulnerable 
to short-range defensive fire once detected. One solution the 
Iranians thought of was to arm them with standoff weapons 
for better survivability. The IRGC together with Joolaee Marine 
Industries developed the highly maneuverable YMH-1Ya-Mahdi 
(also known as Falaq-2) catamaran boat that can be operated 
in both manned and unmanned modes to a maximum speed 
of 50 kts. What is noteworthy about this reportedly low radar 
cross-section “smart rocket launching platform” is its ability 
to automatically detect and engage surface targets with what 
seems to be a slightly smaller version of the Hoot rocket 
torpedo and/or a surface-skimmer rocket of yet unidentified 
type, with a caliber of about 380 mm. Three of such weapons 
can be carried in a central canister/launcher, which, due to the 
relative sophistication of the supercavitation rocket torpedoes, 
have to be preloaded before embarking on a mission. Ya-Mahdi 
entered into service with the IRCGN in 2010. 
Iran acquired and tested 10 Shkval-E rocket torpedoes 
(200 kts speed/10 km range) in 2004 with the help of the 
Russians, followed by additional orders. In 2008, the IRGCN 
a submarine-launched anti-anti-submarine warfare helicopter 
missile similar in performance to the German IDAS system. In 
fact, the mysterious “358 surface-to-air missiles” seized twice 
in the Arabian Sea in cargo dhows by the U.S. Navy in November 
2019 and February 2020 could be just that.
20 
Production of the first Qaem reportedly started in 2008, 
although there is no report of sea trials or service entry yet. 
All diesel-electric submarines need to approach the surface at 
regular intervals to obtain air and to recharge their batteries. 
Iranian submarines are no exception, despite the fact that 
they usually embark on short missions not far from their home 
bases. The Iranian navy has also been working on various 
AIP/fuel cell technologies to incorporate them into their new 
submarine designs, and there is even verbal encouragement 
in Iran for developing nuclear propulsion for future larger 
submarine designs. 
Speaking of operational issues, a submarine blockade could 
prove difficult in the shallow waters of the strait given the 
restrictions that need to be put on underwater speeds, 
therefore increasing the number of submarines required. A 
more probable area for operating submarines would be the 
southeast approaches to the strait where the depth is about 
90 meters and the tidal streams are weaker. In addition, it 
will be difficult for Iran to use submarines in its so-called 
“smart control” of the strait, as selective blockading by 
submarine would be possible only if positive identification and 
coordination are available.
Iran’s increasing number of small submarines has allowed its 
commanders to employ “Wolf Pack”-style blockading tactics, 
which involves using a row of submarines each spaced about 
1 mile from each other. Coordination of such operations is 
challenging, but they could be aided by new locally-made 
underwater communications equipment that claims to offer 
safe voice and data links between subsurface, surface, and 
aerial assets, as well as land command posts. Any radio 
communication, though, can be detected by the opponent’s 
electronic surveillance, and pinpointed to its source. 
Fast inshore patrol craft and robot boats
Despite amassing a large number of speed boats of various 
sizes and configurations to fulfill its swarming missions in 

15
“Beside speed, Iran has also tried to improve the ability of its rocket-firing 
swarm boats to survive enemy suppression fire by making them ‘stealthier’ 
and even unmanned.”
and the Aerospace Industries Organization of Iran began 
reverse-engineering the complex weapon near Mashhad 
in northeastern Iran, 22 and it is estimated that a relatively 
significant number of the original and copied versions 
are currently in service. In addition to speedboats such 
as IPS-18, and submarines, Hoot can also be fired from 
prepositioned static underwater launchers at a depth of up to 
330 feet (100 meters).
Aircraft
Aside from a small number of IRGC helicopters with the 
capability to fire anti-ship missiles, Iran can also use its F-4E 
Phantom II and Sukhoi Su-24MK and Su-22Mk-4 strike aircraft 
to launch missiles of this nature; at least a few of the Phantom 
were modified to carry the C-801K and the longer-range Noor, 
Ghadr, and Ghadir missiles. The first two aircraft have the 
ability to refuel in the air from specially equipped aircraft of the 
same type at a low altitude — the so-called “buddy refueling 
technique” — and give the Iranians an option to attack enemy 
vessels in the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman/Arabian Sea if 
and when their planes take to the skies. These aircraft can 
also deliver the 2000-lb Qassed-3 EO-guided standoff missile, 
a lookalike copy of the American AGM-130, with a range of 
about 100 km, which unlike its smaller counterparts can 
deliver a formidable punch against large oil tankers in the Gulf. 
Other weapons are global navigation satellite system/global 
positioning system (GNSS/GPS)-guided glide bombs developed 
by both the IRGCASF and the Iranian Ministry of Defense. 
Anti-radiation weapons are another threat to surface and 
airborne radars. All the types mentioned earlier can use the 
Russian Kh-58U and other ARMs in the Iranian arsenal. 
The Revolutionary Guards have also deployed a number of 
Bavar (“belief”) wing-in-ground effect (WIG) seaplanes at 
their naval base in Bandar Abbas. This aircraft in its present 
configuration has limited endurance and combat abilities, but 
it still offers potential to serve as airborne observation, forward 
air control, target data relay station, and coastal patrol if they 
are not shot afloat in combat. A larger and more powerful 
version, however, will be armed with light anti-ship missiles 
and rocket launchers, but they too will be highly vulnerable to 
airborne as well as surface defenses.
Cyberattack
The cyber threat to the region’s energy and maritime 
infrastructure by Iran is a relatively new yet very worrying 
phenomenon. Such threats range from simple GNSS/GPS 
signal jamming and spoofing (deceiving a GPS receiver by 
broadcasting fake signals) reportedly originating from the 
Abu Musa Island to opportunistic attacks against critical 
infrastructure targets such as oil and gas, electricity, and water 
desalination plants. Iran has even explored ways of sinking 
ships using cyberattacks by manipulating their ballast water 
system remotely.
23 
Organization 
The IRGCN is organized into five naval districts spanning the 
northern Persian Gulf down to the eastern limits of the Strait 
of Hormuz, “leaving” the Gulf of Oman and beyond to the 
IRIN. However, the IRGCN is also very active in the Gulf of 
Oman using three independent naval bases in Sirik, Jask, and 
Chabahar, as well as a base at the mouth of Shatt al-Arab/
Arvand Rood in the northwest and a base on the Caspian shore. 
The IRGCN has aims of expanding its “permanent” presence in 
the Arabian Sea by commissioning its largest ever ship, Shahid 
Roudaki, a converted 150-meter/12,000-ton ro-ro ship with 
a helipad and makeshift modular anti-ship and anti-aircraft 
missile systems, in November 2020.
24 
Between 2007 and 2009 Iran’s general armed forces staff 
oversaw a separation of IRGCN and IRIN duties and areas of 
responsibility, a move that was completed by the relocation 
of IRGCN headquarters to Bandar Abbas in July 2010. Having 

16
Designation Location
Commanding 
officer
Mission Notes
Saheb al-Zaman 
1st Naval District
Bandar 
Abbas
Vice Cdr. Abbas
Gholamshahi
Control of shipping into and out of 
the Strait of Hormuz, supporting 
other districts
Includes IRGCN headquarters and command-and-
control center, Imam Sadjad Special Commando and 
Marine Brigade, 16th Assef Coastal Missile Group, 
112th Zolfaghar Surface Combat Brigade on Qeshm 
Island (Cdr. Iskandar Mirshekari) known as the “Strait of 
Hormuz Command and Control Center”
Nouh-e Nabi 
(
Noah the 
prophet) 2nd 
Naval District
Bushehr Vice Cdr. 
Ramezan Zirahi
Control of the northern and central 
Persian Gulf, including Kharg oil 
terminal and Bushehr nuclear plant
Includes Shahid Mahalati base and Imam Muhammad 
Bagher 2nd Naval Air Station (Bushehr), 112th 
Zolfaghar Surface Combat Brigade on Kharg Island 
(Capt. Bahmanyar Abdullahi), a marine brigade, and two 
coastal missile brigades
Imam Hossein 3rd 
Naval District
Mahshahr Vice Cdr. 
Amrollah 
Nozari
Control of northwestern Persian 
Gulf and Khuzestan maritime 
borders and coastal waters
Includes a marine brigade, and Arvand Naval Base 
(Zolfaghar Surface Combat Brigade, Lt. Col. Mehdi 
Ravand) in Arvandkenar at the mouth of Shatt al-Arab/
Arvand Rood, Seyed-al-Shohada Surface Combat 
Brigade
Sarallah 4th Naval 
District
Assaluyeh 
(Parsiyan) 
and Dayyer
Vice Cdr. 
Mansour 
Ravankar
Control of the central Persian Gulf 
including the South Pars gas field
Includes Ansar al-Hossein Naval Base and 412th 
Zolfaghar Surface Combat Brigade in Dayyer
Imam Mohammad 
Bagher 5th Naval 
District
Shenas port 
village, west 
of Bandar 
Lengeh
Vice Cdr. Ali 
Ozma’i
Control of the so-called “Nazeat 
Islands,” including Greater & Lesser 
Tunbs, Abu Musa, and Sirri, and the 
Strait of Hormuz
With three naval brigades, including 512th Zolfaghar 
Surface Combat Brigade in Bandar-e Shenas, at least 
one coastal missile group armed with modern missile 
systems, an air-defense brigade, Abu Musa underground 
fortifications, and at least one marine brigade. Also 
includes a large underground bunker complex and 
pre-surveyed missile launch pads 12 km north and 
northeast of Bandar Lengeh
Shahid Raahbar 
Independent 
Naval Base
Sirik Lt. Col. 
Yaghoub 
Sadeghi
“Defensive and offensive” control 
of foreign naval movements to and 
from the Strait of Hormuz, Persian 
Gulf and the Gulf of Oman
The newest IRGCN base was officially declared 
operational on September 23, 2020, despite being in 
operation for the past five years. Includes a hardened 
underground segment and is expected to be expanded
Imamat 
Independent 
Naval Base
Jask Col. Abbas 
Khaksari
Control of approaches to the 
Strait of Hormuz and new Jask oil 
terminal, fishery protection
Boats originating from this base recovered first pieces 
from the wreckage of the U.S. drone shot down by IRGC 
missiles on June 20, 2019
Imam Ali 
Independent 
Naval Base
Chabahar Cdr. Seyed-
Mehdi
Mousavi
Maintain naval presence in the Gulf 
of Oman, including intelligence 
gathering, special ops, training and 
fishery protection
Patrols Iranian territorial waters and approaches to the 
Strait of Hormuz. Conducts offensive operations in the 
Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea. A regional hub for 
small boat maintenance
Aba Abdullah 
Special Forces 
Brigade Base
Faror Island Vice Cdr. Sadeq 
Amooie
Covert special warfare missions, 
training own and foreign forces, 
providing security teams to Iranian 
commercial shipping and tankers 
through the pirate zones in the Gulf 
of Aden
Home of Sepah Navy Special Force training base for 
special warfare tactics modeled after the U.S. Navy 
SEALs.
Samen al-Hojaj 
Independent 
Naval Base North
Babolsar, 
Caspian
Capt. Mohamad 
Bagheri
Mostly serves training purposes
Imam Khamenei 
Naval Academy
Zibakenar, 
east of 
Anzali, 
Caspian
Vice Cdr. 
Abdolreza 
Dabestani
Presides over all IRGC naval and 
maritime colleges
Includes surface warfare, jihadist warrior, marine and 
special forces, missile warfare colleges
IRGCN Operational Districts (Up-to-date as of July 2021)

17
Photo above: A general overhead view of Iranian naval headquarters in Bandar Abbas. To the left of the harbor entrance channel is the IRGCN section 
and to the right is the IRIN’s First Naval Base. Moored to the left breakwater is a mockup of the USS Nimitz, which capsized and sank in August 2020 
after a live fire exercise, and to its right is the 229-meter/56,000-ton Al Buhaira Aframax tanker purchased by the IRIN to be converted into a floating 
sea base. Renamed Makran, the converted ship was commissioned in January 2021 and is currently Iran’s largest naval vessel. Credit: Google Earth.

QATAR-UAE (Abu Dhabi)
IRAN-QATAR
FSO
 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
OMAN
QATAR
KUWAIT
IRAQ
IRIN 3/IRGCN Imam Ali
IRIN 1
Bahregan Oil Center (Imam Hossein)
Goreh oil pumping station
Ras Laffan
Goreh-Jask oil pipeline
Al-Dhafra Air Base
Muscat Int’l Airport
(former Seeb AB)
Prince Sultan Air Base
Ali Al-Salem 
Air Base
Camp 
Buehring
Major city/port
IRGCN base
IRIN base
Manifold
Oil & gas terminal
Coalition air or naval base
Water desalination plant
UAV base
Oil & gas site/platform
Al-Udaid 
Air Base
Shiraz
Basra
IRGCN missile base, Bandar Sejafi
Riyadh
IRAN-UAE (Dubai)
IRAN-OMAN
HMS Jufair
DOLPHIN GAS PIPELINETO UAE
Iran-Iraq median line
IRAN
Qeshm Larak
Hengam
Hormuz
BAHRAIN-IRAN-SAUDI ARABIA
Jebel Ali
Dubai
Bandar Abbas
Lavan
Kish
Omani straight 
baseline claim
Not finalized
IRIN 2/IRGCN Emamat
IRAN-QATAR-UAE (Abu Dhabi)
Fujairah
Khor 
Fakkan
New oil & gas 
storage & export terminal
Mina al-Fahal
Al-Ahmadi
Abu MusaSirri
Iraq-Kuwait 
median line
IRGCN 5
IRGCN Shahid Raahbar 
Naval Base, Sirik
3rd “Nabovat” IRIN 
Naval District, Konarak
IRGCN Engineering HQ & 
26th Salman Missile Brigade
Iran straight baseline
Inland waters (territorial sea) boundary
Iran flight information region (FIR) boundary
Contiguous zone boundary
Continental shelf boundary
GULF OF OMAN
Greater 
Tunb
PERSIAN GULF
Hendurabi
Camp de la Paix, France
Al-Hamra 
Army Base
Barakah nuclear
power plant project
Abu Dhabi
Muscat
Doha
5th “Naze’at” 
IRGCN Naval 
District, Bandar 
Lengeh
NSA Bahrain 
(5th Flt)
0 10 20 50
50
100
100
150 200 km
mi
IRGCN 1
Habshan-Fujairah 
crude oil pipeline
IRIN Naval 
Base, Kharg
IRGCN 3
IRGCN 4
BAHRAIN-SAUDI ARABIA
Jubail
Saudi Petroline & Abqaiq-Yanbu NGL Pipeline
Ras Al-Khair water 
desalination plant
King Abdul Aziz 
Naval Base
Camp Arifjan
Camp Spearhead
Manama
Isa Air 
Base
SAUDI ARABIA
Khafji oilfield
Ras-Tanura
BAHRAIN
IRAN-SAUDIARABIA
IRGCN 2
Bushehr
Abadan
Bandar 
Khomeini
2nd “Velayat” IRIN 
Naval District, Jask
Kuwait City
Farur
Faruran
Lesser 
Tunb
Abqaiq (Buqaiq) Oil Center
IRIN Naval Base, Bushehr
(IRIN Southwest Fleet HQ)
1st “Emamat” 
IRIN Naval District, 
Bandar Abbas
IRGCN 112th Naval 
Combat Brigade
Asaluyeh gas condensate 
production, refinery & terminal

QATAR-UAE (Abu Dhabi)
IRAN-QATAR
FSO
 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
OMAN
QATAR
KUWAIT
IRAQ
IRIN 3/IRGCN Imam Ali
IRIN 1
Bahregan Oil Center (Imam Hossein)
Goreh oil pumping station
Ras Laffan
Goreh-Jask oil pipeline
Al-Dhafra Air Base
Muscat Int’l Airport
(former Seeb AB)
Prince Sultan Air Base
Ali Al-Salem 
Air Base
Camp 
Buehring
Major city/port
IRGCN base
IRIN base
Manifold
Oil & gas terminal
Coalition air or naval base
Water desalination plant
UAV base
Oil & gas site/platform
Al-Udaid 
Air Base
Shiraz
Basra
IRGCN missile base, Bandar Sejafi
Riyadh
IRAN-UAE (Dubai)
IRAN-OMAN
HMS Jufair
DOLPHIN GAS PIPELINETO UAE
Iran-Iraq median line
IRAN
Qeshm Larak
Hengam
Hormuz
BAHRAIN-IRAN-SAUDI ARABIA
Jebel Ali
Dubai
Bandar Abbas
Lavan
Kish
Omani straight 
baseline claim
Not finalized
IRIN 2/IRGCN Emamat
IRAN-QATAR-UAE (Abu Dhabi)
Fujairah
Khor 
Fakkan
New oil & gas 
storage & export terminal
Mina al-Fahal
Al-Ahmadi
Abu MusaSirri
Iraq-Kuwait 
median line
IRGCN 5
IRGCN Shahid Raahbar 
Naval Base, Sirik
3rd “Nabovat” IRIN 
Naval District, Konarak
IRGCN Engineering HQ & 
26th Salman Missile Brigade
Iran straight baseline
Inland waters (territorial sea) boundary
Iran flight information region (FIR) boundary
Contiguous zone boundary
Continental shelf boundary
GULF OF OMAN
Greater 
Tunb
PERSIAN GULF
Hendurabi
Camp de la Paix, France
Al-Hamra 
Army Base
Barakah nuclear
power plant project
Abu Dhabi
Muscat
Doha
5th “Naze’at” 
IRGCN Naval 
District, Bandar 
Lengeh
NSA Bahrain 
(5th Flt)
0 10 20 50
50
100
100
150 200 km
mi
IRGCN 1
Habshan-Fujairah 
crude oil pipeline
IRIN Naval 
Base, Kharg
IRGCN 3
IRGCN 4
BAHRAIN-SAUDI ARABIA
Jubail
Saudi Petroline & Abqaiq-Yanbu NGL Pipeline
Ras Al-Khair water 
desalination plant
King Abdul Aziz 
Naval Base
Camp Arifjan
Camp Spearhead
Manama
Isa Air 
Base
SAUDI ARABIA
Khafji oilfield
Ras-Tanura
BAHRAIN
IRAN-SAUDIARABIA
IRGCN 2
Bushehr
Abadan
Bandar 
Khomeini
2nd “Velayat” IRIN 
Naval District, Jask
Kuwait City
Farur
Faruran
Lesser 
Tunb
Abqaiq (Buqaiq) Oil Center
IRIN Naval Base, Bushehr
(IRIN Southwest Fleet HQ)
1st “Emamat” 
IRIN Naval District, 
Bandar Abbas
IRGCN 112th Naval 
Combat Brigade
Asaluyeh gas condensate 
production, refinery & terminal

Photo above: Iranian defense industries have produced a range of anti-ship cruise missiles based on Chinese models, including this air-
launched version of the C-802 Noor missile with a range of between 75 and 120 kilometers. Credit: The author’s collection.
20
Organizational Values and Training
The IRGC is generally believed to be a highly motivated and 
agile unconventional fighting force with a flexible organization 
that quickly adapts to new situations and requirements. 
Compared to the national armed forces, the Pasdaran 
(members of the IRGC) are more ideologically and religiously 
driven and trusted. A higher percentage of IRGCN members 
believe in the martyrdom culture than do their counterparts in 
the IRIN. The martyrdom culture is a Shi’a ideological package 
developed by the Iranian regime to boost morale and facilitate 
the acceptance of the idea of martyrdom within the IRGC 
(and to much less success the Artesh) ranks through constant 
idolization of previous martyrs, especially Imam Hussein. It is 
also called “cultural engineering of values.” 
As a result, IRGCN members are expected to prioritize 
revolutionary values over national interests and to take 
risks more readily by using the lead-from-the-front model, 
received the same order from Khamenei, the IRIN, however, 
dragged its feet for an additional decade.
25 
The IRGCN was formally given responsibility for protecting 
Iranian waters and coastlines in the Persian Gulf and the Strait 
of Hormuz, but it still retains sizable operational capabilities in 
the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea. 
Each IRGCN naval district has unique responsibilities and 
capabilities. Different base designs and features offer some 
unique capabilities in line with their assigned roles and 
missions. Depending on their mission, each naval district 
includes one or more surface action group or brigade 
equipped with armed speedboats, one or more marine 
brigades, and one or more missile brigades (see the detailed 
table on preceding spread).

21
“IRGCN members are expected to prioritize revolutionary values over 
national interests and to take risks more readily by using the lead-from-
the-front model.”
especially now that the IRGCN headquarters has been moved 
from southeast Tehran to Bandar Abbas. Members of the 
IRGC are also expected by their leaders and commanders 
to assume responsibility, take initiative, and make initial 
decisions independently when necessary. However, 
persistent indoctrination can result in excessive risk-taking 
and an overconfident notion of insightfulness and divination 
(known as basirat in the Iranian ideo-political nomenclature) 
among personnel. When combined with insufficient training, 
this overinflated sense of insightfulness often can lead to 
disaster, as was demonstrated by the shooting down of the 
Ukrainian International Airlines passenger jet by an IRGC 
surface-to-air missile near Tehran in January 2020. The IRGC 
command, nevertheless, prides itself on its so-called “non-
conservativeness,” aka its mission-oriented commitment 
to safeguarding the Islamic Revolution anytime, anywhere, 
(almost) notwithstanding the consequences. 
Training
By 2016 the IRGCN had gradually concentrated all its training 
at its Imam Khamenei Naval Academy in Zibakenar, near 
Bandar-e Anzali on the Caspian coast. The complex includes 
several colleges, such as the Staff College, Naval Warfare 
College, Missile Warfare College, Aviation College, Seyed al-
Shohada Jihadi and Marine Training College, and UAV College. 
The naval academy also trains members of the “international 
axis of resistance,” including those from Lebanese Hezbollah, 
Palestinian Hamas, and the Yemeni Houthis, in an attempt to 
“expand the geography of resistance.”
26 
The IRGC is also believed to provide Shi’a cells in Bahrain 
and Saudi Arabia with arms and training to use them both as 
leverage against Saudi support for Iranian pan-Arab separatist 
movements as well as sleeper cells to instigate political and 
social instability in their respective countries.
The Final Word
A combination of strengths, weaknesses, and challenges defines 
Iran’s current stance in the Persian Gulf region. The Iranian 
military today almost completely relies on domestic industry 
and supplies sourced from across the country. The geography 
and proximity of supply sources and staging areas also play in 
the hands of the Iranians, and are combined with zealous and 
determined personnel, many of whom are recruited from local 
towns and villages and therefore accustomed to the region’s 
extreme environment. 
There have been concerns in Iran over the erosion of the IRGC’s 
revolutionary zeal in recent years, especially following the 2009 
street riots. However, it is not believed to affect the IRGCN’s 
overall performance in the Persian Gulf. 
Throughout recent years the IRGCN has invested in its potential 
opponents’ overreliance on large, generally vulnerable naval 
units and regional bases that are well within the range of Iran’s 
increasingly accurate missiles.
27 As a result the U.S. Navy 
maintains its carrier battle groups — when they are deployed to 
the CENTCOM area of responsibility — on station in the Arabian 
Sea outside the range of most Iranian missiles.
Given the dependency of the industrialized world on oil imports 
from the Persian Gulf area and the already high oil prices, even 
small disruptions in the flow of petroleum and LNG out of the 
area are expected to put upward pressure on prices with a risk of 
serious and far-reaching economic consequences. The region is 
also a major intersection of intercontinental data superhighways 
with substantial data traffic passing through submarine fiber-
optic cables and coastal nodes.
Such vulnerabilities, together with Iran’s geographical hold over 
the Hormuz chokepoint, give the Islamic Republic leverage 
over the world’s large economies, especially now that Iran 
has inaugurated the first phase of its crude oil export terminal 
outside the Strait of Hormuz. For its own imports of goods, 

22
the Iranians are increasingly confident of their ability to inflict 
a severe blow to the enemy, if not achieve an all-out victory, 
it will be highly unlikely that the Western powers will refrain 
from dislocating a major part of Iran’s conventional military 
infrastructure if the situation escalates into open conflict. 
No doubt for the time being Iran’s primary concerns in the 
region are defensive, and Tehran cannot forget that its own 
shaky economy largely depends on the freedom of navigation 
to and from the Persian Gulf region. Yet one cannot dismiss 
the possibility that the increasing confidence among certain 
influential circles in the Islamic Republic, when combined with 
revolutionary zeal and other geopolitical developments, could 
lead to a decision to preempt the “enemy” and try to remove the 
“threat” on its doorstep once and for all. This very risk requires 
much more effective deterrence as well as preparedness to 
cope with any eventuality. It is yet to be seen if any gradual U.S. 
de-prioritization of the Middle East and withdrawal from the Gulf 
region following a shift to great power competition in the Indo-
Pacific region will have any positive effect on Iran’s behavior 
— and that will also largely depend on the outcome of the future 
nuclear talks. But as CENTCOM Commander Gen. Kenneth F. 
McKenzie reminded his bosses in February, the Iranian regime’s 
continuing troubling behavior, which is causing an ongoing 
deterrence contest, combined with the increasing Chinese and 
Russian presence, is likely to keep the Persian Gulf region on the 
front pages for the foreseeable future.
28 
accounting for about 70% of its overall imports, Iran relies on 
Bandar Khomeini in the northern Gulf, Bandar Abbas, and the 
port of Chabahar.
Iran has vastly improved its air defense capabilities in recent 
years, but it is still believed to be vulnerable to determined 
airpower. Its known fleet and naval staging and support bases 
will be vulnerable as well, and it still lacks a reliable means for 
long-range intelligence collection. All of these factors make the 
sustained support of an operation to close the Strait of Hormuz, 
if Iran were ever to attempt it, difficult. 
In addition, reliance on offshore oil facilities as staging and/or 
surveillance posts makes them targets of retaliatory attacks, 
as was the case during the Iran-Iraq War of the 1980s, with 
potential for environmental disasters. The Iranians are also 
overconfident of their “asymmetric” capabilities and often tend 
to ignore the Americans’ own innovative and effective littoral 
special operations capabilities and tactics that have surprised 
them in the past and could continue to do so in the future. 
The most effective counter against an asymmetric swarming 
tactic would be an effective attempt at disrupting the “order” of 
the swarming vessels, achievable using weapons such as cluster 
bombs, AI-enabled small-diameter guided weapons, directed 
energy weapons, and cyber technology. 
Iran has the upper hand in offensive mine warfare in the Gulf 
region. Even though U.S. Navy’s floating forward base in the Gulf, 
such as the counter-mine support ship USS Ponce (LPD-15) and 
its replacement expeditionary mobile base platform ship USS 
Lewis B. Puller (ESB 3), can facilitate the deployment of mine-
clearing and special operations forces, they can only be partly 
effective and will require extensive force-protection in a dynamic 
combat situation in the Persian Gulf of today. 
Iran’s formidable arsenal of modern weapons is suited to its 
geography and asymmetric way of warfare, for defensive but 
also offensive purposes. Iran will also make extensive use of 
civilian infrastructure to cover its operations, potentially putting 
civilians at great risk. One example is its widespread deployment 
of mobile anti-ship missile batteries disguised as civilian trucks.
 
Iran might be capable of severely disrupting — or even 
temporarily blocking — navigation through the Strait of Hormuz, 
but in doing so it will risk a wider and longer confrontation 
with the United States and the international community. While 

23
ENDNOTES
1. Farzin Nadimi, Clarifying Freedom of Navigation in the Gulf, July 
24, 2019, PolicyWatch 3154, Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, available at https:/ /www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-
analysis/clarifying-freedom-navigation-gulf. 
2. For years voices were heard in Iran promoting Bab al-Mandab and 
the Red Sea as Iran’s new maritime national security perimeters. 
See ‘How far should Iran’s maritime national security perimeter 
extend?’, January 10, 2012, available from http:/ /www.tabnak.
ir/fa/news/218714/حریم-امنیت-ملی-دریایی-ایران-کجاستin Farsi). 
This website reflects the views of a former IRGC commander and 
current influential political and security figure.  
3. 2020 OPEC Annual Statistical Bulletin, Organization of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries, Vienna, 2020, available at https:/ /
www.opec.org/opec_web/en/publications/202.htm. 
4.  احداث پایگاه دائمی سپاه در اقیانوس هند؛ استراتژی نظامی
چیست؟June 24, 2020, www.ana.press/x6f8V. 
5. Choi, Timothy, ‘One Does not Simply ‘Close’ the Strait of Hormuz’, 
Canadian Naval Review, Vol. 8, No. 1 (Spring 2012), pp. 29-30. 
6. Those strong tidal streams also make minesweeping extremely 
difficult and time-consuming, and a high-threat environment 
makes use of AMCM helicopters extremely risky.  
7. Richard R. Hobbs, Naval Science, 4th edn, Naval Institute Press, 
Annapolis, Maryland, 1997, p. 230. 
8. It is well beyond the 3.6 km range of the Phalanx CIWS onboard 
American warships when used against the Iranian launch 
platforms. 
9. شلیک موشک بالستیک از اعماق زمین برای اولین بار در دنیا انجام شدJuly 29, 
2020, www.mshrgh.ir/1100676.  
10. رونمایی از شهر موشکی جدید نیروی دریایی سپاهMarch 15, 2021, https:/ /
www.iribnews.ir/00CnP9. 
11. Iran’s aspirations to dominate the Persian Gulf transpire in its 
naming of its latest missile. This missile was the pet-project of the 
same IRGC commander who was killed in a large explosion in Iran 
a few months ago. After photos surfaced on the Internet of what 
looked like an ARM version of Fateh, development of such weapon 
was acknowledged by an IRGC commander in July. See http:/ /
www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=13910411001071, July 1, 
2012 (in Farsi).  
12. The latest ‘fourth generation’ of Fateh is also said to incorporate 
terminal guidance with “pinpoint” accuracy. 
13. “We can produce missiles with ranges in excess of 2,000km” (in 
Farsi), July 9, 2011, available from http:/ /www.farsnews.com/
printable.php?nn=9004180006 and http:/ /www.kayhannews.
ir/900419/14.HTM#other1408. 
14. Iran is reportedly fielding an OTH surveillance radar with a range 
of over 3,000km. See http:/ /www.mehrnews.com/fa/newsdetail.
aspx?NewsID=1402310 (in Farsi). 
15. See Farzin Nadimi, The IRGC Lifts Off: Implications of Iran’s 
Satellite Launch, The Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, August 27, 2020, PDF available at https:/ /www.
washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/irgc-lifts-implications-
irans-satellite-launch  
16. The average depth in the Persian Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz is 
164 feet (50m), with a maximum depth of 197-328 feet (60-
100m) at the entrance to the Strait. 
17. ترین زیردریایی کشور مراسم رونمایی”فاتح” پیشرفتهFebruary 2019, https:/ /
www.isna.ir/news/97112814764/ 
 
18. تجهیز زیردریایی غدیر به موشک های زیرسطحی به سطحDecember, 2, 2018, 
https:/ /www.khabaronline.ir/news/1208899 
 
19. شلیک موفق موشک زیرسطح به سطح از زیردریایی کلاس غدیرSeptember 11, 
2020, https:/ /www.mehrnews.com/xSHjD  

24
20. U.S. Central Command Dhow Interdictions, February 19, 2020, 
https:/ /www.centcom.mil/MEDIA/NEWS-ARTICLES/News-Article-
View/Article/2087998/us-dhow-interdictions/#pop4016320.  
21. See Stephen J. Thorne, March 28, 2018, Climb aboard a water-
borne improvised explosive device, https:/ /legionmagazine.com/
en/2018/03/climb-aboard-a-water-borne-improvised-explosive-
device/. 
22. As highlighted in the leaked Iranian Hoot test reports. Those 
detailed and seemingly genuine reports of the joint Iranian-
Russian Shkval tests in the Persian Gulf in February 2004, and a 
contract in 2008 to reverse-engineer its propulsion system within 
two years by IRGCN, can be found at http:/ /www.fas.org/nuke/
guide/iran/missile/hoot/index.html (in Farsi). 
23. Deborah Haynes, Iran’s Secret Cyber Files, Sky News, July 26, 
2021, available at https:/ /news.sky.com/story/irans-secret-
cyber-files-on-how-cargo-ships-and-petrol-stations-could-be-
attacked-12364871  
24. پیمای شهید رودکی به نیروی دریایی سپاه الحاق ناو اقیانوسNovember, 19, 
2020, https:/ /www.iribnews.ir/00CFp7 
25. ستاد فرماندهی نیروی دریایی ارتش به بندرعباس انتقال یافتNovember 21, 
2019, www.irna.ir/news/83563745/  
26.  نقشه نبرد ما با دشمنان هنوز کامل نیست، باید جغرافیای مقاومت را گسترش
دهیمOctober 9, 2019. https:/ /www.iribnews.ir/00AfsU 
27. Annual Congressional Report on Military Power of Iran, U.S. 
Department of Defense, April 2012, p. 4. Available online at http:/ /
www.fas.org/man/eprint/dod-iran.pdf. 
28. Jim Garamone, Great power competition adds to challenges in 
Middle East, February 9, 2021, https:/ /www.centcom.mil/MEDIA/
NEWS-ARTICLES/News-Article-View/Article/2498619/great-
power-competition-adds-to-challenges-in-middle-east/ 

25

WWW.MEI.EDU
