 
201The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
China
Dean Cheng
I
n its 2021 Interim National Security Strategic 
Guidance, the Biden Administration made clear 
that it sees China as a major and growing threat: 
“China…has rapidly become more assertive” and “is 
the only competitor potentially capable of combin -
ing its economic, diplomatic, military, and techno -
logical power to mount a sustained challenge to a 
stable and open international system.1
While this is labeled an interim guidance, it 
probably will be reﬂected eventually in the Admin -
istration’s full National Security Strategy when 
it is issued.
Threats to the Homeland
Both China and Russia are seen as revisionist 
powers, but they pose very diﬀerent challenges to 
the United States. The People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) has the world’s second-largest gross domes -
tic product (GDP), and its economy as measured in 
terms of purchasing power parity (PPP) is far larg -
er than the U.S. economy.2 China is also an integral 
and important part of the global supply chain for 
crucial technologies, especially those relating to 
information and communications technology. As 
a result, it has the resources to support a compre -
hensive military modernization program that has 
been ongoing for more than two decades and spans 
the conventional, space, and cyber realms as well as 
weapons of mass destruction, an area that includes a 
multipronged nuclear modernization eﬀort.
At the same time, the PRC has been acting more 
assertively—even aggressively—against a growing 
number of its neighbors. Unresolved land and mar -
itime disputes have led Beijing to adopt an increas -
ingly confrontational attitude toward territorial 
disputes in the South China Sea, in the East China 
Sea, and along the China–India border, and Beijing’s 
reaction to the Democratic Progressive Party’s victo-
ries in Taiwan’s 2016 and 2020 elections has height-
ened cross-Strait tensions.
In May 2020, the U.S.–China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission reported that, “[w]ith the 
world distracted by COVID-19, China also inten -
siﬁed its multi-faceted pressure campaign against 
Taiwan. Chinese military aircraft crossed the me -
dian line of the Taiwan Strait three times in the 
early months of 2020 after only one such incursion 
in 2019.” The commission further noted that Chi -
na conducted several provocative military exercis -
es around the island and “continued its eﬀorts to 
poach Taiwan’s remaining diplomatic allies as the 
virus spread.”3 Since then, China has been intruding 
regularly across the median line of the Taiwan Strait 
with ever-larger groups of aircraft.
Meanwhile, China’s attempts to obscure the or -
igins of the COVID-19 pandemic and stiﬂe interna -
tional investigations into the matter have under -
mined global health eﬀorts. Beijing has also sought 
to exclude Taiwan from multilateral eﬀorts to com-
bat the pandemic.
Growing Conventional Capabilities. The Chi-
nese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) remains one of 
the world’s largest militaries, but its days of largely 
obsolescent equipment are in the past. Nearly two 
decades of officially acknowledged double-digit 
growth in the Chinese defense budget have resulted 
in a comprehensive modernization program that has 
beneﬁted every part of the PLA. This has been com-
plemented by improvements in Chinese military 
training and, in 2015, the largest reorganization in 
the PLA’s history.4 The PLA has lost 300,000 person-
nel since those reforms, but its overall capabilities 
have increased as newer, much more sophisticated 
systems have replaced older platforms.

 
202 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
A major part of the 2015 reorganization was the 
establishment of a separate ground forces head -
quarters and bureaucracy; previously, the ground 
forces had been the default service providing staﬀs 
and commanders. Now the PLA Army (PLAA), re -
sponsible for the PLA’s ground forces, is no longer 
automatically in charge of war zones or higher head-
quarters functions. At the same time, the PLAA has 
steadily modernized its capabilities, incorporating 
both new equipment and a new organization. It has 
shifted from a division-based structure toward a bri-
gade-based one and has been improving its mobility, 
including heliborne infantry and ﬁre support.5 These 
forces are increasingly equipped with modern ar -
mored ﬁghting vehicles, air defenses, both tube and 
rocket artillery, and electronic support equipment.
The PLA Navy (PLAN) is Asia’s largest navy “and 
within the past few years…has surpassed the U.S. 
Navy in numbers of battle force ships (meaning the 
types of ships that count toward the quoted size of 
the U.S. Navy).”6 According to the U.S. Department 
of Defense (DOD):
The PLAN is the largest navy in the world with 
a battle force of approximately 355 platforms, 
including major surface combatants, subma-
rines, aircraft carriers, ocean-going amphibious 
ships, mine warfare ships, and ﬂeet auxiliaries. 
This ﬁgure does not include 85 patrol com-
batants and craft that carry anti-ship cruise 
missiles (ASCMs). The PLAN’s overall battle 
force is expected to grow to 420 ships by 2025 
and 460 ships by 2030.7
Although the total number of ships has dropped, 
the PLAN has ﬁelded increasingly sophisticated and 
capable multi-role ships. Multiple classes of surface 
combatants are now in series production, including 
the Type 055 cruiser and the Type 052C and Type 
052D guided missile destroyers, each of which ﬁelds 
long-range surface-to-air missile (SAM) and an -
ti-ship cruise missile systems, as well as the Type 
054 frigate and Type 056 corvette.
The PLAN has similarly been modernizing its 
submarine force. Since 2000, the PLAN has consis -
tently ﬁelded between 50 and 60 diesel-electric sub-
marines, but the age and capability of the force have 
been improving as older boats, especially 1950s-vin-
tage Romeo-class boats, are replaced with newer de-
signs. These include a dozen Kilo-class submarines 
purchased from Russia and domestically designed 
and manufactured Song and Yuan classes. All of 
these are believed to be capable of ﬁring both tor -
pedoes and anti-ship cruise missiles.8 The Chinese 
have also developed variants of the Yuan, with an 
air-independent propulsion (AIP) system that re -
duces the boats’ vulnerability by removing the need 
to use noisy diesel engines to recharge batteries, and 
are “expected to produce a total of 25 or more Yuan 
class submarines by 2025.”9
The PLAN has been expanding its amphibious as-
sault capabilities as well. The PLA Marine Corps, for 
example, is China’s counterpart to the U.S. Marine 
Corps. According to the DOD:
The PLANMC previously consisted of two 
brigades (approximately 10,000 personnel) 
and was limited in geography and mission to 
amphibious assault and defense of South China 
Sea outposts. In 2020, the PLANMC continued 
to mature an enlarged force structure of eight 
brigades intended to be scalable and mobile, 
modernize its capabilities for joint expeditionary 
operations—including operations beyond the 
First Island Chain—and become more proﬁcient 
in conventional and irregular warfare. Through-
out 2020, the PLANMC continued to work to-
wards fully equipping and training its four newly 
established maneuver brigades (in addition to 
its two previously existing brigades), a SOF bri-
gade, and an aviation (helicopter) brigade.10
To move this force, the Chinese have begun to 
build more amphibious assault ships, including 
Type 071 amphibious transport docks. 11 Each can 
carry about 800 naval infantrymen and move them 
to shore by means of four air-cushion landing craft 
and four helicopters.
Supporting these expanded naval combat forces 
is a growing ﬂeet of support and logistics vessels. The 
2010 PRC defense white paper noted the accelerated 
construction of “large support vessels.” It also noted 
speciﬁcally that the navy is exploring “new meth -
ods of logistics support for sustaining long-time 
maritime missions.” 12 These include tankers and 
fast combat support ships that extend the range of 
Chinese surface groups and allow them to operate 
for more prolonged periods away from main ports. 
Chinese naval task forces dispatched to the Gulf of 
Aden have typically included such vessels.

 
203The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
The PLAN has also been expanding its naval avi -
ation capabilities, the most publicized element of 
which has been the growing Chinese carrier ﬂeet. 
This currently includes not only the Liaoning, pur-
chased from Ukraine over a decade ago, but a domes-
tically produced copy, the Shandong, that completed 
its ﬁrst exercise in 2021.13 Both of these ships have 
ski jumps for their air wing, but the Chinese are also 
building several conventional takeoﬀ/barrier land -
ing (CATOBAR) carriers (like American or French 
aircraft carriers) that will employ catapults and 
therefore allow their air complement to carry more 
ordnance and/or fuel.14
The PLAN’s land-based element is modernizing 
as well, with a variety of long-range strike aircraft, 
anti-ship cruise missiles, and unmanned aerial ve -
hicles (UAVs) entering the inventory. In addition 
to more modern versions of the H-6 twin-engine 
bomber (a version of the Soviet/Russian Tu-16 Bad-
ger), the PLAN’s Naval Aviation force has added a 
range of other strike aircraft to its inventory. These 
include the JH-7 /FBC-1 Flying Leopard, which can 
carry between two and four YJ-82 anti-ship cruise 
missiles, and the Su-30 strike ﬁghter.
The PLA Air Force (PLAAF), with more than 
1,700 combat aircraft, is Asia’s largest air force. It has 
shifted steadily from a force focused on homeland 
air defense to one that is capable of power projection, 
including long-range precision strikes against both 
land and maritime targets. The DOD’s 2021 report 
on Chinese capabilities notes that:
Although they currently have limited power 
projection capability, both the PLAAF and 
PLAN Aviation are seeking to extend their 
reach. The PLAAF, in particular, has received 
repeated calls from its leadership to become a 
truly “strategic” air force, able to project power 
at long distances and support Chinese national 
interests wherever they extend.15
The PLAAF currently has more than 700 
fourth-generation ﬁghters that are comparable to 
the U.S. F-15, F-16, and F-18. They include the do -
mestically designed and produced J-10 as well as the 
Su-27 /Su-30/J-11 system, which is comparable to 
the F-15 or F-18 and dominates both the ﬁghter and 
strike missions. 16 China is also believed to be pre -
paring to ﬁeld two stealthy ﬁfth-generation ﬁghter 
designs. The J-20 is the larger aircraft and resembles 
the American F-22 ﬁghter. The J-31 appears to re -
semble the F-35 but with two engines rather than 
one. The production of advanced combat aircraft 
engines remains one of the greatest challenges to 
Chinese ﬁghter design.
The PLAAF is also deploying increasing numbers 
of H-6 bombers, which can undertake longer-range 
strike operations including operations employing 
land-attack cruise missiles. Although the H-6, like 
the American B-52 and Russian Tu-95, is a 1950s-era 
design copied from the Soviet-era Tu-16 Badger 
bomber, the latest versions (H-6K) are equipped 
with updated electronics and engines and are made 
of carbon composites. In addition, China is develop-
ing the H-20, a ﬂying wing–type stealth bomber that 
is probably similar to the U.S. B-2.17
Equally important, the PLAAF has been intro -
ducing a variety of support aircraft, including air -
borne early warning (AEW), command and control 
(C2), and electronic warfare (EW) aircraft. These 
systems field state-of-the-art radars and elec -
tronic surveillance systems that allow Chinese air 
commanders to detect potential targets, including 
low-ﬂying aircraft and cruise missiles, more quickly 
and gather additional intelligence on adversary ra -
dars and electronic emissions. China’s combat air -
craft are also increasingly capable of undertaking 
mid-air refueling, which allows them to conduct ex-
tended, sustained operations, and the Chinese aerial 
tanker ﬂeet, which is based on the H-6 aircraft, has 
been expanding.
At the biennial Zhuhai Air Show, Chinese com -
panies have displayed a variety of unmanned aerial 
vehicles that reﬂect substantial investments and re-
search and development eﬀorts. The surveillance 
and armed UAV systems include the Xianglong 
(Soaring Dragon) and Sky Saber systems. The DOD’s 
2019 report on Chinese capabilities stated that 
China had “successfully tested the AT-200, which 
it claims is the ‘world’s ﬁrst large cargo UAV ,’” and 
further speciﬁed that “[t]his drone can carry up to 
1.5 tons of cargo and… may be especially suited to 
provide logistic support to PLA forces in the South 
China Sea.”18 Chinese UAVs have been included in 
various military parades over the past several years, 
suggesting that they are being incorporated into 
Chinese forces, and the DOD’s 2021 report on Chi -
nese capabilities states that “The PLAAF continues 
to modernize with the delivery of domestically built 
aircraft and a wide range of UAVs.”19

 
204 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
The PLAAF is also responsible for the Chinese 
homeland’s strategic air defenses. Its array of sur -
face-to-air missile batteries is one of the world’s 
largest and includes the Russian S-300 (SA-10B/
SA-20) and its Chinese counterpart, the Hongqi-9 
long-range SAM. The S-400 series of Russian long-
range SAMs, delivery of which began in 2018, mark 
a substantial improvement in PLAAF air defense 
capabilities, as the S-400 has both anti-aircraft and 
anti-missile capabilities.20 China has deployed these 
SAM systems in a dense, overlapping belt along its 
coast, protecting the nation’s economic center of 
gravity. Key industrial and military centers such as 
Beijing are also heavily defended by SAM systems.
China’s airborne forces are part of the PLAAF . 
The 15th Airborne Corps has been reorganized from 
three airborne divisions to six airborne brigades in 
addition to a special operations brigade, an aviation 
brigade, and a support brigade. These forces have 
been incorporating indigenously developed air -
borne mechanized combat vehicles for the past de -
cade, giving them more mobility and a better ability 
to engage armored forces.
Nuclear Capability.  Chinese nuclear forces 
are the responsibility of the PLA Rocket Forces 
(PLARF), one of the three new services created on 
December 31, 2015. China’s nuclear ballistic missile 
forces include land-based missiles with a range of 
13,000 kilometers that can reach the U.S. and CSS-
4 and submarine-based missiles that can reach 
the U.S. when the submarine is deployed within 
missile range.
The PRC became a nuclear power in 1964 when 
it exploded its ﬁrst atomic bomb as part of its “two 
bombs, one satellite” eﬀort. China then exploded 
its ﬁrst thermonuclear bomb in 1967 and orbited its 
ﬁrst satellite in 1970, demonstrating the capability to 
build a delivery system that can reach the ends of the 
Earth. China chose to rely primarily on a land-based 
nuclear deterrent instead of developing two or three 
diﬀerent basing systems as the United States did.
Unlike the United States or the Soviet Union, 
China chose to pursue only a minimal nuclear deter-
rent. The PRC ﬁelded only a small number of nuclear 
weapons: 100–150 weapons on medium-range ballis-
tic missiles and approximately 60 intercontinental 
ballistic missiles (ICBMs). Its only ballistic missile 
submarine (SSBN) conducted relatively few deter -
rence patrols (perhaps none),21 and its ﬁrst-genera-
tion submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM), 
the JL-1, if it ever attained full operational capability 
had limited reach. The JL-1’s 1,700-kilometer range 
makes it comparable to the ﬁrst-generation Polaris 
A1 missile ﬁelded by the U.S. in the 1960s.
After remaining stable for several decades, Chi -
na’s nuclear force became part of Beijing’s two-de -
cade modernization effort. The result has been 
both modernization and expansion of the Chinese 
nuclear deterrent. The core of China’s ICBM force 
is the DF-31 series, a solid-fueled, road-mobile sys -
tem, along with a growing number of longer-range, 
road-mobile DF-41 missiles that may already be in 
the PLA operational inventory. The DOD’s 2019 re-
port on Chinese capabilities characterized the DF-41 
as “a new MIRV-capable, road-mobile ICBM,”22 and 
its 2021 report (as have previous reports) again 
states that “China appears to be considering addi -
tional DF-41 launch options, including rail-mobile 
and silo basing.”23 China’s medium-range nuclear 
forces have similarly shifted to mobile, solid-rocket 
systems so that they are both more survivable and 
more easily maintained.
This past year has seen a sudden inﬂation in the 
number of strategic nuclear warheads available to 
the PLA Rocket Force. Imagery analysts at several 
think tanks discovered at least three ﬁelds of silos 
under construction in western China. 24 Each ap -
pears to contain around 100 silos, indicating that 
China could expand its land-based nuclear deterrent 
component by more than an order of magnitude.
Notably, the Chinese are also expanding their bal-
listic missile submarine ﬂeet. Replacing the one Type 
092 Xia-class SSBN are six Type 094 Jin-class SSBNs, 
all of which are operational. Equipped with the lon-
ger-range JL-2 SLBM, “the PLAN’s six operational 
Jin class SSBNs represent the PRC’s ﬁrst credible 
sea-based nuclear deterrent.” In addition, “[e]ach 
Jin class SSBN can carry up to 12 JL-2 SLBMs.”25
There is some possibility that the Chinese nucle-
ar arsenal now contains land-attack cruise missiles. 
The CJ-20, a long-range, air-launched cruise mis -
sile carried on China’s H-6 bomber, may be nucle -
ar-tipped, although there is not much evidence that 
China has pursued such a capability. China is also 
believed to be working on a cruise missile subma -
rine that, if equipped with nuclear cruise missiles, 
would further expand the range of its nuclear at -
tack options.26
As a result of its modernization eﬀorts, China’s 
nuclear forces appear to be shifting from a minimal 

 
205The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
deterrent posture, suited only to responding to an at-
tack and then with only limited numbers, to a more 
robust but still limited deterrent posture. While 
the PRC will still likely ﬁeld fewer nuclear weapons 
than either the United States or Russia, it will ﬁeld 
a more modern and diverse set of capabilities than 
India, Pakistan, or North Korea, its nuclear-armed 
neighbors, are capable of ﬁelding. If there are corre-
sponding changes in doctrine, modernization will 
enable China to engage in limited nuclear options 
in the event of a conﬂict.
This assessment changes, however, if the missiles 
going into the newly discovered silos are equipped 
with MIRVs (multiple independently targetable re-
entry vehicles). With ﬁve MIRVs atop each missile, 
for example, 300 new ICBMs would have some 1,500 
warheads—equivalent to the U.S. and Russian num-
bers allowed under New START. Even with fewer 
than 300 ICBMs, the new SLBMs and new bombers 
would enable China, within a few years, to ﬁeld as 
large a nuclear force as the United States or Russia 
is capable of ﬁelding.
In addition to strategic nuclear forces, the PLARF 
has responsibility for medium-range and interme -
diate-range ballistic missile (MRBM and IRBM) 
forces. These include (among others) the DF-21 
MRBM, which has a range of approximately 1,500 
kilometers, and the DF-26 IRBM, which has a range 
of approximately 3,000 kilometers and “is capable 
of conducting precision conventional or nuclear 
strikes against ground targets, such as U.S. military 
bases on Guam, as well as against maritime targets.”27 
It is believed that Chinese missile brigades equipped 
with these systems may have both nuclear and con -
ventional responsibilities, making any deployment 
from garrison much more ambiguous from a stabil -
ity perspective. The expansion of these forces also 
raises questions about the total number of Chinese 
nuclear warheads.
While it is unclear whether they are nucle -
ar-armed, China’s hypersonic glide vehicles also 
pose a growing threat to the United States and its 
allies. Hypersonic glide vehicles are slower than 
ICBMs—Mach 5 for a hypersonic vehicle as opposed 
to Mach 25 for an ICBM warhead—but are designed 
to maneuver during their descent, making inter -
ception far more diﬃcult. During a Chinese test in 
August 2021, a hypersonic vehicle apparently went 
into orbit.28 This creates a fundamentally diﬀerent 
threat, as a fractional orbital bombardment system 
(FOBS) could allow attacks from southern trajecto-
ries (that is, from over the South Pole) or even the 
placement of warheads in orbit, which would make 
them almost impossible to intercept. Even without 
a nuclear warhead, an orbiting hypersonic vehicle 
could do enormous damage to a city or a military 
facility such as an air base or an ICBM silo. Nota -
bly, because of the strategic instability that FOBS 
programs would introduce, neither the U.S. nor the 
Soviet Union ever pursued them.
Cyber and Space Capabilities. The PLA’s major 
2015 reorganization included creation of the PLA 
Strategic Support Force (PLASSF), which brings 
the Chinese military’s electronic, network (includ -
ing cyber), and space warfare forces under a single 
service umbrella. Previously, these capabilities had 
been embedded in diﬀerent departments across 
the PLA’s General Staﬀ Department and General 
Armaments Department. By consolidating them 
into a single service, the PLA has created a Chinese 
“information warfare” force that is responsible for 
oﬀensive and defensive operations in the electro -
magnetic and space domains.
Chinese network warfare forces are known to 
have conducted a variety of cyber and network re -
connaissance operations as well as cyber economic 
espionage. In 2014, the U.S. Department of Justice 
charged PLA oﬃcers from Unit 61398, then of the 
General Staﬀ Department’s 3rd Department, with 
the theft of intellectual property and implanting of 
malware in various commercial ﬁrms. 29 Members 
of that unit are thought also to be part of Advanced 
Persistent Threat-1, a group of computer hackers 
believed to be operating on behalf of a nation-state 
rather than a criminal group. In 2020, the Depart -
ment of Justice charged several PLA oﬃcers with 
one of the largest breaches in history: stealing the 
credit ratings and records of 147 million people 
from Equifax.30
The PRC has been conducting space operations 
since 1970 when it ﬁrst orbited a satellite, but its space 
capabilities didn’t gain public prominence until 2007 
when the PLA conducted an anti-satellite (ASAT) test 
in low-Earth orbit against a defunct Chinese weather 
satellite. The test became one of the worst debris-gen-
erating incidents of the space age: Many of the sever-
al thousand pieces of debris that were generated will 
remain in orbit for more than a century.
Equally important, Chinese counter-space eﬀorts 
have been expanding steadily. The PLA not only has 

 
206 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
tested ASATs against low-Earth orbit systems, but 
also is believed to have tested a system designed to 
attack targets at geosynchronous orbit (GEO) ap -
proximately 22,000 miles above the Earth. As many 
vital satellites are at GEO, including communica -
tions and missile early-warning systems, China’s 
ability to target such systems constitutes a major 
threat. In early 2022, China’s Shijian-22 towed a 
dead Chinese satellite into a “graveyard” orbit above 
the GEO belt.31 While this was oﬃcially touted as a 
servicing operation, the ability to attach one satellite 
to another and then tow it also has potential military 
implications.
The creation of the PLASSF , incorporating count-
er-space forces, reﬂects the movement of count -
er-space systems, including direct-ascent ASATs, 
out of the testing phase to ﬁelding with units. In 
2018, for example, the U.S. National Air and Space 
Intelligence Center (NASIC) noted that “China has 
military units that have begun training with anti-sat-
ellite missiles.”32
Threats to the Commons
The U.S. has critical sea, air, space, and cyber in-
terests at stake in the East Asia and South Asia inter-
national common spaces. These interests include an 
economic interest in the free ﬂow of commerce and 
the military use of the commons to safeguard Amer-
ica’s own security and contribute to the security of 
its allies and partners.
Washington has long provided the security back-
bone in these areas, and this in turn has supported 
the region’s remarkable economic development. 
However, China is taking increasingly assertive 
steps—including the construction of islands atop 
previously submerged features—to secure its own 
interests, and two things seem obvious: China and 
the United States do not share a common conception 
of international space, and China is actively seeking 
to undermine American predominance in securing 
international common spaces.
In addition, as China expands its naval capabili -
ties, it will be present farther and farther away from 
its home shores. As part of this eﬀort, it established 
its ﬁrst formal overseas military base in 2017 pursu-
ant to an agreement with the government of Djibouti.
Dangerous Behavior in the Maritime and 
Airspace Common Spaces. The aggressiveness of 
the Chinese navy, maritime law enforcement forc -
es, and air forces in and over the waters of the East 
China Sea and South China Sea, coupled with ambig-
uous, extralegal territorial claims and assertion of 
control there, poses an incipient threat to American 
and overlapping allied interests. Chinese military 
writings emphasize the importance of establishing 
dominance of the air and maritime domains in any 
future conﬂict.
Although the Chinese do not necessarily have 
suﬃcient capacity to prevent the U.S. from oper -
ating in local waters and airspace, the ability of the 
U.S. to take control at acceptable costs in the early 
stages of a conﬂict has become a matter of greater 
debate.33 A signiﬁcant factor in this calculus is the 
fact that China has “fully militarized at least three of 
several islands it built in the disputed South China 
Sea, arming them with anti-ship and anti-aircraft 
missile systems, laser and jamming equipment and 
ﬁghter jets in an increasingly aggressive move that 
threatens all nations operating nearby.”34 China also 
has been intensifying its challenges to long-standing 
rivals Vietnam and the Philippines and has begun to 
push toward Indonesia’s Natuna Islands and into 
waters claimed by Malaysia.
It is unclear whether China is yet in a position to 
enforce an air defense identiﬁcation zone (ADIZ) 
consistently, but the steady two-decade improvement 
of the PLAAF and PLAN naval aviation will eventually 
provide the necessary capabilities. Chinese observa-
tions of recent conﬂicts, including wars in the Persian 
Gulf, the Balkans, and Afghanistan, have emphasized 
the growing role of airpower and missiles in conduct-
ing “non-contact, non-linear, non-symmetrical” war-
fare.35 This growing parity, if not superiority, consti-
tutes a radical shift from the Cold War era when the 
U.S. and its allies clearly would have dominated air 
and naval operations in the Paciﬁc.
China has also begun to employ nontraditional 
methods of challenging foreign military operations 
in what Beijing regards as its territorial waters and 
airspace. It has employed lasers, for example, against 
foreign air and naval platforms, endangering pilots 
and sailors by threatening to blind them.36
Increased Military Space Activity.  One of 
the key force multipliers for the United States is its 
extensive array of space-based assets. Through its 
various satellite constellations, the U.S. military can 
track opponents, coordinate friendly forces, engage 
in precision strikes against enemy forces, and con -
duct battle-damage assessments so that its muni -
tions are expended eﬃciently.

 
207The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
Because the American military is expedition -
ary—meaning that its wars are fought far from the 
homeland—its reliance on space-based systems is 
greater than that of many other militaries. Conse -
quently, it requires global rather than regional re -
connaissance, communications and data transmis -
sion, and meteorological information and support. 
At this point, only space-based systems can provide 
this sort of information on a real-time basis. No oth-
er country is capable of leveraging space as the U.S. 
does, and that is a major advantage. However, this 
heavy reliance on space systems is also a key Amer -
ican vulnerability.
China ﬁelds an array of space capabilities, includ-
ing its own BeiDou/Compass system of navigation 
and timing satellites, and has claimed a capacity to 
refuel satellites.37 It has four satellite launch centers. 
China’s interest in space dominance includes not 
only accessing space, but also denying opponents 
the ability to do the same. As one Chinese assess -
ment notes, space capabilities provided 70 percent 
of battleﬁeld communications, more than 80 per -
cent of battleﬁeld reconnaissance and surveillance, 
and 100 percent of meteorological information 
for American operations in Kosovo. Moreover, 98 
percent of precision munitions relied on space for 
guidance information. In fact, “[i]t may be said that 
America’s victory in the Kosovo War could not [have 
been] achieved without fully exploiting space.”38
To this end, the PLA has been developing a range 
of anti-satellite capabilities that include both hard-
kill and soft-kill systems. The former include di -
rect-ascent kinetic-kill vehicles (DA-KKV) such as 
the system famously tested in 2007, but they also 
include more advanced systems that are believed 
to be capable of reaching targets in mid-Earth orbit 
and even geosynchronous orbit.39 The latter include 
anti-satellite lasers for either dazzling or blinding 
purposes.40 This is consistent with PLA doctrinal 
writings, which emphasize the need to control space 
in future conﬂicts. “Securing space dominance has 
already become the prerequisite for establishing in-
formation, air, and maritime dominance,” says one 
Chinese teaching manual, “and will directly aﬀect 
the course and outcome of wars.”41
Soft-kill attacks need not come only from ded -
icated weapons, however. The case of Galaxy-15, a 
communications satellite owned by Intelsat Cor -
poration, showed how a satellite could disrupt com-
munications simply by always being in “switched on” 
mode.42 Before it was ﬁnally brought under control, 
it had drifted through a portion of the geosynchro -
nous belt, forcing other satellite owners to move 
their assets and juggle frequencies. A deliberate 
such attempt by China (or any other country) could 
prove far harder to handle, especially if conducted 
in conjunction with attacks by kinetic systems or 
directed-energy weapons.
Most recently, China has landed an unmanned 
probe at the lunar south pole on the far side of the 
Moon. This is a major accomplishment because the 
probe is the ﬁrst spacecraft ever to land at either 
of the Moon’s poles. To support this mission, the 
Chinese deployed a data relay satellite to Lagrange 
Point-2, one of ﬁve points where the gravity wells 
of the Earth and Sun “cancel out” each other, al -
lowing a satellite to remain in a relatively ﬁxed lo -
cation with minimal fuel consumption. While the 
satellite itself may or may not have military roles, 
the deployment highlights that China will now be 
using the enormous volume of cis-lunar space (the 
region between the Earth and the Moon) for various 
deployments. This will greatly complicate Ameri -
can space situational awareness eﬀorts by forcing 
the U.S. to monitor a vastly greater area of space for 
possible Chinese spacecraft. The Chinese Chang’e-5 
lunar sample retrieval mission in 2020 and the re -
cent Chinese landing on Mars underscore China’s 
eﬀort to move beyond Earth orbit to cis-lunar and 
interplanetary space.
Cyber Activities and the Electromagnetic 
Domain. As far back as 2013, the Verizon Risk Cen-
ter identiﬁed China as the “top external actor from 
which [computer] breaches emanated, representing 
30 percent of cases where country-of-origin could be 
determined.”43 Given the diﬃculties of attribution, 
country of origin should not necessarily be conﬂated 
with perpetrator, but forensic eﬀorts have associ -
ated at least one Chinese military unit with cyber 
intrusions, albeit many years ago.44 The Verizon re-
port similarly concluded that China was the source 
of 95 percent of state-sponsored cyber espionage 
attacks. Since the 2015 summit meeting between 
Chinese President Xi Jinping and U.S. President 
Barack Obama, during which the two sides reached 
an understanding to reduce cyber economic espio -
nage, Chinese cyber actions have shifted. Although 
the overall level of activity appears to be unabated, 
the Chinese seem to have moved toward more fo -
cused attacks mounted from new sites.

 
208 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
China’s cyber espionage eﬀorts are often aimed 
at economic targets, reﬂecting China’s much more 
holistic view of both security and information. Rath-
er than creating an artiﬁcial dividing line between 
military security and civilian security, much less in-
formation, the PLA plays a role in supporting both 
aspects and seeks to obtain economic intellectual 
property as well as military electronic information.
This is not to suggest that the PLA has not em -
phasized the military importance of cyber warfare. 
Chinese military writings since the 1990s have em -
phasized a fundamental transformation in glob -
al military aﬀairs. Future wars will be conducted 
through joint operations involving multiple services, 
not through combined operations focused on mul -
tiple branches within a single service, and will span 
not only the traditional land, sea, and air domains, 
but also outer space and cyberspace. The latter two 
arenas will be of special importance because warfare 
has shifted from an eﬀort to establish material dom-
inance (characteristic of industrial age warfare) to 
establishing information dominance. This is due to 
the rise of the information age and the resulting in -
troduction of information technology into all areas 
of military operations.
Consequently, according to PLA analysis, future 
wars will most likely be “informationized local wars.” 
That is, they will be wars in which information and 
information technology will be both widely applied 
and a key basis of victory. The ability to gather, trans-
mit, analyze, manage, and exploit information will 
be central to winning such wars: The side that is 
able to do these things more accurately and more 
quickly will be the side that wins. This means that 
future conﬂicts will no longer be determined by plat-
form-versus-platform performance and not even by 
system against system: Conﬂicts are now clashes be-
tween rival systems of systems.45
Chinese military writings suggest that a great 
deal of attention has been focused on developing an 
integrated computer network and electronic warfare 
(INEW) capability. This would allow the PLA to re -
connoiter a potential adversary’s computer systems 
in peacetime, inﬂuence opponent decision-makers 
by threatening those same systems in times of crisis, 
and disrupt or destroy information networks and 
systems by cyber and electronic warfare means in 
the event of conﬂict. INEW capabilities would com-
plement psychological warfare and physical attack 
eﬀorts to secure “information dominance,” which 
Chinese military writings emphasize as essential for 
ﬁghting and winning future wars.
It is essential to recognize, however, that the 
PLA views computer network operations as part 
of information operations, or information combat. 
Information operations are speciﬁc operational ac -
tivities that are associated with striving to establish 
information dominance. They are conducted in both 
peacetime and wartime with the peacetime focus on 
collecting information, improving its ﬂow and appli-
cation, inﬂuencing opposing decision-making, and 
eﬀecting information deterrence.
I n f o r m a t i o n  o p e r a t i o n s  i nv o l v e  f o u r 
mission areas:
 l Command and Control Missions. An essen-
tial part of information operations is the ability 
of commanders to control joint operations by 
disparate forces. Command, control, commu-
nications, computers, intelligence, surveil-
lance, and reconnaissance structures therefore 
constitute a key part of information operations 
by providing the means for collecting, transmit-
ting, and managing information.
 l Oﬀensive Information Missions. These are 
intended to disrupt the enemy’s battleﬁeld 
command and control systems and commu-
nications networks, as well as to strike the 
enemy’s psychological defenses.
 l Defensive Information Missions. Such 
missions are aimed at ensuring the surviv-
al and continued operation of information 
systems. They include deterring an opponent 
from attacking one’s own information systems, 
concealing information, and combating attacks 
when they do occur.
 l Information Support and Informa-
tion-Safeguarding Missions. The ability 
to provide the myriad types of information 
necessary to support extensive joint operations 
and to do so on a continuous basis is essential 
to their success.46
Computer network operations are integral to all 
four of these overall mission areas. They can include 
both strategic and battleﬁeld network operations 
and can incorporate both oﬀensive and defensive 

 
209The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
measures. They also include protection not only of 
data, but also of information hardware and operat -
ing software.
Finally, computer network operations will not 
stand alone; they will be integrated with electronic 
warfare operations as reﬂected in the phrase “net -
work and electronics uniﬁed.” Electronic warfare 
operations are aimed at weakening or destroying en-
emy electronic facilities and systems while defend -
ing one’s own.47 The combination of electronic and 
computer network attacks will produce synergies 
that aﬀect everything from ﬁnding and assessing the 
adversary, to locating one’s own forces, to weapons 
guidance, to logistical support and command and 
control. The creation of the PLASSF is intended to 
integrate these forces and make them more comple-
mentary and eﬀective in future “local wars under 
informationized conditions.”
Threat of Regional War
Three issues, all involving China, threaten Amer-
ican interests and embody the “general threat of re-
gional war” noted at the outset of this section: the 
status of Taiwan, the escalation of maritime and 
territorial disputes, and border conﬂict with India.
Taiwan. China’s long-standing threat to end the 
de facto independence of Taiwan and ultimately to 
bring it under the authority of Beijing—by force if 
necessary—is both a threat to a major American se -
curity partner and a threat to the American interest 
in peace and stability in the Western Paciﬁc.
After easing for eight years, tensions across the 
Taiwan Strait have worsened as a result of Beijing’s 
reaction to the outcome of Taiwan’s 2016 and 2020 
presidential elections. Beijing has suspended most 
direct government-to-government discussions with 
Taipei and is using a variety of aid and investment 
eﬀorts to deprive Taiwan of its remaining diplo -
matic partners.
Beijing has also undertaken significantly es -
calated military activities directed at Taiwan. 
For example:
 l In 2021, China sent more than 150 aircraft into 
Taiwan’s air defense identiﬁcation zone.48
 l In 2022, 39 Chinese aircraft, including ﬁght-
ers, bombers, and support aircraft, conducted 
the largest single incursions into Taiwan-
ese airspace.49
 l Chinese ﬁghters, along with airborne early 
warning aircraft, have increased their exercises 
southwest of Taiwan, demonstrating a growing 
ability to conduct ﬂexible air operations and 
reduced reliance on ground-based control.50
 l For at least six months in 2021, the Chi-
nese maintained a warship between Taiwan 
and the string of Japanese islands south-
west of Kyushu.51
 l The PLA has undertaken sustained joint 
exercises to simulate extended air operations, 
employing both air and naval forces including 
its aircraft carriers.52
These activities continued unabated and, in some 
ways, even intensiﬁed in the wake of China’s struggle 
with COVID-19.53
Regardless of the state of the relationship at any 
given time, Chinese leaders from Deng Xiaoping and 
Mao Zedong to Xi Jinping have consistently empha-
sized the importance of ultimately reclaiming Tai -
wan. The island—along with Tibet—is the clearest 
example of a geographical “core interest” in Chinese 
policy. China has never renounced the use of force, 
and it continues to employ political warfare against 
Taiwan’s political and military leadership.
For the Chinese leadership, the failure to eﬀect 
uniﬁcation, whether peacefully or by using force, 
would reﬂect fundamental political weakness. For 
this reason, China’s leaders cannot back away from 
the stance of having to unify the island with the 
mainland, and the island remains an essential part 
of the PLA’s “new historic missions,” shaping its ac-
quisitions and military planning.
It is widely posited that China’s anti-access/
area-denial (A2/AD) strategy—the deployment 
of an array of overlapping capabilities, including 
anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs), submarines, 
and long-range cruise missiles, satellites, and cyber 
weapons—is aimed largely at forestalling Ameri -
can intervention in support of friends and allies 
in the Western Paciﬁc, including Taiwan. By hold -
ing at risk key American platforms and systems 
(for example, aircraft carriers), the Chinese seek 
to delay or even deter American intervention in 
support of key friends and allies, thereby allowing 
the PRC to achieve a fait accompli. The growth of 
China’s military capabilities is speciﬁcally oriented 

 
210 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
toward countering America’s ability to assist in the 
defense of Taiwan.
Moreover, China’s eﬀorts to reclaim Taiwan are 
not limited to overt military means. The “three war-
fares” highlight Chinese political warfare methods, 
including legal warfare/lawfare, public opinion war-
fare, and psychological warfare. The PRC employs 
such approaches to undermine both Taiwan’s will to 
resist and America’s willingness to support Taiwan. 
The Chinese goal would be to “win without ﬁght -
ing”—to take Taiwan without ﬁring a shot or with 
only minimal resistance before the United States 
could organize an eﬀective response.
Escalation of Maritime and Territorial Dis -
putes. The PRC and other countries in the region 
see active disputes over the East and South China 
Seas not as diﬀerences regarding the administration 
of international common spaces, but rather as mat-
ters of territorial sovereignty. As a result, there ex -
ists the threat of armed conﬂict between China and 
American allies that are also claimants, particularly 
Japan and the Philippines.
Because its economic center of gravity is now 
in the coastal region, China has had to emphasize 
maritime power to defend key assets and areas. This 
need is exacerbated by China’s status as the world’s 
foremost trading state. China increasingly depends 
on the seas for its economic well-being. Its facto -
ries are powered by imported oil, and its diets con -
tain a growing percentage of imported food. China 
relies on the seas to move its products to markets. 
Consequently, it not only has steadily expanded its 
maritime power, including its merchant marine and 
maritime law enforcement capabilities, but also has 
acted to secure the “near seas” as a Chinese preserve.
Beijing prefers to accomplish its objectives qui -
etly and through nonmilitary means. In both the 
East China Sea and the South China Sea, China has 
sought to exploit “gray zones,” gaining control incre-
mentally and deterring others without resorting to 
A  heritage.org
SOURCE: “America and China Spar over the 
Taiwan Strait,” The Economist, June 23, 2022, 
https:/ /www.economist.com/china/2022/06/23/ 
america-and-china-spar-over-the-taiwan-strait 
(accessed August 18, 2022).
MAP 4
Maritime Boundaries 
in the Taiwan Strait
MedianLine
Taiwan
Strait
Philippine
Sea
Territorial baseline
Contiguous zone
CHINA
TAIWAN
Taipei

 
211The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
the lethal use of force. It uses military and econom -
ic threats, bombastic language, and enforcement 
through legal warfare (including the employment 
of Chinese maritime law enforcement vessels) as 
well as military bullying. Chinese paramilitary-im -
plemented, military-backed encroachment in sup -
port of expansive extralegal claims could lead to an 
unplanned armed clash.
The growing tensions between China and Japan 
and among a number of claimants in the South China 
Sea are especially risky. In the former case, the most 
proximate cause is the dispute over the Senkakus.
China has intensiﬁed its eﬀorts to assert claims 
of sovereignty over the Senkaku Islands of Japan in 
the East China Sea. Beijing asserts both exclusive 
economic rights within the disputed waters and rec-
ognition of “historic” rights to dominate and control 
those areas as part of its territory.54 Chinese ﬁshing 
boats (often believed to be elements of the Chinese 
maritime militia) and Chinese Coast Guard (CCG) 
vessels have been encroaching steadily on the ter -
ritorial waters within 12 nautical miles of the unin -
habited islands. In 2020, CCG or other government 
vessels repeatedly entered the waters around the 
Senkakus.55 In the summer of 2016, China deployed 
a naval unit (as opposed to the CCG) into the area.56
Beijing’s 2013 ADIZ declaration was just part of 
a broader Chinese pattern of using intimidation and 
coercion to assert expansive extralegal claims of sov-
ereignty and/or control incrementally. For example:
 l In June 2016, a Chinese ﬁghter made an “un-
safe” pass near a U.S. RC-135 reconnaissance 
aircraft in the East China Sea area.
 l In March 2017, Chinese authorities warned the 
crew of an American B-1B bomber operating 
in the area of the ADIZ that they were ﬂying 
illegally in PRC airspace. In response to the 
incident, the Chinese Foreign Ministry called 
for the U.S. to respect the ADIZ.57
 l In May 2018, the Chinese intercepted an Amer-
ican WC-135, also over the East China Sea.58
There have been no publicly reported ADIZ- related 
confrontations since then.
In the South China Sea, overlapping Chi -
nese, Bruneian, Philippine, Malaysian, Vietnam -
ese, and Taiwanese claims raise the prospect of 
confrontation. This volatile situation has led to a 
variety of confrontations between China and other 
claimants, as well as with Indonesia, which is not 
claiming territory or rights disputed by anyone ex -
cept (occasionally) China.
China–Vietnam tensions in the region, for exam-
ple, were on display again in 2020 when CCG vessels 
twice rammed and sank Vietnamese ﬁshing boats 
near the disputed Paracel islands. 59 Vietnam has 
also protested China’s decision to create additional 
administrative regions for the South China Sea, one 
centered on the Paracels and the other centered on 
the Spratlys.60 This is part of Beijing’s “legal warfare” 
eﬀorts, which employ legal and administrative mea-
sures to underscore China’s claimed control of the 
South China Sea region. For this reason, conﬂict 
often occurs around Chinese enforcement of uni -
laterally determined and announced ﬁshing bans.61
Because of the relationship between the Phil -
ippines and the United States, tensions between 
Beijing and Manila are the most likely to lead to 
American involvement in these disputes. There have 
been several incidents going back to the 1990s. The 
most contentious occurred in 2012 when a Philip -
pine naval ship operating on behalf of the country’s 
coast guard challenged private Chinese poachers 
in waters around Scarborough Shoal. The resulting 
escalation left Chinese government ships in control 
of the shoal, after which the Philippines successfully 
challenged Beijing in the Permanent Court of Ar -
bitration regarding its rights under the U.N. Con -
vention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). There is 
no indication that the Chinese have reclaimed land 
around the shoal as they did in the Spratlys, but they 
continue to control access to the reef, and the pres -
ence of the Chinese Coast Guard remains a source 
of confrontation.62
In March and April of 2021, a similar dispute 
seemed to be simmering around Whitsun Reef in 
the Spratlys. The presence of more than two hun -
dred Chinese ﬁshing boats, among them known as -
sets of China’s maritime militia, 63 sparked protests 
from Manila. After a stay of a few weeks—which 
Beijing claimed was necessary because of the poor 
weather—most of the ships departed. The unprec -
edented gathering of ﬁshing boats and maritime 
militia could be an attempt to establish a basis 
within the Philippines exclusive economic zone 
(EEZ) for a subsequent return backed by the Chi -
nese Coast Guard.

 
212 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
A  heritage.orgSOURCE: Heritage Foundation research.
MAP 5
The Scope of Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs)
As shown in the map 
above, EEZs and other 
waters under national 
jurisdiction account for 40 
percent of the world’s 
oceans. U.S. freedom of 
navigation worldwide 
would be compromised if 
national governments were 
granted expansive 
authority to restrict foreign 
militaries from operating in 
their EEZs. The South China 
Sea, virtually all of which is 
covered by various EEZ 
claims (see map at right), 
has become a particular 
ﬂashpoint as China has 
sought to restrict freedom 
of navigation for U.S. 
military vessels there.
Q E x c l u s i v e  
Economic 
Zone
Paciﬁc
Ocean
Paciﬁc
OceanAtlantic
Ocean
U.S.
RUSSIA
CHINA
AUSTRALIA
AFRICA
SOUTH
AMERICA
Indian
Ocean
TAIWAN
South China
Sea
VIETNAM
LAOS
BURMA
CHINA
CAMBODIA
PHILLIPINES
MALAYSIA
MALAYSIA
INDONESIA
THAILAND

 
213The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
In each of these cases, the situation is exacer -
bated by rising Chinese nationalism. 64 In the face 
of persistent economic challenges, nationalist 
themes are becoming an increasingly strong un -
dercurrent and aﬀecting policymaking. Although 
the nationalist phenomenon is not new, it is gain -
ing force and complicating eﬀorts to maintain re -
gional stability.
Governments may choose to exploit nationalism 
for domestic political purposes, but they also run the 
risk of being unable to control the genie that they 
have released. Nationalist rhetoric is mutually re -
inforcing, which makes countries less likely to back 
down than they might have been in the past. The 
increasing power that the Internet and social me -
dia provide to the populace, largely outside of gov -
ernment control, adds elements of unpredictability 
to future clashes. China’s refusal to accept the 2016 
Permanent Court of Arbitration ﬁndings, which 
overwhelmingly favored the Philippines, despite 
both Chinese and Philippine accession to UNCLOS 
is a partial reﬂection of such trends.
In case of armed conﬂict between China and the 
Philippines or between China and Japan, either by 
intention or because of an accidental incident at 
sea, the U.S. could be required to exercise its treaty 
Ho Chi
Minh
City
Cuarteron Reef
Gaven Reefs
Spratly Islands Mischief Reef
Hughes Reef
Subi Reef
Duncan Island Woody Island
Thitu Island Southwest
Cay
Scarborough
Shoal
Natuna
Islands
Fiery Cross Reef
Itu Aba
Island
Swallow
Reef
Paracel Islands
Reclamation work done by:
China    Taiwan    Philippines
Vietnam    Malaysia         Airstrip
Hanoi
Manila
Taipei
Jakarta
Bangkok
Surabaja
Hong Kong
Singapore
Phnom Penh
Kuala
Lumpur
South
China
Sea
Philippine Sea
0°
10°S
20°N
10°N
110°E
100°E
120°E
130°E
THAILAND
LAOS
VIETNAM
CHINA
BURMA
TAIWAN
PHILIPPINES
INDONESIA
MALAYSIAMALAYSIA
CAMBODIA
BRUNEI
A  heritage.org
SOURCE: “China Has Militarised the South China Sea and Got Away with It,” The Economist, June 23, 2018, https:/ /www.economist.com/ 
asia/2018/06/21/china-has-militarised-the-south-china-sea-and-got-away-with-it (accessed July 23, 2021).
MAP 6
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) Claims in the South China Sea
Vietnam
Philippines
Malaysia
Brunei
Indonesia
China’s 
“Nine-Dash 
Line”

 
214 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
0°
30°S
30°N
90°E
120°E
China-India Border. The Line of 
Actual Control represents one 
of the world’s longest 
disputed borders and has 
been the site of several 
standoﬀs between the 
Chinese and Indian militaries 
in recent years, including a 
border crisis in 2020 that 
resulted in the ﬁrst casualties 
from hostilities at the border 
in more than 40 years.
East China Sea. China claims 
the disputed Senkaku/Diaoyu 
Islands, which are currently 
administered by Japan. In 
recent years, Chinese aircraft 
and naval vessels have 
entered the airspace and 
territorial sea around the 
islands with growing 
frequency.
Taiwan. The sovereignty of 
Taiwan remains unsettled. 
The People’s Republic of 
China disputes this status and 
regularly conducts 
provocative military 
maneuvers near Taiwan.
South China Sea. The South 
China Sea hosts several 
territorial disputes between 
China and Taiwan and its 
Southeast Asian neighbors. 
China's unlawful claims in the 
sea and attempts to restrict 
freedom of navigation there 
have also produced tensions 
with the U.S., which has sent 
aircraft and naval vessels 
through the South China Sea 
to signal its objections to the 
nature of China's claims. This 
has resulted in a number of 
confrontations between 
Chinese and U.S. vessels.
South
China
Sea
East
China
Sea
Philippine
Sea
Bay of
Bengal
Indian Ocean
Arabian
Sea
China-India
Border
East China Sea
South China Sea
INDIA
CHINA
BURMA
JAPAN
SOUTH
KOREA
MONGOLIA
RUSSIA
KAZ.
PAK.
PHILIPPINES
Taiwan
Senkaku/
Diaoyu Islands
Spratly
Islands
Paracel
Islands
A  heritage.orgSOURCE: Heritage Foundation research.
MAP 7
Chinese Fault Lines

 
215The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
commitments.65 Escalation of a direct U.S.–China in-
cident is also not unthinkable. Keeping an inadver -
tent incident from escalating into a broader military 
confrontation would be diﬃcult. This is particularly 
true in the East and South China Seas, where naval 
as well as civilian law enforcement vessels from both 
China and the U.S. operate in what the U.S. considers 
to be international waters.
The most signiﬁcant development in the South 
China Sea during the past three years has been Chi-
nese reclamation and militarization of seven artiﬁ -
cial islands or outposts. In 2015, President Xi prom-
ised President Obama that China had no intention of 
militarizing the islands. That pledge has never been 
honored.66 In fact, as described by Admiral John 
Aquilino, Commander, U.S. Indo-Paciﬁc Command, 
Disputed borders
Disputed territories
MAP 8
Disputed Borders Between India and China
A  heritage.orgSOURCE: Heritage Foundation research.
Line of 
Control
CHINA
TIBET 
AUTONOMOUS 
REGION
Jammu and 
Kashmir
Ladakh
Xinjiang
Qinghai
Sichuan
Yunnan
Himachal 
Pradesh
Uttarakhand
Uttar 
Pradesh
Aksai 
Chin
Sikkim
Lhasa
New Delhi
Dhaka
Islamabad
INDIA
NEPAL
TAJIKISTAN
PAKISTAN
BHUTAN
BANGLADESH
BURMA
Bay of Bengal
Arunachal Pradesh
Western Sector. Aksai Chin, a 
barren plateau that was part 
of the former princely state of 
Jammu and Kashmir, has been 
administered by the Chinese 
since they seized control of 
the territory in the 1962 
Sino–Indian border conﬂict. 
One of the main causes of 
that war was India’s discovery 
of a road China had built 
through the region, which 
India considered its territory.
Middle Sector. The Middle 
Sector, where the Indian states 
of Uttarakhand and Himachal 
Pradesh meet the Tibet 
Autonomous Region, is the 
least contentious of the three 
main disputed “sectors,” with 
the least amount of territory 
contested. It is also the only 
sector for which the Chinese 
and Indian governments have 
formally exchanged maps 
delineating their claims.
Eastern Sector. China claims 
nearly the entire Indian state 
of Arunachal Pradesh, which 
Beijing calls South Tibet. The 
McMahon Line, which has 
served as the de facto Line of 
Actual Control since 1962, was 
established in 1914 by the 
British and Tibetan 
representatives and is not 
recognized by China. The U.S. 
recognizes Arunachal Pradesh 
as sovereign Indian territory.
Western Sector
Middle Sector
Eastern Sector

 
216 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
in his March 2022 posture statement to the Senate 
Committee on Armed Services:
[T]he PLA has deployed anti-ship cruise 
missiles, surface-to-air missiles, and jamming 
equipment to its artiﬁcial Spratly Islands fea-
tures since 2018 and ﬂown aircraft from those 
locations since 2020. The PLA has emplaced 
expansive military infrastructure in the SCS by 
building aircraft hangars suﬃcient to accom-
modate multiple ﬁghter brigades, protective 
shelters for surface-to-air and anti-ship missiles, 
and signiﬁcant fuel storage facilities.67
According to the DOD’s 2021 annual report on 
the Chinese military, “[n]o substantial land has been 
reclaimed at any of the outposts since the PRC com-
pleted its extensive artiﬁcial manipulation in the 
Spratly Islands in late 2015, after adding more than 
3,200 acres of land to the seven features it occupies 
in the Spratlys.”68 This would seem to suggest that 
the process has been completed.
There is the possibility that China will ultimately 
try to assert its authority over the entire area by de-
claring an ADIZ above the South China Sea.69 There 
also are concerns that under the right circumstanc-
es, China will move against vulnerable targets like 
Philippines-occupied Second Thomas Shoal or Reed 
Bank, where a Chinese ﬁshing boat in 2019 rammed 
and sank a Philippine boat, causing a controversy in 
Manila. There is also consistent speculation in the 
Philippines about when the Chinese will start rec -
lamation work at Scarborough. This development 
in particular would facilitate the physical assertion 
of Beijing’s claims and enforcement of an ADIZ, re -
gardless of the UNCLOS award.
Border Conﬂict with India.  The possibility 
of armed conﬂict between India and China, while 
currently remote, poses an indirect threat to U.S. in-
terests because it could disrupt the territorial sta -
tus quo and raise nuclear tensions in the region. A 
border conﬂict between India and China could also 
prompt Pakistan to add to regional instability by try-
ing to take advantage of the situation.
Long-standing border disputes that led to a Sino–
Indian war in 1962 have again become a ﬂashpoint in 
recent years. In April 2013, the most serious border 
incident between India and China in more than two 
decades occurred when Chinese troops settled for 
three weeks several miles inside northern Indian 
territory on the Depsang Plains in Ladakh. A visit to 
India by Chinese President Xi Jinping in September 
2014 was overshadowed by another ﬂare-up in bor-
der tensions when hundreds of Chinese PLA forces 
reportedly set up camps in the mountainous regions 
of Ladakh, prompting Indian forces to deploy to for-
ward positions in the region. This border standoﬀ  
lasted three weeks until both sides agreed to pull 
their troops back to previous positions.
In 2017, Chinese military engineers were build -
ing a road to the Doklam plateau, an area claimed by 
both Bhutan and China, and this led to a confronta-
tion between Chinese and Indian forces, the latter 
requested by Bhutanese authorities to provide assis-
tance. The crisis lasted 73 days; both sides pledged 
to pull back, but Chinese construction eﬀorts in 
the area have continued.70 Improved Chinese infra-
structure not only would give Beijing the diplomat -
ic advantage over Bhutan, but also could make the 
Siliguri corridor that links the eastern Indian states 
with the rest of the country more vulnerable.
In June 2020, the situation escalated even fur -
ther. Clashes between Indian and Chinese troops 
using rocks, clubs, and ﬁsts led to at least 20 Indian 
dead and (as the Chinese authorities recently admit-
ted) at least four Chinese killed in the Galwan Val -
ley area of Ladakh.71 In September, reports of shots 
exchanged near the Pangong Lake region signaled 
further potential escalation.72
India claims that China occupies more than 
14,000 square miles of Indian territory in the Ak -
sai Chin along its northern border in Kashmir, and 
China lays claim to more than 34,000 square miles 
of India’s northeastern state of Arunachal Pradesh. 
The issue is also closely related to China’s concern 
for its control of Tibet and the presence in India of 
the Tibetan government in exile and Tibet’s spiritual 
leader, the Dalai Lama.
China is building up military infrastructure and 
expanding a network of road, rail, and air links in 
its southwestern border areas. To meet these chal -
lenges, the Indian government has committed to 
expanding infrastructure development along the 
disputed border, although China currently holds a 
decisive military edge.
Conclusion
China presents the United States with the re -
gion’s most comprehensive security challenge. It 
poses various threat contingencies across all three 

 
217The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
areas of vital American national interests: home -
land; regional war, including potential attacks on 
overseas U.S. bases as well as against allies and 
friends; and international common spaces. China’s 
provocative behavior is well documented. It is chal-
lenging the U.S. and its allies such as Japan at sea, in 
the air, and in cyberspace; it has raised concerns on 
its border with India; and it is a standing threat to 
Taiwan. Despite a lack of oﬃcial transparency, pub-
licly available sources shed considerable light on 
China’s rapidly growing military capabilities.
The Chinese launched their ﬁrst homegrown 
aircraft carrier during the past year and are ﬁelding 
large numbers of new platforms for their land, sea, 
air, and outer-space forces as well as in the electro -
magnetic domain. The PLA has been staging larger 
and more comprehensive exercises, including major 
exercises in the East China Sea near Taiwan, that 
are improving the ability of the Chinese to operate 
their abundance of new systems. It also has contin -
ued to conduct probes of both the South Korean 
and Japanese ADIZs, drawing rebukes from both 
Seoul and Tokyo.
This Index assesses the overall threat from China, 
considering the range of contingencies, as “aggres -
sive” for level of provocation of behavior and “for -
midable” for level of capability.
HOSTILE AGGRESSIVE TESTING ASSERTIVE BENIGN
Behavior %
FORMIDABLE GATHERING CAPABLE ASPIRATIONAL MARGINAL
Capability %
Threats: China

 
218 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
Endnotes
/one.tab/period.tab President Joseph R. Biden, Jr., “Interim National Security Strategic Guidance,” The White House, March 2021, p. 8, https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2021/03/NSC-1v2.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022).
/two.tab/period.tab The size of a country’s economy can be measured in nominal terms as adjusted for underlying diﬀerences in the cost to produce a good—an 
adjustment known as purchasing power parity (PPP). In nominal GDP , the U.S. economy is larger than China’s; adjusted for PPP , China’s economy 
is larger than that of the U.S. See Graham Allison, Nathalie Kiersznowski, and Charlotte Fitzek, “The Great Economic Rivalry: China vs the U.S.,” 
Harvard Kennedy School, Belfer Center for Science and International Aﬀairs, Avoiding Great Power War Project, March 23, 2022, https:/ /www.
belfercenter.org/sites/default/ﬁles/ﬁles/publication/GreatEconomicRivalry_Final_2.pdf (accessed September 30, 2022).
/three.tab/period.tab Anastasia Lloyd-Damnjanovic, “Beijing’s Deadly Game: Consequences of Excluding Taiwan from the World Health Organization During the 
COVID-19 Pandemic,” U.S.–China Economic and Security Review Commission Issue Brief, May 12, 2020, p. 2, https:/ /www.uscc.gov/sites/default/
ﬁles/2020-05/Beijings_Deadly_Game_Excluding_Taiwan_from_WHO_during_COVID-19_Pandemic.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022).
/four.tab/period.tab Joel Wuthnow and Phillip C. Saunders, Chinese Military Reform in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, Challenges, and Implications, National Defense 
University, Institute for National Strategic Studies, Center for the Study of Chinese Military Aﬀairs, China Strategic Perspectives No. 10, March 
2017, passim, https:/ /ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/stratperspective/china/ChinaPerspectives-10.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, 2019, pp. 58–60, https:/ /
apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1066163.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/period.tab Ronald O’Rourke, “China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress,” Congressional 
Research Service Report for Members and Committees of Congress No. RL33153, updated March 8, 2022, p. 2, https:/ /fas.org/sgp/crs/row/
RL33153.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022). See also Table 2, “Numbers of Chinese and U.S. Navy Battle Force Ships, 2000–2030,” in ibid., p. 9.
/seven.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, p. 49, https:/ /media.defense.gov/2021/Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-1/0/2021-CMPR-FINA L.PDF (accessed May 23, 
2022).
/eight.tab/period.tab Dennis Gormley, Andrew S. Erickson, and Jingdong Yuan, “A Potent Vector: Assessing Chinese Cruise Missile Developments,” Joint Force 
Quarterly No. 75 (4th Quarter 2014), pp. 98–105, https:/ /ndupress.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/jfq/jfq-75/jfq-75_98-105_Gormley-et-al.pdf 
(accessed May 23, 2022).
/nine.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, pp. 49.
/one.tab/zero.tab/period.tab Ibid., p. 52.
/one.tab/one.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, p. 70.
/one.tab/two.tab/period.tab Section II, “National Defense Policy,” in People’s Republic of China, Ministry of National Defense, White Paper, China’s National Defense in 2010, 
March 2011, http:/ /eng.mod.gov.cn/publications/2021-06/23/content_4887922.htm (accessed May 23, 2022).
/one.tab/three.tab/period.tab Kristin Huang, “Shandong Aircraft Carrier Group Concludes South China Sea Exercise,” South China Morning Post, May 2, 2021, https:/ /www.scmp.
com/news/china/military/article/3131977/shandong-aircraft-carrier-group-concludes-south-china-sea (accessed May 23, 2022).
/one.tab/four.tab/period.tab Franz-Stefan Gady, “China’s New Aircraft Carrier to Use Advanced Jet Launch System,” The Diplomat, November 6, 2017, https:/ /thediplomat.
com/2017/11/chinas-new-aircraft-carrier-to-use-advanced-jet-launch-system/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/one.tab/five.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, p. 61.
/one.tab/six.tab/period.tab International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2022: The Annual Assessment of Global Military Capabilities and Defence 
Economics (London: Routledge, 2022), pp. 260–261.
/one.tab/seven.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, p. 145.
/one.tab/eight.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2019, p. 58, https:/ /media.defense.gov/2019/May/02/2002127082/-1/-1/1/2019_CHINA_MILITARY_POWER_REPORT.
pdf (accessed May 23, 2022).
/one.tab/nine.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, p. 55.
/two.tab/zero.tab/period.tab Franz-Stefan Gady, “Russia Delivers 1st S-400 Missile Defense Regiment to China,” The Diplomat, April 3, 2018, https:/ /thediplomat.com/2018/04/
russia-delivers-1st-s-400-missile-defense-regiment-to-china/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/two.tab/one.tab/period.tab Andrew S. Erickson and Michael S. Chase, “China’s SSBN Forces: Transitioning to the Next Generation,” Jamestown Foundation China Brief, Vol. 9, 
Issue 12 (June 12, 2009), http:/ /www.jamestown.org/single/?no_cache=1&tx_ttnews[tt_news]=35120#.U5G0OSjb5NQ (accessed May 23, 2022).

 
219The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
/two.tab/two.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2019, p. 45.
/two.tab/three.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, p. 62.
/two.tab/four.tab/period.tab Brad Lendon, “China Is Building a Sprawling Network of Missile Silos, Satellite Imagery Appears to Show,” CNN, updated July 2, 2021, https:/ /
www.cnn.com/2021/07/02/asia/china-missile-silos-intl-hnk-ml/index.html (accessed May 23, 2022); Matt Korda and Hans Kristensen, “China 
Is Building a Second Nuclear Missile Silo Field,” Federation of American Scientists, Strategic Security Blog, July 26, 2021, https:/ /fas.org/blogs/
security/2021/07/china-is-building-a-second-nuclear-missile-silo-ﬁeld/ (accessed May 23, 2022); and Shannon Bugos and Julia Masterson, “New 
Chinese Missile Silo Fields Discovered,” Arms Control Today, September 2021, https:/ /www.armscontrol.org/act/2021-09/news/new-chinese-
missile-silo-ﬁelds-discovered (accessed May 23, 2022).
/two.tab/five.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, p. 49.
/two.tab/six.tab/period.tab For more information on China’s cruise missile program, see Dennis M. Gormley, Andrew S. Erickson, and Jingdong Yuan, A Low-Visibility 
Force Multiplier: Assessing China’s Cruise Missile Ambitions  (Washington: National Defense University Press, 2014), http:/ /ndupress.ndu.edu/
Portals/68/Documents/Books/force-multiplier.pdf  (accessed May 23, 2022). Published by the NDU Press for the Center for the Study of 
Chinese Military Aﬀairs, “established as an integral part of the National Defense University’s Institute for National Strategic Studies on March 
1, 2000.”
/two.tab/seven.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Oﬃce of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2021, pp. 61 (DF-21) and 78 (DF-26).
/two.tab/eight.tab/period.tab Chandelis Duster, “Top Military Leader Says China’s Hypersonic Missile Test ‘Went Around the World,’” CNN, updated November 18, 2021, https:/ /
www.cnn.com/2021/11/17/politics/john-hyten-china-hypersonic-weapons-test/index.html (accessed May 23, 2022).
/two.tab/nine.tab/period.tab Press release, “U.S. Charges Five Chinese Military Hackers for Cyber Espionage Against U.S. Corporations and a Labor Organization for 
Commercial Advantage,” U.S. Department of Justice, May 19, 2014, https:/ /www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-charges-ﬁve-chinese-military-hackers-
cyber-espionage-against-us-corporations-and-labor (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/zero.tab/period.tab BBC News, “Equifax: US Charges Four Chinese Military Oﬃcers over Huge Hack,” February 11, 2020, https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/world-us-
canada-51449778 (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/one.tab/period.tab Andrew Jones, “China’s Shijian-21 Towed Dead Satellite to a High Graveyard Orbit,” SpaceNews, January 27, 2022, https:/ /spacenews.com/chinas-
shijian-21-spacecraft-docked-with-and-towed-a-dead-satellite/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/two.tab/period.tab National Air and Space Intelligence Center, “Competing in Space,” December 2018, p. 21, https:/ /media.defense.gov/2019/Jan/16/2002080386/-
1/-1/1/190115-F-NV711-0002.PDF (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/three.tab/period.tab Gregory B. Poling, “The Conventional Wisdom on China’s Island Bases Is Dangerously Wrong,” War on the Rocks, January 10, 2020, https:/ /
warontherocks.com/2020/01/the-conventional-wisdom-on-chinas-island-bases-is-dangerously-wrong/ (accessed May 23, 2022), and J. Michael 
Dahm, “Beyond ‘Conventional Wisdom’: Evaluating the PLA’s South China Sea Bases in Operational Context,” War on the Rocks, March 17, 
2020, https:/ /warontherocks.com/2020/03/beyond-conventional-wisdom-evaluating-the-plas-south-china-sea-bases-in-operational-context/ 
(accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/four.tab/period.tab Associated Press, “U.S. Admiral Says China Has Fully Militarized Islands,” Politico, March 20, 2022, https:/ /www.politico.com/news/2022/03/20/
china-islands-militarized-missiles-00018737 (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/five.tab/period.tab “Building an Active, Layered Defense: Chinese Naval and Air Force Advancement,” interview with Andrew S. Erickson, U.S. Naval War College, 
by Greg Chaﬃn, National Bureau of Asian Research, September 10, 2012, https:/ /www.nbr.org/publication/building-an-active-layered-defense-
chinese-naval-and-air-force-advancement/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/six.tab/period.tab Patrick M. Cronin and Ryan D. Neuhard, “Countering China’s Laser Oﬀensive,” The Diplomat, April 2, 2020, https:/ /thediplomat.com/2020/04/
countering-chinas-laser-oﬀensive/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/seven.tab/period.tab Xinhua, “China Announces Success in Technology to Refuel Satellites in Orbit,” June 30, 2016, http:/ /www.china.org.cn/china/Oﬀ_the_Wire/2016-
06/30/content_38784419.htm (accessed May 23, 2022).
/three.tab/eight.tab/period.tab Mei Lianju, Space Operations Teaching Materials (Beijing, PRC: Academy of Military Sciences Publishing House, 2013), p. 65.
/three.tab/nine.tab/period.tab See, for example, Brian Weeden, Through a Glass, Darkly: Chinese, American, and Russian Anti-Satellite Testing in Space, Secure World 
Foundation, March 17, 2014, https:/ /swfound.org/media/167224/through_a_glass_darkly_march2014.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022).
/four.tab/zero.tab/period.tab Ian Easton, “The Great Game in Space: China’s Evolving ASAT Weapons Programs and Their Implications for Future U.S. Strategy,” Project 2049 
Institute, 2009, pp. 4–5, https:/ /project2049.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/china_asat_weapons_the_great_game_in_space.pdf (accessed 
May 23, 2022).
/four.tab/one.tab/period.tab Mei Lianju, Space Operations Teaching Materials, p. 69.

 
220 2023 Index of U.S. Military Strength
/four.tab/two.tab/period.tab Peter B. de Selding, “Runaway Zombie Satellite Galaxy 15 Continues to Pose Interference Threat,” Space.com, October 15, 2010, http:/ /www.
space.com/9340-runaway-zombie-satellite-galaxy-15-continues-pose-interference-threat.html (accessed May 23, 2022). Article “provided 
by SpaceNews.”
/four.tab/three.tab/period.tab Verizon, 2013 Data Breach Investigations Report, pp. 21–22, https:/ /cybersecurity.idaho.gov/wp-content/uploads/sites/87/2019/04/data-breach-
investigations-report-2013.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022). See also Elise Ackerman, “New Verizon Security Report Finds a Growing Number of 
Attacks by China’s Hacker Army,” Forbes, April 23, 2013, https:/ /www.forbes.com/sites/eliseackerman/2013/04/23/new-verizon-security-report-
ﬁnds-a-growing-number-of-attacks-by-chinas-hacker-army/#11429f622c49 (accessed May 23, 2022), and Lucian Constantin, “Verizon: One in 
Five Data Breaches Are the Result of Cyberespionage,” PC World, April 23, 2013, http:/ /www.pcworld.com/article/2036177/one-in-ﬁve-data-
breaches-are-the-result-of-cyberespionage-verizon-says.html (accessed May 23, 2022).
/four.tab/four.tab/period.tab Mike Lennon, “Unit in China’s PLA Behind Massive Cyber Espionage Units,” SecurityWeek, February 18, 2013, https:/ /www.securityweek.com/
cyber-unit-chinas-pla-behind-massive-cyber-espionage-operation-report (accessed May 23, 2022). For the full report, see Mandiant, APT1: 
Exposing One of China’s Cyber Espionage Units, https:/ /www.mandiant.com/sites/default/ﬁles/2021-09/mandiant-apt1-report.pdf (accessed May 
23, 2022).
/four.tab/five.tab/period.tab Bai Bangxi and Jiang Lijun, “‘Systems Combat’ Is Not the Same as ‘System Combat,’” China National Defense Newspaper, January 10, 2008, 
cited in Dean Cheng, “U.S.–China Competition in Space,” testimony before the Subcommittee on Space, Committee on Science, Space, and 
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives, September 27, 2016, p. 2, https:/ /docs.house.gov/meetings/SY/SY16/20160927/105387/HHRG-114-
SY16-Wstate-ChengD-20160927.pdf (accessed May 23, 2022).
/four.tab/six.tab/period.tab Guo Ruobing, Theory of Military Information Security (Beijing, PRC: National Defense University Publishing House, 2013), pp. 12–21.
/four.tab/seven.tab/period.tab Tan Rukan, Building Operational Strength Course Materials (Beijing, PRC: Academy of Military Sciences Publishing House, 2012), p. 204.
/four.tab/eight.tab/period.tab Helen Davidson, “China Sends Largest Incursion of Warplanes into Taiwan Defence Zone Since October,” The Guardian, January 24, 2022, https:/ /
www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/24/china-sends-largest-incursion-of-warplanes-into-taiwan-defence-zone-since-october (accessed May 
23, 2022).
/four.tab/nine.tab/period.tab Reuters, “Taiwan Reports New Large-Scale Chinese Air Force Incursion,” January 24, 2022, https:/ /www.reuters.com/world/asia-paciﬁc/taiwan-
reports-new-large-scale-chinese-air-force-incursion-2022-01-23/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/zero.tab/period.tab Reuters, “Taiwan Air Force Scrambles Again to Warn oﬀ Chinese Jets,” Al Jazeera, March 16, 2020, https:/ /www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/03/
taiwan-airforce-scrambles-warn-chinese-jets-200317003712908.html (accessed May23, 2022).
/five.tab/one.tab/period.tab Davidson, “China Sends Largest Incursion of Warplanes into Taiwan Defence Zone Since October.”
/five.tab/two.tab/period.tab Kristin Huang, “Chinese Air Force’s Drill ‘Aimed at Signalling Deterrent Around Taiwan,’” South China Morning Post, April 2, 2020, https:/ /www.
scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3077997/chinese-air-forces-drill-aimed-signalling-deterrent-around (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/three.tab/period.tab Erin Hale, “In Shadow of Coronavirus, China Steps up Manoeuvres Near Taiwan,” Al Jazeera, April 23, 2020, https:/ /www.aljazeera.com/
news/2020/04/shadow-coronavirus-china-steps-manoeuvres-taiwan-200422011542456.html (accessed May 23, 2022), and Yew Lun Tian and 
Ben Blanchard, “China Rattles Sabres as World Battles Coronavirus Pandemic,” Reuters, April 21, 2020, https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-china-
security/china-rattles-sabres-as-world-battles-coronavirus-pandemic-idUSKBN2230GC (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/four.tab/period.tab See Chapter 10, “The South China Sea Tribunal,” in Tufts University, The Fletcher School, Law of the Sea: A Policy Primer, https:/ /sites.tufts.edu/
lawofthesea/chapter-ten/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/five.tab/period.tab Kyodo News, “Japan Lodges Protests Against Chinese Maritime Intrusions Near Senkakus,” The Japan Times, April 22, 2020, https:/ /www.
japantimes.co.jp/news/2020/04/22/national/japan-protest-chinese-intrusions-senkakus/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/six.tab/period.tab Ankit Panda, “Japan Identiﬁes Chinese Submarine in East China Sea: A Type 093 SSN,” The Diplomat, January 16, 2018, https:/ /thediplomat.
com/2018/01/japan-identiﬁes-chinese-submarine-in-east-china-sea-a-type-093-ssn/ (accessed May 23, 2022); Howard Wang, “China vs. Japan: 
Is the East China Sea Showdown Back on?” The National Interest, The Buzz Blog, June 7, 2019, https:/ /nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/china-vs-
japan-east-china-sea-showdown-back-61492 (accessed May 23, 2022); and Ankit Panda, “China Patrol Ships Sustain Presence Near Senkaku 
Islands: Report,” The Diplomat, June 10, 2019, https:/ /thediplomat.com/2019/06/china-patrol-ships-sustain-presence-near-senkaku-islands-
report/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/seven.tab/period.tab Jason Le Miere, “China Claims U.S. Military Plane ‘Illegally’ Entered Chinese Air Defense Zone,” Newsweek, March 24, 2017, http:/ /www.newsweek.
com/china-claims-us-military-plane-illegally-entered-chinese-air-defense-zone-573711 (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/eight.tab/period.tab Hans Nichols and Courtney Kube, “Two Chinese Fighter Jets Intercept U.S. Plane over East China Sea, Oﬃcials Say,” NBC News, updated May 18, 
2017, http:/ /www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/two-chinese-ﬁghter-jets-intercept-u-s-plane-oﬃcials-say-n761931 (accessed May 23, 2022).
/five.tab/nine.tab/period.tab Khanh Vu, “Vietnam Protests Beijing’s Sinking of South China Sea Boat,” Reuters, April 4, 2020, https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-vietnam-
china-southchinasea/vietnam-protests-beijings-sinking-of-south-china-sea-boat-idUSKBN21M072 (accessed May 23, 2022), and “Chinese Vessel 
Rams Vietnamese Fishing Boat in S. China Sea,” The Maritime Executive, June 14, 2020, https:/ /www.maritime-executive.com/article/report-
chinese-vessel-rams-vietnamese-ﬁshing-boat-in-s-china-sea (accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/zero.tab/period.tab Reuters, “Vietnam Protests Beijing’s Expansion in Disputed South China Sea,” April 19, 2020, https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-vietnam-china-
southchinasea/vietnam-protests-beijings-expansion-in-disputed-south-china-sea-idUSKBN2210M7 (accessed May 23, 2022).

 
221The Heritage Foundation | heritage.org/Military
/six.tab/one.tab/period.tab Tam Anh, “Vietnam Rejects China’s Illegal Fishing Ban,” Vn Express International, April 29, 2021, https:/ /e.vnexpress.net/news/news/vietnam-
rejects-china-s-illegal-ﬁshing-ban-4270611.html (accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/two.tab/period.tab Andreo Calonzo, “Philippines Slams China’s ‘Dangerous’ Move in Disputed Sea,” Bloomberg, updated May 3, 2021, https:/ /www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2021-05-03/philippines-dials-up-protest-on-china-s-dangerous-sea-maneuver?sref=InMWfBxD (accessed May 23, 2022), and 
Reuters and Bloomberg, “Philippines Foreign Minister Issues Expletive-Laced Tweet over South China Sea Dispute,” The Straits Times, updated 
May 4, 2021, https:/ /www.straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/philippines-slams-china-for-dangerous-manoeuvre-in-disputed-south-china-sea 
(accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/three.tab/period.tab Center for Strategic and International Studies, Asia Transparency Initiative, “Caught on Camera: Two Dozen Militia Boats at Whitsun Reef 
Identiﬁed,” April 21, 2021, https:/ /amti.csis.org/caught-on-camera-two-dozen-militia-boats-at-whitsun-reef-identiﬁed/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/four.tab/period.tab “Philippines Has Ulterior Motives to Suddenly Hype up the Matter over Niu’e Jiao,” Global Times, April 5, 2021, https:/ /www.globaltimes.cn/
page/202104/1220284.shtml (accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/five.tab/period.tab Although it has long been a matter of U.S. policy that Philippine territorial claims in the South China Sea lie outside the scope of American 
treaty commitments, the treaty does apply in the event of an attack on Philippine “armed forces, public vessels or aircraft in the Paciﬁc.” 
Mutual Defense Treaty Between the United States and the Republic of the Philippines, August 30, 1951, Article V, http:/ /avalon.law.yale.
edu/20th_century/phil001.asp (accessed May 23, 2022). In any event, Article IV of the treaty obligates the U.S. in case of such an attack to 
“meet the common dangers in accordance with its constitutional processes.” Regardless of formal treaty obligations, however, enduring U.S. 
interests in the region and perceptions of U.S. eﬀectiveness and reliability as a check on growing Chinese ambitions would likely spur the U.S. to 
become involved.
/six.tab/six.tab/period.tab See, for example, Center for Strategic and International Studies, Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “An Accounting of China’s Deployments to 
the Spratly Islands,” May 9, 2018, https:/ /amti.csis.org/accounting-chinas-deployments-spratly-islands/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/seven.tab/period.tab Admiral John C. Aquilino, U.S. Navy, Commander, U.S. Indo-Paciﬁc Command, statement on “U.S. Indo-Paciﬁc Command Posture” before the 
Committee on Armed Services, U.S. Senate, March 10, 2022, p. 7, https:/ /www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/INDOPACOM%20
Statement%20(ADM%20Aquilino)%20_SASC2.PDF (accessed May 23, 2022).
/six.tab/eight.tab/period.tab U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2021, p. 
104.
/six.tab/nine.tab/period.tab Kelvin Chen, “China to Set up ADIZ in South China Sea,” Taiwan News, May 5, 2020, https:/ /www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/3928503 
(accessed May 23, 2022).
/seven.tab/zero.tab/period.tab Joel Wuthnow, Satu Limaye, and Nilanthi Samaranayake, “Doklam, One Year Later: China’s Long Game in the Himalayas,” War on the Rocks, June 
7, 2018, https:/ /warontherocks.com/2018/06/doklam-one-year-later-chinas-long-game-in-the-himalayas/ (accessed May 23, 2022).
/seven.tab/one.tab/period.tab BBC News, “Ladakh: China Reveals Soldier Deaths in India Border Clash,” February 19, 2021, https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-56121781 
(accessed May 23, 2022).
/seven.tab/two.tab/period.tab BBC News, “China Says Indian Troops Fired ‘Provocative’ Shots in Border Dispute,” September 8, 2020, https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-
china-54067400 (accessed May 23, 2022).