 
 
FOUO 
 
DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for 
Employing Biometrics in Military Operations 
 
 
 
  
 
Approved by Deputy Chief of Staff, G-3/5/7, United States Army 
10 June 2012 
 
 
 
 


 
i 
FOUO 
Table of Contents 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................ iii 
1.0 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................. 1 
2.0 DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................................................... 1 
3.0 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY .................................................................................................................... 1 
4.0 OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT .............................................................................................................. 1 
5.0 APPLYING BIOMETRICS .......................................................................................................................... 1
 5.1 DOD BIOMETRIC PROCESS ......................................................................................................... 3
 5.2 DISCUSSION OF DOD BIOMETRIC AND ANALYTICAL/OPERATIONAL ACTIONS ......................... 4 
 5.3 BIOMETRIC CYCLE FOR MILITARY OPERATIONS ........................................................................ 7 
6.0 RISKS AND MITIGATION ......................................................................................................................... 9
 6.1 PROTECTION OF BIOMETRIC DATA ............................................................................................ 9
 6.2 COUNTERMEASURES.................................................................................................................. 9
 6.3 RESTRICTIONS ............................................................................................................................ 9
 6.4 DATA QUALITY AND LATENCY .................................................................................................... 9 
7.0 IMPLICATIONS ........................................................................................................................................ 9 
A. VIGNETTES ............................................................................................................................................. A-1 
A.1 ACCESS TO SERVICES FOR NON-US PERSONNEL  ................................................................... A-1 
A.2 THEATER SECURITY COOPERATION AND EXERCISES  ............................................................. A-2  
A.3 DISASTER RELIEF  .................................................................................................................... A-3 
A.4 MANAGING REFUGEES DURING FOREIGN HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE MISSION  ............. A-4 
A.5 FOREIGN HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE— SECURITY MISSION ............................................... A-5 
A.6 MARITIME INTERDICTION OPERATION WHILE PROTECTING THE HOMELAND ..................... A-6 
A.7 INTERAGENCY OPERATIONS WHILE RESTORING CIVIL SECURITY........................................... A-7  
A.8 PERSONNEL RECOVERY DURING STABILITY OPERATIONS ...................................................... A-8 
A.9 TRACK A HIGH-VALUE TARGET  .............................................................................................. A-8  
A.10 CONTINGENCY OPERATION AND UNITED STATES LAW ENFORCEMENT SUPPORT  ............ A-9 
A.11 LIMITED STRIKES AND UNITED STATES BORDER PROTECTION SUPPORT .......................... A-10  
A.12 REPATRIATION AND WAR CRIMES PROSECUTION DURING MAJOR COMBAT OPERATIONS .... 
 .................................................................................................................................................... A-11 
B. REFERENCES........................................................................................................................................... B-1  
C. GLOSSARY .............................................................................................................................................. C-1 
D. ACRONYMS .......................................................................................................................................... D-1 
 
  

   
ii 
FOUO 
Figure Table 
FIGURE 1: BIOMETRIC PROCESS ............................................................................................................. iv & 4 
FIGURE 2: BIOMETRIC CYCLE FOR MILITARY OPERATIONS..................................................................... v & 7 
FIGURE 3: BIOMETRICS ACROSS THE RANGE OF MILITARY OPERATIONS ................................................. A-1 
  

   
iii 
FOUO 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
A biometric is a measurable physical characteristic or personal behavior trait used to recognize the 
identity or verify the claimed identity of an individual.  Fingerprints are an example of a physical 
biometric characteristic.  Behavioral biometric characteristics like handwriting are learned and acquired 
over time.  
Biometrics is the process of recognizing an individual based on measurable anatomical, physiological and 
behavioral characteristics.  Employing biometrics can help positively identify adversaries, allies and 
neutral persons.  This is particularly useful when facing adversaries who rely on anonymity to operate. 
Biometrics is not forensics even though the two can, and often are, employed in concert.  Forensics 
involves the use of scientific analysis to link people, places, things and events while biometrics involves 
the use of automated processes to identify people based on their personal traits.  Because of the 
interrelationship between biometrics and forensics, the Department of Defense (DOD) intends to 
develop a single concept of operation (CONOP) in the future describing how biometrics and forensics 
can be employed in a complementary manner.         
This CONOP describes how DOD employs biometrics across the full range of military operations.  It 
applies to all DOD organizations.  This CONOP does not address the use of biometrics in DOD business 
functions not related to military operations.   
The DOD biometric process relies on five biometric actions and three analytical/operational actions: 
1) Collect: Obtain biometric and related contextual data from an object, system, or individual with, 
or without, his knowledge.   
 
2) Normalize: Create a standardized, high-quality biometric file consisting of a biometric sample 
and contextual data.   
 
3) Match: Determine whether biometric samples come from the same human source based on 
their level of similarity. 
 
4) Store: Maintain biometric files to make available standardized, current biometric information of 
individuals when and where required.  Biometric files are initially enrolled and then 
subsequently updated as part of storing.  
 
5) Share: Exchange standardized biometric files and match results among approved DOD, 
interagency and international partners in accordance with applicable laws, policies, authorities 
and agreements. 
 
6) Analyze: To deliberately consider biometric and non-biometric information on an individual and 
reach logical conclusions.  These conclusions can include his intent, affiliation(s), activities, 
location and behavioral patterns.    

   
iv 
FOUO 
 
7) Provide: Exchange analysis and associated information on individuals among approved DOD, 
interagency and international partners in accordance with applicable laws, policies, authorities 
and agreements. 
 
8) Decide/Act: Take action based on a biometric file’s match results and analysis of associated 
information.  
By logically sequencing the biometric actions into the biometric process (Figure 1), the DOD can 
positively identify people and take appropriate action.  This CONOP provides vignettes to illustrate this.  
 
Figure 1: Biometric Process 
(Note: Solid lines represent exchanges of information that must occur to support the decide/act action.  
Dashed lines represent additional exchanges of information to other entities.) 
Biometrics operations are inherently legally intensive.  Throughout the biometrics process, commanders 
and leaders must ensure operations are conducted in accordance with applicable laws, policies, 
authorities and agreements. 
Whereas the biometric process progresses from collection of biometric samples to decision/action on 
them, the biometric cycle for military operations provides a method for integrating biometrics into 
military operations.  It relies on six related activities as depicted and explained below: 


   
v 
FOUO 
 
Figure 2: DOD Biometric Cycle for Military Operations 
When planning and directing biometric collections, commanders identify which information 
requirements can be met with biometrics; determine what biometric data is needed; analyze where, 
when, how and by whom the data should be collected; what resources are required for collection; what 
biometric  products are to be produced; and how those products will be disseminated.   
Units collect and transmit biometric samples and contextual data in accordance with authoritative 
direction and their estimate of the situation.  It is worth noting that collection of biometric data can be 
done by non-DOD authorities, a partner nation or agency for example, and then shared with the US 
military.     
Normalizing biometric data converts it into forms that can be readily used by DOD.  For example, if 
biometric files were obtained through a sharing agreement with another country, the contextual data 
may need translating prior to being input into DOD automated systems. 
During analysis and production, biometric information, contextual data, and other related information 
and intelligence is integrated, evaluated, analyzed and interpreted to create finished biometric products 
that meet the commander’s information requirements.     
 
During dissemination, biometric products are delivered to and used by tactical units or other 
organizations. 
 
During evaluation and feedback, units or organizations assess the effectiveness of biometrics efforts and 
adjust as needed.  


 
1 
FOUO 
1.0 PURPOSE 
This CONOP’s purpose is to assist US military forces in using biometrics across the full range of military 
operations.   
2.0 DEFINITIONS  
A biometric is a measurable physical characteristic or personal behavior trait used to recognize the 
identity or verify the claimed identity of an individual.  Fingerprints are an example of a physical 
biometric characteristic.  Behavioral biometric characteristics like handwriting are learned and acquired 
over time.    
Biometrics is the process of recognizing an individual based on measurable anatomical, physiological and 
behavioral characteristics.  Biometrics is not forensics even though the two can, and often are, 
employed in concert.  Forensics involves the use of scientific analysis to link people, places, things and 
events while biometrics involves the use of automated processes to identify people based on their 
personal traits.  Additional definitions are located at Appendix C.   
3.0 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY 
This CONOP applies to DOD organizations employing biometrics in military operations while under DOD 
control.  It is not applicable to DOD business functions unrelated to military operations such as 
enrollment as a military dependent.   Because of this CONOP’s broad nature, it does not reference 
specific biometrics equipment or systems.  
4.0 OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT 
The “Capstone Concept for Joint Operations” (CCJO) of 15 Jan 2009 describes the expected joint 
operational environment as dynamic and unpredictable.  As described in the CCJO, the future operating 
environment will be characterized by uncertainty, complexity, rapid change, and persistent conflict. 
 
Some adversaries will continue to rely on relative anonymity amongst the world’s population to harm 
the US and its allies.  Without being positively identified, enemies can remain hidden while pursuing 
their nefarious aims.  The effective use of biometrics will help remove our enemies’ critical capability of 
anonymity and expose them to counter action. 
5.0 APPLYING BIOMETRICS 
Biometric operations are undertaken to remove adversary anonymity and positively identify other 
people.   In some circumstances, identifying other people can include US military personnel.  For 
instance, biometrics may be used by recovery forces to positively identify isolated US military personnel 
or biometrics may be incorporated in sensitive site exploitations to help determine the whereabouts of 
missing US military personnel.      

   
2 
FOUO 
The DOD conducts biometric operations globally and across the range of military operations.  This 
includes rule of law operations and security cooperation activities undertaken to favorably shape the 
environment.     
US military forces conduct biometric operations independently as well as “by, with and through” other 
countries and in cooperation with other US government agencies.  Typically this is done through 
mutually agreed upon exchanges of information.  These agreements often contain caveats as to how 
and when information may be stored, shared and what it can be used for.  
Combatant commanders may conduct biometric operations within their geographic or functional areas 
of responsibility.  They allocate resources, organize and task their forces based on their missions and 
estimate of the situation.  In addition, combatant commanders engage interagency and international 
partners and other combatant commands to conduct biometric operations.  Since each combatant 
command’s area of responsibility is different, the legal frameworks in which they conduct biometric 
operations are different.    
DOD may enter into information sharing agreements with other countries to support combatant 
commander biometric efforts.  Combatant commanders make foreign disclosure decisions involving 
biometric data on non-US persons in the absence of agreements and build partner nation biometric 
capacity through security cooperation and intelligence cooperation activities.     
Since many countries collect biometrics more for law enforcement, border security, population 
management and immigration than military purposes, combatant commanders may consider engaging 
other countries’ non-military government agencies through appropriate channels to facilitate biometrics 
sharing on non-US persons.  For instance, a combatant commander may engage through a US embassy’s 
country team.   
Biometrics can be employed in all phases of a campaign or major operation.  Annex A provides vignettes 
to illustrate this.  Biometrics can:  
• Shape events favorably toward US interests by assisting foreign governments and US law 
enforcement agencies in their efforts to maintain a secure environment and protecting US 
military forces 
• Deter or dissuade an adversary who relies on anonymity as a critical capability   
• Assist a joint force in seizing the initiative and dominating the situation  
• Stabilize a situation by supporting civil affairs 
• Enable civil authorities in maintaining, or establishing, rule of law and other governance 
functions  
On the tactical level Commanders may use biometrics in: human terrain mapping, census taking, access 
control, personnel screening, incident response, personnel recovery, identification of human remains, 
detainee management and sensitive site exploitation among other things.           
 

   
3 
FOUO 
5.1 DOD BIOMETRIC PROCESS 
Biometrics operations are inherently legally intensive.  Throughout the biometrics process, commanders 
and leaders must ensure operations are conducted in accordance with applicable laws, policies, 
authorities and agreements.  The DOD biometric process relies on five biometric actions and three 
analytical/operational actions that lead from the collection of biometric data to decision/action on it.  
The actions are: 
1) Collect: Obtain biometric and related contextual data from an object, system, or individual with, 
or without, his knowledge.   
 
2) Normalize: Create a standardized, high-quality biometric file consisting of a biometric sample 
and contextual data.   
 
3) Match: Determine whether biometric samples come from the same human source based on 
their level of similarity. 
 
4) Store: Maintain biometric files to make available standardized, current biometric information of 
individuals when and where required.  Biometric files are initially enrolled and then 
subsequently updated as part of storing. 
 
5) Share: Exchange standardized biometric files and match results among approved DOD, 
interagency and international partners in accordance with applicable laws, policies, authorities 
and agreements. 
 
6) Analyze: To deliberately consider biometric and non-biometric information on an individual and 
reach logical conclusions.  These conclusions can include his intent, affiliation(s), activities, 
location and behavioral patterns.    
 
7) Provide: Exchange analysis and associated information on individuals among approved DOD, 
interagency and international partners in accordance with applicable laws, policies, authorities 
and agreements. 
 
8) Decide/Act: Take action based on a biometric file’s match results and analysis of associated 
information.  
Logically sequencing the actions produces the DOD biometric process illustrated in Figure 1. 

   
4 
FOUO 
 
Figure 1: Biometric Process 
(Note:  Dashed lines represent additional exchanges of information to other entities.) 
5.2 DISCUSSION OF DOD BIOMETRIC AND ANALYTICAL/OPERATIONAL ACTIONS 
5.2.1 COLLECT BIOMETRIC SAMPLE 
Collection is the obtaining of a biometric sample and related contextual data from an object, system, or 
individual with, or without, his knowledge.   
It is important to note that collection of biometric samples can be done by other countries and non-DOD 
US government or non-government agencies and then, when appropriate and permissible, shared with 
the DOD.  Commanders should obtain appropriate level legal review prior to collecting biometric data to 
ensure compliance with law, policy, and obligations with foreign agreement.  Biometric collection 
operations should also be coordinated with other technical experts as dictated by the circumstances to 
provide the best results.  These technical experts may include forensic technical examiners, network 
architects and communications specialists.   Pre-planning before collection begins is important to 
ensuring the usability of collected data.     
Collection can be done with, or without, the individual’s knowledge.  For DOD use, the biometric sample 
can be a fingerprint, facial image, palm print, iris image, handwriting, or voice sample.  Finger and palm 
prints may be latent prints, e.g. taken from a surface touched by the individual using forensic methods 
vice taken directly from the individual.  Contextual data includes situational information associated with 
a collection event.  For instance, where and when the biometric sample was collected; under what 


   
5 
FOUO 
circumstances it was collected; why it was collected; the claimed identity of the individual; and 
biographic data is usually collected.   
5.2.2 NORMALIZE BIOMETRIC SAMPLE 
Normalization is the process of transforming biometric files so they are in a standard format and meet a 
specified level of quality.  This ensures biometric files can be used by DOD and other automated 
biometric systems.   
DOD biometric collection systems are generally capable of creating normalized biometric files at the 
point of collection.  Biometric files obtained from other countries however are likely to have contextual 
data written in a foreign language and use formats incompatible with DOD systems.  Incompatible files 
such as these require normalization for subsequent matching, storing and sharing by DOD.  This can be 
painstaking and resource intensive, but a critical task.    
Once a biometric file is normalized, it may be transmitted to a data source for matching if the biometric 
collection system does not allow for matching at the point of collection.   
5.2.3 MATCH 
Matching is the process of deciding whether, or not, a biometric sample and a stored template come 
from the same human source based on their high level of similarity.    Matching consists of either a one-
to-one (verification) or a one-to-many (identification) search.   
• Verification: Verification is a task where a biometric system attempts to confirm an individual’s 
claimed identity by comparing a newly submitted sample to already enrolled samples.  It 
answers the question, “Is this person who they say they are?”  
• Identification: Identification is a task where a biometric system searches a database for a 
reference matching a submitted biometric sample and, if found, returns a corresponding 
identity.  Identification answers the questions, “Have we ever collected biometric information 
from this individual before and, if so, what was their claimed identity?”    Identification is 
“closed-set” if the person is known to exist in the database.  In “open-set” identification 
(sometimes referred to as “watch listing”) the person is not guaranteed to exist in the database.  
The biometric system must determine where the person is in the database, and then return his 
identity.  
Once matching is complete, the collected biometric sample and contextual data can be enrolled into the 
repository as a new file, used to update an existing file or deleted entirely.     
5.2.4 STORE  
During storage, DOD users enroll or update and maintain biometric files at one of three types of source 
locations.  The purpose is to make available standardized, comprehensive and current biometric 
information on individuals. The vignettes in this CONOP illustrate applications of stored biometric files in 
operations.  

   
6 
FOUO 
As part of storage, the biometric files may be marked and assigned caveats and have permissions set for 
appropriate access and use.  
For the purpose of this CONOP, a source is a database and infrastructure that stores biometric files. 
Storage requirements can be as complex as a data mega-center or as simple as a hand held device. 
There are three types of biometric storage sources:  
• Authoritative source: An authoritative source is the primary DOD approved repository of 
biometric information.   It provides a strategic capability for access to standardized, 
comprehensive and current biometric files within the DOD and for the sharing of biometric files 
with joint, interagency and designated multinational partners.  The DOD may designate more 
than one authoritative source for various populations in accordance with applicable law, policy 
and directives.  All DOD operational applications should be designed to acquire biometric files 
from the appropriate authoritative source.  
• Local trusted source:  A local trusted source is a sub-set of the authoritative source that is 
established to accomplish a specific function within an operational mission.  Reasons for 
establishing a local trusted source include: insufficient network connectivity able to provide 
adequate access to the authoritative source or an operational need for closed-loop access or 
permission application.  
• Local un-trusted source:  A local un-trusted source is a local repository of biometric files that 
have not been enrolled with an authoritative or local trusted source.  In many cases, local un-
trusted sources are established for missions of short duration or to satisfy political, policy, or 
legal restrictions related to the sharing of biometric information.  
5.2.5 SHARE  
Sharing is the exchange of standardized biometric files or match results.    
 Sharing of biometric files is conducted through DOD-approved biometric information exchange portals 
and other sharing systems among DOD, interagency and multinational partners as mutually agreed upon 
or otherwise allowed by law and policy.  As stated before, biometric sharing agreements with partner 
nations may have caveats as to how, when and with whom biometric information they provide may be 
shared.  Commanders should obtain appropriate level legal review prior to sharing biometric files or 
match results to ensure compliance with law, policy, and foreign agreement obligations. 
5.2.6 ANALYZE  
During analysis we integrate biometric, associated, and intelligence information about a person and 
determine what it all means.  We query information repositories for non-biometric information 
associated with an identity to answer the question, “Do we know anything else about this person in 
addition to his biometric file like his location, personal associations, or activities?”  If there is associated 
information, it may be linked to a biometric file and this link can be used to prompt users of the 
associated information.   

   
7 
FOUO 
 
 
5.2.7 PROVIDE 
In providing we disseminate information, analysis and conclusions to appropriate organizations and 
entities in a timely manner. 
5.2.8 DECIDE/ACT  
The decide/act action is the response (either automated or human directed) to the results of the 
analysis and/or match.  
5.3 DOD BIOMETRIC CYCLE FOR MILITARY OPERATIONS 
Whereas the biometric process progresses from collection of biometric samples to decision/action on 
individuals, the biometric cycle for military operations provides a method to integrate biometrics into 
military operations.  The two are closely related, mutually dependent, and share some activities.   
The biometric cycle for military operations relies on six related activities as depicted and explained 
below: 
 
Figure 2: DOD Biometric Cycle for Military Operations    
 


   
8 
FOUO 
5.3.1 PLANNING AND DIRECTING BIOMETRIC COLLECTIONS 
When planning and directing biometric collections, commanders identify which information 
requirements can be met with biometrics; determine what biometric data is needed; analyze where and 
when the data should be collected; what resources are required for collection; what biometric products 
are to be produced; and how those products will be disseminated.   
Commanders and their staffs should also consider the utility of biometrics in recovering captive or 
isolated US or friendly personnel.  Specifically, biometrics can be used to prove the captured or isolated 
people are still alive and positively identify them provided their biometric data has already been 
collected and is available to recovery forces. 
5.3.2 COLLECTING BIOMETRIC DATA 
 Units collect and transmit biometric samples and contextual data in accordance with authoritative 
direction and their estimate of the situation.  It is worth noting that collection of biometric data can be 
done by non-DOD authorities, a partner nation or agency for example, and then shared with the US 
military.  
5.3.3 NORMALIZING BIOMETRIC DATA 
Normalizing biometric data converts it into forms that can be readily used.  For example, if a large 
number of biometric files were obtained subsequent to an agreement with another country, the 
contextual data may need translating or the files may need to be normalized prior to being input into 
DOD automated systems. 
5.3.4 ANALYZING AND PRODUCING BIOMETRIC PRODUCTS 
During analysis and production, biometric information and contextual data is integrated, evaluated, 
analyzed and interpreted to create finished biometric products that meet the commander’s information 
requirements or some other need.   For instance, biometric products may be used to help build a 
prosecutable case for a foreign government during rule of law operations.    
 
5.3.5 DISSEMINATING BIOMETRIC PRODUCTS 
During dissemination, biometric products are delivered to and used by tactical units or organizations 
supporting them. 
5.3.6 FEEDBACK AND EVALUATION 
During evaluation and feedback, units assess the effectiveness of biometric efforts and adjust as 
needed.  Evaluation and feedback may also serve to refine biometric collection requirements and 
priorities in phased operations as the combination and sequencing of offensive, defensive and stability 
activities is adjusted. 
 

   
9 
FOUO 
6.0 RISKS AND MITIGATION 
6.1 PROTECTION OF BIOMETRIC DATA  
Biometric data can be misused.  DOD must protect and secure its biometric data to ensure its integrity 
and security.  During system development, business operations, and execution of operations collected 
biometric data must be protected in a distributed network environment.  This protection ensures the 
credibility and integrity of the biometric sources, files, and authoritative databases.      
6.2 COUNTERMEASURES 
Our enemies are adaptive and continually seek new ways to counter our biometrics technologies and 
processes.  Innovative research, engineering and testing are necessary to ensure that we incorporate 
technological advancements into our future biometric capabilities.  In order to maintain our 
technological advantage we must ensure requisite analytic support; joint experimentation of concepts 
and pilots; and necessary standards continue to be developed and resourced.  The DOD must also use 
current information assurance practices in order to protect against unlawful access or inadvertent 
release of biometric information.  
6.3 RESTRICTIONS  
Domestic and foreign laws, international agreements, policies, regulations and socio-cultural inhibitions 
may prohibit or restrict the employment of biometric capabilities.  Biometric systems must be flexible to 
accommodate restrictions and changes to an individual’s status as they occur.  The DOD may cooperate 
with domestic and foreign partners to employ biometrics capabilities while respecting agreements, laws, 
policies, standards, regulations and department direction.  Because DOD’s biometric systems are largely 
automated, they must be adaptive to adhere to differing agreements and restrictions while processing a 
large volume of transactions without reliance on human oversight of each one. 
6.4 DATA QUALITY AND LATENCY 
We must use standardized, high quality files that are properly transmitted and loaded promptly in order 
to most effectively use biometrics.  A poor quality file may preclude it from being matched.  A file that is 
not promptly transmitted and uploaded into the appropriate data source(s) reduces its utility.  
Standardization of biometric collection devices and normalization of files, together with matching, 
storing and sharing standards are critical in order to share files with partner organizations.  Once 
standards are established, they must be adhered to for DOD’s biometric systems to work properly in 
supporting military operations.   
7.0 IMPLICATIONS 
Employment of biometrics has implications across the areas of doctrine, organization, training, materiel, 
leadership and education, personnel, facilities, policy, standards, data sharing and research and 
development.  These implications must be addressed in related documents.   Potential implications 
include:  

   
10 
FOUO 
• The DOD must continue to influence, establish, direct, adopt, support and enforce 
complementary biometric related policies and standards, both within DOD and with external 
partners.   
• Applying biometric capabilities requires cross-domain solutions that are interoperable with US 
and coalition processes and systems.  Consequently, the DOD must continue to influence, 
establish, adopt, support and enforce national and international biometric standards and 
operating rules to ensure the requisite interoperability is achieved.  Additional detail must be 
developed in implementing documents.   
• Formal biometric data sharing policy guidance must be established with joint, interagency (e.g., 
Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal justice information systems, Department of Homeland 
Security visitor and immigration systems), state, local, tribal and international partners to fully 
exploit the capability described in this CONOP.  
• Application of DOD’s biometrics capabilities must adhere to US law, policy, and agreement.  
Legal review of planned or ongoing activities is required in order to assure this.    
• Successful employment of biometrics relies on several information assurance (IA) capabilities, 
including confidentiality, integrity, availability and non-repudiation.  Biometric and biometric-
enabled systems must adhere to the data security requirements specified by IA related 
directives.  
• Because sharing biometric files with joint, interagency and multinational partners may be 
necessary, the DOD intends to keep the classification of biometric files at the lowest level 
acceptable to the mission and conditions of collection.  If special circumstances make it 
necessary to classify a biometric file, the file will require processes established in accordance 
with applicable laws, policies, directives and guidance from national and OSD governance 
bodies.  
• Employing biometrics can create significant demands on communication systems.   
Communication systems must be able to support operational timeliness requirements for 
biometrics.  Meanwhile, reducing bandwidth requirements through data compression and 
templating should be pursued.  
• Research and development activities must support and involve interagency participation.    
• US national and DOD biometrics organizations must identify and resource authoritative sources 
of associated information and analysis of individuals.  
• DOD must integrate multimodal biometric systems for collection, matching and storage.  
• Matching is a statistical process.  Consequently, there is a possibility for error, such as a false 
match or a false non-match.  This possibility must be considered when developing standards, 
procedures and making decisions.  

 
A - 1 
FOUO 
A. VIGNETTES 
Military operations are conducted across the conflict continuum.  The following vignettes describe how 
the DOD can employ biometrics across the range of military operations as depicted in Figure 3.  The 
vignettes describe situations where establishing an individual’s identity through biometrics yields an 
advantage.  Some capabilities described in the vignettes are assumed to be future capabilities.  For each 
vignette, assume the described operations have been reviewed and found consistent with all applicable 
foreign and domestic laws, regulations, policies and agreements.  
 
Figure 3: Biometrics Across the Range of Military Operations 
A.1 ACCESS TO SERVICES FOR NON-US PERSONNEL  
While operating in the host nation, the US contracts with local nationals to provide labor and services. 
As a condition of employment, the laborer must provide individual identity information and biometric 
samples for screening and background check purposes.  Biometric samples are taken and matched 
against both host nation and US authoritative sources.  Both positive and negative matches result in the 
update and enrollment of individual biometric files, respectively.  Additionally, once stored, these 
biometric files are shared with host nation and US government non-DOD parties for subsequent analysis 
and fusion of applicable biometric and associated information (e.g., criminal records).  Based on this 


   
A - 2 
FOUO 
exhaustive research, the US military decides whether to offer employment and issue biometrics-enabled 
identity cards to the job applicant.  Successfully screened laborers receive identity cards that they must 
display to access the base and receive wages for work performed.  Biometric matching of all laborers is 
conducted on payday to confirm identity prior to payment.   
One individual has lost his ID card, but his biometric sample matches his file in the local trusted source. 
Analysis of associated information by finance personnel indicates that he worked every day.  He is paid 
and his biometric file is updated.  
A second individual presents his ID card and a biometric sample.  He is matched to the local trusted 
source and identified as having been fired two days ago.  Finance personnel determine how much he is 
owed and he is required to surrender his ID card (he had claimed to have lost it the day he was fired) 
upon leaving the installation.  
A third individual provides his ID card.  His picture appears to match; however, his biometric sample 
does not match to any individual stored in the local trusted source.  On-scene analysis reveals he is the 
brother of an actual worker.  The individual is detained and escorted off base.  A biometric file is created 
and stored at the local trusted source and later shared, along with other non-biometric information, 
with non-DOD partners.  Additionally, a prompt with this information is attached to his biometric file for 
possible disciplinary action the next time he attempts to enter the base.  The brother’s (actual worker) 
biometric file is also identified to indicate his credentials have been compromised and this information is 
provided to other relevant authorities.  
Tasks achieved utilizing biometrics:  
• Identify unknown individuals during tactical operations  
• Manage local populations during military operations  
• Enable information assurance (authorize access to privileges)  
• Control physical access  
A.2 THEATER SECURITY COOPERATION AND EXERCISES  
The US military furthers security cooperation through medical civic action programs (MEDCAPs) to 
remote regions of allied nations in conjunction with port visits and combined military exercises.   
During an annual combined exercise, an Army medical detachment executes MEDCAPs in a number of 
villages within the exercise AOR.  Army medics collect biometric information on those who receive 
vaccinations and medical treatment during the MEDCAPs.  The biometric information is collected with 
consent from the patients and the host nation government.  Biometric files are enrolled and stored for 
each individual receiving treatment and/or vaccinations.  These biometric files are linked to subsequent 
treatment and vaccination records stored in other repositories of associated information.  
The following year a different Army medical detachment deploys to the AOR to perform MEDCAPs.  At 
the first village, Army medics encounter far more villagers awaiting vaccination than anticipated, 
creating concern that the amount of on-hand vaccine is insufficient.  To assist the ongoing mission, a 

   
A - 3 
FOUO 
repository of associated information has been established during previous MEDCAP exercises.  Biometric 
samples are collected on each person awaiting vaccination and matched to the local-trusted source.  
Numerous positive matches occur.  These match results are compared against the repository of 
associated information to identify which individuals received vaccinations in the past.  Analysis of the 
match results and the repository of associated information reveals that a large number of those 
awaiting vaccination have already received the vaccine during previous MEDCAPs and do not require an 
additional dose.  
Relying on the biometric data, the on-scene commander orders vaccination of only those with no 
biometric match and those with biometric matches whose linked medical treatment record does not 
indicate the vaccine was previously received.  The villagers are briefed accordingly.  
The Army medics successfully complete the MEDCAP with the vaccine on hand.  The on-scene 
commander is confident that the total supply of vaccination is sufficient for future MEDCAPs based on 
the biometric matches experienced in this initial MEDCAP.  
Tasks achieved utilizing biometrics:  
• Manage local populations during military operations  
• Enable information assurance (authorize access to privileges)  
• Share identity information  
A.3 DISASTER RELIEF 
The US Government is responding to a request from a country that has experienced a catastrophic 
disaster.  The disaster has created the immediate need to locate, rescue and manage the affected 
population.  
The host government approves the multinational response force to collect biometric samples from the 
civilian population to assist with disaster relief efforts with the stipulations that: (a) the biometric 
information only be used to identify individuals located and rescued and to manage the flow of 
casualties and the displaced population; and (b) the biometric information not be removed from the 
country.  
Biometric data is collected as the affected individuals are rescued, treated or entered into the refugee 
management process.  Because of the scale of the disaster, much of the biometric data from affected 
people is collected by the host government and then given to the DOD.  After normalizing the data, DOD 
personnel store the collected biometric files on a local un-trusted source and use them as the reference 
set against which subsequent matches are made.  As personnel are placed aboard transportation, 
provided medical care or basic services at a disaster relief site, the individuals’ biometrics are the 
“tokens” that authorize their access.  In each instance, once the biometric file is matched, the identity is 
referenced against repositories of non-biometric information such as camp rosters, medical records, 
records of service provided, transportation logs, etc. to enable better management of services provided 
and needs of the population.  This data and the collected biometrics are shared with the host nation and 

   
A - 4 
FOUO 
coalition partners to assist in integrating their relief efforts with those of US forces.  The host nation also 
compares the collected information with repositories of non-biometric data that have survived the 
disaster (tax records, census data, etc) to assist in the speedy location and reunion of families.  At the 
request of relief organizations, the national government shares the biometric data and identification 
results with NGOs and neighboring countries affected by the refugee flow.  
Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Manage local populations during military operations  
• Manage emergency situations  
• Share identity information  
A.4 MANAGING REFUGEES DURING FOREIGN HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE MISSION  
The US military is responding as part of an international disaster relief effort.  Thousands of injured are 
being treated and awaiting further treatment as soon as field medical hospitals are assembled and 
operational.  All individuals who receive medical attention within the disaster area are immediately 
enrolled in a biometric local un-trusted source that has been established for management of the 
refugees.  All treatment records are linked to their respective biometric files.  Many of the injured, after 
being initially treated, voluntarily relocate within the disaster area.  This movement is making it difficult 
for medical personnel to efficiently provide medical services or track patients for follow-up treatment.  
Navy corpsmen are performing triage for refugees arriving by buses at one of the newly established US 
field hospitals.  The corpsmen collect biometric samples from each refugee for identification purposes as 
part of the initial medical assessment process.  The biometric files are then sent for matching against the 
local un-trusted source to assist with the identification of the individual and retrieve any available 
treatment history.  
A refugee who cannot be matched against the local un-trusted source is enrolled as a new biometric file. 
All subsequent medical treatment will later be linked to the file of that individual.  When a refugee is 
positively matched against the local un-trusted source, links to his medical history are accessed and his 
prior treatment records are retrieved.  Subsequent treatment is updated in the refugee’s medical record 
so that information can be accessed by others again in the future through utilizing the established net-
centric links between the non-biometric repository (medical files) and his biometric file.  The corpsman 
uses these medical records to aid in triage.  
Tasks achieved utilizing biometrics:  
• Manage local populations during military operations  
• Manage emergency situations  
• Share identity information  
 
 

   
A - 5 
FOUO 
A.5 FOREIGN HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE— SECURITY MISSION  
The US and multinational partners operate from several dozen military bases in an allied nation and 
contract locally for a wide range of services, such as vehicle rental and maintenance, civil construction, 
provisioning of food and water and waste removal.  Biometrics are collected to support a wide range of 
activities from base access to monitoring of all contracting activities.  All biometric data are matched 
against the local-trusted source and repositories of associated information for the purposes of vetting. 
All samples reveal a negative match and are enrolled in the local-trusted source and transmitted to the 
authoritative source.  
Several base contracting officers encounter a dishonest local contractor who is awarded contracts and 
receives partial payment but never performs the work – essentially disappearing with the money.  This 
associated information is analyzed with relevant biometric data.  This analysis is transmitted to the 
authoritative source, the individual’s biometric file is identified and repositories of associated 
information are modified for future analysis to indicate he is barred from further contracts.  This 
information is then shared with local-trusted sources and other interested parties.  
The dishonest local contractor relocates to another region and applies for new US and coalition 
contracts using a different company name and false personal data.  The contracting official collects his 
biometric sample and requests a match from the local-trusted source.  A subsequent positive match 
reveals a prompt directing the user to relevant associated information indicating his previous activities 
and status.  His bids are eliminated.  The dishonest contractor’s biometric file is updated with the newly 
collected biometric sample and contextual data and the attempt is shared with all appropriate 
authorities.  
A newly-arrived disbursing officer is ordered into the local community to pay a contractor for recently 
completed work.  This officer has never met the local national to whom he is to pay a large sum of cash. 
Following the directions provided by a local interpreter, the disbursing officer arrives at what he believes 
is the office of the intended contractor.  Unbeknownst to the disbursing officer, he has arrived at a fake 
contractor's office.  As a condition of payment the supposed contractor provides his biometric 
information.  A field match test reveals the presented biometric samples do not match the biometric file 
of the individual identified in the contract.  The disbursing officer refuses to pay despite the local 
interpreter’s and contractor's insistence.  
Upon returning to base the disbursing officer provides the collected biometric information and his 
incident report to the Provost Marshal for investigation with the local police.  The local interpreter is 
immediately detained on-base for questioning.  The fraudulent contractor’s biometric file is enrolled and 
stored within the local-trusted source, transmitted to the authoritative source and shared with 
interested parties.  Upon completion of the investigation, the Provost Marshal concludes that the 
contractor is a fraud.  US military contracting offices operating within the region as well as the host 
nation update their respective repositories with this information.  
 

   
A - 6 
FOUO 
Tasks achieved utilizing biometrics:  
• Track a person of interest  
• Manage local populations during military operations  
• Control physical access  
• Enable information assurance (authorize access to privileges)  
• Share identity information  
A.6 MARITIME INTERDICTION OPERATION WHILE PROTECTING THE HOMELAND 
A US Coast Guard Law Enforcement Detachment (LEDET) is aboard a US Navy ship and operating under 
US Navy tactical control while conducting a compliant maritime interdiction operation seeking terrorists.  
After obtaining flag state consent, the LEDET boards a large container ship and collects biometric 
samples from each crewman.  The data is transmitted to a DOD authoritative source and is followed up 
with acknowledgment of receipt.  The biometric data is compared against all stored files and shared 
with mission partners.  A subsequent match is made on three of the crewmen.  Furthermore, the 
matched files show a link to the National Counter-Terrorism Center (NCTC) terrorist watchlist.  The 
authoritative source updates the applicable biometric files with newly collected biometric samples and 
contextual data.  The LEDET is informed of the match result and watchlist status.  
Further analysis of the biometric files and additional associated information indicates the three 
crewmen have travel patterns consistent with those of previously apprehended terrorists.  Based on this 
information, the on-scene commander detains the three crew members pending further disposition. 
The on-scene commander further requests, and is granted, flag state authorization to conduct a detailed 
search of the vessel.  In the course of the search, 40 undocumented individuals are discovered in a cargo 
hold.  They are determined to be attempting illegal entry into the US.  Also during the search, 
documents related to the design of an improvised nuclear device are discovered and collected. 
Biometric samples are next collected from the undocumented individuals.  Their biometric data is 
transmitted to the DOD authoritative source and compared to all stored files; however, no match is 
made.  Each undocumented individual’s biometric data is enrolled into a biometric file, linked to the 
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) information and stored for later use.  The biometric files and 
related associated information are shared with the mission partners and entered into interagency 
systems, including the maritime domain awareness systems, the FBI criminal justice information systems 
and DHS visit and immigration systems.  The on-scene commander informs the appropriate authority 
and, after receiving flag state and US Government authorization, takes the undocumented individuals 
into custody pending further disposition.  
Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Identify an unknown individual during tactical operations  
• Locate a person of interest  
• Track a person of interest  
• Enable information assurance  

   
A - 7 
FOUO 
• Share identity information  
A.7 INTERAGENCY OPERATIONS WHILE RESTORING CIVIL SECURITY 
US and multinational forces are supporting a foreign country’s rebuilding process, which is being 
undermined by smuggling into the state.  The US and multinational forces are working largely “by, with, 
and through” the host government’s institutions.  The host government has only allowed US forces to 
use collected biometric data within the host nation and required all collected data be shared with them.  
Therefore, all biometric operations are conducted using local un-trusted sources.  
In accordance with standard operating procedures (SOPs), a truck driver provides biometric samples to 
the border police at a remote international border crossing supported by US military personnel.  The 
biometric samples and contextual information are transmitted to the local un-trusted source and 
subsequently compared to locally stored biometric files.  The truck driver’s biometric data does not 
match any file at the local un-trusted source and a negative response is provided back to the border 
police.  The truck driver also is checked against local and national criminal records.  The border police 
review the match result, associated information and other available situational information and clear 
the truck driver to continue.  The biometric file is enrolled and stored at the local un-trusted source, as 
well as shared with US forces, multinational partners and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 
operating within the country.  
Several months later, the host nation’s national police, supported by a US Government agency, conduct 
a raid on a drug-smuggler’s safe house and seize numerous documents and other evidence.  Biometric 
samples are collected using forensic techniques and compared to the local un-trusted source.  A match 
is made between the latent fingerprint samples collected during the raid and the truck driver’s 
previously collected biometric file.  An analysis of the raid, as well as additional associated information, 
is completed and the truck driver’s non-biometric reference information is updated with these new 
samples, identified for future matches and shared with all local sources within the country.  
Several days later, the truck driver attempts to cross at a different border checkpoint.  He submits his 
individual identification and a biometric sample for verification.  The sample is compared against the 
truck driver’s biometric sample on file, which alerts the border police to the prompt stored at the local 
un-trusted source.  The truck driver is detained for questioning and his biometric file is updated with the 
newly collected biometric sample and contextual data.  
Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Identify an individual during tactical operations  
• Locate a person of interest  
• Track a person of interest  
• Manage local populations during military operations  
• Control physical access  
• Share identity information  

   
A - 8 
FOUO 
A.8 PERSONNEL RECOVERY DURING STABILITY OPERATIONS 
US government, DOD, multinational and NGO personnel are conducting stability operations in a country 
coping with insurgent activity.  Several civilians have been abducted.  
A US special operations forces (SOF) team receives information from intelligence sources concerning the 
location of a US civilian contractor who has been held by insurgents for nearly 30 days.    
Prior to conducting a rescue operation, the SOF team downloads digital biometric files and associated 
information on the captive from the authoritative source in order to verify the individual’s identity.  
During the operation, the team detains seven individuals at the site and collects their biometric data. 
Using their tactical biometric device, the team immediately matches one sample to the individual the 
unit was sent to recover.  The team also uses associated information obtained from the contractor’s firm 
to verify the identity of the individual.  Other individuals are not immediately matched and their 
biometric files are transmitted, enrolled and stored at the authoritative source.  The authoritative 
source acknowledges receipt of biometric files.  
The team initiates handling protocols for the rescued captive and detains the remaining individuals.  At 
the repository, the files are processed and stored for future use.    
Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Identify an individual during tactical operations  
• Locate a person of interest  
• Identify friendly forces  
A.9 TRACK A HIGH-VALUE TARGET 
While on patrol, a squad of Marines detects an improvised explosive device (IED).  Explosive ordnance 
disposal technicians render the device safe, a forensics team manages to collect latent fingerprints and 
DNA samples, and the IED components are sent to a forward forensic facility for more analysis.   
The latent fingerprints are formatted into a standardized electronic file, compared to samples on file 
and stored locally.  There is no match at the local-trusted source and the data is enrolled into a 
biometric file.  Both the electronic fingerprint file and DNA samples are transmitted to their respective 
authoritative source for further comparison.  Acknowledgement of receipt is transmitted back to the 
local source.  Matching at the authoritative source does not yield a DNA match and the sample is stored 
for further comparison.  The fingerprint and DNA samples are also shared with coalition partners, 
revealing a fingerprint match to a suspected bomb-maker.  Based on this identification, the coalition 
partner provides a facial photograph of the suspected bomb maker as well as other information gained 
from intercepted signals and captured documents. 
Analysis of the shared biometric samples, signals and documents indicates the suspected bomb maker’s 
last reported location was outside the joint area of operations in a country providing sanctuary.  This 

   
A - 9 
FOUO 
analysis, as well as the photograph provided by multinational partners, is sent to the DOD authoritative 
source to update the biometric file.  An alert (prompt) containing pointers to information located in non-
biometric reference data is disseminated to tactical users to facilitate future data comparisons on their 
local biometrics systems should they encounter the individual.  
A series of raids on suspected insurgent locations provides more biometric samples that are matched to 
the suspected bomb maker.  This match information, the biometric files and the associated information 
from the previous analysis that led to his being tied to the IED incidents are shared with interested 
parties for further analysis.  Analysis of associated information indicates that the suspected bomb maker 
is moving within the area of responsibility and provides locations he will likely move to.  Cameras are 
positioned around those locations and provide photographs that identify the suspected bomb maker 
using facial recognition.  Once the suspected bomb maker is located, a tactical unit conducts a raid to 
apprehend him.  
The raid force encounters six men at the site, all with authentic-looking identification in their 
possession.  Pictures of the bomb-maker provided to the raid force are outdated and do not closely 
resemble any individual at the raid site but a field biometric test matches the suspected bomb-maker. 
Analysis of that biometric match result and associated information from the previous analysis that tied 
him to the IED incident enable the raid force leader to decide to detain that man.  The other men are 
released after collecting their biometric samples and comparing them against available repositories to 
determine if they had been encountered previously.  All collected samples and contextual information 
are updated in their respective biometric files and annotated to reflect that the raid force encountered 
them in the company of a known bomb-maker.  Other information found at the scene is also collected 
by the raid force and subsequently stored in a repository of associated information for use in later 
analysis. 
Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Identify an unknown individual during tactical operations 
• Locate a person of interest  
• Track a person of interest  
• Enable information assurance  
• Share Identity Information  
A.10 CONTINGENCY OPERATION AND UNITED STATES LAW ENFORCEMENT SUPPORT  
A squad on a patrol is attacked by armed fighters in native garb.  After the initial skirmish, the fighters 
surrender their arms and are detained by US military forces.  A search of the subjects’ possessions 
reveals falsified identification documents from Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan.    
Biometric samples are collected from each of the detainees and are transmitted to a DOD authoritative 
source.  The data is compared against all files within the authoritative source and a positive match is 
made on two of the individuals.  Match results indicate these two subject’s biometrics have been found 
at a location containing bomb-making materials in Yemen around the time of the USS Cole attack.  

   
A - 10 
FOUO 
After updating and storing the subjects’ new biometric files, the DOD shares all of the biometric samples 
and associated information with the FBI’s and Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) biometric 
databases.  After analysis of available biometric and associated information, the subjects are nominated 
and promoted by the NCTC as known or suspected terrorists.  The subjects’ biometric files are identified 
and linked to the NCTC’s terrorist watch list at the DOD authoritative source, as well as entered into the 
FBI’s known or suspected terrorist (KST) database.  
Several months later, the detainees are released to a foreign government for adjudication and 
repatriation.  
Several years later, a US police department responds to a trespassing complaint at a local water 
treatment plant, which services a large metropolitan area.  Two subjects are apprehended and 
fingerprints are taken at the police department’s primary booking station.  The fingerprints are 
transmitted to the FBI’s fingerprint database and matches are made against the previously shared 
biometric files collected from the military detainees.  Because the fingerprints have been entered into 
the FBI’s KST file, the FBI CJIS Division Intelligence Group immediately alerts the Terrorist Screening 
Center (TSC) of the encounter.  Upon notification, the TSC advises the local Joint Terrorism Task Force to 
investigate whether the trespassing act was an indication of a terrorist threat to the nation.  
Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Identify an unknown individual during tactical operations  
• Locate a person of interest  
• Track a person of interest  
• Enable information assurance  
• Share identity information  
A.11 LIMITED STRIKES AND UNITED STATES BORDER PROTECTION SUPPORT  
Allied forces are supporting a foreign country’s operation to neutralize a suspected WMD bomb-making 
facility within the country’s borders.  During a successful raid of the facility, US military forces locate 
stockpiles of IEDs and detain several subjects in connection with the operation.  
The subjects are turned over to the foreign country’s government after biometric samples and 
contextual data are collected and transmitted to a DOD authoritative source.  The data is compared 
against all files within the authoritative source and no matches are made on any of the individuals.  The 
DOD authoritative source enrolls the new biometric files.  The DOD shares the biometric files and 
associated information with the FBI.  There are no matches within the FBI’s database.  
Several months later, the subjects escape from the foreign government’s prison system.    
Several years later, DHS Customs and Border Protection (CBP) collects a visitor’s fingerprints during a 
primary border-entry check.  The CBP transmits the biometric information to the DHS authoritative 
source.  Through system interoperability with the FBI’s biometric database, DHS identifies one of the 
subjects as having been previously detained at the WMD bomb-making facility.  

   
A - 11 
FOUO 
Upon notification of the match, the primary border check escalates to a secondary CBP inspection and 
an investigation into the encounter is initiated.  After a more detailed inspection, an IED is found 
concealed in the subject’s vehicle and is later determined to be a WMD.  The subjects are immediately 
detained and handed over to the FBI for further questioning.  
Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Identify an unknown individual during tactical operations  
• Track a person of interest  
• Control physical access  
• Share identity information 
A.12 REPATRIATION AND WAR CRIMES PROSECUTION DURING MAJOR COMBAT OPERATIONS 
US and allied forces have begun major combat operations after several months of intense diplomatic 
activity.  They are acting under a UN resolution authorizing the use of force.  Their purpose is to defeat a 
country’s invasion of one of its neighbors.     
The UN forces take a large number of prisoners of war early in the campaign.  Facial photographs and 
fingerprints are taken from the prisoners in order to provide the opposing nation and appropriate 
international organizations an accounting of the identity of the prisoners, their health and location.  The 
fingerprints and photographs are also enrolled into DOD’s authoritative database of biometric samples. 
Several mass graves and caches of looted valuables are discovered by UN forces as liberation of the 
country continues.  Latent fingerprints are recovered from the sites using forensic techniques and 
matched to twenty enemy prisoners of war.  When questioned concerning the presence of their 
fingerprints on looted valuables and shell casings at mass graves, roughly half of the prisoners decline to 
answer or are highly evasive.  The other half admit to their participation in mass killings and looting but 
state they were acting under coercion.  Their accounts of the times and locations of the atrocities accord 
with evidence obtained through exploiting captured documents.  The cooperating prisoners identify 
several commanders as responsible for the atrocities using pre-conflict media footage to identify them.  
These commanders are also consistently identified by multiple members of the local civilian populace as 
being responsible for the mass killings and theft. 
The pre-conflict photographs of the individuals suspected of ordering and leading the atrocities are 
electronically compared to the facial photographs of enemy prisoners of war under UN control.  This 
results in two matches.  When confronted both individuals admit they presented false identity 
documents upon capture purporting to be members of the medical service corps.  They state they did 
this in order to protect their knowledge of their country’s military and intelligence apparatus.  When 
questioned regarding illegal killings and looting both individuals quickly claim no knowledge of such 
things and decline to answer further questions.  
The investigation is pursued further.  After considering its conclusions the UN Security Council refers the 
case the International Criminal Court.  By the end of hostilities the International Criminal Court has 

   
A - 12 
FOUO 
issued several indictments for individuals who are later successfully prosecuted.  The remaining 
prisoners of war are repatriated.      
 Tasks achieved using biometrics:  
• Locate a person of interest  
• Share identity information  

 
B - 1 
FOUO 
B. REFERENCES 
a. Privacy Act of 1974, 5 USC 552a, especially:  
• 5 U.S.C. § 552a(b)(1) 
• 5 U.S.C. § 552a(e)(9)  
• J. 5 U.S.C. § 552a(e)(10)  
b. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Guidelines, 40 Federal. Register.  28,948, 28,955 (09 July 
1975)  
c. OMB CIRCULAR NO. A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources (08 February 1996)  
d. Army Regulation 190-8, “Enemy Prisoners of War, Retained Personnel, Civilian Internees and Other 
Detainees,” (October 1997), http://www.usapa.army.mil/pdffiles/r190_8.pdf  
e. Title 10, United States Code (Armed Forces) (26 June 1998)  
f. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) “Electronic Fingerprint Transmission Specification” (EFTS) 
(January 1999)  
g. FBI DNA Advisory Board, “Quality Assurance Standards for Forensic DNA Testing Laboratories and for 
Convicted Offender DNA Database Laboratories,” (July 2000), 
http://www.fbi.gov/hq/lab/fsc/backissu/july2000/codispre.htm  
h. Public Law 106-246 Military Appropriations (13 July 2000)  
i. American National Standards Institute/National Institute of Standards and Technology (ANSI/NIST)-ITL 
1- 2011, “Data Format for the Interchange of Fingerprint, Facial & Other Biometric Information” 
j. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Executive Agent for the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Biometrics Project” (27 December 2000)  
k. Assistant Secretary of Defense (Command, Control, Communication and Intelligence) (C3I) 
Memorandum “Biometrics as an Information Enabler” (19 January 2001)  
l. A0380-19 Secretary of the Army Information Systems AIS “Change in Systems Records Notice“ 
(amended 13 April 2001)  
m. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum “ DOD Strategic Plan for Biometrics” (28 June 2002)  
n. Army General Order No. 3 “Assignment of Functions and Responsibilities Within Headquarters, Dept. 
of the Army” (09 July 2002)  
o. DOD Directive 5101.1 “DOD Executive Agent” (03 September 2002)  

   
B - 2 
FOUO 
p. Secretary of the Army General Counsel Memorandum “ Legislative Authority for the DOD Biometrics 
Program “ (17 October 2002)  
q. DOD Directive 8500.1 ”Information Assurance (IA)” (24 October 2002)  
r.  DOD Instruction 8500.2 “Information Assurance Implementation” (06 February 2003)  
s.  DOD Directive 5000.01 “The Defense Acquisition System” (12 May 2003)  
t. DOD Instruction 5000.02 “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System “ (8 December 2008)  
u. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum “ DOD Biometrics Enterprise Vision” (25 August 2003)  
v. Homeland Security Presidential Directive HSPD-6 “Integration and Use of Screening Information” (16 
September 2003), http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2003/09/20030916-5.html  
w. Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 “Critical Infrastructure Identification, Prioritization and 
Protection Purpose” (17 December 2003)  
x. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration Memorandum, “Department 
of Defense Compliance with the Internationally Accepted Standard for Electronic Transmission and 
Storage of Fingerprint Data from ‘Red Force’ Personnel” (02 February 2004)  
y. Army CIO/G-6 Memorandum “FBI Guidance on Collection of Fingerprint and Other Biometric Data 
from Military Detainees” (18 February 2004)  
z. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Criteria and Guidelines for Screening and Processing 
Persons Detained by the Department of Defense in Connection with the War on Terrorism” (20 February 
2004)  
aa. Commander, Fleet Force Command Message “Establishment of a Navy Program to Support Counter 
Terrorism-Anti Terrorism-Force Protection” (12 April 2004)  
bb. Turner Congressional Memorandum “DOD Collection and Use of Biometric Data” (12 April 2004)  
cc. ANSI/INCITS 385-2004, “Face Recognition Format for Data Interchange” (May 2004). This standard is 
copyrighted and licensed copies are available from the International Organization for Standardization.  
dd. DODD 8521.01E “Department of Defense Biometrics” (February 2008) 
 
ee. ISO/IEC 19794-6:2005 379-2004, “Information technology -- Biometric data interchange formats -- 
Part 6: Iris image data”.  This standard is copyrighted and licensed copies are available from 
International Organization for Standardization ISO.   
ff. US Central Command (CENTCOM) “Fragmentary Order Biometric Collection and Reporting System ” 
(18 June 2004)  

   
B - 3 
FOUO 
gg. Title 28 United States Code Section 534, Acquisition, Preservation and Exchange of Identification 
Records and Information (19 June 2004)  
hh. DOD Directive 1000.25, “Personnel Identity Protection” (19 July 2004)  
ii. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration Memorandum ASD (NII), 
Director, Information Assurance Memorandum Establishment of a DOD Automated Biometric 
Identification System (ABIS) (05 August 2004)  
jj. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DOD Detainee Biometric Collection Processing Policy” 
(15 August 2004)  
kk. Biometrics Identity Management Agency (BIMA) “Enemy Prisoner of War Records Security Standard 
Operation Procedures” (23 August 2004)  
ll. Homeland Security Presidential Directive 11 “Comprehensive Terrorist-Related Screening Procedures” 
(27 August 2004), http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2004/08/20040827-7.html or 
http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/direct.htm  
mm. Homeland Security Presidential Directive 24 
 
nn. Executive Order 13356, “Strengthening the Sharing of Terrorism Information to Protect America,” 
(27 August 2004), http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2004/08/20040827-4.html  
oo. Director, Biometrics Management Office (BMO) Memorandum “ Interim Policy on Searching and 
Matching Biometric Data for the Iraqi Multi-Purpose Access Card” (20 October 2004)  
pp. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Department of Defense Detainee Biometric Policy” (01 
November 2004) (Classified)  
qq. DOD Directive 5400.11, “DOD Privacy Program” (16 November 2004)  
rr. Fleet Judge Advocate Memorandum “Legal Opinion on Legality of Taking Fingerprints of Suspected 
Terrorists During Conduct of Title 10 Missions” (08 December 2004)  
ss. Director, Navy Staff Memorandum “Resource Sponsorship for Biometrics” (16 December 2004)  
tt. National Security Presidential Directive 41/ Homeland Security Presidential Directive 13 “Maritime 
Security Policy” (21 December 2004)  
uu. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff “National Military Strategy” (2011)  
vv. Chief for Naval Operations Memorandum “Authority and Capabilities Required for the Global War on 
Terrorism” (18 January 2005)  
ww. DOD Department of the Army Privacy Act of 1974, System of Records Notice (DOD ABIS) (25 
February 2005)  

   
B - 4 
FOUO 
xx. Secretary of Defense, “National Defense Strategy of the United States of America” (June 2008)  
yy. DA-G6 Memorandum, “DOD Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) For Collecting and Processing 
Detainee Biometric Data” (04 March 2005)  
zz. Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) Memorandum “Interim Approval to Connect (IATC) for 
the Biometrics Identity Management Agency (BIMA), West Virginia to the Secret IP Router Network 
(SIPRNet)” (17 March 2005)  
aaa. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Force Protection Identity Screening Policy for Base 
Access” (29 March 2005)  
bbb. Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence Multi-National Force Iraq, Memorandum “CENTCOM 
Operational Needs Statement” (30 April 2005)  
ccc. National Security Agency Information “Assurance Architecture, version 1.1” (May 2005)  
ddd. DOD Identity Protection and Management Vision (June 2005)  
eee. DOD “Electronic Biometric Transmission Specification, Version 1.1” (23 August 2005)  
fff. Net-Centric Environment Joint Functional Concept (07 April 2006)  
ggg. FBI Electronic Fingerprint Transmission Specification 7.1 (02 May 2005)  
hhh. Department of The Army Office of The General Counsel memo, “Ownership of Biometric Data 
Submitted to DOD Automated Biometric Identification System (ABIS)” (12 May 2005) 
iii. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum ”Joint Improvised Explosive Device (IED) Defeat“ (27 June 
2005)  
jjj. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Department of Defense Policy for Biometric 
Identification System for Access to U.S. Installations and Facilities in Iraq” (15 July 2005)  
kkk. DOD Biometrics Management Office Memorandum, “Interim Notification Process for Matches 
Made on Biometric Automated Toolset (BAT) Data using the DOD Automated Biometric Identification 
System (ABIS)” (15 July 2005)  
lll. Capstone Concept for Joint Operations Version 2.0 (August 2005)  
mmm. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum “Notifying Individuals When Personal Information is 
Lost, Stolen, or Compromised” (15 July 2005)  
nnn. Biometrics Identity Management Agency (BIMA) Memorandum, “Interim Executive Agent Guidance 
on Ownership of Biometric Data Submitted to and Stored in the DOD Automated Biometric 
Identification System (ABIS)” (15 July 2005)  
ooo. Global Information Grid Information Assurance Initial Capabilities Document (06 March 2006)  

   
B - 5 
FOUO 
ppp. Net-Centric Environment Joint Functional Concept (07 April 2006)  
qqq. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Collection of Biometric Data from Certain U.S. 
Persons in the United States Central Command (USCENTCOM) Area of Responsibility (AOR)” (24 May 
2006)  
rrr. “Products certified for compliance with the FBI’s Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification 
System image quality specifications,” http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cjisd/iafis/cert.htm  
sss. DA Form 2663-R, “Fingerprint Card,” http://www.apd.army.mil/pub/eforms/pdf/a2663_r.pdf  
ttt. DA Form 4137, “Evidence/Property Custody Document,” 
http://www.apd.army.mil/pub/eforms/pdf/a4137.pdf  
uuu. Department of Defense Biometrics Website, http://www.biometrics.DOD.mil  
vvv. Secretary of Defense Strategic Planning Guidance, 2006-2011  
www. Public Law 93-579, Disclosure of Social Security Number  
xxx. Homeland Security Presidential Directive 59 
 
yyy. DOD Identity Protection and Management Senior Coordinating Group Charter 
zzz. DOD Roadmap to Identity Superiority 
aaaa. CJCSI 6212.01E Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology and National 
Security Systems 
 
bbbb. Biometrically Enabled Intelligence Concept of Operations (26 Feb 10) 
 
cccc. Joint Capabilities Document, Biometrics Support to Identity Management (31 Jan 08) 
 
dddd. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum “Authority to Collect, Store, and Share Biometric 
Information of Non-U.S. Persons with US Government Entities and Partner Nations” (13 Jan 12) 
 
eeee. Biometric Glossary, www.biometrics.gov/ReferenceRoom/Introduction 
 
ffff. DOD Directive 5205.15E “DOD Forensic Enterprise” (26 April 11) 
 
gggg. DOD Directive 8521.01E “Department of Defense Biometrics” (21 February 08) 
 

 
C - 1 
FOUO 
C. GLOSSARY  
Analyze – To deliberately consider available information on an individual and reach logical conclusions.  
These conclusions can include his intent, affiliation(s), activities, location and behavioral patterns.  (DOD 
Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Associated Information – Non-biometric information about a person.  For example, a person's name, 
personal habits, age, current and past addresses, current and past employers, telephone number, email 
address, place of birth, family names, nationality, education level, group affiliations and history, 
including such characteristics as nationality, educational achievements, employer, security clearances, 
financial and credit history.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military 
Operations)  
Authentication – The process of establishing confidence in the truth of some claim.  The claim could be 
any declarative statement for example: “This individual’s name is ‘Joseph K.’ ” or “This child is more than 
5 feet tall.”  In biometrics, “authentication” is sometimes used as a generic synonym for verification. 
[National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006]  
Authoritative Source – The primary DOD approved repository of biometric information on a biometric 
subject.  The authoritative source provides a strategic capability for access to standardized, 
comprehensive and current biometric files within the DOD and for sharing of biometric files with joint, 
interagency and designated multinational partners.  The DOD may designate authoritative sources for 
various populations in accordance with applicable law, policy and directives.  (DODI 8521.bb)  
Behavioral Biometric Characteristic – A biometric characteristic that is learned and acquired over time 
rather than one based primarily on biology.  All biometric characteristics depend somewhat upon both 
behavioral and biological characteristic.  Examples of biometric modalities for which behavioral 
characteristics may dominate include signature recognition and keystroke dynamics.  (NSTC 
Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
Biological Biometric Characteristic – A biometric characteristic based primarily on an anatomical or 
physiological characteristic, rather than a learned behavior.  All biometric characteristics depend 
somewhat upon both behavioral and biological characteristic.  Examples of biometric modalities for 
which biological characteristics may dominate include fingerprint and hand geometry.  (NSTC 
Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
Biometric Automated Toolset – Army (BAT-A) – A multimodal biometric system that collects, stores, and 
shares fingerprints, iris images, and facial photography.  It is used to enroll, identify, and track persons of 
interest, build digital dossiers on individuals that can include attached digital images, reports, 
documents, and include a wide variety of reports to include biographic, contextual, relationship, and 
interrogation reports.  BAT-A has an internal biometric signature search/match capability and can be 
configured into either a mobile or handheld configuration.  (PM DOD Biometrics, TCM BF) 

   
C - 2 
FOUO 
Biometrics Enabled Intelligence – Intelligence information associated with and or derived from 
biometrics data that matches a specific person or unknown identity to a place, activity, device, 
component, or weapon that supports terrorist/insurgent network and related pattern analysis, 
facilitates high value individual targeting, reveals movement patterns, and confirms claimed identity.  
(DoDD 8521.01E) 
Biometric File – The standardized individual data set resulting from a collection action that consists of a 
biometric sample and contextual data.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics 
in Military Operations)  
Biometric Identity – A distinct, non-refutable set of physical and behavioral characteristics.  (DOD 
Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Biometric Samples – Information or computer data obtained from a biometric sensor device.  Examples 
are images of a face or fingerprint. (NSTC Subcommittee on Biometrics) 
Biometric – Measurable physical characteristic or personal behavior trait used to recognize the identity 
or verify the claimed identity of an individual.  (JP 1-02) 
Biometrics – The process of recognizing an individual based on measurable anatomical, physiological 
and behavioral characteristics.  (JP 1-02) 
Capabilities Based Assessment (CBA) – The CBA is the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development 
System analysis process that includes four phases: the functional area analysis, the functional needs 
analysis, the functional solution analysis and the post independent analysis.  The results of the CBA are 
used to develop a joint capabilities document or initial capabilities document.  (CJCSM 3170.01B, 11 May 
2005)  
Collect – Obtain biometric and related contextual data from an object, system, or individual with, or 
without, his knowledge.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military 
Operations)  
Contextual Data – Elements of biographical and situational information (who, what, when, where, how, 
why, etc.) that are associated with a collection event and permanently recorded as an integral 
component of the biometric file.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in 
Military Operations)  
Database – A collection of one or more computer files.  For biometric systems, these files could consist 
of biometric sensor readings, templates, match results, related end user information, etc.  (NSTC 
Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
Decide/Act – Take action based on a biometric file’s match results and analysis of associated 
information.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  

   
C - 3 
FOUO 
Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS) and the Real-Time Automated Personnel 
Identification System (RAPIDS) – Operational programs in support of resources/benefits management, 
critical defense missions, the Uniformed Services Identification (ID) Card program and awareness 
regarding benefits to which Uniformed Services personnel and their family members are entitled. 
(Defense Manpower Data Center)  
Enrollment – The process of collecting a biometric sample from an end user, converting it into a 
biometric reference and storing it in the biometric system’s database for later comparison.  (NSTC 
Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
Family of Joint Future Concepts – Provides the conceptual basis for capabilities-based assessments 
(CBAs) to answer these questions by identifying capabilities, gaps and redundancies as well as potential 
non-materiel and materiel approaches to addressing the issues.  (CJCSM 3170.01B, 11 May 2005)  
Forensic – Scientific analysis linking persons, places, things and events.  These linkages are made in both 
traditional law-enforcement and medical purviews, as well as the expeditionary environment. (DODD 
5205.15E, 26 April 2011)  
Functional Capabilities Board – A permanently established body that is responsible for the organization, 
analysis and prioritization of joint warfighting capabilities within an assigned functional area.  (CJCSM 
3170.01B, 11 May 2005)  
Future Joint Force – A force that is knowledge-empowered, networked, interoperable, expeditionary, 
adaptable / tailorable, enduring / persistent, precise, fast, resilient, agile and lethal.  (CJCSM 3170.01B, 
11 May 2005)  
Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 – A policy for a common identification standard for 
federal employees and contractors.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in 
Military Operations)  
Identification – A task where the biometric system searches a database for a reference matching a 
submitted biometric sample and if found, returns a corresponding identity.  A biometric is collected and 
compared to all references in a database.  Identification is “closed-set” if the person is known to exist in 
the database.  In “open-set” identification, sometimes referred to as a “watchlist,” the person is not 
guaranteed to exist in the database.  The system must determine whether the person is in the database, 
then return the identity.  (NSTC Subcommittee on Biometrics and Identity Management Biometrics 
Glossary) 
Identity – The set of attribute values (i.e. characteristics) by which an entity is recognizable and that, 
within the scope of an identity manager’s responsibility, is sufficient to distinguish that entity from any 
other entity and to distinguish the identity from any other identity.  (DOD Capstone Concept of 
Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  

   
C - 4 
FOUO 
Identity Management – The combination of technical systems, policies and processes that create, 
define, govern and synchronize the ownership, utilization and safeguarding of identity information. 
(DOD Identity Management Strategic Plan) 
Identity Protection – The process of safeguarding and ensuring that identities of individuals, devices, 
applications and services are not compromised.  (DOD IPMSCG Charter)  
Individual – A specific, physical person.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics 
in Military Operations)  
Information Assurance – Operational capabilities that facilitate information sharing while protecting and 
defending electronic information and information systems by ensuring their availability, integrity, 
authentication and confidentiality. (Pentagon Area Common Information Technology Wireless Security 
Policy, September 2002)  
Intelligence Exploitation – The process of converting collected information into forms suitable to the 
production of intelligence.  (Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations JP 2-01)  
Joint Capabilities Document (JCD) – The JCD identifies a set of capabilities that support a defined mission 
area as identified in the Family of Joint Future Concepts, concept of operations (CONOP), or Unified 
Command Plan-assigned missions.  The capabilities are identified by analyzing what is required across all 
functional areas to accomplish the mission.  The gaps or redundancies are then identified by comparing 
the capability needs to the capabilities provided by existing or planned systems.  The JCD will be used as 
a baseline for one or more initial capabilities documents or joint doctrine, organization, training, 
materiel, leadership and education, personnel and facilities change recommendations, but cannot be 
used for the development of capability development or capability production documents.  The JCD will 
be updated as changes are made to the Family of Joint Future Concepts, CONOP or assigned missions. 
(CJCSM 3170.01B, 11 May 2005)  
Joint Force – A general term applied to a force comprised of significant elements, assigned or attached, 
of two or more Military Departments operating under a single Joint Force commander.  (CJCSM 
3170.01B, 11 May 2005)  
Latent – A substance lying dormant or hidden until circumstances are suitable for development or 
manifestation. (Oxford Dictionary) 
Local-Trusted Source –  A sub-set of the authoritative source that is established to accomplish a specific 
function within an operational mission or business function.  Reasons for establishing a local trusted 
source include: insufficient network connectivity able to provide immediate access to the authoritative 
source or an operational need for closed-loop access or permission application.  If a match is not made 
against a local trusted source, then the file should be queried against the authoritative source.  (DOD 
Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Local Un-trusted Source – A local repository of biometric files that have not been enrolled with an 
authoritative or local trusted source.  In many cases, local un-trusted sources are established for 

   
C - 5 
FOUO 
missions of short duration or to satisfy political, policy, or legal restrictions related to the sharing of 
biometric information.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military 
Operations)  
Logical Access – Process of granting access to information system resources to authorized users, 
programs, processes, or other systems.  The controls and protection mechanisms that limit users' access 
to information and restrict their forms of access to only what is appropriate.  (DOD Capstone Concept of 
Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Match – A decision that a biometric sample and a stored template comes from the same human source, 
based their high level of similarity.  (NSTC Subcommittee on Biometrics and Identity Management 
Biometrics Glossary)  
Modality – A type or class of biometric system. For example: face recognition, fingerprint recognition, 
iris recognition, etc.  (NSTC Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
Multimodal Biometric System – A biometric system in which two or more of the modality components 
(biometric characteristic, sensor type or feature extraction algorithm) occurs in multiple.  (NSTC 
Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
Non-DOD Partners – Interagency and multinational partners.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for 
Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Normalize – Create a standardized, high-quality biometric file consisting of a biometric sample and 
contextual data.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)   
One-to-many – A phrase used in the biometrics community to describe a system that compares one 
reference to many enrolled references to make a decision.  The phrase typically refers to the 
identification of an individual.  (NSTC Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
One-to-one – A phrase used in the biometrics community to describe a system that compares one 
reference to one enrolled reference to make a decision.  The phrase typically refers to the verification 
task (though not all verification tasks are truly one-to-one).  The identification task can be accomplished 
by a series of one-to-one comparisons.  (NSTC Subcommittee on Biometrics, 16 February 2006)  
Person of Interest – An individual whose identity is of special interest.  (DOD Capstone Concept of 
Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Physical Access – The process of granting access to installations and facilities.  (DOD Capstone Concept 
of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Provide – Exchange analysis and associated information on individuals among approved DOD, 
interagency and international partners in accordance with applicable laws, policies, authorities and 
agreements.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations) 

   
C - 6 
FOUO 
Share – Exchange standardized biometric files and match results among approved DOD, interagency and 
international partners in accordance with applicable laws, policies, authorities and agreements. 
Source – An approved database and infrastructure that stores biometrics files.  (DOD Capstone Concept 
of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military Operations)  
Store – Maintain biometric files to make available standardized, current biometric information of 
individuals when and where required.  Biometric files are initially enrolled and then subsequently 
updated as part of storing.  (DOD Capstone Concept of Operations for Employing Biometrics in Military 
Operations)  
Verification – A task where a biometric system attempts to confirm an individual’s claimed identity by 
comparing a submitted sample to one or more previously enrolled templates.  (NSTC Subcommittee on 
Biometrics and Identity Management Biometrics Glossary)  
  

 
D - 1 
FOUO 
D. ACRONYMS  
ANSI - American National Standards Institute  
AOR - Area of Responsibility  
BAT - Biometric Automated Toolset  
BEI - Biometrically Enabled Intelligence 
BIMA - Biometrics Identity Management Agency 
BISA - Biometrics Identification System for Access  
CBA - Capabilities Based Assessment  
CBP - Customs and Border Protection  
CCJO - Capstone Concept for Joint Operations  
CJIS - Criminal Justice Information Systems  
DEERS - Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System  
DHS - Department of Homeland Security  
DISA - Defense Information Systems Agency  
DMDC - Defense Manpower Data Center  
DOD - Department of Defense  
DODD - Department of Defense Directive  
DOTMLPF - Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership & Education, Personnel, Facilities  
EFTS - Electronic Fingerprint Transmission Specification  
EOD - Explosive Ordnance Disposal  
FBI - Federal Bureau of Investigation  
FCB - Functional Capabilities Board  
GIG - Global Information Grid  
HSPD-12 - Homeland Security Presidential Directive - 12  
IA - Information Assurance  

   
D - 2 
FOUO 
IATC - Interim Approval to Connect  
ICD - Initial Capabilities Document  
IED - Improvised Explosive Device  
IPMSCG - Identity Protection and Management Senior Coordinating Group  
JCD - Joint Capabilities Document  
JCIDS - Joint Capabilities Integration and Development Systems  
KM/DS - Knowledge Management and Decision Support  
KST - Known or Suspected Terrorist  
LEDET - Law Enforcement Detachment  
MEDCAPs - Medical Civic Action Programs  
NCTC - National Counter-terrorism Center  
NIST - National Institute of Standards and Technology NSTC - National Science and Technology Council  
NGO - Non-Governmental Organization  
PKI - Public Key Infrastructure  
RAPIDS - Real-Time Automated Personnel Identification System  
SIPRNet - Secret Internet Protocol Router Network  
SMT - Scar Mark & Tattoo  
SOF - Special Operations Forces  
SOP - Standard Operation Procedures  
TSC - Terrorist Screening Center  
USCENTCOM - United States Central Command 