31 January 2013
Joint Targeting
Joint Publication 3-60

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 

i 
PREFACE 
1.  Scope  
This publication provides doctrine for the planning, coordination, and execution of joint 
targeting. 
2.  Purpose  
This publication has been prepared under the direction of the Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff (CJCS).  It sets forth joint doctrine to govern the activities and performance 
of the Armed Forces of the United States in joint operations and provides the doctrinal basis 
for US military coordination with other US Government departments and agencies during 
operations and for US military involvement in multinational operations.  It provides military 
guidance for the exercise of authority by co mbatant commanders and other joint force 
commanders (JFCs) and prescribes joint doctrine for operations, education, and training.  It 
provides military guidance for use by the Armed Forces in preparing their appropriate plans.  
It is not the intent of this publication to restrict the authority of the JFC from organizing the 
force and executing the mission in a manner the JFC deems most appropriate to ensure unity 
of effort in the accomplishment of the overall objective. 
3.  Application  
a.  Joint doctrine established in this publication applies to the Joint Staff, commanders of 
combatant commands, subordinate unified co mmands, joint task forces, subordinate 
components of these commands, and the Services. 
b.  The guidance in this publication is authoritative; as such, this doctrine will be 
followed except when, in the judgment of the commander, exceptional circumstances dictate 
otherwise.  If conflicts arise between the cont ents of this publicati on and the contents of 
Service publications, this publ ication will take precedence unl ess the CJCS, normally in 
coordination with the other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has provided more current 
and specific guidance.  Commanders of forces operating as part of a multinational (alliance 
or coalition) military command should follow multinational doctrine and procedures ratified 
by the United States.  For doctrine and pro cedures not ratified by the United States, 
commanders should evaluate and follow th e multinational command’s doctrine and 
procedures, where applicable and consistent with US law, regulations, and doctrine. 
For the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
 
 CURTIS M. SCAPARROTTI 
 Lieutenant General, U.S. Army 
 Director, Joint Staff 


Preface 
ii JP 3-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 
 

iii 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES 
REVISION OF JOINT PUBLICATION 3-60 
DATED 13 APRIL 2007 
 
 Reorganizes discussion of targets, targeting, the joint target cycle, and targeting 
duties and responsibilities for readability. 
 
 Moves discussions on following from appendices into Chapters I, 
“Understanding Targets and Targeting,” through Chapter III, “Joint Force 
Targeting Duties and Responsibilities”:  time-sensitive target considerations, 
intelligence support to target development, capabilities analysis and force 
assignment, and collateral damage estimation. 
 
 Adds or updates the following terms and definitions in accordance with current 
directives and practices:  target, active defense, critica l element, damage 
criteria, damage estimation, entity, passive defense, physical characteristics, 
protected emblems, and targeteer. 
 
 Adds discussion of component-critical targets as distinct from joint force 
commander-validated time-sensitive targets. 
 
 Adds discussion on joint targeting working groups and describes their purpose. 
 
 Clarifies roles and responsibilities during federated targeting support. 
 
 Adds United States Cyber Command’s ro le in support of joint targeting and 
discussion on integration of cyberspace operations in joint targeting. 
 
 Adds detailed description of battle damage assessment and its role in the 
targeting process. 

Summary of Changes 
iv JP 3-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 

v 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PAGE 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................. vii 
CHAPTER I 
UNDERSTANDING TARGETS AND TARGETING 
 Introduction 
SECTION A.  TARGETS ................................................................................................. I-1 
 Target Description ..................................................................................................... I-1 
 Characteristics of Targets .......................................................................................... I-2 
 
SECTION B.  TARGETING ............................................................................................ I-5 
 The Purpose of Joint Targeting ................................................................................... I-5 
 Principles of Targeting ................................................................................................ I-7 
 Prioritization and Special Considerations ................................................................... I-8 
 The Joint Targeting Cycle ......................................................................................... I-10 
 Targeting and Joint Operation Planning ................................................................... I-10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 THE JOINT TARGETING CYCLE 
 
 General Activities ......................................................................................................II-1 
 Categories of Targeting and Targets ..........................................................................II-1 
 The Joint Targeting Cycle ..........................................................................................II-3 
 Time-Sensitive Target Considerations .....................................................................II-31 
 The Relationship Between Targeting and Effects ...................................................II-33 
 
CHAPTER III 
 JOINT FORCE TARGETING DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
 Joint Targeting Integration and Oversight ............................................................... III-1 
 Joint Force Targeting Responsibilities..................................................................... III-2 
 Federated Targeting Support .................................................................................. III-13 
 
APPENDIX 
 
A Legal Considerations in Targeting ................................................................... A-1 
B Targeting Automation .......................................................................................B-1 
C Component Targeting Processes .......................................................................C-1 
D The Targeting Assessment Process .................................................................. D-1 
E References ......................................................................................................... E-1 
F Administrative Instructions ............................................................................... F-1 
 

Table of Contents 
vi JP 3-60 
GLOSSARY 
 
Part I Abbreviations and Acronyms .................................................................. GL-1 
Part II Terms and Definitions ............................................................................. GL-4 
FIGURE 
I-1  Targeting Overview ..................................................................................... I-6 
II-1  Categories of Targeting and Targets ..........................................................II-2 
II-2  Joint Targeting Cycle .................................................................................II-4 
II-3  Target Development Relationships ............................................................II-6 
II-4  Example Target System, Components, and Elements ................................II-7 
II-5  Example of Petroleum, Oils, and Lubricants Target System and 
Components ................................................................................................II-8 
II-6  Factors in Target Evaluation Within a Target System Analysis ................II-9 
II-7  Commander’s Decision and Force Assignment .......................................II-17 
II-8  Phase 5—Mission Planning and Force Execution ...................................II-20 
II-9  Correlation of Deliberate and D ynamic Targeting During Phase 5 .........II-22 
II-10 Phase 5 Targeting Steps ...........................................................................II-23 
II-11 Find ...........................................................................................................II-24 
II-12 Find Step Determinations and Actions .....................................................II-25 
II-13 Fix .............................................................................................................II-26 
II-14 Track .........................................................................................................II-27 
II-15 Target .......................................................................................................II-28 
II-16 Engage ......................................................................................................II-30 
III-1 Joint Targeting Coor dination Board Organization and Representation ... III-4 
III-2 Notional Joint Targeting Coor dination Board Agenda ............................ III-6 
III-3 Joint Targeting Working Group ............................................................... III-8 
III-4 Notional Relative Division of Joint Targeting Cycle Responsibilities .. III-10 
C-1  Joint Air Tasking Cycle ..............................................................................C-3 
C-2  Notional Joint Air Tasking Cycle Timeline ...............................................C-4 
C-3  Joint Air Tasking Cycle Battle Rhythm .....................................................C-5 
D-1  The Interconnected Operational Environment .......................................... D-2 
D-2  Assessment Levels and Measures ............................................................. D-3 
 

vii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
COMMANDER’S OVERVIEW 
• Provides an understanding of Targets and Targeting  
 
• Explains the Joint Targeting Cycle 
 
• Addresses Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
  
 
Understanding Targets and Targeting 
 
Targeting is the process of 
selecting and prioritizing targets 
and matching the appropriate 
response to them, considering 
operational requirements and 
capabilities. 
Joint targeting is a fundame ntal task of the fires 
function that encompasses many disciplines and 
requires participation from all joint force staff 
elements and components, along with various 
nonmilitary agencies. The primary purpose of joint 
targeting is to integrate and synchronize all weapon 
systems and capabilities. 
 
Target Description 
 
Targets should be logically and 
causally tied to objectives at all 
levels—strategic, operational, 
and tactical. 
A target is an entity (p erson, place, or thing) 
considered for possible e ngagement or action to 
alter or neutralize the function it performs for the 
adversary. A target’s operational importance is 
determined by conducting an assessment to 
determine if engaging the target is consistent with 
planned operations and will help achieve the 
commander’s objective(s) and the end state. 
 
Characteristics of Targets Every target has distinct intrinsic or acquired 
characteristics that form the basis for target 
detection, location, identification, and classification 
for ongoing and future surveillance, analysis, 
engagement, and assessment. Physical, functional, 
cognitive, environmental, and temporal are broad 
categories that help define the characteristics of a 
target. 
 
The purpose of targeting is to 
integrate and synchronize fires 
into joint operations by utilizing 
available capabilities to generate 
a specific lethal or nonlethal 
effect on a target. 
Targeting systematically analyzes and prioritizes 
targets and matches appropriate lethal and nonlethal 
actions to those targets to create specific desired 
effects that achieve the joint force commander’s 
(JFC’s) objectives, accounting for operational 
requirements, capabilities, and the results of 
previous assessments. The emphasis of targeting is 
on identifying resources (targets) the enemy can 

Executive Summary 
viii JP 3-60 
least afford to lose or that provide him with the 
greatest advantage (high-value target [HVT]), then 
further identifying the subset of those targets which 
must be acquired and engaged to achieve friendly 
success (high-payoff target [HPT]). Targeting links 
the desired effects to actions and tasks.  
 
Principles of Targeting Adherence to these four principles throughout the 
targeting cycle should create desired effects while 
diminishing undesired collateral effects. 
 
Focused. The function of targeting is to efficiently 
achieve the JFC’s objectives through target 
engagement within the parameters set by the 
concept of operations ( CONOPS), the operational 
limitations within the plans and orders (to include 
fragmentary orders), the rules of engagement 
(ROE), the law of war, and agreements concerning 
the sovereignty of national territories. Every target 
nominated should contribute to attaining the JFC’s 
objectives. 
 
Effects-Based. The art of targeting seeks to create 
desired effects with the least risk and least 
expenditure of time and resources. 
 
Interdisciplinary. Joint t argeting entails 
participation from all elements of the JFC’s staff, 
component commanders’  
staffs, other agencies, 
departments, organizations, and multinational 
partners. 
 
Systematic. The joint targeting cycle is designed to 
create effects in a systematic manner. It is a rational 
and iterative process that methodically analyzes, 
prioritizes, an
d assigns assets against targets 
systematically. 
 
Prioritization and Special 
Considerations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planning and execution of all joint and component 
targeting should be in accordance with the priorities 
established by the JFC. The JFC’s guidance should 
describe the objectives to be achieved and the 
relative priority of each. Sensitive targets refer to 
those targets for whi
ch planned actions warrant 
President or the Secretary of Defense review and 
approval. An HVT is a target that the enemy 

Executive Summary 
ix 
 
Certain targets may require 
special care or caution in 
treatment because attacking them 
improperly could lead to adverse 
consequences. 
commander requires for the successful completion 
of the mission. An HPT is one whose loss to the 
enemy will significantly contribute to the success of 
the friendly course of action (COA). A time-
sensitive target (TST) is a JFC-validated target or 
set of targets of such high importance to the 
accomplishment of the JFC’s mission and 
objectives, or that presents such a significant 
strategic or operational threat to friendly forces or 
allies, that the JFC dedicates intelligence collection 
and engagement assets, or is willing to divert assets 
away from other targets in order to find, fix, track, 
target, engage, and assess it. Component 
commanders may nominate targets to the JFC for 
consideration as TSTs. If they meet TST criteria, 
but are not approved as TSTs by the JFC, these 
component-critical targets may still require 
dynamic execution with cross-component 
coordination and assistance in a time-compressed 
fashion. 
 
Targeting and Joint Operation 
Planning 
Target development and selection are based on the 
JFC’s desired end state rather than on the available 
ways and means to achieve them. In other words, 
the focus should be on crea ting the desired target 
effects that accomplish targeting-related tasks and 
objectives in support of the JFCs objectives, rather 
than simply servicing a list of targets or basing 
targeting decisions on the availability of particular 
weapons, platforms, or systems. Joint operation 
planning is the mechanism by which a JFC 
translates national military objectives into viable 
plans and orders for conducting military operations. 
The joint targeting process occurs within this 
context. 
 
The Joint Targeting Cycle 
 
General Activities 
 
The joint targeting cycle supports 
the joint force commander’s 
(JFC’s) joint operation planning 
and execution with a 
comprehensive, iterative, and 
logical methodology for 
Joint targeting is an integral part of joint operation 
planning and continues through publication of the 
campaign or contingency plan, operation order, or 
fragmentary order. Detailed joint intelligence 
preparation of the operational environment and 
country assessments, performed by JFCs within 
their operational areas (OAs), set the stage for 
detailed targeting within the joint targeting cycle. 

Executive Summary 
x JP 3-60 
employing the ways and means to 
create desired effects that support 
achievement of objectives. 
Once actions are taken against targets, the 
commander and staff assess the effectiveness of the 
actions. If there is no evidence that the desired 
effects were created, ree ngagement of the target 
may be necessary, or another method selected to 
create the desired effects. 
 
Categories of Targeting The targeting process can be generally grouped 
into two categories: deliberate and dynamic.  
 
Deliberate targeting normally supports the joint 
force’s future plans effort, which is overseen by the 
plans directorate of a joint staff (J-5). (Normally, 
the future operations di rectorate focuses on 24 
hours out to 72 hours. This is a critical linkage 
during targeting execution.)   
 
Dynamic targeting is normally employed in 
current operations planning because the nature and 
time frame associated with current operations 
(usually the current 24-hour period) typically 
requires more immediate responsiveness than is 
achieved in deliberate targeting.  
 
Categories of Targets Targets may be described as two different 
categories: planned targets and targets of 
opportunity. Each has two separate subcategories: 
 
Planned targets  are known to exist in the 
operational environment with engagement actions 
scheduled against them. Planned targets may be 
further divided into sche duled targets and on-call 
targets. Scheduled targets  are prosecuted at a 
specific time. On-call targets have actions planned, 
but not for a specific delivery time.  
 
Targets of opportunity refer to targets that meet 
the criteria to achieve objectives but were not 
selected for action during the current joint targeting 
cycle. Targets of opportunity can be divided into 
two subgroups: unplanned targets and unanticipated 
targets. Unplanned targets are known targets and 
are included on a target list, but not selected for 
engagement because the target was not nominated, 
was nominated but did not make the joint integrated 
prioritized target list (JIPTL), or was not expected 

Executive Summary 
xi 
to be available for engagement within the target 
cycle. However, changes to the target status 
(priority, access, permissions) could result in the 
need (or opportunity) to engage the target during 
the current cycle. Unanticipated targets  are 
unknown or not expected to be present in the 
operational environment. These targets are not 
included on a target list and an evaluation of the 
target is needed to determine engagement 
requirements and timing. 
 
The Joint Targeting Cycle The joint targeting cycle is a six phase iterative 
process: end state and commander’s objectives, 
target development and prioritization, capabilities 
analysis, commander’s decision and force 
assignment, mission planning and force execution, 
and assessment. 
 
Joint Targeting Cycle Phase 1—
The End State and Commander’s 
Objectives 
Understanding the military end state and the 
commander’s intent, centers of gravity, objectives, 
desired effects, and required tasks developed during 
operational planning provides the initial impetus for 
the targeting process. Understanding the JFC’s 
guidance, CONOPS, and intent is the most 
important and first activity of joint targeting 
because they document the set of outcomes relevant 
to the present situation and set the course for all that 
follows. Objectives are the basis for developing the 
desired effects and scope of target development, 
and are coordinated among strategists, planners, and 
intelligence analysts for approval by the 
commander. 
 
Joint Targeting Cycle Phase 2—
Target Development and 
Prioritization 
Target development is the analysis, assessment, and 
documentation processes to identify and 
characterize potential targets that, when 
successfully engaged, suppor t the achievement of 
the commander’s objectives. Phase 2 is comprised 
of three steps: target syst em analysis; entity-level 
target development; and target list management. 
 
Joint Targeting Cycle Phase 3—
Capabilities Analysis 
This phase of the joint targeting cycle involves 
evaluating all available capabilities against targets’ 
critical elements to determine the appropriate 
options available to the commander for target 
engagement while highli ghting the best possible 

Executive Summary 
xii JP 3-60 
solution under given circ umstances. Capabilities 
analysis is comprised of four steps: target 
vulnerability analysis, capabilities assignment, 
feasibility assessment, and effects estimate. 
 
Joint Targeting Cycle Phase 4—
Commander’s Decision and 
Force Assignment 
The force assignment process integrates previous 
phases of joint targeti ng and fuses capabilities 
analysis with available forces, sensors, and weapons 
systems. The process of resourcing JIPTL targets 
with available forces or systems and intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance assets lies at the 
heart of force assignment. This process links 
theoretical planning to actual operations. Once the 
JFC has approved the JIPTL, either entirely or in 
part, tasking orders are prepared and released to the 
executing components and forces. The 
commander’s decision  in phase 4 is to either 
approve the draft JIPTL, approve targets to be 
added to or removed from the JIPTL, or approves a 
particular way or ways of engaging a particular 
target or targets. 
 
Joint Targeting Cycle Phase 5—
Mission Planning and Force 
Execution 
Upon receipt of ta sking orders, deta iled planning 
must be performed for the execution of operations. 
During execution, the operational environment 
changes as a result of actions from the joint force, 
adversary, and other acto rs. The joint targeting 
process monitors these ch anges in order to allow 
commanders to decisively use joint force 
capabilities to seize and maintain the initiative. 
 
Joint Targeting Cycle Phase 6—
Targeting Assessment 
The targeting assessment phase is a continuous 
process that assesses the effectiveness of the 
activities that occurred during the first five phases 
of the joint targeting cycle. The targeting 
assessment process helps the commander and staff 
determine if the ends, ways, and means of joint 
targeting have resulted in progress toward 
accomplishing a task, creating an effect, or 
achieving an objective. 
 
Time-Sensitive Target (TST) 
Considerations  
 
 
 
The JFC’s objectives and guidance shape the basic 
procedural framework for components to expedite 
engagement of TSTs. Additionally, the JFC 
establishes guidance on procedures for 
coordination, deconfliction, and synchronization 

Executive Summary 
xiii 
Generally, TSTs are engaged 
using dynamic targeting, so the 
command and control 
arrangements should include the 
rapid identification and 
communication capabilities 
required for expedited decision 
making. 
among components. Once this guidance is issued, 
the components establish planned and reactive 
procedures for engaging the prioritized TSTs. A 
critical aspect of successful TST engagement is to 
understand the level of risk acceptable to the JFC. 
Items to be considered in the risk assessment 
include risk to civilians, friendly forces, and 
noncombatants; possible collateral damage; and the 
disruption incurred by diver ting assets from their 
deliberately planned missions.  
 
The Relationship Between 
Targeting and Effects 
 
It is important that desired and 
undesired effects be clearly 
communicated as far down as 
necessary to ensure these effects 
are created or avoided 
respectively. 
From the targeting perspective, an effect is a change 
in the physical or behavi oral state of a target 
system, a target system component, a target, or a 
target element that results from an action, a set of 
actions, or another effect. A desired effect can be 
thought of as a condition that can support achieving 
an associated objective, while an undesired effect is 
a condition that can inhibit progress toward an 
objective 
 
Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
Joint Targeting Integration and 
Oversight 
The JFC’s primary targeti ng responsibility lies in 
establishing the objectives that component 
commanders will achieve throughout the 
operational environment with their forces (assigned, 
attached, and supporting). With the advice of 
subordinate component commanders, JFCs set 
priorities, provide clear targeting guidance, and 
determine the weight of effort to be provided to 
various operations. Th roughout the targeting 
process, JFC and component commanders should 
establish safeguards to re duce the possibility of 
friendly fire. Joint standards and methods for 
estimating collateral damage potential provide 
mitigation techniques and assist commanders with 
weighing collateral risk against military necessity 
and assessing proportionality within the framework 
of the military decision-making process. 
 
Joint Force Targeting 
Responsibilities 
The JFC has the responsibility to conduct planning, 
coordination, and deconfliction associated with 
joint targeting. Joint targeting coordination 
responsibilities for the JFC include:  
 

Executive Summary 
xiv JP 3-60 
 
 Establish parameters for successful targeting 
within the JFC’s OA by promulgating intent, 
objectives, guidance, sequencing, and priorities.
 
 Direct the formation, composition, and specific 
responsibilities of a jo int fires element (JFE) 
and joint targeting coordination board (JTCB) 
(if required). 
 
 Approve or delegate approval of the JIPTL 
developed from component and staff 
nominations. 
 
Joint Targeting Coordination 
Board 
Targeting coordination tasks are normally 
accomplished through the JFC established JTCB or 
like body. The JFC normally  appoints the deputy 
JFC or a component commander to chair the JTCB 
to provide the appropriate  level of experience and 
focus. When a JTCB is not established and the JFC 
decides not to delegate targeting oversight authority 
to a deputy or subordinate commander, the JFC may 
perform this task at the joint force headquarters, 
with the assistance of the operations directorate of a 
joint staff (J-3). The JFC ensures that this is a joint 
effort involving applicable subordinate commands, 
other agencies, and multinational partners, as 
appropriate. The JTCB normally facilitates and 
coordinates joint force targeting activities with the 
components’ schemes of maneuver to ensure that 
the JFC’s priorities are met.  
 
Joint Fires Element The JFC may approve the formation of a JFE within 
the J-3. The JFE is an integrating staff element that 
synchronizes and coordina tes fires planning and 
coordination on behalf of the JFC and should be 
physically located near th e joint task force joint 
operations center, colocated with the information 
operations cell if possible. 
 
Joint Targeting Working Group The joint targeting working group (JTWG) supports 
the JTCB by conducting initial collection, 
consolidation, and priori tization of targets and 
synchronization of target planning and coordination 
on behalf of the JFC. The JTWG is an action officer 
level venue, chaired by the JFE chief, operations 

Executive Summary 
xv 
directorate of a joint staff (J-2) (chief of targets), or 
similar representative, and meets as required to 
consolidate and prioritize the draft JIPTL and 
discuss targeting integr ation and synchronization 
issues raised by the JFC, staff, planning teams, and 
the JFC’s major subordinate commands. 
 
Joint Force Staff Responsibilities Intelligence Directorate. The J-2 has the primary 
responsibility for prioriti zation of intelligence 
collection efforts, an alysis, validation, and 
assessment for all joint operations. In addition, the 
J-2 provides a major input to the J-3 and J-5 in the 
form of adversary COA assessments critical to the 
joint target prioritization process and identification 
of HVTs and HPTs.  
 
Operations Directorate. The J-3 assists the 
commander in the direction and control of 
operations, including the planning, monitoring, and 
completion of specific operations. In this capacity, 
the directorate is the lead for coordinating, 
integrating, and executing operations throughout the 
OA. 
 
Staff Judge Advocate (SJA). The SJA advises the 
JFC and other staff members on applicable 
international and domestic laws, legal custom and 
practice, multilateral and bilateral agreements with 
host nations, law of war issues, compliance and 
interpretation of the ROE, and other pertinent issues 
involved in joint target recommendations and 
decisions. 
 
Component Commander 
Responsibilities 
With regard to joint ta rgeting, the components’ 
responsibilities normally include the following: 
 
 Conduct target development. 
 
 Nominate potential targets for inclusion in the 
joint target list and restricted target list.  
 
 Nominate targets for inclusion on the JFC’s 
TST list and maintain their own lists of HPTs. 
 
 Provide timely and accurate reporting to the 
JFE in support of joint operations assessment.  

Executive Summary 
xvi JP 3-60 
 
 Coordinate components’ deliberate and 
dynamic targeting via established procedures. 
 
Federated Targeting Support 
 
 
The Joint Staff intelligence 
directorate of a joint staff 
normally ensures that federated 
targeting support requirements 
are addressed in contingency 
plans and orders and will assist 
in the dissemination of targeting 
support-related information 
between the federated partners 
and the supported JFC. 
A federated target development and assessment 
process can provide reachb ack support to the JFC 
and component commanders during the joint 
targeting cycle. Under a collaborative federated 
architecture, the supported JFC works in 
conjunction with the National Joint Operations and 
Intelligence Center and the Joint Staff J-2 using the 
intelligence planning process to establish federated 
targeting support partners and assessment reporting 
responsibilities between combatant commands in 
accordance with the supported combatant 
commander’s requirements. Many organizations 
provide critical support  to joint targeting. 
Federation establishes part nerships and leverages 
appropriate expertise, allowing access to more 
actionable information than would otherwise be 
available to JFCs and their staffs. It also provides 
for an efficient division  of labor and maximizes 
resources. Federation provides commands 
conducting operations access to organizations and 
individuals that are experts in their respective 
analytic areas. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
 This publication provides doctrine for the planning, 
coordination, and execution of joint targeting. 
 
 
 

I-1 
CHAPTER I 
UNDERSTANDING TARGETS AND TARGETING 
1.  Introduction 
Targeting is the process of  selecting and prioritizing  targets and matching the 
appropriate response to them, considering operational requirements and capabilities.  Joint 
targeting is a fundamental task of the fires function that encompasses many disciplines and 
requires participation from all joint force staff elements and components, along with various 
nonmilitary agencies.  The primary purpose of joint targeting is to integrate and synchronize 
all weapon systems and capabilities.  Targeting helps integrate and synchronize fires with 
other joint functions (command and control [C2], intell igence, movement and maneuver, 
protection, and sustainment) during the joint operation planning process (JOPP).  While the 
focus of this publication is joint targeting, it should also be understood that not all military 
operations require fires based ta rgeting as it is not the only joint function by which joint 
force commander’s (JFC’s) objectives are achieved.  Careful analysis and understanding of 
the specific mission and the JFC’s objectives w ill help determine if joint targeting is 
necessary to achieve the objectives.  
SECTION A.  TARGETS 
2.  Target Description 
a.  A target is an entity (person, place, or thing) considered for possible engagement or 
action to alter or neutralize the function it performs for the adversary.  A target’s importance 
derives from its potential contribution to achieving a commander’s objective(s) or otherwise 
accomplishing assigned tasks.  These objectives must be consistent with national strategic 
direction and selected to accomplish the assigned missions and tasks.  Targets nominated for 
attack may include the following: 
(1)  Facility: a geographi cally located, defined physic al structure, group of 
structures, or area that provides a function that contributes to a target system’s capability.  
(2)  Individual(s): a person or persons who provide a function that contributes to a 
target system’s capability.  
(3)  Virtual: an entity in cyberspace that  provides a function that contributes to a 
target system’s capability.  
(4)  Equipment: a device that provides a function that contributes to a target 
system’s capability.  
“It is not the object of war to annihilate those who have given provocation for it, but 
to cause them to mend their ways.” 
Histories by the Greek historian Polybius (circa 200 to 118 B.C.) 

Chapter I 
I-2 JP 3-60 
(5)  Organization: a group or unit that provides a function that contributes to a target 
system’s capability.  
b.  The JFC establishes objectives to fo cus and guide joint operation planning and 
execution to reach the end state linked to national strategic direction and goals.  From these 
objectives, actions are planned and executed to create the desired effects (e.g., compelling an 
adversary to comply with specific requirement s or modify their behavior) necessary to 
accomplish these objectives.  A target’s operational importance is determined by conducting 
an assessment to determine if engaging the target is consistent with planned operations and 
will help achieve the commander’s objective(s) and the end state.   
c.  Targets should be logically and causally  tied to objectives at all levels—strategic, 
operational, and tactical.  From a comma nder’s planning, execution, and assessment 
perspective, tactical actions should be ultimately tied to operational and strategic outcomes 
so that the whole operation, from the tactical engagements up to national objectives, forms a 
logical chain of cause and effect. 
d.  Joint forces conduct continuous target development and assessment in support of 
joint operation planning and execution to maintain viable and validated targets that reflect 
changes in the operational environment, the commander’s concept of operations (CONOPS), 
or the approved end state and provides a range of options for commanders. 
3.  Characteristics of Targets 
Every target has distinct intrinsic or acquired characteristics that form the basis for target 
detection, location, id entification, and classi fication for ongoing and future surveillance, 
analysis, engagement, and assessment.  Physical, functional, cognitive, environmental, and 
temporal are broad categories that help define the characteristics of a target.  As an example, 
some typical target characteristics are listed below; however, the list is not exhaustive, and 
some characteristics may belong in more than one category. 
a.  Physical Characteristics.  These characteristics or features help describe a target.  
These common physical characteristics are generally discernible to the five senses or through 
sensor-derived signatures and may shape or influence the selection of the type and number of 
weapons, the weapon systems, and the methods or tactics employed against the target. 
(1)  Location. 
(2)  Shape. 
(3)  Size or area covered. 
(4)  Appearance (outward form and features, including color). 
(5)  Number and nature of elements that make up the target as a whole. 
(6)  Dispersion or concentration of elements. 

Understanding Targets and Targeting 
I-3 
(7)  Reflexivity (to heat, light, sound, radar energy, etc.). 
(8)  Structural composition. 
(9)  Degree of hardening. 
(10)  Electromagnetic signature (e.g., radar and radio transmissions). 
(11)  Mobility characteristics: 
(a)  Fixed (unable to move). 
(b)  Transportable (operate from fixed locations, but can be broken down and 
moved). 
(c)  Mobile (operate on the move or with very limited setup time). 
b.  Functional Characteristics.  These characteristics describe what the target does and 
how it does it.  They describe the target’s function within a greater target system, how the 
target or target system operates, its level of activity, the status of its  functionality, and in 
some cases, its significance.  Functional charac teristics are often diffi cult to discern.  
Assessing functional characterist ics entails careful review of  known facts and the use of 
deductive and inductive reasoning.  Functional characteristics generally include: 
(1)  Target normal or reported activity. 
(2)  Target status (state or condition at a given point in time [e.g., operational, 
inoperative]). 
(3)  Degree, proportion, or percentage of  functionality (e.g., function 50 percent 
degraded). 
(4)  Materials the target requires in order to perform its function(s). 
(5)  Functional redundancy (can the function be performed elsewhere in the target 
system or by a similar capability in an alternate target system?). 
(6)  Ability to reconstitute the target or its function. 
(7)  Self-defense capability. 
(8)  Target importance within the strategic structure, such as its role or its cultural 
importance. 
(9)  Necessary relationships (if the target  is an individual or organization, what 
other individuals or organizations are necessary to enable it to function?).  The nature of 
relationships (what is the nature of the connectivity between this individual/organization and 
others?). 

Chapter I 
I-4 JP 3-60 
(10)  Target physical vulnerabilities (ide ntification of potential aimpoints above 
ground, natural ventilation, exposure of critical infrastructure, dependence on above ground 
functions/facilities, etc.). 
c.  Cognitive Characteristics.  These characteristics describe how targets process 
information or exercise control functions.  In those cases where the entity is an individual, 
cognitive characteristics are focused on describing that person’s reasoning patterns or how 
that person’s decision making is influenced.  Cognitive characteristics are particularly 
important to properly assess the critical nodes in a target system, since nearly every target 
system possesses some central controlling function.  Neutralizing those controlling functions 
may be crucial to bringing about desired ch anges in behavior.  As with functional 
characteristics, cognitive characteristics can be difficult to identify.  Cognitive characteristics 
may relate to: 
(1)  How the target processes information. 
(2)  How the target’s decision cycle works (if applicable).  
(3)  Process inputs the target requires to perform its function(s). 
(4)  Process outputs resulting from target functions. 
(5)  How much information the target can handle. 
(6)  How the target or system stores information. 
(7)  If the target is an individual or organization: 
(a)  How does the target think? 
(b)  What are its motivations? 
(c)  What behavior does the target exhibit? 
(d)  What are the target’s rules, norms, and beliefs? 
(e)  What are its cognitive vulnerabilities? 
(8)  Cultural considerations (perceptions, attitudes, religious factions, tribal 
affiliations).  
d.  Environmental Characteristics.  These characteristics desc ribe the effect of the 
environment on the target.  These characteristics may also affect the methods used to affect 
or observe them. 
(1)  Atmospheric conditions affecting the target (temperature and visibility, etc.). 
(2)  Terrain features (land form, vegetation, soil, and elevation, etc.). 

Understanding Targets and Targeting 
I-5 
(3)  Denial and deception measures. 
(4)  Physical relationships (such as pr oximity to civilians, noncombatants, or 
friendly forces, etc.). 
(5)  Dependencies (raw materials, personnel, energy, water, and command/control, 
etc.). 
e.  Temporal Characteristics.   Time, as a characteristic  of a target, describes the 
target’s vulnerability to det ection, attack, or other engageme nt in relation to the time 
available.  All potential targets and all target s nominated for attack continually change in 
priority due to the dynamic nature of the evolving operational environment.  Many targets 
may be fleeting and some may be critical to friendly operations.  Those that are both fleeting 
and critical present one of th e biggest targeting challenges f aced by the joint force.  This 
characteristic can help determine when and how to find or engage a target.  By comparing 
this characteristic to information latency and knowledge of friendly capabilities, the staff can 
make better recommendations to the comman der regarding possible actions.  Factors 
contributing to this include: 
(1)  Time of Appearance.   The expected time the target will appear in the 
designated operational area (OA). 
(2)  Dwell Time.  The length of time a target is expected to remain in one location 
(this can be directly related to the physical char acteristic of target mobility).  Generally, a 
target is more difficult to find or engage on the move. 
(3)  Time to Target Functionality.  The length of time required for the target to 
become operational, to conduct its mission, or to repair or reconstitute. 
(4)  Identifiable Time.  The length of time a target is identifiable as a threat before 
it then becomes indistinguishable from other objects in the operational environment. 
SECTION B.  TARGETING 
4.  The Purpose of Joint Targeting 
a.   Targeting systematically analyzes and prioritizes targets and matches appropriate 
lethal and nonlethal actions to those targets to create specific desired effects that achieve the 
JFC’s objectives, accounting for operational requirements, capabilities, and the results of 
previous assessments. The emphasis of targeting is on identifying resources (targets) the 
enemy can least afford to lose or that provide him with the greatest advantage (high-value 
target [HVT]), then further identifying the subset of those targets which must be acquired 
and engaged to achieve friendly success (hi gh-payoff target [HPT]).  Targeting links the 
desired effects to actions and tasks.  This c ontributes to creating the effects necessary to 
achieve the JFC’s objectives. 

Chapter I 
I-6 JP 3-60 
b.  Targeting links intelligence, plans, and operations across all levels of command and 
phases of operations.  Targeting leverages the commander’s guidance and operational end 
state from the Adaptive Planning and Execution system to translate and operationalize the 
intelligence from the joint intelligence preparation of the operational environment (JIPOE) 
and other outputs of the intelligence process.  Capabilities are selected during the targeting 
process to create effects and achieve objectiv es developed in the planning process (see 
Figure I-1). Targeting encompasses many processes, all linked and logically guided by the 
joint targeting cycle, that continuously seek to analyze, identify, develop, validate, assess, 
and prioritize targets for engagement in order to create the effects needed to help achieve the 
commander’s objectives. 
c.  The purpose of targeting is to integrate and synchronize fires into joint operations by 
utilizing available capabilities to generate a specific lethal or nonlethal effect on a target.  
The joint targeting cycle provi des an iterative, logical me thodology for the development, 
planning, execution, and assessment of targeting, weapons, and capabilities effectiveness.  
Principles of joint targeti ng can apply in multinational operations, and may involve 
participation from other agencies, departments, governments, and organizations throughout 
all phases of an operation.  
 
Figure I-1.  Targeting Overview
Targeting Overview
PMESII political, military, economic, social, information, and infrastructure
Legend
Targeting
Operations
Situational 
Awareness
PlansEffects
Capabilities
Tasks
Doctrine
Threat
Target System
Target Characteristics
PMESII
Objectives
Guidance
Intent
Planning
Intelligence

Understanding Targets and Targeting 
I-7 
d.  Effective and disciplined joint targeting minimizes undesired effects, potential for 
collateral damage, and inefficient actions during military planning and operations.  It 
supports the successful application of severa l fundamental principles of war (e.g., mass, 
maneuver, and economy of force).  Joint targeting supports unity of effort by providing: 
(1)  Compliance with JFC objectives, guidance, and intent. 
(2)  Coordination, integration, synchr onization, and deconf liction of target 
engagement. 
(3)  A common perspective on all targeti ng efforts performed in support of the 
commander. 
(4)  Reduced duplication of effort. 
(5)  Full integration of all available target engagement capabilities. 
(6)  Reduced chance of friendly fire and collateral damage. 
(7)  Focus on creating effects to achieve objectives in support of the commander’s 
plan. 
(8)  Expeditious assessment of targeting effects. 
5.  Principles of Targeting 
The joint targeting cycle provides the means to achieve the JFC’s objectives through 
joint fires.  Adherence to these four principles throughout the targeting cycle should create 
desired effects while diminishing undesired collateral effects. 
a.  Focused.  The function of targeting is to e fficiently achieve the JFC’s objectives 
through target engagement within the para meters set by the CONOPS, the operational 
limitations within the plans and orders (to include fragmentary orders), the rules of 
engagement (ROE), the law of war, and agreements concerning the sovereignty of national 
territories.  Every target nominated should contribute to attaining the JFC’s objectives. 
b.  Effects-Based.  To contribute to the achievement of the JFC’s objectives, targeting is 
concerned with the creation of specific desired effects through target engagement.  Target 
analysis considers all possible means to create  desired effects, drawing from all available 
capabilities.  The art of targeting seeks to create desired effects with the least risk and least 
expenditure of time and resources. 
c.  Interdisciplinary.  Joint targeting is a comma nd function that requires the 
participation of many disciplines.  It entails participation from all elements of the JFC’s staff, 
component commanders’ staffs, other agen cies, departments, organizations, and 
multinational partners. 

Chapter I 
I-8 JP 3-60 
d.  Systematic.  The joint targeting cycle is designe d to create effects in a systematic 
manner.  It is a rational and iterative proce ss that methodically analyzes, prioritizes, and 
assigns assets against targets systematically.  If the desired effects are not created, targets 
should be reconsidered for the targeting process. 
6.  Prioritization and Special Considerations 
a.  JFC Guidance.  Planning and execution of all joint and component targeting should 
be in accordance with the priorities estab lished by the JFC.  The JFC’s guidance should 
describe the objectives to be achieved and the relative priority of each.   
b.  Certain targets may require special care or caution in treatment because attacking 
them improperly could lead to adverse consequences.  Examples include leadership targets 
that should be handled with sensitivity due to potential political and/or diplomatic 
repercussions; targets located in areas with a high risk of collateral damage; and weapons of 
mass destruction (WMD) faciliti es, where an attack could lead to increased collateral 
damage.  The use of nonlethal  capabilities in support of such operations may reduce the 
potential for unintended consequences that are detrimental to the JFC’s strategic goals.  
(1)  Sensitive targets refer to those ta rgets for which planned actions warrant 
President or the Secretary of Defense (SecDef) review and approval.  Criteria normally are 
delineated in plans, orders, and/or ROE by  combatant commanders (CCDRs).  Sensitive 
targets exceed national-level thresholds such as high collateral damage or collateral effect 
(e.g., versus civilian po pulation, property, infrastructure, f acilities); adverse political or 
diplomatic ramifications (e.g., near the terr itory of surrounding states); environmental 
harm/hazard (water contamination, chemical/biological/radiological/nuclear plume hazards); 
or adverse public sentiment (local or interna tional).  See Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3122.06, Sensitive Target Approval and Review (STAR) Process 
(classified publication), for more information on sensitive targets. 
(2)  All potential targets and all target s nominated for engagement continually 
change in importance due to the dynamic nature of the evolving operational environment.  
When the importance of a target rises to such  a level that it poses (or soon will pose) a 
danger to friendly forces, or it presents a highl y lucrative, fleeting opportunity of tactical 
advantage, the JFC may validate it as requiring immediate engagement.  Such “time-
sensitive” targets may be fully anticipate d and planned in adva nce during the target 
development phase in the joint targeting cycle for engagement by assigned forces.  However, 
if their nature precludes detailed advanced mission and execution planning in phase 5 (e.g., a 
mobile ballistic missile threat), they may be  pre-validated during the target development 
phase of the joint targeting process (with appropriate advance intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance [ISR] tasking) and once detected they may be prosecuted using the find, fix, 
track, target, engage, and assess (F2T2EA) during dynamic targeting in phase 5.  “Time-
sensitive” targets should not be confused with “sensitive” targets.  A target may be both 
“time-sensitive” due to posing an immediat e threat and “sensitive” depending on 
engagement option.  An example of both is a ballistic missile threat planned for engagement 
with a collateral damage estimate that exceeds the cut-off value per the ROE. 

Understanding Targets and Targeting 
I-9 
c.  High-Value and High-Payoff Targets.   An HVT is a target that the enemy 
commander requires for the successful completion of the mission.  HPTs are derived from 
the list of HVTs.  The loss of HVTs would be  expected to serious ly degrade important 
enemy functions throughout the friendly commander’s area of interest.  An HPT is one 
whose loss to the enemy will significantly contribute to the success of the friendly course of 
action (COA).  Time-sensitive and component-c ritical targets are usually special types of 
HPTs.  Component and JFC target development and priorities will focus on these targets to 
support success of the mission.  
d.  Time-Sensitive Target (TST).  A TST is a JFC-validated target or set of targets of 
such high importance to the accomplishment of  the JFC’s mission and objectives, or that 
presents such a significant strategic or operational threat to friendly forces or allies, that the 
JFC dedicates intelligence collection and engagement assets, or is willing to divert assets 
away from other targets in order to F2T2EA it. 
(1)  TSTs comprise a very small or limited number of targets due to the required 
investment of assets and potential disruption of planned execution, and are only those targets 
validated by the JFC and listed as such in the CONOPS.  
(2)  In most cases, TSTs require immediate response because they pose (or will 
soon pose) a direct danger to friendly forces and/or noncombatants, or are highly lucrative, 
fleeting targets of opportunity.  TSTs are normally engaged dynamically; however, to be 
successful, they require considerable deliberat e planning and preparation within the joint 
targeting cycle. 
(3)  The JFC provides specific guidance and priorities for TSTs within the OA.  
Examples might be a vessel ca rrying WMD that was just detected approaching the joint 
force; a sought-after enemy leader whose loca tion was just identified; an enemy aircraft 
detected approaching friendly high-value assets; or launch of an intermediate-range ballistic 
missile.  Only the JFC may validate a target or set of targets as a TST. 
(4)  A JFC validates targets or a set of targets based on criteria established during 
phase 1 of the joint targeting cycle.  Target s or a set of targets that the JFC has not 
specifically named, but still satisfy TST characteristics, may be engaged through dynamic 
targeting.  Although these targets or sets of targets may be critical to the components due to 
risk to mission or forces, they are not li sted separately from guidance and priorities 
previously established for TSTs. 
e.  Component-Critical Targets.  Component commanders may nominate targets to the 
JFC for consideration as TSTs.  If they meet TST criteria, but are not approved as TSTs by 
the JFC, these component-critical targets ma y still require dynamic execution with cross-
component coordination and assistance in a time-compressed fashion.  The JFC and 
component commanders should identify these ta rgets within the join t targeting cycle; 
provide clear guidance to develop and approve the appropriate priority of asset allocation 
(intelligence collection, exploitation, and attack assets); and provide ROE to facilitate rapid 
cross-component coordination in order to minimize confusion and facilitate prosecution.  

Chapter I 
I-10 JP 3-60 
For more information, refer to Army Tac tical Publication (ATP) 3-60.1/Marine Corps 
Reference Publication (MCRP) 3-16D/Navy Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (NTTP) 3-
60.1/Air Force Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (Instruction) (AFTTP[I]) 3-2.3, Multi-
Service Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for Dynamic Targeting. 
7.  The Joint Targeting Cycle 
The joint targeting cycle supports the JFC’s joint operation planning and execution with 
a comprehensive, iterative, and logical methodology for employing the ways and means to 
create desired effects that support achievement of objectives. 
8.  Targeting and Joint Operation Planning 
a.  Integrating and synchronizing planning, execution, and assessment is pivotal to the 
success of joint operations.  Understanding th e objectives, intentions, capabilities, and 
limitations of all actors within the operational environment enables the use of joint, 
interagency, and multinational means to accomplish tasks, create effects, and achieve 
objectives.  Target development and selection are based on the JFC’s desired end state rather 
than on the available ways and means to achieve them.  In other words, the focus should be 
on creating the desired target effects that accomplish targeting-related tasks and objectives in 
support of the JFCs objectives, ra ther than simply servicing a list of  targets or basing 
targeting decisions on the availability of pa rticular weapons, platfo rms, or systems.  
Commanders and their staffs integrate lethal and nonlethal target engagements into the joint 
targeting cycle.  
b.  Joint operation planning is the mechanism by which a JFC translates national military 
objectives into viable plans and orders for conducting military operations.  The JFC issues 
initial targeting guidance early in the planning effort.  The jo int targeting process occurs 
within this context.   
c.  Detailed JIPOE, country assessments, and target system analysis (TSA) set the stage 
for detailed target development.  
For more information on JIPOE, see Joint Publication (JP) 2-01.3, Joint Intelligence 
Preparation of the Operational Environment.  
d.  Through the CONOPS the JFC provides fi res and targeting gui dance, operational 
objectives, desired effects, tasks, and targeting/fires priorities.  The CONOPS provides more 
detail on what and where fi res effects are desired by pha se (e.g., deny, disrupt, delay, 
suppress, neutralize, destroy, corrupt, usurp, or  influence).  In a ddition, the JFC provides 
guidance on munitions usage and restrictions, restricted targets, and a no-strike list (NSL). 
e.  The operation plan (OPLAN), or ope ration order (OPORD), provides broad 
guidelines for prioritizing targets, making clear which sets or systems are most important to 
the operation.  The OPLAN or OPORD should also provide guidance on the sequencing of 
targeting actions or effects, which is not the same thing as priority.  Although creating 
parallel effects is generally best, some targets must be attacked sequentially to enable effects 
against other targets. 

Understanding Targets and Targeting 
I-11 
f.  Targeting begins during pre-hostilities deliberate planning or crisis action planning 
and continues throughout execution.  As the operation progresses, joint operation planning 
generally occurs in three distinct but overlapping timeframes: future plans, future operations, 
and current operations.  The joint force battle rhythm and the JFC’s decision cycle are two 
factors that affect planning in these timeframes, with the greatest potential impact on current 
operations planning.  The joint targeting cycle and supporting component processes (such as 
the six-stage air tasking cycle) must adapt to the joint force battle rhythm and decision cycle. 
g.  Deliberate targeting typi cally supports all three pl anning horizons, while current 
operations planning (usually the current 24-hour period) typically requires the immediate 
responsiveness of dynamic targeting. 
Refer to JP 5-0, Joint Operation Planning,  for more informa tion on planning during 
execution. 
Chapter II, “The Joint Targeting Cycle,” provides a detailed discussion of each phase in the 
joint targeting cycle. 

Chapter I 
I-12 JP 3-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank

II-1 
CHAPTER II 
THE JOINT TARGETING CYCLE 
1.  General Activities 
a.  Joint targeting is an integral part of joint operation planning and continues through 
publication of the campaign or contingency plan, OPORD, or fragmentary order.  Detailed 
JIPOE and country assessments, performed by JFCs within their OAs, set the stage for 
detailed targeting within th e joint targeting cy cle.  Many products used to support a 
contingency or military operation are developed, maintained, and continuously updated as 
foundational information for specific targets. 
b.  The consideration of effects during jo int operation planni ng helps establish a 
coherent relationship between objectives and tasks.  During development of COAs and the 
CONOPS, understanding desired and undesired effects can help the JFC and staff refine the 
mission statement and the joint force component s’ tasks.  Once actions are taken against 
targets, the commander and staff assess the eff ectiveness of the actions.  If there is no 
evidence that the desired effects were created, reengagement of the target may be necessary, 
or another method selected to create the desired effects. 
2.  Categories of Targeting and Targets 
a.  The targeting process can be generally grouped into two categories:  deliberate and 
dynamic.  Neither is indicative of the target to be engaged but is more closely aligned with 
the planning phase in which the target is identified and prosecuted. Timing is the primary 
factor that determines whether deliberate  or dynamic targeting will support the JFC’s 
targeting requirements (see Figure II-1). 
(1)  Deliberate targeting normally supports the joint force’s future plans effort, 
which is overseen by the plans directorate of a joint staff (J-5).  The timing of focus for this 
effort varies according to the level of command, type of operation, JFC’s desires, and other 
factors.  (Normally, the future operations di rectorate focuses on 24 hours out to 72 hours.  
This is a critical linkage during targeting execution.)  Typically the emphasis of the future 
plans effort is on planning the next phase of operations (sequels to the current operation).  In 
a campaign, this could be planning the next major operation.   
“The general who wins a battle makes many calculations in his temple before the 
battle is fought.  The general who loses a battle makes but a few calculations 
beforehand.  Thus many calculations lead to victory and few calculations to defeat.  
It is by attention to this point that I can foresee who is likely to win or lose.” 
Sun Tzu, The Art of War (circa 500 B.C.) 

Chapter II 
II-2 JP 3-60 
(2)  Dynamic targeting is normally employed in current operations  planning 
because the nature and time frame associated with current operations (usually the current 24-
hour period) typically requires more immediate responsiveness than is achieved in deliberate 
targeting.  Current operations planning addresses the immediate or very near-term planning 
issues associated with ongoing operations which usually occur in the joint operations center 
(JOC) under the operations directorate of a joint staff (J-3).  
b.  Targets may be described as two different categories: planned targets and targets of 
opportunity.  Each has two separate subcategories: 
(1)  Planned targets are known to exis t in the operational environment with 
engagement actions scheduled against them.  Examples range from targets being engaged 
through ongoing shaping activ ities, targets on jo int target lists (JTLs ) in the applicable 
operations plan, to targets detected in sufficient time to list in an air tasking order (ATO), 
mission-type orders, attack gui dance matrix, fragmentary orders, or fire support plans.  
Planned targets may be further divided into scheduled targets and on-call targets depending 
upon when they may be attacked.  Scheduled targets are prosecuted at a specific time.  On-
call targets have actions pla nned, but not for a specific delivery time.  The commander 
expects to locate these targets in sufficient time to execute planned actions.  These targets are 
unique in that actions are planned against them using deliberate targeting but execution will 
normally be conducted using dynamic targeting. 
(2)  Targets of opportunity refer to targ ets that meet the criteria to achieve 
objectives but were not selected for action during the current joint targeting cycle.  Targets of 
opportunity can be divided into two subgroups:  unplanned targets and unanticipated targets.  
These targets often cause deliberate plans to change and are best managed using dynamic 
targeting. 
 
Figure II-1.  Categories of Targeting and Targets 
Categories of Targeting and Targets
Deliberate Targeting 
(Planned)
Dynamic Targeting
(Targets of Opportunity)
On-call 
Targets
Unanticipated 
Targets
Scheduled 
Targets
Unplanned 
Targets
Time Sensitive Targets
Component Critical Targets
Sensitive Targets

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-3 
(a)  Unplanned targets are known targets and are included on a target list, but 
not selected for engagement because the target was not nominated, was nominated but did 
not make the joint integrated prioritized target list (JIPTL), or was not expected to be 
available for engagement within the target cycl e.  However, changes to the target status 
(priority, access, permissions) could result in the need (or opportunity) to engage the target 
during the current cycle.  
(b)  Unanticipated targets are unknown or not expected  to be present in the 
operational environment.  These targets are not included on a target list and an evaluation of 
the target is needed to determine engagement requirements and timing.  In some cases the 
target will require engagement in the current targeting cycle and will require use of dynamic 
targeting.  In other cases, the target will be identified and pr ocessed as a new target for 
inclusion on the appropriate targeting list through normal target development. 
Refer to JP 5-0, Joint Operation Planning , for more informa tion on planning during 
execution.  Refer to JP 3-33, Joint Task Force Headquarters, for information on joint task 
force battle rhythm, the commander’s decision cycle, and other factors that can affect joint 
targeting and the synchronization of plans and operations. 
3.  The Joint Targeting Cycle 
a.  The joint targeting cycle is a six phase iterative process (see Figure II-2): 
(1)  End state and commander’s objectives. 
(2)  Target development and prioritization. 
(3)  Capabilities analysis. 
(4)  Commander’s decision and force assignment. 
(5)  Mission planning and force execution. 
(6)  Assessment. 
b.  The process is not time-constrained nor  rigidly sequential.  Steps may occur 
concurrently, but it provides an essential framework to describe the steps that must be 
satisfied to conduct joint targeting successfully.  The deliberate and dynamic nature of the 
joint targeting cycle supports joint operation planning and execution, providing the depth and 
flexibility required to support the CONOPS and commander’s intent as opportunities arise 
and plans change.    
 

Chapter II 
II-4 JP 3-60 
c.  Phase 1—The End State and Commander’s Objectives 
(1)  Understanding the military end state and the commander’s intent, centers of 
gravity (COGs), objectives, desired effects, and required tasks developed during operational 
planning provides the initial impetus for the targeting process.  The military end state is the 
set of required conditions that defines achievement of all military objectives for the 
operation.  The CCDR typically will be concer ned with the military end state and related 
strategic military objectives, while a subordi nate JFC will focus on military end state, 
operational objectives, and supporting tasks.  The mission analysis step of JOPP facilitates 
the development of the commander’s objectives .  Theater-strategic and national guidance 
also shape the commander’s objective(s).  An  important result of mission analysis is the 
commander’s initial intent statement.  This is a clear and concise expression of the purpose 
of the operation and the military end state.  This statement, which the commander revises 
throughout the course of planning, deals primarily with the military conditions that lead to 
mission accomplishment, so the commander may highlight selected objectives, desired 
effects, and required tasks. 
(2)  Understanding the JFC’s guidance, CONOPS, and intent is the most important 
and first activity of joint targeting because they document the set of outcomes relevant to the 
present situation and set the course for all that follows.  Objectives are the basis for 
developing the desired effects and scope of target development, and are coordinated among 
strategists, planners, and intelligence analysts for approval by the commander.  Attainment 
of clear, measurable, and achievable objectives is essential to the successful realization of the 
 
Figure II-2.  Joint Targeting Cycle
Joint Targeting Cycle
1.
End State and 
Commander’s 
Objectives
2.
Target Development 
and Prioritization
3.
Capabilities 
Analysis
4.
Commander’s 
Decision and Force 
Assignment
5.
Mission Planning 
and Force 
Execution
6.
Assessment

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-5 
desired end state.  The ability to generate the type and extent of effects necessary to achieve 
the commander’s objectives distinguishes effective targeting.   
For more information on end state and commander’s objectives see JP 5-0, Joint Operation 
Planning. 
(3)  Equally important is the development of observable, achievable, and reasonable 
measures (such as measures of effectiveness [MOEs] and measures of performance [MOPs]) 
and indicators to assess whether the effects and objectives are being or have been attained.  
Measures and indicators help focus target development within the joint targeting process and 
are critical to enabling asse ssment.  Measures and indicat ors are coordinated between 
operations, plans, and intelligence for approval by the commander. 
d.  Phase 2—Target Development and Prioritization 
(1)  Target development is the analysis, assessment, and documentation processes 
to identify and characterize potential targets that, when successfully engaged, support the 
achievement of the commander’s objectives.  A fully developed target must comply with 
national and command guidance, law of war, and the applicable ROE to be engaged.  Phase 
2 is comprised of three steps:  
(a)  Target system analysis; 
(b)  Entity-level target development; and  
(c)  Target list management (TLM). 
(2)  Target developers systematically examine the enemy to the entities to the 
elements utilizing the targeti ng taxonomy, which hierarchica lly orders the adversary, its 
capabilities, and the targets which enable the capabilities into a clarifying framework (see 
Figure II-3).   
For more information on the targeting taxonomy, see CJCSI 3370.01, Target Development 
Standards. 
(a)  Target systems are typically a br oad set of interrelated functionally 
associated components that generally produce a common output or have a shared mission.  
Target development always approaches adve rsary capabilities from a target systems 
perspective.  This includes physical, logical, and complex social systems, and the interaction 
among them.  While a single target may be significant because of its own characteristics, the 
target’s real importance lies in its relationship to other targets within an operational 
system.  A target system is most often consider ed as a collection of assets directed to 
perform a specific function or series of functions (see Figure II-4).  While target systems are 
intra-dependent to perform a specific function, they are also interdependent in support of 
adversary capabilities (e.g., th e electric power system ma y provide energy to run the 
adversary’s railroads that are a key component of their military logistic system).  System-
level target development links these multiple target systems and their components to reflect 
both their intra- and interdependency that, in  aggregate, contribute to the adversary 

Chapter II 
II-6 JP 3-60 
capabilities.  JIPOE helps target developers prioritize an adversary’s target systems based on 
how much each contributes to the adversary’s ability to wage war.  
(b)  Establishing intelligence requirements is critical to the success of target 
development and to the entire targeting proc ess.  Targeteers should work closely with 
collection managers, intelligence analysts, a nd planners to develop, adjust, and integrate 
intelligence requirements for planning, execution, and assessment throughout the targeting 
cycle and integrate them into the collection plan.  This iterative process should also quickly 
incorporate changes needed to adapt to a rapidly evolving operational environment. 
(3)  Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment   
(a)  The JIPOE process is a fundamental step in the planning process and is 
important to target development.  This is because JIPOE provides a disciplined methodology 
that provides an understanding of the relationship between adversary COGs.  This baseline 
intelligence illuminates which decisive points o ffer opportunity to attack the adversary’s 
COGs (directly and indirectly), extend friendly operational reach, or enable the application 
of friendly forces and capabilities.  Targeteers and planners should resolve any 
misunderstanding or unclear objectives.  Along with a dynamic threat assessment, JIPOE 
products provide much of the substantive identification, baseline analysis, characterization of 
systems, functional capabilities that inform target development, and target systems analysis. 
 
Figure II-3.  Target Development Relationships 
Target Development Relationships
1.
End State and 
Commander’s 
Objectives Joint Intelligence 
Preparation of the 
Operational 
Environment
Target 
System 
Analysis
Electronic 
Target 
Folder
Adversary
Target System
Target System Component
Target
Target 
Element
Taxonomy Product
2.
Target 
Development and 
Prioritization
3.
Capability Analysis

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-7 
(b)  During planning, targeteers will evaluate the objectives and the adversary 
COGs as described in JIPOE for selection of target systems.  The purpose is to characterize 
the function, criticality, and vulne rabilities of each potential target .  It is essential to link 
targets back to targeting objectives and MOEs developed duri ng the end state and 
commanders objectives phase of the joint targeting cycle to weigh resources toward the most 
relevant and valuable target systems.  
(4)  Target System Analysis.  TSA is the foundational pr ocess of system-level 
target development.  TSA is equally applicable to systems and capabilities associated with 
both nation-state and non-state actors.  The TSA process enables additional, more detailed 
stages of target development.  Note:  While crisis action planning may necessitate a truncated 
TSA process, targeteers will still be required to compile enough intelligence to support the 
 
Figure II-4.  Example Target System, Components, and Elements 
Example Target System, Components, and Elements
Legend
target system elementstarget system components
Munitions
Runways
Personnel
Petroleum, Oil, and 
Lubricants
Operations Areas
Maintenance Areas
Integrated Air 
Defense System Airfields
Air Defense Forces 
Early Warning and
Ground Control 
Intercept Radar Sites
Anti-Aircraft Artillery
Command, Control, 
and Communications
Surface-to-Air 
Missile Sites

Chapter II 
II-8 JP 3-60 
target’s vetting and the operational and legal requirements necessary for executing operations 
against the target in a dynamic environment. 
(a)  The first step is evaluating whic h target systems are relevant to the 
planning effort.  Examples of target systems are an adversary’s C2 structure, ground forces 
and facilities, and the petroleum, oils, and lubricants (POL) industry (see Figure II-5). 
 
Figure II-5.  Example of Petroleum, Oils, and Lubricants Target System and Components  
Example of Petroleum, Oils, and Lubricants Target System 
and Components
In-Field Collection
Crude Oil Wells
Natural Gas Wells
Tars, Bitumen, Coke
Kerosenes
Natural Pipeline
Pumping Station
Pipelines
Liquids
To Users
Gasoline Plant
(looks like a small refinery)
Rundown 
Storage
Cracking, 
Reforming, and 
Blending Units
Gasoline Plants
Crude 
Storage at 
RefineryEnd Product 
Storage and 
Shipping 
Area
Lubricant Plant

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-9 
(b)  Target system components are a related group of entities within a target 
system that performs or contributes toward a similar function.  The emphasis in component 
identification shifts from the system to the sp ecific activities, such as industries and basic 
utilities involved in producing parts of an end product.  The same general analytic process 
applies for nonindustrial target systems.  For example, the components of a ballistic missile 
target system might include missile transporter erector launchers, resupply vehicles, C2 links 
and nodes, meteorological radars, missile fuel storage sites and/or shelters, deployment 
areas, and the supporting road transportation network; while an insurgency’s components 
may include its core leadership, its military and political arms, its international political and 
financial network, and the active or passive support of the population.  The purpose of a TSA 
is to identify targeting strategies that enable a JFC to use targeting to accomplish objectives 
and to identify high value and high payoff targets that underpin those strategies.  Targeteers 
should consider a target’s criticality and vulnerability when evaluating its value or payoff, 
and how much its engagement will contribute to the targeting strategy (see Figure II-6).  
1.  Criticality.  Criticality measures a target’s contribution to a target 
system’s larger function and its relative impor tance within the target system.  Target 
development focuses on identifying critical nodes within key target systems to achieve 
objectives and conform to JFC guidance.  Ther e are four factors that measure a targets 
criticality: 
a.
  Value.  Value measures the target’s importance to the adversary’s 
target system and to a friendly force’s ab ility to accomplish a mission or achieve an 
objective.  Significance is the degree of concern in excess of the value assigned to its normal 
performance.  This value measurement may re flect relative military, economic, political, 
psychological, informational, environmenta l, cultural, or geogr aphic importance.  
Psychological significance assigned to a targ et reflects the thought processes of the 
adversary.  For example, the birthplace of a political, religious, or cultural leader may hold 
greater psychological significance than its military value merits. 
b.  Depth is a measure of the time between the disruption of a target’s 
activity and its measurable impact on system output.  Average depth is a time construct 
designed to measure the average interval between the time the production of an item begins 
and the time the finished product appears in use by a tactical unit.  Understanding the target’s 
depth provides the targeteer with an important measure of the time available for the 
 
Figure II-6.  Factors in Target Evaluation Within a Target System Analysis 
Factors in Target Evaluation Within a Target System Analysis
Criticality




Value
Depth
Recuperation
Capacity
Vulnerability






Cushion
Reserves
Dispersion
Mobility
Countermeasures
Physical Characteristics

Chapter II 
II-10 JP 3-60 
adversary to organize substitute consumption, alternate production, or procurement before 
the system is functionally degraded. 
c.  Recuperation is a measurement of the time and cost required for a 
target to regain its functiona l capability after being disrupte d.  By assigning each target a 
reconstitution or recuperation time factor, such as days required to rebuild the facility or 
perform the original function again, the amount of target value restor ed each day can be 
estimated.  The target analyst can then determine the timing or necessity for a reattack. 
d.  Capacity is measured in two ways: current output and maximum 
output.  Current output may be represented by such things as plant production based on the 
present labor force, economy of the coun try, current demand for the product, and 
demonstrated production over the past two or three years.  Maximum output is an assessment 
of full-capacity production based upon existing equipment and continuous operation over a 
24-hour day. 
2.
  Vulnerability.  A target’s vulnerability refers to the physical 
susceptibility to damage, disruption, intrusion,  interference, or ot her desired effect.  
Vulnerability affects the size and types of action required to damage, disrupt, or otherwise 
affect a target, in addition to such factors as munitions and fuzing requirements.  There are 
six characteristics that contribute to a target’s vulnerability: 
a.  Cushion is a measure of the extent to which a single target can 
absorb a disruptive influence and continue to function.  Viewed another way, cushion is that 
portion of the target that must be affected in order to reach desired outcomes.  Determining 
this point for an industry or a military target requires detailed analysis of a target’s operation, 
including idle plant capacity, replacement substitution and expansion capacity, civilian 
production use, the production of nonessential military items or services, and production or 
provision of substitute materials or services. 
b.
  Reserves provide a quantity of stored resources that may be used 
when the normal supply of the resource is disrupted.  Assessment of reserves depends upon 
the estimation of the system use or flow rate.  The measure of reserves is the percentage of 
the products used versus the total products available. 
c.  Dispersion is the geographic distribution of the targets in a target 
system and/or target elements within a target .  A target with a large number of dispersed 
target elements presents a more difficult ta rget engagement problem  than does a tightly 
concentrated target.  Alternatively, dispersion may degrade the efficiency of an adversary’s 
capabilities by making his own operations more complex. 
d.  Mobility is a measure of the time required to shift a target’s 
function from one location to another.  Mobi lity affects both the perishability of the 
information about the location of the target a nd friendly system’s ability to detect, locate, 
identify, and take action against the target. 
e.  Countermeasures mean the ability to counteract the potential 
disruptive activity of the friendly system through active and passive means.  This can involve 

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-11 
the use of terrain, camouflage, emission contro ls, passive, and active defenses to negate 
friendly efforts to affect adversary activity. 
f.  Physical characteristics are analyzed to determine the target’s 
susceptibility to damage, disruption, or other effect.  They include such elements as weight, 
shape, volume, construction, and sturdiness.  
(5)  Entity-Level Target Development.  Entity-level target development builds on 
TSA and generally occurs in three stages: basic, intermediate, and advanced.  Each stage is 
defined by a minimum set of essential data required to progress a target from initial 
identification and functional characterization to execution-level detail.  A target is considered 
fully developed when the three stages are comp lete (i.e., when the target is characterized 
enough to be engaged effectively). 
(a)  Once an entity has been identified as a potential target (known as a target 
development nomination [TDN]), an electronic target folder (ETF) should be started.  ETFs 
are used to store entity-level target intelligence, operational, planning, and legal information.  
They are catalogued by an entity  identification (alphanumeric string in approved national 
databases).  Target materials (TM) may be presentations of target intelligence and are stored 
in ETFs.  
(b)  TDNs are further developed and, when intermediate target development 
and command quality control standards are met, the entity is placed on a candidate target list 
(CTL).  The CTL subsequently drives further target development and TLM.  
(6)  Target List Management.  TLM is the third step of the joint targeting cycle 
phase 2 and begins when a target is nominate d for target development and ends with the 
creation and maintenance of a prioritized target list.  TLM includes target vetting, validation, 
listing, nomination, and prioritization.  
(a)  Target vetting assesses the accuracy of the supporting intelligence.  This 
includes verifying the candidate target’s functional characterization, expectation statement, 
and target significance, as well as analyzing the target elements.  Although an entity may 
have multiple functions, for effective and effi cient vetting, only one description and the 
primary functional characterizati on of the entity should be pr esented to the intelligence 
community (IC); however, there is utility in listing the other functions.  This description and 
functional characterization should be coordinated between functional, supported, supporting, 
and geographic combatant commands/designated authorities.  Target vetting session votes 
are recorded in the ETF.  In a dynamic targeting environment, well-organized, and inclusive 
target vetting sessions are critically important due to compressed timelines. 
(b)  Once vetted, candidate targets then go through validation.  Validation is a 
part of target development that ensures all vetted candidate targets meet the objectives and 
criteria outlined in the commander’s guidance and ensures compliance with the law of war 
and ROE.  Candidate targets go through a target va lidation board or similar body to be 
validated, then are added to a JTL or restricted target list (RTL). 

Chapter II 
II-12 JP 3-60 
(7)  Target List Development.  Various target lists may be identified for use by the 
JFC.  It is imperative that procedures be in place for additions or deletions to the lists and 
that those procedures are responsive and veri fiable.  Commanders should be aware of the 
larger impact when removing targets from the target list.  The removal of one seemingly 
isolated target may cause an entire target list to be ineffective and require a different set of 
targets to create the same effect. 
(a)  Joint targeting has established the following target lists: 
1.
  Candidate target list - A list of entities which have met intermediate 
target development criteria and are being vetted and validated; 
2.  Joint target list - A list of validated targets upon which there are no 
target engagement restrictions; 
3.  Restricted target list - A list of validated targets upon which there are 
target engagement restrictions; 
4.  Target nomination list (TNL) - A list of targets from the JTL and RTL 
which are nominated by an organization; 
5.  Joint integrated prioritized target list - A list of targets from the TNLs 
which are prioritized according to JFC objectives. 
For more information on target lists and TLM, see CJCSI 3370.01, Target Development 
Standards. 
(b)  The draft JIPTL usually contains more targets than there are resources 
available to take action on during a given time period.  Thus, a draft JIPTL cut line is usually 
established.  This cut line should reflect wh ich targets will most lik ely have action taken 
against them.  
(c)  It should be clearly understood that the cut line simply reflects an estimate 
of resources available to take action against targets in priority order and does not guarantee 
that a specific target will be engaged or that additional targets may not be engaged.  Other 
variables like TSTs, evolving JFC priorities, extreme situations, a nd changing resource 
availability will determine which targets ar e ultimately prosecuted.  The JIPTL provides 
components as well as the JFC with the pr oper feedback on how th eir specific target 
nominations fit into creating the effects desired.  
1.  No-strike entities are protected from the effects of military operations 
under international law and/or the ROE.  Attacking these may violate the laws of war (e.g., 
cultural and religious sites, embassies belonging to noncombatant countries, hospitals, 
schools) or interfere with friendly relations with other nations, indigenous populations, or 
governments.  NSLs are not target lists, since the entities on the NSLs are not targets.  NSLs 
are continuously updated with the latest information from the operational environment.  For 
more information on no-strike entities and NSLs, see CJCSI 3160.01, No Strike and the 
Collateral Damage Estimation Methodology.  

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-13 
2.  Restricted.  A restricted target is a valid target that has specific 
restrictions placed on the actions authorized ag ainst it due to operational considerations.  
Actions that exceed specified restrictions are prohibited until coordinated and approved by 
the establishing headquarters.  Attacking rest ricted targets may interfere with projected 
friendly operations.  Targets may have certain specific restrictions associated with them that 
should be clearly documented in the ETF (for example, do not strike during daytime, strike 
only with a certain weapon).  When targets are restricted from lethal attacks, commanders 
should consider nonlethal capab ilities as a means to achieve  or support the commander’s 
objectives.  However, use of nonlethal capabilities in targeting should not be limited to the 
case where lethal capability use is restricted.  For additional information, see Appendix A, 
“Legal Considerations in Targeting,” and CJCSI 3370.01, Target Development Standards. 
(8)  Target Nomination for Prioritization, Synchronization, and Action.  Once 
potential targets are identified, researched, developed, vetted, and validated, they are 
nominated by component commanders, nationa l agencies, supporting commands, and the 
JFC’s staff and placed onto TNLs.  The TNLs are compiled into a draft JIPTL, coordinated 
with the components, and submitted to the JFC for approval.  Once approved, the list is 
transmitted to all components and appropriate agencies as the JFC’s JIPTL, which focuses 
targeting efforts for a designated time period. 
For more detailed guidance and discussion on target development, see CJCSI 3370.01, 
Target Development Standards.  
e.  Phase 3—Capabilities Analysis 
(1)  This phase of the joint targeting cycle involves evaluating all available 
capabilities against targets’ critical elements to determine the appropriate options available to 
the commander for target engagement while highlighting the best possible solution under 
given circumstances.  Its purpose is to weigh the relative effectiveness and efficiency of the 
available forces as an aid to achieving the objectives set forth by the JFC and subordinate 
commanders through target engagement.  Commanders also consider risks to the force and 
no-strike entities in evaluating available capab ilities.  Estimates of  required weapons or 
capabilities shape other planni ng considerations within the joint force.  For example, 
weapons requirements will drive significant portions of theater logistics planning efforts.  
The capabilities analysis and force assignment phases of the joint targeting cycle are closely 
related.  The primary purpose of capabilities anal ysis is to maximize the employment 
efficiency of forces through application of enough force to create the desired effects while 
minimizing collateral damage and waste of res ources.  Estimates of the effectiveness of 
available forces and/or systems against vari ous proposed targeting opt ions assist in the 
apportionment process and in subordinate  component commanders force assignment 
decisions.  Capabilities analysis is comprised of four steps: 
(a)  Target Vulnerability Analysis.  Building on the critical target elements 
identified in phase 2, target vul nerability analysis reveals all aspects of the target that, if 
engaged, would result in a redu ction in the target’s ability to perform its function for the 
adversary. 

Chapter II 
II-14 JP 3-60 
(b)  Capabilities Assignment.   Once a target’s vulnerabilities are known, 
appropriate target engagement capabilities are assigned.  Target engagement capabilities may 
be either lethal or nonlethal weapons or capabilities.  All target engagement types must be 
accounted for in capabilities analysis.  Weapon eering is accomplished in this step for all 
lethal capabilities and some nonlethal capabilities from other mission areas (i.e., technical 
capabilities such as space, electronic warfare, and cybers pace).  Once capabilities are 
assigned to vulnerabilities, a list  of these asset target interactions (ATIs) is created and 
evaluated in the next step. 
(c)  Feasibility Assessment.  E a c h  o f  t h e  A T I s  m u s t  b e  e v a l u a t e d  f o r  
feasibility.  For example, a lethal weapon might be able to neutralize a particular target’s 
function, but because the target is located in a country for which we have no (and would not 
receive approval for) lethal authorities, this ATI would be “unfeasible.”  
(d)  Effects Estimate.  Each feasible ATI should have first, second, and higher 
order effects identified.  Sometimes this is done by a command’s red team.  Collateral 
damage is a second order effect.  Collateral damage estimation (CDE) is a process normally 
performed by trained and certified personnel at various echelons.  CDE is intended to 
characterize the level and extent of collateral damage risk for a commander.  Higher order 
effects may include such actions as diploma tic and public relations consequences arising 
from collateral damage or the potential for post-hostility economic costs to restore damaged 
adversary infrastructure.  Attrition calculations may be included in this step.  These effects 
estimates are essential in gaining the JFC’s approval in phase 4, commander’s decision and 
force assignment. 
(2)  Capabilities analysis focuses at the target element level on matching specific 
capabilities against identified target vulnerabilities and estimating the effects.  This process 
builds upon the analysis perfor med in target development, both for information that 
characterizes the physical, functi onal, and behavioral vulnerability of the target and for a 
connecting thread of logic to the JFC’s object ives and guidance.  During the capabilities 
analysis phase, the weaponeer estimates the most likely outcome resulting from employing 
selected capabilities against a specific target element to create a specific effect.  Its purpose 
is to weigh the relative efficacy of the available forces and systems or processes and agents.  
These estimates may be generated using pr obabilistic mathematical models (e.g., Joint 
Munitions Effectiveness Manual [JMEM]) that take into account the target’s critical 
vulnerabilities, performance data on the assets considered for application against the target, 
and means of delivery.  Capabilities analysis may also inform the JFC’s choice of COA and 
other decision-making processes.  The wea poneer focuses on the target’s physical, 
functional, cognitive, and environmental char acteristics to determine how to leverage 
vulnerabilities.  This analysis should consid er nonlethal capabilities .  Effects estimates 
should also take into account  estimated repair and recupe ration times when matching 
capabilities with vulnerabilities and account for reuse and reconstruction during later plan 
phases to avoid negatively affecting the end stat e.  The IC and federated partners provide 
TM, which include estimative analyses essen tial to assessing how a specific method can 
affect the target.  Any intelligence gaps hi ghlighted during this phase will also refine 
collection requirements. 

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-15 
(3)  All estimates generated during this phase are situation-specific, reflecting the 
pairing of forces against targets under particular conditions of employment.  As such, users 
of this information must use caution in assuming that the estimated effectiveness of a force 
capability under one set of circumstances is broadly applicable to other circumstances.  
Relatively minor targeting variations may have an unintended impact on effects estimates.  It 
is equally important to stress that these estim ates of performance are not designed to take 
into account considerations outside of the realm of ATI (e.g., they do not address whether or 
not the delivery system will surv ive to reach the target).  Es timates of consequences only 
consider the first order effects of ATI and do not model higher-order desired effects or 
unintended collateral effects. 
(4)  Weaponeering is conducted in the third phase of the joint targeting cycle during 
which appropriate weapons or other capabilities are matched with target elements to create 
the desired effects on the target(s).  It is the process of determining the quantity of a specific 
type of lethal or nonlethal means required to create a desired effect on a given target.  
(a)  Weaponeering is part of advanced target development.  Since not all targets 
will require advanced target development, only prioritized targets (i.e., targets within TNLs 
and JIPTLs) should require the extra effort necessary to weaponeer.  
(b)  Planners and weaponeers should not arbitrarily exclude any capability that 
can create the desired effect(s).  For example, inclusion of interagency capabilities may be 
leveraged to create more powerful, comprehens ive, and enduring results.  At present, 
weaponeering is more developed to support munitions than nonlethal actions.  The Services, 
as well as the Joint Technical Coordinating Group for Munitions Effectiveness (JTCG/ME), 
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), Joint Warfare Analysis Center (JWAC), and the 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), have developed a number of quantitative 
techniques used to estimate weapon effectiveness and collateral damage risk.  The JTCG/ME 
develops operational and anal ytical models used to measure and predict munitions 
effectiveness.  These models produce a large body of scientifically valid data, which enable 
weaponeers to predict the effectiveness of weapons against most selected targets.  Inputs to 
these calculations include targ et characteristics (e.g., size, sh ape, and hardness), desired 
damage criteria or probability of damage (PD) calculations, and delivery parameters (e.g., 
altitudes, speeds, dive angles).  Model outputs include the predicted effectiveness of selected 
weapons and target pairings or the number of assets required to create desired effects using 
specified weapons and/or delivery systems. 
(c)  Considering both nonlethal capabilities and nonlethal effects should be a 
part of this analysis.  Though highly effective for their intended purpose, lethal capabilities 
may not always be suitable.  For example, during stability operations, military engagement, 
security cooperation, and deterrence operations, the application of lethal fires is normally 
greatly restricted, making nonl ethal capability use the dominant feasible option.  The 
considerations for use of nonlethal capabilities in targeting should not pertain to only specific 
phases or missions, but should be integrated throughout the operation. 
(d)  The JFC may also need to addre ss concerns about inflicting unintended 
casualties among noncombatants and civilians and producing collateral damage to 

Chapter II 
II-16 JP 3-60 
infrastructure and facilities that may be re quired during later phase s of the campaign or 
major operation.  For example, the JFC may re quire targeteers to prevent enemy flight 
operations while safeguarding the airfield’s capability to support blue force operations once 
captured.  The employment of nonlethal capabili ties, such as public affairs, key leader 
engagement, civil-military operations, and military information support operations can help 
address these concerns.  Nonlethal capability  use can also influence adversary decision 
maker’s choice of actions, loca l public condemnati on of adversary actions, and directly 
impact domestic and international support of the adversary.  Nonlethal target engagement 
provides the JFC a range of flexible target engagement options.  The scalability, selectability, 
and responsiveness of nonlethal capabilities provide the JFC the means to engage all target 
types: facilities (e.g., to clear a facility of personnel, thus stopping its function), individuals 
(e.g., detaining an individual), virtual targets (through cyberspace), equipment (e.g., through 
seizure), and organizations (e.g., revoking a license to engage in commerce).  
(e)  The use of nonlethal capabilities may be particularly desirable when 
restraints on friendly weaponry, tactics, and levels of violence characterize the operational 
environment.  In some cases, even carefully applied force with lethal weapons can result in 
negative public perceptions that could adversely affect efforts to gain or maintain legitimacy 
and impede the attainment of both short and long-term goals.  Escalation of force guidance in 
the form of ROE/rules for the use of force, coupled with appropriate nonlethal capabilities, 
can help avoid raising the level of conflict unnecessarily. 
(5)  CDE is a critical part of the effects estimate step in the joint targeting process 
phase 3 (or in the “track” step of phase 5 during dynamic targeting) when munitions are used 
on facilities.  CJCSI 3160.01, No-Strike and the Collateral Damage Estimation Methodology 
details a specific CDE process followed Department of Defense (DOD)-wide.  Targets with 
associated collateral damage concerns expect ed to exceed theater (combatant command) 
thresholds are referred either to SecDef or the President using the sensitive target approval 
and review (STAR) process, detailed in CJCSI 3122.06, Sensitive Target Approval and 
Review (STAR) Process.   
f.  Phase 4—Commander’s Decision and Force Assignment 
(1)  The force assignment process integrates previous phases of joint targeting and 
fuses capabilities analysis with available forces, sensors, and weapons systems.  Figure II-7 
provides a graphic illustration of the flow of this step.  It is primarily an operations function, 
but requires considerable intelligence support to ensure ISR assets are properly integrated 
into the plan.  The process of resourcing JIPTL targets with available forces or systems and 
ISR assets lies at the heart of force assignment.  This process links theoretical planning to 
actual operations.  Once the JFC has approved the JIPTL, either entirely or in part, tasking 
orders are prepared and released to the executing components and forces.  The joint targeting 
cycle facilitates the publica tion of tasking orders by providing amplifying information 
necessary for detailed tactical-level planning of operations. 

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-17 
(2)  During any current operation, the joint targeting pr ocess also documents the 
logical linkage between tasks, effects, objectives, and guidance.  This documentation traces 
the analytical reasoning that supported the nominated targets and the details of the capability 
effectiveness estimates.  The work of mission planners is significantly enhanced when they 
are furnished with detailed in sights into the reas oning that resulted in their unit tasking. 
Furthermore, because the pairings of capabilities against targets are made using nominal 
weapon and weapon system performance data, there may be divergences with more current 
and/or specific data used by unit-level planne rs.  Making the factors used in joint force 
assignment available to the mission planners , and providing them r eal-time collaboration 
capability with other targeting specialists, en ables adjustment and fine-tuning of mission 
planning.  It also provides a channel to discu ss mitigation of risk for the attacking force, 
since variations in tactics may be required that could affect the results created at the target; 
the joint targeting process must account for these variations and adjust expectations 
accordingly.  This is a critical path of info rmation flow during execution that reduces the 
likelihood of confusion between joint force assignment expectations and actual achievement.  
Ultimately, the exchange of information during phase 4 and the reconciliation of a common 
 
Figure II-7.  Commander’s Decision and Force Assignment 
Phase 4 – Commander’s Decision and Force Assignment
Legend
Draft JIPTL and/or List of 
Feasible ATIs
Plan mission/update mission plans
(deliberate targeting)
Analyze task order period for 
dynamic targeting opportunities
(dynamic targeting)
Consolidate Target Development and 
Capabilities Analysis Results
Target 
Development 
Data
Capabilities 
Analysis 
Results
Assemble data 
on friendly 
forces status
Assigning Forces to Targets 
and Missions
Allocation MAAP
Development Allotment
Disapproved
Revise
JFC
Approval
Approved
Issue/Revise Plans and Orders
Air Tasking 
OrderIO Plan Space PlanFire Support 
Plans Collection Plan
ATI asset target interaction
IO information operations
JFC joint force commander
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized 
target list
MAAP master air attack plan

Chapter II 
II-18 JP 3-60 
operational picture (COP) are critical elements during phase 6 of the joint targeting cycle 
where outcomes are analyzed and future actions are determined. 
(3)  Targeteers work closely with planners to balance the available employment 
options with their expected effects.  The targeteers’ recommendations should reflect an 
objective assessment of the most appropriate capability to create the effect required to meet 
the commander’s objective, no matter the source.  During force assignment, targeteers also 
provide updated target status, effectiveness analysis, and collateral damage estimates. 
(4)  Five General Steps in Force Assignment 
(a)  Consolidate Target Development and Capabilities Analysis Results.  In 
this step, targeting personnel assemble the necessary data from the work done in phases 2 
and 3.  To make this complex data more usef ul to their planning counterparts, targeting 
personnel should prepare summary files and worksheets distilling the pertinent information 
collected on each potential target.  Target fi les should contain four types of information: 
target development data, capabilities analysis  or number of assets required, CDE, and 
attrition calculations. 
1.  Target Development Data.  The process of target development 
produces extensive, detailed target folders a nd supporting products for each target on the 
JIPTL.  While crucial for the overall joint targ eting cycle, this mass of detail may very 
quickly overwhelm the force assignment t eam unless distilled down into a summary 
containing only the essential information needed to perform this function.  To condense this 
material, targeteers prepare target briefs su mmarizing the contents of the target folder.  
Mandatory information includes all informati on necessary for the JFC to decide how the 
target’s engagement contributes to the JFC’s objectives. 
2.  Capabilities Analysis.  During capabilities analysis, estimates of 
weapons effects and damage criteria are typically arrayed using the following factors: forces, 
delivery systems, weapons fuzing/reliability, and delivery parameters/arrival conditions.  The 
results from the capabilities analysis provide multiple calculations, which estimate the 
physical damage resulting from planned actions against the target.  Targeting personnel may 
also provide the projected e ffects of nonlethal applications on the target.  The force 
assignment team will normally require several possible weaponeering solutions for each joint 
desired point of impact (JDPI) or on each target, arranged in order of effectiveness.   
3.  Collateral Damage Estimation.  Every target where a weaponeering 
solution was determined should also have an estimate of the projec ted collateral damage 
resulting from each anticipated weapon type.  Estimates should reflect the collateral damage 
projected to occur from the use of the weapons required to create the desired effects.  When 
presented alongside weaponeering results, a CDE informs the commander’s application of 
the law of war principle of proportionality to assess the risk to mission and strategic risk due 
to collateral damage.   
4.  Attrition Calculations.  Intelligence analysts provide data on the 
enemy defensive posture, capabilities, and intentions.  Working with planners, weaponeers 

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-19 
run attrition models to estimate the probability of the weapon system arriving at the target, 
and include probability of rel ease or probability of arrival (PA).  Other factors include 
maintenance failure, defenses, and weather.  Weaponeering personnel  should factor this 
attrition analysis and PA data into their PD calculations. 
(b)  Assemble Data on Friendly Force Status, Factoring in Operational 
Limitations and Apportionment Guidance.  Planners and their lo gistics counterparts 
assemble data on the current status and availability of friendly forces and munitions.  The 
JFC approves specific apportionment guidance describing the division of military effort 
among the different missions.  Apportionment affects how the force assignment team tasks 
dual or multi-role platforms, sequences force activities, and directs force packages to operate 
in different parts of the OA.  Other issues affecting force assignment include the maintenance 
status of combat and support assets, battle damage to equipment from previous missions, 
operator and munitions availability, and location of stockpiles relative to combat assets.  
However, simply knowing what forces are available does not give the complete operational 
picture.  Planners should consider weather, adversary operations, force protection concerns, 
operational environment management issues, la w of war, ROE, and special instructions 
constraints.  Packaging, timing issues, OAs, required support assets (e.g., availability of air 
refueling aircraft for aerial missions), and other considerations also affect which targets can 
be acted against. 
(c)  Assign Forces to Specific Targets and Supporting Missions.  In this 
step, planners assign forces, munitions, nonletha l capabilities and ISR assets to specific 
targets and aimpoints.  They develop force packages, assign supporting assets, and resolve 
timing, sequencing, and deconfliction issues.  Operational limitations may require 
modification to targeteers’ initial reco mmendations.  Timing, event sequencing, and 
interaction of combat forces with supporting assets become crucial in crafting an effective 
and actionable CONOPS and fire support pla n.  The operational characteristics of a 
particular weapon system when tasked against a specific target may require adjustments to 
the overall plan or order.  Often, targets are not attacked in the same priority order as they 
appear on the JIPTL.  Targeting personnel must be ready to assist in evaluating the impact of 
these changes upon the entire targeting effort.  As changes are made due to operational and 
special limitations (such as collateral damage restrictions) it is important to ensure that 
achieving the commander’s objec tive does not result in inadvertently violating existing 
constraints or restraints. 
(d)  Present Joint Targeting Recommendations to the JFC for Approval.  
The commander’s decision in phase 4 is to either approve the draft JIPTL, approve targets to 
be added to or removed from the JIPTL, or approves a particular way or ways of engaging a 
particular target or targets. In any case,  the force assignment team will prepare a 
comprehensive briefing on the recommended pl an explaining the rationale behind the 
operational decisions and target selections.  The planners inform the affected component 
commander(s) if high priority targets cannot be attacked, targeting effect cannot be created, 
or targeting objectives cannot be met.  The component commander may modify the targeting 
effect, seek different means to achieve the objective, or accept the fact the targeting objective 
will not be met during this cycle.  It may be necessary to ask the JFC to modify the objective, 
guidance, or prioritization vi a the joint targeting coordina tion board (JTCB) process.  

Chapter II 
II-20 JP 3-60 
Normally, a summary of the plan resulting from the force assignment process, once approved 
by the component commander, is briefed to the JFC.  Generally, operations and intelligence 
staffs work together to produce and brief the recommended plan.  At the conclusion of this 
phase, the stage is set for the planning and execution of operations that perform discrete tasks 
in synergistic support of the JFC’s over-arching objectives.   
(e)  Issue Tasking Orders to Forces.  Once the plan developed by the force 
assignment team is approved, tasking orders to the assigned combat and support forces are 
prepared and issued.  Intelligence assets and organizations, which support mission planning 
and assessment, are also tasked during this phase. 
(5)  At the conclusion of this phase, the stage is set for the planning and execution 
of operations that perform discrete tasks in  synergistic support of  the JFC’s overarching 
objectives. 
g.  Phase 5—Mission Planning and Force Execution 
(1)  Upon receipt of tasking orders, deta iled planning must be performed for the 
execution of operations.  Figure II-8 illustrates the typical process flow of this phase.  The 
joint targeting process supports this planning by providing planners with direct access to 
detailed information on the targets, supporte d by the nominating component’s analytical 
reasoning that linked the target with the desire d effect (phase 2).  This will provide the 
background information necessary for the warfighter to focus on the JFC’s objectives as the 
operation unfolds. 
(2)  Combat operations are dynamic.   During execution, the operational 
environment changes as a result of actions from the joint force, adversary, and other actors.  
 
Figure II-8.  Phase 5—Mission Planning and Force Execution 
Phase 5 – Mission Planning and Force Execution
Fire Support 
Plans
Plan mission/
update mission plans/
validate
Issue orders Execute orders Task reattack Reprioritize assets
Desired effects 
not achieved
Evaluate
Conduct dynamic 
assessment of 
target
Information 
Operations Plan Space Plan Air Tasking Order Collection Plan
Issue/Revise Plans and Orders

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-21 
The joint targeting process monitors these changes in order to allow commanders to 
decisively use joint force capabilities to sei ze and maintain the initiative.  These dynamic 
changes require particular attention to positiv e identification (PID), combat identification 
(CID), and target validation. 
(a)  PID is an identification derived fr om observation and analysis of target 
characteristics including visual recogniti on, electronic support sy stems, non-cooperative 
target recognition techniques, identification friend or foe systems, or other physics-based 
identification techniques.  PID is acquired during step 2 (Fix) during F2T2EA.  CID is the 
process of attaining an accura te characterization of detect ed objects in the operational 
environment sufficient to support an engageme nt decision.  CID is acquired prior to 
engagement.  
(b)  Target validation is a critical function during this phase.  Validation during 
execution includes analysis of the situation to determine if planned targets still contribute to 
objectives (including changes to plans and objectives), if targets are accurately located, and 
how planned actions will impact other friendly operations. 
(3)  Lessons learned from recent operations have demonstrated the need for a 
distinct focus on dynamic targeting during phase 5.  Phases 1 through 4 of the joint targeting 
cycle collectively produce targeting tasks, products, and the commander’s guidance for all 
targeting, whether deliberate or dynamic.  In coordination with joint components and other 
agencies, the JFC and staff develop dynamic targeting guidance, which should include as a 
minimum priorities and guidance for dynamic targeting and identification of requirements by 
components; prioritization of targets, including TST criteria and procedures and component-
critical targets; guidance for acquisition; and action against the targets.  (See Figure II-9 for a 
comparison between deliberate and dynamic ta rgeting during phase 5.)  The JFC should 
articulate risk tolerance sufficiently to let on-scene commanders understand his intent when 
dynamic targeting requires accelerated coordination. 
(4)  Dynamic targeting has often been called F2T2EA or the “kill chain” and has 
also been used for specifically engaging TSTs (see Figure II-10).  Its applicability extends to 
all targets whether developed during deliberate targeting or dynamic targeting.  Targets of 
opportunity have been the traditional focu s of dynamic targeting because decisions on 
whether and how to engage must be made qui ckly.  However, pla nned targets are also 
covered during this phase but the steps simp ly confirm, verify, and validate previous 
decisions (in some cases requiring changes or cancellation).  The steps of dynamic targeting 
may be accomplished iteratively and in parallel.  The find, fix, track, and assess steps tend to 
be ISR-intensive, while the target and engage steps are typically labor-, force-, and decision 
making- intensive.  Whether dynamic or deliber ate targeting is used the next phase is 
assessment. 
(a)  Step 1—Find (Figure II-11) 
1.  During this step, emerging targets are detected and characterized for 
further prosecution. 

Chapter II 
II-22 JP 3-60 
 
2.  Inputs to the find step: 
a.  Clearly delineated JFC dynamic targeting guidance and priorities. 
b.  Focused JIPOE, to include identified named areas of interest, target 
areas of interest, and cross cu eing of intelligence disciplines to identify potential target 
deployment sites or operational environments. 
c.  Collection plans based on the JIPOE. 
3.  The find step involves intell igence collection based on JIPOE.  
Traditional ISR, nontraditional ISR such as aircraft targeting pods and radar warning 
receiver indications, and special operations forces (SOF) may provide initial detection of a 
potential target for both deliberate and dynamic targeting.  In this section, the term “sensor” 
refers both to traditional and nontraditional ISR means. 
 
Figure II-9.  Correlation of Deliberate and Dynamic Targeting During Phase 5 
Correlation of Deliberate and Dynamic Targeting During 
Phase 5






Find
Fix
Track
Target
Engage
Assess
Joint 
Targeting 
Cycle Phases
End State and 
C
 
ommander’s 
Objectives
F2T2EA
Commander’s  
Decision and 
Force 
Assignment
Mission Planning 
and Execution 
Target 
Development
and Prioritization
Capabilities 
Analysis
Assessment 
Deliberate 
Targeting
Dynamic 
Targeting
F2T2EA
F2T2EA

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-23 
 
4.  The term “emerging target” is used to describe a detection that meets 
sufficient criteria to be evaluated as a potential target.  The criticality and time-sensitivity of 
an emerging target, and its probability of being a potential target, is initially undetermined.  
Emerging targets normally require further ISR and/or analysis to develop, confirm, and 
continue the targeting process.  During the find step (see Figure II-12), an emerging target 
will be: 
a.
  Validated, confirming planned actions; continue the mission, 
retarget, divert, re-role, or cancel. 
b.  Designated a potential target or TST; continuing dynamic targeting. 
c.  Designated a potential target not requiring dynamic targeting and 
passed to deliberate targeting. 
d.  Continued to be examined or analyzed by sensors as a potential 
target (that is, continuing the find step). 
Figure II-10.  Phase 5 Targeting Steps 
Phase 5 Targeting Steps
1. Find
2. Fix
3. Track
4. Target
5. Engage
6. Assess



Assess
Report results
Re-attack 
recommendations




Order engagement
Transmit order
Monitor/manage
Strike



Prioritize intelligence, 
surveillance, and 
reconnaissance
Maintain track
Update time available


Intelligence collection
Detection





Determine resources
Develop options
Maintain track
Weaponeer
Satisfy restrictions





Deconflict
Target area clearance
Risk assessment
Select method
Decide




Focus sensors
Locate
Identify
Determine time available

Chapter II 
II-24 JP 3-60 
e.  Discarded completely or entered on the NSL. 
5.  If an emerging target is detected , identified, and determined to be a 
potential target by a system capable of engaging it, this may result in the find and fix steps 
being completed nearly simultaneously without the need for traditional ISR, and the target 
and engage phases being completed with a much abbreviated coordination and approval 
process.  For example, use of aircraft syst ems that carry ISR and weapons capability may 
enable accomplishment of steps 1-5 and assessment using a single platform. 
6.  Output of the find step: potential  targets detected and nominated for 
further development. 
(b)  Step 2—Fix 
 
Figure II-11.  Find
Find
Common 
Operational 
Picture
Analyze task order 
period for dynamic 
targeting opportunities
Monitor operational 
environment for 
dynamic events
Verify event/indication 
is of interest
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
Support to Dynamic Operations
Reconcile target 
priorities
Task/retask 
sensors
Determine sensor 
availability
Further 
information 
required
Issue/Revise Plans and Orders
Air Tasking 
Order
Information 
Operation Plan Space PlanFire Support 
Plans Collection Plan
Available Sensors/
Fire AssetsCollect data
Initial 
Detection
Battle Damage 
Assessment 
Detection
Emerging 
Target
Retask 
Detection

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-25 
1.  A “fix” is a position determined from terrestrial, electronic, or 
astronomical data.  The fix step of this phase includes actions to determine the location (fix) 
of the potential target for dynamic targeting and on-call target for deliberate targeting (see 
Figure II-13). 
2.  Inputs to the fix step: 
a.  Potential targets requiring dynamic targeting. 
b.  Sensor information on the target. 
c.  On-call targets for deliberate targeting.  
3.  The fix step begins after potential targets requiring dynamic targeting or 
on-call targets for deliberate targeting are det ected.  When a potential target is identified, 
sensors are focused to confirm target identification and its precise location.  The correlation 
and fusing of data confirms, identifies, and locates the target and it may then be characterized 
as a TST or other target requiring dynamic or deliberate targeting.  TSTs receive the highest 
priority in dynamic targeting.   
 
Figure II-12.  Find Step Determinations and Actions
Find Step Determinations and Actions
Find Step Input Find Step Determination Follow-On Actions
Emerging 
Target
Potential Target 
Requiring Dynamic 
Targeting
Potential Target           
Not Requiring
Dynamic Targeting
Unknown
Not a Target


Enter potential target in 
collaborative tools
Fix, track, and target
 Pass to deliberate 
targeting process
 Continue find phase
 Discard or enter on no-
strike list


Validate target and 
confirm actions
Continue the mission, 
re-target, divert, re-role, 
or cancel
Potential Target 
Confirming/Meeting 
Requirements 
Established During 
Deliberate Targeting

Chapter II 
II-26 JP 3-60 
4.  A determination or estimation of the target’s window of vulnerability 
frames the timeliness required for prosecution and affects the required prioritization of assets 
and risk assessment. 
5.  Output of the fix step: 
a.  Positive identification. 
b.  Target location accuracy refine d to level required for target 
engagement. 
c.  Determination or estimation of target time characteristics. 
(c)  Step 3—Track 
1.  During this step, the target is observed, and its activity and movement 
are monitored (see Figure II-14). 
2.  Input to the track step: 
a.  Positively identified target. 
 
Figure II-13.  Fix 
Fix
Initial 
Detection
Battle Damage 
Assessment 
Detection
Emerging 
Target
Time-
Sensitive 
Target
Unknown
High-Payoff 
Target
Restricted/
No-Strike 
Target
Retask 
Detection
Define target/
target set
Available 
Sensors/ 
Fire Assets
Joint Intelligence 
Preparation of the 
Operational 
Environment
Characterize
Not a target
No
Yes
Valid
Detection
Further 
information 
required
Disseminate 
collection/
target 
information
Locate
Identify
Classify
Generate/
update track
Task reattack

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-27 
b.  Target location and plot of movement (if applicable). 
3.  The track step begins once a definite fix is obtained on the target and 
ends when the engagement’s desired effect upon the target is determined.  Note that some 
targets may require continuous tracking upon initial detection as an emerging target.  Sensors 
may be coordinated to maintain situational aw areness (SA) or track continuity.  Target 
windows of vulnerability should be updated when warranted.  Relative priorities for ISR 
requirements are based on JFC guidance and objectives.  TSTs generally receive the highest 
priority.  If track continuity is lost, the fi x step will likely have to be repeated (and 
potentially the find step as well). 
4.  Output of the track step: 
a.  Track continuity maintained on a target by appropriate sensor or 
combination of sensors. 
b.  Sensor prioritization scheme. 
c.  Updates to target window of vulnerability. 
(d)  Step 4—Target 
 
Figure II-14.  Track 
Track
HPT high-payoff target
HVI high-value individual
HVT high-value target
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized target list
JTL joint target list
TST time-sensitive target
Legend
Define target/
target set
Verify 
event/indication 
is of interest
Determine 
target 
significance/ 
urgency
Sort
No
No No No
No
Yes YesYes Yes
TST HVI HPT/
HVT
JIPTL/JTL 
Target
Further 
information 
required
Assess blue 
force 
proximity
Validate 
target/
target set
Generate/
update track
Request effects/ 
nominate 
engagement option
Update mission 
plans

Chapter II 
II-28 JP 3-60 
1.  During this step the decision is made to engage the target in some 
manner to create desired effects and the means to do so are selected and coordinated (see 
Figure II-15). 
2.  Input to the target step: 
a.  Identified, characterized, located, and prioritized target. 
b.  Restrictions:  CDE guidance, WMD consequences of execution, 
law of war, ROE, NSL, and RTL, compone nt boundaries, and fire support coordination 
measures (FSCMs). 
c.  SA on available assets from all components. 
 
Figure II-15.  Target 
Target
Legend
CDE collateral damage estimation
HPT high-payoff target
HVI high-value individual
HVT high-value target
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized target list
JTL joint target list
ROE rules of engagement
TST time-sensitive target
Issue orders Task reattack
JIPTL/
JTL
Target
HPT/
HVT HVI TST
Yes Yes Yes
Yes
Reduce effects/
nominate 
engagement option
Target point 
mensuration
Formulate 
engagement 
options
Assess 
weather 
effects
Determine 
desired 
effects
Evaluate 
request/ 
nomination
Submit 
combat 
assessment 
requirements
Conduct 
CDE
Conduct 
threat 
analysis
Prioritize 
targets
Select attack 
option
Assess 
engagement 
capability
Evaluate 
window of 
vulnerability
Determine 
time available
Update 
mission plans
Verify ROE
Geolocate 
target
Track until 
haltedMaintain track

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-29 
3.  The target step begins with target validation.  That is, operations 
personnel ensure that all vetted targets meet the objectives and criteria outlined in the 
commander’s guidance.  Additionally, validation reviews the target’s compliance with law of 
war and ROE and ensures that it is not otherwise restricted.  The target phase matches 
available engagement and sensor assets against the desired effect.  Restrictions are resolved, 
the actions against the target are coordinated and deconflicted, and a risk assessment is 
performed.  The target is weaponeered,  engagement options are formulated, a 
recommendation is nominated, an option is selected to affect the target, and assessment 
requirements are submitted.  The target phase can be time -consuming due to the large 
number of requirements to satisfy.  Target step actions can be initiated and/or completed in 
parallel with previous phases to enable timely decisions. 
4.  Output of the target step: 
a.  The target is validated. 
b.  Target data information or intelligence products finalized in a 
format useable by the system that will engage it. 
c.  Asset deconfliction and target area clearance considerations (to 
include interagency and multinational partner deconfliction) are resolved. 
d.  Target execution approved (decision) in accordance with JFC and 
component commander guidance is validated. 
e.  Assessment collection requirements are submitted. 
f.  Collateral damage estimates are performed.  
g.  Collateral effects estimates for chemical, biological, or radiological 
targets and environmental concerns are performed. 
(e)  Step 5—Engage 
1.  In this step, action is taken against the target (see Figure II-16). 
2.  Input to the engage step: target approval decision and selected 
engagement option. 
3.  During the engage step, the engagement is ordered and transmitted to 
the selected asset.  Engagement orders must be transmitted to, received by, and understood 
by those engaging the target.  The engaging component manages and monitors the actual 
target engagement.  The CID process is conducted prior to target engagement, and continues 
throughout the engagement, in coordination with the controlling agency for any changes to 
the operational environment that may affect the engagement decision. 
4.  Output of the engage step: 

Chapter II 
II-30 JP 3-60 
a.  Issuing and passing of the engagement order. 
b.  Target engagement via lethal or nonlethal means. 
c.  Engagement direction and control. 
(f)  Step 6—Assess 
1.  In this step, initial assessment of action against the target is performed. 
2.  Input to the assess step is target engagement (step 5). 
3.  During the assess step, initial assessment of the physical or functional 
status of the target takes place.   For attacks in the physical environment, the assessment 
confirms impact of the weapon on the target and makes an initial estimate of the damage.  
For nonlethal weapons, the initial assessment attempts to detect changes in functionality 
indicating a successful engagement.  
4.  For both lethal and nonlethal weapons, this initial assessment is part of 
battle damage assessment (BDA), phase I. Attack recommendations are generally not made 
using BDA phase I information.  However, in cases of a confirmed miss, a reattack may be 
authorized based on target priority and weapon availability.  
5.  Further, assessment takes place in phase 6, targeting assessment. 
 
Figure II-16.  Engage 
Engage
Update mission 
plans
Further 
information 
required
Conduct dynamic 
assessment of 
target
Evaluate
Issue orders Execute orders
Support 
weapon flyout
Attack target Confirm impact Task reattack
Reprioritize 
assets
Track weapon
Determine 
desired effects

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-31 
h.  Phase 6—Targeting Assessment 
(1)  The targeting assessment phase is a continuous process that assesses the 
effectiveness of the activities that occurred during the first five phases of the joint targeting 
cycle.  The targeting assessment process helps the commander and staff determine if the 
ends, ways, and means of joint targeting have resulted in progress toward accomplishing a 
task, creating an effect, or achieving an objective.  Targeting assessment occurs at the 
tactical, operational, and strate gic levels of war.  The asse ssment of target engagement 
results must be integrated to provide the overa ll joint targeting assessment.  Paragraph 4, 
“Time-Sensitive Target Considerations,” and Appendix D, “The Targeting Assessment 
Process,” discuss assessment in more detail.   
(2)  The targeting assessment phase is  common to both deliberate and dynamic 
targeting of the joint targeting process and examines the results of the target engagement.  
Effective assessments in phase 6 require detailed, continuous inputs from the first five phases 
of the joint targeting process to include: 
(a)  Phase 1: End states, objectives, tasks, effects, MOEs, and MOPs. 
(b)  Phase 2: TM, to include characteristics, critical elements, and functional 
linkages. 
(c)  Phase 3: Target vulnerability, weaponeering solutions, and collateral 
damage estimates. 
(d)  Phase 4: Tasking orders, weapon/delivery platform, and delivery tactics. 
(e)  Phase 5: Intelligence collect ion supporting the commander’s critical 
information requirements, mission details, and mission reporting.  
(3)  The outputs from phase 6 are: B DA, munitions effectiveness assessment 
(MEA), collateral damage assessment (CDA), and reattack recommendations.  
For additional information on  targeting assessment, see Appendix D, “The Targeting 
Assessment Process.”  Also refe r to DIA publications DI-2820-4-03, Battle Damage 
Assessment (BDA) Quick Guide, and DI 2800-2-YR, Critical Elements of Selected Generic 
Installations (Critical Elements Handbook). 
4.  Time-Sensitive Target Considerations 
a.  Objectives and Guidance for TSTs.  The JFC’s objectives and guidance shape the 
basic procedural framework for components to expedite engagement of TSTs.  Additionally, 
the JFC establishes guidance on procedur es for coordination, deconfliction, and 
synchronization among components.  Once this guidance is issued, the components establish 
planned and reactive procedures for engaging the prioritized TSTs.  JFC guidance on TSTs 
to component commanders supports different  phases of both deliberate and dynamic 
targeting and includes the following:  

Chapter II 
II-32 JP 3-60 
(1)  Establishing planned FSCMs against specific TSTs. 
(2)  Defining TST engagement authority based on a JFC’s OA, assigned functional 
mission, or a combination thereof.  The JFC should normally define those situations, if any, 
where immediate destruction of the immine nt TST threat outweighs the potential for 
duplication of effort.  The JFC should carefully balance the risk between the TST threat and 
the potential for friendly fire and collateral damage. 
(3)  Identifying specific communication requirements between component C2 
elements of the joint force to conduct ra pid TST engagement.  This normally includes 
authorizing direct liaison and coordinating authority. 
(4)  For those targets that component  commanders consider the component 
equivalent of a TST, the applicable com ponent commanders should coordinate relative 
priorities and establish guidance at the JTCB, through the joint fires element (JFE), or via 
other appropriate means. 
b.  Risk Assessment Considerations for TSTs 
(1)  A critical aspect of successful TST engagement is to understand the level of risk 
acceptable to the JFC.  This is a complex task.  Items to be considered in the risk assessment 
include risk to civilians, friendly forces, and noncombatants; possible collateral damage; and 
the disruption incurred by diverting assets from their deliberately planned missions.  These 
base considerations must be balanced agains t the danger of not engaging the TST, risk of 
mission failure, or harm to friendly forces. 
(2)  Successful prosecution of TSTs requires a well organized and well rehearsed 
process for sharing sensor data and targeting information, identifying suitable strike assets, 
obtaining mission approval, and rapidly deconflicting weapon employment.  The key for 
success is performing as much coordination and decision making as possible in advance. 
(3)  The on-scene commander’s knowledge of JFC guidance and intent can greatly 
accelerate decision making and reduce the reaction time between detection and engagement.  
This is critical when time compression precludes thoroughly coordinating all decisions and 
actions. For this to occur, the JFC must articulate objectives, guidance, priorities, and intent 
for TSTs before target identification. 
(4)  The appropriate response for each TS T is often dependent on the level of 
conflict, the clarity of the de sired effect, and ROE.  For ex ample, during a major combat 
operation the JFC may be able to accept a higher level of risk to civilians, friendly forces, 
and noncombatants when attacking adversary WMD to ensure a quicker response.  But 
during a limited contingency operation, the risk  of collateral damage may require more 
detailed and time-consuming coordination. 
c.  C2 for TST Operations 
(1)  Focused Operations.  The JFC has several options with which to structure C2 
operations for engaging TSTs.  Generally, TSTs are engaged using dynamic targeting, so the 

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-33 
C2 arrangements should include the rapid id entification and comm unication capabilities 
required for expedited decisi on making.  Overall responsib ility for mission execution 
remains with the components in order to accomplish coordination and deconfliction.  The C2 
node that has the best information or SA to execute the mission and direct communications 
(e.g., hotlines, radio net) to the operators a nd crews of the chosen engagement systems 
should have the authority to plan and engage  the TST.  Placing the appropriate level of 
authority at subordinate C2 nodes can stream line the C2 process and facilitate timely 
engagement.  Decentralized C2 nodes can exchange sensor, status, and target information 
with a fidelity that permits them to operate as a single, integrated C2 entity.  Tied together by 
wide area networks and common interactiv e displays, they can effectively perform 
decentralized and coordinated execution of TST engagement.  Coordination and 
deconfliction of multinational forces may lead to additional challenges and should be 
addressed during planning through liaison officers and/or representatives of the respective 
nations.  
(2)  Compressed Decision Cycle.  Successful engagement of TSTs may require a 
very compressed decision cycle, even when  compared with pros ecution of non-TSTs via 
dynamic targeting.  To compress the decision  cycle successfully, the joint force and 
component staffs must be thoroughly familiar w ith the details of each step of the joint 
targeting cycle and with the specific nodes or  cells in the joint force and components 
responsible for each portion of the process.   Conducting detailed prior planning and 
coordination between joint forces, a thoroug h JIPOE, employment of interoperable 
communications systems, and clear guidance on what constitutes a TST saves valuable time.  
Undefined, ambiguous TSTs can redirect assets away from executing the JFC’s overall plan.  
Mission planning and execution activities must  take place simultaneously or on a 
compressed time line. 
d.  Engaging TSTs.  TSTs are engaged using either deliberate or dynamic targeting.  
Since TSTs are time-sensitive, and often fleeting, or emerging, they tend to be engaged via 
dynamic targeting, but guidance, validation, re lative prioritization, assessment criteria, 
collection requirements, and many other aspects of developing TSTs can be accomplished 
during pre-operation planning and/or as part of deliberate targeting. 
5.  The Relationship Between Targeting and Effects 
a.  From the targeting perspective, an effect is a change in the physical or behavioral 
state of a target system, a target system component, a target, or a target element that results 
from an action, a set of actions, or another eff ect.  A desired effect can be thought of as a 
condition that can support achieving an associated objective, while an undesired effect is a 
condition that can inhibit progress toward an objective. 
b.  The joint force can create effects across the levels of war.  Strategic and operational 
effects focus on larger aspects of various systems, while tactical-level effects typically are 
associated with results of offensive, defensive, and stability operations tactical actions, often 
involving weapons employment.  Many of the wa ys and means associated with targeting 
result in tactical-level effects relative to the selected targets.  However, the cumulative results 
of these target engagements can contribute to the JFC’s desired operational-level and theater-

Chapter II 
II-34 JP 3-60 
strategic effects.  Specifically, the term “effects” relates to targeting in two phases of the 
joint targeting cycle:  
(1)  Phase 3—Capabilities Analysis.  Step 4 of phase 3 is “effects estimate.”  As 
stated earlier, during this step the desired effect of engaging the target at the target element 
level is defined and the undesired effects (e.g., collateral damage) of that particular target 
engagement method are estimated. 
(2)  Phase 6 —Targeting Assessment.   BDA measures the effect of target 
engagements at three levels:  the target element level (commonly called phase 1 BDA), the 
target level (phase 2 BDA), and the target system level (phase 3 BDA).  MEA measures the 
effectiveness of any munitions used.  Any post-engagement assessment of collateral damage 
also occurs in phase 6.  All other higher-order post-engagement effects are outside the scope 
of phase 6. 
c.  The JFC and staff must consider undesired effects in COA and CONOPS 
development.  In some cases, operational limitations can be adjusted to prevent undesired 
effects. 
d.  It is important that desired and undesired effects be clearly communicated as far 
down as necessary to ensure these effects are created or avoided respectively.  An improperly 
or incompletely stated effect , that does not clearly link the effect to be created with the 
objective that is to be achieved, can result in a successful mission that hits the designated 
target at the designated time, but still does not achieve the objective.  
For example, during operations defending a hypothetical friendly country, 
the joint force commander (JFC) might approve the following desired 
operational-level effect relative to the adversary’s air force:   
Joint force air component commander (JFACC) Objective 1: Joint air forces 
will achieve air superiority over the theater of operations by D+5. 
Measure of effectiveness (MOE) 1.1: Destruction of 60 percent of enemy 
aircraft by D+4.  
MOE 1.2: 70 percent degradation of enemy air command and control 
capability by D+4.  
MOE 1.3: Enemy air forces evacuate 30 percent of its aircraft to a safe haven 
by D+5.  
The cumulative results of the JFACC’s tactical target engagements create 
the JFC’s desired operational -level effect, since the enemy’s air system 
would be virtually inoperable by D+4.  In turn, this desired effect is one of 
several conditions that support the JFC’s objective—integrity of the friendly 
country’s borders would be restored by D+19.   This example shows that 
understanding desired effects helps link joint force components’ tasks to the 
JFC’s objectives. 

The Joint Targeting Cycle 
II-35 
e.  The commander should be focused on the purpose of the fires with regard to creating 
effects against chosen targets.  Effects are more than the results of the fires.  Effects are the 
cumulative results of target engagements by lethal and nonlethal means.  Once the target is 
engaged, the commander must assess the effec tiveness of the engagement.  If the desired 
effect was not created, the target may need to  be reengaged or another method selected to 
create the effect.  There are many different ways to categorize effects.  One important 
distinction is between direct and indirect effects. 
(1)  Direct effects are the immediate, first-order consequences of a military action 
(weapons employment results, etc.), unaltered by intervening events or mechanisms.  They 
In the previous example, the joint force air component commander (JFACC) 
needs to preserve certain enemy airfields for friendly use after eliminating 
the enemy air threat, because current friendly forward air bases are not near 
enough for the desired level of support of impending ground operations.  An 
undesired effect of friendly’s offensive counterair operations would be the 
destruction of runways at selected enemy airfields.  In response to this, 
either the joint force commander’s (JFC’s) or JFACC’s operational 
limitations could include the constraint, enemy airfields A, B, and D must be 
able to support friendly air operations by D+10.  Refer to Joint Publication 5-
0, Joint Operation Planning, for more information on the use of operational 
limitations during planning. 
In the following example, the joint force land component commander 
(JFLCC) designates two bridges that span Red River in the JFLCC’s area of 
operations as high-priority targets for attack in the next 24 hours (by D+8).  
The JFC approves the targets.  The joint air operations center (JAOC) 
analyzes the targets, selects aimpoints, munitions, and platforms, and 
includes the missions on the air tasking order (ATO) for execution.   
Missions are flown the following day, and battle damage assessment 
indicates the bridges are damaged sufficiently to prevent foot and vehicle 
traffic, the typical desired effect for this type of target.  12 hours later the 
joint fires element (JFE) at the joint force headquarters tasks the JAOC to hit 
the targets again.  When JAOC ATO planners ask for clarifications, the JFE 
explains that Red River—an interior line of communication for enemy 
forces—is a main supply route.  Apparently enemy forces use river barges 
extensively for most classes of supply, including fuel and ammunition.  The 
JFLCC had established the desired effect: enemy  forces cannot resupply 
along Red River beginning D+8 .  But friendly ground forces are still 
conducting entry operations 100 kilometers from Red River, and are not in 
position to create this effect.  JFLCC planners have determined that 
completely dropping all spans of the two bridges will result in an obstacle 
impassable to the river barges, thus creating the JFLCC’s desired effect.  
With this understanding, JAOC planners adjust the aimpoints and munitions 
to drop the spans of the two bridges, the target effect necessary to create 
the JFLCC’s desired effect, although 36 hours later than expected. 

Chapter II 
II-36 JP 3-60 
are usually immediate and easily recognizable.  (For example, an enemy C2 center is 
destroyed by friendly artillery or a terrorist network courier is captured by a direct action 
mission.) 
(2)  Indirect effects are the delayed and/or displaced second-, third-, and higher-
order consequences of action, created through intermediate events or mechanisms.  These 
outcomes may be physical or beha vioral in nature.  Indirect  effects may be difficult to 
recognize due to subtle changes in system behavior that may make them difficult to observe.  
For example, an indirect effect of destroying a communications node or capturing a terrorist 
cell courier may degrade the effectiveness of the fielded enemy force’s C2 structure.  Effects 
such as this have real benefits, but may be more difficult to assess and measure individually 
or in the short-term.  Although a factor for consideration, difficulty of assessment should not 
be the primary factor for choosing to create direct or indirect effects.  
(3)  Direct and indirect effects possess many characteristics that can qualitatively 
shape the operational environment.  Several of these are discussed below. 
(a)  Cumulative Effects.  Effects tend to compound, such that the ultimate 
result of a number of direct  and/or indirect effects of ten combine to produce greater 
outcomes than the sum of their individual impacts.   
(b)  Cascading Effects.  Effects can ripple throu gh a targeted system, often 
influencing other systems.  This most typically occurs through nodes and li nks that are 
common and critical to related systems.  The cascading of direct and indirect effects, as the 
name implies, usually flows from higher to lower levels.  As an example, destruction of a 
headquarters element or capture of a terrorist senior leader will result in the loss of C2 and 
thus degrade the effectiveness of subordinate organizations.  
(c)  Unintended Effects.  Effects often spill over to create unintended 
consequences, which may be counterproductive or may create opportunities.  An example of 
a counterproductive consequence entails injury or collateral damage to persons or objects 
unrelated to the intended target.  Convers ely, some unforeseen effects may create 
opportunities that the joint force can exploit to help accomplish objectives.  Unintended 
effects may also occur if the pre-strike an alysis was incorrect and the enemy’s reaction 
differs from what we expected, complicates operations, or causes a change to operations 
(e.g., we expected enemy withdrawal, but they counterattacked with their strategic reserve 
instead).  The pre-strike analysis may also have miscalculated the local civilian population 
perceptions/reactions and international pub lic opinion, ultimately resulting in more 
restrictions on target  selection or engagement timing.  Planners and targeteers should 
consider second-, third-, and higher-order effects, especially political-military effects, during 
planning and assessment.  While estimating outcomes is rarely an exact process, estimation 
becomes increasingly difficult as effects continue to compound and cascade through targets 
and target systems.  In addition, the impact of a single event can often be magnified over 
time and distance that greatly exceeds the span of the direct effect associated with that one 
event. 
 

III-1 
CHAPTER III 
JOINT FORCE TARGETING DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
1.  Joint Targeting Integration and Oversight 
a.  The JFC’s primary target ing responsibility lies in es tablishing the objectives that 
component commanders will achieve throughout the operational environment with their 
forces (assigned, attached, and supporting).  With the advice of subordinate component 
commanders, JFCs set priorities, provide clear targeting guidance, and determine the weight 
of effort to be provided to  various operations.  Joint fo rce and component commanders 
identify HVTs and HPTs for acquisition, collection, and attack or influence, employing their 
forces in accordance with the JFC’s guidance. 
b.  Friendly Fire Prevention.  Throughout the targeting process, JFC and component 
commanders should establish safeguards to reduce the possibility of friendly fire.  
Knowledge of friendly forces position and intended scheme of maneuver in relation to select 
targets aids in friendly fire prevention.  Friendly fire prevention is a key consideration of risk 
assessment throughout the entire spectrum of anticipated targeting timelines from long-term 
to rapidly changing time-sensitive situations .  Although the JFC may justifiably elect to 
accept additional risk during time sensitive targeting, particularly for HVTs or HPTs, 
appropriate friendly fire prevention measures must still be in-place and followed. 
c.  Collateral Damage Prevention.  The United States of America places a high value 
on preserving civilian and noncombatant lives  and property and seeks to accomplish its 
mission through the discriminate application of force with minimal collateral damage.  Joint 
standards and methods for estimating collate ral damage potential provide mitigation 
techniques and assist commanders with weighing collateral risk against military necessity 
and assessing proportionality within the framework of the military decision-making process.  
Joint standards and methods for conducting CDE are stipulated in CJCSI 3160.01, No-Strike 
and the Collateral Damage Estimation Methodology.   
d.  Targeting  Organizational Structure.   The joint targeting process crosses 
traditional functional and organi zational boundaries.  Operations , plans, and intelligence 
personnel are the primary participants, but ot her functional area (e.g., logistics, weather, 
legal, and communications) subject matter experts (SMEs) also support the joint targeting 
cycle.  Therefore, the organizational structure established by the JFC should be functionally 
inclusive, responsive, and flexible enough to adapt to a range of situations.  In addition, JFCs 
should arrange their joint targeting organizational structure based upon assigned, attached, 
and supporting forces, as well as the threat, mission, and OA.  Ultimately, the organizational 
“Four brave men who do not know each other will not dare to attack a lion.  Four 
less brave, but knowing each other well, sure of their reliability and consequently of 
their mutual aid, will attack resolutely.” 
Colonel Charles Ardant du Picq, 1880 

Chapter III 
III-2 JP 3-60 
design must be able to identify adversary crit ical vulnerabilities and execute all phases of 
joint targeting efficiently and continuously.  
e.  Other Considerations.   Offensive military activit ies (e.g., electronic attack, 
offensive cyberspace operations, and information-related capabilities) should be coordinated 
and deconflicted with the joint targeting process.  
f.  Targeting Integration via Joint and Component Operations Centers.  The joint 
intelligence operations center (JIOC), JOC, and/or component command centers plan for and 
conduct operations.  Targeting mechanisms shou ld exist at multiple levels.  Joint force 
components identify requirements, nominate targets that are outsi de their boundaries or 
exceed the capabilities of organic or supporting assets (based on the JFC’s apportionment 
decision), and conduct execution planning.  After the JFC makes the targeting and 
apportionment decisions, components plan a nd execute assigned missions through their 
respective operations centers.  The theater air ground system is normally the C2 structure 
through which targeting should be integrated. 
For additional information, see JP 3-05, Special Operations, JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support, JP 
3-30, Command and Control for Joint Air Operations, JP 3-31, Command and Control for 
Joint Land Operations, JP 3-32, Command and Control for Joint Maritime Operations, JP 3-
33, Joint Task Force Headquarters, and Field Manual (FM) 3-52.2/NTTP 3-56.2/AFTTP(I) 
2.17, Multi- Service Tactics, Techniques, a nd Procedures for the Theater Air Ground 
System. 
2.  Joint Force Targeting Responsibilities 
a.  JFC Responsibilities   
(1)  The JFC has the responsibility to  conduct planning, coordination, and 
deconfliction associated with joint targeting.  Joint targeting coordination responsibilities for 
the JFC include: 
(a)  Establish parameters for successf ul targeting within the JFC’s OA by 
promulgating intent, objectives, guidance, sequencing, and priorities. 
(b)  The JFC assigned as the supported commander will provide early, broad, 
and clear targeting guidance to components and supporting commands and DOD agencies 
consistent with the operation’s end state. 
(c)  Maintain currency of mission pla nning guidance, inte nt, and priority 
intelligence requirements (PIRs) throughout the operation. 
(d)  Direct the formation, composition, and specific responsibilities of a JFE 
and JTCB (if required). 
(e)  Approve or delegate approval of the JIPTL developed from component and 
staff nominations. 

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-3 
(f)  Define criteria for identification of TSTs in the OA.  These coordination 
tasks are normally accomplished through the JFC established JTCB or like body.   
(2)  Joint Targeting Coordination Board.   Targeting coordination tasks are 
normally accomplished through the JFC established JTCB or like body.  The JFC normally 
appoints the deputy JFC or a component co mmander to chair the JTCB to provide the 
appropriate level of experience and focus.  Component and JFC staff representation on the 
JTCB should also possess the necessary rank, experience, and knowledge to speak 
authoritatively for their respect ive components and staff elements.  When a JTCB is not 
established and the JFC decides not to delegate targeting oversight authority to a deputy or 
subordinate commander, the JFC may perform this task at the joint force headquarters, with 
the assistance of the J-3.  The JFC ensures th at this is a joint effo rt involving applicable 
subordinate commands, other agencies, and multin ational partners, as appropriate.  Joint 
targeting is a highly iterative process that needs close coordination during operations.  If the 
JFC delegates authority for jo int target planning, coordi nation, and deconfliction to a 
subordinate commander, that commander should possess or have access to a sufficient C2 
infrastructure, adequate facilities, and joint planning expertise to effectively manage and lead 
the JFC’s joint targeting opera tions.  Should a specific agen cy be charged with joint 
functional command responsibilities, a joint targeting mechanism might also be needed to 
facilitate this task at the component level.  All component s are normally involved in 
targeting and should establish pr ocedures and mechanisms to manage their part in joint 
targeting. 
(a)  The JTCB may be an integrating center for targeting oversight efforts or a 
JFC-level review mechanism.  It should be comprised of representatives from the joint force 
staff, all components and, if deemed necessary, other agencies, multinational partners, and/or 
subordinate units (Figure III-1). 
(b)  Membership of the JTCB should include SMEs in both lethal and nonlethal 
capabilities.  The relative importance of lethal versus nonlethal capabilities in targeting may 
shift as the focus of the operation shifts from  direct combat to stability operations.  The 
JTCB should be flexible enough to  consider both types of capabilities for appropriate 
targeting.  This represents the integrated functional staff effort, anchored by the joint 
targeting working group (JTWG), leading up to  the JTCB.  There is typically a parallel 
lethal/nonlethal effort at the working group level, due to time and SME availability.  In some 
cases, an additional JTWG may be required to  process, deconflict, and prioritize all 
nominated targets.   
(c)  The JFC defines the role of th e JTCB.  The JTCB provides a forum in 
which all components can articulate strategies and priorities for future target engagements so 
that they may be synchronized and integrated.  The JTCB normally facilitates and 
coordinates joint force targeti ng activities with the compone nts’ schemes of maneuver to 
ensure that the JFC’s priorities are met.  Targeting issues are generally resolved below the 
level of the JTCB, by direct coordination between elements of the joint force, but the JTCB 
and/or JFC may address specific target issues not previously resolved. 

Chapter III 
III-4 JP 3-60 
(d)  In multinational operations, the JTCB may be subordinate to a 
multinational targeting coordination board, with JFCs or their agents representing the joint 
force on the multinational board. 
(e)  The JTCB is typically responsible for the following: 
1.  Reviewing operational-level assessment to guide the JFC’s decision 
making. 
2.  Maintaining a macro-level view of the operational environment. 
3.  Reviewing components’ schemes of maneuver and broad targeting 
guidance for compliance with the JFC’s intent. 
4.  Integrating, when appropriate, component plans according to the JFC’s 
CONOPS. 
5.  Developing and refining broad co mponent targeting guidance and 
priorities. 
 
Figure III-1.  Joint Targeting Coordination Board Organization and Representation 
Joint Targeting Coordination Board Organization and 
Representation
Joint 
Targeting 
Coordination 
Board
Chairman
(Deputy 
Commander)
External Agencies
Other J-Codes
J-2
J-5
J-6
J-3
Information 
Operations
Joint Fires 
Element
Multinational 
Partner 
Representatives
Component 
RepresentativesSpecial 
Staff
J-2 intelligence directorate of a joint staff
J-3 operations directorate of a joint staff
J-5 plans directorate of a joint staff
J-6 communications directorate of 
a joint staff
required members
attend as required
Legend

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-5 
6.  Reviewing and refining ISR collection requirements and joint ISR 
assessment guidance based on JFC priorities and intent, to include refinement of MOPs and 
MOEs, as appropriate. 
7.  Reviewing and submitting the coordinated JIPTL for JFC approval or 
serving as approving authority for JIPTL when designated by the JFC. 
8.  Ensuring the JTL, NSL, RTL, a nd other relevant target lists are 
maintained and updated based on JFC guidance. 
9.  Reviewing, validating, and approving targets to the JTL and RTL when 
such authorities are delegated to the JTCB by the JFC. 
(f)  JTCB Scope and Focus.  The JTCB’s focus is to develop broad targeting 
priorities and other targeting guidance in accordance with the JFC’s objectives as they relate 
operationally.  The JTCB must be flexible to address targeting issues, but should not become 
over-involved in tactical-level  decision making.  In order to  function as effectively and 
efficiently as possible, the JTCB requires a fo cused agenda to guide the daily conduct of 
business.  A notional JTCB agenda is outlined in Figure III-2.  In breaking the meeting into 
four parts, the JTCB may address at least four planning horizons. 
1.
  Assessment.  The first session is a review of completed operation (for 
example, the last 24 hours), focusing on the operational level and progress toward the JFC’s 
objectives.  It should include an intelligence forecast of anticipate d adversary action for 
future operations planning considerations. 
2.  JFC Intent.  The second portion of the board should consist of broad 
guidance for future plans, given by the JTCB’s chairman.   
3.  Component Schemes of Maneuver.  The third portion should review 
components’ detailed operational-level scheme s of maneuver for the future operations.  
Broad targeting guidance and priorities should be refined as appropriate in this portion of the 
meeting. 
4.  Joint Maneuver and Fires.   The final portion of the board should 
review the next 24 hours plan for maneuver, fire s, and targeting.  More specific targeting 
issues may be addressed here if not previously resolved as part of deliberate targeting.  Such 
issues may include TSTs, target restrictions , dynamic targeting priorities, priorities for 
certain weapons (e.g., cruise missiles), and collection and assessment issues.  This is the final 
review of the next day’s plan to ensure it is still valid.  This is the JTCB’s final chance to 
recommend modification to targeting priorities before execution. 
(g)  JFC (or designated representative) approval for the next day’s JIPTL and 
related products is usually sought immediat ely upon adjournment of the JTCB and then 
promulgated in message format throughout the joint force. 

Chapter III 
III-6 JP 3-60 
(h)  The JTCB is concerned with future  operations, not th e current battle.  
Operators already have the current day’s targ eting plan(s) in hand and are preparing to 
execute.  Changing priorities on the day of execution is possible, but will normally be 
handled through the J-3 (or their equivalents at the component level) rather than the JTCB.  
Moreover, component commanders are normally authorized to make execution day changes 
compelled by current conditions, consistent with the JFC’s guidance and intent. 
(3)  Joint Fires Element.  The JFC may approve the formation of a JFE within the 
J-3.  The JFE is an optional staff element comprised of representatives from the J-3, the 
components, and other elements of the JFC’s staff, to include the intelligence directorate of a 
joint staff (J-2) targeting staff, logistics direct orate of a joint staff (J-4), J-5, and others as 
required.  The JFE is an integr ating staff element that sync hronizes and coordinates fires 
planning and coordination on behalf of the JF C and should be physically located near the 
joint task force JOC, colocated with the info rmation operations (IO) cell if possible.  The 
JFE assists the J-3 in accomplishing responsibilities and tasks as a staff advisor to the JFC.  
JFE key functions and tasks generally include the following: 
 
Figure III-2.  Notional Joint Targeting Coordination Board Agenda 
Notional Joint Targeting Coordination Board Agenda
J-3  operations directorate of a joint staff
JFC  joint force commander
JIPTL  joint integrated prioritized target list
OPR office of primary responsibility
Legend
Topic: Assessment
Content: Progress toward JFC’s objectives in the 
last 24 hours
OPR: JFC’s assessment team
Topic: JFC’s intent
Content:  Broad guidelines for the next 72 hours
OPR: JFC
Topic: Component schemes of maneuver
Content:  Major component operations, next 24 
hours
OPR: Components
Topic: Joint maneuver and fires
Content:  Macro-level review and guidance on 
targeting and intelligence, surveillance, 
and reconnaissance requirements, next 
24 hours
OPR: Components
Topic: JIPTL
Content:  Approve JIPTL when authorized by JFC
OPR: Deputy JFC/designated representative

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-7 
(a)  Develops OA-wide joint targeti ng guidance, objectives, and priorities 
(normally accomplished in conjunction with component planners as part of the joint planning 
group [JPG]). 
(b)  Coordinates, deconflicts, and validates target nominations at the JFC level 
and higher. 
(c)  Coordinates component input to the JIPTL.  Prioritizes and forwards the 
JIPTL to the JTCB for review and approval and then manages the approved JIPTL. 
(d)  Coordinates, maintains, and disseminates a complete list of FSCMs within 
the OA to avoid friendly fire and deconflicts with other current or future operations, to 
include managing the RTL and NSL. 
(e)  Develops the roles, functions, and agenda of the JTCB for JFC approval. 
(f)  Organizes a strategy team to address intermediate targeting efforts to bridge 
the gap between current and future operations. 
(g)  Recommends ISR collection require ments to include assisting the joint 
intelligence support element (JISE) in developing targets. 
(h)  Develops the joint fires estimate and COAs. 
(i)  Monitors TST and co mponent-critical target operations for the J-3.  
Recommends procedures for engaging TSTs and component-critical targets. 
(j)  Recommends HPTs to the JPG. 
(k)  Coordinates joint fires and targeting ROE issues. 
(l)  Develops collateral damage prevention procedures based on commanders’ 
guidance and higher level directives. 
(m)  Conducts assessments of joint fire s and targeting in coordination with 
higher headquarters and components. 
(4)  Joint Targeting Working Group 
(a)  To assist in the coordination and integration throughout the joint targeting 
process, the JFC may approve the formation of a JTWG.  The JTWG supports the JTCB by 
conducting initial collection, consolidation, and prioritization of targets and synchronization 
of target planning and coordina tion on behalf of the JFC.  Th e JTWG is an action officer 
level venue, chaired by the JFE chief, J-2 (chief  of targets), or similar representative, and 
meets as required to consolidate and priori tize the draft JIPTL and discuss targeting 
integration and synchronization issues raised by the JFC, staff, planning teams, and the JFC’s 
major subordinate commands (see Figure III-3). 

Chapter III 
III-8 JP 3-60 
(b)  The purpose of the JTWG: 
1.  Consolidate, deconflict, and pr ioritize target nominations from 
components, supporting and supported commands, joint force directorates and agencies, and 
interagency and multinational partners, higher headquarters, and national level offices and 
organizations submitted through the JFE. 
2.  Synchronize the lethal and nonlethal targeting effort in order to ensure 
target engagements remain nested with JFC objectives; synchronize detection and collection 
requirements in conjunction with  the collection management authority or team; identify 
delivery capabilities; and review assessments to determine reattack requirements and future 
targeting. 
3.  Disseminate revised or new targeting guidance. 
4.  Identify and integrate lethal and nonlethal opportunities and 
engagements. 
(c)  JTWG responsibilities include: 
1.  Reviewing the JFC’s broad ta rgeting guidance and components 
proposed schemes of maneuver and to ensure  compliance with th e JFC’s intent and 
CONOPS. 
 
Figure III-3.  Joint Targeting Working Group 
Joint Targeting Working Group
Joint Target 
Working 
Group
Chairman
(Joint Fires 
Element Chief)
External AgenciesOther J-Codes
J-2
J-5
J-6
J-4
J-3
Joint Fires 
Element
Multinational 
Partner 
Representatives
Component 
RepresentativesSpecial 
Staff
J-2 intelligence directorate of a joint staff
J-3 operations directorate of a joint staff
J-4 logistics directorate of a joint staff
Legend
required members
attend as required
J-5 plans directorate of a joint staff
J-6 communications directorate of 
a joint staff

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-9 
2.  Disseminating the JFC’s target ing guidance and priorities to 
components and JFC staff. 
3.  Reviewing and refining ISR collection requirements and joint ISR 
assessment guidance based on JFC priorities, intent, and CONOPS, to include refinement of 
MOPs and MOEs, as appropriate. 
4.  Submitting the draft JIPTL for JTCB review. 
5.  Maintaining and updating the JTL,  NSL, RTL, and other relevant 
target-related lists. 
(d)  Inputs to the JTWG may include commander’s guidance, current target-
related lists (JTL and RTL) including TSTs, TNLs, the NSL, and estimated availability of 
resources/capabilities. 
(e)  Some of the products the JTWG should produce are recommended JIPTL 
and apportionment, changes to target lists (particularly any targets nominated from the RTL), 
and changes to TSTs collection requirements and recommended priorities. 
b.  Joint Force Staff Responsibilities.  The JFC should determine the relative burden 
sharing for the joint targeting cycle between  the JFC staff and those of the component 
commanders.  The JFC develops guidance that directs and focuses planning and targeting to 
support the CONOPS.  Collaboration between joint force staff and component targeteers and 
planners is a critical element of the execution of the joint targeting cycle.  Supporting and 
subordinate commanders, functional and Service,  will have their own targeting processes 
that will complement and support the supported JFC’s targeting process.  The supported JFC 
is responsible for coordinating these vari ous targeting processes and delineating the 
responsibilities of each supporting and s ubordinate commander to support the JFC’s 
targeting cycle.  Interacti on between the joint force and component planners occurs 
throughout the phases of the joint targeting cycle, but is especially important during phase 4 
as forces are assigned.  Figure III-4 provides a notional model for the division of functional 
responsibility between the JFC and the components throughout the joint targeting cycle.  
Although the JFC establishes the joint targeting cycle, all subordinate commanders must 
have the ability to nominate targets for joint targeting consideration.  The supported JFC is 
responsible for providing opportunities for co ordination between thes e various targeting 
processes and delineating the responsibilities of each supporting and subordinate commander 
to support the JFC’s targeting process. 
(1)  Intelligence Directorate.   The J-2 has the primary responsibility for 
prioritization of intelligence collection efforts, analysis, validation, and assessment for all 
joint operations.  In addition, the J-2 provides a major input to the J-3 and J-5 in the form of 
adversary COA assessments critical to the joint target prioritization process and 
identification of HVTs and HPTs.  Joint targeting related duties that are normally performed 
by the J-2 are as follows: 

Chapter III 
III-10 JP 3-60 
(a)  Work closely with J-3 and J-5 in developing targeting guidance, priorities, 
and objectives for inclusion in the JFC’s planning guidance, planning directives, and daily 
guidance letter. 
(b)  Conduct JIPOE in support of pl anning and execution.  For further 
information on JIPOE, see JP 2-01.3, Joint Intelligence Prepara tion of the Operational 
Environment. 
(c)  Produce and maintain target intelligence products: TSAs, ETFs, target lists, 
and target intelligence assessments.   
See CJCSI 3370.01, Target Development Standards, and JP 2-0, Joint Intelligence, for more 
details on target intelligence.   
(d)  Conduct target development including analysis, assessment, and 
documentation. 
(e)  Manage the CTL, and coordinate target vetting with the national IC. 
(f)  Nominate targets for engagement based on all-source fusion analysis in the 
JIOC and/or JISE, component intelligence organizations, and federated partners. 
(g)  Recommend targets for inclusion in the JIPTL in coordination with the 
JFE. 
 
Figure III-4.  Notional Relative Division of Joint Targeting Cycle Responsibilities
Notional Relative Division of Joint Targeting Cycle 
Responsibilities
Feedback
Joint Force Commander Level Component Level
Phase 1:  End State and C  ommander’s Objectives
Phase 2:  Target Development and Prioritization 
Phase 3:  Capabilities Analysis 
Phase 4:  Commander’s Decision and Force Assignment
Phase 5:  Mission Planning and Force Execution
Phase 6:  Assessment 

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-11 
(h)  Develop and maintain the JFC’s NSL in coordination with the JFE, if 
established. 
(i)  Manage theater collection priorities via the joint collection management 
board and maintain appropriate collection operations management liaison with the 
components and national IC during execution.  Coordinate collection in support of BDA, in 
accordance with collection priorities established by JFC. 
(j)  Manage PIRs. 
(k)  Serve as lead agent for overall coordination and management of target 
intelligence assessment within the JIOC or JISE in support of the JFE’s assessment.  
Coordinate target intelligence assessment with the national IC. 
(l)  Provide target intelligence support to operations (e.g., target intelligence 
briefs, TM, BDA, and re-strike/future targeting recommendations).  
(2)  Operations Directorate.  The J-3 assists the commander in the direction and 
control of operations, includi ng the planning, monitoring, a nd completion of specific 
operations.  In this capacity, the directorate is  the lead for coordinating, integrating, and 
executing operations throughout the OA.  The di rectorate also leads planning efforts for 
current and future operations.  The flexibility and range of forces require close coordination 
and integration for effective unity of effort.  When a JFE is established by the JFC, the J-3 
will normally organize it and serve as a member.  Operations directorate key functions and 
tasks generally include the following: 
(a)  Coordinate assessment activities at the JFC level, if directed. 
(b)  At the joint force level, the JOC is the focal point for synchronizing and 
integrating joint operations at the macro level.  Joint targeting related duties are as follows: 
1.
  Provide current operational assessment. 
2.  Develop and maintain operational ROE in coordination with other staff 
elements, including the staff judge advocate (SJA), agencies, and components. 
3.  Publish JFC’s daily guidance, in cluding objectives and targeting 
guidance.   
4.  In coordination with the com ponent commanders, develop proposed 
placement of land and maritime force boundaries. 
5.  Provide targeting options, revised boundaries, and FSCM changes for 
future operations. 
6.  Nominate targets for inclusion in the JIPTL. 

Chapter III 
III-12 JP 3-60 
7.  Deconflict and validate target nominations at the JFC level and higher, 
then prioritize and forward to the JFC for review, approval, and inclusion in the JIPTL, if the 
JFE has been formed. 
8.  Manage the JTL and RTL. 
9.  Nominate targets to the JFC based on the JTL and RTL. 
10.  Conduct CDE and post-engagement CDA. 
11.  Conduct MEA. 
12.  Initiate and coordinate the sensitive target approval and review 
process.  See CJCSI 3122.06, Sensitive Target Approval and Review (STAR) Process 
(classified instruction), for more information on STAR. 
(c)  Additionally, if directed by the JFC, the J-3 may act as lead agent for the 
JTCB or any similar group established to provide broad targeting oversight. 
(3)  Logistics Directorate.  The J-4 identifies logistic issues unique or specific to 
targeting.  Of particular interest, the J-4 compares the op erational logistic plans to 
developing target lists to identify infrastructure and supplies required to support current and 
future operations and recommendations for the RTL or the desired degree of functionality 
required to support future operations. 
(4)  Plans Directorate.  The J-5 performs the long-range or future joint planning 
responsibilities.  Planning is conducted by various organizations in conjunction with 
appropriate staff elements.  Specific joint targeting related duties normally performed by the 
J-5 are as follows: 
(a)  Publish JFC’s planning guidance and planning directives. 
(b)  Identify possible branches and sequels. 
(c)  Develop, analyze, compare, and recommend COAs for JFC approval. 
(d)  Ensure overflight agreements or arrangements are in place with en route 
nations prior to commencement of operations. 
(5)  SJA Responsibilities.  The SJA advises the JFC and other staff members on 
applicable international and domestic laws, legal custom and practice, multilateral and 
bilateral agreements with host nations, law of war issues, compliance and interpretation of 
the ROE, and other pertinent issues involved in joint target recommendations and decisions.  
SJA also reviews target selection and force assignment for legal compliance.  The SJA also 
highlights potential associated issues, such  as harmful environmental impacts or other 
consequences that should be considered in the targeting process.  For additional information 
see Appendix A, “Legal Considerations in Targeting.” 

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-13 
c.  Component Commander Responsibilities 
(1)  With regard to join t targeting, the components’ responsibilities normally 
include the following: 
(a)  Conduct target development. 
(b)  Nominate potential targets for inclusion in the JTL and RTL. 
(c)  Nominate targets for inclusion on  the JFC’s TST list and maintain their 
own lists of HPTs. 
(d)  Identify and nominate component- critical targets for JFC approval.  
Typically these are component nominations not approved as TSTs by the JFC.  
(e)  Provide appropriate representation to the JFE, JTWG, and JTCB, as well as 
other associated staff organizations when established. 
(f)  Consolidate and nominate deconflicted and prioritized targets for inclusion 
in the JIPTL. 
(g)  Provide timely and accurate repor ting to the JFE in support of joint 
operations assessment. 
(h)  Provide tactical and operational assessment to the JFE for incorporation 
into the JFC’s overall assessment efforts. 
(i)  Coordinate components’ deliberate and dynamic targeting via established 
procedures.  Examples include the liaison elements to the joint air operations center 
(JAOC)—battlefield coordination detachment, Marine liaison element, naval and amphibious 
liaison element, Air Force liaison element, tactical air planners, and the special operations 
liaison element.  Direct cr oss-component coordination pr ovides a means to rapidly 
coordinate dynamic targeting and avoid de lays or possible mi scommunication through 
liaison elements.  Decentralized execu tion during dynamic operations (e.g., 
counterinsurgency and certain stability operations) is facilitated by conducting tactical air 
planning within lower, tactical-level units a nd commands.  This level of integration will 
enable more flexible employment of airpower and also improve the fidelity of the joint force 
air component commander’s (JFACC’s) overall COP. 
3.  Federated Targeting Support 
a.  A federated target development and assessment process can provide reachback 
support to the JFC and component commanders during the joint targeting cycle.  Under a 
collaborative federated architecture, the supported JFC works in conjunction with the 
National Joint Operations and Intelligence Center (NJOIC) and the Joint Staff (JS) J-2 using 
the intelligence planning process to establis h federated targeting support partners and 
assessment reporting responsibilities between combatant commands in accordance with the 
supported CCDR’s requirements.  The supported CCDR may request that the JS facilitate in 

Chapter III 
III-14 JP 3-60 
identifying targeting support and assessment partners or work directly with other combatant 
commands to provide information to the JS regarding any in ter-command targeting 
coordination.  The JS J-2 normally ensures that federated targeting support requirements are 
addressed in contingency plans and orders and will assist in the dissemination of targeting 
support-related information between the federated partners and the supported JFC. 
b.  Many organizations provide critical support to joint targeting.  Federation establishes 
partnerships and leverages appropriate expe rtise, allowing access to more actionable 
information than would otherwise be available to JFCs and their staffs.  It also provides for 
an efficient division of labor and maximizes  resources.  Federation provides commands 
conducting operations access to organizations a nd individuals that are experts in their 
respective analytic areas.  Federation allows  supported commanders to request assistance 
from outside the theater in such areas as: 
(1)  Target Development.  TSA, target analysis, and production of ETFs, to include 
supporting TM (e.g., graphics and specific data such as JDPIs). 
(2)  Capability Analysis.   Weaponeering solutions , CDEs, and modeling and 
simulation products. 
(3)  Assessment.  Physical damage/change, functional damage/change, and target 
system assessments. 
c.  Roles and Responsibilities 
(1)  Federated production planning takes place as part of the JFC’s deliberate and 
crisis action planning.  The J-2 conducts the intelligence planning process and develops the 
intelligence plan as annex B (Intelligence) to the contingency plan or OPORD.  The J-2 
assesses the joint force orga nic tasking, collection, pr ocessing, exploitation, and 
dissemination capabilities to s upport the JFC’s selected opera tions through all phases of 
conflict.  The joint force J-2 determines intelligence shortfalls and, working with the JS J-2 
and combatant command (if required), begins to establish federated partnerships with other 
intelligence organizations to address these shortfalls.  Federated partnerships are formal 
agreements between other theater JIOCs, Serv ice intelligence centers, DOD intelligence 
agencies, reserve intelligence elements, or ot her non-DOD intelligence agencies to assist 
with the joint force J-2’s intelligence responsibilities.  These agreements form the basis for 
national intelligence functiona l support plans to appendix 4 (Targeting) to annex B 
(Intelligence) for contingency plans and OPORDs, as well as all-source intelligence analysis 
and production (e.g., linguistics and translation services, document and material exploitation, 
counterintelligence, human intelligence [HUMINT], geospatial intelligence [GEOINT], and 
signals intelligence [SIGINT] operations).  Federation agreements and intelligence tasking 
lists are formalized during intelligence plan development.  The NJOIC and the JS J-2 assist 
the joint force J-2 in establishing a federated targeting and assessment plan. 
(2)  Under the Defense Intelligence Analysis Program, there are designated 
responsible organizations that are the experts for production and maintenance of analysis 
relating to functional and topical capabilities and activities that typically concern planners, 

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-15 
such as counterterrorism, WMD, infrastructure capabilities, and orders of battle.  This may 
also include social networks, national co mmunication means, or other key information 
networks.  Responsible organizations conduc ting target development should also be 
responsible for performing assessments on the same capabilities and targets. 
(3)  TSA, ETF, and JDPI production, weaponeering, CDEs, and physical and 
functional assessments are typically conducted in theater to the maximum extent possible.  
However, if federation is required, it should leverage the array of national agency, command, 
and service centers that are re sourced and proficient in thes e areas.  Specific targeting 
federation requirements are identified in command intelligence plans and supporting 
responsible organizations specified within related functional support plans.  For both 
deliberate and crisis action planning, the NJOIC and the JS J-2 will work with the supported 
command, national agencies, and supporting service centers to form federated partnerships to 
synchronize use of available resources and capabilities.   
d.  Intelligence Organizations and Supporting Agencies 
(1)  In a federated environment, especially during crisis action planning, control is 
essential.  The supported commander should establish a single point of contact for records 
and accountability.  Careful administration of records can maximize the usage of analytical 
and productive resources available to support targeting.  The following list of organizations 
includes potential partners in the production of target intelligence.  It is neither all-inclusive, 
nor will all of these organizations necessarily support every combat operation. 
(2)  DOD Organizations.  The primary organizations within DOD include the JS, 
NJOIC, DIA, National Security Agency (NSA ), National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency 
(NGA), and the National Reconnaissance O ffice (NRO), as well as the combatant 
commands.  Other organizations within the DOD that provide uni que capabilities to joint 
targeting efforts include DTRA, Joint Inform ation Operations Warfare Center (JIOWC), 
United States Cyber Command (USCYBERCO M), and JWAC.  The JS J-2 leads the 
national IC for target vetting.  The community of interest for target vetting should include, as 
a minimum, JS J-2 and J-3, NJOIC, DIA, NSA, NGA, DTRA, Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA), and NRO. 
(a)  Joint Staff J-2.  The JS J-2 is a unique organization in that it is a major 
component of DIA, which is a combat support agency, as well as a fully integrated element 
of the JS.  The JS J-2 is the primary coor dination element for national-level intelligence 
support to joint targeting.  Th e JS J-2 functions as the lead agent for providing and 
coordinating national-level intelligence support to joint targeting.  Specific JS J-2 targeting 
responsibilities include: 
1.
  Providing Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the JS J-3 
with targeting, assessment, and technical support during deliberate and crisis action planning. 
2.  Providing target development and/or assessment federation through the 
JS Targeting and BDA Cell, if required. 

Chapter III 
III-16 JP 3-60 
3.  Assisting the joint force in establishing, coordinating, and/or supporting 
federated intelligence operations, to include target development and assessment. 
4.  Assisting the joint force with coordination of IC target vetting. 
5.  Providing functional expertise on targeting and targeting-related issues 
undergoing JS, SecDef, and Presid ential review.  This include s, but is not limited to, 
command target lists, planning orders, warning orders, and STAR products. 
6.  Identifying targeting automation ga ps for the targeting intelligence 
enterprise architecture.  
For additional details, see JP 2-0, Joint Intelligence,  and JP 2-01, Joint and National 
Intelligence Support to Military Operations. 
(b)  Defense Intelligence Agency.   DIA provides significant all-source 
intelligence resources on a broad array of targ eting issues.  The Director of DIA is the 
Commander, Joint Functional Component Comm and for Intelligence, Surveillance, and 
Reconnaissance (JFCC-ISR) under United Stat es Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM).  
DIA provides finished target intelligence to the President, SecDef, and JFCs, providing 
worldwide support to military operations.  An alysts across the agency directly support 
targeting efforts by performing all-source target development, material production, TSA, and 
assessment. 
For additional details, see JP 2-01, Joint and National Intellig ence Support to Military 
Operations. 
(c)  National Joint Operations and Intelligence Center.  The NJOIC is the 
primary conduit through which national-level target intelligence support is provided to the 
combatant commands and subordinate joint forces.  The NJOIC and combatant command 
JIOCs leverage national intelligence assets and determine requirements through the Director 
of National Intelligence and IC representatives to combatant commands. 
For more information on the NJOIC, see JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to 
Military Operations.  
(d)  National Security Agency.  NSA provides critical intelligence support to 
all phases of joint targeting.  This support includes analysis of communications networks or 
other aspects of the information infrastructure, as well as operational SIGINT.  Along with 
other affected members of the IC, NSA is responsible for providing the combatant command, 
JS J-2, and NJOIC with the intelligence gain or loss assessment, which is an evaluation of 
the quantity and quality of intelligence data lost if desired effects are created on a target.  The 
NSA will keep the NJOIC, combatant command JIOCs, and other interested commands and 
agencies informed of agency activities that take place in each respective geographic CCDR’s 
area of responsibility and/or JFC’s OA. 
(e)  National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency.  NGA is a combat support 
agency as well as a national intelligence organization.  NGA is the primary source for 

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-17 
GEOINT analysis and products at the national level.  In addition to the GEOINT support 
identified in JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations, and JP 
2-03, Geospatial Intelligence Support to Joint Operations, NGA’s mission supports national 
and homeland security, and advanced weapons and systems development.   
1.  NGA works with commercial imagery vendors to procure diverse, 
unclassified imagery. 
2.  NGA can provide GEOINT support to combatant commands via an 
NGA support team or as part of a national intelligence support team (NIST). NISTs are 
established at each combatant command headquarters.  The NIST provides the full spectrum 
of NGA’s GEOINT capabilities and is composed of a core cadre that includes geospatial 
analysts, imagery analysts, and staff officers.  The NIST also has full connectivity with NGA 
to ensure reachback capability into NGA’s total support effort. 
3.  Targeting support products use advanced geospatial -intelligence 
analytical techniques and technologies, geodetically-controlled source material, and refined 
mensuration techniques and data.  NGA is a major contributor to the success of the military 
operations in supplying needed intelligence, mission specific data sets, and foundational data 
to support the targeting effort.  NGA assists in providing foundational data for national and 
international contingency planning and post disaster event analysis. 
4.  NGA’s imagery analysts play a critical role in federated target 
development and assessment.  NGA informs the NJOIC, combatant command JIOCs, and 
other interested commands and agencies as analysis affecting targets of interest occur in each 
respective OA. 
5.  CJCSI 3505.01, Target Coordinate  Mensuration Certification and 
Program Accreditation, establishes NGA as the accreditation authority for mensuration 
certification training programs under this instruction. 
For additional information, see JP 2-03, Geospatial Intelligence Support to Joint Operations. 
(f)  Defense Threat Reduction Agency .  DTRA provides special tools and 
expertise on WMD and helps safeguard the US and its allies by providing capabilities to 
eliminate, reduce, and/or counter these threats and/or mitigate their effects.  DTRA’s work 
covers a broad spectrum of activities , but is directly involved in the targeting process by 
making collateral damage and casualty estimations when employing weapons against 
facilities that may contain WMD.  DTRA also provides target characterization and high 
fidelity weapons effects modeling to support physical and functional defeat of hardened and 
deeply buried targets.  DTRA also verifies existing foreign controls of stockpiles of nuclear-
related equipment and materials. 
(g)  Joint Information Operations Warfare Center.  The JIOWC, a CJCS 
controlled activity under the JS J-3, assists JS in improving DOD ability to meet combatant 
command information-related requirements, improve development of information- related 
capabilities, and ensure operational integration and coherence across combatant commands 
and other DOD activities in accordance with CJCSI 5125.10, Charter of the Joint 

Chapter III 
III-18 JP 3-60 
Information Operations Warfare Center.  The JIOWC provides federated support, including 
intelligence, to CCDRs, and can be tasked through the JS  J-3.  The JIOWC provides full 
spectrum IO to include human influence targeting support that can be tailored for integration 
into TSAs.  JIOWC personnel often work directly with the supported command’s targeting 
personnel from the earliest stages of the targeting process to ensure that IO considerations 
are fully integrated into targeting efforts. 
For additional details, see JP 3-13, Information Operations. 
(h)  United States Strategic Command.  Commander, United States Strategic 
Command ( CDRUSSTRATCOM) supports joint targeting  with assigned forces and 
capabilities including: 
1.  United States Cyber Command.  USCYBERCOM (a subunified 
command under USSTRATCOM) plans, coordinates, integrates, synchronizes, and conducts 
activities to direct the operations and defense of specified DOD information networks and 
prepares to, when directed, conduct full-spectrum military cyberspace operations in order to 
enable actions throughout the operational environment, and facilitates US/Allied freedom of 
action in cyberspace while denying the same to our adversaries. 
2.  Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, 
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance.  The JFCC-ISR provides oversight and management of 
DOD ISR and associated processing, exploitation, and dissemination (PED) capabilities by 
developing and synchronizing sourcing solutions to integrate national and theater ISR 
capabilities in support of combatant commands’ requirements. 
3.  Joint Functional Component Command for Space (JFCC-Space) 
optimizes planning, execution, and force management (as directed by CDRUSSTRATCOM) 
of the assigned missions of coordinating, planning, and conducting space operations via the 
Joint Space Operations Center.  Commander, JFCC-Space, will serve as the single point of 
contact for military space operational matters to plan, task, direct, and execute space 
operations, giving JFCs and subordinate commanders access to information and space 
capabilities beyond organic command resources. 
For additional details, see JP 3-14, Space Operations. 
4.  Joint Functional Component Command for Global Strike (JFCC-
GS) integrates all elements of military power in support of CDRUSSTRATCOM’s global 
missions; synchronizes USSTRATCOM global deterrence capabilities and DOD capabilities 
to combat adversary WMD worldwide; provides integrated global strike capabilities to deter 
and dissuade threats and when directed, defeat adversaries through decisive joint global 
combat operations.  JFCC-GS optimizes planning, execution, and force management for the 
assigned missions of deterring attacks against the US, its territories, and installations. 
5.  United States Strategic Command Center for Combating Weapons of 
Mass Destruction (SCC-WMD).  The CDRUSSTRATCOM established the SCC-WMD to 
support CDRUSSTRATCOM as the lead combatant command for  integrating and 
synchronizing DOD efforts to dissuade, deter, and prevent the acquisition, development, 

Joint Force Targeting Duties and Responsibilities 
III-19 
transfer, or use of WMD and related materials and precursors by adversaries (i.e., to combat 
WMD).  The SCC-WMD director is dual-hatted as the director of DTRA, enabling the SCC-
WMD to leverage DTRA capabilities and assist DOD with preventing, deterring, detecting, 
locating, tracking, targeting, and mitigating the effects of WMD systems or threats. 
For additional details, see JP 3-40, Combating Weapons of Mass Destruction.  
6.  Joint Warfare Analysis Center.  JWAC provides the JS, combatant 
commands, JFCs, and other DOD and non- DOD agencies with precision targeting and 
deterrent options for selected networks and nodes.  JWAC conducts engineering and 
modeling analysis, fused with scientific and intelligence data, to produce optimized target 
sets that support the JFC’s objectives.  As such, JWAC is a key provider of information 
supporting target development and assessment.  It may also be a key provider of unique 
weaponeering cases and CDE analysis. 
(i)  Supporting combatant commands have valuable resources that may be 
brought to bear to support federated targeting.  Supporting combatant commands may 
construct ETFs and TM, assist in JIPOE, derive mensurated coordinates, support federated 
assessments, or provide other federated targeting support as coordinated during deliberate or 
crisis action planning.  Combatant command JIOCs support component command 
intelligence requirements and work within the joint component command structure to ensure 
a common solution to satisfy mission objectives. 
e.  Non-DOD Organizations Supporting Joint Targeting.  Non-DOD organizations 
provide significant intelligence and operational support to joint targeting.  The principal non-
DOD organizations supporting joint targeting are the CIA, Department of State (DOS), and 
Department of Energy (DOE).  The Departments of Justice, Treasury, Homeland Security, 
Transportation, Health and Human Services also provide peripheral support and intelligence 
to targeting efforts, but this section concentrates on the three that have the most direct 
bearing on joint targeting: 
(1)  Central Intelligence Agency.  The CIA, through its target coordination group 
within its Associate Directorate of Military Affairs, wor ks with the DOD on many issues 
relating to the targeting cycle. 
(2)  Department of State.  Because of the DOS’s worldwide network of diplomatic 
missions and posts staffed with representatives of numerous national agencies, the DOS is a 
key source of information during war or crises.  The central point of contact within the DOS 
for intelligence, analysis, and research is the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR).  
INR produces intelligence studies and analyses, which have provided valuable information in 
support of targeting.  Additionally, all- source reporting via Foreign Service channels at 
American embassies or consular posts is useful, particularly during the end state and 
commander’s objectives, target development, and assessment phases of the joint targeting 
cycle. 
(3)  Department of Energy .  DOE, through its national laboratories, provides 
significant chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear process analysis data related to 

Chapter III 
III-20 JP 3-60 
counterproliferation facilities and installations.  Additionally, DOE has resources to assist in 
consequence analysis prediction. 
 

A-1 
APPENDIX A 
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS IN TARGETING 
1.  Introduction 
It is DOD policy that members of DOD co mply with law of war during all armed 
conflicts, however such conflicts are character ized, and in all other military operations.  
International law considerations may directly affect all phases of the joint targeting cycle.  
Targeteers and planners must  understand and be able to ap ply the basic principles of 
international law as they relate to targeting.  This appendix supports the joint targeting cycle 
by providing a discussion of those aspects of  international law that impact targeting 
decisions.  In particular, this appendix discusses issues related to the basic principles of the 
law of war, ROE, general restrictions, precautions in attack, separation of military activities, 
special protections, national sovereignty, and environmental considerations. 
2.  International Law and the Law of War 
Law of war is that part of  international law that regul ates the conduct of armed 
hostilities.  It encompasses all international law for the conduct of hostilities binding on the 
US or its individual citizens, including treaties and international agreements to which the US 
is a party, and applicable customary international law.  The law of war rests on fundamental 
principles of military necessity, unnecessa ry suffering, proportionality, and distinction 
(discrimination), which will apply to targeting decisions.  It is DOD policy that law of war 
principles govern actions to be taken by m ilitary personnel in defense of US personnel, 
selected host nation personnel, and property and equipment.  This applies to both lethal and 
nonlethal weapons.  Some of the law of war principles to be considered during the planning 
process are military necessity, unnecessary suffering, distinction, and proportionality. 
For detailed discussion, see JP 1-04, Legal Support to Military Operations.  
3.  Rules of Engagement 
a.  ROE are directives issued by compet ent military authority that delineate the 
circumstances and limitations under which US forces will initiate and/or continue combat 
engagement with other forces encountered. 
b.  ROE are the means by which the Presid ent, SecDef, and operational commanders 
regulate the use of armed force in the context of applicable political and military policy, and 
domestic and international law.  ROE provi des a framework that encompasses national 
policy goals, mission requirements, and the rule of law.  All targeting decisions must be 
made in light of the applicable ROE.  Supplemental measures enable a commander to obtain 
or grant those additional authorities necessary to accomplish an assigned mission. 
c.  Standing Rules of Engagement (SROE).  The SROE establishes fundamental 
policies and procedures for US commanders and their forces during military operations and 
contingencies outside the US and its territories and outside US territorial seas and airspace.  
SROE also apply to air and maritime homeland defense missions conducted within the US 

Appendix A 
A-2 JP 3-60 
and its territories, or territorial seas, unl ess otherwise directed by SecDef.  See CJCSI 
3121.01, Standing Rules of Engagement/Standing Rules for the Use of Force for US Forces, 
for further discussion on SROE. 
4.  General Restrictions on Targeting 
a.  Protection of the Civilian Population and Civilian/Protected Objects.  Civilian 
populations and civilian/protected objects may not be intentionally targeted, although there 
are exceptions to this rule.  Civilian objects consist of all civilian property and activities 
other than those used to support or sustain warfighting capability.  Acts of violence solely 
intended to spread fear among the civilian population are prohibited. 
(1)  Direct Participation in Hostilities.  The protection offered civilians carries a 
strict obligation on the part of civilians not to take direct part in armed combat, become 
combatants, or engage in acts of war.  Civilians engaging in combat or otherwise taking a 
direct part in combat operations, singularly or as a group, lose their protection against direct 
attack.  Consult the servicing SJA when civilians are intermingled in the target are or used as 
human shields.  For additional information on NSLs and CDE methodology reference CJCSI 
3160.01, No Strike and the Collateral Damage Estimation Methodology.   Joint force 
targeting during such situati ons is driven by the principl e of proportionality, so that 
otherwise lawful targets involuntarily shielded with protected civilians may be attacked, and 
the protected civilians may be considered as collateral damage, provided that the collateral 
damage is not excessive compared to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated 
by the attack.  In cases where civilians voluntarily act as human shields, those civilians may 
be taking a direct part in hostilities and lose protection from attack.  Such civilians need not 
be taken into account when assessing collateral damage under the law, though there may be 
diplomatic or strategic concerns that affect targeting decisions.  
(2)  Requirement to Distinguish Between Military Targets and 
Civilian/Protected Objects.  It is necessary to distinguish between military targets and 
civilian/protected objects regardle ss of the legal status of th e territory on or over which 
combat occurs.  Purely civilian/protected obj ects or locations may not be intentionally 
targeted.  However, due consideration under the principle of proportionality must be taken 
where such objects or locations are colocated w ith or are in close proximity to military 
targets.  Further, the adversary’s use of a civilian/protected object or location for military or 
combat purposes may result in the loss of protected status, rendering it subject to attack. 
b.  Lawful Military Attacks.  Military attacks will be directed only at military 
objectives.  In the law of war, military objec tive is a treaty term: “those objects which by 
their nature, location, purpose, or use make an effective contribution to military action and 
whose total or partial destruction, capture, or neutralization, under the circumstances ruling 
at that time, offers a definite military advantage.” 
(1)  If the objective is not enemy military forces and equipment, the second part of 
the definition (that is, that the destruction of a target offers a definite military advantage) 
limits the first part (that is, it contributes to military action).  Both parts must apply before an 
object that is normally a civilian object can be considered a military objective.  In addition, 

Legal Considerations in Targeting 
A-3 
the definition deals only with intentional attack  and not with damage to civilian objects 
incidental to the lawful attack of military objectives. 
(2)  Nature.  Nature refers to the type of obj ect, for example, equipment used as 
military transports, and facilities used as C2 centers or communication stations. 
(3)  Location.  Location includes areas that are militarily important because they 
must be captured from or denied to an enemy, or because the enemy must be made to retreat 
from them.  An area of land, such as a mount ain pass, or a like route through or around a 
natural or man-made obstacle, may be a milita ry objective.  A town, village, or city may 
become a military objective, even if it does not contain military objectives, if its seizure is 
necessary (e.g., to protect a v ital line of communications) or  for other legitimate military 
reasons. 
(4)  Purpose or Use.  Purpose means the future intended or possible use, while use 
refers to its present function.  The potential dual use of a civilian object, such as a civilian 
airport, also may make it a military objective because of its future intended or potential 
military use.  The connection of some objects to an enemy’s war-fighting, war-supporting, or 
war-sustaining effort may be direct, indirect, or even discrete.  A decision as to classification 
of an object as a military objective and allocation of resources for its attack is dependent 
upon its value to an enemy stat es war-supporting or war-sustai ning effort (including its 
ability to be converted to a more direct connection), and is not solely reliant on its overt or 
present connection or use. 
(5)  Nature, Location, Purpose, or Use.  The words nature, location, purpose, or 
use allow wide discretion, but are subject to qualifications stated later in the definition of 
effective contribution to military action and th e offering of a definite military advantage 
through its seizure or destruction.  There doe s not have to be a geographical connection 
between effective contribution and military advantage.  Attacks on military objectives in the 
enemy rear, or diversionary attacks, away from the area of military operations as such (the 
contact zone), are lawful. 
(6)  Military Action. Military action is used in the ordinary sense of the words, and 
is not intended to encompass a limited or specific military operation.  
(7)  Circumstances Ruling at the Time.  The phrase in the circumstances ruling at 
the time is essential.  If, for example, en emy military forces have taken up position in a 
building that otherwise would be regarded as a civilian object, such as a school, retail store, 
or museum, the building has become a military objective.  The circumstances ruling at the 
time that is, the military use of the building permits its attack, if attacking the building would 
offer a definite military advantage.  If enemy military forces abandon the building, however, 
the change of circumstances may preclude its treatment as a military objective. 
(8)  Definite.  Definite means a concrete and perceptible military advantage, rather 
than one that is merely hypothetical or speculative.  A military commander may regard this 
requirement as met in seeking to seize or destroy objects with a common purpose in order to 
deny their use to the enemy.  An example is  the attack of all bridges on lines of 

Appendix A 
A-4 JP 3-60 
communication the enemy is using, or may use as alternate lines of communication, in order 
to reinforce or resupply his or her forces. 
(9)  Military Advantage.  Military advantage refers to the advantage anticipated 
from an attack when considered as a whole, and not only from its isolated or particular parts.  
The advantage need not be immediate.  For example, the military advantage in the attack of 
an individual bridge may not be seen immediately (particularly if, at the time of the attack, 
there is no military traffic in the area), but can  be established by the overall effort against 
bridges in order to isolate enemy military forces on the battlefield.  Similarly, military 
advantage is not restricted to tactical gains, but is linked to the full context of war strategy.  It 
may involve a variety of considerations, including the security of the attacking force. 
5.  Separation of Military Activities 
a.  General Information.  The law of war gives civilians protection from attack during 
armed conflict.  Civilians may lose this protection based upon specific warlike acts.  Once 
civilians take a direct part in hostilities, they  become lawful targets for such time as they 
directly participate in the hostilities. 
(1)  The parties to a conflict are obligated to remove their own civilian population, 
individual civilians, and civilian objects from areas or locations where military objects are 
located. 
(2)  Under the law of war, safety zones or demilitarized zones may be created by or 
between the warring parties.  While the creation of such zones rarely occurs, if created, they 
must only be used for their intended purposes.  Examples are open cities, civilians, prisoner 
of war (POW) camps, hospitals, etc. 
(3)  Similarly, the law of war requires that combatants wear uniforms, insignia, or 
other clearly identifiable markings.  Faciliti es such as hospitals and POW camps must be 
clearly marked as required by the Geneva Conventions.  To the maximum extent feasible, the 
law of war requires combatants to locate their military facilities away from protected civilian 
objects, such as hospitals and schools. 
b.  Result of Failure to Separate Military Activities.   When an adversary places 
military objectives in or near a populated area, this failure will weaken effective protection of 
their nearby civilian population and constitutes a violation of the law of war. 
6.  Precautions in Attack 
a.  When conducting military operations, positive steps and precautions must be taken to 
avoid excessive incidental civilian casualties and damage to civilian property.  The extent of 
danger to the civilian population varies with the type of military target attacked, terrain, 
weapons used, weather, and civilian proximity. 
b.  Threats to civilians depend on engageme nt techniques, weapons  used, nature of 
conflict, commingling of civilian and military objects, and armed resistance encountered.  
Precautions include the following: 

Legal Considerations in Targeting 
A-5 
(1)  Military Objectives.  Planners should ensure that military objectives, and not 
civilian objects, are prosecuted.  Sound target intelligence enhances military effectiveness 
and target validity. 
(2)  Minimization of Civilian Casualties.  Unless otherwise prohibited by ROE, 
attacks are not prohibited against military targets even if they might cause incidental injury 
or damage to civilians or civilian objects.  In spite of precautions, such incidental casualties 
are inevitable during armed conflict. 
(a)  Collateral damage to civilian objects or persons must not be excessive in 
relation to the concrete and direct military advantage expected to be gained.  If the attack is 
directed against dual-use objects that are legitimate military targets but also serve a 
legitimate civilian need (e.g., electrical power or telecommunications), then this factor must 
be carefully balanced against the military  benefits when making a proportionality 
determination. 
(b)  Required precautionary measures are reinforced by traditional tenets of 
military doctrine, such as surprise, economy of force, and concentration of effort.  Warnings 
must be given when circumstances permit (e.g., any degradation in attack effectiveness is 
outweighed by the reduction in co llateral damage because advanced warning allowed the 
adversary to get civilians out of the target area). 
(3)  Cancellation or Suspension of Attacks.  Target intelligence may be found to 
be faulty before an attack is started or completed.  If it becomes apparent that a target is no 
longer a lawful military objective, the attack must be cancelled or suspended. 
7.  Special Protection 
a.  Intentional and direct attacks on civilians or civilian objects are prohibited.  However, 
the incidental injury or death of civilian personnel or damage to civilian objects at or near a 
military target is not an automatic cause for redress.  Special protections are discussed below. 
b.  Wounded and Sick Personnel, Medical Units, Hospitals, and Medical Transport.  
Under the law of war, the following are protected: 
(1)  Fixed hospitals and mobile medical establishments. 
(2)  Medical personnel and chaplains. 
(3)  Ambulances and clearly marked medical transport vehicles. 
(4)  Air ambulances and clearly marked medical aircraft. 
(5)  Hospital ships and, where possible, sick bays of warships. 
(6)  Wounded, sick, and shipwrecked persons, military or civilian. 

Appendix A 
A-6 JP 3-60 
c.  Distinctive Medical Emblems.  The Red Cross, Red Crescent, and Red Crystal 
Emblem are the three intern ationally recognized protect ed emblems or symbols for 
designating protected medical activities and clearly marked ambulances and medical 
vehicles.  Some countries use other distinct ive emblems, such as a Red Cedar tree by 
Lebanon and the Red Star of David by Israel .  Although not recognized in the Geneva 
Conventions, when parties to the conflict are placed on notice that another party is using a 
unique emblem to mark its medical facilities, such facilities must be given due respect as 
such.  The key purpose of the Geneva Conventions is not the emblem, but rather the notice 
that a facility is a protected medical installation.  Governments and combatants have a duty 
to identify these places with distinctive and visible signs.  
(1)  These emblems may be used to mark civilian and military medical personnel, 
ambulances and medical transport vehicles, and hospitals.  The International Committee of 
the Red Cross and national Red Cross societies also use these symbols. 
(2)  The Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time 
of War authorizes use of sy mbols to mark zones established for the wounded and sick.  
Safety zones for wounded, sick, aged, expect ant mothers, children under 15, and mothers 
with children under 7 are to be marked with an oblique red band on a white background. 
d.  Religious, Cultural, and Charitable Buildings and Monuments.  As long as 
buildings and monuments devoted to religion, art, charitable purposes, or historical sites are 
not used for military purposes, they may not be targets.  Governments and combatants have a 
duty to identify such places with distinctive and visible signs.  When these buildings are used 
for military purposes, they may qualify as military objectives.  Lawful military targets 
located near protected buildings are not im mune from attack, but the principle of 
proportionality must be carefully applied.  The Hague Convention for the Protection of 
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1954) established a royal blue and white 
shield as the distinctive emblem for protected cultural property in war. 
e.  Prisoner of War Camps.  POWs may not be targets, be kept in a combat zone, or be 
used to render an area immune from military  operations.  When military considerations 
permit, the letters “PW” or “PG” clearly visible from the air identifies POW camps.  The use 
of POW camp markings for any other purpose is prohibited.  
8.  Environmental Considerations 
a.  Joint operations have the potential to adversely affect natural and cultural resources.  
Consistent with operational requirements, action should be taken to identify these resources 
and develop plans to prevent or mitigate adverse effects.  These include historic, 
archeological, and other natural resources in the OA.  Attacks against installations containing 
dangerous natural forces—including dams, dike s, and nuclear power facilities—must be 
carefully considered for potentially catastrophic collateral damage. 
b.  It is generally lawful under the laws of war to cause collateral damage to the 
environment during an attack on a legitimate military target.  However, the commander has 
an affirmative obligation to avoid unnecessary damage to the environment to the extent that 

Legal Considerations in Targeting 
A-7 
it is practical to do so consistent with mission accomplishment.  To that end and as far as 
military requirements dictate, methods and m eans of attack should be employed with due 
regard to the protection and preservation of the natural environment.  Destruction of the 
environment not required by military necessity and carried out wantonly is prohibited. 
9.  Role of the Staff Judge Advocate 
Due to the complexity and extent of international law considerations involved in the 
joint targeting cycle, the SJA or their repr esentative must be immediately available and 
should be consulted at all levels of command to provide advice about law of war compliance 
during planning and execution of exercises and operations.  Early involvement by the SJA 
will improve the targeting process and can prevent possible violations of international or 
domestic law.   
For additional details, see JP 1-04, Legal Support to Military Operations. 
 

Appendix A 
A-8 JP 3-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank

B-1 
APPENDIX B 
TARGETING AUTOMATION 
1.  Overview 
a.  Targeting automation is the use of com puter systems, applications, and database 
technologies to speed the accurate developm ent, recording, dissemination, and usage of 
information that systematically links objec tives and guidance with targeting and its 
assessment.  Targeting automation is decision support technology.  To optimize support to 
the joint force, commanders should work to automate the steps in the targeting cycle, where 
possible, in support of deliberate and dynamic targeting while continuing to emphasize due 
diligence in analysis.  This appendix addre sses current targeting automation capabilities 
necessary for contingency and crisis action pl anning.  It details how targeting automation 
occurs within the joint targeting cycle a nd concludes with a summary discussion of 
implications for targeting automation. 
b.  Automating targeting has historically been  a challenge.  The definition of what is 
considered a target by automation systems and databases has evol ved from only fixed 
facilities to include equipment, individuals, organizations, and cyberspace targets.  Similarly, 
requirements for targeting automation have been redefined by a need to accommodate a 
variety of weapon and capability options, ranging across a variety of means to create lethal 
or nonlethal effects. 
c.  At the same time, computer science has rapidly advanced through multiple 
generations of operating systems and an exponential increase in computing capacity, storage, 
and network bandwidth.  Moreover, the busines s processes of target ing have adapted to 
incorporate the lessons learne d from numerous operations a nd exercises as well as the 
evolution of targeting doctrine and the national use of military power. 
d.  The challenges of targeting automation are twofold: to ensure automation occurs in a 
standardized manner, allowing communications between targeting entities to remain clear, 
and to avoid the temptation to rely on auto mation for targeting expertise.  Although 
automation provides speed of function, it is  still incumbent on the targeteer to fully 
comprehend foundational targeting concepts.  
2.  Automating the Joint Targeting Process 
a.  The essence of targeting automation is its ability to assist a targeteer in developing, 
saving, and disseminating the details of targeting decisions.  Targeting automation underpins 
the orderly accumulation and flow of information that ‘connects the dots’ of the joint 
targeting process.  Joint targeting is a series of phased activities that plan, execute, monitor, 
and assess the application of targeting to ach ieve military objectives.  It is applied in 
numerous contexts ranging from contingency planning through tactical execution. 
b.  Intelligence, operations, and plans must work together as a cohesive team in a 
collaborative environment to establish a co mmon targeting capabilit y.  The J-2, J-3, J-5, 
force structure, resource, and assessment directorate of a JS, interagency and multinational 

Appendix B 
B-2 JP 3-60 
communities each present unique challenges to establishing a common targeting capability 
that can serve the needs of all these communities and their “customers.”  Currently, many 
parts of the targeting process are automated, although no one single tool automates the entire 
process.  The process of targeting occu rs on many levels and in many locations 
simultaneously, yet no single interoperable solution has emerged or been established.  To 
serve such a diverse and distributed client base, targeting automation must conduct efficient 
bidirectional data flow among intelligence centers, users of both classified and unclassified 
computer systems, multinational partners, targeting tools, and, most significantly, support 
data exchange and interoperability.  To extend the targeting enterprise to the edge user base, 
targeting automation must also be able to accommodate producers and consumers of 
information on low bandwidth, message-based environments.  The following sections detail 
considerations associated with automating elements of joint targeting: 
(1)  End State and Commander’s Objectives.   During contingency planning, 
combatant commands typically provide objectives, guidance, desired effects, and intent to 
their staff and subordinate forces.  Targeteers  and intelligence analys ts then select the 
appropriate target sets and map them electroni cally to the supported ob jective(s).  In this 
phase, targeteers search for targets in databases (e.g., the modernized integrated database 
[MIDB]) and portals via manual and automated searches. 
(2)  Entity Identifiers.  Entity identifiers are a unique alphanumeric convention that 
can be assigned to entities for the purposes of unique identification.  One example of an 
entity identifier is the widely recognized basic encyclopedia (BE) numbering system.  
Currently, many C2 systems can accommodate current standards for target numbering (BEs, 
unit identifiers, candidate target identifiers, etc.) as defined by DIA and the IC.   
(3)  Target Development and Prioritization.  To fully develop targets, targeteers 
access web-based intelligence repositories to perform in-depth research and target 
development.  Where sufficient information is not already available, intelligence analysts 
submit requests for information and collection requirements to fill these gaps in non-TST 
situations. 
(a)  Target Systems Analysis.   In order to understa nd the roles particular 
targets play within a system, targeteers c onduct TSA to model the ex istence of broader, 
functionally-related target systems.  Automation is often used to record the structure of target 
systems and model various functional impacts on them.  Automated models are also used to 
study the cascading effects and coupling of target systems to show how they could affect one 
another (e.g., the effect of dropping the electrical grid on POL production).  
(b)  Electronic Target Folders.  Targeteers normally use web-based services 
to create an ETF for each target.  The ETF web-service acts as both a production interface to 
intelligence databases (e.g., MIDB) and as a means for users to query for produced ETFs.  It 
is important to ensure that ETF data is duplicated across networks  to ensure widest 
dissemination.  Using the electronic identification as a query input, consumers request ETFs, 
which are compiled dynamically via the ETF  web-service employing data pulls from 
community databases, and image repositories.  Standardized metadata recognized across the 
intelligence and joint fires community should be used to facilitate the automated exchange of 

Targeting Automation 
B-3 
whole or partial ETFs.  ETFs should be shared with targeting intelligence systems as well as 
targeting C2 systems and with the J-3. 
(c)  Target Materials.  TM are standardized products that capture graphic and 
textual presentations of target intelligence and other information.  Target graphics are 
softcopy or hardcopy imagery annotated with  pertinent information, titling, and other 
reference data.  TM can also take the form of textual descriptions of target information (e.g., 
collateral damage concerns, target significance) and geospatial features that outline or depict 
key aspects of a target.  TM are an integral part of the ETFs and are normally produced by 
joint forces or their assigned, attached, and supporting forces during target development and 
target engagement.  Automation assists with the generation, storage, and presentation of TM. 
(d)  Modernized Integrated Database.   The MIDB Data Services 
Environment is the DOD’s authoritative, all-source repository of worldwide general military 
and targeting intelligence.  MI DB information is maintained  in support of the combatant 
commands, Services, combat support agencies, United States Government departments and 
agencies, and international intergovernmental organizations.  The MIDB’s architecture 
consists of a group of component databases that continuously replicate worldwide between 
hundreds of nodes on a variety of networks and between different security levels.  This 
architecture provides the infrastructure for data exchange between intelligence and 
operational consumers from the national to tactical levels.  MIDB provides a baseline source 
of intelligence on installations, facilities, military forces, population concentrations, C2 
structures, and equipment in addition to target  details.  Because of MIDB’s replication 
architecture and business rules designed to protect data inte grity, MIDB is the national 
database for all target lists, NSLs, and textual data in ETFs. 
(4)  Capabilities Analysis.  For target-weapon pairings covered by JMEM or other 
weaponeering programs, during capabilities analysis, weaponeering information for a 
particular target is entered into an automated weaponeering system.  Automated 
weaponeering programs utilize approved weapons data, delivery parameters, and accuracies 
to provide optimal weapon and platform (or capability) pairings to minimize forces required 
to meet the commander’s objectives.  This data is then automatically tagged and linked to 
associated ETFs.  Weaponeerin g data is stored in MIDB weapons tables. The data is 
replicated out to other MIDB servers and is thus available to the wider targeting community.   
(5)  Mission Execution   
(a)  Once the targets are approved for action, targeteers pass the approved target 
list electronically to C2 syst ems within the joint force and to multinational partners as 
specified by the multinational architecture.  Prior to execution, the tasking orders are 
disseminated electronically to the appropriate planning cells. 
(b)  Dynamic Targeting.  During execution, some targets will be identified as 
emerging or fleeting targets and will require expedited development to prepare for execution 
in time.  These targets must be prosecute d more quickly than those prosecuted using 
deliberate targeting.  Consequently, automating and expediting the flow of information, from 

Appendix B 
B-4 JP 3-60 
nomination, through development and execution, and then back to the targeteers, becomes 
even more critical in these instances. 
(6)  Combat Assessment (CA).  At the tactical and operational levels, assessment 
cells develop a task list assigning specific targ ets or target sets to federated assessment 
partners.  Assessment analysts responsible for specific target sets will draft assessment 
reports.  All operational reports are imported and parsed electronically to populate prescribed 
assessment report formats.  When the assessment reports are approved by the supported 
command, they are disseminated via machine-readable message format or free text reports.  
Machine readable dissemination enables the automatic update of databases.  Changes in 
databases may then be reflected dynamically in the ETFs and various operating pictures.  
Updates and changes in the automated databases enable the next phases of the joint targeting 
cycle.  
3.  Implications for Targeting Automation 
a.  Authoritative, national target intelligence data is stored in MIDB.  In addition, the 
entire joint targeti ng enterprise should seamlessly sh are well-understo od, standardized 
representations of target intelligence and data and not rely on local databases.  Using national 
databases as a foundation, targeteers also rely on automation tools and processes to facilitate 
rapid exchange of target intelligence and data among various echelons and organizations.  
Automation assists in transforming targeting information into a variety of forms to support 
warfighters, building cases for target enga gement, or collecting information on observed 
damage.  To provide value, targeting automation tools and processes must be responsive to 
multiple organizations and aggressive timelines, as well as provide accurate and consistently 
repeatable presentations of data. 
b.  In summary, automation is a critical enabler allowing targeteers to be more accurate 
and efficient in all phases of the joint targeting process with reliable target intelligence, but 
automation is not a replacement for human thinking or proactive communications.  Stand-
alone systems create a break in the flow of intelligence or targeting data and sub-optimize the 
enterprise and waste resources.  Ideally, targ eting automation should facilitate real-time, 
virtual, collaborative, and multilayered security analysis and planning.  The key components 
to targeting automation are common target data standards and data interoperability.  
These components, in turn, enhance information sharing  while providing for the 
worldwide replication of targeting information between all users, to include multinational 
partners. 
 

C-1 
APPENDIX C 
COMPONENT TARGETING PROCESSES 
1.  Component Commander Inputs to Joint Targeting Cycle   
Component commanders are instrumental to the joint targeting cycle by assisting the 
JFC in formulating guidance, controlling many of the collection assets, engaging targets, and 
providing feedback as part of the assessment process.  These functions remain constant 
regardless of how the joint force is orga nized (functional or Service components).  
Coordination and communication between com ponents, theater analysts, and federation 
partners can be especially critical in regard to TSTs. 
2.  Four-Phase Targeting Process: Land and Maritime Components  
a.  Land and maritime force commanders normally use an interrelated process to 
enhance joint fire support planning and interface with the joint targeting cycle known as the 
decide, detect, deliver, and assess (D3A ) methodology.  D3A incorporates the same 
fundamental functions of the joint targeting cycle as the F2T2EA process and functions 
within phase 5 of the joint targeting cycle.  The D3A methodology facilitates synchronizing 
maneuver, intelligence, and fire support.  
b.  Through JIPOE, the commander builds a picture of the adversary, or threat model, 
and the operational environment, which may include neutral and multinational partners.  The 
threat model includes an order of battle, COP, and other products.  Through these efforts, the 
commander, staff, and components identify what  threat capabilities the adversary may 
possess. 
c.  The commander decides upon a scheme of maneuver, organizes available collection 
and fire support assets, and promulgates command guidance.  Upon execution of the 
collections plan, ISR assets detect HPTs and firing units deliver fires on them in accordance 
with the commander’s guidance.  Assessment reporting allows the staff to continually assess 
adversary and friendly capabilities. 
(1)  In the decide phase, target categories are identified for engagement.  Fire 
support, intelligence, and operations personnel deci de what targets to look for, where the 
targets can be found in the operational environment, who can locate those targets, and how 
the targets should be attacked based on the comm ander’s intent and the desired end state.  
Integrating component targeting processes, especially in terms of component coordination 
and communication, is critical for all targeting.  Together, they determine the available assets 
to be allocated and additional assets required.  They also identify channels needed to provide 
acquisition information on a real-time basis. 
(2)  The detect phase is designed to acquire the targets selected in the decide phase.  
In this phase, target acquisition assets and agencies execute the intelligence collection plan 
and focus on specific areas of interest.  Targets must be monitored after detection (especially 
mobile targets).  Tracking is an essential element of the detect function.  Tracking priorities 

Appendix C 
C-2 JP 3-60 
are based on the commander’s concept of the operation and targeting priorities.  Detection 
and tracking are executed through use of a collection plan. 
(3)  The deliver phase  involves engaging specific ta rgets to create  effects in 
accordance with the commander’s guidance. 
(4)  The assess phase is the estimate of damage or other effects resulting from the 
use of military force, either lethal or nonlethal, against a target.  Assessment requires 
extensive coordination between operational and intelligence elements to be effective, timely, 
and accurate.  A key element of the assess functi on is to decide whethe r or not the target 
requires reattack in order to achieve results specified by the commander. 
d.  Not all operations are targeting, and not all targeting is conducted within operations.  
Fire support planning and joint operation planning, which the commander and staff use to 
arrive at and to execute tactical decisions, are related.  JOPP is designed to direct staff 
functions to produce a coordinated plan or OPORD to accomplish the mission in accordance 
with the commander’s concept of the operation , intent, and scheme of maneuver.  Fire 
support planning within the decision-making process includes the decide phase in the four-
phase surface targeting cycle.   
See JP 5-0, Joint Operation Planning, for more details on JOPP. 
3.  Six-Stage Joint Air Tasking Cycle 
a.  For targeting in general, the JFACC uses both deliberate and dynamic targeting.  To 
integrate targeting into the ongoing battle rhythm, the JFACC normally uses the joint air 
tasking cycle (see Figures C-1 and C-2).  An example of an effective battle rhythm to 
support the planning process can be seen in Figure C-3.  
b.  A joint air tasking cycle is used to provide for the efficient and effective employment 
of the available joint air capab ilities.  The cycle provides an iterative process for the 
planning, coordination, allocation, and tasking of joint air missions, within the JFC’s intent.  
It accommodates changing tactical situations  and JFC guidance, as well as requests for 
support from other component commanders.  A timely joint ATO is critical, as other joint 
force components conduct their planning and operations based on a prompt, executable joint 
ATO, and they are dependent on its information.  There are usually at least five joint ATOs 
at any given time: one (or more) being assessed for future action, one in execution (today’s 
plan), one in production (tomorrow’s plan), one in the master air attack planning and target 
development (the day after tomorrow’s plan), and one in strategy development (examining 
objective and guidance for 72 hours and beyond).  The joint air tasking cycle begins with the 
JFC’s air apportionment process and culminates with the assessment of previous missions. 
For additional details on the joint air tasking process, refer to JP 3-30, Command and 
Control for Joint Air Operations. 
c.  The joint air tasking cycle stages are related to deliberate targeting.  The approach is 
similar: a systematic process that matches available capabilities with  targets to achieve 
operational objectives.  However, they are not the same since joint targeting may be executed 

Component Targeting Processes 
C-3 
apart from the joint air tasking cycle and contains functions, processes, and procedures that 
are performed in peacetime, both before and after conflicts. 
Figure C-1.  Joint Air Tasking Cycle 
Joint Air Tasking Cycle
meetings or sub-processes
common products of this phase
Italic Text
Bold Text
teams and staff agencies involved
ACO airspace control order
ALLOREQ allocation request
AOD air operations directive
ATO air tasking order
ISR intelligence, surveill ance, and reconnaissance
JAOP joint air operation plan
JFC joint force commander
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized target list
JTCB joint targeting coordination board
MAAP master air attack plan
ROE rules of engagement
Legend
SORTIE/ALLOT sortie allotment 
SPINS special instructions
TET targeting effects team
TST time-sensitive target
MAAP 
Briefing
ATO 
Production 
Team
JFC Staff,
Strategic Plans
and
Guidance 
Teams Strategic 
Guidance
and TET 
Teams
MAAP
Team
Tactical and
Component
Assessment 
Teams
JFC Staff
Combat 
Operations’ 
Offense, 
Defense, and 
TST Teams
ISR
AOD
JIPTL
JAOP
MAAP brief
SORTIE/ALLOT 
message
ATO
ACO
SPINS
Recommendations for 
future action; tactical, 
operational, and 
campaign assessment
Physical damage 
assessment; inflight 
reports, mission 
reports
Component/
Agency
Target
Coordination
ROE ALLOREQ
JTCBObjectives, 
Effects, and 
Guidance
Crisis Action 
Planning
Contingency 
Planning
ATO Production  
and 
Dissemination
Assessment Target 
Development
Weaponeering 
and Allocation
Execution 
Planning and 
Force Execution
Campaign 
Planning

Appendix C 
C-4 JP 3-60 
 (1)  Stage 1, objectives, effects, an d guidance, requires JFC and component 
commanders to collaborate about the use of jo int air assets to establish guidance for the 
duration of that air battle plan.  The JFACC provides the strategy division of the JAOC with 
broad guidance based on the JFC’s priorities and intent, coordination with other component 
commanders, and the JFACC’s own objectives.  This is normally transmitted in an air 
operations directive (AOD) and guides the planning for the duration of that joint air tasking 
cycle.  The AOD includes prioriti zed tactical tasks that support object ives and must be 
distributed to other components since it aff ects prioritizing targets.  Components should 
influence the writing of the AOD and with selecting and prioritizing the tactical tasks.  It is 
 
Figure C-2.  Notional Joint Air Tasking Cycle Timeline 
Notional Joint Air Tasking Cycle Timeline
Legend
ACO airspace control order
AOD air operations directive
ASR air support request
ATO air tasking order
JFACC joint force air component command
JFC joint force commander
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized target list
JTCB joint targeting coordination board
MAAP master air attack plan
SPINS special instructions
TET target effects team
External 
ASRs
Changes 
and 
Updates
Objectives, 
Effects, 
and 
Guidance
ATO 
Production 
and 
Dissemination
(ACO, ATO, 
SPINS)Target Development/ 
Nomination (JIPTL)
Weaponeering and 
Allocation (MAAP)
Execution Planning 
and Force Execution
Tactical Mission Planning
Assessment
JFC 
Guidance
Target 
Nominations
Strategy 
Meeting
Publish/ 
Disseminate 
ATO
TET Draft 
JIPTL
JFACC 
Guidance 
(AOD)
JFACC 
Briefing
MAAP 
Approved
Start ATO 
Execution
ATO Execution
JTCB
JIPTL
MAAP 
Started
 Stage 1
 Stage 4
06 12 18 24 06 12 06 1212 18 1818 24 2424 06 06 24-Hour 
Clock
72 66 60 54 48 18 2442 12 36 06 30 00 Cumulative 
Hours
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 6
Stage 5

Component Targeting Processes 
C-5 
also essential that other components provi de inputs to the JFA CC’s air apportionment 
recommendation to the JFC because it influenc es the strategy to task methodology used 
during the joint air tasking cycle.  If a JFACC is not used, this process will be conducted for 
each Service component performing air operations. 
 (2)  Stage 2 is target development.  The specific objectives received during stage 1 
are used to focus this effort.  Targets are nominated to support the objectives and priorities 
provided by the JFC.  In accordance with the JFC’s objectives a nd component targeting 
requirements, the JFACC (or Service component commander if a JFACC is not used) 
conducts daily joint air planning for the employment of available capabilities and/or forces.  
If the JFC designates an air component to me rge other joint forces TNLs and develop the 
draft JIPTL, the end product of the target development stage is the draft JIPTL that supports 
the JFC’s prioritized objectives and conforms to guidance.  In any case, the air component 
uses this process to develop the air component’s TNL for inclusion in the draft JIPTL.  
 
Figure C-3.  Joint Air Tasking Cycle Battle Rhythm 
Joint Air Tasking Cycle Battle Rhythm
Legend
AOD air operations directive
ATO air tasking order
ATO Prod ATO production and dissemination
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized target list
MAAP master air attack plan
Multiple Cycles with Specific Timetables
Assessment
ATO A
ATO B
ATO C
ATO D
ATO E
AOD
AOD
AOD
AOD
AOD
JIPTL
JIPTL
JIPTL
JIPTL
JIPTL
MAAP
MAAP
MAAP
MAAP
MAAP
ATO 
Prod
ATO 
Prod
ATO 
Prod
ATO 
Prod
ATO 
Prod
ATO 
Prod
Fly
Fly
Fly
Fly
Fly
D-Day
D-Day
D-1
D-1
D+4
D+4
D-2
D-2
D+3
D+3
D-3
D-3
D+2
D+2
D-4
D-4
D+1
D+1

Appendix C 
C-6 JP 3-60 
(3)  Stage 3 is weaponeering and allo cation.  Targeting personnel quantify the 
expected results of lethal a nd nonlethal actions against prioritized targets.  The JIPTL 
constructed during the previous phase, and approved by the JFC, provides the basis for 
weaponeering assessment activities.  The final prioritized targets are then included in the 
master air attack plan (MAAP).  The resulting MAAP is the plan of employment that forms 
the foundation of the joint ATO. 
(4)  Stage 4 is ATO production and dissemination.  After the MAAP is approved by 
the JFACC, detailed preparations continue by the JAOC combat plans.  The joint air tasking 
cycle applies targeti ng to air-specific operations.  Pr oducts include the ATO, special 
instructions, and the airspace control order.  The airspace control authority’s and area air 
defense commander’s instructions must be provided in sufficient detail to allow components 
to plan and execute all missions tasked in the joint ATO.   
(5)  Stage 5 is execution planning and fo rce execution.  The JFACC (or Service 
component commander if a JFACC is not used) directs the execution or deconfliction of all 
capabilities or forces made available for a given joint ATO.  The JFACC has the authority to 
redirect those forces for which the JFACC has operational or tactical control.  For all others, 
the affected component commander must approv e all requests for redi rection of direct 
support air assets.  Affected component commanders will be notified by the JFACC upon 
redirection of joint sorties previously allocated in the joint ATO for support of component 
operations.  Aircraft or other capabilities or forces not apportioned for tasking, but included 
in the joint ATO for coordination purposes, will be redirected only with the approval of the 
respective component commande r.  Components execute the joint ATO, as tasked, and 
recommend changes to the JAOC as appr opriate, given emergi ng JFC and component 
requirements. 
(6)  Stage 6 is assessment.  Assessment is conducted at all levels of the joint force.  
The JFC should establish a dynamic system, including an assessmen ts cell, to support 
assessment for all components.  Normally, the joint force operations officer will be 
responsible for coordinating assessment, assisted by the joint force intelligence officer.  The 
assessment cell evaluates the effectiveness of  operations to achieve command objectives, 
answering the questions:  “Are we doing things right?” and “Are we doing the right things?” 
4.  Special Operations Component Targeting 
Special operations targeti ng and mission planning are in terrelated functions and 
processes; neither is accomplished in isolation of the other.  The targeting process supports 
planning by providing comma nders and planners with a methodology, direct access, and 
detailed information concerning targets as ex pressed within the commander’s objectives, 
guidance, and intent.  Special operations targ eting is accomplished in both deliberate and 
crisis action planning.  It is founded in join t targeting principles but has many unique and 
SOF-specific products and processes. 
For additional information, see JP 3-05, Special Operations. 

Component Targeting Processes 
C-7 
5.  Nuclear Targeting 
Nuclear targeting and mission planning are interrelated functions and processes; neither 
is accomplished in isolation of the other.  The targeting process supports planning by 
providing commanders and planners with a methodology, direct access, and detailed 
information concerning targets as expressed within the commander’s objectives, guidance, 
and intent.  Nuclear targeting is accomplished in both deliberate and crisis action planning. 
6.  Integration of Electronic Warfare in Joint Targeting 
Electronic warfare activities conducted in joint operations should be coordinated through 
JFC’s electronic warfare staff or joint electroni c warfare cell (if established). These staffs 
should integrate their efforts into the JFC’s targeting cycle to coordinate nonlethal and lethal 
fires in strike operations. 
For more information, see JP 3-13.1, Electronic Warfare. 
7.  Integration of Cyberspace Operations in Joint Targeting 
Cyberspace targeting is conducted by JFCs with the mission and au thority to create 
offensive effects in or through cyberspace after having deconflic ted them with the 
commander, USCYBERCOM in accordance with current policy.  Targeting for cyberspace 
generally follows the processes and procedures  used for traditional targeting but must 
account for the unique nature of cyberspace as compared to the traditional physical domains 
and the unique requirements for matching cyberspace capabilities to targets in cyberspace.  
USCYBERCOM does much of this targeting work  and develops target s in support of its 
organic planning efforts and as recommendations for the integration of cyberspace targeting 
efforts with the combatant commands.  
For more information, see JP 3-12, Cyberspace Operations.  
8.  Integration of Information Operations in Joint Targeting 
a.  IO is the integrated employment duri ng military operations of information-related 
capabilities in concert with other lines of operation to influence, disrupt, corrupt, or usurp the 
decision making of adversaries and potential adversaries while protecting our own.  IO can 
be employed as a means of target engagement  and may be conducted at all levels from 
tactical through national strategic.  IO planners consider all instruments of the adversary’s 
national power to determine how best to achieve stated objectives by affecting information 
and information systems.  Successful integration of information-related capabilities into the 
targeting process is fundamental to the success of the campaign.  IO may call for targeting 
adversary human decision processes (human factors), information, and information systems 
used to support decision making or adversary morale with a variety of lethal and nonlethal 
means.  The selection of IO actions should be consistent with national objectives, applicable 
international conventions, ROE, and other guidance. 
b.  The joint force IO cell is another source for target requirements and should be closely 
integrated to deconflict redundant targeting, consider intelligence gain versus loss 

Appendix C 
C-8 JP 3-60 
assessments, and provide inputs to the RTL and NSL.  IO planners will coordinate and 
integrate IO at all levels.  Most destructive IO attacks will either support or be considered 
strategic attacks or interdiction operations. Th erefore, planners, operators, and targeteers 
should carefully consider prospective IO ta rget nominations when making apportionment 
decisions. 
For further information, see JP 3-13, Information Operations. 
9.  Joint Targeting Process within Deliberate and Crisis Action Planning 
Deliberate and crisis action planning are the mechanisms with which a JFC translates 
national military objectives into a viable COA that is supported by detailed planning.  This is 
the context within which the joint targeting process occurs.  Despite the outward differences, 
deliberate and crisis action planning are esse ntially the same processes completed under 
different circumstances.  Joint targeting rema ins the same within these processes, with 
shifting emphasis based upon the situation. 
For further information, see JP 5-0, Joint Operations Planning. 
10.  Monitoring and Coordinating Target Execution 
a.  Target Awareness.  The operation center director, located at JIOC, JOC, and/or 
component command centers, monitors the execution of current operations and maintains SA 
of planned, executed, and emerging (especially time-sensitive) targets. 
(1)  Starting with the current OPORD and the JIPTL (or other prioritized target list), 
the operation center director must have knowledge of each target, its importance, when it is 
scheduled for engagement, the responsible component, the asset, and the desired outcome.  
The operation center director should also ha ve knowledge of target  vulnerability and 
susceptibility to various joint force capabilities. 
(2)  The knowledge required above enables the operation center director to better 
understand the significance of a report indicating that an engagement on a particular target 
has been unsuccessful or of a report of a newly located priority target.  In the latter situation, 
the operation center director should recommend to the commander whether the new target 
would require actions at the expense of another one already scheduled for engagement.  This 
advice should also analyze the impact on frie ndly operations (including consequences for 
taking no action versus the impact on ongoing and planned joint force actions).  Decisions to 
modify missions or direct a ttacks that deviate from the OP ORD should be based on the 
commander’s guidance, the theater strategy,  and the campaign objectives to be 
accomplished.  These decisions normally can only be made with an understanding of 
priorities of each component’s targeting efforts throughout the operation. 
b.  Emerging Targets.  The operation center director  should know what forces are 
available for tasking, as well as their capabilities to engage an emerging target (e.g., on-call 
target, target of opportunity, or TST).  They should also understand joint fires and how joint 
fire support and joint operations are integr ated.  As shortfalls develop, component 
commanders normally prioritize th e weight of effort, recons ider the adequacy of the 

Component Targeting Processes 
C-9 
CONOPS or, if the new target or mission is of sufficient priority, request or direct diversion 
of committed assets.  During this proce ss, the commanders normally depend upon the 
operation center director to provide recommendations as to the most appropriate force and/or 
weapon system as well as the best targets to defer.  For example, when the current operations 
center becomes aware of a newly located tactical  surface-to-air threat in the vicinity of a 
close air support mission, the operation center director may determine that an available Army 
tactical missile system is the most effective and responsive asset to engage that target.  To 
provide these inputs to the commanders, the operation center director must be familiar with 
weapons effects and specific weapons support requirements, as well as deconfliction 
requirements between systems to prevent friendly fire. 
(1)  Weapons System Capabilities.  The operation center director monitors 
ongoing operations and normally selects the best available joint force capability to apply 
against emerging targets.  The operation center director must also have an understanding of 
the weapons capabilities of a ll joint force components, to include nonlethal assets.  The 
operation center director should normally understand the capabilities of delivery platforms.  
For example, the B-52 may be the most capable aerial platform for delivering land and sea 
mines, while the Tomahawk land attack missile may be the best weapon for engaging early 
warning sites. 
(2)  Support Requirements.  In addition to knowing what constitutes the best 
available weapons to apply against an emerging target, the operation center director should 
understand the support requirements to deliver the fires of choice on the target.  Support 
requirements include not only such joint force capabilities as suppression of enemy air 
defenses and refueling, but also how much time is required to change a direct fire mission or 
ordnance load. 

Appendix C 
C-10 JP 3-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank

D-1 
APPENDIX D 
THE TARGETING ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
1.  The Purpose of Assessment 
a.  Assessment is used to measure progr ess of the joint force toward mission 
accomplishment.  Commanders continuously a ssess the operational environment and the 
progress of operations, and compare them to their initial vision and intent.  Commanders 
adjust operations based on their assessment to ensure tasks are completed, effects created, 
objectives achieved, and the desired end state reached.  The assessment process is continuous 
and directly tied to the commander’s deci sions throughout planni ng, preparation, and 
execution of operations.  Staffs monitor key factors that can influence operations and provide 
the commander timely information needed for decisions.  The assessment process helps the 
commander and staff decide what and how to  measure to determine progress toward 
accomplishing a task, creating an effect, or achieving an objective.  Commanders and their 
staffs determine relevant assessment actions and measures during planning.  They consider 
assessment measures as early as mission analysis, and include assessment measures and 
related guidance in commander and staff estimates.  They use assessment considerations to 
help guide operational design because these considerations can affect the sequence and type 
of actions along lines of operations.  Phase 6 (Targeting Assessment) is a continuous process 
that measures the overall effectiveness of employing joint force targeting capabilities during 
military operations.  It supports the commander’s decisions within the joint targeting cycle 
and contributes to the overall operation or campaign assessment process.  
b.  During execution, commanders continually monitor progress toward accomplishing 
tasks, creating effects, and achieving objectiv es.  Assessment actions and measures help 
commanders adjust operations and resources as required and make other decisions to ensure 
current and future operations remain aligne d with the mission and desired end state.  
Normally, the joint force J-3, assisted by the J-2, is responsible for coordinating assessment 
activities at the JFC’s level.  Various elements of the JFC’s staff use assessment results to 
adjust both current operations and future planning. 
c.  During conflict, the US will use all instruments of its national power against the full 
spectrum of adversary systems—political, military, economic, social, infrastructure, 
information, and others.  Organizationally diverse, yet operationally interconnected, 
instruments of national power must be sync hronized to achieve the desired objectives.   
Assessment must parallel this multidimensional approach.  Friendly, adversary, and neutral 
diplomatic, informational, and economic actions applied in the operational environment can 
impact military actions and objectives.  C onversely, military actions will influence the 
employment and effects of diplomatic, informational, and economic instruments of national 
power in the operational environment (see Fi gure D-1).  The commander should plan to 
assess the results of these actions.  This typically requires collaboration with other agencies 
such as elements from DOS or the Department of Homeland Security, national intelligence 
agencies, multinational partners, intelligence  sources, and other combatant commands to 
generate a complete and accurate assessment. 

Appendix D 
D-2 JP 3-60 
d.  Continual Reassessment.   Commanders and staffs de rive relevant assessment 
measures during the planning process and reevaluate them c ontinuously throughout 
preparation and execution.  They consider assessment measures during mission analysis, 
refine these measures in the JFC’s initial planning guidance and in commander and staff’s 
estimates, wargame the measures during COA development, and include MOEs and MOPs 
in the approved plan or order. 
2.  Assessment and the Levels of War 
a.  Assessment occurs at all levels and across the range of military operations.  Even 
in operations that do not include combat, assessment of progress is just as important and can 
be more complex than traditional CAs.  As a general rule, the level at which a specific 
operation, task, or action is directed should be the level at which such activity is assessed and 
the appropriate level commander should be responsible for assessing it, if possible.  To do 
this, JFCs and their staffs consider assessment ways, means, and measures during planning, 
preparation, and execution.  This properly focuses assessment and collection at each level, 
 
Figure D-1.  The Interconnected Operational Environment 
The Interconnected Operational Environment
Operational 
Center of Gravity
Node
Link
Strategic Center 
of Gravity
Military
Social
Information
Infrastructure
Political
Economic

The Targeting Assessment Process 
D-3 
reduces redundancy, and enhances the efficien cy of the overall assessment process (see 
Figure D-2). 
b.  Operational and Strategic-Level Assessment.  Assessment at the operational and 
strategic levels typically is broader than at the tactical level (e.g., CA) and uses MOEs that 
support strategic and operational mission accomplishment.  Strategic- and operational-level 
assessment efforts concentrate on broader tasks, effects, objectives, and progress toward the 
end state.  In general, assessments should answer two questions:  “Is the joint force doing 
things right?”  “Is the joint force doing the ri ght things?”  The JFC also can use MOEs to 
determine progress toward success in those ope rations for which tactical-level CA ways, 
means, and measures do not ap ply.  Strategic- and operational-level assessment helps the 
JFC adjust planning and execution as necessary, and also provides the President and SecDef 
a way to measure progress toward national-strategic objectives.  
c.  Tactical-Level Assessment.   Tactical-level assessmen t typically uses MOPs to 
measure task accomplishment.  The results of tactical tasks are often physical in nature, but 
also can reflect the impact on specific functions and systems.  Tactical-level assessment may 
include assessing progress by phase lines; destruction of enemy forces; control of key terrain, 
people, or resources; and security or reconstr uction tasks.  Assessment of results at the 
tactical level helps commanders determine operational and strategic progress, so JFCs must 
have a comprehensive, integrated assessmen t plan that links assessment activities and 
measures at all levels. 
 
Figure D-2.  Assessment Levels and Measures 
Assessment Levels and Measures
End state and 
objectives
End state and mission
Objectives
Effects
Tasks
Mission
Objectives
Effects
Tasks
Mission
Objectives
Tasks
National
strategic
Theater
strategic
Operational
Tactical
Assessed using measures of
effectiveness 
(Are we ?)doing the right things
Assessed using measures of
performance 
(Are we ?)doing things right
Combat tasks (particularly fires) 
use combat assessment
GuidanceLevels
Battle Damage 
Assessment
Reattack or 
Future Targeting
Munitions 
Effectiveness 
Assessment

Appendix D 
D-4 JP 3-60 
d.  Combat Assessment.  Within the assessment phase is a subcomponent called CA 
that is focused on determining the results of engaging a target with lethal or nonlethal 
capabilities or weapons, and thus, is an impor tant component of joint fires and the joint 
targeting process.  To conduct CA, it is important to fully understand the linkages between 
the targets and the JFC’s objectives, guidance, and desired effects.  CA is composed of 
three related elements: BDA, MEA, and reattack recommendations or future targeting.   
(1)  Battle Damage Assessment.  BDA is an element of CA and is the estimate of 
target damage or effect which is based on physical damage assessment, change assessment, 
and functional damage assessment, as well as target system assessment, resulting from the 
application of lethal and nonlet hal capabilities.  BDA must be treated as an integral 
component of the joint targeting process and must not be conducted as a separate, post-attack 
activity. BDA planning should occur early in  the joint targeting cycle to improve 
effectiveness and timeliness of BDA.  Effective BDA requires a coordinated and integrated 
effort between joint force intelligence and ope rations functions.  BDA is composed of 
physical damage/change assessment, functiona l damage/change assessment, and target 
system assessment, typically taking a three-phased approach to proceed from a micro-level 
examination of the damage or effect inflicte d on a specific target element, to ultimately 
arriving at macro-level conclusions regarding the functional outcomes created in the target 
system.  The three-step analytical process (physical damage/change assessment, functional 
damage assessment, target system assessment) is reported via a three-phased BDA reporting 
process: phase 1, BDA Initial Target A ssessment; phase 2, BDA Supplemental Target 
Assessment; and phase 3, BDA Target System Assessment. 
(a)  BDA Phase I, Physical Damage/Change Assessment 
1.
  A physical damage assessment is an estimate of the quantitative extent 
of physical damage (through munitions blast, fragmentation, or fire damage) to a target 
element based on observed or interpreted dama ge.  Physical damage assessment is the 
physical damage equivalent to change assessment. This post-attack target analysis should be 
a coordinated effort among combat units, component commands, the subordinate joint force, 
the combatant command, primary theater BDA cell, national agencies, supporting 
commands, and the JIOC.  Some representative  sources for data necessary to make a 
physical damage assessment include the AT O or MAAP, mission reports (MISREPs), 
aircraft cockpit video, weapon systems vide o (WSV), visual/verbal reports from ground 
spotters or combat troops, controllers or obser vers, artillery target surveillance reports, 
SIGINT, HUMINT, GEOINT, measurement and signature intelligence (MASINT), technical 
intelligence, or open-source intelligence. 
2.
  Key factors in determining the extent of physical damage are target type 
and size: Was the attacked target/element a piece of equipment or a building or bunker? How 
hard is the target?  How big is the target? 
3.  To quantify physical damage, the assessment is conducted against one 
or more specific aimpoints, usually containing a critical element.  Destruction of an entire 
building may not be required if the stated objective is to destroy a specific portion of the 
building based on the function (critical elemen t) conducted within that section of the 

The Targeting Assessment Process 
D-5 
building.  Assessments of NO DAMAGE or DESTROYED are easily defined and 
understandable.  The difficulty comes in subjective judgment specifying the level of damage 
between these two extremes.  Intermediate damage definitions are dependent on target type 
and the ease of assessing damage.  For example, in buildings, LIGHT, MODERATE, and 
SEVERE damage is determined by the percent of  the target area (building) damaged.  In 
contrast, when assessing armored vehicles, only the DAMAGED category is used.  Likewise, 
runways have more specific categorie s that include CRATERED, CUT, and 
INTERDICTED.  In assessing physical damage, consider whether the enemy may have used 
camouflage, concealment, and deception tech niques to either mini mize or amplify the 
apparent extent of physical damage, obviously distorting the assessment. 
4.
  In determining the level of physic al damage, a confidence level is 
assigned to the assessment.  The three terms used to identify confidence are CONFIRMED, 
PROBABLE, and POSSIBLE.  Detailed informa tion and definitions of these confidence 
levels, along with physical damage definitions for specific target elements, may be found in 
the DIA Battle Damage Assessment (BDA) Quick Guide. 
5.  Collateral damage is also assessed and reported during BDA.  Collateral 
damage is unintentional or incidental injury or damage to persons or objects that would not 
be lawful military targets in the circumstan ces ruling at the time.  Such damage is not 
unlawful so long as it is not excessive in light of the overall military advantage anticipated 
from the attack. 
6.  Initial reports that contribute to physical damage assessment are often 
based primarily on visual observation of the target and usually derived from a single source.  
Further analysis continues with all-source reporting resulting in further supplemental reports.  
Inputs come from aircrew MISREPs and debriefs, WSV, imagery, and other sources.  The 
unit controlling the weapons system, as well as intelligence collection units that can see the 
damage, develop bomb damage assessment reports (BDAREPs).  The command designated 
BDA cell is responsible for collating reports and making the final assessment. 
(b)  BDA Phase II, Functional Damage/Change Assessment 
1.  Functional damage assessment is an estimate of the degradation or 
destruction of the functional/operational capability of a target to perform its intended 
mission.  Functional assessments are inferred fr om the assessed physical damage and all-
source intelligence information.  This assessme nt must include an estimation of the time 
required for recuperation or re placement of the target’s function.  BDA analysts need to 
compare the desired effect for the attack with the current status of the target to determine if 
the targeting effect was created. 
2.
  Functional damage assessment reviews all physical damage 
assessments and amplifies the initial analysis.  A key step in functional damage assessment is 
identifying and establishing the installation’s or target’s critical elements and their 
interconnectivity.  If destroyed, a critical el ement will preclude an installation or system 
from functioning.  Additionally, the targets normal level of operation must be quantified.  If 
it is an industrial target, what  does it produce?  If it is a military installation, what basic 

Appendix D 
D-6 JP 3-60 
purpose does it serve?  Without these pre-att ack assessments, wartime functional damage 
assessments may be inadequately stated.  Ideally, BDA will be performed by, or with, the 
input of the targeteer who originally targeted the facility/equipment. 
3.  An estimate of the recuperation time required for the enemy to repair or 
reconstitute should always be part of a BDAREP.  This time (expressed in hours, days, etc.) 
is an estimate based upon type, degree, and location of the physical damage.  Factors used to 
calculate recuperation times include the avai lability of spares, backup or alternate 
replacement functions, operational tempo, expected duration of hostilities, and the enemy’s 
determination to repair or replace.  This requ ires the integration of theater and national 
source information.  The theater JIOC has access to these sources and provides significant 
support.  SIGINT, GEOINT, and MASINT sources are also useful. 
4.
  Often, BDA analysts have relatively little information by which to 
make a functional damage assessment. Therefore, it is important for analysts to verify that 
the target critical elements were properly identified, that weapons effects were reasonably 
predicted beforehand, and that all available and relevant intelligence information is 
considered in the assessment. It is also important to document the referenced information 
sources and provide a confidence level associated with the assessment. 
5.
  Developing appropriate indicators and collection plans ahead of time is 
crucial to timely assessments, especially if the damage cannot be directly observed.  These 
indicators allow analysts to rapidly identify the critical elements, what sources are capable of 
collecting the required information, best collection time, what specific change in activity the 
sensor should collect, and how this change in  activity determines th e target’s functional 
status.  This facilitates BDA collection plan ning since optimal collection times are more 
easily determined well in advance.  Examples of such indicators and collections plans may 
be found in various DOD agency products, such as the JWAC’s  functional damage 
assessment guides for electric power industry, lines of communications, POL industry, and 
telecommunications networks. 
(c)  BDA Phase III, Functional Assessment of the Higher-Level Target 
System 
1.
  Functional assessment of the highe r-level target system is a broad 
assessment of the overall impact on an adversar y target system relative to the targeting 
objectives established.  These assessments may be conducted at the combatant command or 
national-level by fusing all phases I and II BDA reporting on targets within a target system. 
2.  BDA phase III produces a target system assessment for the theater of 
operations.  SMEs compile the functional dama ge assessments of the individual targets 
within a system and apply it to the current system analysis or enemy order of battle.  
Although different weapons are involved, the pr ocess described above applies to BDA of 
targets attacked with nonlethal fires as we ll.  SIGINT will often be the most capable 
collection asset for determining the actual functional damage to the target in these cases.  

The Targeting Assessment Process 
D-7 
(d)  Federated BDA.  Federated BDA allows the supported CCDR to establish 
preplanned partnerships to sh are responsibilities and leverage  appropriate expertise from 
outside the theater.  The CCDR may reque st federated BDA support from multiple 
commands and agencies through JS J-2.  Upon approval, each agency in the partnership will 
be assigned specific targets, either by indi vidual target sets/categories or by geographic 
region.  JS J-2 will work with the requesting command to form the best federated partnership 
based on available resources and capabilities.  
(e)  BDA Reports.  The results of the BDA pr ocess are provided in three 
phases of BDAREPs: 
1.  Phase I reporting contains an initial physical damage assessment of hit 
or miss based usually upon single source data.  Reporting timeline: 1-2 hours after receipt of 
information.  Reporting format: structured free text, United States message text format 
(USMTF), or voice report during system connectivity problems. 
2.  Phase II reporting builds upon the phase I initial report and is a fused, 
all-source product addressing a more detailed description of physical damage, an assessment 
of the functional damage, inputs to target system assessment (phase III), and any applicable 
MEA comments.  When appropriate, a reattack recommendation is also included.  Reporting 
timeline: 4-6 hours after receipt of information.  Reporting format: USMTF. 
3.  Phase III reporting contains an in-depth assessment of the higher-level 
target system.  When appropriate, a reattack recommendation or targeting nomination is also 
included.  This report combines the analyses from the phases I and II reports, plus all-source 
information.  Reporting timeline: daily.  Reporting format: structured free text (if sent via 
USMTF, use the general free text narrative format). 
(2)  Munitions Effectiveness Assessment.  MEA is an element of CA as the 
assessment of the military force applied in terms of the weapons system and munitions 
effectiveness to determine and recommend any required changes to the methodology, tactics, 
weapon system, munitions, fusing, and/or weapon  delivery parameters to increase force 
effectiveness.  The purpose of MEA is to compare the actual effectiveness of the task to the 
anticipated effectiveness calculated during phase 3 capability analysis of the joint targeting 
cycle.  MEA is conducted concurrently and interactively with BDA.  MEA is primarily the 
responsibility of operations with required inputs and coordination from the IC.  The purpose 
of MEA is to compare the actual effectiveness of the means employed to their anticipated 
effectiveness calculated during the capability an alysis phase of the joint targeting cycle.  
MEA may be completed rapidly for the purpose of providing recommendations for a weapon 
or tactic change or may continue for years following the cessation of hostilities for 
development of updated/improved weaponeering methodologies.  The sources that contribute 
to effective BDA also contribute to effective MEA. 
(3)  Future Targeting and  Reattack Recommendations.  Future target 
nominations and reattack recommendations merge the picture of what was done (BDA) with 
how it was done (MEA) and compares the resu lt with predetermined MOEs that were 
developed at the start of the joint targeting cycle.  The purposes of this phase in the process 

Appendix D 
D-8 JP 3-60 
are to determine degree of success in achievi ng objectives and to formulate any required 
follow-up actions, or to indicate readiness to move on to new tasks in the path to achieving 
the overall JFC objectives. 
(4)  BDA requires more than post-strike imagery.  Although in some situations a 
single data source may be adequate to perform BDA, in most cases, the use of “all-source” 
information is critical to providing accura te BDA.  The following sources assist in 
conducting comprehensive BDA: 
(a)  GEOINT, including tactical and/or unmanned aerial vehicle platforms.  
(b)  In-flight reports and MISREPs containing both executed ATO and pilot 
BDA.  
(c)  Aircraft/weapon system video and/or data.  
(d)  SIGINT.  
(e)  HUMINT, to include direct re porting by forward air/ground observers, 
tactical air control parties, SOF, etc.  
(f)  MASINT.  
(g)  Open source intelligence.  
(h)  End of MISREPs for surface-to-surface fires. 
(i)  Indigo reports for cruise missiles. 
(j)  Technical intelligence. 
(k)  Counterintelligence. 
For additional information on the BDA process, see DIA  publications DI-2820-4-03, Battle 
Damage Assessment (BDA) Quick Guide, and DI 2800-2-YR, Critical Elements of Selected 
Generic Installations (Critical Elements Handbook). 
e.  Estimated Assessments.  The current CA process relies on phased BDA analysis to 
assess combat effectiveness.  If no data is available for a target, the assessment is usually left 
blank or unknown.  Based on the BDA scenario and commander’s guidance, analysts may 
try to provide a prediction of the estimated damage for both individua l targets and target 
systems based on the initial predictions as place  holders for the probabilities of success, a 
process facilitated by the precision and reliability of many modern weapon systems.  As the 
operation is executed, the predictions for individual target elements are updated continually 
with the latest available information on the action taken.  Such updates might be final, 
definitive BDA or it may be information, whic h, while not definitive, helps refine the 
estimate (e.g., confirmation that a joint direct attack munitions successfully dropped through 
the clouds on the programmed coordinates).  Combining latest information on individual 

The Targeting Assessment Process 
D-9 
target elements means an assessment cell can provide an estimate of success refined with the 
latest available information.  As more defi nitive data becomes available, the assessment 
becomes less of an estimate and more of an  actual assessment of what was or was not 
achieved. 
(1)  The overall goal of this approach is to provide the JFC with the best estimated 
assessment of the progress of the joint operation at any given time, using all information 
available at that time.  For lethal strikes, this means using assessed effects where BDA is 
available.  It then predicts the effects for strikes where BDA is not yet available.  Such 
predictions should be based on historical data on strike performance and analyses of likely 
success given the specific planned weapon/targ et pairings (e.g., JMEM data).  Finally, 
assessors should continuously refine effects predictions based on the success of intermediate 
steps in the execution chain.  This means, even where final BDA is not available for a given 
strike, assessors should update the prediction of likely strike success as soon as it is known 
whether the planned task was actually perfor med, update again as soon as it is known 
whether the weapon successfully  released or launched, and update again as soon as it is 
known whether the weapon successfully guided to or engaged the target. 
(2)  A key aspect of this approach is that it suggests a need for a smooth transition 
between assessing a plan prior to execution, when only predictions are available, to assessing 
a plan in the midst of execu tion, when partial BDA inform ation is available, through 
assessing success at the end of an operation approaching full BDA availability.  Estimation 
can also facilitate undertaking higher level assessments of more complicated, interdependent 
systems. 
(3)  Estimating higher level effects based on estimates of what happens at specific 
target elements has advantages and limitati ons.  A key advantage is that, by using the 
approach discussed earlier, assessors will ha ve a basis for estimating what happens at 
specific target elements.  This estimate will  be based on a combination of prediction and, 
when available, execution data.  These estimated effects on specific target elements can then 
serve as the input to the model of the target system in estimating system level effects.  A key 
limitation is that the fidelity of the estimate diminishes the further one gets from the initial, 
direct effects of the action or task accomplishment. 
3.  Assessment Metrics and Measurements 
a.  Assessment Metrics.  The staff should develop metrics to determine if operations are 
properly linked to the JFC’s overall strategy an d the larger hierarchy of operational and 
national objectives.  These metrics evaluate th e results achieved during joint operations.  
During target development, personnel should develop metrics for each specific target.  These 
metrics should indicate the intended effects(s) on the target as a result of actions(s) against it.  
Example: Destruction of Critical Node 1 will degrade Target A by at least 50 percent.  These 
metrics may be refined during the weaponeering process, as the choice of weapons, fuzes, 
and delivery tactics may further influence effects.  These metrics should be posted in an ETF 
or provided in another format to the assessment team prior to post-strike assessment, so they 
can measure the intended performance against the target.  Metrics can either be objective 
(using sensors or personnel to directly observe damage inflicted) or subjective (using indirect 

Appendix D 
D-10 JP 3-60 
means to ascertain results), depending on the metric applied to either the objective or task.  
Both qualitative and quantitative metrics s hould be used to avoid unsound or distorted 
results.  Metrics can either be inductive (directly observing the operational environment and 
building SA cumulatively) or deductive (extrapolated from what was previously known of 
the adversary and operational environment).  Success is measured by indications that the 
effects created are influencing enemy, friendl y, and/or neutral activity in desired ways 
among various target systems. 
b.  Measurement Types.  The assessment process uses MOPs and MOEs to evaluate 
progress toward task accomplishment, effects creation, and objective achievement.  Well-
devised measures can help the commanders and staffs understand the causal relationship 
between specific tasks and desired effects.  
For more information on MOEs and MOPs, see Appendix D, “Assessment,” of JP 5-0, Joint 
Operation Planning.  
4.  Post-Combat Assessment 
a.  The joint targeting cycle does not end when  combat operations  cease.  Following 
combat operations, the JFC should collect all available information that feeds both BDA and 
MEA analysis.  This data collection effort is essential to:  
(1)  Evaluate the full extent of target physical and functional damage.  
(2)  Determine the true effectiveness of employed delivery systems and munitions. 
(3)  Critique and improve the assessment analysis and reporting process.  
b.  Although there are many different types of  data to collect for follow-on analyses, 
generally they can be grouped into the area s of operational data, intelligence information, 
and MEA exploitation.  Collection of operatio nal or mission-specific data includes all 
executed mission type orders (to include all executed ATOs), all MISREPs, and copies of 
aircraft or WSV at a minimum.  Information to collect includes both national and tactical 
intelligence gathered during the operations, as  well as continued post-conflict damage 
assessment and analysis of reconstruction activities. 
c.  The optimal method to analyze muniti ons effects is to deploy MEA exploitation 
teams (engineers, tacticians, and intelligence analysts) to conduct on-site analyses of damage 
from the ground-level perspective.  The goal of these operations is to bridge the knowledge 
gap existing between the levels of damage/change observed through sensors and the actual 
physical and functional damage/change accomplis hed to the adversary targets and target 
systems.  Due to the perishable nature of critical data at targeted sites, planning for ground 
truth exploitation needs to be fully integrated in OPLANs and in OPLANs in concept format 
for immediate execution following combat operations.  If feasible, initial exploitation could 
be accomplished during operations by ground forces. 
 

E-1 
APPENDIX E 
REFERENCES 
The development of JP 3-60 is based upon the following primary sources.  
1.  General 
Geneva Conventions. 
2.  Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Publications  
a.  CJCSI 3121.01B, Standing Rules of Engagement/Standing Rules for the Use of Force 
for US Forces (U).  
b.  CJCSI 3122.06C, Sensitive Target Approval and Review (STAR) Process (U).  
c.  CJCSI 3160.01, No Strike and the Collateral Damage Estimation Methodology (U).  
d.  CJCSI 3370.01, Target Development Standards (U).  
e.  CJCSI 3505.01A, Target Coordinate Mensurati on Certification and Program 
Accreditation (U).  
f.  JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States. 
g.  JP 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. 
h.  JP 1-04, Legal Support to Military Operations. 
i.  JP 2-0, Joint Intelligence. 
j.  JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations. 
k.  JP 2-01.3, Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment. 
l.  JP 2-03, Geospatial Intelligence Support to Joint Operations. 
m.  JP 3-0, Joint Operations. 
n.  JP 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats. 
o.  JP 3-02, Amphibious Operations. 
p.  JP 3-03, Joint Interdiction. 
q.  JP 3-05, Special Operations. 
r.  JP 3-05.1, Joint Special Operations Task Force Operations. 

Appendix E 
E-2 JP 3-60 
s.  JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support. 
t.  JP 3-09.3, Close Air Support. 
u.  JP 3-12, Cyberspace Operations. 
v.  JP 3-13, Information Operations. 
w.  JP 3-13.1, Electronic Warfare. 
x.  JP 3-13.2, Military Information Support Operations.  
y.  JP 3-13.4, Military Deception. 
z.  JP 3-14, Space Operations. 
aa.  JP 3-30, Command and Control for Joint Air Operations. 
bb.  JP 3-31, Command and Control for Joint Land Operations. 
cc.  JP 3-32, Command and Control for Joint Maritime Operations. 
dd.  JP 3-33, Joint Task Force Headquarters. 
ee.  JP 3-40, Combating Weapons of Mass Destruction.  
ff.  JP 3-52, Joint Airspace Control. 
gg.  JP 4-0, Joint Logistics. 
hh.  JP 5-0, Joint Operation Planning. 
3.  Multi-Service Publications 
a.  FM 3-09.34/MCRP 3-25H/NTTP 3-09.2.1/AFTTP(I) 3-2.59, Multi-Service 
Procedures for Killbox Employment. 
b.  ATP-3-60.1/MCRP 3-16D/NTTP 3-60.1/AFTTP 3-2.3, Multi-Service Tactics, 
Techniques, and Procedures for Dynamic Targeting. 
4.  Service Publications 
a.  Army Doctrine Publication 3-0, Unified Land Operations. 
b.  FM 3-09, Doctrine for Fire Support. 
c.  ATP 3-60.1, Dynamic Targeting.  
d.  FM 3-93, Theater Army Operations. 

References 
E-3 
e.  NTTP 3-03.1, Volume 1, Tomahawk Land Attack Missile (TLAM-C/D/E) Employment 
Manual. 
f.  NTTP 3-03.1, Volume 2, Tomahawk Land Attack Missile (TLAM) Launch Platform 
Weapons Systems and Tactics.  
g.  NTTP 3-13.1, Theater and Campaign Information Operations.  
h.  Navy Warfare Publication (NWP) 3-03.4, Naval Strike and Air Warfare. 
i.  NWP 3-01.1, Naval Strike and Fires Support.  
j.  Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 1, Air Force Basic Doctrine , Organization 
and Command. 
k.  AFDD 3-03, Counterland. 
l.  AFDD 3-1, Air Warfare. 
m.  AFDD 3-60, Targeting. 
n.  AFDD 3-70, Strategic Attack. 
o.  Air Force Instruction 13-1AOC, Vol. 3, Operational Procedures—Air Operations 
Center. 
p.  AFTTP 3-3 AOC, Operational Employment of Air Operations Center. 
q.  Naval Warfare Development Command  Technical Manual  3-03.1-11, Maritime 
Dynamic Targeting.  
 

Appendix E 
E-4 JP 3-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank

F-1 
APPENDIX F 
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTIONS 
1.  User Comments 
Users in the field are highly encouraged to submit comments on this publication to: Joint 
Staff J-7, Deputy Director, Joint and Coalition Warfighting, Joint and Coalition Warfighting 
Center, ATTN: Joint Doctrine Support Di vision, 116 Lake View Parkway, Suffolk, VA 
23435-2697.  These comments should address content (accuracy, usefulness, consistency, 
and organization), writing, and appearance. 
2.  Authorship 
The lead agent for this publication is the US Air Force.  The JS doctrine sponsor for this 
publication is the J-3. 
3.  Supersession 
This publication supersedes JP 3-60, 13 April 2007, Joint Targeting. 
4.  Change Recommendations 
a.  Recommendations for urgent changes to this publication should be submitted: 
TO:  JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC//J7-JEDD// 
b.  Routine changes should be submitted electronically to the Deputy Director, Joint and 
Coalition Warfighting, Joint and Coalition Warfighting Center, Joint Doctrine Support 
Division, and info the lead agent and the Director for Joint Force Development, J-7/JEDD. 
c.  When a JS directorate submits a proposal  to the CJCS that would change source 
document information reflected in this publication, that directorate will include a proposed 
change to this publication as an enclosure to its proposal.  Th e Services and other 
organizations are requested to notify the JS J-7 when changes to source documents reflected 
in this publication are initiated. 
5.  Distribution of Publications 
Local reproduction is authorized, and access to unclassified publications is unrestricted.  
However, access to and reproduction authoriz ation for classified JPs must be IAW DOD 
Manual 5200.01, Volume 1, DOD Information Security Program: Overview, Classification, 
and Declassification, and DOD Manual 5200.01, Volume 3, DOD Information Security 
Program: Protection of Classified Information. 

Appendix F 
F-2 JP 3-60 
6.  Distribution of Electronic Publications 
a.  JS J-7 will not print copies of JPs for distribution.  Electronic versions are available 
on JDEIS at https://jdeis.js.mil (NIPRNET) and http://jdeis.js.smil.mil (SIPRNET), and on 
the JEL at http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine (NIPRNET). 
b.  Only approved JPs and joint test publications are releasable outside the combatant 
commands, Services, and JS.  Release of any classified JP to foreign governments or foreign 
nationals must be requested through the loca l embassy (Defense Attaché Office) to DIA, 
Defense Foreign Liaison/IE-3, 200 MacD ill Blvd., Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling, 
Washington, DC 20340-5100. 
c.  JEL CD-ROM.  Upon request of a joint doctrine development community member, 
the JS J-7 will produce and deliver one CD-ROM with current JPs.  This JEL CD-ROM will 
be updated not less than semi-annually and when received can be locally reproduced for use 
within the combatant commands and Services. 
 

GL-1 
GLOSSARY 
PART I—ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AFDD Air Force doctrine document 
AFTTP(I) Air Force tactics, techniques, and procedures (instruction) 
AOD air operations directive 
ATI asset target interaction 
ATO air tasking order 
ATP Army tactical publication 
 
BDA battle damage assessment  
BDAREP bomb damage assessment report 
BE basic encyclopedia  
C2 command and control  
CA combat assessment  
CCDR combatant commander 
CDE collateral damage estimation 
CDRUSSTRATCOM Commander, Unite d States Strategic Command 
CIA Central Intelligence Agency  
CID combat identification 
CJCS Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
CJCSI Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff instruction 
COA course of action 
COG center of gravity 
CONOPS concept of operations 
COP common operational picture  
CTL candidate target list 
D3A decide, detect, deliver, and assess  
DIA Defense Intelligence Agency  
DOD Department of Defense 
DOE Department of Energy 
DOS Department of State  
DTRA Defense Threat Reduction Agency 
ETF electronic target folder 
F2T2EA find, fix, track, target, engage, and assess 
FM field manual (Army) 
FSCM fire support coordination measure 
GEOINT geospatial intelligence 
HPT high-payoff target 
HUMINT human intelligence  
HVT high-value target 

Glossary 
GL-2 JP 3-60 
IC intelligence community 
INR Bureau of Intelligence and Research (DOS) 
IO information operations  
ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance  
J-2 intelligence directorate of a joint staff 
J-3 operations directorat e of a joint staff  
J-4 logistics directorate of a joint staff  
J-5 plans directorate of a joint staff  
JAOC joint air operations center  
JDPI joint desired point of impact 
JFACC joint force air component commander  
JFC joint force commander 
JFCC-GS Joint Functional Component Command for Global Strike 
JFCC-ISR Joint Functional Compon ent Command for Intelligence, 
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (USSTRATCOM) 
JFCC-Space Joint Functional Component Command for Space 
(USSTRATCOM) 
JFE joint fires element 
JIOC joint intelligence operations center 
JIOWC Joint Information Operations Warfare Center 
JIPOE joint intelligence preparation of the operational 
environment 
JIPTL joint integrated prioritized target list 
JISE joint intellig ence support element 
JMEM Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual 
JOC joint operations center 
JOPP joint operation planning process  
JP joint publication 
JPG joint planning group 
JS the Joint Staff 
JTCB joint targeti ng coordination board 
JTCG/ME Joint Technical Coordinating Group for Munitions 
Effectiveness  
JTL joint target list  
JTWG joint targeting working group 
JWAC Joint Warfare Analysis Center  
MAAP master air attack plan  
MASINT measurement and signature intelligence 
MCRP Marine Corps reference publication 
MEA munitions effectiveness assessment  
MIDB modernized integrated database 
MISREP mission report 
MOE measure of effectiveness  
MOP measure of performance 

Glossary 
GL-3 
NGA National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency 
NIST national intelligence support team  
NJOIC National Joint Operations and Intelligence Center 
NRO National Reconnaissance Office 
NSA National Security Agency  
NSL no-strike list  
NTTP Navy tactics, tec hniques, and procedures 
NWP Navy warfare publication 
 
OA operational area 
OPLAN operation plan  
OPORD operation order  
PA probability of arrival 
PD probability of damage 
PID positive identification 
PIR priority intelligence requirement  
POL petroleum, oils, and lubricants 
POW prisoner of war 
ROE rules of engagement 
RTL restricted target list  
SA situational awareness 
SCC-WMD United States Strategic Command Center for Combating 
Weapons of Mass Destruction 
SecDef Secretary of Defense  
SIGINT signals intelligence 
SJA staff judge advocate 
SME subject matter expert  
SOF special operations forces 
SROE standing rules of engagement  
STAR sensitive target approval and review  
TDN target development nomination 
TLM target list management 
TM target materials 
TNL target nomination list 
TSA target system analysis  
TST time-sensitive target  
USCYBERCOM United States Cyber Command 
USMTF United States message text format 
USSTRATCOM United States  Strategic Command  
WMD weapons of mass destruction 
WSV weapons system video 

GL-4 
PART II—TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
active defense.  The employment of limited offensive action and counterattacks to deny a 
contested area or position to the enemy.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02 with 
JP 3-60 as the source JP.)  
aimpoint.  1. A point associated with a target and assigned for a specific weapon impact.  2. 
A prominent radar-significant feature used to assist an aircrew in navigating and 
delivering their weapons.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
area target.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.)  
attack pattern.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.)  
attack timing.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.)  
bomb impact plot.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.)  
bullseye.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.)  
candidate target list.  A list of objects or  entities submitted by component commanders, 
appropriate agencies, or the joint force commander’s staff for further development and 
inclusion on the joint target list and/or rest ricted target list, or moved to the no-strike 
list.  Also called CTL.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
center of burst.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
circular error probable.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
collateral damage.  Unintentional or incidental injury or damage to persons or objects that 
would not be lawful military targets in the circumstances ruling at the time.  (Approved 
for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
combat assessment.  The determination of the overall effectiveness of force employment 
during military operations.  Combat assessment is composed of three major 
components: (a) battle damage assessment; (b) munitions effectiveness assessment; and 
(c) reattack recommendation.  Also called CA.   (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
complete round.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
converge.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
crater.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
critical element.  1. An element of an entity or object that enables it to perform its primary 
function.  2. An element of a target, which if effectively engaged, will serve to support 
the achievement of an operational objectiv e and/or mission ta sk.  Also called CE.  
(Approved for inclusion in JP 1-02.) 

Glossary 
GL-5 
cross-targeting (nuclear).  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
damage assessment.   1. The determination of the eff ect of attacks on targets. 2. A 
determination of the effect of a compromi se of classified information on national 
security. (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
damage criteria.  The critical levels of various weapons effects required to create specified 
levels of damage.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
damage estimation.   A preliminary appraisal of the potential effects of an attack.  
(Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02 with JP 3-60 as the source JP.)  
damage expectancy (nuclear).  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
desired mean point of impact.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.)  
desired point of impact.   A precise point, associated with a target and assigned as the 
impact point for a single unitary weapon to  create a desired effect.  Also called DPI.  
(Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)   
direct laying.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
dwell time.  1. The length of time a target is expected to remain in one location.  (JP 3-60)  
2. The period of time between the release from involuntary active and the reporting date 
for a subsequent tour of active duty pursuant to Title 10, United States Code, Section 
12302.  Such time includes any voluntary active duty performed between two periods of 
involuntary active duty pursuant to Title  10, United States Code, Section 12302.  
(DODD 1235.10)  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
dynamic targeting.  Targeting that prosecutes targets identified too late, or not selected for 
action in time to be included in deliberate targeting.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
effective damage.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
end of mission.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
entity.  Within the context of targeting, a term used to describe faci lities, organizations, 
individuals, equipment, or virtual (nontangible) things.  (Approved for inclusion in JP 1-
02.)  
extent of damage.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
field of view.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
functional damage assessment.  The estimate of the effect of military force to degrade or 
destroy the functional or operational capability  of the target to perform its intended 
mission and on the level of success in achie ving operational objectives established 
against the target.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  

Glossary 
GL-6 JP 3-60 
glide bomb.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
ground fire.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
group of targets.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
gun.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
high-payoff target.  A target whose loss to the enemy will significantly contribute to the 
success of the friendly course of action.  Also called HPT.  (Approved for incorporation 
into JP 1-02.)  
high-payoff target list.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
high-value target.  A target the enemy commander requires for the successful completion of 
the mission.  Also called HVT.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
impact area.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
indirect fire.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
joint desired point of impact.  A unique, alpha-numeric coded precise aimpoint associated 
with a target to achieve an explicit w eaponeering objective, and identified by a three 
dimensional (latitude, longitude, elevation) mensurated coordinate.  Also called a JDPI.  
(Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
joint fires element.   An optional staff element that provides recommendations to the 
operations directorate to accomplish fires pl anning and synchronization.  Also called 
JFE.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
joint integrated prioritized target list.   A prioritized list of targets approved and 
maintained by the joint force commander.  Also called JIPTL.  (Approved for 
incorporation into JP 1-02.)   
joint targeting coordination board.   A group formed by the joint force commander to 
accomplish broad targeting oversight functions that may include but are not limited to 
coordinating targeting information, providing targeting guidance, synchronization, and 
priorities, and refining the joint integrated prioritized target list.  Also called JTCB.  
(Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
joint targeting steering group.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
joint target list.  A consolidated list of selected targets, upon which there are no restrictions 
placed, considered to have military significance in the joint force commander’s 
operational area.  Also called JTL.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
laser illuminator.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
laser-target line.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 

Glossary 
GL-7 
lay.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
loft bombing.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
master air attack plan.  A plan that contains key information that forms the foundation of 
the joint air tasking order.  Also called MAAP.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-
02.)  
maximum effective range.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
mean point of burst.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
mean point of impact.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
mensuration.  The process of measurement of a feature or location on the earth to determine 
an absolute latitude, longitude, and elevation.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-
02.) 
minimum range.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
mortar.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
napalm.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
naval gunfire spotting team.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
neutralization fire.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
no-strike list.  A list of objects or entities characte rized as protected from the effects of 
military operations under international law an d/or rules of engagement.  Also called 
NSL.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
observer-target range.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
on-call target.   Planned target upon which fires or  other actions are determined using 
deliberate targeting and triggered, when detected or located, using dynamic targeting.  
(JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
passive defense.  Measures taken to reduce the probability of and to minimize the effects of 
damage caused by hostile action without the intention of taking the initiative.  
(Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02 with JP 3-60 as the source JP.)  
physical characteristics.  Those military characteristics of equipment that are primarily 
physical in nature.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
physical damage assessment.  The estimate of the quantitative extent of physical damage to 
a target resulting from the application of military force.  (Approved for incorporation 
into JP 1-02.)  

Glossary 
GL-8 JP 3-60 
planned target.  Target that is known to exist in the operational environment, upon which 
actions are planned using deliberate targetin g, creating effects which support 
commander’s objectives. There are two subcategories of planned targets: scheduled and 
on-call.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
precision bombing.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
preparation fire.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
probability of damage.  The probability that damage will occur to a target expressed as a 
percentage or as a decimal.  Also called PD.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02 
with JP 3-60 as the source JP.) 
protected emblems.  The red cross, red crescent, and other symbols that designate that 
persons, places, or equipment so marked have a protected status under the law of war.  
(Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02 with JP 3-60 as the source JP.)  
reattack recommendation.   An assessment, derived from the results of battle damage 
assessment and munitions effectivene ss assessment, providing the commander 
systematic advice on reattack of a target.  Also called RR.  (Approved for incorporation 
into JP 1-02.)  
restricted target.   A valid target that has specific restrictions placed on the actions 
authorized against it due to operational considerations.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
restricted target list.  A list of restricted targets nominated by elements of the joint force 
and approved by the joint force commander or directed by higher authorities.  Also 
called RTL.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
scheduled target.   Planned target upon which fires or other actions are scheduled for 
prosecution at a specified time.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
schedule of targets.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
strategic mission.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
suppression mission.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
suppressive fire.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
target.  1. An entity or object that performs a function for the adversary considered for 
possible engagement or other action.  2. In intelligence usag e, a country, area, 
installation, agency, or person against which intelligence operations are directed.  3. An 
area designated and numbered for future firing. 4. In gunfire support usage, an impact 
burst that hits the target.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)  

Glossary 
GL-9 
target acquisition.  The detection, identification, and location of a target in sufficient detail 
to permit the effective employment of weapons.  Also called TA.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: 
JP 3-60)  
target analysis.  An examination of potential targets to determine military importance, 
priority of attack, and weapons required to  obtain a desired level of damage or 
casualties.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
target array.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
target bearing.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
target complex.  A geographically integrated series of target concentr ations.  (JP 1-02. 
SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
target component.  A set of targets within a target system performing a similar function.  
(JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
target concentration.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
target development.  The systematic examination of potential target systems—and their 
components, individual targets, and even  elements of target s—to determine the 
necessary type and duration of the action that must be exerted on each target to create an 
effect that is consistent with the commander’s specific objectives.  (JP 1-02.  SOURCE: 
JP 3-60) 
targeteer.  An individual who has completed formal targeting training in an established 
Service or joint school and participates in the joint targeting cycle in their current duties.  
(Approved for inclusion in JP 1-02.) 
target folder.  A folder, hardcopy or electronic, containing target intelligence and related 
materials prepared for planning and executing action against a specific target.  (JP 1-02. 
SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
target intelligence.  Intelligence that portrays and loca tes the components of a target or 
target complex and indicates its vulnerabili ty and relative importance.  (JP 1-02. 
SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
target materials.  Graphic, textual, tabular, digital, video, or other presentations of target 
intelligence, primarily designed to support operations against designated targets by one 
or more weapon(s) systems.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.)   
target nomination list.   A prioritized list of targets drawn from the joint target list and 
nominated by component commanders, appr opriate agencies, or the joint force 
commander’s staff for inclusion on the joint in tegrated prioritized target list.  Also 
called TNL.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.) 

Glossary 
GL-10 JP 3-60 
target of opportunity.  1. A target identified too late, or not selected for action in time, to be 
included in deliberate targeting that, when detected or located, meets criteria specific to 
achieving objectives and is processed using dynamic targeting.  2. A target visible to a 
surface or air sensor or observer, which is within range of available weapons and against 
which fire has not been scheduled or requested.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-
02.) 
target overlay.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
target priority.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
target signature.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.)  
target system.  1. All the targets situated in a pa rticular geographic area and functionally 
related.  2. A group of targets that are so related that their destruction will produce some 
particular effect desired by the attacker.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
target system analysis.  An all-source examination of potential target systems to determine 
relevance to stated objectives, military importance, and priority of attack.  Also called 
TSA.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
target system assessment.  The broad assessment of the overall impact and effectiveness of 
the full spectrum of military force applied against the operation of an enemy target 
system, significant subdivisions of the system, or total combat effectiveness relative to 
the operational objectives established.  (Approved for incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
target system component.  A set of targets belonging to one or more groups of industries 
and basic utilities required to produce component parts of an end product, or one type of 
a series of interrelated commodities.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
time-sensitive target.  A joint force commander validated target or set of targets requiring 
immediate response because it is a highly lucrative, fleeting target of opportunity or it 
poses (or will soon pose) a danger to friendly forces.  Also called TST.  (Approved for 
incorporation into JP 1-02.)  
toss bombing.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
unanticipated target.  A target of opportunity that was unknown or not expected to exist in 
the operational environment.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
unplanned target.   A target of opportunity that is known to exist in the operational 
environment.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60)  
validation.  1. A process associated with the collection and production of intelligence that 
confirms that an intelligence collection or production requirement is sufficiently 
important to justify the dedication of intelligence resources, does not duplicate an 
existing requirement, and has not been previ ously satisfied.  (JP 2-01)  2. A part of 
target development that ensures all vetted  targets meet the objectives and criteria 

Glossary 
GL-11 
outlined in the commander’s guidance and ensures compliance with the law of war and 
rules of engagement.  (JP 3-60)  3. In computer modeling and simulation, the process of 
determining the degree to which a model or simulation is an accurate representation of 
the real world from the perspective of the intended uses of the model or simulation.  (JP 
3-35)  4. Execution procedure whereby all the information records in a time-phased 
force and deployment data are confirmed e rror free and accurately reflect the current 
status, attributes, and availability of units and requirements.  (JP 3-35)  (Approved for 
incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
vetting.  A part of target development that  assesses the accuracy  of the supporting 
intelligence to targeting.  (JP 1-02. SOURCE: JP 3-60) 
vulnerability.  1. The susceptibility of a nation or military force to any action by any means 
through which its war potential or combat eff ectiveness may be reduced or its will to 
fight diminished.  (JP 3-01)  2. The characteristics of a system that cause it to suffer a 
definite degradation (incapability to perf orm the designated mission) as a result of 
having been subjected to a certain level of effects in an unnatural (man-made) hostile 
environment.  (JP 3-60)  3. In information operations, a weakness in information system 
security design, procedures, implementation, or internal controls that could be exploited 
to gain unauthorized access to informati on or an information system.  (JP 1-02. 
SOURCE: JP 3-13)  
vulnerable node.  None.  (Approved for removal from JP 1-02.) 
weaponeer.  An individual who has completed requisite training to determine the quantity 
and type of lethal or nonlethal means requi red to create a desi red effect on a given 
target.  (Approved for inclusion in JP 1-02.) 
weaponeering.  The process of determining the quant ity of a specific type of lethal or 
nonlethal means required to create a desire d effect on a given target.  (Approved for 
incorporation into JP 1-02.) 
 

Glossary 
GL-12 JP 3-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intentionally Blank 

Maintenance
Approval Development
Initiation
JOINT
DOCTRINE
PUBLICATION
ENHANCED
JOINT
WARFIGHTING
CAPABILITY
STEP #3 - Approval STEP #2 - Development
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
JSDS delivers adjudicated matrix to JS J-7
JS J-7 prepares publication for signature
JSDS prepares JS staffing package
JSDS staffs the publication via JSAP for
signature
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
LA selects primary review authority (PRA) to develop the first
draft (FD)
PRA develops FD for staffing with JDDC
FD comment matrix adjudication
JS J-7 produces the final coordination (FC) draft, staffs to
JDDC and JS via Joint Staff Action Processing (JSAP) system
J adjudicates FC comment
matrix
FC joint working group
oint Staff doctrine sponsor (JSDS)
STEP #4 - Maintenance
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
JP published and continuously
assessed by users
Formal assessment begins
24-27 months following
publication
Revision begins 3.5 years
after publication
Each JP revision is completed
no later than 5 years after
signature
STEP #1 - Initiation
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
/c108
Joint doctrine development
community (JDDC) submission to fill
extant operational void
Joint Staff (JS) J-7 conducts front-
end analysis
Joint Doctrine Planning Conference
validation
Program directive (PD) development
and staffing/joint working group
PD includes scope, references,
outline, milestones, and draft
authorship
JS J-7 approves and releases PD to
lead agent (LA) (Service, combatant
command, JS directorate)
JOINT DOCTRINE PUBLICATIONS HIERARCHY
JOINT
DOCTRINE
JP 1
LOGISTICS COMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMPLANSOPERATIONSPERSONNEL INTELLIGENCE
JP 1-0 JP 2-0 JP 3-0 JP 4-0 JP 5-0 JP 6-0
OPERATIONS
JP 3-0
All joint publications are organized into a comprehensive hierarchy as shown in the chart above.
is in the series of joint doctrine publications. The diagram below
illustrates an overview of the development process:
Joint
Publication (JP) 3-60 Operations

