B-21 Raider | Northrop Grumman
B-21 RAIDER
World’s first sixth-generation aircraft.
B-21 RAIDER
THE FUTURE OF U.S. AIR POWER
When it comes to delivering America’s resolve, the B-21 Raider will be standing by, silent and ready. We are providing America’s warfighters with an advanced aircraft offering a combination of range, payload, and survivability. The B-21 Raider will be capable of penetrating the toughest defenses to deliver precision strikes anywhere in the world. The B-21 is the future of deterrence and the world's first sixth-generation aircraft to reach the skies.
What You Need to Know About the B-21 Raider
Quote
This is what disciplined acquisition delivers
Quote
– General Dale R. White
Director, Critical Major Weapons Systems, Direct Reporting Portfolio Manager to the Deputy Secretary
Quote
The B-21 is foundational to our long-range strike capability and to credible deterrence
Quote
- Troy Meink
Secretary of the Air Force
SIXTH-GENERATION AIRCRAFT
Northrop Grumman’s sixth-generation aircraft, the B-21, forms the backbone of future U.S. air power, leading a powerful family of systems that deliver a new era of capability and flexibility by seamlessly integrating data, sensors, and weapons. Built with next-generation stealth, advanced networking and an open systems architecture, the B-21 is specifically designed for high-threat environments, ensuring the U.S. Air Force is equipped to accomplish its most challenging missions.
UNVEILING OF THE B-21 RAIDER
The U.S. Air Force unveils the B-21 Raider at a ceremony in Palmdale, Calif., Dec. 2, 2022. (DoD photo by Chad J. McNeeley)
Watch B-21 Unveiling Video
B-21 NEWS
Click here for all B-21 News
Northrop Grumman Accelerating B-21 Raider Production
Learn More
Northrop Grumman Advances B-21 Raider Across Test and Production
Learn More
B-21 Highlights Strong Performance Through Innovative Technology
Learn More
Northrop Grumman's Program Strategy Driving B-21 Raider Forward in Flight Test, Production
Learn More
Northrop Grumman's B-21 Raider Continues Its Flight Test Campaign
Learn more
What You Need to Know About Northrop Grumman's B-21 Raider
Learn More
Northrop Grumman's B-21 Raider Continues Progression to Flight Test
Learn More
10 Facts About Northrop Grumman's B-21 Raider
Learn More
THE RAIDER LEGACY
On April 18, 1942, 80 men and 16 B-25 Mitchell medium bombers set off on what some said was an impossible mission, to change the course of World War II. The actions of these 80 volunteers, led by Lt. Col. Jimmy Doolittle, were instrumental in shifting momentum in the Pacific theater and setting the stage for victory at the Battle of Midway.
These men, dubbed the Doolittle Raiders, launched 16 B-25s off the flight deck of the USS Hornet, despite the plane not being designed for carrier operations. The raid acted as a catalyst to many future innovations in U.S. air superiority from land or sea. That bold, innovative and courageous spirit of the Doolittle Raiders has been the inspiration behind the name of America’s next generation bomber, the B-21 Raider, in development now by the U.S. Air Force and Northrop Grumman.
B-21 CAREER OPPORTUNITIES
Northrop Grumman employees are Defining Possible every day through science, technology and engineering. We are 100,000 people – with careers in all areas: air, cyber, land, sea and space – working as one to defend and define the future.
Explore B-21 Careers
Who We Are
What We Do
Careers
Company Store
Investors
News
Suppliers
Privacy Notice
Manage Cookie Preferences
Terms of Use
EEO
Corporate Governance
E-Verify
Contact Us
© 2026 Northrop Grumman. The Northrop Grumman name and logos are registered trademarks of Northrop Grumman.