F-35 Lightning II | Lockheed Martin
F-35 Lightning II: Stealth Fighter Jet
___
Products
| F-35 Lightning II
F-35 Lightning II
Lethal. Survivable. Connected.
F-35 Lightning II
F35.com
Distributed Teaming
F-35 Training
F-35 EOTS
The F-35's Unrivaled Capabilities
The F-35 is essential to securing air dominance and ensuring mission success across every domain. As the most lethal, survivable, and connected fighter aircraft for America and its allies, it acts as the quarterback of the skies—integrating air, land, sea, space, and cyber operations to lead the fight and deliver a decisive advantage.
More than a fighter jet, the F-35 is a force multiplier. Its unmatched ability to gather, process, and share data empowers joint forces, strengthens global partnerships, and keeps pilots ahead of emerging threats—all while helping them return home safely.
Learn More
1 Million +
Flight Hours and Counting
Capabilities   ___
Strengthening global security, enhancing partnerships and powering economic growth.
With modernized sustainment capabilities and 24/7 support from Lockheed Martin’s global network, the F-35 remains mission-ready anytime, anywhere. As adversaries evolve and legacy fleets retire, the F-35 ensures air dominance is not only maintained—but redefined for decades to come.
Delivers an unrivaled advantage for our pilots, nation, and global partners
F-35 in Action: Unites allies and strengthens global security
Delivers 5th Generation Sustainment for Mission Readiness
Strengthens Communities Worldwide. Securing Our Future.
F-35 Capabilities: Stealth
F-35 Capabilities: Sensor Fusion
F-35 Capabilities: Multirole Fighter
F-35 Capabilities: 1M Flight Hours and Counting
Hands down, without a doubt, the F-35 is the aircraft to take into combat. It's the quarterback of the entire fight.
U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Gina Sabric, Commander, 10th Air Force, Sept 2024
Enabling Joint All Domain Operations
The F-35 is the most advanced node in a 21st Century Security network-centric architecture. In the highly contested battlespace versus peer adversaries, dominance will be determined by the ability to securely connect high-tech platforms to share information across every domain – air, land, sea, space and cyber.
Evolving for Tomorrow’s Threats
The F-35 is more than a fighter jet, it’s a powerful force multiplier with advanced sensors and communications suites operating close to the battlefield and from an elevated position significantly enhancing the capabilities of networked airborne, maritime, space, surface and ground-based platforms.
JASSM/LRASM Integration
Integrating JASSM, LRASM and new technologies onto the F-35 suite continues to increase multi-role mission capabilities – helping to continue to make the F-35 the most lethal, stealthy and survivable aircraft in the world.
News & Insights
                      ___
View All
Feb 26, 2026
Story
Dominance in the Skies
Individually, our aircraft are formidable. Collectively, they reflect a force built around one objective — mission dominance.
Read More
Jan 12, 2026
Press Release
Secretary of War Visits Lockheed Martin F-35 Production Facility
Lockheed Martin welcomed Secretary of War Pete Hegseth to the Fort Worth, Texas, F-35 Lightning II production facility.
Read More
Jan 07, 2026
Press Release
F-35 Breaks Delivery Record, Continues Combat Success in 2025
In a record-breaking year for the F-35 Lightning II program, Lockheed Martin delivered 191 F-35s in 2025, surpassing the previous delivery record of 142 jets.
Read More
Careers   ___
Join Lockheed Martin’s F-35 Team. Shape the Future of Aerospace.
Be part of the cutting-edge technology behind one of the world’s most advanced military aircraft. We’re hiring for roles like contract instructor pilots, engineers, test pilots and program managers.
Join The Team
Resources   ___
News Releases
Media & Media Kit Downloads
Contacts   ___
Media Contact
301-312-4307