How Tehran’s Proxy Network Could Outlast the Iranian Regime | The Washington Institute
Skip to main content
Policy Analysis
Articles & Op-Eds
How Tehran’s Proxy Network Could Outlast the Iranian Regime
by
Michael Jacobson
,
Matthew Levitt
Apr 2, 2026
Also published in
Los Angeles Times
About the Authors
Michael Jacobson
Michael Jacobson is a senior fellow in The Washington Institute's Jeanette and Eli Reinhard Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence.
Matthew Levitt
Matthew Levitt is the Fromer-Wexler Senior Fellow and director of the Reinhard Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence at The Washington Institute.
Articles & Testimony
Even if Washington somehow convinces Iran to cut off support for groups like Hezbollah, Hamas, and the Houthis, this would not eliminate the threat they pose.
A month into the Iran war, the United States has offered a 15-point plan to end the hostilities, which includes a broad range of demands on Iran’s nuclear and missile programs, and guarantees on freedom of navigation in the Strait of Hormuz. The U.S. is also insisting on Iranian commitments to stop funding and supporting its network of proxies, including Hezbollah, Hamas and Houthi militants in Yemen, recognizing that these terrorist groups have been one of the major driving forces behind the chaos that currently exists in the region. Yet while U.S. officials are right to press Tehran hard on the proxy front, they should have low expectations that this decades-long problem will be solved in the near term...
Read this article on the Los Angeles Times website.
View/Print Page as PDF
Share
Email Alerts
Sign Up
To top
Recommended
Brief Analysis
Deniable, Disposable, Disruptive: Iran’s Hybrid Warfare in Europe Demands a Proactive Response
May 4, 2026
◆
Adrian Shtuni
Articles & Testimony
The U.S. Shouldn’t Lose Sight of the Real Terrorist Threats
May 4, 2026
◆
Michael Jacobson
Articles & Testimony
Is There a China Strategy Behind the Iran War?
May 4, 2026
◆
Michael Sobolik
Grant Rumley
Topics
Terrorism
Regions & Countries
Iran
Stay up to date
Sign up for email alerts