(540)
CHAPTER 8: CHINA’S EVOLVING COUNTER-
INTERVENTION CAPABILITIES AND THE ROLE 
OF INDO-PACIFIC ALLIES
Abstract
Over the past two decades, China has invested heavily in capabil -
ities to counter military action by the United States and its allies 
in the event of a conflict in the Indo-Pacific. As a result, U.S. forces 
and bases in the region would face a significant threat from the 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) in any regional contingency involv -
ing treaty allies and/or security partners, and the outcome of any 
such conflict is far from certain. In addition, U.S. allies Japan, the 
Philippines, and Australia perceive China’s military buildup and 
aggressive actions as a growing threat to their national security 
and are deepening defense collaboration with the United States. As 
the United States continues to enhance its capacity to respond to 
Chinese aggression, it must navigate both potential differences with 
allies about the parameters of cooperation during a conflict as well 
as questions about how to best adapt its force posture, capabilities, 
and defense industrial base.
Key Findings
 • The PLA plans to counter military action by the United States 
and potentially U.S. allies in the event of a regional conflict. 
Since at least the early 2000s, China’s leadership has viewed 
the U.S. military’s presence and alliance activities in the In -
do-Pacific as threatening, and it continues to express concern 
about new developments that combine deepening allied coop -
eration with an expanded U.S. military footprint in the region.
 • China’s assertion that it will militarily defend its disputed ter -
ritorial and maritime claims threatens U.S. allies and security 
partners in the Indo-Pacific. Should China’s leadership decide to 
use force to enforce its claims in the South or East China Seas 
or with regard to Taiwan, this aggression could trigger U.S. de -
fense commitments.
 • The PLA continues to improve the quality and quantity of mil -
itary capabilities needed to counter U.S. military action in the 
event of a conflict, including a large arsenal of ballistic and 
cruise missiles, air defense systems, advanced fighter jets, mar -
itime forces, and electronic warfare (EW) capabilities.
 • The PLA has also developed a redundant and resilient architecture 
for Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, 
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) to protect its own sys-
tems from attack, and it increasingly has the capability to disrupt 
or paralyze an adversary’s C4ISR system. China’s advancements 

541
in counter-C4ISR capabilities such as directed energy weapons and 
anti-satellite technologies may threaten the United States’ ability 
to access its own C4ISR networks for reconnaissance, targeting, 
and other functions in peacetime or wartime.
 • Despite improvements to a broad suite of capabilities, the PLA 
still faces challenges in logistics and sustainment. The PLA’s 
maintenance system may struggle to quickly repair and resup -
ply its advanced platforms and weapons systems under harsh 
battlefield conditions, impacting the PLA’s ability to project and 
sustain combat power.
 • Chinese military experts perceive that U.S. and allied militar -
ies are adapting to the PLA’s improved capabilities and force 
posture. They observe that the United States and its allies 
are strengthening their missile defense capabilities while also 
working to improve their ability to strike China’s forces. They 
also note that new operational concepts emphasizing geograph -
ic dispersion and joint integration across warfighting domains 
could also contribute to U.S. and allied forces’ survivability.
 • U.S. allies in the Indo-Pacific are adjusting their defense pol -
icies in response to Beijing’s aggressive military posture and 
activities. Japanese leaders are concerned about a possible re -
gional conflict and therefore seek to enhance Japan’s military 
capabilities and interoperability with the United States. The 
current government of the Philippines views cooperation with 
the United States and other partners as core elements of its 
response to China’s military and gray zone threats in the South 
China Sea and its own military modernization efforts. Australia 
seeks to deepen security cooperation with the United States, 
its chief defense partner, while re-posturing its own military 
for the possibility of great power conflict. Nevertheless, allies’ 
interest in working with the United States to address threats 
from the PLA does not necessarily imply a commitment to allow 
U.S. military access to their bases during a conflict or guarantee 
the participation of allied military forces.
Recommendations
The Commission recommends:
 • Congress direct the U.S. Department of Defense to produce 
within 60 days a classified net assessment report on current 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Command, Control, Communi -
cations, Computers Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnais -
sance (C4ISR) capabilities and PLA electronic warfare (EW) ca -
pabilities (including electronic attack and electronic protection 
capabilities). The report should examine U.S. counter-C4ISR 
and counter-EW capabilities, assess the resiliency of U.S. capa -
bilities, identify counter-C4ISR and counter-EW gaps, and pro -
vide a menu of procurement options to close the gaps. Not later 
than 60 days after its completion, the U.S. secretary of defense 
shall provide the report to the appropriate congressional com -
mittees and brief them on its findings.

542
 • Congress direct the Office of the Director of National Intelli -
gence, in conjunction with the U.S. Departments of Defense, 
Commerce, and the Treasury and other relevant agencies, to 
conduct a comprehensive review of potential technological 
chokepoints across the People’s Republic of China military in -
dustrial base and devise plans to apply controls, in conjunction 
with allies, to slow China’s military development.
 • Congress reinvigorate and recommit to space as an area of 
strategic competition, including by conducting a review of the 
commercial space industry to determine if there are regulatory 
updates that would ensure that the U.S. commercial space in -
dustry is able to innovate as quickly as possible while maintain -
ing safety as a top priority.
Introduction
China continues to develop capabilities to resist future military 
action by the United States in a conflict involving U.S. allies and 
partners in the Indo-Pacific, such as a PLA invasion of Taiwan or 
effort to control waters and disputed features in the South and East 
China Seas.* 1 The PLA has invested heavily in air, maritime, mis -
sile, space, and EW capabilities to target and degrade U.S. forces 
and bases in the Indo-Pacific region. 2 As a result, the threat to the 
United States and its allies is growing more acute.
“Anti-Access/Area Denial” and “Counter-Intervention”
This chapter uses a set of related terms to describe PLA capa -
bilities relevant to restricting the access and operations of foreign 
military forces. “Anti-Access/Area Denial” (A2/AD) is a U.S. mili -
tary term referring to an opponent’s military operations that aim 
to restrict military forces’ ability to enter into a theater of opera -
tions (anti-access) and to restrict military forces’ freedom of action 
within an area of operations under the opponent’s direct control 
(area denial). 3 This chapter refers to military capabilities that 
could contribute to such operations as “A2/AD capabilities.” These 
capabilities include ballistic and cruise missiles, air defense sys -
tems, advanced bombers, maritime forces, and EW capabilities. 4 
“Counter-intervention” is an English term used to describe Chi -
na’s operational approach to employing military capabilities that 
would enable it to deter and, if needed, defeat a foreign military’s 
attempts to become involved in a conflict in areas adjacent to 
China.5 Counter-intervention does not itself constitute a Chinese 
strategy; rather, it is a component of PLA operational practice 
with operational and strategic implications for the United States 
and its allies. 6 This chapter uses the term “counter-intervention 
* China views resolving longstanding territorial and maritime claims in these areas as falling 
within the scope of its stated national defense objective to defend China’s “sovereignty, security, 
and development interests.” China’s 2019 defense white paper specifies that this includes safe -
guarding “national sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security”; deterring and resisting 
“aggression”; opposing and containing “Taiwan independence”; and safeguarding China’s “mari-
time rights and interests.” It also includes other objectives related to political and social stabil -
ity, Tibet, sustainable development, space, electromagnetic, and cyber. China Aerospace Studies 
Institute, In Their Own Words: China’s National Defense in the New Era , March 16, 2021, 6–7; 
State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 
the New Era , July 2019, 7.

543
scenario” to refer to a situation in which the PLA seeks to resist 
and defeat a foreign military’s involvement in a conflict in the 
Indo-Pacific, including military action by the United States or its 
allies in response to a PLA invasion of Taiwan. It uses the term 
“counter-intervention capabilities” to refer to A2/AD capabilities 
used in a counter-intervention scenario.
This chapter evaluates China’s counter-intervention capabilities 
as well as U.S. and allied efforts to address the regional security 
challenges they pose. The chapter begins with an assessment of 
China’s perceptions of U.S. and allied military actions in the In -
do-Pacific and its investment in capabilities that disrupt U.S. and 
allied abilities to defend against, target, and strike Chinese assets 
in conflict. It then examines the value of U.S. alliances in countering 
China’s counter-intervention and surveys the approaches and per -
spectives of three U.S. allies in the region: Japan, the Philippines, 
and Australia. It concludes by discussing implications for the United 
States. The chapter draws on the Commission’s March 2024 hearing 
on “China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Impli -
cations for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners,” 
consultations with experts, open source research and analysis, and 
the Commission’s June 2024 fact-finding mission to Taiwan, Japan, 
and U.S. Indo-Pacific Command.
China’s Approach to Countering U.S. and Allied 
Military Actions in the Indo-Pacific
China’s leadership views the U.S. military’s presence, activities, 
and alliance commitments in the Indo-Pacific region as hostile, lead -
ing the PLA to focus significant efforts on planning and training for 
the possibility of U.S. military involvement in a regional conflict. 
This perceived need to deter and contest U.S. military activity in -
forms its operational planning, its intense observation of U.S. and 
allied defense cooperation, and its investment in a suite of capabili -
ties designed to restrict enemy forces’ operations in the Indo-Pacific 
region.
China’s Leadership Views U.S. Indo-Pacific Military Activities 
and Alliances as Hostile
China’s defense leadership has long viewed the U.S. military pres-
ence and alliances in the Indo-Pacific region as a threat to China’s 
security interests. Every Chinese national defense white paper * 
since 2000 has referenced U.S. military presence and deployments 
as well as U.S. alliance activities in the Indo-Pacific among the 
chief challenges in China’s security environment. † 7 In 2000, the 
* China’s defense white papers are policy documents published every few years that outline the 
country’s security objectives and military activities at a high level. Dennis J. Blasko, The Chinese 
Army Today: Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century, Second Edition, Routledge, 2012, 
xv–xvi.
† China’s 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2015, and 2019 white papers mention the United States 
by name with regard to these activities. The corresponding statement in the 2002 and 2013 white 
“Anti-Access/Area Denial” and “Counter-Intervention”—
Continued

544
defense white paper listed “negative developments in the security 
of the Asia-Pacific region,” including “the United States . . . further 
strengthening its military presence and bilateral military alliances 
in the region.” 8 Nearly two decades later, China’s 2019 white paper 
delivered a similar message, stating, “The U.S. is strengthening its 
Asia-Pacific military alliances and reinforcing military deployment 
and intervention, adding complexity to regional security.”  9 With re -
gard to military presence, the series of nine white papers over this 
period demonstrates an enduring concern about the United States 
increasing, adjusting, and reinforcing its military deployments in 
the region. 10 With regard to alliances, the white papers reiterate 
perceived threats from the United States strengthening, consolidat -
ing, and enhancing its regional alliance relationships generally, and 
on several occasions they draw specific attention to alliance coor -
dination between the United States and Japan, South Korea, and 
later, Australia.11
Influential experts within China’s strategic policy community 
voiced similar concerns during the same two-decade period. In 2011, 
a professor from China’s leading military academy, National De -
fense University, published a book entitled “On Maritime Strategic 
Access,” which argues that China faced strategic maritime encircle -
ment by the United States and its allies in the Pacific. 12 The author 
claims that during the Cold War, the United States had “used the 
offensive system of the large number of military bases and island 
chains” in the Pacific to “build a ‘crescent-shaped maritime encircle-
ment’ ” of China and the Soviet Union, “besieging” them and seeking 
to control their maritime strategic access to the Pacific. 13 The book 
then claimed that since the end of the Cold War, the United States 
has sought to seal off China’s maritime access to the Indian and Pa-
cific Oceans through a ring of military bases along an “island chain 
blockade line,” pointing out deployments in Japan, South Korea, 
Guam, Hawaii, and the Western Pacific in particular. * 14 In 2011, 
a PLA expert writing for the journal of an influential research or -
ganization affiliated with China’s Ministry of State Security (MSS) 
argued that the United States was deliberately exaggerating the 
threat of China’s A2/AD capabilities to justify investing in advanced 
weaponry, shifting military deployments to the Pacific, and increas -
ing its “containment” of China.15 The author argued that the United 
States sought to use its Pacific military presence to “interfere in 
issues concerning China’s core interests,” namely China’s claims to 
Taiwan, in the South China Sea, and in the East China Sea. 16 An 
papers reference the United States in oblique statements about “certain” or “some” countries. Chi-
na Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 2019 China’s National Defense in the New 
Era, March 16, 2021; State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
Military Strategy, May 2015; Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of 
China, The Diversified Employment of China’s Armed Forces , April 16, 2013; Information Office 
of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2010, March 
31, 2011; Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Na-
tional Defense in 2008 , January 20, 2009; Information Office of the State Council of the People’s 
Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2006 , December 2006; Information Office of the 
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2004 , December 
2004; Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National 
Defense in 2002 , December 2002; Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic 
of China, China’s National Defense in 2000, October 2000.
* Regarding Japan and South Korea, the text claims that the United States had formed its 
military alliances with these states specifically “to suppress the PRC’s strategic space along the 
maritime direction.” China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: On Maritime Stra -
tegic Access, April 2024, 236.

545
article in the same journal in 2016 describes the U.S. military’s for -
ward deployment to the region as a key enabler of undesirable U.S. 
“coercion” in the East and South China Seas. 17
Characterizations of U.S. “Deterrence” in Chinese Sources
Although official and unofficial Chinese sources occasionally 
describe U.S. policy as “deterrence” and acknowledge that the 
United States seeks to “deter” certain Chinese military actions, 
they generally do so while dismissing U.S. actions as hostile or 
destabilizing. Some scholarly sources explore what they describe 
as U.S. “deterrence” policy at length; for example, two articles in 
China’s Journal of International Security Studies  in 2022 detail 
what the authors call a U.S. strategy of “deterrence by denial” 
against China and the associated trends in U.S. military devel -
opment.* 18 The authors variously acknowledge that the United 
States seeks to prevent China from launching a military attack in 
the Western Pacific against Taiwan, U.S. forces, or U.S. allies, or 
from forcibly resolving disputes in the South China Sea, but they 
still dismiss U.S. commitments to regional stability and conclude 
that the United States sought to “contain” China and pursue its 
security at China’s expense.† 19 Official statements from China’s 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of National Defense also 
occasionally mention U.S. “deterrence” ‡ as part of their effort to 
delegitimize U.S. actions. Some accuse the United States of using 
“deterrence” as a façade to conceal aggressive intentions, while 
others simply claim that trying to “deter” China is an aggressive 
act in itself. 20 China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs also expresses 
the perspective that U.S. efforts to deter China through nucle -
ar weapons deployments, nuclear sharing, alliance commitments 
to allies, and activities in cyberspace are motivated by aggres -
sion.§ 21 Finally, Chinese officials have stated that China cannot 
* A state practicing “deterrence” seeks to persuade an opponent to refrain from undertaking a 
specific action. Deterrence relies on credible threats that create fear in the mind of the opponent 
that if it undertakes the unwanted action it either will be unable to achieve its objective—which 
is known as deterrence by denial—or will suffer unacceptable retaliation for doing so—which is 
known as deterrence by punishment. For more on deterrence and its application to the Taiwan 
Strait, see U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Chapter 4, “A Dangerous Pe -
riod for Cross Strait Deterrence: Chinese Military Capabilities and Decision-Making for a War 
over Taiwan,” in 2021 Annual Report to Congress , November 2021, 390–392.
† This negative view of U.S. intentions also informs assessments by both authors that U.S. 
deterrence of China may not succeed. One author describes a security dilemma in which China 
will “strive to break out of” what he calls “military intimidation” by the United States and its 
allies and claims that this will “inevitably” lead to the failure of U.S. deterrence. The other author 
draws on the concept in deterrence theory that successful deterrence requires coupling coercive 
threats with “reassurance” that the threat will not be carried out if the deterred party refrains 
from taking the unwanted action. The author argues that, for both the United States and China, 
“coercive threats” have begun to overwhelm “reassurances,” leaving deterrence unbalanced and 
potentially ineffective. Chen Xi and Ge Tengfei, “An Analysis of the United States’ Deterrence 
by Denial Strategy against China” ( 美国对华拒止性威慑战略论析), International Security Studies , 
September 16, 2022, 24. CSIS Interpret Translation; Zuo Xiying, “Adjustments in the United 
States’ Conventional Deterrence Strategy against China” (美国对华常规威慑战略的调整), Interna-
tional Security Studies , September 16, 2022, 18. CSIS Interpret Translation.
‡ Many other official descriptions of U.S. and allied actions by these institutions never acknowl -
edge that they are intended to deter China from military action, instead simply describing them 
as belligerent, provocative, and aimed at undermining China’s security. China’s Ministry of For -
eign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s Regular Press Conference on July 11, 2024, 
July 11, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s 
Regular Press Conference on May 27, 2024 , May 27, 2024.
§ On multiple occasions in 2024, China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs adopted this angle in 
an apparent attempt to delegitimize U.S. policy on North Korea. In one statement, a ministry 

546
or will not be deterred from undertaking what they regard as 
appropriate actions toward Taiwan or in the South China Sea, 
implying that the United States intends to dissuade them from 
undertaking a particular course of action. 22
China Perceives Challenges to Its Counter-Intervention from 
the United States and Its Allies
China’s leadership likely perceives intensified threats from recent 
enhancements to U.S. military capabilities, concepts, and alliance 
relationships. Since China began fielding A2/AD capabilities in 
the early 2000s, China’s official media as well as PLA- and gov -
ernment-affiliated academic journals have continuously noted U.S. 
military efforts to counter the PLA’s counter-intervention through 
its own advances and through deepening relations with allies. 23 Al-
though it is challenging to assess China’s overall level of confidence 
in its current counter-intervention capabilities through disparate 
open source reporting, analysis of China’s past observations reveals 
several areas in which continued U.S. efforts could challenge PLA 
objectives. According to testimony by Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, di -
rector of the China studies program at the Center for Naval Anal -
yses, China’s media and academic journals express concern about 
both ongoing U.S. efforts to increase the quality and quantity of its 
military capabilities in the region and U.S. actions to strengthen 
alliances and security partnerships. 24 She assesses that the most 
concerning developments to Beijing are those that couple an im -
provement in an alliance relationship with changes to the U.S. mil -
itary footprint in the region. 25
China’s government, military, and academic sources point to sev -
eral trends in U.S. military development with the potential to un -
dermine China’s counter-intervention capabilities. Evolution in U.S. 
strike and missile defense capabilities coupled with new operational 
concepts have improved the capacity of the U.S. military to strike 
China’s forces while making it more difficult for China to strike U.S. 
forces in return.26 Many Chinese government and academic sources 
have observed increased cooperation between the United States and 
its Indo-Pacific allies against China’s military capabilities and por -
trayed such cooperation as detrimental to China’s interests.
 • Long-range strike capabilities increase U.S. reach: China’s state 
media and articles from  PLA- and government-affiliated aca -
demic journals show enduring concern over U.S. development of 
long-range strike capabilities, which can weaken China’s count-
er-intervention by allowing U.S. forces to attack more effectively 
from a distance. The 2011 analysis from the journal affiliated 
with the MSS notes efforts in 2010 to transform the U.S. ter -
spokesperson claimed the United States was heightening tensions in the region by “resorting to 
military deterrence” against North Korea, and in another they insisted the United States must 
“desist from acts of deterrence” against the country in order to avoid escalation. China’s Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s Regular Press Conference on June 
3, 2024, June 3, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang 
Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference on April 3, 2024, April 3, 2024.
Characterizations of U.S. “Deterrence” in Chinese  
Sources— Continued

547
ritory of Guam—which at the time was outside of China’s con -
firmed ballistic missile range—into a hub for long-range strikes 
as a key avenue for responding to China’s A2/AD capabilities. 27 
In 2012, China’s state media suggested that Guam-based U.S. 
Air Force bombers paired with stealth fighters may be able to 
carry out long-range strikes on China. 28 Articles in the journal 
of the PLA Naval University of Engineering in 2020 discuss 
the continued value of Guam’s long-range bomber force as well 
as U.S. long-range missile capabilities which could be used for 
countering China.* 29
 • Missile defenses make striking U.S. assets more difficult: Chi-
nese sources have tracked the U.S. military’s development and 
deployment of missile defense systems as a key indicator of its 
capacity to counter China’s counter-intervention capabilities. 
In 2007, China’s state media claimed that deploying missile 
defense systems near key military facilities in the region was 
among the first recommendations U.S. military experts put for -
ward to counter China’s emerging A2/AD capabilities.30 Chinese 
academic journals have since noted the priority successive U.S. 
administrations placed on improving missile defense in North -
east Asia and the Western Pacific, especially as China’s missile 
capabilities have expanded to reach locations such as Guam that 
had previously been out of range .31 Some analysts assess that 
China’s development of hypersonic weapons is motivated by the 
increasing difficulty of breaking through U.S. missile defense 
capabilities.32 One journal article from 2022 even warns that if 
the United States employs directed-energy weapons technology 
for missile interception in the future, the resulting increase in 
cost-effectiveness of missile defense would represent “a qualita -
tive leap in its deterrence by denial capability against China.” 33
 • Indo-Pacific missile deployments increase U.S. and allied strike 
capabilities: China’s media, government representatives, and 
other experts have reacted strongly over U.S. and allied efforts 
to increase missile deployments in the Indo-Pacific region, in -
cluding but not limited to the sale of U.S. Tomahawk cruise mis-
siles to Japan in 2023, ongoing discussion of deploying inter -
mediate-range ballistic missiles (IRBMs) to Japan’s Southwest 
Islands, and U.S. deployment of a Typhon Mid-Range Capability 
missile system † in the Philippines in April 2024. 34 The vocifer-
ous objection of China’s Ministry of National Defense spokesper-
son to the Philippines deployment suggests China’s leadership 
perceives the system as a serious security risk. ‡ 35 According to 
* The journal also emphasizes the value of U.S. investments in space-based information systems 
as necessary support for long-range missile strikes. Shi Zhangsong, Gong Wenbin, and Wu Zhong-
hong, “Status and Development of Long-Range Precision Strike Operations Technology Based 
on Space-Based Information” (基于天基信息的海上远程精确打击技术现状及发展), Journal of Naval 
University of Engineering (Comprehensive Edition)  17:3 (September 2020): 27. Translation.
† The U.S. Army Typhon Mid-Range Capability missile system launches Tomahawk cruise mis -
siles and standard SM-6 multi-domain missiles and is intended for targets at ranges between 500 
kilometers (km) and 2,776 km (310 miles [mi] and 1725 mi). From its location in Northern Luzon, 
the system could reportedly cover the entire Luzon Strait, PLA bases in the South China Sea, 
and even China’s mainland coastline. Aaron-Matthew Lariosa, “U.S. Army Deploys New Missile 
Launcher to the Philippines,” Naval News , April 15, 2024; Ashley Roque, “Army’s New Typhon 
Strike Weapon Headed to Indo-Pacific in 2024,” Breaking Defense, November 18, 2023.
‡ The Ministry of National Defense Spokesperson stated that this action had “put the entire re -
gion under U.S. fire, brought a huge risk of war to the region,” and “gravely impacted the regional 

548
an article in the Beijing-based Journal of International Security 
Studies in 2022, the introduction of intermediate-range missiles 
in the first island chain not only strengthens U.S. deterrence but 
also complicates China’s strategic calculations and could even 
undermine its advantages by forcing investment in expensive 
defense measures to protect targets within China. 36 China’s 
government representatives have warned the United States 
that China will take “resolute countermeasures” in response to 
such deployments but have not specified what those measures 
would be.37 Ms. Kivlehan-Wise notes that Chinese experts view 
missile deployments in the region both as significant military 
capacity improvements and as indicators of stronger security 
partnerships between the United States and its allies. 38
 • New operational concepts could make U.S. forces more surviv -
able: Chinese observers and military media have taken a strong 
interest in new operational concepts developed by U.S. military 
services, such as Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations 
(EABO) for the U.S. Marine Corps, Agile Combat Employment 
(ACE) for the U.S. Air Force, Distributed Maritime Operations 
(DMO) for the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps, and Multi-Domain 
Operations (MDO) for the U.S. Army. 39 Ms. Kivlehan-Wise tes -
tified that common themes in China’s media coverage of these 
U.S. concepts include that they were developed solely to counter 
China’s military, especially within the first island chain, and 
that they could improve U.S. military stealth, strike, and surviv-
ability.40 For example, a 2023 article from China’s Ministry of 
National Defense newspaper re-circulated by the People’s Daily 
notes that these various service concepts derive from an effort 
to increase the U.S. military’s “distributed lethality,” which em-
phasizes the use of flexible and dispersed attack formations to 
avoid destruction from enemy strikes. 41 China’s military and 
state media have also taken note when U.S. forces practice 
these concepts in cooperation with security partners in the re -
gion.* 42 In 2022, one military analyst writing in the Ministry of 
National Defense newspaper even argued that the U.S. military 
has an overall advantage in the development of operational con -
cepts that could provide it an edge over the PLA. 43 Neverthe -
less, Ms. Kivlehan-Wise testified that China’s media has also as-
sessed that the PLA’s long-range missile capabilities still have 
the potential to counter these new operational concepts, making 
them insufficient for the task of countering China’s counter-in -
tervention capabilities. 44 Some coverage has also argued that 
limitations in U.S. network technology, firepower effectiveness, 
security structure,” requiring China to exercise “a high degree of vigilance.” China’s Ministry of 
National Defense, Transcript of May 2024 Ministry of National Defense Regular Press Conference  
(2024年5月国防部例行记者会文字实录), May 30, 2024. Translation.
* The above-mentioned article from China’s Ministry of National Defense newspaper, for ex -
ample, describes exercises in which military forces from Australia, Canada, France, Japan, the 
Philippines, and other countries carried out related exercises with U.S. forces. It makes note of 
foreign media coverage stating that the new operational concepts and their associated tactics 
had been shared with U.S. allies, and it warns that “in the future, the United States will draw 
support from its global military alliance system to make ‘distributed lethality’ more covert and 
threatening.” China National Defense News , “U.S. Military Steps Up New Combat Concepts in 
Exercises” (美军加紧新型作战概念演练), People’s Daily, November 8, 2023. Translation.

549
and real-world practice of the concepts present reasons to doubt 
their effectiveness in practice. 45
 • Increased force and network integration could support U.S. op -
erations: China has also observed evolving efforts at increasing 
the integration of U.S. military operations. In 2014, an article 
in the People’s Daily expressed alarm at the then multi-service 
initiative, “Air-Sea Battle,” which aimed to develop cross-domain 
approaches for countering China’s A2/AD capabilities through 
both inter-service cooperation and greater networked connectiv -
ity.46 In 2016, Party media describing a separate U.S. military 
initiative to counter China’s A2/AD capabilities—known as the 
“Third Offset Strategy”—pointed out the importance of building 
a multi-domain “global surveillance-strike network” to the suc -
cess of the proposed U.S. approach. 47 In 2024, China’s military 
academic media has explored the U.S. Department of Defense 
(DOD) strategic warfighting concept of Joint All-Domain Com -
mand and Control (JADC2), noting the potential advantages of 
this effort to leverage network technology and integrate com -
mand and control across traditional and emerging combat do -
mains, as well as the associated technical and organizational 
challenges it still poses. 48
 • Greater U.S.-allied cooperation could complicate China’s mili -
tary environment: China has also paid attention to the military 
implications of recent efforts to deepen cooperation between the 
United States and individual allies and partners. For example, 
since 2022, Chinese news media and academic journals have 
described complete, planned, and prospective U.S. and Japanese 
military deployments and exercises around Japan’s southwest -
ern islands as measures that strengthen the allies’ military 
position vis-à-vis China because they increased the range, con -
centration, and resilience of U.S. offensive capabilities. * 49 Af-
ter the expansion of the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agree -
ment (EDCA) between the United States and the Philippines 
in 2023,† Chinese commentators argued that the United States 
intends to use the new EDCA sites to improve its position for 
contingencies related to Taiwan or the Spratlys and that the 
agreement strengthens the United States’ ability to control 
the Bashi Channel between the Philippines and Taiwan. 50 The 
Trilateral Security Partnership between the United States, the 
UK, and Australia (AUKUS) is also a topic of great concern to 
Chinese observers.51 Ms. Kivlehan-Wise assesses that AUKUS 
* According to testimony from Ms. Kivlehan-Wise, Chinese subject matter experts believe these 
changes improve the ability of the United States and Japan to track PLA air and naval vessels, 
deny the PLA access to the Pacific Ocean through key straits, and destroy PLA platforms and 
infrastructure at sea and on the Chinese Mainland. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony 
for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Count-
er Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and 
Partners, March 21, 2024, 6.
† EDCA, originally signed in 2014 between the United States and the Philippines, allows the 
U.S. armed forces a rotational presence at certain military bases in the Philippines. In February 
2023, the two countries announced the designation of four additional Philippine bases as EDCA 
sites, in addition to the five existing sites. Gregory B. Poling, “The U.S.-Philippine Alliance’s Very 
Busy Month,” Center for Strategic and International Studies , April 12, 2023; U.S Department of 
Defense, Philippines, U.S. Announce Locations of Four New EDCA Sites , April 3, 2023; Karen 
Lema, “Philippines Reveals Locations of 4 New Strategic Sites for U.S. Military Pact,” Reuters, 
April 3, 2023.

550
has sharply increased China’s concern about U.S. Indo-Pacific 
alliances and security partnerships because of its surprise an -
nouncement, the substantial military benefits it grants to the 
members, and a perception in Beijing that Australia had chosen 
to side with the United States against China. * 52 (For more on 
expanding cooperation between the United States and these al -
lies and partners, see “U.S.-Allied Efforts to Address Challenges 
from China’s Military” below.)
 • U.S. undersea warfare capabilities:  The PLA has monitored 
developments in U.S. submarine and other undersea capabili -
ties because of the likelihood such capabilities will be used to 
thwart an invasion or disrupt a blockade of Taiwan. 53 China 
has invested in both submarine and anti-submarine warfare 
(ASW) capabilities to erode U.S. longstanding advantages in the 
undersea domain.54 While the PLA appears to have made some 
progress in ASW capabilities, notably through the introduction 
of many airborne and seaborne ASW platforms as well an ex -
panded hydrophone network, foreign and Chinese experts still 
assess that China “lags behind” the United States in its abilities 
to detect and destroy enemy submarines as well as to protect its 
own submarines from enemy detection. 55 Some Chinese sources 
assert that the PLA may be able to narrow this gap by integrat -
ing supercavitation technology into its torpedoes, which enables 
a torpedo to wrap itself in an air bubble underwater to reduce 
drag and increase its speed. † 56 Since 2022, some media sources 
have claimed that Chinese scientists are developing a hybrid 
anti-ship weapon that travels first through the air as a hyper -
sonic missile before diving and maneuvering below the water as 
a supercavitating torpedo, allowing it to potentially challenge 
* China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs has criticized the partnership as “a clear attempt at coun-
tering China” and sought to undermine its legitimacy through public statements. This represents 
a shift from prior years, in which Australia was viewed as more reluctant to participate actively 
in frameworks that could be perceived as countering China or choosing sides between China and 
the United States. Xia Liping, “Xia Liping: The U.S. Indo-Pacific Strategy from the Dual Perspec -
tives of Geopolitics and Geoeconomics” (夏立平:地缘政治与地缘经济双重视角下的美国“印太战略”), 
American Studies  2 (2015). Translation; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Remarks on AUKUS Nuclear Submarine Cooperation on March 17, 
2023, March 17, 2023; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Commentary VII on AUKUS: Fire Can-
not Be Wrapped Up in Paper; Whoever Plays with Fire Will Perish by It , October 6, 2022; China’s 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reality Check: Falsehoods in US Perceptions of China , June 19, 2022.
† Chinese state and military newspapers have observed other countries’ application of super -
cavitation technology on torpedoes since at least 2015, noting the technology’s development by the 
Soviet Union and its adoption by Russia, the United States, Germany, and Norway. More recent 
research on the technology’s application to anti-submarine warfare was conducted by researchers 
affiliated with the state-owned defense corporation China North Industries Defense Corporation 
in a journal sponsored by a state-owned shipbuilding company. These sources have noted advan -
tages of supercavitating torpedoes in speed, flexible firing orientation, large kinetic energy, and 
cost effectiveness. Later sources list range as an advantage, in contrast to earlier sources that 
claimed supercavitating torpedoes could not yet match the range of regular torpedoes. Earlier 
sources also noted difficulties applying guidance technologies in light of the munitions’ great 
speed and warned that supercavitating torpedoes could be easily detected by nature of their 
bubble trails. Qi Xiaobin et al., “Application of Supercavitation Technology in Anti-Submarine 
Warfare” (超空泡技术在反潜作战中的应用设想), Digital Ocean and Underwater Warfare  5:2 (April 
2022): 109, 112–114. Translation; Li Xiang and Huang Kang, “Supercavitating Weapons: Building 
Their Own Path Underwater” (超空泡兵器:自己造路水下行), China Military Online , April 3, 2020. 
Translation; Military News , “Revealing the Secrets of Supercavitating Torpedoes: Underwater 
Speed as Fast as High-Speed Train and Faster than a Helicopter” ( 揭秘超空泡鱼雷:水下速度如高
铁 比直升机机快 ), Xinhua, October 20, 2015. Translation; Norinco Group, “Northwest Institute of 
Mechanical & Electrical Engineering” (西北机电工程研究所). Translation. https:/ /web.archive.org/
web/20240806145540/http:/ /xbjd.norincogroup.com.cn/; China National Knowledge Infrastruc -
ture, “Digital Ocean & Underwater Warfare” (数字海洋与水下攻防). Translation.

551
existing ship defense systems by traveling farther and faster 
than a traditional torpedo. 57
 • New developments in U.S. uncrewed underwater vehicles 
(UUVs) enhance its capabilities to identify, monitor, and track 
PLA submarines: Both China and the United States are in -
vesting in developing new undersea drones that could play a 
decisive role in future military conflicts, with uses that in -
clude intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR). 58 
In February and March 2024, the U.S. Defense Advanced Re -
search Projects Agency (DARPA) conducted full-scale testing 
of the “Manta Ray” prototype UUV, an autonomous and pay -
load-capable large-scale UUV that mimics the shape and mo -
tion of a manta ray and achieves the energy efficiency needed 
for long-duration missions. 59 China’s military, defense indus -
try, and state-run media closely followed DARPA’s Manta 
Ray project, publishing reports detailing its development and 
capabilities. 60 China’s state-run media has highlighted the 
Manta Ray project’s underwater survivability and made note 
of its potential capability to use AI, big data, and new naviga -
tion technologies to “identify, monitor, and track submarines 
and seabed resources of other countries in disputed waters 
and key waterways” globally. 61 China is also developing its 
own mantra ray-inspired UUVs. At the China Military Smart 
Technology Expo held in Beijing in May 2024, the Boya Gon -
gdao Robot Technology Company displayed its own domes -
tically developed manta ray UUV along with other models 
of biomimetic autonomous submersibles. 62 One team of re -
searchers at China’s Northwestern Polytechnical University 
has already developed six models of manta ray UUVs that 
could reportedly conduct tasks ranging from monitoring coral 
reefs to carrying heavy payloads on long-duration missions 
with integrated reconnaissance and strike capabilities. 63
Chinese Commentators Observe U.S. Military Capabilities 
in the Middle East
Several commentaries in China’s Party-state news media 
view the defense by the United States, Israel, and other part -
ners against Iranian missile strikes on Israel’s territory in 
April 2024 as a successful test of U.S. missile defense technolo -
gy and alliance coordination. The commentators agree that the 
large number of attacking weapons successfully intercepted 
showcased the power of the multilayered missile defense sys -
tem deployed by the United States and Israel. 64 They also note 
the important role the U.S. destroyers played in shooting down 
medium-range ballistic missiles, the contributions of U.S. and 
UK forces in intercepting drones, and the likely importance 
of intelligence sharing between the United States, Israel, and 
other Gulf states before and during the attacks. 65 (For more on 
China’s position on conflicts in the Middle East, see Chapter 5, 
“China and the Middle East.”)

552
PLA Anticipates U.S. Intervention
Evidence suggests the PLA plans for military action by the United 
States in the event of a conflict in the Indo-Pacific. In 2014, General 
Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping directed the 
PLA to “make strategy planning and preparations for dealing with 
a powerful enemy’s military intervention,” using a term frequently 
applied in PLA writings to refer to the United States. 66 The 2020 
edition of the strategic-level PLA textbook Science of Military Strat -
egy * makes repeated reference to external military intervention, 
emphasizing the gravity of potential military intervention carried 
out by powerful enemies, at a large scale, or at a high intensity. † 67 
In one section, the text highlights external military intervention as 
a “strategic risk” that could result in the PLA facing two or even 
many enemies at one time.68 In other sections, it variously describes 
military intervention as an action the PLA must deter, as an im -
portant factor in the timing for beginning and ending a war, and 
as a critical variable influencing war control and escalation. 69 The 
2006 operational-level PLA textbook Science of Campaigns ‡ similar-
ly frames the “military intervention of a powerful enemy” as a key 
variable that PLA forces must anticipate, plan for, and—if neces -
sary—adjust to in the course of executing any military campaign. 70 
In addition to this general description, the text includes “resist[ing] 
the military intervention of a powerful enemy” in the list of basic 
missions for a conventional missile assault campaign, and it pro -
vides additional guidance on handling opposition in the context of 
an offensive campaign against island reefs. 71
China’s Military Objectives Implicate U.S. Defense 
Commitments in the Indo-Pacific
Several of China’s stated military objectives threaten the inter-
ests of U.S. allies and security partners in the Indo-Pacific, includ-
ing those to whom the United States has a treaty defense com -
mitment. China’s 2019 defense white paper includes among the 
country’s national defense aims safeguarding “national sovereign-
ty, unity, territorial integrity and security”; deterring and resist -
ing “aggression”; opposing and containing “Taiwan independence”; 
and safeguarding China’s “maritime rights and interests.” 72 This 
same document claims the Senkaku Islands in the East China 
Sea and all features in the South China Sea as inalienable parts 
of China’s territory while explicitly reserving the option to use 
* Science of Military Strategy  is a core military textbook for senior PLA officers on how wars 
should be planned and conducted at the strategic level. Joel Wuthnow, “What I Learned from the 
PLA’s Latest Strategy Textbook,” Jamestown Foundation, May 25, 2021.
† Although no specific countries are referenced by name, these descriptions most likely charac -
terize the way the PLA considers intervention from the United States. In most of these instances, 
the text either characterizes the intervening party as a “strong” or “powerful” enemy or enemies 
or as a “great” or “major” power or powers, or it characterizes the intervention as “large-scale” 
or “high-intensity.” China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Military 
Strategy 2020, January 2022, 44, 46, 140, 192, 198, 257, 259.
‡ Science of Campaigns  is a military textbook released by China’s National Defense University 
in 2006. According to the China Aerospace Studies Institute, it is studied by almost all PLA 
officers in senior academies. The textbook designs a “campaign” as “the operational activities com-
posed of a series of battles conducted under a unified command by a large formation to achieve 
partial . . . or overall . . . goals of a war.” China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 
PLA’s Science of Campaigns, 2006, [v], 19.

553
force if necessary to unify Taiwan with the Mainland. * 73 China 
maintains an interpretation of its “maritime rights” that is con -
trary to well-established international law and includes privileg -
es to which it is not entitled, and it has repeatedly demonstrated 
a willingness to advance its claims and interests in these areas 
through aggressive and dangerous behavior. 74 A conflict in the 
Senkaku Islands or in the South China Sea could trigger defense 
commitments under the United States’ treaties with Japan † and 
the Philippines.‡ 75 The United States also has a stated interest 
in peace across the Taiwan Strait and an expectation that issues 
will be resolved without the use of force. 76 Since at least the 
1990s, Chinese military planners have acknowledged the need to 
base military planning for a war against Taiwan on the assump -
tion of U.S. involvement, and they have worried that the PLA 
could be defeated if it does not rectify its various technological 
and manpower-related deficiencies.§ 77
China’s Military Capabilities for “Counter-Intervention”
China has developed military capabilities designed to undermine 
the U.S. military’s ability to become involved in a conflict between 
China and its neighbors. 78 China’s plan to counter U.S. military 
intervention requires the capacity to find U.S. forces, thwart their 
operations, hamper their ability to rely on satellites and other net -
worked systems, and destroy forward-based assets as well as assets 
at long distances.79 Among the most important capabilities for these 
* Other governments in the Indo-Pacific hold competing sovereignty claims in the region. For 
instance, Japan, Taiwan, and China claim the Senkakus. China asserts sovereignty over the is -
land of Taiwan, a claim disputed by the government in Taipei. Taiwan, the Philippines, Malaysia, 
Vietnam, Brunei, and Indonesia also claim territory in the South China Sea. Ben Dolven et al., 
“China Primer: South China Sea Disputes,” Congressional Research Service  IF10607, August 21, 
2023; Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, MOFA Condemns False Claim Regarding Taiwan’s 
Sovereignty in Joint Statement Issued by China and Russia , February 5, 2022; Mark E. Manyin, 
“The Senkakus (Diaoyu/Diaoyutai) Dispute: U.S. Treaty Obligations,” Congressional Research Ser-
vice R42761, March 1, 2021.
† In their security treaty, the United States and Japan commit to act in response to “an armed 
attack on either Party in the territories under administration of Japan,” which includes the Jap -
anese-administered Senkaku Islands. David Vergun, “Austin Says U.S. Committed to Defending 
Japan, Including Senkaku Islands,” DOD News, October 4, 2023; Reuters, “Obama Says Disputed 
Islands within Scope of US-Japan Security Treaty,” April 22, 2014; Japan’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, Japan-U.S. Security Treaty, January 19, 1960, Article V.
‡ In their mutual defense treaty, the United States and the Philippines commit to act to meet 
common dangers in the event of an armed attack against either party in the Pacific, which, as 
clarified in the countries’ 2023 Bilateral Defense Guidelines, includes an attack on either state’s 
public vessels, aircraft, or armed forces (including coast guards) anywhere in the South China 
Sea. U.S. Department of Defense, FACT SHEET: U.S.-Philippines Bilateral Defense Guidelines , 
May 3, 2023; U.S. Department of State, U.S. Collective Defense Arrangements ; Avalon Project at 
the Yale Law School, “Mutual Defense Treaty Between the United States and the Republic of the 
Philippines; August 30, 1951.”
§ In response to previous acts of Chinese aggression or military coercion against Taiwan during 
the so-called “First Taiwan Strait Crisis” (1954–1955), the “Second Taiwan Strait Crisis” (1958), 
and the “Third Taiwan Strait Crisis” (1995–1996), the United States successfully leveraged cred -
ible military threats to deter a Chinese invasion or to deter escalating use of force. Kristen 
Gunness and Phillip C. Saunders, “Averting Escalation and Avoiding War: Lessons from the 
1995–1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis,” National Defense University Press, China Strategic Perspectives  
17 (December 2022): 37; U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2021 Annual 
Report to Congress , November 2021, 391.
China’s Military Objectives Implicate U.S. Defense 
Commitments in the Indo-Pacific— Continued

554
missions are the PLA’s C4ISR * networks, EW assets, and offensive 
missile forces, each of which it has significantly improved over the 
past two decades. At the same time, however, the PLA continues to 
contend with issues sustaining and maintaining its warfighters in 
combat.
Achieving Information Dominance in Conflict Involving 
the United States
China views “information dominance” as a key effort to control 
the battlespace and gain operational advantage in warfare. 80 In-
formation dominance is defined by the PLA as the ability to es -
tablish control of information flows in a particular space and time 
by collecting and managing information and employing informa -
tion more precisely than the adversary.81 Chinese military strate-
gists believe information dominance is a prerequisite to achieving 
air and maritime dominance and is critical to the PLA’s combat 
success in any regional conflict. 82 The PLA pursues information 
dominance by conducting informationized warfare, which utilizes 
information systems, data gathering and fusion, and command 
automation tools to enable joint operations and gain superiority 
in the information domain in combat. 83 Chinese military writings 
describe modern warfare as involving “systems confrontation” or 
“systems destruction warfare,” meaning a conflict is fought be -
tween adversarial operational systems. † 84  The PLA views “sys -
tems confrontation” as the means to paralyze the functions of 
an adversary’s combat and operational systems in the air, sea, 
land, space, cyber, and electromagnetic domains using kinetic and 
non-kinetic attacks.85 Anticipating such attacks in turn, the PLA 
would also prioritize the defense of its own C4ISR systems against 
enemy disruptions and preserve its access to battlespace data. 86
Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, 
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR)
The PLA is working to build a robust C4ISR infrastructure to 
quickly find U.S. military forces and achieve battlefield information 
dominance in the event of kinetic conflict. 87 C4ISR enables militar -
ies to access—and to deny enemies’ access to—battlespace informa -
tion, including locating, tracking, and targeting enemy assets. 88 The 
PLA has studied the United States’ reliance on C4ISR systems in 
* C4ISR is an acronym that refers to a collection of individual systems. Other variations of 
“C4ISR” may include additional systems such as adding “cyber” or “targeting” (C5ISR-T). In 
China’s Science of Military Strategy 2020 , it describes the battlefield information network as 
a “C4ISRK” system (Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, 
Reconnaissance, Kill) and refers to C4ISRK as a system the U.S. military relies on to synchronize 
combat commands at all levels. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and 
Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 4; China 
Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Military Strategy 2020 , January 
2022, 349.
† According to Jeffrey Engstrom, senior political scientist at the RAND Corporation, the PLA’s 
theory of victory in modern warfare is no longer centered on the annihilation of enemy forces. 
Instead, it is now based on system destruction warfare, in which victory may be achieved by 
the ability to “disrupt, paralyze, or destroy the operational capability of the enemy’s operational 
system.” Jeffrey Engstrom, “Systems Confrontation and System Destruction Warfare: How the 
Chinese People’s Liberation Army Seeks to Wage Modern Warfare,” RAND Corporation, February 
1, 2018, iii.

555
recent wars and observed how the U.S. military uses these systems 
to conduct reconnaissance, provide early warning, and enable the 
real-time synchronization of combat commands at all levels. 89 Rec-
ognizing that its own C4ISR was an area of substantial weakness, 
the PLA began modernizing, upgrading, and expanding its commu -
nications infrastructure in the 1990s to support future command 
and control capabilities.90 According to J. Michael Dahm, senior resi-
dent fellow for aerospace and China studies at the Mitchell Institute 
for Aerospace Studies, decades of investment have resulted in the 
PLA developing a robust, redundant, and resilient C4ISR system. 91 
Mr. Dahm further suggests that China’s C4ISR architecture could 
provide military advantages to the PLA by establishing localized 
information, air, and maritime dominance in key areas out to the 
second island chain and by enabling strikes on U.S. bases and de -
ployed forces in the Indo-Pacific region. 92 The PLA is also looking 
to leverage artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities to accelerate its 
processing of imagery, signals, and other ISR data across the land, 
air, sea, and space domains. 93 (For more on the PLA’s use of AI to 
enhance its ISR capabilities, see Chapter 3, “U.S.-China Competition 
in Emerging Technologies.”)
China’s C4ISR consists of a suite of interconnected systems to 
support PLA warfighter decision-making and targeting capabilities 
across varied domains. 94 These include:
 • Terrestrial (ground-based) C4ISR:  China’s terrestrial net -
work is the core architecture of the PLA’s broader C4ISR 
system. 95 The PLA’s National Defense Communications Net -
work, upgraded in the mid-1990s to high-speed fiber-optic ca -
ble, serves as the PLA’s primary communication network. 96 
The network connects the PLA command centers to units in 
the field with reliable communications 97 According to Mr. 
Dahm, compared to the space-based communications capabil -
ities, the “hard-wired” connectivity of the National Defense 
Communications Network could provide the PLA with more 
secure communications that would be difficult for an attack -
er to disrupt or destroy. * 98 China has also constructed sky -
wave over-the-horizon (OTH) radar systems to increase the 
PLA’s ability to locate targets such as ships and aircraft up to 
1,864 miles (3000km) from China’s coastline. † 99 OTH radars 
are reported to have been deployed along China’s coast since 
at least 2010. 100 In addition, radar detected on Chinese-oc -
cupied features in the Spratlys—including Subi Reef, Fiery 
Cross Reef, Cuarteron Reef, and Mischief Reef—are probably 
over-the-horizon; they would play a crucial role in enabling 
the PLA to detect and track U.S. and allied forces between 
the first and second island chains. 101
 • Air C4ISR: The PLA has increased the number of special mis -
sion aircraft and uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs) that have ex -
* China’s use of buried fiber-optic cables may be more secure from remote signals intelligence 
and less susceptible against electromagnetic and radiofrequency weapons and jamming. Carlo 
Kopp, “Advances in PLA C4ISR Capabilities,” Jamestown Foundation, February 18, 2010.
† According to the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, China’s OTH radar is used to 
detect low-altitude penetrating bombers and has early warning ability against intercontinental 
ballistic missiles and other long-range platforms. U.S. Army TRADOC, Type SLR-66 Chinese Over-
The-Horizon (OTH) Radar .

556
tended the PLA’s line of sight and improved its airborne early 
warning and control (AEW&C) and signals intelligence (SIGINT) 
capabilities.* 102 The PLA Air Force and PLA Navy together are 
estimated to operate 52 AEW&C aircraft, including the KJ-200, 
KJ-500, and Y-8J.103 Mr. Dahm points to commercial satellite 
imagery revealing new special mission aircraft that have ap -
peared at PLA airfields, including the KJ-500 AEW&C aircraft, 
KQ-200 anti-submarine warfare/maritime patrol aircraft, and 
Y-9JB signals and electronic intelligence aircraft. 104 These spe -
cial mission aircraft provide C4ISR support to PLA Air Force 
and PLA Navy operations and have been flying beyond the first 
island chain and operating from China’s artificial features in 
the South China Sea. 105 For example, in January 2024, the KJ-
500 early warning aircraft likely tested the performance of its 
radar and sensors to support J-15 carrier-based fighter jets and 
J-11B land-based fighter jets to track targets and support their 
long-range air-to-air fires during a live-fire exercise over the 
South China Sea. 106 In March 2022, then U.S. Pacific Air Force 
Commander Kenneth Wilsbach reportedly noted the KJ-500’s 
important role in supporting the PLA’s fifth-generation J-20 
fighter and the need for U.S. forces to interrupt the kill chain 
for long-range air-to-air missiles. 107
 • Maritime C4ISR: The PLA has developed several platforms to 
conduct C4ISR in the maritime domain. These platforms include 
surface combatant ships that are equipped with radars, sensors, 
and sonars, such as the new Type 055 Renhai guided-missile de-
stroyer.108 Mr. Dahm notes that PLA Navy warships operating 
in areas beyond the first island chain to the South China Sea, 
the Gulf of Aden, and Southwest Asia conduct long-range mar -
itime ISR that could provide indications and warning of U.S. or 
allied movements.109 The PLA Navy also has a variety of plat -
forms to track enemy submarines, such as the Z-20 shipborne 
ASW helicopter, KQ-200 ASW/maritime patrol aircraft, and sur-
face combatant ships equipped with variable-depth sonars and 
towed array sonar systems. 110
 • Space-based C4ISR: The PLA has improved its space-based 
C4ISR capabilities by increasing its numbers of on-orbit sat -
ellites that provide remote sensing, † signals and electronic in -
telligence, and communications capabilities. 111 Between 2020 
and 2024, the PLA doubled its ISR satellites in geostationary 
orbit; between 2018 and 2024, it tripled its ISR satellites in low 
Earth orbit. ‡ 112 The PLA is estimated to have 92 ISR satel -
lites and 81 electronic intelligence/SIGINT satellites in orbit. 113 
* These special mission aircraft can also conduct electronic attack (jamming) capabilities. J. 
Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United 
States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 27.
† Remote-sensing capabilities of these satellites include electro-optic, hyperspectral, infrared imag-
ing, and synthetic aperture radar. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and 
Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners, March 21, 2024, 27.
‡ To illustrate China’s urgency to develop this capability, 76 percent of China’s 213 low Earth 
orbit satellites have been launched since 2021. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 27.

557
General Stephen Whiting, commander of U.S. Space Command, 
stated in written testimony for the U.S. Senate Armed Services 
Committee in February 2024 that China’s advances in its space 
capabilities increase its ability to monitor, track, and target 
U.S. and allied forces both on the ground and on orbit. 114 Mr. 
Dahm notes that China is reportedly one of the only countries 
with electro-optic imaging satellites in geostationary orbit that 
can provide “persistent imagery coverage across most of the In -
do-Pacific to detect U.S. and allied ships,” though these images 
are likely to be low in resolution due to the satellites’ distance 
from the Earth and atmospheric conditions. 115 Other Chinese 
satellites launched into geostationary orbit, such as the Ludi 
Tance-4 01  (Land Exploration-4 01) synthetic aperture radar 
(SAR), can reportedly collect 20-meter-resolution images in all 
weather conditions, allowing China to more effectively detect 
and track U.S. ships at sea. 116
The PLA’s Counter-C4ISR Efforts
The PLA could use its advances in directed energy weapons, 
anti-satellite capabilities, and other counterspace technologies to 
threaten the United States’ C4ISR networks and use of the space 
domain in peacetime or in a counter-intervention scenario. 117 
There is some public evidence that the PLA views researching 
and developing such counter-C4ISR capabilities as an important 
way to respond to the emergence of commercial satellite providers 
and their contracting relationships with DOD. * For example, in 
May 2022, PLA researchers from the Beijing Institute of Tracking 
and Telecommunications—affiliated with the now disbanded PLA 
Strategic Support Force—called for the development of anti-sat -
ellite capabilities such as microwave technology that can jam 
communications to disrupt the functions and operating systems 
of satellite constellations like SpaceX’s Starlink. † 118 Following a 
December 2022 announcement that SpaceX would be partnering 
with DOD to provide technology and launch capability—called 
Starshield—to support national security efforts, PLA research -
ers assessed that Starshield satellites could make it difficult for 
PLA military operations to elude U.S. monitoring. 119 According 
to a Reuters review of almost 100 articles in more than 20 Chi -
* Examples of counter-C4ISR capabilities include the use of camouflage, denial, attack, or de -
ception activities that could negatively impact the United States and allied forces’ ability to sense 
and target PLA forces. For instance, actions may also include electronic warfare, cyber attacks, 
and other physical or nonphysical destruction or disruption of adversary networks, ISR platforms, 
and command nodes. One article published in the PLA Daily by the Political Work Department 
of the PLA’s Northern Theater Command likened adversary ships, naval platforms, and combat 
aircraft whose access to C4ISR networks had been disrupted to “headless flies.” J. Michael Dahm, 
written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s 
Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pa -
cific Allies and Partners, March 21, 2024, 4, 17; Wang Ning, “Seizing Information Control Is Key 
to Taking the Initiative on the Battlefield” (夺取制信息权是掌握战场主动权的关键), China Military 
Online, November 2, 2016. Translation.
† The PLA has also been paying close attention to the effective use of constellation satellite 
networks in warfare, such as Starlink, which have been used to secure the communications of 
Ukraine’s military amid attacks by Russia. PLA researchers have reportedly noted how Star -
link services could support U.S. military operations and provide ISR capabilities around Taiwan. 
Kyodo News , “China Wary of SpaceX’s Starlink Service during Taiwan Contingency,” ABS-CBN 
News, May 26, 2024; Eduardo Baptista and Greg Torode, “Insight: Studying Ukraine War, China’s 
Military Minds Fret over U.S. Missiles, Starlink,” Reuters, March 7, 2023.

558
nese defense journals, in one of the articles PLA researchers 
expressed urgency for China to develop its own similar satellite 
network while developing other capabilities to shoot down or dis -
able Starlink satellite systems. 120 This concern has accelerated 
China’s development of its own constellation satellite network as 
well as capabilities to attack or deny U.S. space programs. 121 In 
a counter-intervention scenario, the PLA would likely engage in 
“counter-C4ISR” to attack critical nodes of the United States’ own 
C4ISR systems, such as satellites, in order to thwart a potential 
U.S. and allied military advance. 122
Electronic Warfare
The PLA has developed substantial EW capabilities to detect, tar -
get, and disrupt U.S., allied, and partner forces operating in the 
Indo-Pacific.123 In the event of a Taiwan contingency, the PLA could 
expect the United States to field unmanned submarines, unmanned 
surface ships, aerial drones, next-generation aircraft and ships 
equipped with advanced sensors, radars, and precision-guided mu -
nitions to target China’s invasion force.124 In preparation for such a 
contingency, experts assess that China’s developed EW capabilities 
would present a significant challenge to U.S. forces by disrupting 
the data links and communications U.S. and allied forces need to 
operate during conflict. 125 In October 2023, a senior U.S. defense 
official indicated the PLA anticipates needing to be better prepared 
to operate in a complex electromagnetic environment and continues 
to try to improve its EW capabilities. 126 In his testimony to the 
Commission, Mr. Dahm argued that the PLA has invested in EW 
capabilities that exceed those of the Russian military and even po -
tentially those of the U.S. military. 127
The PLA’s EW capabilities include offensive and defensive capa -
bilities that disrupt an enemy’s equipment or protect PLA weapons 
systems from enemy attack. 128 In addition, the PLA considers how 
EW can be employed as a deception strategy by concealing real sig -
nals and injecting false information to mislead adversary operators 
and decision-makers.129
 • Electronic attack (EA) capabilities: The PLA uses electromagnet-
ic or directed energy to disrupt an adversary’s electronic infor -
mation systems, or it uses anti-radiation missiles, high-energy 
lasers, and electromagnetic pulse weapons to directly damage 
their equipment.130 These EA capabilities mostly correspond to 
ground-based and road-mobile electronic countermeasures bri -
gades.* 131 The PLA Air Force, PLA Navy, and PLA Rocket Force 
each operate electronic countermeasures brigades that provide 
both electronic support (e.g., intelligence) and EA capabilities 
* An example of ground-based jamming equipment was reported in April 2018, when China 
installed the equipment on Mischief Reef in the Spratlys. Michael R. Gordon and Jeremy Page, 
“China Installed Military Jamming Equipment on Spratly Islands, U.S. Says,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, April 9, 2018 .
The PLA’s Counter-C4ISR Efforts— Continued

559
to the theater commands. * 132 Other capabilities include PLA 
Air Force EA aircraft such as the new Y-9G that conducts com -
munications jamming. The PLA Air Force currently fields three 
Y-9G variants and two Y-9XZ variants. † 133 The PLA Air Force 
also fields at least 12 J-16D PLA radar-jamming EW aircraft 
with sensors that can determine the position of radar-transmit -
ting devices used to both jam and target adversary radars. 134 
In January 2022, two J-16D aircraft were spotted, reportedly for 
the first time, conducting an exercise alongside 11 other PLA 
aircraft that entered Taiwan’s Air Defense Identification Zone, 
demonstrating the PLA’s intent to conduct EW in a Taiwan con-
tingency.135 The PLA has also developed anti-radiation weapons 
designed to destroy radar or communications targets, such as 
the PLA Air Force YJ-91 anti-radiation missile (ARM) or sever -
al new ARMs like the TL-30 (known as the AKF088C) that can 
reportedly fly and loiter in search for targeted enemy electronic 
signals.136 China has sought to improve its ARMs by produc -
ing a seeker on the missile that could cover multiple frequency 
bands and could prioritize targets that are uploaded to the on -
board computer from the ground or by pilots while in flight. 137 
The PLA has also developed counterspace EA capabilities, such 
as experimental on-orbit jamming systems and road-mobile sat -
ellite jamming facilities and brigades that can potentially con -
duct non-kinetic attacks on U.S. and allied satellites as a first 
move in a counter-intervention operation. 138
 • Electronic protection (EP) capabilities:  China anticipates re -
ciprocal electronic jamming attacks as well as kinetic attacks 
against its own C4ISR, and it has taken measures to protect its 
systems. The PLA conducts trainings and exercises to prepare 
units, such as radar brigades, for an attack or to protect against 
enemy satellites conducting reconnaissance.139 EP activities can 
also involve strategies like “frequency hopping,” where a radar 
or communications system jumps across a preset array of fre -
quencies to make it difficult for enemies to detect and jam. ‡ 140 
The PLA has also built redundancy into its systems, protecting 
against adversarial actions by developing a joint datalink sys -
tem that covers a broad range of the frequency spectrum. 141 Mr. 
Dahm notes that these datalink systems § are likely resistant 
to adversarial intercepts and jamming. 142 In effect, the PLA’s 
* The previous PLA Strategic Support Force operated ground-based electronic countermeasure 
brigades that likely focused on the air defense of Beijing. In April 2024, China disbanded the 
Strategic Support Force and created three new military forces: the Military Aerospace Force, 
the Cyberspace Force, and the Information Support Force. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony 
for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Count-
er Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and 
Partners, March 21, 2024, 33. For more on the PLA Strategic Support Force reorganization, see 
Chapter 2, “U.S.-China Security and Foreign Affairs (Year in Review).”
† It is estimated that the PLA Air Force has four electronic warfare regiments, which consist 
of about 31 electronic warfare aircrafts including the J-16D Flanker, Y-8CB, Y-8DZ, Y-8G, Y-8XZ, 
Y-9G, and Y-9XZ. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter 
Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 260.
‡ Other operational forms of electronic protection to avoid detection include turning off radars 
and not operating radars in view of enemy satellite collection. J. Michael Dahm, Senior Resident 
Fellow, Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies , interview with Commission staff, May 28, 2024.
§ The PLA’s Joint Information Distribution System is similar to the U.S. Link-16 or Joint Tac -
tical Information Distribution System data link. The system is developed as a frequency-hopping 
datalink and described by Chinese sources as being capable of connecting army, navy, air force, 
and satellite communication networks and integrating these service-level tactical data links into 

560
broad range of coverage over the frequency spectrum * increas-
es the challenge for an adversary to jam or destroy enough of 
the PLA’s electronic systems to significantly disrupt its ability 
to access battlespace-related information. 143 The PLA has also 
looked to utilize emerging technologies to enhance its electron -
ic protection capabilities to counter U.S. electronic attacks. 144 
For instance, as reported in the South China Morning Post , a 
Chinese academic journal titled Radar and Electronic Count -
er Measure examines how AI could help the PLA Navy’s radar 
counter the U.S. Navy’s EA-18G Growler’s electromagnetic jam-
ming.145
The PLA’s investments in a diversity of EW capabilities has like -
ly improved its ability to operate in a complex electromagnetic en -
vironment.146 It continues to emphasize combat training in such 
an environment; in January 2024, a naval brigade of the Southern 
Theater Command simulated targeting and countering enemy air -
craft anti-jamming methods. 147 Mr. Dahm notes it is unclear based 
on open source research how the PLA’s EA capabilities may fare 
against advanced and hardened U.S. military systems equipped 
with electronic protection capabilities. 148 Comparing the United 
States’ and China’s EW systems, it is likely that the U.S. Navy EW 
aircraft, the EA-18G Growler, is qualitatively better than any jam -
mer, such as the Y-9G, in the PLA inventory.149 That said, Mr. Dahm 
assesses that the diversity found in PLA air-to-air weapons, naval 
radars, surface-to-air missile radars, and early warning radars poses 
significant challenges for the U.S. military to effectively disrupt all 
of the PLA systems. 150
China’s Offensive Missile Capabilities
China’s continued expansion of its missile force is a critical com -
ponent of its A2/AD capabilities that could threaten U.S. and al -
lied bases, logistics and port facilities, and other key infrastructure 
in the Indo-Pacific. 151 Over time, China has increased the number, 
range, precision, and types of missiles in its arsenal, particularly for 
medium- and long-range missiles.152 In 2015, at the start of China’s 
major military modernization reforms, DOD estimated that the PLA 
had fielded 200–300 medium-range ballistic missiles (with a range 
of approximately 1,500 kilometers (km) (930 miles [mi]) with 100–
125 launchers; as of 2023, the PLA had reportedly deployed 1,000 
medium-range ballistic missiles and 300 launchers. 153 Similarly, in 
2018, DOD published for the first time its estimate that the PLA 
had deployed 16–30 intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBMs), 
with a range of approximately 3,000–4,000 km (1,900–2,500 mi) 
with 16–30 launchers; as of 2023, DOD assessed that the PLA had 
500 IRBMs and 250 launchers.154 The large quantity of longer-range 
IRBMs also enables the PLA to extend the distance and frequency 
a single joint network. J. Michel Dahm, “Inter-Island Communications,” Johns Hopkins Applied 
Physics Laboratory, July, 2020, 10–11.
* The PLA’s coverage over the frequency spectrum includes ground-based radars employed for 
ISR ranging from high-frequency (HF) skywave OTH to very-high-frequency (VHF); ultra-high 
frequency (UHF); and L-, S-, C-, and X-band radars. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter 
Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 34; J. Michael Dahm, “South China Sea Military Capability Series: Air and 
Surface Radar,” Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory , 2020, 2–21.

561
of its strikes out to the Philippine Sea and beyond, increasing the 
risks to U.S. and allied forces operating within the second island 
chain.155 The PLA has also improved the precision of its missiles, 
as illustrated in recent exercises targeting moving maritime assets 
and ground-based assets. * 156 In addition, the PLA has diversified 
the types of missiles in its arsenal and now has a variety of bal -
listic and cruise missiles that can strike land-, air-, and sea-based 
targets.† 157 The PLA has also invested in the development of hyper -
sonic technology and is known to have outfitted the medium-range 
DF-17 with a hypersonic glide vehicle. 158 The maneuverability of 
the hypersonic glide vehicle could allow the missile to evade U.S. 
air and missile defenses. 159 Thomas Shugart, adjunct senior fellow 
at the Center for a New American Security, also assesses that the 
PLA’s greater quantity of anti-ship ballistic missiles will enable it to 
strike not only high-value targets like large and medium-size ships 
(such as U.S. aircraft carriers) but also smaller groups or warships 
(such as logistics ships). 160
Competency of China’s missile forces is difficult to determine. Some 
Chinese military analysts project confidence that its missile force is 
formidable enough to counter changes in the U.S. force posture in 
the region. Ms. Kivlehan-Wise highlights writings by a retired PLA 
officer that claim China’s long-range missiles and warfighting capa-
bilities in the air domain would render any U.S. attempts to create 
an “outpost on the first island chain . . . impossible.” 161 Even so, re -
cent corruption charges and the rare admission of shortcomings in 
the political oversight ‡ of training conducted by the PLA’s Rocket 
Force units—reported in 2023—suggests a potential deficiency in 
the force’s combat readiness.162 (For more on corruption investiga -
tion within the PLA Rocket Force and the Equipment Development 
Department, see Chapter 2, “U.S.-China Security and Foreign Af -
fairs (Year in Review).”)
* For example, in May 2023, the PLA conducted a joint exercise about 740 km northwest of 
Guam involving the PLA Rocket Force and the PLA Navy’s Shandong aircraft carrier group that 
reportedly illustrated its capacity to target moving surface ships and naval bases beyond the first 
island chain. In 2020, the PLA also conducted a live-fire exercise where it launched DF-21 and 
DF-26 ballistic missiles and successfully hit a moving ship in the South China Sea. International 
Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 
220; U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments 
Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023, October 19, 2023, 67; Minnie Chan, “China Says 
PLA Rocket Force Joined Shandong Carrier Group in Drills near US Base in Western Pacif -
ic,” South China Morning Post , May 10, 2023; Kristin Huang, “China’s ‘Aircraft-Carrier Killer’ 
Missiles Successfully Hit Target Ship in South China Sea, PLA Insider Reveals,” South China 
Morning Post, November 14, 2020 .
† China has developed robust anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs) with an estimate of over 140 
DF-26s and approximately 30 DF-21Ds. It has also developed air-launched land attack cruise 
missiles (LACMs) such as the CJ-20, air-launched antiship cruise missiles (ASCMs) such as the 
YJ-12 and the YJ-18, and sea-launched land attack cruise missiles and sea-launched antiship 
cruise missiles that can target U.S. and allied military forces on fixed bases in the Indo-Pacific as 
well as on moving air and maritime assets operating within the region. International Institute 
for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter Five: Asia” February 12, 2024, 254; U.S. 
Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 
the People’s Republic of China 2023, October 19, 2023, 66–67; Jordan Wilson, “China’s Expanding 
Ability to Conduct Conventional Missile Strikes on Guam,” U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, May 10, 2016, 8–11.
‡ A September 2023 PLA Daily article details the importance of bolstering unit-level political 
commissar work to oversee the implementation of reforms and training by PLA Rocket Force 
units. Reuters, “China’s Military Rocket Force Uncovers ‘Shortcomings,’ PLA Daily Reports,” Sep-
tember 15, 2023; Yang Shaotong and Yang Lun, “The Party Committee of a Certain Rocket Force 
Conducted an In-Depth Investigation and Study to Solve Problems in the Development of the 
Army” (火箭军某部党委深入调查研究解决部队发展难题), PLA Daily , September 15, 2023. Transla -
tion.

562
China’s Logistics and Maintenance Sustainment Capabilities 
Improve, but Challenges Remain
The PLA views logistics support functions as a key requirement 
for winning wars and has sought to transform its decentralized logis-
tics system to a more centralized hub-and-spoke system that better 
enables joint operations. 163 In order to sustain the PLA’s offensive 
campaigns in a Taiwan scenario (such as blockades, joint firepower 
strike, and island landing operations), the PLA would require ex -
tensive logistics support to transport material and oil supplies, con -
duct infrastructure protection, and enable the maintenance of war 
material reserves. 164 The PLA has spent more than two decades 
adjusting its approach to logistics to respond to contingencies more 
quickly and efficiently and with greater capacity.165 These measures 
include the following:
 • Under the 2016 military reforms initiated by General Secretary 
Xi, the PLA created the Joint Logistics Support Force with the 
intent to improve the management of its logistics and equip -
ment support system across the theater commands. 166
 • The PLA has continued to conduct exercises and training fo -
cused on improving its joint logistics capability across theater 
commands.* 167 These exercises and training appear to focus on 
preparing for situations in which PLA logistics are targeted in 
a conflict.168 For instance, in August 2023, the Eastern Theater 
Command Air Force conducted runway repair drills and train -
ing to improve its ability to recover following enemy strikes. 169
 • The PLA has conducted airfield renovations, expanded taxi -
ways, developed new shelters for aircraft, and updated fuel and 
munitions storage.† 170
 • For the PLA Navy, the service has been developing replenish -
ment platforms such as auxiliary replenishment oilers and has 
been practicing the transfer of missile systems while underway 
at sea.171 For example, the PLA Navy’s Zhanlan far seas train -
ing exercise in 2020 focused on combat support to sustain lim -
ited offensive strikes at sea and featured the first known case 
of the PLA Navy training on transferring ordnance while un -
derway outside the first island chain, including replenishment 
of torpedoes using a helicopter. 172
 • The PLA is also investing in new technologies such as AI, 
autonomous vehicles, big data, cloud computing, data mining 
technology, Internet of Things, 5G mobile communications, and 
* Kevin McCauley, an independent analyst, assessed in 2022 that extensive logistics exercises 
and training to ensure the PLA’s successful execution of complex and difficult logistics support 
plans for a large-scale joint landing operation had not appeared to have taken place thus far. 
Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval War College, China 
Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 22 , July 2022, 1.
† According to Eli Tirk, research analyst at the China Aerospace Studies Institute, these up -
dates of hardened storage facilities and the expansion of munition storage occurred at airfields 
within the Eastern Theater Command that could improve the PLA’s combat abilities in a Taiwan 
contingency. Mr. Tirk also assesses that in a contingency involving a large-scale PLA air combat 
operation conducting a blockade of Taiwan, the airfields within and around 600 miles of Taiwan 
in the Eastern Theater Command and Southern Theater Command would allow the PLA to op -
erate over and around Taiwan for longer periods of time while enabling aircraft on longer-range 
sorties conducting counter-intervention operations to refuel and rearm. Eli Tirk, “PLA Capability 
to Sustain Air Combat Operations,” U.S. Army War College, February 2023, 147.

563
other automatic identification technologies to enhance precision 
logistics that could improve decision-making for PLA command -
ers.173
Despite efforts to improve its logistics capabilities, however, the 
PLA continues to face a range of challenges that could limit its ef -
fectiveness in combat.
 • The continuous reorganization of the PLA’s logistics forces has 
led to internal frictions, complex coordination issues, and diffi -
cult command issues that hold implications for response time 
and efficiency of wartime logistics support. 174
 • The PLA may lack sufficient logistics capabilities required to 
successfully support a large-scale amphibious landing on Tai -
wan, and countering a foreign military response would add 
additional strain on the PLA’s logistics assets. 175 According to 
Kevin McCauley, an independent analyst, the PLA’s All Army 
Logistics Academic Research Center’s writings reflect concerns 
that a U.S. military response could disrupt the PLA’s logistics 
operations through missile strikes or information attacks. 176
 • The PLA also faces maintenance challenges. In written testimo -
ny to the Commission, Cristina Garafola, policy researcher at 
the RAND Corporation, argued that shortcomings in the PLA’s 
maintenance management system * could present key challeng -
es to China’s logistics performance during high-end combat. 177 
Ms. Garafola similarly noted that the PLA’s rapid force mod -
ernization combined with its lack of recent combat experience 
means its maintenance systems could struggle to conduct bat -
tlefield repair of high-technology weapons and equipment. † 178 
For example, she identified maintenance challenges that could 
result in degraded performance for advanced platforms such as 
the J-20 fighter jet and the maritime and naval assets on fea -
tures in the South China Sea.179 A second element is insufficient 
training for the personnel within the PLA’s logistics system who 
are tasked with maintaining important weapons platforms and 
other equipment. 180 Ms. Garafola also identified low morale 
and ad hoc practices across the services as key vulnerabilities 
that could compromise the PLA’s ability to maintain its growing 
suite of weapons systems under battlefield conditions. ‡ 181 In 
a high-intensity conflict, any limitations in PLA maintainers’ 
ability to service increasingly advanced maritime and air assets 
could have operational effects on PLA war-fighting performance, 
* The PLA’s maintenance management system is a component of the logistics and sustainment 
activities but separate from the Joint Logistics Support Force command structure. Cristina Ga -
rafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on 
China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and 
Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners, March 21, 2024, 1, 9.
† The 2020 Science of Military  Strategy highlights that the task of equipment maintenance 
has become more “onerous” and cites the potential for higher failure rates in new weapons and 
equipment not tested under combat conditions. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own 
Words: Science of Military Strategy 2020 , January 2022, 443.
‡ For example, a PLA Daily article reveals the lack of an institutionalized approach for highly 
skilled maintainers to pass on their knowledge to the unit prior to retirement. Cristina Gara -
fola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on 
China’s Evolving Counter-Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and 
Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners, March 21, 2024, 7; Jia Baohua, Yang Lei, and Xiang Shuangxi, 
“Compiling an ‘Encyclopedia’ for Equipment Maintenance” (为装备维修编制‘百科全书'), PLA Daily, 
April 5, 2018. Translation.

564
such as low platform availability rates, reduced sortie genera -
tion, or degraded platform performance. 182
 • The PLA may also face shortages of supplies close to the loca -
tion of a potential conflict. PLA experts assess that its war ma -
terial reserves, including the stockpiling of oil, equipment parts, 
and munitions, need to be strengthened along its frontline tacti -
cal areas, such as China’s coastline across from Taiwan.183 Com-
pounding this potential shortage of supplies near the vicinity 
of the conflict are uncertainties about the PLA’s capability to 
respond quickly and move large quantities of supplies through -
out the country. * (For more on China’s stockpiling efforts, see 
Chapter 7, “China’s New Measures for Control, Mobilization, 
and Resilience.”)
U.S.-Allied Efforts to Address Challenges from 
China’s Military
U.S. alliances represent a critical part of the United States’ ap -
proach to pursuing security and advancing stability in the Indo-Pa -
cific region, including responding to threats from China’s counter-in-
tervention capabilities. Christopher Johnstone, senior adviser and 
Japan Chair at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
argued in his testimony before the Commission that U.S. alliances 
in the Indo-Pacific represent a “foundational strength for the United 
States” both for the access they provide and for the capabilities they 
bring to the table. 184 Allies’ provision of basing, rotational, or other 
access enables a routine U.S. military presence and ensures that 
the United States is able to respond quickly to a crisis. 185 Alliances 
can potentially reinforce deterrence by complicating Beijing’s deci -
sion-making, since they increase the likelihood that a conflict will 
involve more military actors than the United States. 186
There are prospects for increased allied cooperation in the face 
of China’s counter-intervention capabilities. In addition to the com -
mon values and strategic interests underlying these alliance com -
mitments, the United States and its Indo-Pacific allies increasingly 
share similar concerns about the implications of China’s military 
capabilities and objectives.187 There nevertheless remain differences 
in the specific activities each country might be willing to participate 
in or to support, driven by differences in political will and the capa -
bilities of their militaries.
U.S. Defense Industrial Base Challenges
A robust and resilient U.S. defense industrial base is crucial 
for the sustainment of U.S. strategic competition in peacetime 
and surge capacity in wartime. The U.S. defense industrial base 
faces acute challenges brought by an evolving strategic environ -
* There have been few recent events by which to judge the PLA’s current capacity for rapid 
mobilization. However, some observers pointed to this as an area of challenge during the 2008 
Sichuan earthquake and the PLA’s response to the outbreak of COVID-19 in 2022. Elsa Kania 
and Ian Burns McCaslin, “People’s Warfare against COVID-19: Testing China’s Military Medi -
cal and Defense Mobilization Capabilities,” Institute for the Study of War, December 2020, 25 ; 
Joel Wuthnow, “Responding to the Epidemic in Wuhan: Insights into Chinese Military Logistics,” 
Jamestown Foundation, April 13, 2020 ; Jake Hooker, “Quake Revealed Deficiencies of China’s 
Military,” New York Times, July 2, 2008.

565
ment that has placed strain on U.S. policies and investments, a 
limited workforce, and inadequate domestic production. 188 Some 
problems currently facing the defense industrial base include a 
high reliance on a small number of contractors for critical de -
fense capabilities; supply chain difficulties; challenges identify -
ing, recruiting, and retaining talent; and complex and protracted 
procurement procedures.189 These issues within the U.S. defense 
industrial base contribute to challenges and delays in supplying 
not only the U.S. military but also U.S. allies and partners. 190 
One area of particular concern is the U.S. capacity to keep up 
with surging demand for munitions in a conflict scenario. 191 For 
instance, high consumption rates and dwindling stockpiles would 
compound existing limitations on production capacity caused by 
previous low demand signals for munitions. 192 In April 2023, the 
Wall Street Journal reported that plans to increase production of 
key munitions, such as mortar shells, artillery rounds, and Tom -
ahawk missiles, have been marred by a shortage of chips, ma -
chinery, and skilled workers.193 U.S. experts have also found that 
the U.S. military is not buying enough munitions, threatening the 
ability to meet the requirements of future conflicts and making it 
more difficult to sustain production lines. 194 Mackenzie Eaglen, 
senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, assessed that 
the U.S. Navy likely has an inadequate supply of Tomahawk Land 
Attack Missiles, as lackluster procurement does not offset cur -
rent expenditure rates. * 195 In testimony before the Commission, 
witnesses suggested that increased cooperation with allies such 
as Japan and Australia may offer one pathway for ameliorating 
capacity shortfalls in shipbuilding and maintenance or munitions 
production; however, operationalizing such cooperation would still 
require substantial investment in joint capabilities. 196 In a step 
to enhance cooperation with allies in addressing defense indus -
trial base vulnerabilities, the United States announced that it is 
launching the Partnership for Indo-Pacific Industrial Resilience 
with 12 of its allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific and Europe, 
including Taiwan, in order to fast-track production of weapons 
systems.197 (For more on U.S.-Taiwan defense cooperation, see 
Chapter 9, “Taiwan.”)
Indo-Pacific Allies’ Geography Is a Major Asset for the U.S. 
Military
Geographic access from Indo-Pacific alliances is an important ele -
ment of U.S. military posture † in the Indo-Pacific region. According 
* As an example, the U.S. Navy stated it expended more than 80 Tomahawks on the opening 
day alone to strike targets within Yemen. Ms. Eaglen points out that in 2023, the entire Tom -
ahawk purchase of 55 missiles accounted for 68 percent of the precision munitions fired at the 
Houthis in one day, a rate of expenditure that is unsustainable. Mackenzie Eaglen, “Why Is the 
U.S. Navy Running Out of Tomahawk Cruise Missiles?” American Enterprise Institute , February 
13, 2024.
† Military posture refers to the positioning and organization of military forces and facilities and 
may also refer to international military agreements. Luke A. Nicastro and Ilana Krill, “FY2024 
NDAA: U.S. Military Posture in the Indo-Pacific,” Congressional Research Service  IN12273, Oc -
tober 30, 2023, 1.
U.S. Defense Industrial Base Challenges— Continued

566
to DOD’s 2022 National Defense Strategy,* a focus for U.S. military 
force posture is “the access and warfighting requirements that en -
able [U.S.] efforts to deter PRC [People’s Republic of China] and 
Russian aggression, and to prevail in conflict if deterrence fails.”  198 
According to then Commander of U.S. Indo-Pacific Command Admi -
ral John C. Aquilino in April 2023, implementing the objectives of 
the 2022 National Defense Strategy requires the U.S. military to 
maintain a “persistent, lethal, and integrated” joint force west of 
the International Date Line. 199 The majority of U.S. defense sites 
west of the International Date Line are located in host countries, 
including some that are operated by DOD (such as in Japan and 
South Korea), and others that are used by DOD but owned and 
operated by the host country (such as in the Philippines, Australia, 
and Singapore) (see Figure 1). 200 U.S. Army, Navy, Marine Corps, 
and Air Force installations at these sites support a range of actions 
and capabilities, including missile detection and defense, logistics 
support, training, and exercises. 201
Figure 1: Select U.S. Military Installations and Defense Sites in the  
Indo-Pacific
SOUTH 
KOREA
GUAM
FED. STATES OF 
MICRONESIAPALAU
TAIWAN
OKINAWA
SINGAPORE
PAPUA 
NEW 
GUINEA
TIMOR-
LESTE
AUSTRALIA
NEW ZEALAND
NAURU
KIRIBATI
HAWAII
PHILIPPINES
SOLOMON 
ISLANDS
FRENCH 
POLYNESIANEW 
CALEDONIA
VANUATU
SAMOA
FIJI
NORTHERN 
MARIANA 
ISLANDS MARSHALL 
ISLANDS
JAPANCHINA
Equator
Int  ’l Date Line
Int  ’l Date Line
0 2,500 Miles
US INDOPACOM area of responsibility
Land Bodies of Water
Select U.S. Military Installations and Defense Sites
Enduring U.S. presence
Rotational/episodic U.S. presence
Hawaii to Taiwan:about 5,000 miles
Source: Adapted from Caitlin Campbell, Cameron M. Keys, and Luke A. Nicastro, “U.S. Indo-Pa-
cific Command (INDOPACOM),” U.S. Congressional Research Service  CRS IF 12604, March 5, 
2024, 2.
Japan’s geography and permanent basing of U.S. forces make it an 
extremely important ally for a China contingency. Its strategic loca -
tion on the first island chain means that one of the PLA’s shortest 
passages into the Pacific brings it between Japan’s Southwest Is -
lands and Taiwan.202 Japan plays a critical role in U.S. force posture 
* The 2022 National Defense Strategy lays out how the U.S. military plans to address threats 
to vital U.S. national security interests. It directs DOD to “act urgently to sustain and strengthen 
U.S. deterrence” with China as the pacing challenge. U.S. Department of Defense, 2022 National 
Defense Strategy of the United States of America , 2022, 111.

567
through the permanent basing of U.S. military personnel.* More U.S. 
service members are permanently stationed in Japan than in any 
other foreign country, † with this forward deployment serving the 
strategic goal of protecting regional security and increasing deter -
rence against China.203 In his testimony before the Commission, Mr. 
Johnstone described the alliance with Japan as “the foundation of 
[U.S.] power projection in the region” because of the critical U.S. mil-
itary capabilities stationed there. 204 The country hosts U.S. Army, 
Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force installations, with installations 
on the Japanese island Okinawa (in the southwest) providing close 
access to Taiwan and the South China Sea.205 Japan is also the loca-
tion of the forward-deployed Ronald Reagan carrier strike group. 206
The Philippines’ geography and rotational hosting of U.S. forces 
grants potential access to both the South China Sea and the Tai -
wan Strait. Gregory Poling, senior fellow and director of the South -
east Asia program and Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative at 
the Center for Strategic and International Studies, argued in 2023 
that “there is no contingency in the South China Sea that does not 
require access to the Philippines.” ‡ 207 Its position in the first island 
chain also means that one of the PLA’s shortest passages into the 
Pacific is through the Luzon Strait, which lies between Taiwan and 
the Philippines.208 U.S. armed forces have a rotational presence at 
nine bases in the Philippines, governed by the Visiting Forces Agree-
ment (VFA) of 1999 § and the EDCA agreement.209 EDCA allows the 
United States to fund infrastructure upgrades, preposition military 
equipment, and rotate forces through select Philippine military bas -
es for the benefit of both countries. 210 The 2023 EDCA expansion 
included one new site near the Spratlys that could facilitate U.S. as -
sistance to the Philippines in the South China Sea and three facing 
north toward Taiwan that could facilitate U.S. military operations 
in the event of a Taiwan contingency. ¶ 211 Edcel Ibarra, assistant 
professor at the University of the Philippines Diliman, stated in his 
testimony for the Commission that if allowed by the Philippine gov -
* The Status of Forces Agreement (1960)  delineates the legal status of U.S. service personnel in 
Japan and the facilities and areas granted to the United States to use. U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, U.S. Security Cooperation with Japan, January 20, 2021.
† As of 2024, there were 85 U.S. military facilities, and as of 2023, there were approximately 
62,802 U.S. military personnel. As of 2021, thousands of DOD civilians and family members lived 
in Japan. Lindsay Maizland and Nathanael Cheng, “The U.S.-Japan Security Alliance,” Council 
on Foreign Relations, May 3, 2024; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, 
U.S. Security Cooperation with Japan, January 20, 2021.
‡ Mr. Poling also assesses that U.S. military access from the Philippines and rotational access 
of key U.S. capabilities at EDCA sites could offer one of very few feasible avenues for contending 
with China’s military bases in the South China Sea. Gregory Poling, “The Conventional Wisdom 
on China’s Island Bases Is Dangerously Wrong,” War on the Rocks , January 10, 2020.
§ The Visiting Forces Agreement (VFA) (1999) establishes the legal basis for the presence of U.S. 
Armed Forces personnel visiting the Philippines. In February 2020, then Philippine President 
Rodrigo Duterte announced the cancelation of the VFA, but after several subsequent announce -
ments suspending this cancelation and a meeting between President Duterte and U.S. Secretary 
of Defense Lloyd Austin, the agreement was fully restored in July 2021. Andrea Chloe-Wong, 
“Duterte’s Back-Down on US Forces in Philippines,” Interpreter, August 24, 2021; U.S. Depart -
ment of Defense, Philippines President Restores Visiting Forces Agreement with U.S. , July 30, 
2021; Idrees Ali and Karen Lema, “Philippines’ Duterte Fully Restores Key U.S. Troop Pact,” 
Reuters, July 20, 2021.
¶ Original EDCA sites included Antonio Bautista Air Base in Palawan, Basa Air Base in Pam -
panga, Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija, Benito Ebuen Air Base in Cebu, and Lumbia Air Base in 
Mindanao. The new sites identified in 2023 are Naval Base Camilo Osias in Sta Ana and Lal-lo 
Airport, both in Cagayan Province; Camp Melchor Dela Cruz in Gamu, Isabela Province; and the 
island of Balabac off of Palawan. Gregory B. Poling, “The U.S.-Philippine Alliance’s Very Busy 
Month,” Center for Strategic and International Studies , April 12, 2023; Karen Lema, “Philippines 
Reveals Locations of 4 New Strategic Sites for U.S. Military Pact,” Reuters, April 3, 2023.

568
ernment or if mutual defense obligations are triggered, the alliance 
provides a strategic location for forward deployment of U.S. military 
forces and for military logistics. 212
Australia’s geography and rotational hosting of U.S. forces provide 
additional benefits for the U.S. military in countering the PLA in the 
Indo-Pacific.* Its location provides military access to both the Pacific 
and Indian Oceans, close enough to China to influence the military 
environment in places like the South China Sea but outside the first 
and second island chains, where China’s counter-intervention capa -
bilities are strongest.213 Bec Shrimpton, director of defense strategy 
and national security at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, 
argued in her testimony for the Commission that Australia’s large 
size and distance from China make it less vulnerable as a potential 
forward location for U.S. forces than positions in other allied states 
or Guam.214 She also assessed that “in a crisis or early stages of a 
conflict, Australia would be seen as sensible location to disperse/
repair/sustain [U.S.] forward-deployed forces, and as an obvious hub 
from which to flow in supplies, reinforcements and long-range strike 
assets.” 215 Australian bases host U.S. military forces on a rotational 
basis, including navy, air force, and marine corps elements for train -
ing and exercises. 216
U.S. Security Partnerships with the Freely Associated 
States
The United States has strong security partnerships with Pa -
lau, the Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Microne -
sia that confer benefits in terms of geography and military ac -
cess. These three Pacific Island countries, collectively known as 
the Freely Associated States (FAS), maintain a close relationship 
with the United States through Compacts of Free Association 
(COFA) agreements.217 The FAS are located in a strategic region 
of the Pacific near U.S. territories of Guam and the Northern 
Mariana Islands and close to other important security partners 
such as Australia and Papua New Guinea. 218 The agreements 
these states have established with the United States include 
defense-related provisions that grant the U.S. military unilater -
al defense access to an area of the Pacific Ocean broader than 
the continental United States. 219 The agreements also allow the 
United States to deny military access to third countries such as 
China.220 Experts assess that the access afforded by these agree -
ments forms a critical part of the current U.S. defense posture in 
the Pacific.221 According to Kathryn Paik, senior fellow and Aus -
tralia chair at the Center for Strategic and International Studies 
and a previous director for Southeast Asia and the Pacific on the 
National Security Council, “Every contingency you can imagine 
* The Agreement Concerning the Status of United States Forces in Australia (SOFA) (1963) lays 
out the legal status of U.S. Armed Forces personnel in Australia. Australian bases host U.S. mil -
itary forces on a rotational basis, including rotational navy, air force, and marine corps elements 
for training and exercises, U.S. Air Force bombers, and the rotational U.S. Marine Air Ground 
Task Force Marine Rotational Force-Darwin. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7–8; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, U.S. Security Coop-
eration with Australia, September 14, 2021.

569
in the Pacific—Korea, Taiwan—everything, depends on [those] as -
sumptions of defense access.”  222 These countries also host some 
U.S. Army installations used for missile defense activities. 223
Chinese sources recognize the strategic value of these security 
partnerships for the United States. Some Chinese state media 
reporting on the renewal of the COFA agreements has empha -
sized the strategic and military significance of these agreements 
for the United States, and China’s Ministry of National Defense 
spokesperson criticized the renewal as the United States trying 
to turn the region into a “boxing ring.” 224 A 2023 article describes 
these Pacific Island states as “marine and aerial channels for the 
[United States] to deploy troops” in the Western Pacific, makes 
note of U.S. military deployments on their territories, highlights 
their potential service as “logistics replenishment bases,” and 
speculates that they will function as alternatives to the U.S. base 
in Guam. 225 Another article claims the United States seeks to 
“build these three countries into its forward bases against Chi -
na.” 226 These articles ignore the agency and sovereign choices of 
the FAS in continuing their relationships with the United States, 
grossly mischaracterizing the United States as “binding” them 
into its service and using “coercion” to “tie them to its anti-China 
chariot.” 227
Japan’s Perspectives on Addressing Threats from China’s 
Military
China’s aggressive military actions in the region, coupled with the 
rapid buildup of the PLA’s offensive military capability, present a 
growing security threat to Japan. 228 In Japan’s 2022 National Secu-
rity Strategy, China is described as the “greatest strategic challenge” 
to peace and security, a departure from its 2013 National Security 
Strategy that referred to China’s “external stance and military ac -
tivities” as an “issue of concern.” 229 Tokyo’s concern of advances in 
missile-related technologies in its surroundings has motivated re -
cent efforts to upgrade its defense capabilities, especially its coun -
terstrike capabilities, and to deepen defense cooperation with the 
United States and other partners. 230 Japan is likely to determine 
that supporting U.S. efforts in a conflict is in its interests, although 
the degree and type of support are not yet determined.
Japan Perceives Imminent Threats from China’s Military, 
Including over Taiwan
Japan’s policymakers are highly concerned that China’s security 
objectives vis-à-vis Taiwan present a threat to their country, accord -
ing to official reports and research conducted during the Commis -
sion’s June 2024 fact-finding trip to Tokyo. 231 Due to its proximity 
to China, Japan would be at the forefront of any military conflict 
within the first island chain, particularly a war over Taiwan. 232 
Three high-level policy documents from Japan’s Ministry of Defense 
in 2021 and 2022 highlight China’s “intensifying” military activities 
U.S. Security Partnerships with the Freely Associated 
States— Continued

570
in the sea and air around Taiwan among Tokyo’s chief security con -
cerns in the Indo-Pacific, with one of the 2022 documents describing 
stability around Taiwan as something “critical for Japan’s securi -
ty [which] must be closely monitored with a sense of urgency.”  233 
Ministry of Defense policy documents and nongovernment experts 
have also frequently referenced China’s military response to then 
U.S. Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan in August 
2022—during which the PLA conducted live-fire exercises and five 
ballistic missiles fell into Japan’s exclusive economic zone (EEZ)—
as a particularly salient indicator of this threat. 234 In his written 
testimony to the Commission, Tetsuo Kotani, professor at Meikai 
University and senior fellow at the Japan Institute of Internation -
al Affairs, argued that China’s bellicose military response to then 
Speaker Pelosi’s visit demonstrated a “real possibility that Japan 
would be directly involved in a Taiwan contingency.”  235
Tokyo is similarly concerned about China’s aggressive mili -
tary presence elsewhere in the region. In 2019, a Ministry of De -
fense-produced white paper, “Defense of Japan,” noted that the PLA 
Navy and Air Force had “expanded and intensified their activities 
in the surrounding sea areas and airspace of Japan,” seeking to de -
sensitize its neighbors to increased PLA presence in the region. 236 
Furthermore, its 2022 National Defense Strategy notes China “in -
tensifying its activities across the entire region surrounding Japan,” 
including the East China Sea, Sea of Japan, western Pacific Ocean, 
South China Sea, and into the second island chain. 237 The Min -
istry also released detailed documentation highlighting the PLA’s 
expanding activities in the maritime and air domains in the Sea 
of Japan, around its main island, its southwestern islands, and the 
Japanese-administered Senkaku Islands. 238 Japan’s Self-Defense 
Force has also frequently referenced its need to contend with an 
increase in joint Chinese and Russian military activities operating 
near its territory.* 239
Finally, Japan perceives China’s ongoing military modernization 
as a threat because it enables China’s aggressive military posture. 
Tokyo’s 2022 National Defense Strategy highlighted advancements 
in China’s military modernization that have improved China’s A2/
AD military capabilities in the surrounding area, directly threaten -
ing Japan.240 For example, the Strategy pointed out that China now 
possesses larger numbers of modern naval and air assets and has 
built a large arsenal of intermediate- and medium-range missiles, 
anti-ship ballistic missiles, long-range land-attack cruise missiles, 
and hypersonic glide vehicles, all of which could strike Japan. † 241 
* Japan has witnessed the PLA and Russian Navy conduct joint exercises circumnavigating its 
archipelago and operating near its territory. Japan has also scrambled its Air Self-Defense Force 
fighters in response to China and Russia’s joint bomber flights that have occurred seven times 
since July 2019 over the Sea of Japan and the East China Sea. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, 
China’s Activities in East China Sea, Pacific Ocean, and Sea of Japan,  March 2024, 2; Tetsuo 
Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing 
on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States 
and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 2; Dzirhan Mahadzir, “Joint Russia-China 
Military Flights Prompt Japanese, South Korea Fighter Scrambles,” USNI News , December 14, 
2023; Tsuruta Jun, “Chinese and Russian Warships Step Up Activity in Straits around Japan,” 
Diplomat, August 15, 2023; Brad Lendon, “Why Russian and Chinese Warships Teaming Up to 
Circle Japan Is a Big Deal,” CNN, October 25, 2021.
† The PLA has conducted training exercises demonstrating the capability to target Japanese 
and U.S. military bases, aircrafts, and ports in a conflict. For example, commercial satellite im -
ages dating back to 2013 appear to show the PLA Rocket Force using ship targets similar in 

571
In 2023, the “Defense of Japan” white paper pointed with particular 
concern to China’s growing number of nuclear warheads, construc -
tion of a second indigenous aircraft carrier, and development of a 
wide variety of UAVs.242 When referencing expanding PLA capabil -
ities, the Ministry of Defenses’ policy documents clearly articulate 
that this military buildup provides the backing for the aggressive 
activities threatening Japan. 243 Regarding nuclear weapons specifi -
cally, a salient concern in Tokyo is that China’s rapid and nontrans-
parent nuclear modernization could undermine the U.S. ability to 
protect Japan under its nuclear umbrella. * 244
Japan Seeks to Defend against China’s Military Threats
Japan has updated its defense policy to upgrade its defense ca -
pabilities, develop counterstrike capacity, and integrate its capabili -
ties across domains. 245 In December 2023, Tokyo raised its defense 
budget to a record-high $56 billion (7.9 trillion yen), with a plan to 
increase its defense budget to 2 percent of its gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) by 2027. 246 However, the weakening of the Japanese yen 
may undermine Japan’s plans to invest in its military buildup. † 247 
Mr. Kotani’s testimony to the Commission pointed to Russia’s in -
vasion of Ukraine and China’s intensifying military activities as 
factors that drove popular support for dramatic changes to Japan’s 
defense policy.248 Tokyo’s higher defense budget would enable the 
upgrade of its indigenous standoff missiles as a denial capability; se-
cure sufficient munitions and fuel; and accelerate the procurement 
of additional Type-12 cruise missiles and Tomahawks, ‡ as well as 
the development of hypersonic guided missiles. 249 According to the 
2022 National Security Strategy, developing counterstrike capabil -
ities means that in the event of a missile attack by an opponent, 
Japan would have the capability to mount an effective counterstrike 
to prevent further attacks. § 250
size to the U.S. Arleigh Burke-class destroyer and a mock port that closely resembled the U.S. 
naval base in Yokosuka, Japan. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and 
Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners,  March 21, 2024, 4; Nikkei 
Asia, “Satellite Photos Suggest China Training to Attack Japan’s Aircraft,” May 20, 2022; Thomas 
Shugart, “Has China Been Practicing Preemptive Missile Strikes against U.S. Bases?” War on the 
Rocks, February 6, 2017.
* Specifically, as Mr. Kotani explained in his testimony, Japan fears that if China’s rapid nuclear 
buildup results in China reaching nuclear parity with the United States, China may become em -
boldened to initiate a conventional war against its neighbors without fearing a nuclear war with 
the United States. Tetsuo Kotani, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications 
for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 194; Tetsuo Kotani, 
written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s 
Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pa -
cific Allies and Partners, March 21, 2024, 2.
† The weakened yen has eroded Japan’s government’s purchasing power, which, according to 
Satoshi Morimoto, a former Japanese defense minister, could result in the value of the defense 
budget being reduced by 30 percent over the next five years. In analysis published by the New 
York Times, due to the weak yen to the dollar, the cost of equipment has increased, including 
for the U.S.-made Tomahawk missile, helicopters, submarines, and tanks. River Akira Davis and 
Hisako Ueno, “The Yen Is Plunging. So Is Japan’s Defense Budget,” New York Times, July 8, 2024.
‡ Tomahawk cruise missiles on ships in 2025 would be the first time Japan would possess long-
range strike capabilities. Christopher B. Johnstone, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 2.
§ As Mr. Johnstone noted in his testimony, once Japan brings online its counter-strike capabil -
ities, “Beijing will confront for the first time the prospect of a Japan that can shoot back, on its 
own and at long range,” which would raise China’s risk calculus and bolster deterrence against 
aggression. Christopher B. Johnstone, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 

572
Japan has also made efforts to bolster its defense capabilities by 
expanding its military bases along its southwestern islands, as close 
as 68 miles from Taiwan.251 Masafumi Iida, a leading China analyst 
at the National Institute of Defense Studies in Tokyo, argues that 
Japan must enhance the presence and capabilities of the Self-De -
fense Forces in the southwest islands to deal with “possible con -
tingencies involving Taiwan and other areas.”  252 Japan has opened 
bases that can accommodate land-to-ship and land-to-air missile 
units on Miyako in 2019 and Ishigaki in 2023, and in March 2024 it 
deployed a Ground Self-Defense Force unit based on Yonaguni that 
conducts EW, including intercepting adversary communications and 
jamming radar.253 The expanded bases on its southwestern islands 
could complicate Chinese decision-making in the event of a conflict 
over Taiwan, potentially offering U.S. forces access to operate from 
these bases. 254 In addition, Japan is reportedly upgrading civilian 
air hubs and seaports for dual-use capability across the southwest 
islands, as well as ports in the north, to address concerns of a short -
age of facilities that could be used in possible contingencies. 255
A key element of Japan’s evolving defense policies is deepening 
defense cooperation with the United States and other like-minded 
countries in the Indo-Pacific. The United States and Japan have 
agreed to expand U.S. presence, improve interoperability, cooperate 
on enhancing missile defense capabilities, explore opportunities to 
conduct maintenance and repair of U.S. naval ships at commercial 
shipyards in Japan,* and deepen defense science and technology co -
operation.256 In 2024, the two countries’ announced new efforts to 
increase coordination on military command and control, which will 
enhance interoperability between the two militaries both in peace -
time and in a crisis. 257 On July 28, 2024, both sides convened the 
Security Consultative Committee (also known as the 2+2) and an -
nounced that the United States intends to reconstitute U.S. Forces 
Japan (USFJ) as a joint force headquarters reporting to the com -
mander of U.S. Indo-Pacific Command and serve as the counter -
part to the Japan Self-Defense Forces Joint Operations Command 
(JJOC).258 In a phased approach, the USFJ will assume primary 
responsibility for coordinating security activities in and around Ja -
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implica-
tions for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 2.
* The U.S. Navy seeks to improve ship construction and repair yards and place major shipbuild -
ing programs back on schedule by looking to partners and allies in the Indo-Pacific. U.S. Ambas -
sador to Japan Ralph Emmanuel said that U.S. shipyards are “on average 4,000 days behind on 
repair and maintenance.” Currently, in the case of multiyear repairs, the Japan-based U.S. naval 
ships are redeployed to a home port to the United States and a replacement vessel is subsequent -
ly forward deployed to Japan. Forward-deployed U.S. naval ships are currently serviced on site at 
U.S. naval bases in Yokosuka and Sasebo using contract Japanese workers. As of August 9, 2024, 
the Senate and House versions for the fiscal year (FY) 2025 National Defense Authorization Act 
(NDAA) both included provisions related to the overhaul, repair, and maintenance of deployed 
U.S. naval vessels in shipyards outside of the United States or Guam. The Senate FY 2025 NDAA 
includes a provision for the secretary of the navy to conduct a pilot program to perform main -
tenance and repair on forward-deployed naval force ships in foreign shipyards during scheduled 
maintenance and repair exercises. United States Senate Committee on Armed Services, National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2025 Report , July 2024, 170; Servicemember Quality of 
Life Improvement and National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2025, H.R. 8070, intro -
duced June 13, 2024, 722; Alex Wilson, “US, Japan Plan Joint Ship and Aircraft Repair, Missile 
Production and Logistics,” Stars and Stripes, June 11, 2024; Megan Eckstein, “US Navy Secretary 
Points to Foreign Shipyards’ Practices to Fix Delays,” Defense News, April 9, 2024; Justin Katz, 
“SECNAV Says 45-Day Shipbuilding Review Will Be Followed by Another Review,” Breaking De-
fense, April 9, 2024; Ken Moriyasu, “U.S. Turns to Private Japan Shipyards for Faster Warships 
Repairs,” Nikkei Asia, May 24, 2023.

573
pan in accordance with the U.S.-Japan Treaty of Mutual Coopera -
tion and Security. 259 The United States increased its presence in 
Japan by establishing the Marine Littoral Regiment in Okinawa 
in 2022 with ISR and missile capabilities to cooperate with Japan’s 
anti-ship and air defense units in Japan’s southwestern islands. 260 
The two countries’ have also agreed to jointly develop a hypersonic 
missile interceptor, further enhancing allied missile defense capa -
bilities.261 In addition to strengthening bilateral defense ties with 
the United States, Japan has expanded cooperation with Australia, 
the Philippines, the UK, and the Republic of Korea. * 262 Finally, it 
has increased trilateral cooperation with the United States and the 
Philippines † and with the United States and Australia. ‡ 263
Japan Likely to Support U.S. Military Action in a Conflict
In light of Japan’s high level of perceived threat from the PLA 
and close defense cooperation with the United States, its policy -
makers would likely determine some level of cooperation with the 
United States to be in the country’s interest in a conflict—including 
a conflict over Taiwan. As detailed above, Tokyo’s defense policy doc-
uments clearly show that PLA aggression against Taiwan threatens 
Japan’s immediate security.§ 264
Nevertheless, Japan is not guaranteed to grant the degree of ac -
cess to its military facilities that the United States might prefer, 
and it may decide not to involve its own military forces at all. Un -
der the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty, Article 6 provides U.S. forces 
the use of “facilities and areas in Japan” for the “maintenance of 
international peace and security in the Far East,” which some ana -
lysts assess could be interpreted to include a conflict over Taiwan.265 
However, the United States’ use of facilities and areas in Japan as 
bases for military combat—other than that conducted in response to 
an armed attack—would require “prior consultation”  ¶ before access 
* Japan has signed reciprocal access agreements with both Australia and the UK in 2023. On 
July 8, 2024, Japan and the Philippines signed a reciprocal access agreement with the Philippines 
that would be used to support future bilateral and multilateral military exercises and training, 
including humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations. Japan’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, Signing of the Japan-Philippines Reciprocal Access Agreement , July 8, 2024; Sebastian 
Strangio, “Philippines, Japan Sign Reciprocal Access Agreement Amid China Tensions,” Diplomat, 
July 9, 2024; Takahashi Kosuke, “Japan, Philippines Agree to Intensify Defense Cooperation,” 
Diplomat, November 3, 2023; Mari Yamaguchi, “Japan and Australia Agree to Further Step Up 
Defense Cooperation under 2-Month-Old Security Pact,” AP News , October 19, 2023; Jim Gara -
mone, “Japan, South Korea, U.S. Strengthen Trilateral Cooperation,” DOD News, August 18, 2023; 
Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Signing of Japan-UK Reciprocal Access Agreement , January 
11, 2023.
† Japan, the Philippines, and the United States have also agreed to strengthen trilateral co -
operation by conducting joint exercises between their respective coast guards and expanding 
maritime training activity. White House, Joint Vision Statement from the Leaders of Japan, the 
Philippines, and the United States, April 11, 2024 .
‡ In February 2024, the United States and Japan invited Australia to join their historically bi -
lateral Exercise Keen Edge for the first time to test the combined readiness of all three countries 
and demonstrate interoperability in response to security challenges in the region. Australia’s 
Ministry of Defense, Australia Joins Japan-United States Exercise for First Time, February 2, 
2024.
§ In recent years, even Japan’s joint statements with international counterparts have also 
grown more vocal about the importance of stability in the Taiwan Strait, suggesting a desire to 
leverage international partnerships against the growing risk. U.S. Mission Japan, Joint Statement 
of the Security Consultative Committee (2+2) , January 11, 2023; David Sacks, “Reconsidering 
Japan’s Role in the Taiwan Strait, Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, February 7, 2022; 
U.S. Department of Defense, Joint Statement of the U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Committee 
(“2+2”), January 6, 2022.
¶ The United States and Japan clarified the implementation of the Treaty of Mutual Cooper -
ation and Security between Japan and the United States in the 1960 Exchanges of Notes that 
under Article 6, any “major changes in the deployment into Japan of United States armed forces, 

574
is approved, allowing opportunity to voice concerns about risks. 266 
In observing Tokyo’s policy shift since 2010, Mr. Johnstone testi -
fied he is no longer concerned about “first-order questions” such as 
whether the U.S. military would be permitted to operate from its 
military bases in Japan in a conflict scenario. 267 Uncertainties nev -
ertheless remain about whether public opinion would support fur -
ther U.S. military access to all of Japan’s military bases or civilian 
ports and airports.268 Mr. Johnstone also cautioned that he remains 
uncertain on “second-order question[s]” such as the degree of mili -
tary support Tokyo would provide. 269 Any use of force, whether in 
self-defense in response to a direct attack on Japanese territory or 
in collective self-defense in response to an attack on a third party, 
must be approved by the Diet. 270 The Japanese Diet was divided on 
the 2015 security legislation establishing Japan’s right to collective 
self-defense, and a more recent opinion poll from 2022 suggests ap -
proving the use of military force even in noncombat roles could be a 
politically unpopular decision. * 271
If China were to strike Japanese territory, including U.S. bases, 
experts assess this would increase the likelihood of Tokyo granting 
the U.S. military permission to conduct combat operations from its 
bases.272 Such strikes would also constitute what the Japanese gov -
ernment terms an “armed attack situation,” which provides justifica-
tion for the potential use of military force by Japan. 273 At an event 
in 2021, Japan’s then Deputy Prime Minister Taro Aso commented 
that “if a major problem took place in Taiwan, it would not be too 
much to say that it could relate to a survival-threatening situation,” 
invoking a term for a situation that could justify use of military 
force in defense of a third party, although Japan’s government did 
not confirm the comment reflected official policy. 274
The Philippines’ Perspectives on Addressing Threats from 
China’s Military
The current government of the Philippines views China’s aggres -
sive military activities in the South China Sea as a serious threat 
to its military and economic security, and it is concerned about the 
impact a conflict between China and the United States would have 
on regional stability. The Philippines seeks to improve its own ca -
pacity to defend its maritime interests against China’s aggression 
through military modernization and deepening security partner -
ships throughout the region.
The Philippines Views China’s Military as a Present and 
Potential Future Threat
A chief concern for the current government of the Philippines un -
der President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. is China’s aggressive military 
major changes in their equipment, and the use of facilities and areas in Japan as bases for mil -
itary combat operations to be undertaken from Japan other than those conducted under Article 
V of the said Treaty, shall be the subjects of prior consultation with the Government of Japan.” 
Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security Between Japan 
and the United States of America , 1960.
* One public opinion poll from 2022 found that only 22.5 percent of Japanese respondents 
supported Japan’s forces fighting with the United States against the PLA in a Taiwan conflict, 
while 74.2 percent opposed it. Further, only 44.8 percent supported Japan’s forces performing 
noncombat supportive roles, with 51.1 percent opposing such action. Zhuoran Li, “No, Japan Will 
Not Defend Taiwan,” Diplomat, March 18, 2024.

575
presence and activities in the South China Sea. * The 2023 Phil -
ippine National Security Policy notes that other South China Sea 
claimants’ “methods of asserting their positions” pose a “strategic 
challenge.” 275 As Mr. Ibarra emphasized in his testimony for the 
Commission, the Philippines faces acute threats from China in this 
area.276 One element of this threat is the presence of PLA military 
installations on South China Sea features in the Philippines’ imme -
diate vicinity, with the closest located only about 140 miles from its 
fifth-largest island, Palawan. 277 Mr. Ibarra assesses that these in -
stallations could “give China [an] early advantage against the Phil -
ippines in the event of war.”  278 A second element of the threat is 
aggressive “gray zone” activities from China’s military and paramil-
itary forces in the South China Sea, which have included blocking, 
swarming, ramming, and even sinking Philippine vessels as well as 
targeting them with water cannons, laser weapons, and naval gun 
rangefinders.279 These aggressive actions present both a physical 
threat to Philippine forces and assets and a severe challenge to eco -
nomic security, preventing the country from exploring or exploiting 
many of the natural resources within its own EEZ. 280 (For more 
on China’s aggressive actions in the South China Sea against the 
Philippines, see Chapter 2, “U.S.-China Security and Foreign Affairs 
(Year in Review).”)
In addition, the Philippine government and public are concerned 
about the implications of a military conflict involving China for its 
own security interests and the lives of its citizens. Its National Se -
curity Policy voices concern over “heightened rivalries among the 
major powers,” noting that the resulting tense geopolitical landscape 
means regional flashpoints could potentially serve as “tinderboxes 
for conflict.” 281 Philippine policymakers are also concerned about 
conflict in the Taiwan Strait, especially the severe impact on eco -
nomic stability, threat to the welfare of Filipinos in Taiwan, and 
potential influx of refugees to the country that would result. 282 Poll-
* The degree of importance that the Philippines’ previous president Roderigo Duterte placed 
on asserting Philippine rights vis-à-vis China in the South China Sea was not consistent over 
the course of his time in office. Overall, then President Duterte pursued a relatively conciliatory 
approach to China in hopes of benefiting from China’s promises of economic cooperation. His ad -
ministration is described as having downplayed China’s aggressive behavior in the South China 
Sea and at first largely ignoring the decisive tribunal ruling in 2016 that struck down many of 
China’s maritime claims in favor of the Philippines. China’s embassy and some media sources 
have even alleged that the Duterte Administration brokered an informal deal or “gentleman’s 
agreement” with China to avoid confrontation over Second Thomas Shoal—a low-tide feature 
within the Philippines EEZ that China seeks to control. (For more on Second Thomas Shoal and 
China’s recent aggression in this area, see Chapter 2, “U.S.-China Security and Foreign Affairs 
(Year in Review).”) Descriptions of the alleged deal suggest China may have offered the Philip -
pines limited fishing rights and potentially other economic benefits in exchange for agreeing to 
restrict deliveries of supplies to the grounded Philippine warship on the shoal. Other analysts 
and observers note, however, that continued escalation of China’s aggression in the South China 
Sea led then President Duterte to harden his stance in 2020 and to begin insisting that the 2016 
tribunal ruling be respected. In his final state of the nation speech in July 2021, he changed his 
stance and again downplayed the significance of the ruling. Christopher Bodeen, “China Publiciz -
es for the First Time What It Claims Is a 2016 Agreement with Philippines,” AP News, May 3, 
2024; Mong Palatino, “Ex-Phililppine President Rodrigo Duterte’s ‘Gentleman’s Agreement’ with 
China under Scrutiny,” Diplomat, April 5, 2024; Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7; Derek Grossman, “Duterte’s Dalliance with China Is Over,” Foreign Policy, November 
2, 2021; Yuichi Shiga and Kenji Kawase, “Duterte Stresses Soft Approach Toward China in Last 
Policy Speech,” Nikkei Asia, July 27, 2021; Joshua Kurlantzick, “Duterte’s Ingratiating Approach 
to China Has Been a Bust,” Council on Foreign Relations , June 16, 2021; Sabastian Strangio, “In 
UN Speech, Duterte Stiffens Philippines’ Stance on the South China Sea,” Diplomat, September 
23, 2020.

576
ing by the Eurasia Group Foundation released in 2023 reports that 
a majority of Filipinos fear geopolitical confrontation between the 
United States and China could lead to a deterioration of Philippine 
national security.283
The Philippines Invests in Security Partnerships and Its Own 
Capabilities
Although the previous Duterte government temporarily sought 
to downgrade the Philippines’ security cooperation with the United 
States as part of its conciliatory policy toward China, * the current 
government is deepening its security partnership with the United 
States as a key avenue for addressing the challenges from China’s 
military. The 2023 expansion of EDCA, which allows the U.S. mil -
itary a rotational presence at certain Philippine bases, represents 
a continued commitment to defense cooperation with the United 
States relating to Manila’s security interests. 284 The two countries 
also continue efforts to upgrade infrastructure † at EDCA locations, 
some of which play an important role in facilitating joint action in 
the South China Sea. 285 The allies also conduct an annual military 
exercise, Balikatan, which aims to increase interoperability and has 
increased in complexity over the past several years. ‡ 286 Balikatan 
2023 was the largest iteration of the exercise to date, with more 
than 17,600 members of the two countries’ militaries participating, 
almost double the number from 2022. 287 The exercise focused on 
improving capabilities in the areas of maritime security, amphibious 
operations, live-fire training, aviation operations, and cyber defense, 
among others.288 The 2024 exercise took place in areas facing Tai -
wan and the South China Sea, and it was the first to occur outside 
the Philippines’ territorial waters in its EEZ.289 The exercise includ-
ed activities on maritime security, sensing, and targeting; air and 
missile defense; dynamic missile strikes; cyber defense; and infor -
mation operations. 290 The United States and the Philippines have 
conducted joint patrols in the waters near Taiwan in the South Chi -
na Sea.291 They have also increased the cooperation between their 
* In February 2020, then President Duterte announced the cancelation of the U.S.-Philippines 
Visiting Forces Agreement (VFA), which in 1999 established the legal basis for the presence of 
U.S. Armed Forces personnel visiting the Philippines. After several subsequent announcements 
suspending this cancelation and a meeting between then President Duterte and U.S. Secretary of 
Defense Lloyd Austin, the agreement was fully restored in July 2021. Andrea Chloe-Wong, “Dute-
rte’s Back-Down on US Forces in Philippines,” Interpreter, August 24, 2021; U.S. Department of 
Defense, Philippines President Restores Visiting Forces Agreement with U.S., July 30, 2021; Idrees 
Ali and Karen Lema, “Philippines’ Duterte Fully Restores Key U.S. Troop Pact,” Reuters, July 
20, 2021.
† The EDCA agreement allows the United States to fund modernization and upgrades of the 
military infrastructure at these bases, including improvements to runways and airfields, new 
or improved storage facilities for fuel and ammunition, additional aircraft hangars and staging 
areas, new command and control infrastructure, and new training facilities. Jen Judson, “US 
Troops Put New Philippine Military Sites to Test in Balikatan Drill,” Defense News , May 12, 
2024; Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “More than Meets the Eye: Philippine Upgrades 
at EDCA Sites,” Center for Strategic and International Studies , October 12, 2023; David Vergun, 
“New EDCA Sites Named in the Philippines,” DOD News, April 3, 2023.
‡ Although primarily a U.S.-Philippines exercise, Balikatan has also included certain other 
states as participants and observers. In 2024, the exercise included participants from Australia 
and France alongside the United States and the Philippines and observers from Brunei, Canada, 
France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea, Thai-
land, the UK, and Vietnam. In 2023, Australia participated while Brunei, Canada, France, India, 
Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, the UK, and Vietnam observed. 
Maria T. Reyes, “Balikatan 2024 Builds Philippine-U.S. Interoperability, Multilateral Partner -
ships,” Indo-Pacific Defense Forum , May 5, 2024; Philippines Department of National Defense, 
Biggest Balikatan Exercises End; Galvez, Aquilino Meet , May 3, 2023.

577
coast guards through training and conducted the first-ever trilateral 
at-sea coast guard exercise with Japan.292 Finally, the United States 
and the Philippines are working to facilitate military intelligence 
sharing, although efforts to conclude the requisite agreement re -
main in progress. * 293
The Philippines continues to pursue investments in its own mil -
itary capabilities, especially in the maritime and air domains. In 
addition to enhanced cooperation with the United States, Mr. Ibar -
ra testified that although its planned modernization efforts cannot 
build up the Philippine military forces to a degree that it could 
counter threats from China alone, they do represent significant ef -
forts toward a “minimum credible defense posture.” † 294 In February 
2024, Philippines President Marcos approved a defense spending 
plan of approximately $35 billion over the next decade, representing 
the third stage of a three-stage military modernization effort begun 
under former President Benigno Aquino III in late 2012 after China 
seized Scarborough Shoal. ‡ 295 This third stage, known as Horizon 
3, is aimed especially at bolstering the Philippine military’s naval, 
aerial, and surveillance capabilities, including intended purchases 
of fighter aircraft, warships, submarines, and missiles. 296 In March 
2024, the Marcos Administration adopted a new Comprehensive Ar -
chipelagic Defense Concept as a conceptual guide for military mod -
ernization efforts. § 297 The concept places particular emphasis on 
land, maritime, and air capabilities and seeks to solidify a shift to -
ward prioritizing improvements in the military’s capacity to defend 
itself from external threats, a departure from the previous, more 
narrow focus on internal security challenges. 298
* The United States and the Philippines are working toward the conclusion of a General Secu -
rity of Military Information Agreement (GSOMIA), which would facilitate military intelligence 
sharing by ensuring the protection of classified information in both countries. The agreement, 
which the two parties currently hope to conclude by the end of 2024, has been under discussion 
since at least 2021. U.S. Embassy in the Philippines, Joint Statement on the Philippines-United 
States Bilateral Strategic Dialogue , April 25, 2024; U.S. Department of Defense, FACT SHEET: 
U.S.-Philippines 2+2 Ministerial Dialogue, April 11, 2023; U.S. Department of State, Joint Vision 
for a 21st Century United States-Philippines Partnership , November 16, 2021.
† The Philippine Department of National Defense defines a “credible defense posture”—the goal 
of Philippine military modernization—as the “establishment of an effective presence inside the 
Philippines and its exclusive economic zone or EEZ with exhibited competence to defend the 
country and protect its national interests if and when the need arises.” According to the Office of 
the President of the Philippines in 2023, “A minimum credible defense posture means attaining a 
particular degree of military capability or enough defense capacity to make any aggressor think 
twice before engaging in hostile action.” Some government sources have identified the “minimum 
credible defense posture” as an intermediary step toward the Philippines’ ultimate defense goals. 
Office of the President of the Philippines, AFP Cites Importance of PH’s Strong Naval Capability 
amid Current WPS Situation , September 9, 2023; Senate of the Philippines, Photo Release , Au-
gust 30, 2023. https:/ /legacy.senate.gov.ph/photo_release/2023/0830_20.asp; Philippines Depart-
ment of National Defense, Defense Chronicle, 6:1 (2022): 6–7.
‡ The first stage—known as Horizon 1 (2013–2017), under former President Aquino III—divided 
funding among the army, navy, air force, and joint staff, acquiring assets including helicopters 
and training, transporter, and fighter aircraft. The second stage—Horizon 2 (2018–2023), un -
der former President Duterte—tripled funding for the navy and increased funding for the air 
force six-fold. Assets acquired in this time period included anti-submarine helicopters, warships, 
cruise missiles, and amphibious armored vehicles. Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7.
§ In 2021, the Philippine Marine Corps released a new operating concept called Archipelagic 
Coastal Defense (ACD), which aims to enhance sea control capabilities as a means of safeguard -
ing the nation’s territorial integrity. Some observers have noted similarities between this ser -
vice-level concept and the newly announced national-level Comprehensive Archipelagic Defense 
Concept, suggesting that the former may have played a role in influencing the latter. Rej Cortez 
Torrecammpo, “A Paradigm Shift in the Philippines’ Defense Strategy,” Diplomat, April 3, 2024; 
Rej Cortez Torrecampo, “Philippine Marines’ New Operating Concept Highlights Their Growing 
National Security Role,” Diplomat, May 6, 2021.

578
The Philippines has prioritized forging and deepening securi -
ty partnerships with other countries. These efforts have potential 
second-order benefits for U.S. security interests by strengthening 
the Manila’s baseline capabilities and increasing its interoperabili -
ty with other allies. 299 For example, the Philippines and Australia 
have taken recent steps to build on the foundation of their Visiting 
Forces Agreement * with the signing of a new Mutual Logistics Sup -
port Arrangement in 2022 and the initiation of joint patrols † in the 
South China Sea in 2023. 300 In 2023, Japan and the Philippines 
agreed to begin negotiations on a Reciprocal Access Agreement that 
would facilitate the deployment of forces and equipment in each 
other’s territories for defense cooperation, ultimately concluding the 
agreement in July 2024 amid China’s heightened aggression in the 
South China Sea. ‡ 301 The Philippines has pursued expanded de -
fense cooperation with a host of other partners inside and outside 
the region, including Canada, the EU, France, Germany, India, and 
the UK, covering a range of efforts related to military moderniza -
tion, information sharing, joint exercises and training, and—in the 
case of Canada and France—exploring the possibility of future vis -
iting forces agreements. 302
Details of Philippine Policy in a Conflict with China Remain 
Undetermined
Compared to the Japanese government, decisions by the Philip -
pine government to involve its own forces or facilitate the operations 
of U.S. forces in a conflict with China are even more uncertain and 
will depend on a number of factors. The differing stances taken by 
Philippine governments in the past on security cooperation with the 
United States provide one reason for caution. Mr. Johnstone addi -
tionally warns that even if the Philippine government were to ul -
timately allow the U.S. military to use bases on its territory, this 
decision may not be made on a timeline that facilitates U.S. action 
in a crisis. 303 Potential factors in the Philippine leadership’s deci -
sion of whether or how to become militarily involved or grant U.S. 
military access to its bases during a conflict with China would likely 
include the following:
 • China’s actions: One set of potential factors has to do with the 
Philippine government’s assessment of China’s actions during 
or after the conflict. For example, many experts agree that if 
China were to directly attack Philippine territory, the Philip -
pines would be more likely to support the United States mili -
tary thereafter, including potentially providing base access. 304 
* Australia is currently the only country other than the United States to maintain a Visiting 
Forces Agreements with the Philippines. Aaron-Matthew Lariosa, “Australia, Philippines Commit 
to Strategic Partnership, Pledge Joint Patrols,” USNI News, September 11, 2023; Australian Em -
bassy in the Philippines, Australia-Philippines Defense Cooperation .
† Australia is also only the second state, aside from the United States, to conduct joint patrols 
with the Philippines. Australian Associated Press, “Australia and Philippines Begin Joint Patrols 
in South China Sea as Regional Tensions Rise,” Guardian, November 25, 2023; Aaron-Matthew 
Lariosa, “Australia, Philippines Commit to Strategic Partnership, Pledge Joint Patrols,” USNI 
News, September 11, 2023.
‡ Japan has also provided significant security assistance to the Philippines in the form of a 
contract for an air surveillance system and an approximately $4 million (600 million yen) grant 
for securing coastal radars, strengthening the Philippines’ maritime domain awareness and im -
proving its capacity to respond to China’s aggressive actions in the South China Sea. Mikhail 
Flores and Karen Lema, “Japan, Philippines Agree to Hold Talks on Reciprocal Troops Pact, 
Reuters, November 3, 2023.

579
However, absent a direct attack by China, Philippine leaders’ 
perception that involvement or association with U.S. military 
activities could cause China to strike Philippine territory could 
decrease the likelihood and scope of the Philippine govern -
ment’s support for U.S. efforts.* 305 The Philippine government 
may also consider the risk of potential economic retaliation by 
China.306
 • U.S. actions and requests:  A second set of potential factors has 
to do with U.S. actions and the Philippine government’s assess -
ment of U.S. actions or likely actions during the conflict. A de -
tailed 2023 RAND Corporation study on factors likely to influ -
ence host nation decisions about whether to grant the United 
States military access during conflict emphasizes that an im -
portant factor would likely be Philippine leaders’ assessment of 
whether the United States will defend Philippine territory in 
a conflict.307 Mr. Johnstone argues that “continuing to demon -
strate U.S. commitment in areas that are vital to Philippines 
security,” especially the South China Sea, will likely be key to 
obtaining the access the United States desires at EDCA sites.308 
Separately, the RAND Corporation study assesses that the type 
of access the United States requested could also play a role, 
with the Philippine government being more likely to approve 
requests for “nonkinetic or lower-end capabilities, such as ISR, 
overflight, and logistics” compared to “higher-end kinetic capa -
bilities,” such as long-range strikes or direct combat operations 
from Philippine soil. 309
 • Public opinion: Like the governments of other democratic allies, 
the Philippine government would need to consider public opinion 
as part of a decision on military actions in a conflict with Chi -
na.310 Elements of public opinion that could work in the United 
States’ favor include a continued hardening of public sentiment 
against China as a result of the country’s relentless pressure 
in the South China Sea; support from many Filipinos for closer 
relations with the United States; and a widespread desire to see 
the Philippine government defend the country’s maritime rights 
more seriously.311 Nevertheless, the leverage the United States 
has to push for additional benefits under the EDCA agreement, 
for example, are likely limited. Mr. Ibarra warns that EDCA is 
already viewed domestically as a serious concession to the Unit -
ed States due to its similarities to a basing agreement and be -
cause of perceptions that the recent expansions in the north are 
more focused on U.S. security concerns that those of the Philip -
pines.312 Additionally, EDCA is an executive action that likely 
does not enjoy universal political support among the Philippine 
legislature,† making it potentially vulnerable to reconsideration 
* A 2023 RAND study indicated that this judgment could be informed in part by whether China 
has attacked other U.S. allies granting access. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase 
Access: Identifying U.S. Policy Levers,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 82.
† The EDCA agreement was challenged in the Philippine Supreme Court, with the opposition 
arguing that the agreement constituted a treaty subject to the approval of the Philippine Senate. 
In 2016, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of EDCA as an executive action not re -
quiring Senate approval. PressOnePH, “FACT-CHECK: EDCA Is Not Unconstitutional,” April 24, 
2024; Renato Cruz de Castro, “Philippine Supreme Court Approves EDCA: Unlocking the Door for 
the Return of U.S. Strategic Footprint in Southeast Asia,” Center for Strategic and International 

580
by future administrations. 313 Other potential limits to public 
support for further security cooperation could come from local 
governments and business leaders who believe angering China 
runs counter to their economic interests. 314
Regarding a conflict over Taiwan, the Philippine government is 
open to cooperation in principle but has likely not determined in 
advance what course of action would most serve its interests. The 
2023 Philippines National Security Policy states that “any military 
conflict in the Taiwan Strait would inevitably affect the Philippines” 
in light of its geographic proximity and the presence of over 150,000 
Filipinos in Taiwan; however, it does not lay out any particular in -
dicators of how the government would respond in a conflict scenar -
io.315 In a 2023 interview, President Marcos stated that “when we 
look at the situation in the area, especially the tensions in the Tai -
wan Strait, we can see that just by our geographical location, should 
there in fact be a conflict in that area . . . it’s very hard to imagine a 
scenario where the Philippines will not somehow get involved.”  316 
As to whether that involvement would involve a military response, 
he replied that this would depend on the circumstances and what 
was best for the Philippines. 317 Similarly, Philippine Ambassador to 
the United States Jose Manuel G. Romualdez has reportedly stated 
that Manila would allow the U.S. military to use its bases in the 
event of a Taiwan conflict only “if it is important for us, for our 
security.” 318 Some experts have assessed that for a country like the 
Philippines with a significant number of its citizens in Taiwan, a 
large-scale attack such as an amphibious invasion directly threat -
ening those citizens may be more likely to incentivize supporting 
actions than a more limited attack such as military action against 
one of Taiwan’s offshore islands.319
Australia’s Perspectives on Addressing Threats from China’s 
Military
Australia is increasingly focused on countering threats from Chi -
na’s military, especially the PLA’s A2/AD capabilities, due to their 
perceived potential to restrict its forces’ activity in their immediate 
region while pushing U.S. forces out of the region. Australian policy -
makers are pursuing military reforms alongside deepening defense 
cooperation with the United States, the UK, and other partners. 
Australia’s government would likely view providing some kind of 
support to the United States in the event of a conflict with China 
as being in line with its interests; however, this support may not 
include direct military participation.
Australia Views China’s Military Capabilities as a Threat
Expert assessments and defense policy documents from Austra -
lia evince serious concern about China’s A2/AD capabilities. For ex -
ample, the Australian government’s 2023 Defense Strategic Review 
noted an increasing need to defend not only against the remote 
possibility of invasion but also against the more immediate threats 
from regional countries’ ability to project power across greater rang-
es and threaten it without an invasion. 320 One element of this per -
Studies Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative , February 1, 2016; Rappler, “SC Rules: PH-US 
Military Deal Constitutional,” January 12, 2016.

581
ceived threat is the PLA’s ability to hit Australia’s northern base 
infrastructure with missile attacks from air-launched, sea-launched, 
and ground-launched land-attack cruise missiles and IRBMs. 321 A 
second element is that these capabilities restrict the Australian mil -
itary’s ability to defend the country’s sea lines of communication.322 
A third element is a concern that China’s A2/AD capabilities and 
gray zone efforts are designed to push the United States out of the 
region, cutting Australia off from its most important defense part -
ner and ally.323
Australian defense officials and analysts view the possibility of 
a Chinese forward base in the South Pacific as a development that 
would increase the risks from China’s forces. Concern about a poten-
tial Chinese military presence in the Pacific Island states surfaced 
clearly among Australia’s think tank community and from political 
leaders in 2018 amid reports of Chinese military cooperation with 
Vanuatu and investments in Papua New Guinea; it has continued 
as China’s engagements in the region have grown and escalated 
with the conclusion of a security deal between China and the Sol -
omon Islands in 2022. 324 Australia’s Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister for Defense Richard Marles stated in an interview with 
the Center for Strategic and International Studies in 2022 that a 
Chinese base in the Pacific would “completely change the national 
security landscape for Australia.” 325 In her testimony, Ms. Shrimp -
ton explained that a PLA presence in the southwest Pacific would 
dramatically enhance the range of China’s A2/AD capabilities and 
thus “fundamentally challenge and change Australia’s requirements 
for [its military] force.” 326 Specifically, a PLA presence in the second 
island chain could require Australia to dedicate more resources to 
defending its east coast from air and missile threats, “tying down 
Australian forces” to the potential detriment of operations within 
the first island chain. 327
Australia Reorients Its Military and Supports Deepening 
Alliance Cooperation
Australia is in the midst of a major effort to jumpstart and 
reorient its domestic defense apparatus to be better suited to ad -
dress threats from China’s military. Significant progress has been 
made in a short time at articulating a new approach, although 
the degree of follow-through on resourcing and implementation 
remains to be seen. In 2020, the Australian Department of De -
fence released a Defence Strategic Update that emphasized Aus -
tralia’s need for “more potent capabilities to hold adversary forces 
and infrastructure at risk further from Australia,” among other 
items.* 328 In 2023, the department released a Defense Strategic 
Review arguing that Australia needed to replace its traditional 
defense concept focused on low-intensity regional conflicts with 
an integrated national defense concept focused on great power 
conflict.329 To match this conceptual shift, the document advo -
cated for the transformation of Australia’s military from a “bal -
anced force” designed to perform in a wide range of low-level, 
* Other priorities identified included strengthened regional partnerships, a more durable sup -
ply chain, and improved capacity to respond to gray zone and cyber threats. Australian Govern -
ment Department of Defence, 2020 Defence Strategic Update , 2020, 33.

582
regional, and global missions into a “focused force” designed to 
prioritize meeting Canberra’s most significant military risk: great 
power conflict. 330 The review additionally recommended that Aus -
tralia adopt a strategy of deterrence by denial and build up its 
own capacity to threaten adversarial forces. 331 Finally, it called 
for Australia’s joint force to become more integrated across the 
five domains of maritime, land, air, space, and cyber. 332 In 2024, 
the Australian government codified this set of recommendations 
into its first National Defense Strategy. 333 The National Defense 
Strategy also reinforces the review’s attention to six specific ar -
eas, highlighted as immediate priorities in both documents: (1) 
advancing Australia’s conventionally armed, nuclear-powered 
submarine capability; (2) enhancing Australia’s long-range strike 
capabilities and production of munitions; (3) strengthening Aus -
tralia’s northern bases; (4) improving growth and retention of a 
highly skilled workforce; (5) boosting innovation; and (6) priori -
tizing partnerships in the Indo-Pacific. 334 The strategy was ac -
companied by a substantial funding boost * as well as an overall 
implementation plan called the 2024 Integrated Investment Pro -
gram allocating funding toward various efforts in the maritime, 
land, air, space, and cyber domains. 335
Australia is deepening cooperation with the United States in 
the framework of the alliance. † The U.S. and Australian militaries 
work to improve interoperability and demonstrate the strength of 
the alliance to third parties through cooperative efforts known as 
Force Posture Initiatives, which have recently expanded. ‡ 336 Ex -
panded force posture cooperation aims to increase Australia’s role 
in hosting forward-deployed U.S. forces and to further prepare 
Australian forces to support “high-end” military operations in the 
* The National Security Strategy announces additional defense funding of about $3.8 billion 
(5.7 billion Australian dollars [AUD]) in the four years between 2024 and 2028 and about 
$33.5 billion (50.3 billion AUD) over the decade between 2024 and 2034 over and above the 
previous trajectory for the period. This yields a total amount of about $219.9 billion (AUD 330 
billion) over that period. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defense 
Strategy , 2024, 8; Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defense Strategy 
Overview , 2024.
† Australia and Japan have also recently signed a set of consequential security agreements 
that can facilitate deepening defense cooperation between them in the future. In 2022, Aus -
tralia and Japan signed an update to their 2007 Joint Declaration on Security, with the new 
version more clearly alluding to China’s challenges to regional security and containing language 
that closely echoes that of the ANZUS security treaty between Australia, New Zealand, and 
the United States, although it remains nonbinding. August 2023 saw the entry into force of the 
Japan-Australia 2022 Reciprocal Access Agreement, which will likely result in increased joint 
training and exercises between the two countries. The agreement strengthens the legal frame -
work and establishes regular procedures for cooperative military activities, including relaxing 
immigration control for military personnel and simplifying procedures for transporting weapons 
and ammunition. The first application of the agreement later in 2023 saw Japan deploy two F-35 
aircraft to Australia—the first-ever overseas deployment of F-35s by Japan—in an exercise that 
is likely to pave the way for greater interoperability in the future. Shingo Nagata, “Security Co -
operation Steps Up with Japanese F-35 Access to Australia,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute, 
March 6, 2024; Prime Minister’s Office of Japan, Japan-Australia Joint Declaration on Security 
Cooperation, October 22, 2023; Ryo Nakamura and Rurika Imahash, “U.S. Cements ‘Game Chang-
ing’ Defense Ties with Australia, Japan,” Nikkei Asia, August 16, 2023; Australian Government, 
Australia and Japan Deepen Defense Ties , August 14, 2023; David Walton and Daisuke Akimoto, 
“What’s New in Australia and Japan’s Updated Joint Declaration of Security Cooperation?” Dip-
lomat, October 25, 2022; Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Japan-Australia Reciprocal Access 
Agreement, January 6, 2022; Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
Australia-Japan Joint Declaration of Security Cooperation .
‡ Preexisting force posture initiatives included the U.S. Marine Rotational Force Darwin; En -
hanced Air, Land, and Maritime Cooperation initiatives; Combined Logistics Sustainment and 
Maintenance Enterprise; and Enhanced Space Cooperation initiative. Australian Government, 
Defense, United States Force Posture Initiatives .

583
Indo-Pacific region. 337 In 2022, the United States and Australia 
committed to expanding force posture activities by “identifying 
priority locations in Australia to support enhanced U.S. force pos -
ture and exploring enabling logistics such as prepositioning of 
stores, munitions, and fuel.”  338 Upgrades to key Australian bases 
Darwin and Tindal are also underway, with the two countries 
collaborating on infrastructure improvements to support bomber 
aircraft. 339 Another avenue for cooperation is Exercise Talisman 
Sabre,* a biennial, joint military exercise designed to improve 
operability and combat readiness and to train military forces 
from the two countries to plan and conduct combined task force 
operations. 340 The exercise has recently included a considerable 
emphasis on complex joint logistics. 341
If fully implemented, the trilateral AUKUS partnership be -
tween Australia, the UK, and the United States has the poten -
tial to improve Australia’s ability to counter China’s A2/AD ca -
pabilities. The AUKUS framework comprises two main lines of 
effort: Pillar One, which supports Australia’s acquisition of nucle -
ar-powered submarines, † and Pillar Two, which involves enhanc -
ing joint capabilities and interoperability with a focus on cyber 
capabilities, AI, quantum technologies, and undersea capabili -
ties.342 Australia’s government argues that the Pillar One acqui -
sition of conventionally armed nuclear-powered submarines will 
enhance Australia’s capacity to both deter coercion and project 
its own military power. 343 Regarding power projection, Australia 
is particularly focused on defending its maritime approaches and 
protecting its sea lines of communication, both of which it has 
identified as being under threat. 344 Key advantages of the nucle -
ar-powered submarine in these areas include its superior stealth, 
speed, and range, which Australia assesses would both strength -
en deterrence and improve its ISR capabilities. 345 On Pillar Two, 
the AUKUS partnership represents potential new avenues for the 
three countries to counter challenges from China through defense 
technology sharing. 346 In her testimony for the Commission, Ms. 
Shrimpton described AUKUS as the most important defense pol -
icy choice Australia has made in decades, emphasizing that the 
two pillars are mutually reinforcing. 347 In contrast, Mr. John -
stone describes the partnership as symbolically useful but too 
narrow in scope to have a meaningful contribution to near-term 
deterrence. 348
* The name of the exercise is spelled “Talisman Sabre” in years when Australia leads and “Tal -
isman Saber” in years when the United States leads. Joseph Clark, “Talisman Sabre 23 Reflects 
U.S., Allies’ Commitment to Indo-Pacific,” DOD News, July 31, 2023.
† Australia’s pathway to a conventionally armed nuclear submarine capability under AUKUS 
is planned as a phased approach. The three countries will work together to jointly produce the 
AUKUS submarines for delivery to the UK by the late 2030s and to Australia by the early 2040s. 
In the interim, while the new submarines are in development, the partners plan to work together 
to bolster deterrence and to develop Australia’s capacity to operate the coming vessels safely. 
Planned steps identified in 2023 included: embedding Australian personnel within the U.S. and 
UK navies beginning in 2023, increasing the frequency of visits by U.S. and UK nuclear-powered 
submarines to Australia in 2023 and 2026, respectively, establishing a rotational presence of U.S. 
and UK nuclear-powered submarines in Australia as early as 2027, and allowing Australia to 
procure several Virginia-class nuclear-powered submarines from the United States beginning in 
the early 2030s before Australia’s diesel-electric submarines are set to begin retiring. Common -
wealth of Australia, The AUKUS Nuclear-Powered Submarine Pathway: A Partnership for the 
Future, 2023, 4, 7–8, 19–20, 28.

584
Australia Committed to Close Cooperation, Participation 
Parameters in a Conflict Remain Uncertain
Australia’s government would likely view providing some kind of 
support to the United States in the event of a conflict with Chi -
na as being in line with its interests. The Australian Department 
of Defence describes the country’s alliance with the United States 
as “central to Australia’s strategic and security arrangements,” and 
Australia’s new National Defense Strategy calls it “fundamental to 
Australia’s national security.” 349 Australia has decided to support 
the U.S. military in every major conflict over the past century, which 
Ms. Shrimpton assessed in her testimony is due in part to the cen -
trality of the alliance relationship to Australian security and mil -
itary planning. 350 Although it does not commit in advance to any 
policy position related to a conflict with China, Australia’s 2020 De -
fense Strategic Update describes a U.S.-China conflict in very simi -
lar terms to the conditions that may sufficiently impact Australia’s 
interests to call for the engagement of the Australian military. 351 
The document emphasizes that “high-intensity military conflict . . . 
including high-intensity military conflict between the United States 
and China” is “less remote” than in the past; recognizes that “state-
on-state conflict . . . could engage the Australian Defense Force (ADF) 
where Australia’s interests are threatened”; and states that “the 
ADF must be better prepared for [high-intensity] conflict if deter -
rence measures fail, or to support the United States and other part -
ners where Australia’s national interests are engaged.” 352
Australian policymakers have publicly committed to acting in a 
conflict over Taiwan and may be supported in doing so by the Aus -
tralian public, but this action may not include direct military partic -
ipation. In 2021 and 2023, successive Australian defense ministers 
publicly stated that it is “inconceivable” that Australia would not 
support the United States in any conflict with China over Taiwan 
and that the consequences of a U.S.-China conflict over Taiwan “are 
so grave that we cannot be passive bystanders.”  353 Joint official 
statements at the head of state and ministerial levels in 2023 also 
emphasized shared opposition to unilateral changes of the status 
quo in the Taiwan Strait.354 Nevertheless, some experts caution that 
Australia does not consider a Taiwan conflict as direct a threat to its 
own security as Japan does by virtue of its geography, raising ques -
tions about what shape this support might take. 355 Ms. Shrimpton 
further noted in her testimony for the Commission that although 
there is a broad consensus in Australia about the importance of 
maintaining freedom of navigation in the South China Sea and Tai -
wan Strait, “there is yet to be a serious national debate on Austra -
lia’s potential response to a Chinese invasion of Taiwan.” 356 A public 
opinion survey in 2023 revealed similarly varied views among the 
Australian public. The poll suggests that approximately 64 percent 
of Australians view a military conflict between the United States 
and China over Taiwan as a “critical threat” to Australia’s vital in -
terests, double the proportion from two years earlier, while an ad -
ditional 32 percent rank it an “important” threat. 357 A majority of 
respondents to the poll also support Australia taking certain actions 
to assist in the event of such a conflict, up to and including provision 
of arms and military support and the involvement of the Austra -

585
lian Navy in countering a blockade; however, there is no majority 
support for sending Australian personnel to Taiwan itself. * 358 Ryan 
Neelam, director of public opinion at the Lowy Institute, the foreign 
policy think tank conducting the poll, summarizes the takeaway as, 
“When it comes to a specific scenario where Taiwan is under mili -
tary threat and the U.S. is engaged, Australians feel quite forward 
leaning about taking action to support Taiwan . . . but that doesn’t 
extend as far as putting boots on the ground.”  359
Implications for the United States
The U.S. interests at stake in a regional conflict scenario—includ -
ing the defense of treaty allies and potentially other Indo-Pacific 
partners—justify dedicated attention to assessing the PLA’s count -
er-intervention capabilities and ensuring sufficient U.S. and allied 
preparedness to counter them. PLA aggression against one of its 
neighbors in the Indo-Pacific region could have serious consequenc -
es for the security of the individual parties involved, for freedom 
of navigation through regional waters and airspace, for broader re -
gional stability and prosperity, and potentially for the United States’ 
reputation as a reliable security partner and ally. Ensuring that the 
United States has the military capability it needs to defend its al -
lies, its access, and the rules-based international order in a potential 
conflict with the PLA—should circumstances demand it—is part of 
the overall task of deterring such aggression in the first place. Ex -
panding access, basing, and overflight (ABO) agreements with U.S. 
allies and partners in the region will also play an important role in 
this effort.
China seeks to overcome the challenges posed by U.S. and allied 
evolving capabilities and operational concepts to counter its count -
er-intervention. The PLA continues to build up its already large 
stockpile of offensive missiles to target U.S. and allied forces, and it 
has placed greater emphasis on improving the PLA’s C4ISR and EW 
capabilities. In addition, the PLA is developing kinetic and non-ki -
netic counter-C4ISR capabilities to attack, degrade, and paralyze 
the United States’ own C4ISR capabilities, which are vital to the 
United States’ ability to project power. These activities could compli-
cate and threaten current U.S. and allied capabilities to effectively 
counter China’s military aggression in conflict.
Publicly available evidence suggests that while China is paying 
close attention to U.S. and allied efforts to strengthen their military 
capabilities, it is also paying attention to any challenges regarding 
implementation.360 Chinese observers are aware of the inherent dif -
ficulties in reorienting U.S. force posture in the region, deepening 
alliance cooperation, and strengthening the capabilities of the U.S. 
defense industrial base. 361 Stagnation, delay, or reversal of existing 
* Regarding potential response to a military conflict between the United States and China over 
Taiwan, 76 percent of survey respondents support imposing sanctions, 64 percent support sending 
arms and military supplies to Taiwan, and 61 percent support participation by the Australian 
Navy to counter a blockade of the island, but only 42 percent support sending “Australian mil -
itary personnel to Taiwan to help defend it from China.” These numbers collected by the Lowy 
Institute in Australia are comparable to those reported in the United States in 2022 by the Chi -
cago Council on Global Affairs regarding the U.S. public’s willingness to take the same actions. 
Kristy Needham, “Australians Say They Would Support Taiwan if China Attacked, with Limits, 
Poll Shows,” Reuters, June 20, 2023; Lowy Institute, “Poll 2023: Potential Conflict over Taiwan.”; 
Chicago Council on Global Affairs, “Defending Taiwan.”

586
efforts in these areas risks harming deterrence against China by 
encouraging doubts about U.S. and allied capacity to follow through 
on defense objectives in the region. Addressing these challenges, 
meanwhile, will require sustained and focused attention as well as 
a commitment to balancing competing priorities.
Finally, although the PLA’s substantial strengths in a counter-in-
tervention scenario merit focused attention, they should not be con -
sidered without reference to accompanying weaknesses or viewed in 
isolation. Understanding potential limitations to PLA performance 
in a counter-intervention scenario, whether from underdeveloped lo -
gistics and maintenance systems or from other areas, can be as im -
portant for informing U.S. approaches as understanding the PLA’s 
strengths. The PLA’s growing ability to challenge U.S. military free-
dom of operation within the first or second island chains also does 
not imply a similar level of PLA capability in other domains and 
scenarios, such as global power projection, indicating that there 
are still areas of competition where the U.S. military maintains a 
greater advantage over the PLA. 362 Being prepared to counter PLA 
threats to U.S. interests across a wide range of domains and scenar -
ios may involve tradeoffs, and weighing those competing priorities 
will require U.S. policymakers to have an in-depth understanding of 
the requirements in each case.

587
ENDNOTES FOR CHAPTER 8
1. Kristen Gunness and Phillip C. Saunders, “Averting Escalation and Avoiding 
War: Lessons from the 1995–1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis,” National Defense University 
Press, China Strategic Perspectives 17 (December 22, 2022): 37; U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, 2021 Annual Report to Congress , November 2021, 
392.
2. U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security 
Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023, October 19, 2023, 87–91.
3. Andrew Krepinevich, Barry Watts, and Robert Work, “Meeting the Anti-Access 
and Area-Denial Challenge,” Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments , 2003, 
3–5.
4. Thomas Shugart, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and 
Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 
2024, 3–7; J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 31–35; U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military 
and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023 , October 
19, 2023, 87–90.
5. Timothy Heath and Andrew Erickson, “Is China Pursuing Counter-Interven -
tion?” Washington Quarterly 38:3 (Fall 2015): 144, 148.
6. Timothy Heath and Andrew Erickson, “Is China Pursuing Counter-Interven -
tion?” Washington Quarterly 38:3 (Fall 2015): 148.
7. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 2019 China’s National 
Defense in the New Era , March 16, 2021; State Council Information Office of the 
People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy, May 2015; Information Office 
of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, The Diversified Employment 
of China’s Armed Forces, April 16, 2013; Information Office of the State Council of 
the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2010 , March 31, 2011; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2008 , January 20, 2009; Information Office of the State Council 
of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2006, December 2006; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2004 , December 2004; Information Office of the State Council 
of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2002, December 2002; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2000 , October 2000.
8. Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2000 , October 2000.
9. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 2019 China’s National 
Defense in the New Era , March 16, 2021, 4.
10. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 2019 China’s Nation-
al Defense in the New Era , March 16, 2021; State Council Information Office of the 
People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy, May 2015; Information Office 
of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, The Diversified Employment 
of China’s Armed Forces, April 16, 2013; Information Office of the State Council of 
the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2010 , March 31, 2011; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2008 , January 20, 2009; Information Office of the State Council 
of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2006, December 2006; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2004 , December 2004; Information Office of the State Council 
of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2002, December 2002; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2000 , October 2000.
11. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 2019 China’s Nation-
al Defense in the New Era,  March 16, 2021; State Council Information Office of the 
People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy, May 2015; Information Office 
of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, The Diversified Employment 
of China’s Armed Forces, April 16, 2013; Information Office of the State Council of 
the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2010 , March 31, 2011; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2008 , January 20, 2009; Information Office of the State Council 
of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2006, December 2006; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 

588
National Defense in 2004 , December 2004; Information Office of the State Council 
of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2002, December 2002; 
Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in 2000 , October 2000.
12. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: On Maritime Strategic 
Access, April 2024, iii–iv, x–xi, 49, 233–234.
13. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: On Maritime Strategic 
Access, April 2024, 49.
14. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: On Maritime Strategic 
Access, April 2024, 235–236.
15. Ye Jianjun, “An Analysis of the U.S. Strategy to Deal with ‘Anti-Access and 
Area Denial’ ” (美国应对“反进入和区域拒止”战略评析), Contemporary International Re -
lations 6 (2011): 45–46. Translation.
16. Ye Jianjun, “An Analysis of the U.S. Strategy to Deal with ‘Anti-Access and 
Area Denial’ ” (美国应对“反进入和区域拒止”战略评析), Contemporary International Re -
lations 6 (2011): 46. Translation.
17. Zhang Wenzong, “U.S. Deterrence and Coercive Diplomacy toward China and 
China’s Response” (美国对华威慑与胁迫及中国应对), Contemporary International Rela-
tions, December 20, 2016. CSIS Interpret Translation.
18. Chen Xi and Ge Tengfei, “An Analysis of the United States’ Deterrence by De -
nial Strategy against China” ( 美国对华拒止性威慑战略论析), International Security 
Studies, September 16, 2022. CSIS Interpret Translation; Zuo Xiying, “Adjustments 
in the United States’ Conventional Deterrence Strategy against China” (美国对华常规
威慑战略的调整), International Security Studies , September 16, 2022. CSIS Interpret 
Translation.
19. Chen Xi and Ge Tengfei, “An Analysis of the United States’ Deterrence by De -
nial Strategy against China” ( 美国对华拒止性威慑战略论析), International Security 
Studies, September 16, 2022, 2, 8, 12, 19, 22–23. CSIS Interpret Translation; Zuo 
Xiying, “Adjustments in the United States’ Conventional Deterrence Strategy against 
China” (美国对华常规威慑战略的调整), International Security Studies , September 16, 
2022, 8–9, 11, 13, 18, 22. CSIS Interpret Translation.
20. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s 
Regular Press Conference on July 29, 2024, July 29, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, Security Assurances: Working Paper Submitted by China , July 23, 2024; Chi -
na’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s Regular 
Press Conference on July 9, 2024 , July 9, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s Regular Press Conference on June 17, 2024, 
June 17, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson 
Mao Ning’s Regular Press Conference on April 11, 2024 , April 11, 2024; China’s Min-
istry of National Defense, Ministry of National Defense: United States Is Actually 
the World’s Biggest Nuclear Threat (国防部:美国才是世界上最大的核威胁), August 31, 
2023. Translation; Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Singapore, Ambas-
sador Hong Xiaoyong Has a Signed Article “Cooperation or Confrontation? The Way 
Ahead for the Region” Published in The Straits Times , June 22, 2020. 
21. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s 
Regular Press Conference on July 29, 2024, July 29, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, Security Assurances: Working Paper Submitted by China , July 23, 2024; Chi -
na’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s Regular 
Press Conference on July 9, 2024 , July 9, 2024; Embassy of the People’s Republic of 
China in Singapore, Ambassador Hong Xiaoyong Has a Signed Article “Cooperation 
or Confrontation? The Way Ahead for the Region,” Published in The Straits Times , 
June 22, 2020; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin 
Jian’s Regular Press Conference on June 17, 2024, June 17, 2024; China’s Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s Regular Press Conference 
on April 11, 2024 , April 11, 2024.
22. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wen-
bin’s Regular Press Conference on May 24, 2024 , May 24, 2024; China’s Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Con -
ference on May 23, 2024 , May 23, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign 
Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s Regular Press Conference on April 19, 2024 , April 
19, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Ji -
an’s Regular Press Conference on April 18, 2024 , April 18, 2024; China’s Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s Regular Press Conference 
on April 10, 2024 , April 10, 2024.
23. Xinhua, “China Opposes U.S. Deployment of Intermediate-Range Missiles in 
Asia-Pacific: Spokesperson,” April 12, 2024; Li Zhenjing et al., “Global Command—
The Future Pattern of Joint U.S. Operations” ( 全域统御—— 美军联合作战的未来格局), 

589
Military Digest  6 (2024). Translation; China National Defense News , “U.S. Military 
Steps Up New Combat Concepts in Exercises” ( 美军加紧新型作战概念演练), People’s 
Daily, November 8, 2023. Translation; He Weibo, “Reanalysis of the Scope of Appli -
cation of the Mutual Defense Treaty between the Republic of the Philippines and 
the United States of America” ( 《美菲共同防御条约》的适用范围问题再分析), Chinese 
Journal of American Studies  3 (2023). Translation; China’s Ministry of Foreign Af -
fairs, Commentary VII on AUKUS: Fire Cannot Be Wrapped Up in Paper; Whoever 
Plays with Fire Will Perish by It, October 6, 2022; Chen Xi and Ge Tengfei, “An Analy-
sis of the United States’ Deterrence by Denial Strategy against China” (美国对华拒止
性威慑战略论析), International Security Studies, September 16, 2022, 11, 13, 14. CSIS 
Interpret Translation; Zuo Xiying, “Adjustments in the United States’ Conventional 
Deterrence Strategy against China” ( 美国对华常规威慑战略的调整), International Se -
curity Studies, September 16, 2022, 16, 18. CSIS Interpret Translation; Guangming 
Daily, “U.S. Third ‘Offset Strategy’ ” (美第三次“抵消战略”述评), Xinhua, March 2, 2016. 
Translation; Zhang Weiwei, “A New Round of Strengthening of the U.S.-Japan Alli -
ance: Content, Motivations, and Prospects” (美日同盟的新一轮强化:内容、动因及前景), 
November 18, 2015. Translation; People’s Daily Online, “Report States That U.S. ‘Air-
Sea Battle’ Intentions against China Are Clear” (报告称美国“空海一体战”针对中国意图
昭然若揭), July 24, 2014. Translation; Ye Jianjun, “An Analysis of the U.S. Strategy 
to Deal with ‘Anti-Access and Area Denial’ ” (美国应对“反进入和区域拒止”战略评析), 
Contemporary International Relations 6 (2011): 45. Translation; China Daily, “RAND 
Corporation Makes False Claims about a Taiwan Strait Conflict: States Our Military 
Can Deter Contain U.S. Military” ( 兰德公司妄言台海冲突 称我军能遏阻美军), April 4, 
2007. Translation.
24. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 3.
25. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 5.
26. Gerry Doyle, “US Strategy for Anti-Ship Weapons to Counter China: Plentiful, 
Mobile, Deadly,” Reuters, September 17, 2024; Stephen Losey, “US Air Force Eyes 
Missile Defense for Dispersed Bases in China Fight,” Defense News, August 22, 2024; 
Scott Smith, “Air and Missile Defense in the Western Pacific,” U.S. Naval Institute, 
January 2024.
27. Franz-Stefan Gady, “Revealed: China for the First Time Publicly Displays 
‘Guam Killer’ Missile,” Diplomat, August 31, 2015; Ye Jianjun, “An Analysis of the 
U.S. Strategy to Deal with ‘Anti-Access and Area Denial’ ” (美国应对“反进入和区域拒
止”战略评析), Contemporary International Relations  6 (2011): 45. Translation.
28. Chen Guangwen, “U.S. Military Desires to Break China’s ‘Anti-Interven -
tion’ Strategy” (美军欲破解中国“反介入”战略), China Youth Reference , May 16, 2012. 
Translation. https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20240528142120/https:/ /qnck.cyol.com/
html/2012-05/16/nw.D110000qnck_20120516_1-19.htm.
29. Shi Zhangsong, Gong Wenbin, and Wu Shong Heng, “Status and Development of 
Long-Range Precision Strike Operations Technology Based on Space-Based Informa -
tion” (基于天基信息的海上远程精确打击技术现状及发展), Journal of Naval University of 
Engineering (Comprehensive Edition 17:3 (September 2020): 27. Translation; Xu Qili 
and Gong Yun, “The Role of U.S. Overseas Bases in Joint Operations” ( 美国海外基地
在联合作战中的作用探析), Journal of Naval University of Engineering (Comprehensive 
Edition) (March 2020): 31. Translation; Chen Guangwen, “U.S. Military Desires to 
Break China’s ‘Anti-Intervention’ Strategy” (美军欲破解中国“反介入”战略), China Youth 
Reference, May 16, 2012. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240528142120/
https:/ /qnck.cyol.com/html/2012-05/16/nw.D110000qnck_20120516_1-19.htm.
30. China Daily , “RAND Corporation Makes False Claims about a Taiwan Strait 
Conflict: States Our Military Can Deter Contain U.S. Military” ( 兰德公司妄言台海冲
突 称我军能遏阻美军), April 4, 2007. Translation.
31. Chen Xi and Ge Tengfei, “An Analysis of the United States’ Deterrence by De -
nial Strategy against China” ( 美国对华拒止性威慑战略论析), International Security 
Studies, September 16, 2022, 8, 10, 15. CSIS Interpret Translation; Zuo Xiying, “Ad -
justments in the United States’ Conventional Deterrence Strategy against China” (
美国对华常规威慑战略的调整), International Security Studies, September 16, 2022, 14. 
CSIS Interpret Translation.
32. Stephen Chen, “Chinese Scientists Plan Surface-to-Air Missile with 2,000km 
Kill Range,” South China Morning Post , March 28, 2024.

590
33. Chen Xi and Ge Tengfei, “An Analysis of the United States’ Deterrence by De -
nial Strategy against China” ( 美国对华拒止性威慑战略论析), International Security 
Studies, September 16, 2022, 15. CSIS Interpret Translation.
34. China’s Ministry of National Defense, Transcript of May 2024 Ministry of Na -
tional Defense Regular Press Conference  (2024年5月国防部例行记者会文字实录), May 
30, 2024. Translation; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokes -
person Li Jian’s Regular Press Conference on April 18, 2024 , April 18, 2024; Xin-
hua, “China Opposes U.S. Deployment of Intermediate-Range Missiles in Asia-Pa -
cific: Spokesperson,” April 12, 2024; Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolv -
ing Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and 
Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 6–7; Zhang Junshe, “Stay Vigilant 
against Four New Trends of US Military in Asia-Pacific,” China Military Online, Jan-
uary 28, 2023; China’s Ministry of National Defense, Regular Press Conference of the 
Ministry of National Defense on July 28 , August 5, 2022.
35. China’s Ministry of National Defense, Transcript of May 2024 Ministry of Na -
tional Defense Regular Press Conference  (2024年5月国防部例行记者会文字实录), May 
30, 2024. Translation.
36. Chen Xi and Ge Tengfei, “An Analysis of the United States’ Deterrence by De -
nial Strategy against China” ( 美国对华拒止性威慑战略论析), International Security 
Studies, September 16, 2022, 11, 13, 14. CSIS Interpret Translation.
37. Xinhua, “China Opposes U.S. Deployment of Intermediate-Range Missiles in 
Asia-Pacific: Spokesperson,” April 12, 2024; China’s Ministry of Defense, Regular 
Press Conference of the Ministry of National Defense on July 28 , August 5, 2022.
38. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 6–7.
39. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 8–9; China National Defense News , “U.S. Military Steps Up New 
Combat Concepts in Exercises” (美军加紧新型作战概念演练), People’s Daily, November 
8, 2023. Translation; Zhang Yifan, “US’ Military Calculations behind Eagerness to 
Bind Three Pacific Nations,” China Military Online , October 2023; Zhang Junshe, 
“Stay Vigilant against Four New Trends of US Military in Asia-Pacific,” China Mili-
tary Online, January 28, 2023; Wang Peng, “Real Purpose of US Military’s Intensive 
Exercises in Pacific 美军在太平洋地区密集军演为哪般,” China Military Online, August 
27, 2021.
40. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 135; Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 8.
41. China National Defense News , “U.S. Military Steps Up New Combat Concepts 
in Exercises” (美军加紧新型作战概念演练), People’s Daily, November 8, 2023. Trans -
lation.
42. China National Defense News, “U.S. Military Steps Up New Combat Concepts in 
Exercises” (美军加紧新型作战概念演练), November 8, 2023. Translation; Zhang Yifan, 
“US’ Military Calculations behind Eagerness to Bind Three Pacific Nations,” China 
Military Online, October 20, 2023; Lin Lin, “Observation | U.S.-Philippines Military 
Relations Are Evolving Rapidly, Can They Really Stand ‘Shoulder to Shoulder’?” (观察
｜美菲军事关系快速演进, 真能“肩并肩”一起走?), The Paper, April 7, 2023. Translation; 
Wang Peng, “Real Purpose of US Military’s Intensive Exercises in Pacific” (美军在太平
洋地区密集军演为哪般), China Military Online , August 27, 2021. Translation.
43. Song Xiaoming, “Develop Operational Concepts, Design Future Wars” (开发作战
概念 设计未来战争), China National Defense News , June 22, 2022. Translation.
44. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 135; Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 9.

591
45. China National Defense News , “U.S. Military Steps Up New Combat Concepts 
in Exercises” (美军加紧新型作战概念演练), People’s Daily, November 8, 2023. Trans -
lation.
46. People’s Daily, “Report States That U.S. ‘Air-Sea Battle’ Intentions against Chi-
na Are Clear” ( 报告称美国“空海一体战”针对中国意图昭然若揭), July 24, 2014. Trans -
lation.
47. Guangming Daily , “U.S. Third ‘Offset Strategy’ ” (美第三次“抵消战略”述评), 
Xinhua, March 2, 2016. Translation.
48. Li Zhenjing et al., “Research on the Development of U.S. Joint All Domain Com-
mand and Control” ( 美军联合全域指挥控制发展研究), Military Digest  9 (2024): 7–12. 
Translation; Peng Yuting et al., “Research on Changes to U.S. Joint All Domain Com-
mand and Control” (美军联合全域指挥控制变革研究), Military Digest 9 (2024): 13–17. 
Translation; Dai Yuchao et al., “Research on the Questions and Challenges of U.S. All 
Domain Command and Control” (美军联合全域指挥控制问题挑战研究), Military Digest 
9 (2024): 18–21. Translation.
49. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and 
Partners, March 21, 2024, 6; Xinhua, “Japanese Media Analyzes the Purpose of 
the Reorganization of the US Marine Corps ( 日媒分析美海军陆战队改编目的),” De-
cember 11, 2023. Translation; Chinese News , “Japan Deploys Missile Forces to Pre -
vent China’s Unification Plan!” YouTube, Video, December 29, 2022. https:/ /www.
youtube.com/watch?v=SpI2_y4O7T8; CCTV, “ ‘Asia Today’ 20221219” (《今日亚洲》 
20221219), Video, December 19, 2022. Translation. https://tv.cctv.com/20 22/12/19/
VIDEFjxNr8lRU58IyQ32xZUA221219.shtml?spm=C45305.PiIkmPvmwrBJ.
E3GBGR5JxwmC.17; CCTV, “ ‘Focus Today’ 20220922 U.S. HIMARS May Stay in Japan, 
Japan Seeks to Purchase Attack Drones for Deployment in Southwest” ( 《今日关注》 
20220922 美“海马斯”或常留日本 日求购攻击无人机部署西南), Video, September 22, 2022. 
Translation. https:/ /tv.cctv.com/2022/09/22/VIDE3NPrhml99ow0WfqdvaoJ220922.
shtml?spm=C45305.PmBKBQYn4ReN.E2d%20BMI2VdbgJ.33; CCTV, “China’s Pub-
lic Opinion Field 20220828” ( 《中国舆论场》 20220828), Video, August 28, 2022. 
Translation. https:/ /tv.cctv.com/2022/08/29/VIDEHy7ayomppYfmqv3Q4vwk220829.
shtml?spm=C52507945305.PXjYs4J0rfFg.%200.0; China’s Ministry of National De -
fense, Regular Press Conference of the Ministry of National Defense on July 28 , Au-
gust 5, 2022; CCTV, “ ‘Focus Today’ Three Aircraft Carriers Deployed around China, 
United States Pulls Japan and Australia to Intervene in the Taiwan Strait and Stir 
up Western Pacific” (《今日关注》 20220112 三航母部署中国周边 美拉日澳干涉台海搅
动西太), Video, January 12, 2022. Translation.
50. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 5; Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 182; Lin Lin, “Observation | U.S.-Philippines Military Relations 
Are Evolving Rapidly, Can They Really Stand ‘Shoulder to Shoulder’?” (观察｜美菲军
事关系快速演进, 真能“肩并肩”一起走?), The Paper, April 7, 2023. Translation; Lin Lin, 
“Observation | The United States Is Building New Facilities at Four Bases in the 
Philippines, Where Is the Sword of Strengthening Defense Cooperation Directed?” 
(观察｜美在菲四个基地建新军事设施, 强化防务合作剑指何方?), The Paper , February 3, 
2023. Translation; China Daily, “Balance between Powers Big Test for Manila: China 
Daily Editorial,” February 1, 2023.
51. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 4; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesper -
son Wang Wenbin’s Remarks on AUKUS Nuclear Submarine Cooperation on March 
17, 2023, March 17, 2023; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Commentary VII on 
AUKUS: Fire Cannot Be Wrapped Up in Paper; Whoever Plays with Fire Will Perish 
by It, October 6, 2022; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reality Check: Falsehoods 
in US Perceptions of China , June 19, 2022; U.S. Department of Defense, AUKUS: The 
Trilateral Security Partnership between Australia, the U.K., and U.S .
52. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 4.

592
53. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2023 Annual Report to 
Congress, November 2023, 459.
54. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2023 Annual Report to 
Congress, November 2023, 459–464.
55. Sarah Kirchberger, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Pursuit of Defense Technologies: Implica -
tions for U.S. and Multilateral Export Control and Investment Screening Regimes , 
April 13, 2023, 4; Zuo Xiying, “Adjustments in the United States’ Conventional Deter-
rence Strategy against China” ( 美国对华常规威慑战略的调整), International Security 
Studies, September 16, 2022, 15. CSIS Interpret Translation; Qi Xiaobin et al., “Appli-
cation of Supercavitation Technology in Anti-Submarine Warfare” ( 超空泡技术在反潜
作战中的应用设想), Digital Ocean and Underwater Warfare  5:2 (April 2022): 109, 114. 
Translation; Alastair Gale, “The Era of Total U.S. Submarine Dominance over China 
Is Ending,” Wall Street Journal, November 20, 2020.
56. Qi Xiaobin et al., “Application of Supercavitation Technology in Anti-Subma -
rine Warfare” ( 超空泡技术在反潜作战中的应用设想), Digital Ocean and Underwater 
Warfare 5:2 (April 2022): 109, 112–114; Li Xiang and Huang Kang, “Supercavitating 
Weapons: Building Their Own Path Underwater” (超空泡兵器:自己造路水下行), China 
Military Online, April 3, 2020. Translation; Military News, “Revealing the Secrets of 
Supercavitating Torpedoes: Underwater Speed as Fast as High-Speed Train and Fast-
er than a Helicopter” (揭秘超空泡鱼雷:水下速度如高铁 比直升机机快), Xinhua, October 
20, 2015. Translation.
57. Gabriel Honrada, “China Unveils Supersonic Missile-Torpedo Anti-Ship Weap -
on,” Asia Times , September 14, 2022; Stephen Chen, “Chinese Scientists Plan Bo -
ron-Powered Supersonic Missile That Can Fly and Swim, South China Morning Post, 
September 13, 2022.
58. Jarry McNeil, “Rising Tide of Underwater Drone Funding Highlights US-China 
Rivalry,” Naval Technology, July 15, 2024; Robert W. Burton et al., “A Survey of Mis -
sions for Unmanned Undersea Vehicles,” RAND Corporation, 2009.
59. Jon Harper, “DARPA Tests Undersea Manta Ray Drone Prototype, Looks to 
Transition Tech to Navy,” Defense Scoop, May 1, 2024; Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency, Manta Ray UUV Prototype Completes In-Water Testing, May 1, 2024; 
Northrop Grumman, “Manta Ray.”
60. Li Lun, “The United States’ New-Type Unmanned Submersible Makes Its Ap -
pearance” (美新型无人潜航器亮相), China Defense News , June 4, 2024. Translation; 
Tank & Armored Vehicle, “Military News from around the World” (环球军讯), 6 (June 
1, 2024): 6–8. Translation; Liang Jiayuan, “Technological Parameters Kept Secret, 
Provokes Speculation about Combat Scenarios! The United States and Australia Suc -
cessively Announce Progress on Research and Development of Large-scale Submers -
ibles” ( 技术参数保持神秘,作战场景引发猜想!美澳接连公布大型潜航器研制进展), Global 
Times, May 16, 2024. Translation.
61. Li Lun, “The United States’ New-Type Unmanned Submersible Makes Its Ap -
pearance” (美新型无人潜航器亮相), China Defense News , June 4, 2024. Translation.
62. Ma Jun and Liu Yang, “Chinese Version of a Robot Manta Ray Appears at the 
Beijing Military Expo, Possesses Low-Noise, Long-Duration, and Fast Speed Charac -
teristics” (“中国版机器蝠鲼”亮相北京军博会,具有低噪音,长续航,速度快等特点), Global 
Times, May 18, 2024. Translation.
63. CCTV, “Soft Body Submersibles Imitating Manta Rays Become Popular—
What’s So Miraculous about This ‘Fish’ ” (仿蝠鲼柔体潜水器走红 这条“鱼”有何神奇?), 
June 10, 2024. Translation; Victoria Bela, “China Plans to Expand ‘Manta Ray’ Sub-
mersible Fleet with Eye on Reconnaissance Roles,” South China Morning Post , June 
9, 2024.
64. Global Times, “Israel’s Anti-Missile Operation, Did the U.S. Military Play the 
Role of ‘General Dispatcher’? Chinese Military Expert Analysis” (以军反导行动, 美军
扮演“总调度”?中国军事专家分析), Xinhua, April 17, 2024. Translation; Reference News, 
“How Israel and Its Allies Could Intercept Incoming Iranian Weapons” ( 以色列及盟
友如何拦截伊朗来袭武器), Xinhua, April 16, 2024. Translation; Xie Ruiqiang and Zhu 
Runyu, “Observation | Iran and Israel Stick to Their Own Stories on the Results of 
the Air Raid, Experts: Both Sides May Improve Their Weapons on the Basis of This 
Attack and Defense” (观察｜空袭效果伊以各执一词, 专家:双方或根据此次攻防改进武器), 
The Paper, April 15, 2024. Translation.
65. Global Times, “Israel’s Anti-Missile Operation, Did the U.S. Military Play the 
Role of ‘General Dispatcher’? Chinese Military Expert Analysis” (以军反导行动, 美军
扮演“总调度”?中国军事专家分析), Xinhua, April 17, 2024. Translation; Reference News, 
“How Israel and Its Allies Could Intercept Incoming Iranian Weapons” ( 以色列及盟
友如何拦截伊朗来袭武器), Xinhua, April 16, 2024. Translation; Xie Ruiqiang and Zhu 
Runyu, “Observation | Iran and Israel Stick to Their Own Stories on the Results of 

593
the Air Raid, Experts: Both Sides May Improve Their Weapons on the Basis of This 
Attack and Defense” ( 观察｜空袭效果伊以各执一词,专家:双方或根据此次攻防改进武器), 
The Paper, April 15, 2024. Translation.
66. Thomas Shugart, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
2; Timothy Heath and Andrew Erickson, “Is China Pursuing Counter-Intervention?” 
Washington Quarterly (Fall 2015): 149.
67. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Military 
Strategy 2020, January 2022, 44, 46, 140, 192, 198, 257, 259.
68. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Military 
Strategy 2020, January 2022, 46.
69. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Military 
Strategy 2020, January 2022, 140, 192, 254–255, 257–259.
70. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: PLA’s Science of Cam-
paigns (2006), December 2, 2020, 122, 129.
71. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: PLA’s Science of Cam-
paigns (2006), December 2, 2020, 610, 719.
72. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 2019 China’s National 
Defense in the New Era  March 16, 2021, 6–7.
73. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: 2019 China’s National 
Defense in the New Era , March 16, 2021, 7.
74. Reuters, “China’s ‘Aggressive Behavior’ in South China Sea Must Be Chal -
lenged, US Navy Official Says,” August 27, 2023; James Kraska, “China’s Excessive 
Straight Baseline Claims,” in James Kraska, Ronan Long, and Myron H. Nordquist, 
eds., Peaceful Maritime Engagement in East Asia and the Pacific Region , Oceans Law 
and Policy , 2023, 151–161; Gregory Poling, “The Conventional Wisdom on China’s 
Island Bases Is Dangerously Wrong,” War on the Rocks, January 10, 2020; Permanent 
Court of Arbitration, Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of the South China 
Sea Arbitration (The Republic of the Philippines v. The People’s Republic of China), 
Case No. 2013–19, July 12, 2016, 473–477; U.S. Department of State, China’s Military 
Aggression in the Indo-Pacific Region .
75. David Vergun, “Austin Says U.S. Committed to Defending Japan, Including 
Senkaku Islands,” DOD News , October 4, 2023; U.S. Department of Defense, FACT 
SHEET: U.S.-Philippines Bilateral Defense Guidelines, May 3, 2023; Reuters, “Obama 
Says Disputed Islands within Scope of US-Japan Security Treaty,” April 22, 2014; 
U.S. Department of State, U.S. Collective Defense Arrangements ; Avalon Project at 
the Yale Law School, “Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the 
Republic of the Philippines,” August 30, 1951.
76. Kristen Gunness and Phillip C. Saunders, “Averting Escalation and Avoiding 
War: Lessons from the 1995–1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis,” National Defense University 
Press, China Strategic Perspectives 17 (December 2022): 20; Nike Ching, “US Oppos -
es Unilateral Changes in Taiwan Strait Status Quo, Biden Says,” Voice of America , 
September 21, 2022; U.S. Department of State, U.S. Relations with Taiwan, May 28, 
2022; Luke Bellocchi, “The U.S. One China Policy: A Primer for Professional Military 
Education Faculty,” Joint Forces Staff College , May 11, 2022; Taiwan Relations Act, 
Pub. L. No. 96–8, 1979, codified at 22 U.S.C. § 3301 et seq.
77. David Roza, “The US Thinks China Is a ‘Near-Peer’ Threat. Does China Agree?” 
Air and Space Forces , March 22, 2023; Kenneth W. Allen et al., “Personnel of the 
People’s Liberation Army,” BluePath Labs (prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission), November 2022, 9–12; Kristen Gunness and Phillip 
C. Saunders, “Averting Escalation and Avoiding War: Lessons from the 1995–1996 
Taiwan Strait Crisis,” National Defense University Press, China Strategic Perspectives 
17 (December 2022): 37; Mangesh Sawant, “Why China Cannot Challenge the U.S. 
Military Primacy,” Air University , December 13, 2021; Timothy Heath and Andrew 
S. Erickson, “Is China Pursuing Counter-Intervention?” Washington Quarterly 38:3 
(October 2015): 149.
78. Timothy Heath and Andrew S. Erickson, “Is China Pursuing Counter-Interven-
tion?” Washington Quarterly 38:3 (October 2015): 144.
79. Eric Heginbotham et al., “The U.S.-China Military Scorecard: Forces, Geogra -
phy, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 1996–2017,” RAND Corporation, September 
14, 2015, 153–199, 245–256.
80. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 5; China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Mili -
tary Strategy 2020 , January 2022, 289.

594
81. Dean Cheng, Cyber Dragon: Inside China’s Information Warfare and Cyber Op-
erations, Praeger, 2017, 39–40.
82. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7; Dai Qingmin, “On Seizing Information Supremacy (论夺取制信息权),” Chi-
nese Military Science 16 :2 (2003): 16. Translation.
83. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 5–7; Mark Cozad, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on Deterring PRC Aggression toward Taiwan, February 
18, 2021, 3.
84. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Military 
Strategy 2020 , January 2022, 183–185; Jeffrey Engstrom, “Systems Confrontation 
and System Destruction Warfare: How the Chinese People’s Liberation Army Seeks 
to Wage Modern Warfare,” RAND Corporation, February 1, 2018, 11.
85. Jeffrey Engstrom, “Systems Confrontation and System Destruction Warfare: 
How the Chinese People’s Liberation Army Seeks to Wage Modern Warfare,” RAND 
Corporation, February 1, 2018, 12, 15.
86. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7; Jeffrey Engstrom, “Systems Confrontation and System Destruction War -
fare: How the Chinese People’s Liberation Army Seeks to Wage Modern Warfare,” 
RAND Corporation, February 1, 2018, iii.
87. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 18–19.
88. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 3, 17.
89. China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Military 
Strategy 2020, January 2022, 349.
90. Andrew S. Erickson and Michael S. Chase, “Informatization and the Chinese 
People’s Liberation Army Navy,” National Defense University , 2011, 253.
91. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 19.
92. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 19.
93. Jacob Stokes, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Econom -
ic and National Security Competition , February 1, 2024, 4–5; Yun Nao Think Tank, 
“Application Background of Artificial Intelligence Technology in the Field of Military 
Intelligence” (人工智能技术在军事情报领域的应用背景), January 15, 2024. Transla -
tion. https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20240516190434/https:/ /m.chuandong.com/tech/
tech46839.html; Zhang Dongrun and Zhang Wenhong, “Intelligent Evolution of Un -
manned Reconnaissance” ( 无人侦察的智能化嬗变), China Military Online , July 28, 
2022. Translation; U.S. National Intelligence Council, Global Trends 2040 , March 
2021, 7.
94. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 18–19, 31; Shane Bilsborough, “China’s Emerging C4ISR Revolution,” Diplo-
mat, August 13, 2013; Carlo Kopp, “Advances in PLA C4ISR Capabilities,” Jamestown 
Foundation, February 18, 2010.
95. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 20.

595
96. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 20; J. Michael Dahm, “Undersea Fiber-Optic Cable and Satellite Communi -
cations,” John Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, July 2020, 3.
97. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 20.
98. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 20.
99. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 21; Eric Heginbotham et al., “The U.S.-China Military Scorecard: Forces, Ge-
ography, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 1996–2017,” RAND Corporation, 2015, 
32; U.S. Army TRADOC, Type SLR-66 Chinese Over-The-Horizon (OTH) Radar .
100. Thomas R. McCabe, “Chinese Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
Systems,” Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs, Air University Press , March 8, 2021.
101. J. Michael Dahm, “Electronic Warfare and Signals Intelligence,” John Hopkins 
University Applied Physics Laboratory , August 2020, 9–10.
102. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 21–24.
103. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter 
Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 259–260.
104. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 22.
105. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 22–23; Mike Yeo, “Satellite Image Shows Chinese Deployment of New Air -
craft to South China Sea,” Defense News, May 12, 2017.
106. Liu Xuanzun and Guo Yuandan, “PLA Holds Naval, Air Patrols in S. Chi -
na Sea amid Provocations,” Global Times, January 4, 2024 ; Military Watch Maga -
zine “China’s KJ-500 ‘Flying Radar’ Fleet Growing Fast: Why America Hates This 
AEW&C Platform,” March 31, 2023.
107. Military Watch Magazine, “China’s KJ-500 ‘Flying Radar’ Fleet Growing Fast: 
Why America Hates This AEW&C Platform,” March 31, 2023.
108. Eric Wertheim, “Type 055 Renhai-Class Cruiser: China’s Premier Surface 
Combatant,” U.S. Naval Institute, March 2023.
109. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 23.
110. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 24; Amber Wang, “Chinese Navy Shows Off New Anti-Submarine Helicop -
ter,” South China Morning Post, April 23, 2022; Rick Joe, “The Chinese Navy’s Grow-
ing Anti-Submarine Warfare Capabilities,” Diplomat, September 12, 2018 .
111. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 27.
112. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 24.
113. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter 
Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 254.

596
114. Stephen N. Whiting, written testimony for U.S. Senate Armed Services Com -
mittee, Full Committee Hearing Open/Closed: To Receive Testimony on United States 
Strategic Command and United States Space Command in Review of the Defense 
Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and the Future Years Defense Program, 
February 29, 2024, 6.
115. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 26–27; Andrew Jones, “China Launches First Geosynchronous Orbit Radar 
Satellite,” Space News , August 14, 2023; New Space Economy , “Synthetic Aperture 
Radar (SAR) Satellite Imagery Applications,” March 19, 2023.
116. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 27.
117. Holly Chik, “China Seeks Space Supremacy and to Exploit It ‘To Our Detri -
ment’: US Intelligence Head,” South China Morning Post , July 18, 2024; Eric Hegin -
botham et al., “The U.S.-China Military Scorecard: Forces, Geography, and the Evolv-
ing Balance of Power, 1996–2017,” RAND Corporation, September 14, 2015.
118. Stephen Chen, “China Military Must Be Able to Destroy Elon Musk’s Starlink 
Satellites if They Threaten National Security: Scientists,” South China Morning Post, 
May 25, 2022.
119. Cate Cadell, “China’s Military Aims to Launch 13,000 Satellites to Rival Elon 
Musk’s Starlink,” Washington Post, April 6, 2023; Courtney Albon, “SpaceX Forms 
‘Starshield’ Business Unit to Focus on National Security,” Defense News , December 
5, 2022.
120. Eduardo Baptista and Greg Torode, “Insight: Studying Ukraine War, China’s 
Military Minds Fret over U.S. Missiles, Starlink,” Reuters, March 7, 2023.
121. Cate Cadell, “China’s Military Aims to Launch 13,000 Satellites to Rival Elon 
Musk’s Starlink,” Washington Post, April 6, 2023.
122. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 4; China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Mili -
tary Strategy 2020 , January 2022, 289.
123. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 31; China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their Own Words: Science of Mil -
itary Strategy 2020 , January 2022, 251.
124. Sam Lagrone, “CNO Franchetti War Plan Preparing Navy for Pacific Con -
flict by 2027 with Flat Budgets, Static Fleet Size,” USNI News, September 18, 2024; 
Josh Rogin, “The U.S. Military Plans a ‘Hellscape’ to Deter China from Attacking 
Taiwan,” Washington Post, June 10, 2024; Mark F. Cancian, Matthew Cancian, and 
Eric Heginbotham, “The First Battle of the Next War: Wargaming a Chinese Invasion 
of Taiwan,” Center for Strategic and International Studies , January 9, 2023, 77, 78.
125. John Christianson, “Fighting and Winning in the Electromagnetic Spectrum,” 
War on the Rocks , December 5, 2022.
126. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 31; Colin Demarest, “China May Struggle in Electromagnetic Spectrum 
Fighting, Pentagon Says,” C4ISR Net, October 23, 2023.
127. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 31; Marcus Clay, “To Rule the Invisible Battlefield: The Electromagnetic 
Spectrum and Chinese Military Power,” War on the Rocks , January 22, 2021.
128. Marcus Clay, “To Rule the Invisible Battlefield: The Electromagnetic Spec -
trum and Chinese Military Power,” War on the Rocks , January 22, 2021.
129. Marcus Clay, “To Rule the Invisible Battlefield: The Electromagnetic Spec -
trum and Chinese Military Power,” War on the Rocks , January 22, 2021.
130. Marcus Clay, “To Rule the Invisible Battlefield: The Electromagnetic Spec -
trum and Chinese Military Power,” War on the Rocks , January 22, 2021.
131. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 

597
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 33.
132. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 33.
133. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 33; International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, 
Chapter Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 260; Xiaobing Li, “The Dragon’s Wing: The 
People’s Liberation Army Air Force’s Strategy,” Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs , Air 
University Press, August 1, 2022; Andrew Tate, “PLAAF Operating ECM Variant of 
Y-9 Aircraft,” Janes, March 11, 2019.
134. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter 
Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 260; U.S. Army TRADOC, J-16D Chinese Radar-Jam-
ming Electronic Warfare Aircraft.
135. Guo Yuandan, Liu Xuanzun, and Leng Shumei, “PLA’s J-16D Electronic War-
fare Aircraft Spotted for 1st Time near Taiwan,” Global Times, January 25, 2022.
136. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 33; U.S. Army TRADOC, YJ-91 Chinese Anti-Radiation Missile .
137. U.S. Army TRADOC, YJ-91 Chinese Anti-Radiation Missile .
138. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 34. Kristin Burke, “Is Military Space-Based Jamming Normal? Some Worry 
It Is,” War on the Rocks , November 13, 2023.
139. Liu Zichao and Ge Chang, “Comprehensively Strengthen Troop Training and 
Preparations | A Radar Brigade of the Air Force Organizes Confrontation Training 
(全面加强练兵备战丨空军某雷达旅组织对抗训练),” PLA Daily , April 22, 2024. Transla -
tion; Feng Dengya and Ye Xingguo, “A Brigade of the 75th Group Army and a Unit of 
the Air Force Conducted Confrontation Training” (第75集团军某旅联合空军某部开展对
抗训练), CNR, November 27, 2023. Translation.
140. J. Michael Dahm, Senior Resident Fellow, Mitchell Institute for Aerospace 
Studies, interview with Commission staff, May 28, 2024.
141. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 34–35.
142. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 35.
143. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 34.
144. Stephen Chen, “How Boeing’s Electronic War Fighter Runs into China’s ‘Kill 
Web’ in the South China Sea,” South China Morning Post , July 14, 2024.
145. Stephen Chen, “How Boeing’s Electronic War Fighter Runs into China’s ‘Kill 
Web’ in the South China Sea,” South China Morning Post , July 14, 2024.
146. J. Michael Dahm, Senior Resident Fellow, Mitchell Institute for Aerospace 
Studies, interview with Commission staff, May 28, 2024; J. Michael Dahm, “Air and 
Surface Radar,” Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory , July 2020, 2.
147. Chen Ziyuan and Yin Liuyu, “A Naval Brigade in the Southern Theater Com -
mand Organized Actual Combat Training in a Complex Electromagnetic Environ -
ment (南部战区海军某旅组织复杂电磁环境下实战化训练), China Military Network, Jan-
uary 21, 2024. Translation.
148. J. Michael Dahm, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 34.
149. J. Michael Dahm, Senior Resident Fellow, Mitchell Institute for Aerospace 
Studies, interview with Commission staff, May 28, 2024.

598
150. J. Michael Dahm, Senior Resident Fellow, Mitchell Institute for Aerospace 
Studies, interview with Commission staff, May 28, 2024.
151. Thomas Shugart, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 3–4; U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and 
Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023 , October 19, 
2023, 89; Thomas Shugart, “First Strike: China’s Missile Threat to U.S. Bases in 
Asia,” Center for New American Security , June 28, 2017; Mark Stokes, written testi -
mony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s 
Missile Forces, April 1, 2015, 2; Roger Cliff et al., “Shaking the Heavens and Splitting 
the Earth,” RAND Corporation, February 17, 2011, 184–186; Michael S. Chase, “Not 
in Our Backyard: China’s Emerging Anti-Access Strategy,” Progressive Policy Insti -
tute, October 2010.
152. Thomas Shugart, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 3–4; Roger Cliff, “China’s Future Military Capabilities,” U.S. Army War Col-
lege, April 26, 2023, ix.
153. U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security 
Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023 , October 19, 2023, 67; 
U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Devel -
opments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016 , May 17, 2016, 109.
154. Thomas Shugart, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 3; U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se -
curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023, October 19, 2023, 
67; U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security 
Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018 , August 16, 2018, 125.
155. Thomas Shugart, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 3.
156. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter 
Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 220; Minnie Chan, “China Says PLA Rocket Force 
Joined Shandong Carrier Group in Drills near US Base in Western Pacific,” South 
China Morning Post, May 10, 2023.
157. U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Secu -
rity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023 , October 19, 2023, 
66–67; Jordan Wilson, “China’s Expanding Ability to Conduct Conventional Missile 
Strikes on Guam,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, May 10, 
2016, 8–11.
158. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter 
Five: Asia” February 12, 2024, 238; Missile Defense Project, “DF-17,” Center for Stra-
tegic and International Studies , February 19, 2020.
159. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “Military Balance 2024, Chapter 
Five: Asia,” February 12, 2024, 238.
160. Thomas Shugart, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 3.
161. Maryanne Kivlehan Wise, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 8–9.
162. Reuters, “China’s Military Rocket Force Uncovers ‘Shortcomings,’ PLA Daily 
Reports,” September 15, 2023; Yang Shaotong and Yang Lun, “The Party Committee 
of a Certain Rocket Force Conducted an In-Depth Investigation and Study to Solve 
Problems in the Development of the Army” (火箭军某部党委深入调查研究解决部队发展
难题), PLA Daily , September 15, 2023. Translation.
163. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 2; Joel Wuthnow, “Joint Logistics Forces Support to Theater Commands,” in 
George R. Shatzer, ed., PLA Logistics and Sustainment PLA Conference 2022,  Army 
War College, February 2023, 17–30; Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-

599
Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval War College,  China Maritime Studies Institute, China 
Maritime Report No. 22 , July 2022, 4; China Aerospace Studies Institute, In Their 
Own Words: Science of Military Strategy 2020 , January 2022, 426; Jeffrey Engstrom, 
“Systems Confrontation and System Destruction Warfare: How the Chinese People’s 
Liberation Army Seeks to Wage Modern Warfare,” RAND Corporation , February 1, 
2018, 50–52.
164. Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval 
War College, China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 22 , July 
2022, 1.
165. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 4–5.
166. Joel Wuthnow, “Joint Logistics Forces Support to Theater Commands,” in 
George R. Shatzer, ed., PLA Logistics and Sustainment PLA Conference 2022,  U.S. 
Army War College, February 2023, 17–21.
167. Joel Wuthnow, “Joint Logistics Forces Support to Theater Commands,” in 
George R. Shatzer, ed., PLA Logistics and Sustainment PLA Conference 2022,  Army 
War College, February 2023, 25–26.
168. Brian Waidelich and Patrick deGategno, eds., “PLA Update,” Center for Naval 
Analyses 14 (September 28, 2023).
169. Brian Waidelich and Patrick deGategno, eds., “PLA Update,” Center for Naval 
Analyses 14 (September 28, 2023).
170. Eli Tirk, “PLA Capability to Sustain Air Combat Operations,” in George R. 
Shatzer, ed., PLA Logistics and Sustainment PLA Conference 2022,  U.S. Army War 
College, February 2023, 146.
171. Justin Boggess and Travis Dolney, “PLA Navy At-Sea Sustainment Capabili -
ties,” in George R. Shatzer, ed., PLA Logistics and Sustainment PLA Conference 2022,  
U.S. Army War College, February 2023, 122–123.
172. Roderick Lee, “The PLA Navy’s ZHANLAN Training Series: Supporting Offen-
sive Strike on the High Seas,” Jamestown Foundation, April 13, 2020.
173. Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval 
War College, China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 22 , July 
2022, 30.
174. Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval 
War College, China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 22 , July 
2022, 31.
175. Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval 
War College, China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 22 , July 
2022, 1–2.
176. Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval 
War College, China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 22 , July 
2022, 3–4.
177. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 11.
178. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 2–3.
179. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 9.
180. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 5–6.
181. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 6–8.
182. Cristina Garafola, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 9.

600
183. Kevin McCauley, “Logistics Support for a Cross-Strait Invasion,” U.S. Naval 
War College, China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report No. 22 , July 
2022, 29–32.
184. Christopher Johnstone, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 1, 4; Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 146–147.
185. Christopher Johnstone, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 1; Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 146.
186. Christopher Johnstone, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 1–2; Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 146.
187. Christopher Johnstone, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Se -
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa-
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 2; Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 146.
188. Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, 
“State of Competition within the Defense Industrial Base,” U.S. Department of De -
fense, February 2022, 1, 17, 54; National Defense Industrial Association, “Vital Signs 
2024: The Health and Readiness of the Defense Industrial Base,” April 2024, 8–9, 12.
189. Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, 
“State of Competition within the Defense Industrial Base,” U.S. Department of De -
fense, February 2022, 1; National Defense Industrial Association, “Vital Signs 2024: 
The Health and Readiness of the Defense Industrial Base,” April 2024, 11–12, 28, 40.
190. Jennifer Kavanagh and Jordan Cohen, “The Real Reasons for Taiwan’s Arms 
Backlog—and How to Help Fill It,” War on the Rocks , January 13, 2023; Thomas 
Shugart, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for 
the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 119; Jeffrey 
L. Seavy, “The United States Must Improve Its Shipbuilding,” U.S. Naval Institute , 
February 2024; Diana C. Maurer, “Testimony before the Subcommittees on Readiness 
and Management Support and Seapower, Committee on Armed Services, U.S. Senate: 
Naval Shipyards: Ongoing Challenges Could Jeopardize Navy’s Ability to Improve 
Shipyards,” U.S. Government Accountability Office, May 10, 2022.
191. Stacie Pettyjohn, “The Pentagon Isn’t Buying Enough Ammo,” Foreign Policy, 
May 21, 2024.
192. Stacie Pettyjohn, “The Pentagon Isn’t Buying Enough Ammo,” Foreign Policy, 
May 21, 2024; Mackenzie Eaglen, “Why Is the U.S. Navy Running Out of Tomahawk 
Cruise Missiles?” National Interest , February 13, 2024; Mackenzie Eaglen, “Surge 
Capacity in the Defense Munitions Industrial Base,” American Enterprise Institute , 
September 14, 2023; Ashley Roque, “To Combat China, Pentagon Eyeing Multi-Year 
Munition Buys in FY24,” Breaking Defense, March 13, 2023; Maiya Clark, “U.S. Mili-
tary Has Fewer Munitions Than You Might Think—And That’s a Problem,” Heritage 
Foundation, February 3, 2023.
193. Doug Cameron, “U.S. Struggles to Replenish Munitions Stockpiles as Ukraine 
War Drags On,” Wall Street Journal , April 29, 2023; Gordon Lubold, “The U.S. Mil -
itary Relies on One Louisiana Factory. It Blew Up,” Wall Street Journal , April 26, 
2023.
194. Mackenzie Eaglen, “Why Is the U.S. Navy Running Out of Tomahawk Cruise 
Missiles?” American Enterprise Institute , February 13, 2024; Wilson Beaver and Jim 
Fein, “The U.S. Needs More Munitions to Deter China,” Heritage Foundation, Decem-
ber 29, 2023.

601
195. Mackenzie Eaglen, “Why Is the U.S. Navy Running Out of Tomahawk Cruise 
Missiles?” American Enterprise Institute , February 13, 2024.
196. Thomas Shugart, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 13; Christopher Johnstone, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Ca-
pabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 6; Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Interven -
tion Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and 
Partners, March 21, 2024, 8; Tetsuo Kotani, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 245; Caitlin Lee, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention 
Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Part -
ners, March 21, 2024, 11.
197. Shih Hsiu-chuan and Sean Lin, “Taiwan to Join U.S.-led Initiative to Tackle 
Weapons Supply Constraints,” Focus Taiwan, September 24, 2024.
198. U.S. Department of Defense, 2022 National Defense Strategy of the United 
States of America , 2022, 13.
199. U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, “House Armed Services Committee (HASC) Open-
ing Remarks April 2023,” April 20, 2023; U.S. Navy, Posture in the Pacific.
200. Luke A. Nicastro, “U.S. Defense Infrastructure in the Indo-Pacific: Background 
and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service  R47589, June 6, 2023, 7–9.
201. Luke A. Nicastro, “U.S. Defense Infrastructure in the Indo-Pacific: Background 
and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service  R47589, June 6, 2023, 7–9, 
13–17.
202. Nozomu Toshitomi, “How Japan Can Help Save Taiwan: Securing the First 
Island Chain,” War on the Rocks , March 23, 2022.
203. Lindsay Maizland and Nathanael Cheng, “The U.S.-Japan Security Alliance,” 
Council on Foreign Relations , May 3, 2024; U.S. Department of Defense, Joint State-
ment of the 2023 U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Committee (“2+2”) , January 11, 
2023; U.S. Forces Japan, Guidance from the Commander, U.S. Forces Japan.
204. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 146.
205. Luke A. Nicastro, “U.S. Defense Infrastructure in the Indo-Pacific: Background 
and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service  R47589, June 6, 2023, 15.
206. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 146; U.S. Department of Defense, USS Ronald Reagan (CVN 76) Returns to 
Yokosuka, November 19, 2023.
207. Rupert Wingfield-Hayes, “US Secures Deal on Philippines Bases to Complete 
Arc around China,” BBC, February 2, 2023.
208. Nozomu Toshitomi, “How Japan Can Help Save Taiwan: Securing the First 
Island Chain,” War on the Rocks , March 23, 2022.
209. Gregory B. Poling, “The U.S.-Philippine Alliance’s Very Busy Month,” Center 
for Strategic and International Studies , April 12, 2023; U.S Department of Defense, 
Philippines, U.S. Announce Locations of Four New EDCA Sites , April 3, 2023; Karen 
Lema, “Philippines Reveals Locations of 4 New Strategic Sites for U.S. Military Pact,” 
Reuters, April 3, 2023; U.S. Department of Defense , Philippines President Restores 
Visiting Forces Agreement with U.S., July 30, 2021.
210. Gregory B. Poling, “The U.S.-Philippine Alliance’s Very Busy Month,” Center 
for Strategic and International Studies , April 12, 2023; Rene Acosta, “Philippines An-
nounce 4 New Locations to Host U.S. Troops,” USNI News, April 3, 2023.
211. Karen Lema, “Philippines Reveals Locations of 4 New Strategic Sites for U.S. 
Military Pact,” Reuters, April 3, 2023; Gregory B. Poling, “The Transformation of the 
U.S.-Philippines Alliance,” Center for Strategic and International Studies , February 
2, 2023.
212. Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
8.

602
213. Anastasia Kapetas, “Australia’s Geography Could Be Our Greatest Strategic 
Asset,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , December 2, 2021; Joshua Espena and 
Chelsea Bomping, “The Taiwan Frontier and the Chinese Dominance for the Second 
Island Chain,” Australian Institute of International Affairs , August 13, 2020.
214. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7–8; Bec Shrimpton, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 220.
215. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7–8.
216. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 146; Luke A. Nicastro, “U.S. Defense Infrastructure in the Indo-Pacific: 
Background and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service  R47589, June 
6, 2023, 15–17.
217. Congressional Research Service, The Compacts of Free Association , CRS IF 
12194, April 25, 2024; U.S. Department of the Interior, Compacts of Free Association .
218. Noah Robertson, “ ‘Already Late’: Pentagon Sounds Alarm on Funding Pacific 
Island Pact,” Defense News, February 23, 2024.
219. Noah Robertson, “ ‘Already Late’: Pentagon Sounds Alarm on Funding Pacific 
Island Pact,” Defense News, February 23, 2024; Charles Edel and Kathryn Paik, “The 
Compacts of Free Association, Congress, and Strategic Competition for the Pacific,” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies , January 31, 2024.
220. Charles Edel and Kathryn Paik, “The Compacts of Free Association, Congress, 
and Strategic Competition for the Pacific,” Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, January 31, 2024.
221. Noah Robertson, “ ‘Already Late’: Pentagon Sounds Alarm on Funding Pacific 
Island Pact,” Defense News, February 23, 2024; Charles Edel and Kathryn Paik, “The 
Compacts of Free Association, Congress, and Strategic Competition for the Pacific,” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies , January 31, 2024.
222. Noah Robertson, “ ‘Already Late’: Pentagon Sounds Alarm on Funding Pacific 
Island Pact,” Defense News, February 23, 2024.
223. Luke A. Nicastro, “U.S. Defense Infrastructure in the Indo-Pacific: Background 
and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service R47589, June 6, 2023, 14.
224. Wang Xinjuan, “US Empty Promises in South Pacific Laid Bare,” China Mil-
itary Online, February 19, 2024; China’s Ministry of National Defense, Transcript of 
October 2023 Ministry of National Defense Regular Press Conference  (2023年10月国
防部例行记者会文字实录), October 26, 2023. Translation; Zhang Yifan, “US’ Military 
Calculations behind Eagerness to Bind Three Pacific Nations,” China Military Online, 
October 20, 2023.
225. Zhang Yifan, “US’ Military Calculations behind Eagerness to Bind Three Pa -
cific Nations,” China Military Online , October 20, 2023.
226. Wang Xinjuan, “US Empty Promises in South Pacific Laid Bare,” China Mili-
tary Online, February 19, 2024.
227. Wang Xinjuan, “US Empty Promises in South Pacific Laid Bare,” China Mil-
itary Online, February 19, 2024; Zhang Yifan, “US’ Military Calculations behind Ea-
gerness to Bind Three Pacific Nations,” China Military Online , October 20, 2023.
228. Government of Japan, National Security Strategy , December 16, 2022, 7–9.
229. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 5; Government of Japan, National Security Strategy , December 16, 2022, 
9; Hiroshi Asahina, “Japan Weighs Labeling China a ‘Challenge’ in New Security 
Strategy,” Nikkei Asia, December 9, 2022.
230. Japan’s Ministry Defense, National Defense Strategy , December 16, 2022, 13; 
Government of Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan , December 2022.
231. Commission meetings with Japanese officials, academics, and experts in To -
kyo, Japan, June 2024; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2022 , 2022, 
11; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, National Defense Strategy [Provisional Translation] , 
December 16, 2022, 6. https:/ /www.mod.go.jp/j/policy/agenda/guideline/strategy/
pdf/strategy_en.pdf; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan  2021, 19; Kristin 

603
Huang, “How Japan Could Find Itself Dragged into a Conflict between US and China 
over Taiwan,” South China Morning Post , March 28, 2021.
232. Kristin Huang, “How Japan Could Find Itself Dragged into a Conflict between 
US and China over Taiwan,” South China Morning Post , March 28, 2021.
233. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2022 , 2022, 10–11; Japan’s 
Ministry of Defense, National Defense Strategy [Provisional Translation] , December 
16, 2022, 6. https:/ /www.mod.go.jp/j/policy/agenda/guideline/strategy/pdf/strategy_
en.pdf; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan , 2021, 19.
234. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 2; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, China’s Activities in East China Sea, Pacific 
Ocean, and Sea of Japan , March 2024, 2. https:/ /www.mod.go.jp/en/d_act/sec_env/
pdf/ch_d-act_a.pdf; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2023 , 15; Japan’s 
Ministry of Defense, National Defense Strategy [Provisional Translation] , 6. h t t p s ://
www.mod.go.jp/j/policy/agenda/guideline/strategy/pdf/strategy_en.pdf; Government 
of Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan , 2022, 8.
235. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 2.
236. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2019 , 2019, 19, 44, 71.
237. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, National Defense Strategy [Provisional Trans -
lation], December 16, 2022, 6. https:/ /www.mod.go.jp/j/policy/agenda/guideline/
strategy/pdf/strategy_en.pdf.
238. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, China’s Activities in East China Sea, Pacific 
Ocean, and Sea of Japan , March 2024, 2, 5–8. https:/ /www.mod.go.jp/en/d_act/sec_
env/pdf/ch_d-act_a.pdf; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, China’s Activities in East China 
Sea, Pacific Ocean, and Sea of Japan , July 2022. https:/ /www.mod.go.jp/en/d_act/
sec_env/pdf/ch_d-act_a_e_2207.pdf.
239. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, China’s Activities in East China Sea, Pacific 
Ocean, and Sea of Japan , March 2024, 2, 8; Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolv -
ing Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and 
Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 2; Dzirhan Mahadzir, “Joint Rus -
sia-China Military Flights Prompt Japanese, South Korea Fighter Scrambles,” USNI 
News, December 14, 2023; Tsuruta Jun, “Chinese and Russian Warships Step Up 
Activity in Straits around Japan,” Diplomat, August 15, 2023; Brad Lendon, “Why 
Russian and Chinese Warships Teaming Up to Circle Japan Is a Big Deal,” CNN, 
October 25, 2021.
240. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, National Defense Strategy, December 16, 2022, 
5–6.
241. U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Secu -
rity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023 , October 19, 2023, 
69; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, National Defense Strategy , December 16, 2022, 5–6.
242. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2023 , 2023, 14.
243. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2023 , 2023, 14; Japan’s Minis-
try of Defense, Japan’s Ministry of Defense, National Defense Strategy [Provisional 
Translation], December 16, 2022, 5–6.
244. Tetsuo Kotani, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
194; Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
2; Paul Huang et al., “Regional Voices on the 2022 China Military Power Report,” 
National Bureau of Asian Research , February 23, 2023; U.S. Department of Defense, 
Joint Statement of the 2023 U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Committee (“2+2”) , 
January 11, 2023; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2023: Digest Book -
let, 2023, 2, 14. https:/ /www.mod.go.jp/en/publ/w_paper/wp2023/DOJ2023_Digest_
EN.pdf; Government of Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan , 8.
245. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 5; Watanabe Tsuneo, “What’s New in Japan’s Three Strategic Documents,” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies , February 13, 2023; Japan’s Ministry 
of Defense, National Defense Strategy , December 16, 2022, 9–10.

604
246. Jesse Johnson, “Japan Ups Defense Spending to 1.6% of GDP with Eye on 
2027 Goal,” Japan Times, April 29, 2024; Keita Nakamura, “Japan’s FY 2024 Defense 
Budget Expands to Record 7.9 Trillion Yen,” Kyodo News, December 22, 2023.
247. River Akira Davis and Hisako Ueno, “The Yen Is Plunging. So Is Japan’s De -
fense Budget,” New York Times, July 8, 2024; Rieko Miki, “Japan Defense Spending 
Plan Takes 30% Hit from Weak Yen,” Nikkei Asia, June 18, 2024.
248. Tetsuo Kotani, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and 
Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 
2024, 235; Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 2.
249. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 6; Mari Yamaguchi, “Japan Cabinet Oks Record Military Budget to Speed 
Up Strike Capability, Eases Lethal Arms Export Ban,” Associated Press , December 
22, 2023; Watanabe Tsuneo, “What’s New in Japan’s Three Strategic Documents,” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies , February 13, 2023.
250. Government of Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan , December 2022, 
18–19.
251. Akira Kitado, “Japan Boosts Defenses on Remote Islands near Taiwan amid 
China Fears,” Nikkei Asia, March 31, 2024.
252. Julian Ryall, “Japan Wants to Enhance Civilian Air Hubs and Seaports for 
‘Contingency.’ Are These Also for the US Military?” South China Morning Post, March 
29, 2024.
253. Akira Kitado, “Japan Boosts Defenses on Remote Islands near Taiwan amid 
China Fears,” Nikkei Asia, March 31, 2024; Kyodo News, “Japan Sends Missile Units 
to Southwestern Island to Face China Threat,” March 16, 2023.
254. Akira Kitado, “Japan Boosts Defenses on Remote Islands near Taiwan amid 
China Fears,” Nikkei Asia, March 31, 2024; Devin Monroe, “USS Rafael Peralta Con -
ducts Port Visit in Ishigaki, Japan,” U.S. Navy Press, March 15, 2024.
255. Julian Ryall, “Japan Wants to Enhance Civilian Air Hubs and Seaports for 
‘Contingency.’ Are These Also for the US Military?” South China Morning Post, March 
29, 2024.
256. White House, FACT SHEET: Japan Official Visit with State Dinner to the 
United States , April 10, 2024; Tetsuo  Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Eco -
nomic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Inter-
vention Capabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies 
and Partners, March 21, 2024, 7.
257. U.S. Department of Defense, Joint Statement of the Security Consultative 
Committee (“2+2”), July 28, 2024; White House, United States-Japan Joint Leaders’ 
Statement, April 10, 2024.
258. U.S. Department of Defense, Joint Statement of the Security Consultative 
Committee (“2+2”), July 28, 2024.
259. U.S. Department of Defense, Joint Statement of the Security Consultative 
Committee (“2+2”), July 28, 2024; White House, United States-Japan Joint Leaders’ 
Statement, April 10, 2024.
260. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7; Steven Keenan, “JGSDF and U.S. Marines Rehearse Defense,” U.S. In-
do-Pacific Command, February 1, 2024.
261. Tetsuo Kotani, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7.
262. Takahashi Kosuke, “Japan, Philippines Agree to Intensify Defense Coopera -
tion,” Diplomat, November 3, 2023; Mari Yamaguchi, “Japan and Australia Agree to 
Further Step Up Defense Cooperation under 2-Month-Old Security Pact,” AP News, 
October 19, 2023; Jim Garamone, “Japan, South Korea, U.S. Strengthen Trilateral Co-
operation,” DOD News, August 18, 2023; Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Signing 
of Japan-UK Reciprocal Access Agreement , January 11, 2023.
263. White House, Joint Vision Statement from the Leaders of Japan, the Philip -
pines, and the United States , April 11, 2024; Australia’s Ministry of Defense, Austra-
lia Joins Japan-United States Exercise for First Time , February 2, 2024.

605
264. Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2023 , 2023, 14; Government of 
Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan , December 2022, 18–19.
265. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access,” RAND Corporation, 
November 28, 2023, 36–37; Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Treaty of Mutual 
Cooperation and Security between Japan and the United States of America , 1960.
266. Bryan Fredereick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access,” RAND Corpora -
tion, November 28, 2023, 36.
267. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 190.
268. Grant Newsham, “US Forces Unwelcome at Japanese Ports and Airfields,” 
Asia Times, March 21, 2024.
269. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 190.
270. Mirna Galic, “Japan’s Authorities in a Taiwan Contingency: Providing Needed 
Clarity,” War on the Rocks , October 5, 2021; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of 
Japan 2019, 2019, 248.
271. Zhuoran Li, “No, Japan Will Not Defend Taiwan,” Diplomat, March 18, 2024; 
Mirna Galic, “Japan’s Authorities in a Taiwan Contingency: Providing Needed Clari-
ty,” War on the Rocks , October 6, 2021.
272. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access: Identifying U.S. Pol-
icy Levers,” RAND Corporation, November 29, 2023, 33, 49.
273. Mirna Galic, “Japan’s Authorities in a Taiwan Contingency: Providing Needed 
Clarity,” War on the Rocks , October 5, 2021; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of 
Japan 2019, 2019, 248.
274. Reuters, “Japan Deputy PM Comment on Defending Taiwan if Invaded Angers 
China,” July 6, 2021; Japan’s Ministry of Defense, Defense of Japan 2019 , 2019, 248.
275. Government of the Philippines, National Security Policy 2023–2028 , 12.
276. Erin L. Murphy and Gregory B. Poling, “A ‘New Trilateral Chapter’ for the 
United States, Japan, and the Philippines,” Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, April 15, 2024; Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Ca-
pabilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 1–4.
277. Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
5.
278. Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
5; Edcel Ibarra, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Com -
mission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implica-
tions for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 205.
279. Erin L. Murphy and Gregory B. Poling, “A ‘New Trilateral Chapter’ for the 
United States, Japan, and the Philippines,” Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, April 15, 2024; White House, Joint Vision Statement from the Leaders of 
Japan, the Philippines, and the United States , April 11, 2024; U.S. Department of 
State, U.S. Support for the Philippines in the South China Sea, March 23, 2024; Edcel 
Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for 
the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 2–3; Edcel 
Ibarra, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Implications for 
the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 205.
280. Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 1–3; Edcel Ibarra, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 206; Office of the President of the Philippines, PBBM Admin’s Adoption of 
Comprehensive Archipelagic Defense Concept Is a Move in the Right Direction, Says 
Expert, March 9, 2024. Translation.

606
281. Government of the Philippines, National Security Policy 2023–2028 , 12.
282. Reuters, “Philippines Sees Risk of Conflict over Taiwan as a ‘Major Concern,’ ” 
August 15, 2023; Government of the Philippines, National Security Policy 2023–2028, 
12.
283. Rob Garver, “Survey Finds Concern with US-China Tension among Asian 
Countries,” Voice of America, June 15, 2023.
284. U.S. Department of Defense, Philippines, U.S. Announce Locations of Four 
New EDCA Sites , April 3, 2023; Karen Lema, “Philippines Reveals Locations of 4 
New Strategic Sites for U.S. Military Pact,” Reuters, April 3, 2023.
285. Niharika Mandhana, “The Dark-Horse Alliance Racing Forward to Take On 
China,” Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2024; Gregory B. Poling, “The Transformation 
of the U.S.-Philippines Alliance,” Center for Strategic and International Studies , Feb-
ruary 2, 2023.
286. U.S. Marine Corps, U.S.-Philippine Forces Sink Target Ship for First Time in 
Balikatan Exercise, April 27, 2023; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Political-Mil -
itary Affairs, U.S. Security Cooperation with the Philippines , October 7, 2022.
287. U.S. Embassy in the Philippines, Philippine, U.S. Troops to Hold Largest Ever 
Balikatan Exercise from April 11 to 28 , April 4, 2023.
288. U.S. Embassy in the Philippines, Philippine, U.S. Troops to Hold Largest Ever 
Balikatan Exercise from April 11 to 28 , April 4, 2023.
289. Michael Punongbayan, “Philippines, France, US Warships Set Sail for West 
Philippine Sea,” Philippine Star, April 26, 2024; Aaron-Matthew Lariosa, “Balikatan 
2024 Drills Prioritize South China Sea, Luzon Strait,” USNI News , April 22, 2024; 
Sebastian Strangio, “US, Philippines to Kick Off ‘Expansive’ Balikatan Exercise,” Dip-
lomat, April 19, 2024.
290. Aaron-Matthew Lariosa, “Balikatan 2024 Drills Prioritize South China Sea, 
Luzon Strait,” USNI News , April 22, 2024; U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, Exercise 
Balikatan 2024 Kicks Off with Opening Ceremony , April 22, 2024.
291. Reuters, “Philippine Military Says Second Joint Patrol with US Underway in 
South China Sea,” January 3, 2024.
292. White House, Fact Sheet: Celebrating the Strength of the U.S.-Philippines Al -
liance, April 11, 2024; Rene Acosta, “Philippine Coast Guard Will Hold First-Ever 
Trilateral Exercise with U.S., Japan,” USNI News, May 29, 2023; Karen Lema, “Phil-
ippines, U.S., Japan to Hold First-Ever Joint Coast Guard Exercise,” Reuters, May 
29, 2023.
293. Ryo Nakamura, “U.S., Philippines to Finalize Intel-Sharing Pact to Counter 
China” Nikkei Asia, November 16, 2023.
294. Edcel Ibarra, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
205–206.
295. Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7; Cliff Harvey Venzon, “Philippines Plans $35 Billion Defense Upgrade in 
Sea Claims Push,” Bloomberg, February 1, 2024.
296. Edcel Ibarra, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7; Cliff Harvey Venzon, “Philippines Plans $35 Billion Defense Upgrade in 
Sea Claims Push,” Bloomberg, February 1, 2024.
297. Rej Cortez Torrecammpo, “A Paradigm Shift in the Philippines’ Defense Strat-
egy,” Diplomat, April 3, 2024; Office of the President of the Philippines, PBBM Ad-
min’s Adoption of Comprehensive Archipelagic Defense Concept Is a Move in the Right 
Direction, Says Expert , March 9, 2024. Translation.
298. Rej Cortez Torrecammpo, “A Paradigm Shift in the Philippines’ Defense Strat-
egy,” Diplomat, April 3, 2024; Office of the President of the Philippines, PBBM Ad-
min’s Adoption of Comprehensive Archipelagic Defense Concept Is a Move in the Right 
Direction, Says Expert , March 9, 2024. Translation.
299. Edcel Ibarra, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
206.
300. Australian Associated Press , “Australia and Philippines Begin Joint Patrols 
in South China Sea as Regional Tensions Rise,” Guardian, November 25, 2023; Aar -
on-Matthew Lariosa, “Australia, Philippines Commit to Strategic Partnership, Pledge 

607
Joint Patrols,” USNI News , September 11, 2023; Australian Embassy in the Philip -
pines, Australia-Philippines Defense Cooperation .
301. Mikhail Flores and Karen Lema, “Philippines Says Pact with Japan Takes 
Defense Ties to Unprecedented High,” Reuters, July 8, 2024; Cliff Harvey Venzon, 
“Japan, Philippines Sign Defense Deal as China Tensions Drag,” Bloomberg, July 7, 
2024; Reuters, “Philippines Aiming to Seal ‘Reciprocal’ Troop Pact with Japan,” No -
vember 6, 2023; Mikhail Flores and Karen Lema, “Japan, Philippines Agree to Hold 
Talks on Reciprocal Troops Pact,” Reuters, November 3, 2023.
302. Regine Cabato, “Philippines Strikes Security Deals as Tensions Rise with Chi-
na at Sea,” Washington Post, March 9, 2024; Philippines Department of National 
Defense, Philippines, Canada Ink Defense Cooperation Agreement, Friday, January 19, 
2024; Reuters, “Philippines, Canada Sign Agreement on Defense Cooperation,” Janu -
ary 19, 2024; Joyce Ann L. Rocamora, “PH, UK Ink Defense Pact; Focus Set on Mar -
itime Domain,” Philippine News Agency , January 16, 2024; Priam Nepomuceno and 
Joyce Ann L. Rocamora, “PH, France Consider Visiting Forces Deal,” Philippine News 
Agency, December 2, 2023; Jim Gomez and Joeal Calupitan, “France and Philippines 
Eye a Security Pact to Allow Joint Military Combat Exercises,” AP News, December 
2, 2023; Don McLain Gill, “Towards a Robust Philippines-India Maritime Security 
Partnership,” Diplomat, September 5, 2023; European Commission, Press Statement 
by President von der Leyen with Philippine President Marcos , July 30, 2023.
303. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 181–182.
304. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access: Identifying U.S. Pol-
icy Levers,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 82; Bonny Lin, written testimony for U.S.-Chi -
na Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Deterring PRC Aggres -
sion toward Taiwan, February 18, 2021, 3.
305. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access: Identifying U.S. Pol-
icy Levers,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 82.
306. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access: Identifying U.S. Pol-
icy Levers,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 83.
307. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access: Identifying U.S. Pol-
icy Levers,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 79, 202–203.
308. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 182.
309. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access: Identifying U.S. Pol-
icy Levers,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 79.
310. Bryan Frederick et al., “Improving Conflict-Phase Access: Identifying U.S. Pol-
icy Levers,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 82.
311. Edcel Ibarra, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
235, 243.
312. Edcel Ibarra, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
245–246.
313. PressOnePH, “FACT-CHECK: EDCA Is Not Unconstitutional,” April 24, 2024; 
Renato Cruz de Castro, “Philippine Supreme Court Approves EDCA: Unlocking the 
Door for the Return of U.S. Strategic Footprint in Southeast Asia,” Asia Maritime 
Transparency Initiative, February 1, 2016; Rappler, SC Rules: PH-US Military Deal 
Constitutional, Center for Strategic and International Studies , January 12, 2016.
314. Cliff Narvey Venzon, “Owner of the Philippines’ Largest Malls Says Chi -
na Feud May Hurt Businesses,” Bloomberg, December 13, 2023; Nick A. Spinwall, 
“U.S.-China Rivalry Hits Home in This Philippine Province,” Nikkei Asia, December 
12, 2023.
315. Government of the Philippines, National Security Policy 2023–2028 , 12.
316. Cliff Venzon, “Marcos Says ‘Hard to Imagine’ Philippines Can Avoid Taiwan 
Conflict,” Nikkei Asia, February 12, 2023.
317. Cliff Venzon, “Marcos Says ‘Hard to Imagine’ Philippines Can Avoid Taiwan 
Conflict,” Nikkei Asia, February 12, 2023.
318. Renato Cruz De Castro, “The Philippines Evolving View on Taiwan: From Pas-
sivity to Active Involvement,” Brookings Institution, March 9, 2023.

608
319. Bonny Lin, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on Deterring PRC Aggression toward Taiwan , February 18, 
2021, 3.
320. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 2; Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Defence 
Strategic Review, 2023, 24–25, 37.
321. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 4.
322. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 3; Bec Shrimpton, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 219; Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence De -
fence Strategic Review , 2023, 37.
323. Bec Shrimpton, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities and Im -
plications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 21, 2024, 
219; Australian Government, National Defence Strategic Review , 2023, 23–25; Aus -
tralia’s Ministry of Defense, Interview with Charles Edel, CSIS, Washington DC: The 
Hon Richard Marles MP Deputy Prime Minister Minister for Defense , July 11, 2022; 
China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s 
Regular Press Conference on April 19, 2022 , April 19, 2022; Australia’s Ministry of 
Defence, Factsheet 2020 Defence Strategic Update , 2020.
324. Thomas Lum, “U.S.-Papau New Guinea Relations: Issues for Congress,” Con-
gressional Research Service , IF11255, January 22, 2024; Informa, “China in the Pa -
cific and the Unfolding Geostrategic Competition in the Region,” July 20, 2023; John 
Garrick and Yan C. Bennet, “China’s Real Ambitions for the South Pacific,” Australian 
Strategic Policy Institute, June 17, 2022; Erin Handley and Edwina Seselja, “China’s 
Presence in the Pacific Is Nothing New—Beijing Has Been Developing in the Region 
for Decades,” Australian Broadcasting Company News , June 7, 2022; Joanne Wal -
lis and Maima Koro, “Amplifying Narratives about the ‘China Threat’ in the Pacific 
May Help China Achieve Its Broader Aims,” The Conversation, May 26, 2022; Peter 
Jennings, “To Stop Chinese Bases, Australia Must Lead in the Pacific,” Australian 
Strategic Policy Institute , March 26, 2022; Fergus Hanson, “How Australia Can End 
the Race for Bases in the Pacific,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , March 25, 
2022; Joanne Wallis and Czeslaw Tubilewicz, “Saying China ‘Bought’ a Military Base 
in the Solomons Is Simplistic and Shows How Little Australia Understands Power in 
the Pacific,” The Conversation, March 24, 2022; Steve Raaymakers, “China Expands 
Its Island-Building Strategy into the Pacific,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , 
September 11, 2020; Peter Jennings, “We Need to Reduce Our Dependence on China, 
and Have the Courage to Call It Out When Required,” Australian Strategic Policy 
Institute, May 1, 2020; Alan Tidwell, “The Tulagi Turning Point,” Australian Strate-
gic Policy Institute , October 28, 2019; Anthony Bergin, “Benefits for All Manu Being 
a Base for US, Australian Forces,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , August 29, 
2018; Paul Dibb, “If China Builds a Military Base in Vanuatu, What Are the Impli -
cations for Australia’s Defense Planning?” Australian Strategic Policy Institute , April 
14, 2018; Australian Broadcasting Company News , “Chinese Military Base in Pacific 
Would Be of ‘Great Concern,’ Turnbull Tells Vanuatu,” April 9, 2018; David Crowe, 
“ ‘Great Concern’: Malcolm Turnbull Draws a Line in the Sand on Military Bases 
near Australia,” Sydney Morning Herald , April 10, 2018; David Wroe, “China Eyes 
Vanuatu Military Base in Plan with Global Ramifications,” Sydney Morning Herald , 
April 9, 2018.
325. Australia’s Ministry of Defense, Interview with Charles Edel, CSIS, Washing -
ton DC: The Hon Richard Marles MP Deputy Prime Minister Minister for Defense , 
July 11, 2022.
326. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 6.
327. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 

609
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 5.
328. Australian Government Department of Defence, 2020 Defence Strategic Up -
date, 2020, 33.
329. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Defence 
Strategic Review, 2023, 31–32.
330. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Defence 
Strategic Review, 2023, 53–54.
331. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Defence 
Strategic Review, 2023, 49.
332. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Defence 
Strategic Review, 2023, 54.
333. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Strategy 
Overview, 2024.
334. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Strategy 
Overview, 2024, 2; Australian Government Department of Defence, Release of the 
Defence Strategic Review , April 24, 2023.
335. Australian Government Department of Defence, Integrated Investment Pro -
gram Overview, 2024.
336. U.S. Department of Defense, Fact Sheet: 2023 Australia—U.S. Ministerial 
Consultations (AUSMIN), July 2023; Australian Government, Defence, United States 
Force Posture Initiatives.
337. Ashley Townshend, “How to Manage the Risks and Requirements of U.S. Aus-
tralia Force Posture Cooperation,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace , Oc-
tober 20, 2023.
338. Australian Government, Defence, United States Force Posture Initiatives .
339. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners, March 21, 
2024, 146; Australia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Joint Statement on Australia-Unit-
ed States Ministerial Consultations (AUSMIN) 2023 , July 29, 2023; Australian Gov -
ernment, Defence, United States Force Posture Initiatives . https:/ /www.defence.gov.
au/defence-activities/programs-initiatives/united-states-force-posture-initiatives.
340. U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, U.S. Security 
Cooperation with Australia, September 14, 2021.
341. Gordon Arthur, “Largest Ever Talisman Sabre Exercise Wraps Up in Austra -
lia,” USNI News , August 4, 2023; Joseph Clark, “Units Conduct Complex Logistics 
Operation at Talisman Sabre 23,” DOD News , July 31, 2023; U.S. Department of 
Defense, Talisman Sabre.
342. U.S. Department of Defense, Spotlight: AUKUS: The Trilateral Security Part -
nership between Australia, U.K. and U.S.
343. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Strategy , 
2024, 37.
344. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Strategy , 
2024, 7, 23, 25; Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence 
Defence Strategic Review, 2023, 37, 54; Commonwealth of Australia, The AUKUS Nu-
clear-Powered Submarine Pathway: A Partnership for the Future , 2023, 13.
345. Australian Submarine Agency, Australia’s Nuclear-Powered Submarines, Octo-
ber 2, 2024; Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Strate-
gy, 2024, 37–38, 42; Kris Osborn, “AUKUS: US, UK & Australian Attack Submarines 
vs. China in Pacific,” Warrior Maven, November 22, 2023.
346. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Strategy , 
2024, 51, 65; Scott Detrow, “U.S., U.L. and Australia Aim to Counter China with an 
Exchange of Submarine Tech,” NPR, March 14, 2023; U.S. Department of Defense, 
Spotlight: AUKUS: The Trilateral Security Partnership between Australia, U.K. and 
U.S.
347. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 8; Bec Shrimpton, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 221.
348. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 147.

610
349. Australian Government Department of Defence, National Defence Strategy , 
2024, 8; Australian Government Department of Defence, United States Force Posture 
Initiatives.
350. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 7; U.S. Department of State Office of the Spokesperson, The United States 
Australia Relationship, July 27, 2023.
351. Australian Government Department of Defence, 2020 Defence Strategic Up -
date, July 1, 2020, 6, 14, 17, 29.
352. Australian Government Department of Defence, 2020 Defence Strategic Up -
date, July 1, 2020, 6, 14, 17, 29.
353. Daniel Hurst, “Australia Cannot Be ‘Passive Bystanders’ in a War between US 
and China, Richard Marles Says,” Guardian, October 18, 2023; Richard McGregor, 
“Australia’s Caution on Taiwan May Not Last,” Brookings Institution, March 29, 2023.
354. White House, United States-Australia Joint Leaders’ Statement Building an 
Innovation Alliance, October 25, 2023; U.S. Department of State, Joint Statement on 
Australia-U.S. Ministerial Consultations (AUSMIN) 2023, July 29, 2023.
355. Christopher Johnstone, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 190.
356. Bec Shrimpton, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 6.
357. Kristy Needham, “Australians Say They Would Support Taiwan if China At -
tacked, with Limits, Poll Shows,” Reuters, June 20, 2023; Lowy Institute, “Poll 2023: 
Threats to Australia’s Vital Interests.”
358. Kristy Needham, “Australians Say They Would Support Taiwan if China At -
tacked, with Limits, Poll Shows,” Reuters, June 20, 2023; Lowy Institute, “Poll 2023: 
Potential Conflict over Taiwan.”
359. Kristy Needham, “Australians Say They Would Support Taiwan if China At -
tacked, with Limits, Poll Shows,” Reuters, June 20, 2023.
360. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Secu -
rity Review Commission,  Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa -
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 185.
361. Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Secu -
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capa -
bilities and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , 
March 21, 2024, 185, 189.
362. Thomas Shugart, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission , Hearing on China’s Evolving Counter Intervention Capabilities 
and Implications for the United States and Indo-Pacific Allies and Partners , March 
21, 2024, 128.