(340)
SECTION 2: CHINA’S NUCLEAR FORCES: 
MOVING BEYOND A MINIMAL DETERRENT
Key Findings
 • The People’s Republic of China (PRC) is carrying out its most 
substantial effort to expand, modernize, and diversify its nucle-
ar forces since first acquiring nuclear weapons in the 1960s. The 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is developing a nuclear triad; 
fielding new, more mobile, and more accurate nuclear weapons 
systems; and significantly expanding its stockpile of nuclear 
warheads. The PLA has also enhanced its intelligence, surveil-
lance, and reconnaissance (ISR) systems.
 • China’s nuclear buildup puts it on a trajectory to become a nu-
clear peer of the United States in qualitative terms. Qualitative 
nuclear parity could entail diversified, reliable, and survivable 
delivery systems; highly precise missiles; warheads of various 
yields; robust command and control processes; and sophisticated 
ISR, all of which enable a truly secure second-strike capability 
and options for calibrated, offensive nuclear use. Current pub-
lic projections suggest China could also become a quantitative 
peer in the number of land-based strategic missiles it deploys 
by 2030.
 • Strategic and political forces are driving China’s departure from 
a minimalist nuclear posture. For most of its modern history, 
China maintained a small nuclear stockpile mainly suitable for 
minimal retaliation against an adversary’s nuclear attack. Gen-
eral Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Xi Jin-
ping’s ambitions for great power status, combined with military 
objectives beyond minimal retaliation, have likely motivated the 
recent buildup of China’s nuclear arsenal.
 • At minimum, China’s nuclear buildup enhances its current re-
taliatory strategy by better enabling its nuclear forces to deter 
or respond in kind to a nuclear attack. Chinese leaders may 
worry that innovations in other nuclear weapon states have 
undermined their nuclear deterrent, requiring them to make 
changes in order to keep up.
 • The scale of China’s nuclear buildup, however, suggests it could 
also be intended to support a new strategy of limited nucle-
ar first use. Such a strategy would enable Chinese leaders to 
leverage their nuclear forces to accomplish Chinese political 
objectives beyond survival, such as coercing another state or 
deterring U.S. intervention in a war over Taiwan.
 • Uncertainties created by China’s nuclear buildup heighten the 
risk of an accidental nuclear exchange or unforeseen nuclear 
escalation during a regional conflict. Specific risks of nuclear es-

341
calation stem from entanglement between China’s nuclear and 
conventional capabilities, its desperation to avoid losing a con-
ventional war in the region, and false alarms that could result 
from its possible shift to a launch-on-warning posture.
 • The PLA’s growing arsenal also casts “nuclear shadows” over 
China’s disputes with its neighbors, many of whom are U.S. al-
lies and partners. Improved nuclear capabilities could encour -
age Chinese leaders to coerce or initiate a conventional conflict 
against U.S. allies or partners in the region if they believe their 
nuclear capability would deter the United States from inter -
vening.
 • China has continued to play a concerning role in the global pro-
liferation of missile and nuclear technologies, though the man-
ner in which this proliferation occurs has evolved over time. 
Whereas two decades ago the Chinese government and state-
owned enterprises (SOEs) were the main source of missile and 
nuclear technologies, Chinese companies and private individu-
als now play a dominant role in the proliferation of such goods 
to countries of concern. The Chinese government turns a blind 
eye to, and in some cases tacitly supports, these illicit activities.
Recommendations
The Commission recommends:
 • Congress direct the Administration to conduct an interagency 
review of any Chinese universities that maintain research or 
training arrangements with China’s nuclear weapons research 
institutes, such as the Chinese Academy of Engineering Physics 
and the Northwest Institute of Nuclear Technology. The review 
should be led by the U.S. Department of Energy and include 
the U.S. Departments of Commerce, Treasury, and Defense; the 
Intelligence Community; and other federal departments and 
agencies as appropriate. The review would:
 ○ Assess the impact of such cooperation on China’s nuclear 
weapons programs and capabilities;
 ○ Assess whether current U.S. export controls adequately ad-
dress risks from the transfer and exchange of information 
and technologies with applications to nuclear research, partic-
ularly by researchers and departments in relevant academic 
disciplines at U.S. universities to these Chinese universities;
 ○ Identify Chinese universities and research institutes that 
should be added to the Entity List, based on the risks posed 
by their cooperation with the Chinese Academy of Engineer -
ing Physics, Northwest Institute of Nuclear Technology, and 
other Chinese institutions involved in nuclear weapons devel-
opment, as appropriate;
 ○ Identify Chinese universities and research institutes that 
merit a presumption of denial for all export licenses involving 
items covered by the Export Administration Regulations; and
 ○ Develop and maintain a list of all academic partnerships in 
fields with applications to nuclear weapons development en-

342
tered into between Chinese universities and U.S. universities 
that receive federal funding for the purpose of determining 
whether these activities are subject to export controls.
 • Congress prevent the erosion of U.S. strategic nuclear superior -
ity and respond to China’s qualitative and quantitative theater 
nuclear advantages by directing the Administration to continue 
implementation of the Obama-Trump Program of Record for nu-
clear modernization.
 • Congress enact legislation creating an independent bipartisan 
commission, similar to the Quadrennial Defense Review com-
missions authorized in the past, to assess the Nuclear Posture 
Review and advise Congress about whether the current U.S. 
nuclear posture is sufficient to maintain deterrence against the 
expanding Chinese and Russian nuclear forces. The Commis-
sion should:
 ○ Determine how Russian and Chinese nuclear capabilities 
have changed between 2010 and 2022;
 ○ Evaluate whether the current number of U.S.-deployed strate-
gic weapons is sufficient to deter both Russia and China over 
the next 20 years; and
 ○ Identify any further changes required to U.S. force posture, 
doctrine, and missile defense.
 • Congress authorize funding for a comprehensive diplomatic 
strategy on nuclear deterrence and arms control. This compre-
hensive program would include:
 ○ Intelligence diplomacy with key allies and partners in the In-
do-Pacific and in Europe to inform them of developments in 
China’s nuclear forces;
 ○ Dialogue to convince these allies and partners to pressure 
Beijing diplomatically to enter into arms control talks and 
to explore these partners’ willingness to host U.S. intermedi-
ate-range forces and other U.S. assets; and
 ○ Continued efforts to engage both Russia and China in trilat-
eral arms control talks, including by continuing efforts with 
Russia to persuade China to enter into arms control discus-
sions.
Introduction
In June 2021, independent researchers analyzing commercial 
satellite imagery identified the construction of 119 new intercon-
tinental ballistic missile silos in a desert in northwestern China. 1 
Their discovery provoked speculation in the expert community and 
alarmed U.S. officials, who had expressed concerns about China’s 
opaque nuclear activities for years. U.S. Department of State spokes-
person Ned Price told reporters the silos reflected China’s growing 
deviation from its decades-old nuclear strategy of limiting China’s 
nuclear forces to the “minimum” size required for deterring a nucle-
ar attack.2 “These reports and other developments suggest that the 
PRC’s nuclear arsenal will grow more quickly, and to a higher level 
than perhaps previously anticipated,” Mr. Price said. 3

343
Concerns about the silos followed remarks by numerous U.S. of-
ficials in recent years about the pace, scale, and nature of ongoing 
changes to China’s nuclear arsenal. Then director of the Defense 
Intelligence Agency Lieutenant General Robert Ashley told an au-
dience at the Hudson Institute in 2019 that China would at least 
double its nuclear warhead stockpile “in the course of implementing 
the most rapid expansion and diversification of its nuclear arsenal 
in China’s history.” 4 Admiral Charles A. Richard, commander of U.S. 
Strategic Command, told the House Armed Services Subcommittee 
on Strategic Forces in April 2021 that Chinese leaders are engaged 
in a “breathtaking expansion” of their country’s nuclear capabilities 
that will “backstop their conventional capability and will potentially 
constrain our options.” 5 Their statements underscore the potential 
for China’s nuclear buildup to presage an arms race and embolden 
Chinese conventional aggression toward U.S. allies. Considered to-
gether with a nuclear-armed Russia, China’s nuclear forces may also 
pose a more complex strategic challenge to the United States than 
U.S. military planners have previously assumed.
This section assesses the ongoing transformation of China’s nu-
clear arsenal as well as China’s role as a supplier of nuclear and 
missile technologies to countries of proliferation concern. First, the 
section examines the modernization, expansion, and diversification 
of China’s nuclear arsenal. Next, it explores competing interpreta-
tions of the purpose for which Chinese leaders are building a larger 
and more capable arsenal: to bolster their retaliatory capability in 
line with declared strategy or to pursue a new, more ambitious nu-
clear strategy that threatens or uses nuclear weapons to accomplish 
China’s regional objectives. It then discusses ambiguity in Chinese 
nuclear doctrine and several scenarios in which China could either 
inadvertently or intentionally escalate to the threat or use of nucle-
ar weapons during a conflict in the Indo-Pacific region. Finally, the 
section surveys the role of China-based companies and individuals 
in the proliferation of dual-use items with nuclear and missile ap-
plications to countries like Iran and Pakistan. This section is based 
on the Commission’s June 2021 hearing on the topic as well as open 
source research and analysis.
China’s Official Stance on Nuclear Weapons
China’s official discourse about the strategy and policy behind its 
nuclear weapons has remained consistent since the country deto-
nated its first atomic device in October 1964. Chinese leaders pub-
licly adhere to a nuclear strategy focused on deterring nuclear use 
against China, insist that they maintain the “minimum” number of 
nuclear weapons required for deterrence, and assert a “no-first-use” 
policy.
China’s declared “self-defensive nuclear strategy” achieves deter-
rence by maintaining the means to survive and credibly retaliate 
against an enemy’s nuclear first strike, a strategy some scholars 
have described as one of “assured retaliation.”  * 6 Chinese leaders’ 
* China’s 2006 defense white paper stated that China pursues a “self-defensive nuclear strat-
egy,” and subsequent white papers have repeated this formulation. Western scholars have vari-
ously characterized China’s nuclear strategy as one of “existential deterrence,” “limited nuclear 
retaliation,” or “assured retaliation,” making use of U.S. and European concepts of strategic deter-
rence to differing extents. By contrast, some Chinese scholars have argued that China’s nuclear 

344
distinctive views about the utility of nuclear weapons and their per -
sonal experience of nuclear coercion influenced the development of 
this strategy in the early 1960s. 7 CCP Chairman Mao Zedong’s fa-
mous remark that “the atomic bomb is only a paper tiger” reflected 
his belief that future wars would remain conventional because nu-
clear weapons were too destructive to actually be used in a situation 
where two nuclear-armed states had achieved mutual vulnerability.8 
At the same time, Chairman Mao recognized that nuclear weapons 
could also be used against nonnuclear weapon states to blackmail 
them or inflict substantial damage in a war. 9 In the face of repeated 
U.S. and Soviet threats to use nuclear weapons when tensions arose 
over conflicts in the 1950s and 1960s, Chairman Mao and his fellow 
CCP leaders concluded that acquiring enough nuclear weapons to 
deter nuclear coercion and aggression was a “destiny-determining 
matter” for the nation.10
Subsequent Chinese leaders, defense white papers, and textbooks 
published by Chinese military academies have continually affirmed 
that China’s nuclear strategy is purely “defensive” and aims only to 
establish a secure second-strike capability.* 11 Accordingly, the authori-
tative Science of Military Strategy describes only one campaign involv-
ing the use of nuclear weapons, a “nuclear counterstrike campaign” 
to be carried out against an adversary’s cities after China absorbs a 
nuclear attack.12 China’s historical focus on targeting an adversary’s 
cities (known as “countervalue” targeting) made sense partly because 
it required considerably less sophisticated technology than did the 
U.S. and Soviet strategies of targeting an adversary’s nuclear forces 
and military infrastructure (known as “counterforce” targeting).†
Another important element of China’s declared nuclear strategy 
is its focus on limiting China’s nuclear forces to the “minimum” size 
required to deter nuclear coercion or attack. The PRC’s early leaders 
stressed that even a small number of nuclear weapons could create 
a deterrent effect and that scarce financial resources should not be 
wasted on the development of excess nuclear weapons. 13 China sim-
ply needed what PLA Marshal Nie Rongzhen termed “the minimum 
strategy is best understood as one uniquely shaped by the country’s own strategic traditions, 
such as the thought of Chinese military strategist Sunzi and early PRC leaders’ decades of ex-
perience fighting revolutionary guerilla war. See, for example, Eric Heginbotham et al., “China’s 
Evolving Nuclear Deterrent: Major Drivers and Issues for the United States,” RAND Corpora-
tion, 2017, 17; Xu Weidi, “China’s Security Environment and the Role of Nuclear Weapons,” in 
Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nuclear Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 2016, 20; State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, 
China’s Military Strategy (中国的军事战略), May 2015. Translation; M. Taylor Fravel and Evan 
S. Medeiros, “China’s Search for Assured Retaliation,” International Security 35:2 (Fall 2010): 
50–51, 63; State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National 
Defense in 2008 (2008年中国的国防), January 2009. Translation; State Council Information Office 
of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2006 (2006年中国的国防), December 
2006. Translation; John Wilson Lewis and Xue Litai, China Builds the Bomb, Stanford University 
Press, 1988, 216.
* A secure second-strike capability is the ability of a nuclear state, after being struck by a 
nuclear attack, to strike back with nuclear weapons and cause massive damage to the adversary. 
Theorists of nuclear deterrence generally believe that nuclear states must have such a capability, 
and make their adversaries believe that capability is credible, in order to deter their adversaries 
from attempting to gain military advantage through a disarming first strike.
† Counterforce and countervalue targeting are generally associated with nuclear warfare and 
refer to the use of nuclear weapons against an enemy that possesses nuclear weapons. Counter -
force involves striking an opponent’s nuclear forces and military infrastructure in order to de-
grade its war-making capacity, whereas countervalue involves striking an opponent’s population, 
society, industrial base, economy, or other valuable target in order to degrade its will to escalate 
or persist in prosecuting a war. However, some states use advanced conventional weapons to carry 
out counterforce and countervalue strikes.

345
means of reprisal,” which could be launched days or even weeks after 
China absorbed an adversary’s nuclear attack. 14 Political guidance 
to restrain the arsenal endured over the following decades in official 
statements and documents. China’s 2002 defense white paper de-
clared that the country’s nuclear arsenal is “kept at the lowest lev-
el necessary for self-defense only,” while defense white papers from 
2006 onward described China’s nuclear forces as “lean and effec-
tive.” * 15 As recently as June 2021, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang 
Yi asserted that China limits its nuclear arsenal to “the minimum 
level required for national security” and “does not compete with any 
other country in the size or scale of nuclear force[s].”  16
Finally, China’s public stance on nuclear weapons is defined by 
its longstanding no-first-use policy and negative security assuranc-
es.† After successfully conducting the country’s first nuclear test 
on October 16, 1964, the Chinese government pledged in a public 
statement that “China will never at any time and under any circum-
stances be the first to use nuclear weapons.”  ‡ 17 China also issued 
assurances at the UN in 1978 and 1995 that it would never use or 
threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear weapon states 
or nuclear-weapon-free zones. 18 Chinese officials have also often 
promised never to engage in arms races and expressed their aspi-
ration for a future in which all nuclear weapon states totally dis-
arm, though they refuse to participate in talks about arms control 
or reduction. 19 The Chinese government continues to affirm these 
elements in its defense white papers, authoritative military texts, 
press conferences, and speeches at international organizations. 20
Provocative remarks by Chinese generals have occasionally con-
tradicted this narrative. In 1995, General Xiong Guangkai implicitly 
threatened to use nuclear weapons against Los Angeles if the Unit-
ed States defended Taiwan in a conflict. 21 Similarly, Major General 
Zhu Chenghu said in 2005 that China should use nuclear weapons 
against the United States if the U.S. military intervenes in a conflict 
over Taiwan.22
* According to retired PLA Major General Yao Yunzhu, keeping the arsenal “lean” means ex-
ercising “restraint” in the overall number of nuclear weapons China develops, while keeping it 
“effective” means ensuring China’s arsenal is modern and robust enough to ensure a retaliatory 
second strike. The “lean and effective” concept neither imposes specific numerical limits on Chi-
na’s nuclear arsenal nor dictates a specific threshold of destruction the adversary should sustain, 
though the 2013 edition of the authoritative military text Science of Military Strategy notes 
such destruction should be “unbearable.” Yao Yunzhu quoted in Eric Heginbotham et al., “China’s 
Evolving Nuclear Deterrent: Major Drivers and Issues for the United States,” RAND Corpora-
tion, 2017, 20; Shou Xiaosong, ed., The Science of Military Strategy (战略学), Military Science 
Press, 2013, 172. Translation; David C. Gompert and Phillip C. Saunders, The Paradox of Power: 
Sino-American Strategic Restraint in an Age of Vulnerability, National Defense University Press, 
2011, 53; Yao Yunzhu, “Chinese Nuclear Policy and the Future of Minimum Deterrence,” Strategic 
Insights 4:9 (September 2005): 4.
† In the context of nuclear warfare, “negative security assurances” and “positive security as-
surances” are statements by nuclear powers intended to reassure nonnuclear weapon states that 
they will not be the victims of a nuclear attack. A negative security assurance is a declaration 
that a country will not use nuclear weapons against a nonnuclear weapon state. A positive secu-
rity assurance is one in which a nuclear weapon state pledges it will come to the aid of a nonnu-
clear weapon state if that state is the victim of a nuclear attack. All five of the nuclear weapon 
states recognized in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons have issued negative 
security assurances, which the UN Security Council recognized in Resolution 984 in 1995. These 
pledges are nonbinding, however, and some nuclear weapon states reserve the right to use nu-
clear weapons against nonnuclear weapon states under certain conditions. Arms Control Associa-
tion, “Nuclear Declaratory Policy and Negative Security Assurances,” March 2018; Nuclear Threat 
Initiative, “Negative Security Assurances (NSAs) and Positive Security Assurances (PSAs),” 2003.
‡ China is the only nuclear weapon state recognized under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons that maintains an unconditional no-first-use policy. Ankit Panda, “ ‘No First 
Use’ and Nuclear Weapons,” Council on Foreign Relations, July 17, 2018.

346
Why China Has Shunned Arms Control Negotiations
Chinese leaders have long been skeptical about nuclear arms 
control on the grounds that it is a “trap” intended to undermine 
China’s nuclear deterrent and “lock in” the superpowers’ nuclear 
advantages.23 Whereas U.S. experts believe transparency about 
nuclear capabilities and behavior enhances strategic stability * by 
increasing predictability among nuclear powers, Chinese experts 
believe “transparency is a tool of the strong to be used against the 
weak.” 24 As a result, China has divulged few details about the 
capabilities of its nuclear forces and shunned the efforts of every 
post-Cold War U.S. president to involve it in arms control mech-
anisms.25 Chinese officials at the same time decried the United 
States’ withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces 
(INF) Treaty in 2019 as a ruse to “free its hand and develop its 
missile capabilities” in East Asia. 26 They also rejected calls by 
the United States and Japan to join proposed negotiations about 
a multilateral INF Treaty, arguing the United States should fur -
ther slash its own nuclear stockpile rather than shift its arms 
control “duties” to other countries. 27 Similarly, China’s Foreign 
Ministry spokesperson Wang Wenbin rebuffed U.S. calls for Chi-
na to join a trilateral arms control framework after the United 
States and Russia extended the New START Treaty in February 
2021.28 Noting the “order-of-magnitude difference” between the 
Chinese arsenal and those of the United States and Russia, he 
emphasized that China “firmly reject[s] the groundless allegation 
and vilification from the U.S. side.” 29
Strategic and Political Rationales for China’s Nuclear Buildup
Major developments in China’s security environment and inter -
national status have provided its leaders strong rationales for its 
nuclear buildup, raising the question of whether Chinese leaders’ 
public statements concerning the use of nuclear weapons reflect 
their true position on the issue. Chinese leaders may be responding 
to these rationales by redefining the requirements of their current 
nuclear strategy and no-first-use policy. Chinese leaders also may be 
reacting with an undeclared departure from their nuclear strategy 
of assured retaliation to one that wields nuclear weapons to accom-
plish the country’s political objectives in the region.
China’s insistence that its stance on nuclear weapons has not 
changed over nearly six decades is notable given major develop-
ments in China’s strategic environment, which Chinese scholars 
and strategists have argued necessitate a buildup of the country’s 
nuclear arsenal. U.S. advancements in precision-guided convention-
al weapons, ballistic missile defense, and ISR since the 1990s have 
* “Strategic stability” has many definitions, but at the broadest level it refers to the absence of 
armed conflict between nuclear-armed states. Other definitions include the ideas that: in a time 
of crisis, there is no incentive to be the first to use military force of any type, nuclear or otherwise 
(also known as “crisis stability”); in a crisis or conventional conflict, there is no incentive to be the 
first to use nuclear weapons (“first strike stability”); and neither side believes it can improve its 
relative position by building more weapons (“arms race stability”). Linton F. Brooks, “Perceptions 
of Sino-American Strategic Stability: A U.S. View,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 
November 7, 2017.

347
exacerbated longstanding concerns within China that its retaliatory 
capability is too vulnerable. 30 China’s “nuclear neighborhood” has 
grown more complex with Russia’s nuclear modernization, the emer-
gence of Pakistan and India as nuclear powers, and North Korea’s 
development of nuclear and missile capabilities. 31 Despite the ap-
parent comity between the two countries, Russia’s deployment of 
low-yield nuclear weapons to its Far East, ongoing missile defense 
efforts, and modernization of its already formidable arsenal chal-
lenge the survivability of China’s nuclear deterrent. 32 Continued 
border tensions with India, a neighboring nuclear power,* under -
score the potential for escalation to nuclear use in a crisis, though 
Chinese analysts remain dismissive of that possibility and of Indian 
nuclear capabilities in general. 33
China’s static public stance on nuclear weapons also stands in 
contrast to recent official remarks that highlight nuclear weapons’ 
contribution to China’s great power status and broader security in-
terests. In a 2016 speech at PLA Rocket Force headquarters, General 
Secretary Xi described the newly elevated service † that oversees the 
country’s land-based missiles as “the strategic support of our coun-
try’s status as a major power,” suggesting the Chinese leadership 
views nuclear weapons as an important element of China’s interna-
tional prestige.34 PLA Rocket Force officers and a political commis-
sar have argued nuclear weapons enable China to deter adversaries 
from threatening the country’s “sovereignty,” “core interests,” and 
“development interests” in addition to “fulfill[ing] the state’s polit-
ical and diplomatic objectives,” aims more expansive than simply 
deterring nuclear attacks against China. 35 Chinese leaders have 
readily leveraged their growing conventional capabilities to advance 
their interests in regional territorial disputes, raising the question 
of whether they might see the threat or use of nuclear weapons as 
appropriate means to supplement conventional methods.
China Modernizes, Diversifies, and Expands the Nuclear 
Forces
China’s unchanging public stance on nuclear weapons raises 
questions in light of the significant and observable transformation 
of China’s nuclear posture ‡ underway today.§ This effort involves 
* India has a stockpile of around 150 nuclear warheads and currently operates eight types of 
nuclear-capable delivery systems: two types of aircraft, four land-based ballistic missile systems, 
and two sea-launched ballistic missile systems. At least three more systems are in development 
and will soon be combat ready. India’s nuclear-capable aircraft and land-based missiles provide 
a mix of strike options against China, but its current sea-launched ballistic missiles cannot yet 
range China’s east coast. Indian nuclear capabilities are not as robust or sophisticated as Chinese 
nuclear capabilities. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Indian Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, July 20, 2020; Alex Lockie, “We Ranked the World’s Nuclear Arsenals — Here’s Why 
China’s Came Out on Top,” Business Insider, January 25, 2019.
† During military reforms announced in December 2015, the PLA Second Artillery Force was 
renamed the PLA Rocket Force and elevated from a military branch to a military service. Like 
its predecessor, the PLA Rocket Force oversees China’s land-based missile force. It is responsible 
for nuclear and conventional deterrence and strike missions. Michael S. Chase, written testimony 
before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Military 
Reforms and Modernization: Implications for the United States, February 15, 2018, 1.
‡ A state’s nuclear posture encompasses its nuclear forces’ size, structure, capabilities, and read-
iness.
§ According to Mr. Hans Kristensen, director of the Nuclear Information Project at the Federa-
tion of American Scientists, the modernization of China’s nuclear forces has occurred in phases. 
The first phase, which occurred in the 1960s and 1970s, introduced bombers and liquid-fuel 
moveable medium-range ballistic missiles (the DF-1, DF-2, and DF-3). The second phase, which 
occurred in the 1980s and 1990s, introduced longer-range liquid-fuel moveable and silo-based 

348
developing a viable nuclear triad;  * improving the mobility, accu-
racy, and penetration of deployed weapons systems; and signifi-
cantly expanding the country’s stockpile of nuclear warheads. The 
PLA is also working to build up its nuclear command, control, and 
communications (NC3) system, which includes improved ISR capa-
bilities that enable future missions such as rudimentary strategic 
early warning and ballistic missile defense. As a result, the size 
and capabilities of China’s nuclear forces will soon clearly exceed 
those required for the minimum and purely retaliatory deterrent 
it claims to have.
If these improvements continue apace, China could become a 
qualitative nuclear peer of the United States in around a decade, 
with a similarly diversified, precise, and survivable force.† 36 Such a 
force will give China a truly secure second-strike capability as well 
as options for highly calibrated nuclear use, be that in the context 
of retaliation or first use. China could even become a quantitative 
nuclear peer if current projections for the growth of its land-based 
strategic missile forces bear out. 37
China’s Nascent Nuclear Triad
For most of its history, China’s strategic nuclear forces ‡ were land 
based and composed of high-yield, “city-busting” warheads mount-
ed atop imprecise missiles. 38 Today, the Chinese nuclear forces are 
making significant if uneven progress toward a nuclear triad com-
posed of submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), land-based 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), and nuclear bombers. 
Many of its new sea-based and land-based weapons systems are lon-
ger range and more accurate than earlier generations, innovations 
that expand the number of targets within the PLA’s reach and give 
it new options to calibrate the level of damage inflicted on adversary 
targets. China is also developing new technologies that will improve 
intercontinental ballistic missiles that put almost all of the United States in range. The second 
phase also included the first solid-fuel, road-mobile medium-range ballistic missile (the DF-21) 
and an experimental nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine (the Type 092). The third phase, 
which occurred in the first decade and a half of the 2000s, introduced solid-fuel, road-mobile 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (the DF-31A), an upgrade to the liquid-fuel intercontinental 
ballistic missiles (the DF-5B) with multiple independently targetable warheads, and a small fleet 
of SSBNs (the Type 094). The fourth and current phase is ongoing. Hans M. Kristensen, written 
testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s 
Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 1–2.
* A nuclear triad is a tripartite nuclear force structure consisting of land-, sea-, and air-
based capabilities. Nuclear missiles can be launched from platforms such as ground-based silos, 
road-mobile launchers, and submarines. Strategic aircraft can drop nuclear bombs and launch 
nuclear missiles.
† Brad Roberts, director of the Center for Global Security Research at Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory, told Commission staff in an email that he expected China to become a qual-
itative nuclear peer of the United States sometime during the decade 2030 to 2040. Brad Roberts, 
Director of the Center for Global Security Research at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 
interview with Commission staff, August 27, 2021.
‡ “Strategic” nuclear forces refer to intercontinental-range missile systems armed with high-
yield warheads; historically, these were intended for use against an adversary’s major urban and 
industrial centers. The New START Treaty signed by the United States and Russia defined the 
range of strategic missiles as greater than 5,500 kilometers. “Non-strategic” forces encompass 
missiles with ranges of less than 5,500 kilometers, potentially including short-, medium- and 
intermediate-range delivery systems. Medium- and intermediate-range delivery systems are often 
associated with China’s “regional” nuclear force. Separately, “tactical” warheads are a subset of 
“non-strategic” weapons intended for use on the battlefield in close proximity to friendly forces; 
they have relatively low explosive power and are carried by very short-range delivery systems 
of 1,000 kilometers or less. Philip C. Saunders and David C. Logan, “China’s Regional Nuclear 
Capability,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. Bolt, eds. China’s Strategic Arsenal, Georgetown Uni-
versity Press, 2021, 126–127; Arms Control Association, “The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces 
(INF) Treaty at a Glance,” August 2019.

349
its ability to counter other countries’ ISR, ballistic missile defense, 
and precision-strike systems. These include multiple independently 
targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs), maneuverable reentry vehi-
cles, decoys, chaff, jamming, and hypersonic glide vehicles.* 39 Chi-
na’s strategic forces are complemented by the PLA’s growing arsenal 
of medium- and intermediate-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs and 
IRBMs) that can deliver nuclear warheads throughout the Indo-Pa-
cific region.40
China’s Nuclear Submarines Become a Credible Deterrent Force
China’s nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) fleet 
now constitutes what the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) de-
scribes as a “credible” sea-based nuclear deterrent after more than 
six decades of incremental progress and development. 41 Before its 
first Jin-class (Type 094) SSBN entered service in 2014, the PLA 
Navy had since the 1980s operated a sole Xia-class (Type 092) 
SSBN that undertook a single patrol and reportedly never sailed 
beyond Chinese waters. 42 Today, China has four operational Type 
094 SSBNs based on Hainan Island and two more in the process 
of being outfitted. 43 Each Type 094 carries up to 12 JL-2 nucle-
ar SLBMs, designed to be equipped with a single warhead each. 44 
DOD’s annual reports on China’s military capabilities, as well as 
other U.S. government sources, suggest China’s Type 094 SSBNs 
have conducted “deterrence patrols” since at least 2016, though it 
remains unclear whether these patrols occur with nuclear warheads 
mated to the missiles on board. 45
China is constructing a follow-on SSBN, the Type 096, that will 
enter service in the mid-2020s and improve on the Type 094’s noisy 
design and limited range. 46 The Type 094 is much louder than the 
top Russian or U.S. SSBNs, making it easily detectable and vul-
nerable to adversaries’ anti-submarine warfare capabilities.47 More-
over, the JL-2 has a range of approximately 7,200 kilometers, which 
is sufficient to target Alaska, Guam, and Hawaii from waters near 
China but unable to reach the continental United States unless the 
submarine operates in the Western Pacific. 48 To reach Washington, 
DC, a Type 094 carrying the JL-2 would need to operate in waters 
north and east of Hawaii. 49 China will equip the Type 096 with the 
JL-3, an SLBM capable of striking targets at a range of more than 
9,000 kilometers.50 The Type 096 would allow China to target north-
western parts of the continental United States from the Bohai Sea 
and to hold Washington, DC, at risk if the submarines sail north-
east of Japan. 51 The Type 096 could carry between 12 and 16 JL-3 
SLBMs, and it is unclear at present if the JL-3s will be MIRVed. 52
The PLA Navy exhibits conventional-nuclear “entanglement”  † to 
the extent that it uses the same shore-based, very-low-frequency 
* MIRV technology enables a single missile to carry a payload of multiple warheads, each of 
which can be programmed to hit a different target. Maneuverable reentry vehicle technology 
enables the warhead on a ballistic missile to track and home in on ground targets. Chaff refers 
to clouds of tiny metallic strips that aircraft or rockets can release in flight that appear as sep-
arate targets to an enemy’s radar and confuse a missile sent to intercept it. A hypersonic glide 
vehicle is a maneuverable glide vehicle that is fired into space by rockets or a ballistic missile 
and then released to glide to its target along the upper atmosphere. Hypersonic glide vehicles fly 
at a lower altitude than ballistic missiles and can change their intended target and trajectory 
repeatedly during their flight.
† Geographic entanglement occurs when a state’s conventional and nuclear forces are located 
in the same space, such as when the forces are garrisoned together during peacetime or when 

350
transmitters to communicate with both its conventional attack sub-
marines and its SSBNs.53 This means any effort by an adversary to 
disrupt communications between a PLA theater command and at-sea 
conventional attack submarines during a war could risk nuclear es-
calation by cutting off communications with the nuclear submarines.
Land-Based Missiles Remain Central to China’s Nuclear Posture
China’s land-based ballistic missile force is the backbone of its 
nuclear deterrent and is undergoing a dramatic expansion. The PLA 
Rocket Force operates China’s ICBMs for strategic deterrence mis-
sions and a variety of shorter-range ballistic missiles for regional 
deterrence missions. Up to half of the PLA Rocket Force’s 40 missile 
brigades * may be nuclear capable.54 The brigades operating China’s 
nuclear missiles are dispersed at many locations across the coun-
try and assigned to six bases;  † a seventh base located in Shaanxi 
Province is responsible for storing and handling most of the force’s 
nuclear warheads.55
China’s Strategic Missiles
The ICBM force is reducing its vulnerability to an adversary’s 
surprise attack by transitioning from liquid-fuel missiles to a com-
bination of solid-fuel silo-based missiles and road-mobile missiles.‡ 
There are currently about 100 ICBMs in the PLA Rocket Force’s ar -
senal that could be assigned to various targets in the United States, 
Russia, and India.56 These systems currently include the liquid-fuel, 
roll-out-to-launch DF-4 (range of 5,500 kilometers); the liquid-fuel, 
silo-based DF-5 (range of 13,000 kilometers), which has two MIRVed 
variants; and the solid-fuel, road-mobile DF-31, DF-31A, and DF-
31AG (ranges varying from 7,000 to 12,000 kilometers). 57 A new 
solid-fuel, road-mobile, MIRV-capable ICBM known as the DF-41 
(range of 14,000–15,000 kilometers) became operational in 2020 
and has been integrated into at least two brigades. 58 DOD assess-
they operate in the same areas during a crisis or wartime. Operational entanglement occurs 
when conventional and nuclear forces are operated by or rely on the same military institutions 
or practices, such as when these forces share personnel, command and control structures, mission 
sets, or maintenance and logistics infrastructure. Technological entanglement occurs when the de-
livery systems of conventional and nuclear forces are identical or indistinguishable, as is the case 
with dual-capable weapons or weapons that have both conventional and nuclear variants. David 
Logan, “Are They Reading Schelling in Beijing? The Dimensions, Drivers, and Risks of Nucle-
ar-Conventional Entanglement in China,” forthcoming in Journal of Strategic Studies, 2020, 5–6.
* The PLA Rocket Force has added ten brigades or more, an increase of more than one-third 
since 2017. Ma Xiu and Peter W. Singer, “What Do We Know about China’s Newest Missiles?” 
Defense One, March 19, 2021.
† PLA Rocket Force “bases” are sometimes referred to as “armies” and are responsible for differ-
ent geographic regions in China. PLA Rocket Force brigades are assigned to bases numbered 61 
through 66; an additional base, Base 67, stores the nuclear warheads. Each base may supervise 
between four and seven brigades, and each brigade encompasses thousands of personnel. The 
structure of brigades varies depending on whether they operate conventional missiles, mobile 
nuclear missiles, or fixed site (silo-based or cave-rollout-to-launch-site) nuclear missiles. Conven-
tional brigades may have up to 36 launchers with as many as six missiles per launcher (enabling 
up to five reloads). Mobile nuclear brigades may have between six and 12 missile launchers 
per brigade, while fixed site nuclear brigades may have six or fewer launchers (silos or roll-out 
sites) per brigade. Christopher J. Mihal, “Understanding the People’s Liberation Army Rocket 
Force: Strategy, Armament, and Disposition,” Military Review, July–August 2021; Decker Ever -
leth, “Mapping the People’s Liberation Army Rocket Force,” A Boy and His Blog, July 2, 2020; 
David Logan, “Making Sense of China’s Missiles Forces,” in Phillip C. Saunders, Arthur S. Ding, 
and Andrew Scobell, eds., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA: Assessing Chinese Military Reforms, 
National Defense University Press, 2019, 403–404.
‡ By transitioning to solid-fuel missiles, China is improving the survivability and safety of its 
ICBM force. Liquid-fuel ICBMs are vulnerable to attack because they take more time to fuel 
before launch; liquid fuel is also dangerous to handle because it is toxic and corrosive.

351
es that the DF-41 could also have silo-based and rail-based launch 
options.59
Due to increases in China’s arsenal of ICBM missiles, launchers 
assigned to its ICBM brigades, and MIRV technology, the number 
of warheads that can be mounted on ICBMs threatening the United 
States is expanding. 60 According to Hans M. Kristensen, director of 
the Nuclear Information Project at the Federation of American Sci-
entists (FAS), in 2000 China possessed 35 ICBMs, of which 20 could 
hit the continental United States carrying one warhead each. 61 To-
day, most of China’s 100 ICBMs are capable of hitting the United 
States with a total of about 125 nuclear warheads, though they are 
not all necessarily assigned to U.S. targets. 62 DOD predicts that the 
number of warheads on China’s land-based ICBMs capable of strik-
ing the United States, which make up only a portion of its total 
warhead stockpile, will grow to 200 by 2025. 63
Moreover, the PLA Rocket Force is constructing more than 270 
new missile silos for its ICBM force in remote regions of China that 
could be intended for multiple purposes. In 2021, researchers analyz-
ing satellite imagery discovered construction underway for 16 silos 
near the city of Jilantai in the western reaches of Inner Mongolia, 
119 new silos near the northwestern city of Yumen in Gansu Prov-
ince, approximately 110 new silos near the city of Hami in Xinjiang, 
and at least 29 silos * in Hanggin Banner in Inner Mongolia (see 
Figure 1).64 That total is more than ten times the number of silos 
the PLA Rocket Force currently operates, greater than the number 
of ICBM silos Russia operates, and more than half of the approxi-
mately 400 land-based ICBMs the United States maintains in silos 
today.65 According to Roderick Lee, director of research at the Chi-
na Aerospace Studies Institute, between the newly discovered silos 
and the PLA Rocket Force’s currently operational ICBM brigades, 
China’s projected inventory of ground-based ICBM launchers is al-
ready “close to or more than the United States’ current number of 
deployed Minuteman III ICBMs.”  66 The silo fields are in various 
stages of development and could take between five and ten years to 
become operational.67
The emergence of new silos—which are easily identifiable and 
vulnerable to precision-guided munitions—is surprising given Chi-
na’s emphasis in recent years on improving mobility, camouflage, 
and concealment for its ICBMs. 68 The PLA Rocket Force (and its 
predecessor, the Second Artillery) has long relied on an elaborate 
infrastructure to store and transport its ballistic missiles, including 
a vast network of underground tunnels, wheeled transporter erec-
tor launchers, and rail networks.69 This infrastructure improves the 
survivability of China’s nuclear forces but requires the relatively 
time-consuming practices of bringing ICBMs out of storage, mat-
ing them with their warheads, erecting them on mobile launchers, 
and connecting them to the appropriate command and control infra-
structure before firing a counterstrike. By contrast, silo-based mis-
siles are the most responsive element of a country’s nuclear forces 
because they can be put on high alert and launched quickly. 70
* Roderick Lee, director of research at the China Aerospace Studies Institute, estimates that 
this site could eventually contain up to 36 silos. Roderick Lee, “PLA Likely Begins Construction 
of an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile Silo Site Near Hanggin Banner,” Air University, August 
12, 2021.

352
Figure 1: China’s Silo-Based ICBMs
NORTH KOREA
AFGHANISTAN SOUTH KOREA
BANGLADESH
KAZAKHSTAN
KYRGYZSTAN
UZBEKISTAN
PHILIPPINES
MONGOLIA
TAJIKISTAN
MYANMAR
THAILAND
PAKISTAN
VIETNAM
BHUTAN
TAIWAN
RUSSIA
CHINA
JAPAN
NEPAL
INDIA
LAOS
NEIXIANG AIRFIELD
(H-6N BOMBER BASE)
JILANTAI
TRAINING AREA
SILOS
(≈16)
YUMEN SILOS
(≈119)
EXISTING
DF-5 SILOS
(≈9-10)
EXISTING
DF-5 SILOS
(≈9-10)
YULIN NAVAL BASE
(NUCLEAR SUBMARINE
BASE)
HANGGIN BANNER
SILOS
(≈29)
HAMI SILOS
(≈110)
PLA ROCKET
FORCE HQ
(BEIJING)
0 250 500 mi
≈
New Silos Under Construction
Operational Silos
Approximate Number of Silos
at this Location
Sources: Hans Kristensen, Director of the Nuclear Information Project at the Federation of 
American Scientists, interview with Commission staff, September 24, 2021; Roderick Lee, “PLA 
Likely Begins Construction of an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile Silo Site Near Hanggin Ban-
ner,” Air University, August 12, 2021; Matt Korda and Hans Kristensen, “China Is Building a 
Second Nuclear Missile Silo Field,” Federation of American Scientists, July 26, 2021; Joby Warrick, 
“China Is Building More than 100 New Missile Silos in Its Western Desert, Analysts Say,” Wash-
ington Post, June 30, 2021; Hans Kristensen, “China’s Expanding Missile Training Area: More 
Silos, Tunnels, and Support Facilities,” Federation of American Scientists, February 24, 2021; 
Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. 
Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and Systems, Georgetown University 
Press, 2021, 98–100; Roderick Lee, “China’s Air Force Might Be Back in the Nuclear Business,” 
Diplomat, September 9, 2020; Tyler Rogoway, “Image Shows Chinese Submarine Entering Myste-
rious Cave Facility at South China Sea Base,” Drive, August 19, 2020.
Some observers speculate that China could deploy some of its 
ICBMs across the matrix of new silos while filling others with de-
coys in a Cold War-style “nuclear shell game” for the purpose of com-
plicating adversary targeting. 71 Alternatively, China could fill most 
or all of the silos with ICBMs, which—especially if MIRVed—would 
improve the chances that more of China’s ICBMs survive an adver -
sary’s first strike and defeat its missile defenses. 72 Finally, DOD 
assesses that expanding the silo-based force and putting a portion 
of that force on heightened alert would enable China to shift to 
a launch-on-warning posture, which would allow China to rapidly 
launch its ICBMs upon notification of an incoming attack before 
their silos could be destroyed. 73 Each interpretation assumes Chi-
na’s motive for building the silos is to secure its second-strike capa-
bility rather than to develop a first-strike capability. Large numbers 
of silo-based missiles can also be used to launch a preemptive nucle-
ar strike on an adversary.
China’s Regional Missiles
The PLA Rocket Force also has nuclear-capable MRBMs and 
IRBMs capable of hitting targets across the Indo-Pacific, such as 
allied capitals or U.S. military bases. These include the road-mo-
bile, solid-fuel DF-21 MRBM (range of 2,150 kilometers) and the 
road-mobile, solid-fuel DF-26 IRBM (range of 4,000 kilometers). 74 

353
Overall, the PLA Rocket Force has assigned about 60 nuclear war -
heads to regional missions. 75
The DF-26 entails unique escalation risks because it is a dual-ca-
pable missile system that is “hot swappable” or able to switch rap-
idly between conventional and nuclear warheads on a launch-ready 
missile.76 DF-26 brigades have held drills in which units launch 
a conventional attack and then reload with a nuclear warhead to 
prepare for nuclear counterattacks. 77 This technological and oper -
ational entanglement generates pressures for escalation to nuclear 
use by making it difficult for an adversary to distinguish whether 
a warhead carried by the DF-26 is conventional or nuclear in flight 
and, by extension, to decide on an appropriate targeting response. 78 
As DOD notes, because the DF-26 is China’s first nuclear-capable 
missile system that can conduct precision strikes, it is the most like-
ly weapon system to field a low-yield warhead in the near-term. 79 
The DF-26’s precision enables it to be used for nuclear missions tar-
geting U.S. military assets in the Indo-Pacific, though authoritative 
Chinese military texts do not show that PLA doctrine has officially 
shifted from its traditional emphasis on countervalue targeting.
China’s Bomber Force Regains a Nuclear Mission
The PLA Air Force appears to have reassumed a nuclear mission 
after a long period of dormancy, indicating its bombers could car -
ry out nuclear counterstrike missions to supplement China’s land- 
and sea-based nuclear deterrent.* 80 In 2019, the PLA unveiled a 
new nuclear-capable variant of the H-6 known as the H-6N that is 
reportedly capable of air-to-air refueling and has a modified fuse-
lage that may allow it to carry a nuclear air-launched ballistic mis-
sile.81 The PLA’s H-6Ns are likely stationed in central China next 
to a hardened underground facility that could be used to store the 
aircraft in peacetime. 82 China is also developing a nuclear-capable 
long-range stealth bomber known as the H-20 that will likely enter 
production within the next decade. 83
DOD assesses that the deployment of the air-launched ballistic 
missile on China’s H-6N will “provide China for the first time with 
a viable nuclear triad of delivery systems,” though the bombers’ lim-
ited range suggests they would more likely be used for missions 
closer to China. 84 Mr. Lee observes that China’s nuclear triad is 
somewhat “lopsided” because its air-launched component is relative-
ly small and too limited in range to target the continental United 
States unless its bombers fly across Russian airspace or the Pacific 
Ocean with their accompanying tankers. 85 He argues that the PLA 
could be pursuing a nuclear bomber force to deter China’s other 
nuclear-armed neighbors, for use against U.S. bases in the region, or 
* The PLA Air Force delivered at least 12 of the nuclear weapons China detonated as part of 
its nuclear testing program in the 1960s and 1970s. The U.S. Intelligence Community assessed 
that some of China’s bombers trained for nuclear missions in the 1970s, but the country did not 
have a dedicated strategic bomber force resembling that of the United States or Soviet Union. 
The PLA Air Force’s nuclear capability is thought to have atrophied during the Cold War and its 
nuclear mission did not appear active until the PLA Air Force publicly revealed the H-6N as its 
first nuclear-capable air-to-air refuellable bomber during a 2019 military parade commemorating 
the PRC’s 70th anniversary. Kenneth W. Allen and Cristina L. Garafola, “70 Years of the PLA 
Air Force,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, 2021, 83; Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, 
“Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear Notebook, December 10, 2020, 453; U.S. Department 
of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020: 
Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 50–51.

354
for the purpose of establishing nuclear competencies within the PLA 
Air Force.86 Given the limited range of China’s bombers and suffi-
ciency of other legs of the triad for China’s nuclear deterrent, how-
ever, some analysts believe the reactivation of the PLA Air Force’s 
nuclear mission more likely reflects its success as a bureaucratic 
actor in fighting for resources than a clear strategic mission. 87
Nuclear Warhead Stockpile Could Double by 2030
China needs more nuclear warheads to arm its new delivery sys-
tems and will significantly expand its inventory of nuclear warheads 
over the next decade. China currently maintains a modest stockpile of 
nuclear warheads similar in size to that of France or the United King-
dom, depending on the estimate used.* 88 DOD estimated in 2020 that 
China’s operational nuclear warhead stockpile was in the low 200s.89 
DOD reports on China’s military capabilities from the early 2000s do 
not indicate how large they assessed China’s nuclear stockpile to be 
at that time, though they asserted the PLA planned to increase the 
number of nuclear warheads that could target the United States in 
the future.90 Researchers at FAS placed China’s 2020 stockpile at up 
to 350 warheads.91 Their estimate of 350 warheads included roughly 
272 operational warheads assigned for delivery by China’s land-based 
ballistic missiles, sea-based missile forces, and nuclear-capable bomb-
ers, as well as 78 warheads to arm new land- and sea-based missiles 
still in the process of being fielded.92 FAS researchers assess that the 
stockpile grew by roughly 118 warheads between 2000 and 2021. 93
Projections of the future size of China’s stockpile vary, but credible 
sources generally agree the increase will be significant. DOD estimated 
in 2020 that the country’s operational nuclear warhead stockpile will 
likely double to more than 400 over the next decade.94 Mr. Kristensen 
testified before the Commission that a doubling of the stockpile over 
the next decade is plausible given China’s past and ongoing modern-
ization efforts.95 Admiral Richard predicted publicly in February 2021 
that China’s nuclear weapons stockpile could even triple or quadruple 
over the next decade.96 Assuming the most extreme case of a quadru-
pling of DOD’s estimate, China could possess up to 1,000 warheads in 
ten years’ time, a figure equivalent to more than two-thirds of the 1,400 
strategic warheads the United States deploys on ballistic missiles † and 
less than one-third of the total U.S. stockpile of strategic warheads.‡ 97
According to Mr. Kristensen, projections for doubling, tripling, or 
quadrupling China’s nuclear warhead stockpile over the next de-
cade would require significant changes to its current force struc-
ture.98 He estimates that to field a doubled stockpile, China would 
need to increase the number of its DF-31AG brigades, double its 
road-mobile DF-41s with MIRV capabilities, deploy a new brigade of 
silo-based DF-41s with MIRVs, field an additional Type 096 SSBN 
* According to the Federation of American Scientists, France and the United Kingdom maintain 
stockpiles of 290 and 225 nuclear warheads, respectively. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, 
“Status of World Nuclear Forces,” Federation of American Scientists, May 2021.
† The New START Treaty caps the number of deployed U.S. and Russian strategic nuclear war -
heads and bombs at 1,550. Arms Control Association, “New START at a Glance,” February 2021.
‡ As of early 2021, the United States maintained an estimated stockpile of around 3,800 nuclear 
warheads. According to FAS, about 1,800 warheads are currently deployed on ballistic missiles or 
at strategic bomber bases. Around 2,000 are kept in storage to be used as a “hedge” as conditions 
warrant. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “United States Nuclear Weapons, 2021,” Nuclear 
Notebook, January 12, 2021.

355
with MIRVed JL-3 missiles, and field more than a dozen nuclear 
bombers.99 To field a tripled stockpile, China would need to increase 
the number of DF-31AG and DF-41 brigades, add additional rail-
based DF-41s, field two Type 096 SSBNs, and double the number 
and weapons capacity of its nuclear bombers. 100 Mr. Kristensen es-
timates that to field a quadrupled stockpile, China would require 
a large number of additional road-mobile and rail-based missiles, 
more nuclear DF-26 units, more bombers, and more MIRVed pay-
loads on its DF-41 ICBMs. 101
China’s Warhead Stockpile Can Grow without New Fissile Material 
Production
China could vastly increase its stockpile of nuclear warheads 
without producing additional fissile material. According to Harvard 
University Belfer Center research associate Hui Zhang, China halt-
ed production of highly enriched uranium and plutonium for nuclear 
weapons in the 1980s and maintains military stockpiles of 14 ± 3 
tons * of highly enriched uranium and 2.9 ± 0.6 tons of plutonium 
from that time.102 Mark Hibbs, nonresident senior fellow at the Car-
negie Endowment for International Peace, testified before the Com-
mission that China could produce between 200 and 800 additional 
nuclear weapons using its existing plutonium inventory, depending 
on how many kilograms of plutonium one estimates is necessary for 
Chinese nuclear weapons designs. 103
If Chinese leaders wished to generate additional weapons-grade 
plutonium for even more warheads, Mr. Hibbs said, they could build 
a new plutonium production reactor, repurpose an existing Chinese 
research reactor to produce weapons-grade plutonium, or operate 
fast reactors as part of their civil nuclear power program to “breed” 
plutonium.104 At present, there is no evidence China intends to use 
its fast reactors for nuclear weapons production, and neither of its 
two 600-MW reactors are yet operational. 105 Given the sufficiency of 
China’s existing inventories of fissile material, Chinese leaders may 
see little need to make use of these additional pathways.
Recent construction activity at China’s testing and weapons pro-
duction facilities may offer additional evidence China is expanding 
its production of nuclear warheads. Commercial satellite images of 
China’s longtime nuclear weapons testing site at Lop Nur taken 
between 2019 and 2021 showed construction of a probable drill site, 
a probable underground facility, an excavated recess, and new roads 
that could be a part of the support facilities required to conduct 
new nuclear tests. 106 Satellite imagery of Pingtong nuclear facili-
ty, which manufactures Chinese nuclear weapons components, also 
shows new and renovated buildings for steam production and elec-
tricity consumption constructed between 2010 and 2020 that may 
increase its capacity to produce larger numbers of finished nuclear 
weapons.107
China May Pursue Low-Yield Warheads in the Future
DOD assesses that China may complement its stockpile of strate-
gic nuclear warheads with the production of low-yield warheads for 
tactical nuclear weapons in the future. 108 Most of China’s nuclear 
* ± is a notation used to measure uncertainty and is read “plus or minus.”

356
warheads have large yields ranging from several hundred kilotons 
to more than one megaton; they are designed to be delivered across 
a region or continents and to inflict large-scale damage on their 
targets.109 By contrast, low-yield weapons can range from 5 kilotons 
to 150 kilotons and are useful for calibrating damage to smaller 
targets, such as military bases or aircraft carriers. 110
There is little publicly available evidence that China has de-
ployed tactical nuclear weapons, but U.S. Intelligence Community 
estimates from the 1970s and 1980s noted “circumstantial evidence” 
the country could have developed low-yield warheads, perhaps for 
use in small bombs or depth charges. 111 The PLA also held several 
military exercises in the early 1980s simulating the use of tactical 
nuclear weapons, though simulations themselves do not prove devel-
opment or deployment. 112
Chinese commentators have argued in recent years that China re-
quires lower-yield nuclear weapons to enhance deterrence and to ex-
pand the PLA’s options for engaging U.S. forces in a regional war.113 
Moreover, a 2017 article that originally appeared in the overseas 
edition of the People’s Daily cited an interview with retired PLA 
Rocket Force Senior Colonel Yang Chengjun in which he mentioned 
that the PLA would develop “smaller tactical nuclear warheads to 
attack the enemy” and limit collateral damage to civilian targets. 114 
China reportedly carried out a secret test at its Lop Nur facility in 
2019 that the State Department and some observers say was con-
sistent with testing a low-yield weapon. 115
China Enhances Nuclear Command, Control, and 
Communications
China has made substantial progress over the last two decades 
toward improving the survivability of its NC3, or the systems and 
processes for directing strategic forces to alert or employ nuclear 
weapons.* 116 According to Phillip C. Saunders, director of the Cen-
ter for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs at the National Defense 
University, between the 1980s and early 2000s China had an “un-
derdeveloped” NC3 system and no strategic ISR systems that could 
provide warning of an incoming attack. 117 Since then, China’s NC3 
system and the ISR that supports it have improved substantially. 
The PLA’s situational awareness now enables more rapid retaliation 
against a nuclear strike and forms the basis for a nascent ballistic 
missile defense system. This progress is consistent with goals for 
China’s nuclear force modernization identified by its 2015 white pa-
per, which called for “improved strategic early warning, command 
and control . . . and rapid reaction.” 118
China’s Shifting Readiness and Nascent Triad Complicate Command 
and Control
China’s NC3 system has historically emphasized centralization 
and strict controls to prohibit the unauthorized use of nuclear weap-
ons. Authority to decide whether to use nuclear weapons is reserved 
* According to DOD, NC3 includes detecting and characterizing incoming attacks, facilitating 
decision-making, transmitting orders to alert or use nuclear weapons, and directing the strategic 
forces. It therefore requires excellent ISR to provide situational awareness of incoming attacks 
and redundant communications to ensure strategic forces carry out orders to use nuclear weap-
ons. U.S. Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, 2018, XIII.

357
to China’s top leaders in the Politburo Standing Committee. 119 The 
Central Military Commission (CMC), headed by General Secretary 
Xi, handles the execution of Chinese nuclear operations. 120 The PLA 
Rocket Force is commanded directly by the CMC rather than indi-
rectly through the geographical Theater Commands that oversee the 
other services, an arrangement reflecting the importance China’s 
leaders place on controlling the nuclear forces. 121 China may have 
several practices in place to prevent the unauthorized use of nucle-
ar weapons, including storing warheads and delivery systems sepa-
rately in peacetime, installing technical-use controls on the weapons 
themselves, and enacting a “two-man rule” prohibiting access to or 
control of the weapons by any single person. 122
The PLA Rocket Force appears to be putting portions of its forc-
es on heightened alert in an effort to improve its readiness. China 
keeps the majority of its nuclear forces on a peacetime status with 
separated launchers, missiles, and warheads, DOD notes, but nu-
clear and conventional PLA Rocket Force brigades conduct “combat 
readiness duty” and “high-alert duty,” which include assigning a mis-
sile battalion “to be ready to launch” and rotating to standby posi-
tions as often as monthly for “unspecified periods of time.” 123 These 
periods of combat readiness and high-alert duty presumably involve 
temporarily mating warheads and delivery systems and could be 
part of what DOD assesses is an impending move by some portions 
of China’s nuclear forces to a launch-on-warning posture. 124
The PLA Rocket Force’s growing numbers of mobile launchers and 
dual-use missiles could complicate its NC3 process. China’s leaders 
maintain redundant means of communication and command path-
ways, including the ability to skip echelons of command, to ensure 
their orders reach the firing units responsible for carrying out nu-
clear strikes.* Dr. Saunders notes that the NC3 system may strug-
gle to adequately track China’s growing number of mobile ICBMs 
since all of those mobile launchers will be dispersed from garrison 
to concealed locations during a crisis or conflict. 125 Another NC3-re-
lated complication that may arise is whether the PLA Rocket Force 
brigades operating the hot-swappable DF-26 missile will answer to 
orders directly from the PLA Rocket Force, which oversees nuclear 
missions, or from the Theater Commands, which oversee convention-
al missions.126
Little information is available about the NC3 processes for Chi-
na’s SSBN fleet and strategic bomber force, which may pose their 
own challenges for command and control. During a crisis or conflict, 
the CMC will presumably relay orders to alert or use nuclear weap-
ons to PLA Navy headquarters and PLA Air Force headquarters, 
* According to George Washington University assistant professor Fiona Cunningham, the CMC 
will transmit orders to alert or use nuclear weapons to the CMC Joint Operations Command, 
PLA Rocket Force Headquarters, the missile bases, and then down the chain of command to the 
missile launch companies. China’s leaders can relay orders directly to missile brigades, battalions, 
or launch companies during a crisis (the so-called “skip echelon” system). The PLA Rocket Force’s 
communications brigades operate redundant means of communication, including radio, fiber-optic 
cables, and satellites, to ensure CMC orders are successfully transmitted to operational units. 
The PLA Rocket Force also operates an automated command system that may be interoperable 
with that of other PLA services and include support for its mobile missile force. Bates Gill, 
“Organization of China’s Strategic Forces,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s 
Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 171; 
Fiona Cunningham, “Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications Systems of the People’s 
Republic of China,” Nautilus Institute, July 18, 2019; Yu Xijun, ed., The Science of Second Artillery 
Campaigns (第二炮兵战役学), People’s Liberation Army Publishing House, 2004, 168. Translation.

358
which will then convey those orders to the submarines on patrol 
and the nuclear bombers, respectively. 127 Dr. Saunders observes 
that each branch must “develop [its] own operational doctrine, per -
sonnel reliability systems, and nuclear warhead handling facilities 
to support . . . nuclear operations,” but the details are currently un-
known.128 The SSBN fleet may have difficulty maintaining contact 
with its command authority while operating in deep ocean waters 
on patrol, though media reports in 2018 indicated China had built 
a massive experimental antenna that could transmit messages to 
submerged submarines via extremely low-frequency waves.* 129 
Moreover, China’s SSBNs cannot replicate the PLA Rocket Force’s 
practice of keeping nuclear warheads separated from their missiles. 
The PLA will need to discard this practice for its SSBNs to carry 
nuclear weapons on patrol, which will remove a traditional barrier 
to unauthorized use. 130
ISR Capabilities Will Enable Multiple Missions
China’s ISR systems improve targeting and situational awareness 
for China’s nuclear forces, enabling missions such as strategic early 
warning and ballistic missile defense. An overlapping network of 
radars and sensing satellites, most of which the PLA Strategic Sup-
port Force likely operates in direct support of the CMC and PLA 
Rocket Force headquarters, are the most important elements. 131 
Together, these capabilities improve Chinese leaders’ situational 
awareness and could enable them to move to a launch-on-warning 
posture, whereby the PLA would launch nuclear weapons in retali-
ation for an incoming strike that has been detected by ISR systems 
but not yet detonated on Chinese territory.
China’s ground-based radars, which include large-phased array 
radars, over-the-horizon radars, and radars that detect low-flying 
targets, enable the PLA to detect threats from different trajectories. 
The Strategic Support Force now operates four large-phased array 
radars that can detect and track incoming ballistic missiles at the 
apex of their trajectory up to 5,000 kilometers away.† 132 Moreover, 
China has two over-the-horizon radar systems that can detect ballis-
tic missile launches up to 2,500 kilometers away from the southeast, 
giving China radar coverage over neighboring countries in the East 
China Sea and much of the Western Pacific. 133 China also has a 
high-frequency surface wave radar as well as radars associated with 
* Submerged submarines are unable to communicate with their command authorities at or -
dinary radio frequencies, which do not travel well through saltwater. Submarines can surface 
and raise an antenna above sea level to use ordinary radio transmissions for communication, 
but this makes them vulnerable to anti-submarine warfare. Such vulnerability is problematic 
because submerged submarines need to be able to receive their launch orders in the event of a 
nuclear war. Technological innovations during the Cold War led to several methods for underwa-
ter communication, such as the use of very low frequency radio waves at shallow depths and ex-
tremely low frequency radio waves at depths up to hundreds of meters. Extremely low frequency 
transmitters are technically difficult to construct and only the United States, Russia, China, and 
India are known to use them. Ryan White, “How Do Submarines Communicate with the Outside 
World?” Naval Post, May 3, 2021.
† The north-facing large-phased array radar at Huanan can detect and track ICBMs launched 
from the United States and Russia on a polar trajectory, while the large-phased array radars at 
Yiyuan and Longgangzhen face southeast toward Taiwan and the South China Sea for the possi-
ble purpose of bolstering Chinese conventional strikes on targets in those areas. The large-phased 
array radar at Korla can face west, south, southeast, or east and may be utilized for tracking 
satellite launch and missile intercept tests. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and 
Programs,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doc-
trine, and Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 115–116.

359
indigenous and Russian-made surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems 
that can detect low-flying stealth aircraft and cruise missiles from 
hundreds of kilometers away.134
China is developing infrared satellites to detect ballistic missiles 
from space, though the extent to which it may already have such 
satellites is unclear. China has built a constellation of infrared ear -
ly warning satellites named Shaobing akin to the United States’ 
Defense Support Program satellites in geosynchronous orbit, ac-
cording to a 2018 article in Science and Technology Daily, the of-
ficial newspaper of China’s Ministry of Science and Technology. 135 
Secret Chinese satellite launches in 2015, 2017, and 2020 provoked 
speculation that the country was establishing a constellation of ear -
ly warning satellites in geosynchronous orbit similar to the Unit-
ed States’ Space-Based Infrared System, but it is not clear if this 
constellation is the Shaobing constellation or something else. 136 In 
2019, Russian President Vladimir Putin said Russia is helping Chi-
na build an early warning system, cooperation that could include 
assistance on space-based sensors. 137 China’s Yaogan electro-optical 
satellite constellation provides broad coverage of ships and aircraft 
operating in the Pacific Ocean. 138
China has intermittently researched and tested technologies re-
quired for ballistic missile defense since the 1960s, even though it 
formally opposes U.S. ballistic missile defense. 139 Dr. Saunders tes-
tified that China already has a “limited capability against tactical 
and medium-range ballistic missiles” enabled by its Russian-built 
and indigenous SAM systems, advanced interceptors, and ISR capa-
bilities.140 For example, DOD assesses that China’s domestic HQ-9 
long-range SAM system “likely has a limited capability to provide 
point defense against tactical ballistic missiles.”  141 China has also 
tested its HQ-19 mid-course interceptor, which may be able to inter -
cept ballistic missiles within a 3,000-kilometer range, similar to the 
U.S. Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system. 142 Dr. Saunders 
notes the PLA “has some capability to engage both short-range and 
medium-range ballistic missiles,” though the speed of its intercep-
tors and its launch detection capabilities may limit its ability to 
intercept longer-range missiles.143
China’s Modernized Nuclear Forces Enable Changes in 
Strategy and Heighten Nuclear Risks
The observable transformation of China’s nuclear posture and the 
projections for its expansion over the next decade raise questions 
about changes in China’s nuclear strategy. Recent qualitative and 
quantitative improvements in the nuclear forces clearly allow Chi-
nese leaders to pursue a more ambitious nuclear strategy if they 
wish to do so. Regardless of the strategic intent behind these chang-
es, China’s buildup creates new capabilities that an increasingly 
risk-tolerant Chinese leadership could someday feel emboldened to 
employ either for threats or for limited use during a regional con-
flict.
Moreover, the risks of a nuclear exchange between China and the 
United States are higher today than in the past. The entanglement 
of China’s conventional and nuclear forces creates risks of acciden-
tal nuclear escalation during a conventional war triggered by Chi-

360
na’s aggression in the Indo-Pacific. If Chinese leaders have already 
changed their strategy without declaring they have done so, they 
could be much more likely to intentionally threaten or use nuclear 
weapons to achieve their regional objectives, such as deterring or 
degrading intervening U.S. forces in a conventional war over Taiwan 
they fear they could lose. Finally, if Chinese leaders choose to shift 
their land-based missile force to a launch-on-warning posture, the 
difficulties associated with learning to operate such a system could 
generate false alarms about nonexistent incoming nuclear attacks, 
potentially triggering a nuclear exchange between China and the 
United States.
Competing Interpretations of China’s Nuclear Buildup
The available evidence about China’s nuclear buildup is consistent 
with multiple interpretations of Chinese leaders’ intent. Chinese 
leaders could simply be upgrading their nuclear forces to ensure 
they can survive and retaliate against an adversary’s first strike 
without altering China’s current nuclear strategy. Alternatively, 
many of these advances could enable a shift to a launch-on-warning 
posture. A third possibility is that Chinese leaders could be trans-
forming their nuclear forces to support a strategy involving the lim-
ited use of nuclear weapons against conventional military targets 
in the Indo-Pacific, such as U.S. aircraft carriers and bases, while 
continuing only to target an adversary’s major cities in retaliation 
for a nuclear attack China sustains first. These explanations are 
not mutually exclusive; Chinese leaders could intend to keep their 
current retaliatory strategy for now but reserve the option to adopt 
a new nuclear strategy in the future should conditions warrant.
China’s Buildup Aims to Create a Survivable Retaliatory Force
One interpretation is that China may be building up its nucle-
ar forces in order to improve or restore its second-strike capability, 
which was arguably never truly secure but has been undermined 
in recent years by technological advances in other nuclear weapon 
states China considers a threat. 144 Chinese scholars and some U.S. 
analysts identify the United States’ development of ballistic missile 
defense and conventional long-range strike capabilities for “damage 
limitation” * as the main impetus for changes in China’s nuclear 
posture.145
The PLA’s emerging nuclear triad, growing warhead stockpile, 
and increasing reliance on mobile platforms make it more difficult 
for an adversary to disarm China in a nuclear first strike, increas-
ing what George Washington University assistant professor Fiona 
Cunningham and Massachusetts Institute of Technology political 
science professor M. Taylor Fravel call the “assuredness” of retal-
* “Damage limitation” refers to the ability to significantly reduce the damage an adversary can 
inflict against the U.S. homeland in an all-out nuclear retaliatory attack. During the Cold War, the 
United States interpreted damage limitation as denying the Soviet Union an “assured destruction 
capability” against the United States, which then Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara defined 
as a state’s ability to destroy 20 to 25 percent of another country’s population and 50 percent of 
its industrial base in retaliation after an attack on its nuclear forces. Damage limitation requires 
robust ISR to track incoming missiles, capable ballistic missile defense to intercept missiles in 
flight, and long-range weapons (conventional or nuclear) that can destroy a state’s nuclear forces 
on land and at sea, as well as its nuclear command and control infrastructure. Charles L. Glaser 
and Steve Fetter, “Should the United States Reject MAD? Damage Limitation and U.S. Nuclear 
Strategy toward China,” International Security 41:1 (Summer 2016): 54, 55, 62.

361
iation.146 MIRV technology on China’s ICBMs and the ability to 
launch enough missiles to impose unacceptable damage on an ad-
versary’s cities helps China complicate the U.S. approach to dam-
age limitation and advance a de facto—if not political *—state of 
mutual vulnerability.147 Growing numbers of missile silos improve 
the likelihood that more of China’s ICBMs survive an attack, since 
they are hardened and could be filled with a mix of decoys and real 
warheads.148 Viewed through this lens, a decision by China to adopt 
a launch-on-warning posture could also be consistent with the retal-
iatory aspect of its current nuclear strategy. 149
China’s Buildup Enables a Transition to Launch-on-Warning
Chinese leaders might also intend their nuclear buildup to sup-
port the adoption of a launch-on-warning posture. Such a posture, 
which is technologically sophisticated and greatly increases the 
speed with which China can retaliate against an incoming attack, 
arguably supersedes the requirements of minimum deterrence if 
adopted across the ICBM force. The very short time frame for de-
cision-making created by a launch-on-warning posture could lead 
Chinese leaders to launch a second strike with overwhelming force, 
before they are able to assess the scale of the damage sustained by 
a target as a result of the adversary’s first strike. Such a posture 
thus creates the possibility that China could impose disproportion-
ate damage on an adversary that struck it first in a more limited 
fashion, behavior that would be inconsistent with the proportion-
ality and relaxed response time emphasized by China’s historical 
nuclear strategy. More importantly, a transition to launch-on-warn-
ing heightens the risks of accidental or erroneous nuclear escalation 
(for more, see “China’s Shift to Launch-on-Warning Could Result in 
Accidental Nuclear Launch”).150
China’s Buildup Enables a More Ambitious Nuclear Strategy
China’s nuclear posture could also support a more ambitious nu-
clear strategy that envisions the limited first use of nuclear weap-
ons as a legitimate means of achieving China’s political objectives 
in the region. Such a strategy would be consistent with important, if 
officially marginalized, Chinese intellectual debates that took place 
in the past over how China could use nuclear weapons to prevail in 
wars and whether it should discard the no-first-use policy. Chinese 
leaders today could be more receptive to the PLA’s perennial push 
for additional strategic options as they consider how best to achieve 
their expanding political interests.
According to Dr. Saunders, PLA theorists have repeatedly raised 
the possibility of a shift toward a more ambitious nuclear doctrine 
that might include nuclear warfighting,† only to have CCP leaders 
* The United States does not publicly acknowledge a mutual vulnerability relationship with 
China. The nuclear forces of China and the United States can hold each other’s countries at risk, 
but not to the same extent given the greater size and sophistication of the U.S. arsenal as well 
as U.S. ballistic missile defense capabilities.
† Nuclear warfighting strategies, often described as “flexible” or “limited” nuclear option ap-
proaches, purportedly enable military commanders to limit the effects of a nuclear war by tar -
geting an enemy state’s nuclear forces and military infrastructure (counterforce targeting) rath-
er than its major population centers (countervalue targeting). Concepts of nuclear warfighting 
assume that nuclear weapons can be deployed with discrimination and flexibility to accomplish 
political objectives without resulting in escalation to all-out nuclear war. Nuclear warfighting 
strategies are distinct from strategies that envision the only function of nuclear weapons as 

362
end the discussion.151 In the 1980s, for example, Chinese strategists 
debated the possibility of a shift to “limited deterrence,”  * an ap-
proach that envisioned a mix of counterforce and countervalue tacti-
cal, theater, and strategic nuclear forces to deter escalation to war or 
compel an adversary to back down if war broke out. 152 Christopher 
P. Twomey, associate professor at the Naval Postgraduate School, 
notes that passages in the 2004 authoritative text Science of Second 
Artillery Campaigns discuss “distinct waves of [nuclear] retaliation,” 
suggesting the text’s authors saw nuclear weapons as a tool to be 
employed in a graduated way to control further escalation † during 
a war that had already gone nuclear. 153
More recently, writings by Chinese strategists and passages in au-
thoritative texts over the past 20 years reflect an officially quashed 
debate over whether China should abandon or otherwise qualify no 
first use.154 Some PLA officers have argued that China should use 
nuclear weapons first if an enemy’s conventional attack threatens 
the survival of China’s nuclear forces or of the CCP itself. 155 The 
aforementioned Science of Second Artillery Campaigns describes 
threatening nuclear use—though not actually employing nuclear 
weapons—in response to conventional attacks against high-value 
targets within China. 156 The 2020 Science of Military Strategy dis-
cusses launching nuclear weapons in “demonstration strikes,” pre-
sumably on China’s territory or the open ocean, to signal resolve 
during a crisis. 157
Nuclear Use against Regional, Conventional Military Targets to 
Deter or Degrade Adversary Forces
If Chinese leaders decide to adjust their nuclear strategy, they are 
most likely to adopt one involving the limited first use of low-yield, 
more precise nuclear weapons against select conventional military 
targets in the Indo-Pacific region. 158 Chinese leaders may believe 
such a strategy would deter U.S. intervention or confer significant 
military advantages if it enables them to destroy assets critical to 
U.S. military operations, such as U.S. aircraft carriers or the bases 
deterring an enemy from launching a nuclear attack. Nuclear warfighting strategies generally 
require many accurate, reliable, and survivable nuclear weapons; robust ISR; and efficient com-
mand and control processes, though the quantities may depend on the enemy state’s nuclear 
capabilities. Bulletin of Peace Proposals, “Nuclear Deterrence, Nuclear War-Fighting and Nuclear 
Disarmament,” Arms and Disarmament SIPRI Findings, 17:3/4 (1986): 391.
* According to Harvard University professor Alastair Iain Johnston, Chinese writings outlining 
limited deterrence identified as appropriate targets an enemy’s strategic missile, naval and air 
forces, nuclear weapons stockpiles, command and control, early warning systems, transportation 
hubs, military industrial targets, and political and economic centers, among others. Hitting these 
targets and successfully suppressing escalation to higher levels of nuclear violence would re-
quire additional numbers of accurate and survivable ICBMs, SLBMs, tactical and theater nuclear 
weapons, ballistic missile defense, space-based early warning, and anti-satellite weapons. Chinese 
strategists believed a limited deterrent should be able to respond proportionately to any level of 
nuclear use, from tactical to strategic, and enable China to “entertain war-winning possibilities.” 
China did not have the capabilities to implement limited deterrence when it emerged in the 
1980s, however, and its core concepts were not reflected in policy or authoritative military texts 
published afterward. Alastair Iain Johnston, “China’s New ‘Old Thinking’: The Concept of Limited 
Deterrence,” International Security 20:3 (Winter 1995–1996): 5–6, 17–20.
† Nuclear weapons can theoretically be used to control substantial military escalation during 
an ongoing war, a concept known as “intrawar deterrence” or “transwar deterrence.” Intrawar 
deterrence can be achieved by threatening to use nuclear weapons should the adversary escalate 
a conflict beyond a particularly important threshold. Christopher Twomey, written testimony for 
the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, 
June 10, 2021, 3–4; Keith B. Payne, “The Great Divide in U.S. Deterrence Thought,” Strategic 
Studies Quarterly (Summer 2020): 24; W. Andrew Terrill, Escalation and Intrawar Deterrence 
during Limited Wars in the Middle East, U.S. Army War College Press, 2009, xi.

363
on Guam and Okinawa.159 They could signal restraint at the strate-
gic level by keeping their ICBM force de-alerted and communicating 
directly that China would continue only to target an adversary’s 
major cities with large-yield warheads in retaliation for a nuclear 
first strike on the Chinese Mainland.
Several technological developments within China’s nuclear forc-
es make this shift in strategy possible. Caitlin Talmadge, associate 
professor of security studies at Georgetown University, testified be-
fore the Commission that the precision, range, and hot-swappable 
character of the DF-26 suggest the system is “designed to be used 
for something other than a countervalue second strike” and “well 
suited to limited nuclear use against U.S. military targets in the 
Pacific.” 160 Chinese commentators have described the future devel-
opment and deployment of lower-yield nuclear weapons as means to 
destroy U.S. aircraft carriers and bases and to manage escalation.161 
Improvements to China’s NC3 system and ISR would also better 
position China’s theater nuclear forces to identify and successfully 
target U.S. forces during a regional conflict. 162 All of these capabil-
ities support Admiral Richard’s observation in February 2021 that 
China can now adopt “any plausible nuclear employment strategy 
regionally” with its nuclear forces.163
Chinese leaders could believe this strategy of limited nuclear use 
is unlikely to provoke further nuclear escalation because of the im-
balance of nuclear forces at the theater level. The United States 
was unable to deploy nuclear or conventional intermediate-range 
missiles in the Indo-Pacific between 1987 and 2019 due to its par -
ticipation in the now-defunct INF Treaty. 164 During the same pe-
riod, China—which was not party to the treaty—rapidly expanded 
the intermediate-range missile arsenal that is now foundational to 
its conventional military strategy and developed several intermedi-
ate-range nuclear variants of these systems. 165 Brad Roberts, direc-
tor of the Center for Global Security Research at Lawrence Liver -
more National Laboratory, told the Commission that as a result, the 
balance of Chinese and U.S. ground-based nuclear forces deployed in 
the Indo-Pacific is “roughly a thousand missiles to zero.” 166 This im-
balance means the United States lacks proportionate ground-based 
options to respond to a limited use of nuclear weapons by China at 
the theater level.
PLA Capabilities to Engage in Limited Nuclear Counterforce against 
the U.S. Homeland
China’s military today may be capable of shifting to counter -
force strategies * involving the very limited use of nuclear weapons 
* One strategy might involve a limited “demonstration” of nuclear use, such as detonating a 
nuclear weapon to create an electromagnetic pulse on the open ocean water near a U.S. military 
installation. Chinese leaders could employ this strategy during a crisis to shock U.S. political 
leaders and demonstrate their resolve to escalate to higher levels of nuclear violence should the 
United States fail to “back down” over the issue at hand. The second strategy could involve using 
a low-yield nuclear weapon against one or more of the radars associated with U.S. missile defense, 
such as those located at military bases in Alaska. This strategy too would aim to intimidate U.S. 
leaders into accepting Chinese political objectives during a crisis, but it would have the added 
benefit of degrading U.S. NC3 and missile defense capabilities that would be relevant in the next 
stage of a war. Both strategies rely on highly questionable assumptions that the U.S. leadership 
would either not retaliate at all, for fear of inviting further nuclear attacks, or inflict a “tolerable,” 
proportionate level of damage with a limited nuclear strike against a similar target in China. 
There is no evidence in Chinese military texts indicating Chinese leaders intend to adopt either 
strategy. Phillip C. Saunders, Director of the Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs at 

364
against targets on the U.S. homeland with its highly precise DF-41 
ICBM and lower-yield warheads potentially under development, but 
these strategies would be unable to manage escalation to all-out 
nuclear war. China remains technologically incapable of launching 
a disarming first strike against the United States. China’s nucle-
ar forces are not large enough or sophisticated enough to destroy 
most or all of the United States’ nuclear forces. It is true China is 
developing highly accurate missiles, MIRVs, better ISR, the abili-
ty to launch rapidly, and ballistic missile defense, all of which are 
theoretically useful for destroying an adversary’s nuclear forces and 
limiting any damage China could sustain in response. But to tar -
get and degrade large portions of the U.S. nuclear arsenal, the PLA 
would need vast quantitative increases and qualitative improve-
ments in each of these capabilities. Even if it were to destroy many 
of the United States’ silo-based ICBMs or strategic air bases, the 
PLA would almost certainly be unable to destroy U.S. SSBNs before 
they inflicted massive and unacceptable retaliation on the Chinese 
Mainland.
New Risks of Nuclear Escalation in a Competitive U.S.-China 
Relationship
Technological changes within China’s nuclear forces and the grow-
ing chance of a conventional conflict in the Indo-Pacific theater in-
crease the risks of escalation to a limited nuclear exchange between 
China and the United States. This section discusses specific risks 
associated with the PLA’s entanglement of nuclear and conventional 
systems, the possibility China might use nuclear weapons to reverse 
the outcome of a conventional war it was losing, and the adoption of 
a launch-on-warning posture. It also assesses the risk that China’s 
more credible nuclear deterrent could give Chinese leaders the con-
fidence to pursue coercion or conventional aggression against U.S. 
allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific.
A U.S. Attack on “Entangled” PLA Assets Results in Nuclear 
Escalation
Growing entanglement between the PLA’s conventional and nucle-
ar forces, specifically in its intermediate-range missile systems and 
submarine forces, creates risks of accidental or unforeseen nuclear 
escalation. It is not clear whether the PLA has intentionally entan-
gled these capabilities to heighten the risks it poses to its adversary, 
thereby enhancing deterrence, or whether it has done so to enhance 
operational efficiency.167 Using the same designs for nuclear and 
conventional missile variants also saves costs associated with re-
search and production, creating economies of scale. 168
The PLA’s entanglement of its conventional and nuclear forces 
increases the possibility that the United States could unintention-
ally degrade components of China’s nuclear arsenal or its associated 
NC3 systems during a conventional war in ways that precipitate 
Chinese nuclear escalation. Dr. Talmadge describes this escalation 
pathway as “conventional counterforce” and notes it is most like-
the National Defense University, interview with Commission staff, July 19, 2021; Christopher P. 
Twomey, Associate Professor at the Naval Postgraduate School, interview with Commission staff, 
July 20, 2021.

365
ly to emerge amid the fog of war and worst-case thinking during 
an armed conflict over Taiwan. 169 “If Beijing interprets the erosion 
of its sea- and land-based nuclear forces as a deliberate effort to 
destroy its nuclear deterrent through conventional counterforce, or 
perhaps even as a prelude to a nuclear counterforce, it might see 
limited nuclear escalation as a way to force an end to the conflict,” 
she observes.170 Similarly, Dr. Saunders agrees “U.S. strikes which 
inadvertently destroy a handful of Chinese ICBMs or severely de-
grade [PLA Rocket Force] strategic command and control systems 
could significantly heighten Chinese threat perceptions and create 
‘use or lose’ pressures that encourage nuclear use.” 171
China Threatens or Uses Nuclear Weapons to Avoid Losing a War 
over Taiwan
Chinese leaders might also consider purposefully threatening the 
use of or actually using nuclear weapons as a means to reverse 
the outcome of a conventional war they were losing, such as a war 
over Taiwan. Consistent with methods of strategic deterrence de-
scribed in the Science of Military Strategy, China could attempt to 
deter the United States from intervening in a conflict over Taiwan 
by threatening the use of nuclear weapons through escalatory sig-
naling practices. These methods include adjusting the deployments 
of China’s nuclear weapons, raising readiness levels, publicly reveal-
ing its prepared nuclear weapons, or carrying out warning strikes 
involving nuclear weapons (presumably on the open ocean), any of 
which could cause unintended escalation if mistaken by an adver -
sary as preparations for a nuclear first strike. 172
Alternatively, Dr. Talmadge argues that China could engage in 
“asymmetric escalation” by actually using nuclear weapons against 
U.S. military targets during a war over Taiwan. 173 “Given the is-
land’s political importance, it is not inconceivable to think that Chi-
nese leaders losing a war over Taiwan could engage in asymmetric 
nuclear escalation to try to get the United States to back down or 
simply to halt the U.S. conventional campaign,” she said. 174 China’s 
use of nuclear weapons against conventional U.S. forces and bases 
during a Taiwan contingency would obviously constitute a violation 
of its no-first-use pledge, but in Dr. Talmadge’s view would be com-
parable to the scenarios in which countries facing the loss of ter -
ritory during a land war have historically threatened asymmetric 
nuclear escalation.* 175
Chinese leaders’ decision to escalate to nuclear use would rely on 
the potentially erroneous assumption that the United States would 
back down because it “cares less” about the outcome of a Taiwan 
* Dr. Talmadge points out that China engaged in highly escalatory behavior during a border 
crisis with the Soviet Union in 1969. “China started a skirmish that risked war and initially 
believed that nuclear weapons would be irrelevant, even though the Soviet arsenal was several 
orders of magnitude larger than China’s, just as the U.S. arsenal dwarfs China’s today,” she 
observed. After learning that the Soviets had discussed with other countries plans to attack 
China with nuclear weapons, Chinese leaders became deeply concerned that a nuclear attack 
was imminent despite having no evidence the Soviets intended to follow through on their threat. 
China tested a thermonuclear weapon at Lop Nur and placed the country’s nuclear forces on a 
months-long alert for the first and only time in China’s history, a risky move given that at the 
time the PLA relied on liquid-fueled missiles and rudimentary command and control procedures. 
Caitlin Talmadge, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 116; Caitlin Talmadge, “Would China Go Nu-
clear? Assessing the Risk of Chinese Nuclear Escalation in a Conventional War with the United 
States,” International Security 41:4 (Spring 2017): 88–90.

366
conflict than does China. “The point of nuclear saber rattling in a 
Taiwan conflict for them would be to awaken us to the asymmetry 
of stake,” Dr. Roberts told the Commission. 176 He argued that Chi-
nese leaders may not fully appreciate the importance the United 
States places on Taiwan as a testament to democracy in Asia and 
as a bellwether for its extended deterrence commitments. 177 “That’s 
a large stake and that’s not wished away by the nuclear shadow,” 
Dr. Roberts said.178
China’s Shift to Launch-on-Warning Could Result in Accidental 
Nuclear Launch
A decision by China to adopt a launch-on-warning posture for its 
nuclear forces increases the risk of accidental nuclear use. Disar -
mament advocates generally regard launch-on-warning as destabi-
lizing because it can produce false alarms about nonexistent attacks 
and trigger a nuclear exchange. 179 Admiral Richard called China’s 
potential shift to launch-on-warning “unsettling” before the Senate 
Committee on Armed Services in April 2021 given what he described 
as “the immature nature of Chinese strategic forces and compressed 
timelines needed to assess and frame a response,” which increase 
“the potential for error and miscalculation.” 180
Moreover, a shift to launch-on-warning could require the predel-
egation of launch authority to General Secretary Xi or to the CMC 
since there would be too little time to build consensus within the Po-
litburo Standing Committee over whether to launch in response to 
potentially false reports of an incoming missile. The abandonment 
of consensus decision-making over nuclear retaliation, a dynamic 
that has already occurred in other policy areas, would mean General 
Secretary Xi’s risk tolerance could play an outsized role in determin-
ing whether China uses nuclear weapons. While DOD assesses that 
China will keep at least a portion of its force on a launch-on-warn-
ing posture, Dr. Saunders told the Commission he does not believe 
a force-wide shift is likely given CCP leaders’ historical distrust of 
the military and their concern that such a posture could heighten 
the risks of escalation or accidental nuclear conflict. 181
Increased Potential for Coercion or Conventional Aggression
China’s growing nuclear arsenal could embolden it to pursue co-
ercion or conventional aggression against U.S. allies and partners if 
Chinese leaders believe their nuclear arsenal will deter the United 
States from intervening on these countries’ behalf. This logic, known 
in political science as the “stability-instability paradox,” holds that 
because nuclear adversaries cannot afford to fight for fear of mutual 
destruction, neither will initiate nuclear war (creating “stability”), 
but that because of this, conventional war remains a viable option 
(creating “instability”).182 Abraham Denmark, director of the Asia 
Program at the Wilson Center, argued in testimony before the Com-
mission that U.S. allies and partners are concerned China’s nuclear 
modernization could affect the willingness of the United States to 
provide extended deterrence in the long term because the poten-
tial costs of defending them from conventional aggression against 
a more capable nuclear-armed China will be higher than before. 183

367
Chinese conventional aggression is most plausible against Tai-
wan and Japan. Mr. Denmark described in testimony one scenario 
in which China could attempt to quickly seize Taiwan and pres-
ent the United States with a fait accompli, threatening nuclear use 
should U.S. forces attempt to roll back its gains. 184 Other analysts, 
especially those in Japan’s strategic community, have argued that 
China could extend its presence around or even seize the Senkaku 
Islands.185
China’s Proliferation Activities: An Added Nuclear Threat
China continues to facilitate the global proliferation of nuclear 
and missile technologies today, presenting the United States and its 
allies with another nuclear-related threat. Whereas decades ago the 
Chinese government and SOEs dominated the trade of prohibited 
nuclear and missile technologies,* today Chinese private individuals 
and companies are the most important vectors for proliferation to 
countries of concern, and the goods they export are dual-use rather 
than those with pure military applications. 186 “The Chinese govern-
ment has adopted an, at best, passive response to this trade, neither 
actively preventing nor punishing private entities for such exports 
or re-exports,” Valerie Lincy, executive director of the Wisconsin 
Project on Nuclear Arms Control, testified to the Commission. 187
U.S. government reports in recent years allege that “China-based 
entities” proliferate technologies and materials with nuclear and 
missile applications to other countries, and that the Chinese gov-
ernment turns a blind eye to their activities. For example, the 2021 
version of the State Department’s annual report, Adherence to and 
Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament 
Agreements and Commitments, stated, “Chinese entities continued 
to supply [Missile Technology Control Regime]-controlled † goods 
to missile programs of proliferation concern in 2020,” though it re-
ferred readers to a classified annex for details. 188 The report noted 
that the U.S. government had raised a number of cases with the 
Chinese government concerning transfers of missile-related goods 
and technology by Chinese entities to countries of concern through-
out 2020. “Although the United States has asked that China inves-
* In the 1980s and 1990s, Chinese SOEs made strategically significant transfers of technology 
and knowhow—including the complete design for a nuclear weapon and multiple missile sys-
tems—to Pakistan, Iran, and North Korea, among others. China made the transfers despite these 
countries variously refusing to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 
violating their treaty commitments, or withdrawing entirely from the treaty. The Chinese gov-
ernment began to observe some nuclear nonproliferation norms and multilateral export control 
regimes in the mid-1990s, which U.S. government sources at the time assessed led to improve-
ment in the export practices of SOEs and an end to confirmed transfers of nuclear-capable mis-
siles. China acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1992, joined 
the Zangger Committee in 1997, and joined the Nuclear Suppliers Group in 2004. Valerie Lincy, 
written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on 
China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 3–11; Congressional Research Service, Chinese Nuclear 
and Missile Proliferation, May 17, 2021, 1; White House, A Report Relating to the Approval and 
Implementation of the Agreement for Nuclear Cooperation between the United States and the 
People’s Republic of China, Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 2153(d), January 12, 1998.
† The Missile Technology Control Regime is a multilateral export control regime that restricts 
the proliferation of missiles, complete rocket systems, unmanned air vehicles, and related tech-
nology for systems capable of carrying a 500-kilogram payload at least 300 kilometers as well as 
systems intended for the delivery of WMD. China agreed to apply some of the Missile Technology 
Control Regime’s guidelines for curbing missile proliferation despite the rejection of its formal 
application for Mission Technology Control Regime membership in 2004 on the grounds that 
it failed to meet the group’s nonproliferation standards. Wade Boese, “Missile Regime Puts Off 
China,” Arms Control Association, November 2004.

368
tigate and put a stop to such activities, most of these cases remain 
unresolved,” the report asserted. 189 The report also assessed that 
China “has failed to adhere” to a pledge it reportedly made to the 
United States in November 2000 that it would not assist “in any 
way, any country in the development of ballistic missiles that can 
be used to deliver nuclear weapons.”  190
The U.S. government continues to sanction China-based enti-
ties for their facilitation of nuclear and missile proliferation. On at 
least two occasions in 2020, for example, the State Department an-
nounced sanctions in accordance with the Iran, North Korea, and 
Syria Nonproliferation Act on a number of Chinese individuals and 
firms for transferring sensitive technology and items to Iran’s mis-
sile programs.191 More broadly, the U.S. government has placed nu-
merous Chinese SOEs, firms, and individuals involved in China’s 
nuclear weapons program and proliferation activities on the U.S. 
Department of Commerce’s Entity List.192 Several Chinese individ-
uals have been prosecuted in recent years for conspiring to illicitly 
transfer U.S.-origin technologies with nuclear and missile applica-
tions to China. 193
Proliferation of Dual-Use Items to Iran
China-based individuals and private enterprises have played a 
dominant role  in publicly documented cases of proliferation to Iran 
over the last decade.* In some cases, Chinese nationals have en-
gaged in elaborate schemes to transfer dual-use items from China to 
Iran. The most notorious of these individual proliferators is Li Fan-
gwei (also known as Karl Lee), a China-based businessman whom 
the United States has sanctioned 12 times since 2010, including 
most recently in 2019, for transferring sensitive dual-use technol-
ogies such as gyroscopes, accelerometers, high-strength alloys, and 
graphite cylinders to Iran. 194 According to a 2019 statement by the 
National Security Council’s senior director for weapons of mass de-
struction (WMD), Mr. Li’s transfers “contributed to Iran’s develop-
ment of more advanced missiles with improved accuracy, range, and 
lethality.” 195 Mr. Li remains at large in China despite U.S. requests 
to extradite him and a $5 million reward the U.S. government has 
offered for information leading to his arrest or conviction. 196 An-
other prominent example of a Chinese individual enabling prolifer -
ation to Iran is Cheng Sihai, a Chinese businessman who provided 
Iran with titanium sheets and tubes, seamless steel tubes, pressure 
valves, bellows, flanges, and U.S.-origin pressure transducers for the 
country’s uranium enrichment program.197 Mr. Cheng was arrested 
* Affiliates or subsidiaries of Chinese SOEs have sometimes been implicated in recent prolifer -
ation activities that benefit Iran’s WMD activities. For example, China’s Wuhan Sanjiang Export 
and Import Co. Ltd. was sanctioned by the U.S. Department of the Treasury in 2017 for selling 
more than $1 million worth of technology, including radars and missile guidance equipment, to 
a subsidiary of Iran’s Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics. Wuhan Sanjiang Export 
and Import Co. Ltd. is a subsidiary of the large enterprise China Sanjiang Space Group, which 
is in turn a subsidiary of the SOE China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation. In the 
1980s and 1990s, the Chinese governemnt reportedly helped Iran explore for uranium, provided 
the design for the conversion plant at Isfahan, and made transfers that aided Iran’s development 
of a solid-fuel ballistic missile. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9; U.S. Depart-
ment of the Treasury, Treasury Designates the IRGC under Terrorism Authority and Targets IRGC 
and Military Supporters under Counter-Proliferation Authority, October 13, 2017; Foreign Trade 
Online, “Wuhan Sanjiang Import & Export Co., Ltd.”

369
by U.S. authorities in 2014 and sentenced in 2016 to nine years in 
prison.198
In other cases, Iranian individuals and companies have operated 
from inside China to arrange transfers of dual-use items. Ms. Lincy 
highlighted the case of Ghobad Ghasempour, an Iranian-born Cana-
dian national who set up front companies in China with the help of 
a Chinese partner to transship U.S.-origin items with applications 
to missile guidance systems—such as a precision lathe machine, 
thermal imaging cameras, and an inertial guidance system—to an 
Iranian state-controlled engineering company. 199 Mr. Ghasempour 
was arrested in the United States in 2017 and sentenced in 2018 to 
42 months in prison, but his accomplice remains at large, presum-
ably in China. 200
SOEs Share Civil Nuclear and Missile Technologies with 
Pakistan
Beijing was instrumental in helping Pakistan develop its nucle-
ar program in the early 1980s, and Chinese SOEs continue to ex-
port dual-use technologies to Pakistan that could further its nuclear 
and missile programs.* Chinese SOEs support a variety of projects 
linked to China’s provision of fuel and services for nuclear power 
plants it has built in Chashma and Karachi. 201 In 2012, China Na-
tional Nuclear Corporation subsidiary China Zhongyuan Engineer -
ing Corporation moved ahead with a plan to build two new civil 
nuclear reactors in Chashma in addition to the two it had built 
there prior to China joining the Nuclear Suppliers Group in 2004.† 
Chinese officials made this decision despite the fact that Nuclear 
Suppliers Group guidelines ‡ prohibit such assistance to Pakistan 
because it is neither a member of the Treaty on the Non-Prolifera-
tion of Nuclear Weapons nor does it have all of its nuclear facilities 
under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.§ 202 One of 
the SOEs constructing the Karachi plants, the China Nuclear En-
ergy Industry Corporation, reportedly supplied fuel assemblies and 
core components to the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, the 
main Pakistani counterpart for the project that has been on the 
U.S. Department of Commerce’s Entity List since 1998 due to pro-
liferation concerns.203 Trade data reviewed by the Wisconsin Project 
* In the 1980s and 1990s, China provided Pakistan with the complete design of a tested nuclear 
weapon; a supply of weapons-grade uranium to fuel that design; the solid-fuel short-range DF-11 
ballistic missile system, which likely formed the basis for Pakistan’s Shaheen missile system; and 
5,000 ring magnets necessary for centrifuges used in uranium enrichment. Shirley A. Kan, “Chi-
na and Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and Missiles: Policy Issues,” Congressional 
Research Service, February 26, 2003, 4–5.
† China built two nuclear reactors at Chashma as a result of agreements struck in 1991 and 
2003. When China joined the Nuclear Suppliers Group in 2004, it informed fellow member states 
that apart from these two reactors at Chashma, it would not supply any further reactors to 
Pakistan. In 2011, however, Beijing asserted that it would “grandfather” a new deal to build two 
reactors into the 2003 agreement, which was concluded before China’s entry into the Nuclear 
Suppliers Group. Jeff M. Smith, “China and Pakistan’s Nuclear Collusion,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 2, 2013; Sharad Joshi, “The China-Pakistan Nuclear Deal: A Realpolitique Fait Accompli,” 
Nuclear Threat Initiative, December 11, 2011.
‡ The Nuclear Suppliers Group is a group of nuclear supplier countries that implements two 
sets of guidelines for nuclear exports and nuclear-related exports in order to curb the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. China joined the Nuclear Suppliers Group in 2004. Nuclear Suppliers Group, 
“About the NSG;” Nuclear Suppliers Group, “Guidelines;” Nuclear Suppliers Group, “Participants.”
§ While Pakistan has International Atomic Energy Agency safeguard agreements in force for all 
its Chinese-built civil nuclear reactors, its nuclear weapons facilities in Islamabad do not have 
such safeguards. Congressional Research Service, Chinese Nuclear and Missile Proliferation, May 
17, 2021, 2.

370
shows that in 2014 and 2017, Wuhan Sanjiang Import and Export 
Co. Ltd., which is ultimately subordinate to the SOE China Aero-
space Science and Industry Corporation,* shipped items with appli-
cations to missile transporters and launchers to Pakistani entities 
associated with the country’s ballistic missile work. 204
Nuclear relations between China and Pakistan remain “extensive 
and problematic,” Ms. Lincy told the Commission. 205 China’s civ-
il nuclear cooperation with Pakistan allows the country to devote 
more of its unsafeguarded nuclear infrastructure to fissile material 
production for nuclear weapons and provides it access to advanced 
nuclear technologies that could ultimately benefit the unsafeguard-
ed program.206
Chinese Finance Benefits North Korea’s WMD Programs
Private actors in China indirectly support North Korea’s ac-
quisition of dual-use goods for its nuclear and missile programs 
by facilitating its access to the foreign currency required to fund 
these programs.† 207 Ms. Lincy argues this support entails hosting 
agents for North Korean financial networks that process illicit 
transactions to finance North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic mis-
sile programs as well as North Korean nationals who remit in-
come ultimately used for the same purposes. 208 Then Deputy As-
sistant Secretary of State and current Commissioner Alex Wong 
said in a November 2020 speech that “China hosts no less than 
two dozen North Korean WMD and ballistic missile procurement 
representatives and bank representatives” despite a UN Security 
Council resolution requiring the expulsion of North Korean dip-
lomats and representatives who assist in the evasion of sanctions 
related to the country’s nuclear and missile programs. 209 “The 
United States has provided China with ample actionable infor -
mation on the ongoing UN-prohibited activities occurring within 
its borders,” Deputy Assistant Secretary Wong noted, “but Beijing 
has chosen not to act.” 210 North Korean workers also continue to 
reside in China and earn income for North Korea’s nuclear weap-
ons program. For example, North Korean information technology 
workers linked to a UN-sanctioned entity that oversees North 
Korea’s nuclear and missile programs—the Munitions Industry 
Department—have established Chinese companies and sponsored 
visas for North Korean workers. 211
* Wuhan Sanjiang Export and Import Co. Ltd. has been sanctioned by the Treasury Department 
for its sales of technology with missile applications to Iran; it is not on the Entity List maintained 
by the U.S. Department of Commerce. The company is also not on the Non-SDN Chinese Mili-
tary-Industrial Complex Companies List (NS-CMIC List), presumably because it is not publicly 
traded. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Supplement No. 4 to Part 
744 - ENTITY LIST, July 19, 2021; U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Foreign Assets 
Control, “Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List,” June 16, 2021; Valerie 
Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing 
on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9–10.
† In the 1990s, Chinese SOEs provided technology and knowhow that furthered North Korea’s 
ballistic missile program. For example, in 1998 the Chinese SOE China Academy of Launch 
Vehicle Technology, a subsidiary of China Aerospace Corporation, allegedly helped North Korea’s 
space program develop satellites that were later used for the North Korean Taepodong-1 MRBM. 
Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 10.

371
Implications for the United States
The rapid buildup of China’s nuclear arsenal signals a clear de-
parture from the country’s historically minimalist nuclear posture. 
It suggests Chinese leaders are more expansively redefining the 
requirements of their assured retaliation strategy and potentially 
even contemplating a more ambitious strategy envisioning the first 
use of nuclear weapons to accomplish China’s regional objectives. 
As Dr. Roberts observes, the significance of China’s buildup for the 
United States “depends, in part, on China’s answer to the question, 
‘How much is enough?’ ” and that so far, “China has given us no 
answer.” 212
China’s nuclear buildup puts it on a path to become a qualitative 
nuclear peer of the United States in around a decade, with a simi-
larly diversified, precise, and survivable force.213 Such a force would 
give China a truly secure second-strike capability as well as options 
for highly calibrated nuclear use that could support both their cur -
rent assured retaliation strategy and a new strategy of limited nu-
clear first use in the region. China could even become a quantitative 
nuclear peer if projections for the growth of the land-based leg of 
the nuclear triad are correct. Regardless of what the future holds, 
however, several troubling implications are already apparent.
First, China’s growing nuclear capabilities create uncertainty and 
raise the risk of accidental or unforeseen nuclear escalation during 
a regional conflict. Because some of the PLA’s conventional and nu-
clear forces and supporting infrastructure are either comingled or 
indistinguishable, the United States might accidentally attack nu-
clear capabilities in the course of attacking nonnuclear capabilities 
during a conventional war in the Indo-Pacific. Such a situation could 
lead to “crisis instability” whereby China resorts to nuclear first use 
in order to preserve its nuclear deterrent, which it believes to be in 
serious danger. Reducing the risks stemming from entanglement in 
the PLA will be challenging because Chinese leaders may worry they 
will undermine deterrence or reduce operational efficiency if they 
agree to reduce entanglement. 214 Moreover, Chinese leaders may 
not believe that accidental nuclear escalation is a serious concern. 
The belief that inadvertent escalation is unlikely actually makes it 
more probable, however. As several nuclear experts affiliated with 
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace argue, this view 
“leaves political and military leaders less inclined, in peacetime, to 
take steps that could mitigate the risks and more inclined, in war -
time, to interpret ambiguous events in the worst possible light.”  215 
Similar risks of unintentional nuclear escalation could stem from a 
launch-on-warning posture, which is prone to false alarms.
Second, China’s growing nuclear capabilities raise the risks that a 
conventional conflict in the Indo-Pacific could escalate to a deliber -
ate nuclear exchange, though these risks are still small in absolute 
terms. The expansion, modernization, and diversification of China’s 
nuclear forces give the PLA greater flexibility, resiliency, and capac-
ity to use its nuclear weapons. According to Dr. Roberts, the result 
of these changes “will be a China that’s more confident in running 
risks, military and political, and more risk for the United States in 
defending its interests in a conflict over Taiwan or elsewhere in the 
region with China.” 216 In a high-stakes conventional war, Chinese 

372
leaders could conceivably decide to threaten or engage in limited 
nuclear use against U.S. conventional forces and bases for fear of 
losing the conflict or their grip on power.
Third, China’s growing nuclear capabilities could strain U.S. ex-
tended deterrence by emboldening conventional aggression or nu-
clear coercion against U.S. allies and partners. As China’s nuclear 
arsenal grows, Dr. Roberts observes, Chinese leaders could become 
confident in their “ability to suppress escalatory responses by the 
United States because of the long shadow of nuclear weapons.”  217 
With stability achieved at the strategic level, Chinese leaders may 
feel more confident in their ability to use conventional force to re-
solve territorial disputes over Taiwan, the East China Sea, or the 
South China Sea. They could also stop short of using force and in-
stead rely on their nuclear arsenal for coercion. Chinese leaders’ 
possible interest in threatening nuclear use to deter Japanese in-
volvement in a Taiwan contingency seemed evident in the decision 
by a municipal Chinese government authority to repost on social 
media a video threatening Japan with nuclear war in July 2021 
after Japanese leaders made statements indicating they could come 
to Taiwan’s defense.218
Fourth, improvements in China’s nuclear forces could complicate 
U.S. nuclear deterrence planning in the future even if they do not 
presently threaten the survivability of U.S. nuclear forces. Never be-
fore has the United States faced two peer nuclear-armed adversar -
ies at the same time. The pace of China’s nuclear modernization, the 
expansion of its nuclear warhead stockpile, and the extent to which 
it cooperates with Russia may require the United States to reex-
amine its deterrence strategies and force posture. Dr. Roberts told 
the Commission the major challenges for the United States in the 
decades ahead are “whether, as China’s nuclear force grows . . . we 
need a strategic force of our own that’s larger as well” and “wheth-
er [China and Russia] are an additive problem or whether China 
remains a lesser-included problem because it’s a smaller force.” 219
Fifth, China’s expanding nuclear arsenal raises the specter of an 
arms race. China’s longstanding refusal to engage in arms control 
inhibits deeper arms reductions by the United States, exacerbates 
the anxiety of U.S. allies, and prompts other countries to hedge in 
their nuclear strategies. 220 Chinese leaders may be uninterested in 
creating mechanisms for crisis communication and management 
because, as Mr. Denmark observes, “the way they make decisions, 
the way they share information, does not lend itself well to those 
sorts of communications.” 221 Without China’s participation in arms 
control, an unbridled arms race between the world’s major nuclear 
powers could develop and U.S. allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific 
could decide to pursue their own nuclear deterrents.
Finally, the Chinese government’s tolerance for Chinese compa-
nies and individuals’ proliferation of dual-use technologies under -
mines the global nonproliferation regime and poses a different type 
of nuclear threat to U.S. allies and partners. The nuclear and ballis-
tic missile technologies provided by various Chinese entities to Iran, 
North Korea, and Pakistan over the years will continue to threaten 
the security of U.S. allies and partners such as Israel, Saudi Arabia, 
South Korea, Japan, and India. Combined with the direct threat 

373
posed by the PLA’s growing nuclear arsenal, the indirect threat 
posed by such proliferation will increase the pressures on U.S. allies 
and partners to develop missile defenses and credible second-strike 
capabilities of their own.

374
ENDNOTES FOR SECTION 2
1. Joby Warrick, “China Is Building More than 100 New Missile Silos in Its West-
ern Desert, Analysts Say,” Washington Post, June 30, 2021.
2. Ned Price, “Department Press Briefing—July 1, 2021,” U.S. Department of State, 
July 1, 2021.
3. David Brunnstrom and Daphne Psaledakis, “U.S. Calls Build-Up of China’s 
Nuclear Arsenal ‘Concerning,’ ” Reuters, July 2, 2021; Ned Price, “Department Press 
Briefing—July 1, 2021,” U.S. Department of State, July 1, 2021.
4. Robert Burns, “Pentagon Says China Planning Big Increase in Nuclear Arsenal,” 
Associated Press, September 1, 2020.
5. “Cheney Highlights China’s Unprecedented Nuclear Threat & The Need to De-
fend the U.S.,” website of Congresswoman Liz Cheney, April 21, 2021.
6. M. Taylor Fravel and Evan S. Medeiros, “China’s Search for Assured Retalia-
tion,” International Security 35:2 (Fall 2010): 49–51.
7. M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy since 1949, Prince-
ton University Press, 2019, 237; John Wilson Lewis and Xue Litai, China Builds the 
Bomb, Stanford University Press, 1988, 11, 34–37.
8. M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy since 1949, Princeton 
University Press, 2019, 246–247; Xu Weidi, “China’s Security Environment and the 
Role of Nuclear Weapons,” in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese 
Nuclear Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2016, 24–25.
9. M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy since 1949, Princeton 
University Press, 2019, 244–245; Xu Weidi, “China’s Security Environment and the 
Role of Nuclear Weapons,” in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese 
Nuclear Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2016, 24–25.
10. John Wilson Lewis and Xue Litai, China Builds the Bomb, Stanford Univer -
sity Press, 1988, 11, 34–37; Xu Weidi, “China’s Security Environment and the Role 
of Nuclear Weapons,” in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nuclear 
Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2016, 22.
11. Xiao Tianliang, ed., The Science of Military Strategy (战略学), Military Science 
Press, 2020, 128, 386. Translation; M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military 
Strategy since 1949, Princeton University Press, 2019, 244–246; State Council Infor -
mation Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in the New 
Era (新时代的中国国防), July 2019. Translation; State Council Information Office of 
the People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy (中国的军事战略), May 2015. 
Translation; State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, The 
Diversified Employment of China’s Armed Forces (中国武装力量的多样化运用), April 
2013. Translation; State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of Chi-
na, China’s National Defense in 2010 (2010年中国的国防), March 2011. Translation; 
State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National 
Defense in 2008 (2008年中国的国防), January 2009. Translation; State Council Infor -
mation Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 2006 
(2006年中国的国防), December 2006. Translation; Yu Xijun, ed., The Science of Second 
Artillery Campaigns (第二炮兵战役学), People’s Liberation Army Publishing House, 
2004, 297–316. Translation.
12. Xiao Tianliang, ed., The Science of Military Strategy (战略学), Military Science 
Press, 2020, 128, 386. Translation.
13. M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy since 1949, Princ-
eton University Press, 2019, 238–239; Sun Xiangli, “The Development of Nuclear 
Weapons in China,” in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nuclear 
Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2016, 82–83.
14. Sun Xiangli, “The Development of Nuclear Weapons in China,” in Li Bin and 
Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nuclear Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 2016, 83.
15. State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Na-
tional Defense in 2006 (2006年中国的国防), December 2006. Translation; State Coun-
cil Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 
2002 (2002年中国的国防), February 2002. Translation.
16. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Wang Yi Delivers 
a Video Speech at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, June 11, 2021.
17. Wilson Center History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, “Statement 
of the Government of the People’s Republic of China,” October 16, 1964.
18. United Nations, “Letter Dated 7 June 1978 from the Permanent Representative 
of China to the United Nations Addressed to the Secretary-General,” June 7, 1978; 
United Nations, “Letter Dated 6 April 1995 from the Permanent Representative of 
China to the United Nations Addressed to the Secretary-General,” April 6, 1995.

375
19. David Logan, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 1–2; John 
Dotson, “Beijing Rejects Any Involvement in Nuclear Arms Limitation Talks,” China 
Brief 20:19 (October 2020); Reuters, “China Says It Won’t Take Part in Trilateral 
Nuclear Arms Talks,” May 6, 2019; Pan Zhenqiang, “China’s No First Use of Nuclear 
Weapons,” in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nuclear Thinking, 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2016, 64–65.
20. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Wang Yi Delivers 
a Video Speech at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, June 11, 2021; Embassy 
of the People’s Republic of China in the United States of America, “Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Zhao Lijian’s Regular Press Conference on April 14, 2021,” April 14, 
2021; State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
National Defense in the New Era (新时代的中国国防), July 2019. Translation; Shou 
Xiaosong, ed., The Science of Military Strategy (战略学), Military Science Press, 2013, 
172. Translation.
21. Barton Gellman, “U.S. and China Nearly Came to Blows in ’96,” Washington 
Post, June 21, 1998.
22. Joseph Kahn, “Chinese General Threatens Use of A-Bombs if U.S. Intrudes,” 
New York Times, July 15, 2005.
23. Henrik Stålhane Hiim and Magnus Langset Trøan, “Hardening Chinese Real-
politik in the 21st Century: The Evolution of Beijing’s Thinking about Arms Control,” 
Journal of Contemporary China (2021), 6–7, 14.
24. Nancy Gallagher, “China on Arms Control,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. 
Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and Systems, Georgetown 
University Press, 2021, 201; Wu Riqiang, “How China Practices and Thinks about 
Nuclear Transparency,” in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nu-
clear Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2016, 232; Pan Zhen-
qiang, “China’s No First Use of Nuclear Weapons,” in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., 
Understanding Chinese Nuclear Thinking, Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, 2016, 67; James Mulvenon and David Finkelstein, eds., China’s Revolution 
in Doctrinal Affairs: Emerging Trends in the Operational Art of the Chinese People’s 
Liberation Army, Center for Naval Analysis, 2005, 131; Kevin Pollpeter, U.S.-China 
Security Management: Assessing the Military-to-Military Relationship, RAND Corpo-
ration, 2004, xiv.
25. Henrik Stålhane Hiim and Magnus Langset Trøan, “China’s Atomic Pessimism 
and the Future of Arms Control,” War on the Rocks, June 21, 2021; Brad Roberts, 
“U.S. Perspective,” in Patricia M. Kim, ed., Enhancing U.S.-China Strategic Stability 
in an Era of Strategy Competition: U.S. and Chinese Perspectives, United States In-
stitute for Peace 172 (April 2021), 11–12; Emma Farge, “U.S. Says China Is Resisting 
Nuclear Arms Talks,” Reuters, May 18, 2021.
26. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Briefing by Mr. Fu Cong, Director General 
of the Department of Arms Control and Disarmament of Ministry of Foreign Affairs,” 
August 6, 2019.
27. Xinhua, “China Reiterates Opposition to Multilateralization of INF Treaty,” 
July 30, 2019.
28. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wen-
bin’s Regular Press Conference on February 5, 2021, February 6, 2021.
29. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wen-
bin’s Regular Press Conference on February 5, 2021, February 6, 2021.
30. Hu Gaochen, “An Analysis of China-U.S. Asymmetric Nuclear Stability and the 
U.S. Strategic Opportunism” (中美不对称核稳定与美国战略机会主义论析), Journal of 
International Security 2 (2021). Translation; Zhang Jingquan, “On the Weakening of 
Nuclear Deterrence Effect in Northeast Asia and Its Countermeasures” (东北亚 “核威
慑效应弱化” 及其应对思考), Asia-Pacific Security and Maritime Affairs 3 (2020). Trans-
lation; Xu Weidi, “China’s Security Environment and the Role of Nuclear Weapons,” 
in Li Bin and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nuclear Thinking, Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, 2016, 35.
31. Christopher Twomey, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5; Eric 
Heginbotham et al., “China’s Evolving Nuclear Deterrent: Major Drivers and Issues 
for the United States,” RAND Corporation, 2017, 78–90.
32. Christopher Twomey, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5; Eric 
Heginbotham et al., “China’s Evolving Nuclear Deterrent: Major Drivers and Issues 
for the United States,” RAND Corporation, 2017, 73–74, 78.
33. Christopher Twomey, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5; 

376
Rajesh Basrur, “The India-China Nuclear Dynamic: India’s Options,” ORF Issue Brief 
430 (December 2020); Toby Dalton and Tong Zhao, “At a Crossroads? China-India 
Nuclear Relations after the Border Clash,” Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, August 19, 2020.
34. People’s Liberation Army Daily, “Solidly Develop Strategic Capabilities: Consci-
entiously Study and Implement Chairman Xi’s Important Speech during His Inspec-
tion of the Rocket Force” (扎扎实实把战略能力搞上去—认真学习贯彻习主席视察火箭军
机关时重要讲话), September 27, 2016. Translation.
35. Zhang Changwei, He Tianjin, and Ge Song, “The Rocket Force Convenes the 
Fourth Changying Forum in Beijing: Deeply Studying the Issue of Building the Rock-
et Force’s Strategic Deterrence and Actual Fighting Capabilities, Providing Scientific 
Theory Support for the Building, Development and Implementation of the Strategic 
Force” (火箭军第四届长缨论坛在京举行: 深化对火箭军战略威慑和实践能力建设问题研究, 
为战略力量建设发展与运用提供科学理论支撑), Rocket Forces Newspaper, September 26, 
2017. Translation; Wan Huilan and Lue Xuejuan, “Firmly Bear in Mind the Sacred 
Missions, Forge the Nation’s Potent Force” (牢记神圣使命铸就国之重器), Rocket Forces 
Newspaper, September 23, 2017. Translation.
36. Brad Roberts, Director of the Center for Global Security Research at Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory, interview with Commission staff, August 27, 2021; 
Brad Roberts, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4–5.
37. Roderick Lee, “PLA Likely Begins Construction of an Intercontinental Ballistic 
Missile Silo Site Near Hanggin Banner,” Air University, August 12, 2021.
38. David Logan, “Making Sense of China’s Missiles Forces,” in Phillip C. Saunders, 
Arthur S. Ding, and Andrew Scobell, eds., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA: Assessing 
Chinese Military Reforms, National Defense University Press, 2019, 395; Christopher 
Cowan, “Getting from Megatons to Kilotons,” ASPI Strategist, October 8, 2018.
39. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 87.
40. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 102.
41. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 45, 86; Renny Ba-
biarz, “China’s Nuclear Submarine Force,” China Brief 17:10, July 21, 2017.
42. Kyle Mizokami, “Underwater Dud: China’s First Nuclear Submarine Failed 
Miserably,” National Interest, July 15, 2021; Renny Babiarz, “China’s Nuclear Sub-
marine Force,” China Brief 17:10, July 21, 2017.
43. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 86; Renny Babiarz, 
“China’s Nuclear Submarine Force,” China Brief 17:10, July 21, 2017.
44. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 451; U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Secu-
rity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to 
Congress, 2020, 86; Renny Babiarz, “China’s Nuclear Submarine Force,” China Brief 
17:10, July 21, 2017.
45. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 45; U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic 
of China 2019: Annual Report to Congress, 2019, 65–67; U.S. Department of Defense, 
Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018: 
Annual Report to Congress, 2018, 76–77; U.S. Department of Defense, Military and 
Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017: Annual Report 
to Congress, 2017, 60–61; U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Devel-
opments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016: Annual Report to Congress, 
2016, 26; Cecil Haney, “Transcript: Admiral Cecil Haney, Commander STRATCOM, 
Defense Writers Group,” Defense Writers Group, October 22, 2015, 16–17.
46. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4.
47. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 3; Sebastien 
Roblin, “China’s Underwater ‘Nukes’: Country-Killers or Paper Tigers?” National In-
terest, July 28, 2018.
48. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 452.
49. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 86.

377
50. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4; Hans M. 
Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear Notebook, De -
cember 10, 2020, 452.
51. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 452–453.
52. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 453.
53. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6.
54. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 97–100.
55. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 98–101; Bates Gill, “Organization of 
China’s Strategic Forces,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic 
Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 170.
56. Hans M. Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 2–3; U.S. 
Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 56.
57. Decker Everleth, “China’s Mobile ICBM Brigades: The DF-31 and DF-41,” A 
Boy and His Blog, July 2, 2020; U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security 
Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Con-
gress, 2020, 56, 58, 86; Missile Defense Project, “DF-4 (Dong Feng-4 / CSS-3),” Center 
for Strategic and International Studies, November 26, 2019; Missile Defense Project, 
“DF-5 (Dong Feng-5 / CSS-4),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, Novem-
ber 18, 2019; Missile Defense Project, “DF-31 (Dong Feng-31 / CSS-10),” Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, October 8, 2019.
58. Admiral Charles A. Richard, testimony before the Senate Armed Services Com-
mittee, April 20, 2021; Missile Defense Project, “DF-41 (Dong Feng-41 / CSS-X-20),” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies, October 8, 2019.
59. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 56.
60. Hans M. Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 2; U.S. 
Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 56; Henry Boyd, “2019 
Pentagon Report: China’s Rocket Force Trajectory,” International Institute for Strate-
gic Studies, May 15, 2019.
61. Hans M. Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 2.
62. Hans M. Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 2–3.
63. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 56.
64. Roderick Lee, “PLA Likely Begins Construction of an Intercontinental Ballistic 
Missile Silo Site Near Hanggin Banner,” Air University, August 12, 2021; Matt Korda 
and Hans Kristensen, “China Is Building a Second Nuclear Missile Silo Field,” Fed -
eration of American Scientists, July 26, 2021; Joby Warrick, “China Is Building More 
than 100 New Missile Silos in Its Western Desert, Analysts Say,” Washington Post, 
June 30, 2021; Hans Kristensen, “China’s Expanding Missile Training Area: More 
Silos, Tunnels, and Support Facilities,” Federation of American Scientists, February 
24, 2021.
65. Matt Korda and Hans Kristensen, “China Is Building a Second Nuclear Missile 
Silo Field,” Federation of American Scientists, July 26, 2021; Hans M. Kristensen and 
Matt Korda, “United States Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear Notebook, January 13, 
2020; U.S. Department of Defense, “America’s Nuclear Triad.” https:/ /www.defense.
gov/Multimedia/Experience/Americas-Nuclear-Triad/ .
66. Roderick Lee, “PLA Likely Begins Construction of an Intercontinental Ballistic 
Missile Silo Site Near Hanggin Banner,” Air University, August 12, 2021.
67. Hans Kristensen, Director of the Nuclear Information Project at the Federation 
of American Scientists, interview with Commission staff, August 27, 2021.
68. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2012 Annual Report to 
Congress, November 2012, 180.

378
69. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving 
the People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 91; Mark 
A. Stokes, “China’s Nuclear Warhead Storage and Handling System,” Project 2049, 
March 12, 2010, 8.
70. Matthew E. Dillow, “Nuclear Hell on Wheels: Examining the Need for a Mobile 
ICBM,” U.S. Airforce Center for Unconventional Weapons Studies, June 2015, 1–2.
71. Joby Warrick, “China Is Building More than 100 New Missile Silos in Its West-
ern Desert, Analysts Say,” Washington Post, June 30, 2021.
72. Lin Yang, “U.S. Concerned about Report China Is Expanding Missile Silos,” 
Voice of America, July 2, 2021.
73. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 90.
74. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 86; Missile De-
fense Project, “DF-21 (Dong Feng-21 / CSS-5),” Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, January 2, 2020; Missile Defense Project, “DF-26 (Dong Feng-26),” Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, June 23, 2020.
75. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 447.
76. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 56; Joshua Pollack 
and Scott LaFoy, “China’s DF-26: A Hot-Swappable Missile?” Arms Control Wonk, 
May 17, 2020.
77. Gerald C. Brown, “Understanding the Risks and Realities of China’s Nuclear 
Forces,” Arms Control Association, June 21, 2021; Joshua Pollack and Scott LaFoy, 
“China’s DF-26: A Hot-Swappable Missile?” Arms Control Wonk, May 17, 2020.
78. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5–6; 
Joshua Pollack and Scott LaFoy, “China’s DF-26: A Hot-Swappable Missile?” Arms 
Control Wonk, May 17, 2020.
79. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 88.
80. Roderick Lee, “China’s Air Force Might Be Back in the Nuclear Business,” Dip-
lomat, September 9, 2020; U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Devel-
opments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 
2020, 50–51; U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments In-
volving the People’s Republic of China 2018: Annual Report to Congress, 2018, 75–77.
81. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 453; U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Secu-
rity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to 
Congress, 2020, 87.
82. Roderick Lee, “China’s Air Force Might Be Back in the Nuclear Business,” Dip-
lomat, September 9, 2020.
83. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 453.
84. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 87; Hans Kris-
tensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis-
sion, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9.
85. Roderick Lee, “China’s Air Force Might Be Back in the Nuclear Business,” Dip-
lomat, September 9, 2020.
86. Roderick Lee, “China’s Air Force Might Be Back in the Nuclear Business,” Dip-
lomat, September 9, 2020.
87. David Logan, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9.
88. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Status of World Nuclear Forces,” Feder -
ation of American Scientists, May 2021.
89. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 85.
90. U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report on the Military Power of the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China, 2004, 37; U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report on the 
Military Power of the People’s Republic of China, 2003, 31.
91. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 443.
92. Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Nuclear 
Notebook, December 10, 2020, 443.

379
93. Dataset provided via email by Hans M. Kristensen, Director of the Nuclear 
Information Project at the Federation of American Scientists, July 22, 2021.
94. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 85.
95. Hans M. Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6.
96. Charles A. Richard, “Forging 21st-Century Strategic Deterrence,” U.S. Naval 
Institute Proceedings, February 2021, 12–14, 3.
97. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 10; Hans M. 
Kristensen and Matt Korda, “United States Nuclear Weapons, 2021,” Nuclear Note-
book, January 12, 2021.
98. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6–7.
99. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6.
100. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6.
101. Hans Kristensen, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6–7.
102. Hui Zhang, “China’s Fissile Material Production and Stockpile,” International 
Panel of Fissile Materials, 2017, 2–3, 19, 38.
103. Mark Hibbs, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9.
104. Mark Hibbs, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 10.
105. Al Jazeera, “Concerns Grow over China Nuclear Reactors Shrouded in Mys-
tery,” May 19, 2021.
106. AllSource Analysis, “China: New Nuclear Test Area Activity, Lop Nur, 2019–
2021,” June 18, 2021, 5.
107. AllSource Analysis, “Expansion at China’s Pingtong Nuclear Facility, 2002–
2020,” November 12, 2020.
108. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 88.
109. Christopher Cowan, “Getting from Megatons to Kilotons,” ASPI Strategist, 
October 8, 2018.
110. Phillip C. Saunders and David C. Logan, “China’s Regional Nuclear Capabil-
ity,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. Bolt, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, 
Doctrine, and Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 126; Chen Feng, “If the 
United States Resumes Nuclear Testing, What Will China Do?” (如果美国恢复核试验, 
中国怎么办?), Guancha, June 15, 2020. Translation.
111. Phillip C. Saunders and David C. Logan, “China’s Regional Nuclear Capabil-
ity,” in James M. Smith and Paul J. Bolt, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, 
Doctrine, and Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 127; Hans M. Kristensen, 
Robert S. Norris, and Matthew G. McKinzie, Chinese Nuclear Forces and U.S. Nuclear 
War Planning, Federation of American Scientists and the Natural Resources Defense 
Council, November 2006, 98–99; U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, PRC Defense Policy 
and Armed Forces, National Intelligence Estimate 13–76, November 11, 1976, 16, 51. 
https:/ /www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/DOC_0001097855.pdf.
112. Hans M. Kristensen, Robert S. Norris, and Matthew G. McKinzie, Chinese 
Nuclear Forces and U.S. Nuclear War Planning, Federation of American Scientists 
and the Natural Resources Defense Council, November 2006, 99.
113. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 88; Chen Feng, “If 
the United States Resumes Nuclear Testing, What Will China Do?” (如果美国恢复核试
验, 中国怎么办?), Guancha, June 15, 2020. Translation; Global Times, “China Should 
Seriously Study the Option of Openly Developing Low-Yield Nuclear Weapons” (中国
应认真研究公开发展低当量核武器的选项), February 5, 2018. Translation.
114. People’s Daily, “China’s Dongfeng-41 Technology Surpasses the United States 
and Russia: Longer Range and Higher Accuracy” (中国东风41部分技术超过美俄: 射程
更远 精度更高), November 24, 2017. Translation.
115. Julian Borger, “China May Have Conducted Low-Level Nuclear Test, U.S. 
Claims,” Guardian, April 16, 2020; Jonathan Landy, “U.S. Says China May Have Con-
ducted Low-Level Nuclear Test Blasts,” Reuters, April 15, 2020.
116. Congressional Research Service, “Nuclear Command, Control, and Communi-
cations (NC3) Modernization,” December 8, 2020.

380
117. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 2.
118. State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s 
Military Strategy (中国的军事战略), May 2015. Translation.
119. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 1–2; 
Fiona Cunningham, “Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications Systems of 
the People’s Republic of China,” Nautilus Institute, July 18, 2019.
120. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 1–2; 
Fiona Cunningham, “Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications Systems of 
the People’s Republic of China,” Nautilus Institute, July 18, 2019.
121. Fiona Cunningham, “Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications Sys-
tems of the People’s Republic of China,” Nautilus Institute, July 18, 2019.
122. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 2, 
4; Fiona Cunningham, “Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications Systems 
of the People’s Republic of China,” Nautilus Institute, July 18, 2019; Federation of 
American Scientists, “Command and Control,” June 23, 2000. https://fas.org/nuke/
guide/china/c3i/.
123. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 88.
124. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 88.
125. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4.
126. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4.
127. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 3.
128. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4.
129. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 3; Ste-
phen Chen, “China’s New Antenna Is Five Times the Size of New York City, but Some 
Fear It Could Be a Cancer Risk,” South China Morning Post, December 31, 2018.
130. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4.
131. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4.
132. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 115–116; Sohu, “This Kind of Early 
Warning Radar Must Be Large, with a Detection Distance of More than 5,000 Kilo-
meters” (我国这种预警雷达一定要大, 探测距离超过5000公里, 美日韩躺枪), October 12, 
2017. Translation.
133. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 116.
134. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 116; Liu Zhen, “China’s New High-Fre-
quency Radar System Could Spot Stealth Aircraft from a Long Distance, Creator 
Says,” South China Morning Post, June 11, 2019.
135. Zhang Qian, “Space-Based Infrared Early Warning Satellites: The Never 
Tired Space ‘Sentinel’ ” (天基红外预警卫星 永不疲惫的太空 “哨兵”), Science and Tech-
nology Daily, February 7, 2018. Translation. http:/ /webcache.googleusercontent.com/
search?q=cache:nrScasxTo6oJ:www.xinhuanet.com/mil/2018-02/07/c_129808061.
htm+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us.
136. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and Sys-
tems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 117; Stephen Clark, “China’s First Launch 
of 2020 Lofts Mystery Payload,” Spaceflight Now, January 7, 2020.
137. Minnie Chan, “Vladimir Putin Says Russia Is Helping China Build a Missile 
Early Warning System,” South China Morning Post, October 4, 2019; U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic 
of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 89.

381
138. Hans M. Kristensen, “China’s Strategic Systems and Programs,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolts, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 117; Business Standard, “China’s Eye 
in the Sky: An Analysis of China’s Satellite Surveillance,” October 30, 2019.
139. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 8.
140. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 8.
141. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 73.
142. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9; U.S. 
Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 73.
143. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9.
144. David Santoro, “China: The Forgotten Nuclear Power No More,” Pacific Forum, 
July 14, 2021; Christopher Twomey, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 
4–5; Gerald C. Brown, “Understanding the Risks and Realities of China’s Nuclear 
Forces,” Arms Control Association, June 2021; Fiona S. Cunningham and M. Taylor 
Fravel, “Assuring Assured Retaliation: China’s Nuclear Posture and U.S.-China Stra-
tegic Stability,” International Security 40:2 (Fall 2015).
145. Christopher Twomey, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4–5; 
David Logan, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 8; Caitlin Talmadge, 
written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 12–13; Hu Gaochen, “An Analysis 
of China-U.S. Asymmetric Nuclear Stability and the U.S. Strategic Opportunism” (中
美不对称核稳定与美国战略机会主义论析), Journal of International Security 2 (2021). 
Translation; Zhang Jingquan, “On the Weakening of Nuclear Deterrence Effect in 
Northeast Asia and Its Countermeasures” (东北亚 “核威慑效应弱化” 及其应对思考), 
Asia-Pacific Security and Maritime Affairs 3 (2020). Translation; Fiona S. Cunning-
ham and M. Taylor Fravel, “Assuring Assured Retaliation: China’s Nuclear Posture 
and U.S.-China Strategic Stability,” International Security 40:2 (Fall 2015): 16, 19; Xu 
Weidi, “China’s Security Environment and the Role of Nuclear Weapons,” in Li Bin 
and Tong Zhao, eds., Understanding Chinese Nuclear Thinking, Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, 2016, 34–35.
146. David Santoro, “China: The Forgotten Nuclear Power No More,” Pacific Forum, 
July 14, 2021; Fiona S. Cunningham and M. Taylor Fravel, “Assuring Assured Re-
taliation: China’s Nuclear Posture and U.S.-China Strategic Stability,” International 
Security 40:2 (Fall 2015): 10.
147. David Santoro, “China: The Forgotten Nuclear Power No More,” Pacific Forum, 
July 14, 2021; Caitlin Talmadge, “China and Nuclear Weapons,” Brookings, Septem-
ber 2019, 2.
148. Brad Lendon, “China Is Building a Sprawling Network of Missile Silos, Sat-
ellite Imagery Appears to Show,” CNN, July 2, 2021; Hans Kristensen, “China’s Ex-
panding Missile Training Area: More Silos, Tunnels, and Support Facilities,” Federa-
tion of American Scientists, February 24, 2021.
149. Tong Zhao, “Strategic Warning and China’s Nuclear Posture,” Diplomat, May 
28, 2015.
150. Tong Zhao, “Modernizing without Destabilizing: China’s Nuclear Posture in a 
New Era,” Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy, August 25, 2020.
151. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9.
152. Alastair Iain Johnston, “China’s New ‘Old Thinking’: The Concept of Limited 
Deterrence,” International Security 20:3 (Winter 1995–1996): 5–6, 17–20.
153. Christopher P. Twomey, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 
4; Christopher Twomey, “Nuclear Doctrine and Deterrence Concept,” in James M. 
Smith and Paul J. Bolt, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and Sys-
tems, 2021, 55.
154. David C. Logan, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021; Christopher 
Twomey, “Nuclear Doctrine and Deterrence Concept,” in James M. Smith and Paul 
J. Bolt, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and Systems, 2021, 52; 

382
U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 86; State Council 
Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s National Defense in 
the New Era, July 2019; Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Cyber and Nuclear 
Capabilities, March 26, 2012, 4–5; Larry M. Wortzel, “China’s Nuclear Forces: Oper -
ations, Training, Doctrine, Command, Control, and Campaign Planning,” U.S. Army 
War College Strategic Studies Institute, 2007, 26–27.
155. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the 
People’s Republic of China 2020: Annual Report to Congress, 2020, 86.
156. Yu Xijun, ed., The Science of Second Artillery Campaigns (第二炮兵战役学), 
People’s Liberation Army Publishing House, 2004, 294–296. Translation.
157. Xiao Tianliang, ed., The Science of Military Strategy (战略学), Military Science 
Press, 2020, 138. Translation.
158. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 9–10; 
Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 3; Christopher 
Twomey, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Com-
mission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4; James Samuel Johnson, 
“Chinese Evolving Approaches to Nuclear ‘War-Fighting’: An Emerging Intense US–
China Security Dilemma and Threats to Crisis Stability in the Asia Pacific,” Asian 
Security (2018): 3–4; Eric Heginbotham et al., “China’s Evolving Nuclear Deterrent: 
Major Drivers and Issues for the United States,” RAND Corporation, 2017, 135–137.
159. Christopher P. Twomey, Associate Professor at the Naval Postgraduate School, 
interview with Commission staff, July 20, 2021.
160. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Securi-
ty Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 3.
161. Chen Feng, “If the United States Resumes Nuclear Testing, What Will China 
Do?” (如果美国恢复核试验, 中国怎么办?), Guancha, June 15, 2020. Translation; Global 
Times, “China Should Seriously Study the Option of Openly Developing Low-Yield 
Nuclear Weapons” (中国应认真研究公开发展低当量核武器的选项), February 5, 2018. 
Translation.
162. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Securi-
ty Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 3–4.
163. Charles A. Richard, testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee, 
April 20, 2021, 6.
164. Jacob Stokes, “China’s Missile Program and U.S. Withdrawal from the In-
termediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty,” U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, February 4, 2019, 2.
165. Jacob Stokes, “China’s Missile Program and U.S. Withdrawal from the In-
termediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty,” U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, February 4, 2019, 3–4.
166. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 215.
167. Phillip C. Saunders, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 62–63; David 
Logan, “Are They Reading Schelling in Beijing? The Dimensions, Drivers, and Risks 
of Nuclear-Conventional Entanglement in China,” forthcoming in Journal of Strategic 
Studies (2020): 33.
168. Gerald C. Brown, “Understanding the Risks and Realities of China’s Nuclear 
Forces,” Arms Control Association, June 21, 2021; Phillip C. Saunders, oral testimony 
for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s 
Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 62; David Logan, “Are They Reading Schelling in Bei-
jing? The Dimensions, Drivers, and Risks of Nuclear-Conventional Entanglement in 
China,” forthcoming in Journal of Strategic Studies (2020): 33.
169. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5–6; 
Caitlin Talmadge, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 104–105; Caitlin Tal-
madge, “Would China Go Nuclear? Assessing the Risk of Chinese Nuclear Escalation 
in a Conventional War with the United States,” International Security, No. 41, April 
1, 2017, 70–73.
170. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Securi-
ty Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 8.
171. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 7.

383
172. Xiao Tianliang, ed., The Science of Military Strategy (战略学), Military Science 
Press, 2020, 136–138. Translation.
173. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Securi-
ty Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4–5.
174. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Securi-
ty Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5.
175. Caitlin Talmadge, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Securi-
ty Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5.
176. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 211.
177. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 211.
178. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 211.
179. Daryl G. Kimball, “Nuclear False Warnings and the Risk of Catastrophe,” 
Arms Control Association, December 2019; Alan Phillips, “No Launch-on-Warning,” 
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, May 1, 2002.
180. Admiral Charles A. Richard, testimony before the Senate Armed Services 
Committee, April 20, 2021, 7.
181. Phillip C. Saunders, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 10.
182. Rajesh Basrur, “China-India: The Stability-Instability Paradox,” RSIS Com-
mentary 128 (June 23, 2020): 2.
183. Abraham Denmark, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6–7.
184. Abraham Denmark, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 6.
185. Patricia Kim, “Washington’s Allies and Partners Weigh in on U.S.-China Com-
petition,” United States Institute of Peace, June 3, 2021; Sugio Takahashi, “Strategic 
Stability and the Impact of China’s Modernizing Strategic Strike Forces,” in James 
M. Smith and Paul J. Bolt, eds., China’s Strategic Arsenal: Worldview, Doctrine, and 
Systems, Georgetown University Press, 2021, 63–64, 79; Scott W. Harold et al., “The 
U.S.-Japan Alliance and Deterring Gray Zone Coercion in the Maritime, Cyber, and 
Space Domains,” RAND Corporation, 2017, 30–31.
186. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 2; Daniel 
Salisbury and Lucy Jones, “Exploring the Changing Role of Chinese Entities in WMD 
Proliferation,” China Quarterly 225 (March 2016): 55–56.
187. Valerie Lincy, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 178.
188. U.S. Department of State, Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, 
Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, April 2021, 44.
189. U.S. Department of State, Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, 
Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, April 2021, 44.
190. U.S. Department of State, 2021 Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Con-
trol, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, April 15, 
2021, 44.
191. U.S. Department of State, New Sanctions under the Iran, North Korea, and 
Syria Nonproliferation Act (INKSNA), November 27, 2020; Reuters, “U.S. Sanctions 
13 Foreign Entities for Supporting Iran Missile Program,” February 25, 2020; “Im-
position of Nonproliferation Measures against Foreign Persons, Including a Ban on 
U.S. Government Procurement,” 85 Federal Register 8618–8619 (February 14, 2020).
192. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Supplement 
No. 4 to Part 744 - ENTITY LIST, July 19, 2021.
193. U.S. Department of Justice, “Electrical Engineer Sentenced to More than Five 
Years in Prison for Conspiring to Illegally Export to China Semiconductor Chips with 
Military Uses,” July 22, 2021; U.S. Department of Justice, “Four Chinese Nationals 
and Chinese Company Indicted for Conspiracy to Defraud the United States and 
Evade Sanctions,” July 23, 2019.
194. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 15; “Imposi-
tion of Nonproliferation Measures against Foreign Persons, Including a Ban on U.S. 
Government Procurement,” 84 Federal Register 23627, May 14, 2019.
195. Joel Gehrke, “White House Blames China for Iranian Missile Threat,” Wash-
ington Examiner, May 8, 2019.
196. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 16; Eric Tucker, 

384
“Chinese Man Charged with Avoiding U.S. Sanctions,” AP News, April 30, 2014; U.S. 
Department of State, Li Fangwei.
197. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 15; U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, “Extradited Chinese National Sentenced to Nine Years for Providing 
U.S. Goods to Iran to Support Its Nuclear Program,” January 27, 2016.
198. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 15; U.S. De-
partment of Justice, “Extradited Chinese National Sentenced to Nine Years for Pro-
viding U.S. Goods to Iran to Support its Nuclear Program,” January 27, 2016; U.S. 
Department of Justice, “Indicted Chinese National Lands at Boston’s Logan Airport 
to Face Federal Prosecution for Supplying Iran with Nuclear Production Parts,” De-
cember 5, 2014.
199. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 17; Iran Watch, 
“Illicit Procurement Network Used Firms in China, Portugal, and Turkey to Supply 
Iran,” October 31, 2018.
200. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 17; U.S. De-
partment of Justice, “Canadian Sentenced to 3+ Years in Prison for Conspiracy to 
Export Restricted Goods and Technology to Iran,” August 22, 2018.
201. Rohan Joshi, “China, Pakistan, and Nuclear Non-Proliferation,” Diplomat, 
February 16, 2015; Ananth Krishnan, “China Involved in Six Nuclear Projects in 
Pakistan, Reveals Official,” India Today, February 8, 2015.
202. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, January 10, 2021, 5; Kelsey 
Davenport and Marcus Taylor, “Assessing Progress on Nuclear Nonproliferation and 
Disarmament: Updated Report Card 2010–2013,” Arms Control Association, April 
2013, 15.
203. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4–5.
204. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5–6.
205. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4.
206. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 5.
207. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 12.
208. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 12.
209. U.S. Department of State, Deputy Special Representative for North Korea De-
livers Keynote Address at CSIS Conference on North Korea’s Economy, November 30, 
2020; United Nations Security Council, “Resolution 2270 (2016),” March 2, 2016, 3–4.
210. U.S. Department of State, Deputy Special Representative for North Korea De-
livers Keynote Address at CSIS Conference on North Korea’s Economy, November 30, 
2020.
211. Valerie Lincy, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 13.
212. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 188.
213. Brad Roberts, Director of the Center for Global Security Research at Law-
rence Livermore National Laboratory, interview with Commission staff, August 27, 
2021; Brad Roberts, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 4–5.
214. James M. Acton, Tong Zhao, and Li Bin, “Reducing the Risks of Nuclear En-
tanglement,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 12, 2018.
215. James M. Acton, Tong Zhao, and Li Bin, “Reducing the Risks of Nuclear En-
tanglement,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 12, 2018.
216. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 188.
217. Brad Roberts, “Taking Stock: U.S.-China Track 1.5 Nuclear Dialogue,” Law-
rence Livermore National Laboratory, December 2020, 51.
218. Emily Clark, “ ‘Military Fanboys’ Shared a Video Threatening Nuclear War. 
This Is Why China Allowed It,” ABC News, July 19, 2021.
219. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 217.

385
220. Brad Roberts, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 140.
221. Abraham Denmark, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Nuclear Forces, June 10, 2021, 214.