 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Image Source: Wired.co.uk) 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 Ian Easton 
 
                                        
  October 17,  2016     
   
 
 
 
 
 
Challenges Facing Taiwan  
in the South China Sea 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About the Project 2049 Institute 
 
The Project 2049 Institute  seeks to guide decision makers toward a more secure Asia by the 
century’s mid-point. Located in Arlington, Virginia, the organization fills a gap in the public policy 
realm through forward -looking, region -specific research on alternative security and poli cy 
solutions. Its interdisciplinary approach draws on rigorous analysis of socioeconomic, governance, 
military, environmental, technological and political trends, and input from key players in the 
region, with an eye toward educating the public and informing policy debate. 
 
About the Author 
 
Ian Easton is a research fellow at the Project 2049 Institute, where he studies defense and 
security issues in Asia. During the summer of 2013, he was a visiting fellow at the Japan Institute 
for International Affairs (JIIA) in Tokyo. Previously, Ian worked as a Chi na analyst at the Center 
for Naval Analyses (CNA)  for two years. He lived in Taipei from 2005 to 2010.  Ian holds an M.A. 
in China Studies from National Chengchi University in Taipei and a B.A. in International Studies 
from the University of Illinois Urbana -Champaign. He studied Chinese at Fudan University in 
Shanghai, and National Taiwan Normal University in Taipei.  
 
Acknowledgments 
 
An earlier draft of this paper was presented on September 6, 2016, in Taipei at the "2016 Defense 
Forum on Regional Security." The author would like to acknowledge and thank  the Taiwan (ROC) 
Ministry of National Defense, and especially the Department of Integrated Assessment and the 
National Defense University, for hosting the forum. Alan Yang, Rachael Burton,  Charles Emmett, 
and Sebra Yen deserve special mention for reviewing paper drafts and making corrections. The 
following represents the author's own personal views only.      
        
 
 
Cover Image: Taiwanese Coast Guard personnel on Itu Aba operate  
an antiquated air defense gun (Source: CNN) 
 
 

 
1 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Introduction  
The People's Republic of China (PRC) has embarked upon an aggressive campaign of 
expansionism in the South China Sea that threatens the national interests of the United States, 
Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and many other countries in the Asia-Pacific. In the past two years, 
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has invested extraordinary resources into the construction 
of artificial island bases which span across disputed territory. When complete, these bases will 
be used for military operations. 1 The People's Liberation Army (PLA) is the armed wing of the 
CCP and an instrument of the communist government. It is modernizing and deploying 
additional forces to the area to ensure that it can project power from new bases as they come 
online.
2  PRC behavior is increa singly provocative, and regional tensions have risen to the 
highest levels seen in decades.3    
 
Since 1947, Taiwan's  Republic of China (ROC) government has claimed sovereignty over the 
South China Sea. Today it maintains control over two of the Sea's mos t strategically positioned, 
naturally formed island atolls: Pratas Island (Dongsha Dao)  and Itu Aba Island ( Taiping Dao). 
Both locations have long airstrips, docks, radars, and other c ivil-military facilities. These island  
outposts add legitimacy to Taiwa n's sovereignty claims and help ensure the security of vital sea 
lines of communication connecting Taiwan's ports to the Middle East and Europe. Like all island 
nations, Taiwan is dependent upon free access to the sea for its survival.   
 
In principle, Taiwan's sovereignty claims and territorial holdings in the South China Sea should 
be viewed by the U.S. as an asset. Of the seven claimants, Taiwan is the only stable democracy 
and  the only American ally that has advanced military capabilities and facili ties that could be 
used to support freedom of navigation operations.
4 In practice, however, the PRC has been able 
to exploit the fundamentally flawed bilateral relationship between Washin gton and Taipei to 
convince many observers that Taiwan has no positive role to play in  the dispute. As a result, a 
rift could grow between the U.S. and ROC governments at the very time they need each other the 
most.
5   
 
This paper will examine the many challenges facing Taiwan in the South China Sea. It will first 
lay out some of the reasons why the South China Sea matters to Taiwan's interests. Next, it will 
assess the PRC threat to Taiwanese interests at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of 
analysis. Finally, the paper will conclude with an outline of areas w here the U.S. and Taiwan 
could cooperate to impose costs on PRC expansionism and better ensure regional peace and 
stability.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Why the South China Sea Matters 
 
For Taiwan, the South China Sea is a peripheral theater that cannot compare to the Tai wan 
Strait in terms of its supreme strategic value. Nonetheless, the Sea is an important factor to 
consider when evaluating Taiwan's national interests. Sea lines of communication connecting 
Taiwan to its markets and suppliers in Europe and the Middle East pass through the South 
China Sea, making it a key chokepoint. Like all island nations, Taiwan is dependent upon free 
access to the sea for ensuring its existence , and survival is the paramount interest of any state. 
This section will briefly discuss the S outh China Sea from the perspective of why it matters for 
Taiwan's continuing struggle to survive as a free, sovereign, and independent state.  
 
It is important to start with the most fundamental problem: Taiwan is a country that is not 
treated like a coun try. Recognizing this reality is essential because it colors every aspect of 
Taiwan's approach to international affairs, defense strategy, and security policy, often making 
what should be relatively simple issues impossibly complex. This problem is the direct result of 
the PRC's strenuous worldwide efforts to purge Taiwan's participation from the international 
community. Consequently, Taiwan does not have a seat at the United Nations and does not 
currently maintain diplomatic relations with the U nited States, Japan, or any of the world's 
other advanced economies. All felt compelled, or were forced, to cut their relations with the ROC 
when they established relations with the PRC.
6  
 
Taiwan is a peaceful, prosperous, and thriving democracy, but it is regul arly treated like an 
international pariah state or an official nonentity. In view of its perilous position, Taiwan's 
foremost challenge is to remind the world that it is not part of the PRC and exists as a legitimate 
and sovereign state. It is therefore in Taiwan's interests to maintain its sovereignty claims in the 
South China Sea until it has the opportunity to negotiate. By contesting PRC (and other) claims 
and refusing to unilaterally concede sovereignty, the ROC government in Taipei sends the signal 
that Taiwan, while often ignored, continues to exist as a free country and is determined to be 
treated with the dignity and respect it deserves. Sovereignty disputes are to be negotiated as 
equals, not unilaterally conceded.     
 
In addition to serious conce rns that Taiwan might forever be left outside the family of nations ,  
Taiwanese leaders must also worry about the possibility that their home island might be invaded 
and occupied by their much larger communist neighbor. The long -running standoff in the 
Taiwan Strait between the ROC and PRC governments began on December 8, 1949 , and 
continues to this day. Throughout this 66 year period (and counting), the PRC has not had the 
combined political, military, and economic wherewithal to attempt an invasion. Yet a significant 
degree of fighting has taken place, the two governments remain hostile, and the potential for 
rapid crisis escalation is growing. The sweeping PLA reforms announced earlier this year appear 
to have been driven, at least in part, by the P RC's s trategy to prepare for a future invasion of 
Taiwan.
7 
 
 The South China Sea has a role to play in the defense of Taiwan. ROC military intelligence 
assets on Pratas and Itu Aba  reportedly allow for the monitoring of PLA activities, providing 

 
3 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 strategic indica tions and warning information to Taipei and Washington. These islands are 
frontline scouting bases , alerting Taiwan's president and cabinet if the PRC is preparing to 
attack. Weather stations, radars, listening posts, and patrol craft s on these islands all  serve to 
provide valuable, life -saving information in peacetime,  but their most important service is to 
meet the early warning and intelligence needs of the country.8  
 
 
Figure 1: Map of Taiwan's Islands in the South China Sea (Project 2049 Institute) 
 
Pratas Island , for example,  is in an excellent location to monitor key PLA units which could 
threaten Taiwan's security. Significant among them are the PLA's 124th amphibious mechanized 
division in Boluo,  the 6th Army Aviation Regiment in Foshan, the "South China Sharp Sword" 
Special Operations Brigade in Guangzhou, and the PLA Navy's 1st and 164th Marine brigades in 
Zhanjiang.9 It is critical for the ROC military to continuously survey these units because they 
would likely be involved in any surprise attac k on Taiwan (see Appendix I for the PLA order of 
battle in the South China Sea area). Moreover, suspected PLA amphibious training bases are 
located nearby. Prior to a major assault on Taiwan, it can be presumed that these bases would be 
used heavily to pre pare Chinese units for the coming invasion. They must therefore be 
monitored for the purpose of providing strategic warning.10 In addition to surveillance platforms 
directed toward the PRC mainland, it seems likely that Pratas has early warning sensors on t he 
island that are capable of picking up air and naval movements through the Luzon Strait, a key 
chokepoint. PLA bombers, ships, and submarines passing through here could be a potential 
threat to Taiwan's east coast and the U.S. territory of Guam.11  


 
4 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Itu Ab a is located far south of Pratas. This location is valuable because it offers Taiwan the 
ability to observe Chinese air and naval movements through the distant  reaches of the South 
China Sea. Itu Aba is useful for monitoring regional developments in Southeast Asia that  impact 
the interests of Taiwan, and it serves as a natural emergency diversion point for Taiwanese 
planes and ships on their way to Singapore or elsewhere in the region. It could also be used as a 
staging base for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief missions in Southeast Asia. While it 
is often noted that Itu Aba provides access to rich fishing grounds and potential oil deposits, this 
island, like Pratas, matters for Taiwan mainly because of its political and military significance.             
 
In the event of a cross- Strait war, the intelligence collected from P ratas and Itu Aba could help 
Taiwanese and American military commanders fight and win battles against the PLA. 
Knowledge of enemy aircraft, ship, and submarine characteristics,  locations, speeds, headings, 
and missions is critical for planning efforts and for ensuring favorable combat outcomes. These 
islands are also militarily valuable in their own right. They can at any time be armed with anti -
ship cruise missiles, garrisoned by marines, and used as springboards for raids against the PRC's 
nearby islands. In modern warfare, and especially in a Taiwan Strait contingency, even small 
scale engagements could have strategic effect s―particularly during the critical days, weeks, or 
months in the run up to a PLA invasion attempt. In addition, the ability to launch combat search 
and rescue operations from these island  bases no doubt has a positive psychological impact 
upon Taiwanese soldiers, sailor s, submariners, airmen, and marines who operate in the South 
China Sea area. Having briefly overviewed the importance of the South China Sea to Taiwan's 
interests, the next section will assess the emerging threats to those interests.    
 
Assessing the Threat 
 
It is important to recognize that not all dangers are equal, and lumping them all together can 
create a misleading impression. Taiwanese officials and pundits sometime portray the 
Philippines and Vietnam as threats to Taiwan because they share overlapp ing territorial claims 
and their patrol forces have a track record of unprofessional behavior. 12 In reality, these two 
countries on their worst days have neither the desire nor the strength to do any significant 
damage to Taiwan, and they often serve as val uable partners. The PRC, on the other hand, 
presents Taiwan with a clear threat in the South China Sea. This section will assess that threat at 
the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of analysis.     
 
Strategic 
 
In national security affairs it is unwise, and often fatal, to disentangle politics from military 
considerations. The nature of the CCP, and the PLA as a Leninist party army, means that all 
military activities are imbued with political and strategic significance. What the PLA leadership 
cares most about is ensuring the legitimacy of the communist party.  To do this, the PLA 
advances Beijing's successor state theory, a false narrative which argues that the ROC 
government ceased to exist on October 1, 1949, and the PRC government inherited sove reignty 
over all the ROC's territory, including the South China Sea.
13  
 

 
5 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 The PRC has lo ng sought to undermine Taiwanese  sovereignty in the South China Sea (and 
everywhere else), but in recent years its activities in this regard have accelerated at a 
considerable pace. According to the Department of Defense, by late 2015 the PRC had added 
3,200 acres of land to seven features it occupies in the Spratly islands, three of which will soon 
have large port facilities and airfields that are nearly 10,000 feet long.
14 These bases form a 
semicircle around Taiwan's Itu Aba Island, enveloping it from the northwest, south, and 
southeast. Previously Itu Aba was the largest island in the Spratlys. It is now dwarfed by PRC 
controlled bases (see Figure 2).   
 
 
Figure 2: Map of PLA bases in the South China Sea (Department of Defense and Project 2049 Institute) 
 
The political -military activities of the PRC have undermined Taiwan's strategic interests in a 
number of important respects. The biggest problem is that PRC behavior ha s complicated 
relations between Taiwan and its only ally, the United States. Some American observers have 
accused Taipei of supporting Beijing's nine -dash line claim and adding to regional tensions. 
From their perspective, Taiwan should consider renouncing  its claims and unilaterally concede 
sovereignty, without the opportunity to negotiate as an equal party. Others have urged Taiwan 
to take a very different tack and stay out of the dispute altogether, arguing that if Taiwan 
challenged Beijing's claims in t he South China Sea, cross -Strait stability would be affected , as 


 
6 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Taiwan would be moving away from the notion of "One China." 15 United front arguments made 
in Taipei and Washington have sought to constrain Taiwan's options , while driving a wedge 
between the U.S. and Taiwan.16 
 
The Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague recently declared that Taiwan's Taiping Island 
is a "rock" and not an island. In addition, the court referred to Taiwan not as a country, but as  
"The Taiwan Authority of China, " a title seen by Taiwan's government  as insulting and highly 
distasteful.17 It seems likely that this would not have happened if Taiwan were recognized as a 
legitimate member of the international community and allowed to present its case before the 
world as a sovereign  equal. China's communist government was afforded the opportunity to 
makes its case. Why should Taiwan's democratic government not have the same opportunity?  
 
The Hague decision demonstrates how C hina continues to employ its coercive power and 
influence to make sure Taiwan s tays segregated from the international community.  In the 
months and years ahead, one of Taiwan's most pressing strategic challenge s will be to figure out 
how to make clear to the watching world that it is not a PRC subsidiary and its island territory, 
sovereignty claims, and actions in the South China Sea all have merit in their own right. The key 
questions facing Taiwanese decision -makers include: How can Taipei use the South China Sea 
issue to bring itself in closer harmony with Washington and mitigate against the very real threat 
of divergence? How can Taiwan show that it does not support nor accept the PRC position, while 
at the same time avoiding actions which could elevate cross-Strait tensions?              
 
Operational 
 
The PRC's rapid development of military bases in the South China Sea will have negative effects 
on Taiwan's defense and limit options during future military crises. During the 1995 -1996 
Taiwan Strait Missile Crisis the U.S. sailed the USS Nimitz (CVN 68)  Battle Group through the 
South China Sea twice. The first time was in December 1995 when the battle group transited the 
Taiwan Strait, went down through the South China Sea, and passed into the Indian Ocean on its 
way to the Persian Gulf . The second time was in March 1996, when the USS Nimitz and her 
escorts were ordered out of the Persian Gulf and back to the Taiwan theater. This time they 
steamed through the South China Sea at flank speed. The PRC stopped firing ballistic missiles 
near Taiwan's major ports only when the carrier group approached its patrol station near Pratas 
Island.
18         
 
In the future, actions similar to those taken during the 1995 -1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis could be 
required again. The U.S. Navy continues to have carrier groups ready  to respond to PRC acts of 
aggression. However, as was the case in March 1996, at least one of them would probably have 
to pass through the South China Sea to arrive on-station in a timely manner. The other available 
routes to Taiwan from the Persian Gulf (through the Java, Celebes, and Sulu Seas, for example) 
are more circuitous and slow. Transiting the South China Sea in a crisis situation, however, will 
be a far more dangerous endeavor for the U.S. Navy. The PLA appears set to deploy early 
warning networ ks, anti -ship missiles, anti -aircraft missiles, bombers, fighters, drones, and 
electronic warfare assets on its reclaimed islands. As a result, the South China Sea will no longer 
be the operational  bastion it once was for the United States.
19  These seascap es are fast 

 
7 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 becoming the forward edge of the PLA's precision strike battle networks, a system whose 
cardinal mission is deterring or defeating U.S. intervention in a Taiwan invasion scenario.20     
 
 
         Figure 3: Map of Notional PLA Danger Zone (Project 2049 Institute) 
 
One of Taiwan's most pressing operational challenges will be to figure out how to adapt its 
defense plans to the possibility that U.S. task forces might take significantly longer to arrive in 
the event of a crisis or war, and the y might arrive not in two or three large and massed battle 
groups, but rather in many small and dispersed formations. 21 The stakes of a future American 
show of force will be far bigger than they were in 1996, which means that Taipei must have 
stronger deterrence plans and capabilities of its own.  
 
The key questions facing Taiwane se decision-makers include: 1) How can Taipei more closely 
coordinate its operational plans with Washington while maintaining its independence of action? 
2) What more can Taiwan do to deter or delay a future Chinese invasion in this more complex 
defense environment? 3) How can Taiwan bolster its islands in the South China Sea for the 
purpose of undercutting the PLA's strategy and plans?       
 
  
 
 


 
8 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Tactical  
 
Taiwanese strategists and defense planners are  currently asking themselves how defendable Itu 
Aba and, to a lesser extent, Pratas are in light of the extraordinary PRC buildup taking place 
around them.
22 They must also ask themselves what these two islands are worth in terms of 
defense trade-offs. Since defense resources are inherently limited, men and material that could 
be used to make one place stronger, will necessarily make another weaker. For example, Hsiung-
Feng missiles and/or Marines deployed to Pra tas or Itu Aba would have to be taken from 
Kaohsiung or somewhere else where they are greatly needed. Making matters worse, Taiwanese 
military deployments to the South China Sea could be perceived by Washington as adding fuel to 
an already highly combustible mix.   
 
Tactical considerations regarding the defense of Itu Aba and Pratas can be informed by other 
experiences. Taiwan has already built -up many of its small islands in the Taiwan Strait into 
fortresses. As a result, Kinmen, Wu Chiu -yu, Matsu, Tung-yin, and the Penghu islands are now 
strongholds that would be exceedingly difficult for the PLA to storm. The objective of hardening 
these islands is not to create frontline outposts that can be held indefinitely. That would be an 
unrealistic goal and wasteful in terms of resource allocation. Rather, the aim is to make sure that 
frontline island garrisons cannot be overrun at low cost.
23 If Taiwan's outer islands were viewed 
as vulnerable and easily conquered, the P RC would have little incentive not to take th em in a 
crisis to put pressure on Taipei's government and demoralize Taiwan's military establishment.24  
 
Today the PLA is well aware it would have to pay a premium price to take Taiwan's islands in the 
Taiwan Strait. The costs would be high, the timelines might be protracted, and the operational 
effects on the PLA's vital staging bases around Xiamen and Fuzhou w ould be problematic and 
make any follow-on invasion campaign against Taiwan more difficult. 25 Put simply, these well -
fortified islands increase uncertainty and complicate PLA plans. This in turn makes Beijing less 
prone to acts of aggression. The question is: what about Pratas and Itu Aba? Are they strong 
enough to make the PRC think twice, or are they tempting targets?  
 
Satellite imagery indicates th at Pratas is probably well -served in terms of defensive 
infrastructure. Itu Aba , while less heavily fortified,  is adding new hard points .
26 However, both 
bases are merely protected by Taiwan's Coast Guard. It is difficult to see how coast guard 
garrisons, by themselves, would have any real deterrent effect in a crisis. 27 These islands require 
well-equipped military garrisons to raise the costs of aggression against them. If Taiwan does 
not make at least symbolic efforts to better defend them, they could  become liabilities which 
may one day present Taipei, on balance, with more burdens than help. Small but tough  
garrisons on Itu Aba and Pratas could complicate PLA plans and raise costs without 
disadvantaging the defense of the homeland. 
 
Going forward, it will be important to maintain a sense of proportion and perspective. The South 
China Sea is not the main strategic direction of the PLA, nor should it be allowed to become a 
priority issue which dominates Taiwan's national security thinking and defense strategy-making. 
The South China Sea is simply not that important. Defending Taiwan from cross -Strait invasion 
must always be the paramount issue.
28  In peacetime, reminding the world of Taiwan's 

 
9 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 sovereignty over its own territory (especially Taiwan and the Penghus)  ought to be accorded 
equal stature as a main mission of the country. To the extent that the South China Sea helps in 
this regard, it plays a positive role. But it should not be allowed to become a distraction.   
 
Perhaps the greatest future risk facing Taiwan is that the PRC could use the South China Sea as 
a trap, employing an attack on Itu Aba as the bait. If it were to fall into the hands of PLA 
aggressors operating from bases nearby, Taiwan should resist the te mptation to send the ROC 
fleet (and the 99th Marine Brigade) to waters where the PLA would have all the advantages. It 
would be a strategic mistake of the first order to throw away capital ships and elite units for the 
sake of relatively unimportant atolls at any time and in any circumstance, but especially now 
when the homeland is at growing risk of invasion. Instead, plans for reprisal attacks should be 
prepared in advance with proportional targets selected from various PLA bases in the Taiwan 
Strait. Mitigating the rising PRC threat in the South China Sea should take place on the basis of 
horizontal escalation, avoiding areas prepared by the enemy in advance. 
 
The key tactical questions facing Taiwanese decision -makers include: 1) How can Taiwan better 
deter PRC aggression against its islands in the South China Sea? 2) What more can the Ministry 
of National Defense (MND) do to raise the stakes for the PLA so that Itu Aba and Pratas are not 
held hostage in a crisis or quickly overrun in a conflict? 3) What can MND do to fortify Taiwan's 
islands while making sure not to take valuable defense resources away from counter-
invasion/homeland defense programs?  4) What retaliatory options are available in the event 
that Itu Aba or Pratas should be seized by the PLA?         
 
This section has laid out some tough questions which Taiwan must confront and grapple with. 
Ultimately, they can only be decided by Taiwan's President. In that sense, even tactical and 
operational challenges may have strat egic implications. The next section will deal with Taipei's 
most important strategic challenge of all: improving U.S.-Taiwan relations.                     
 
Future U.S.-Taiwan Cooperation 
 
The U.S., Japan, South Korea , Taiwan, and other democratic governme nts are failing to deter 
PRC expansionism in the South China Sea. Moreover, they all appear to have little appetite for 
imposing costs upon the PRC for its provocative and destabilizing behavior.
29 If the current 
trends continue, the ultimate consequences c ould be grave. No one should blind themselves to 
the reality that the PRC is determined to gain mastery over the Western Pacific and, in so doing, 
subvert the sovereignty and democracy of countries around its periphery.
30  
 
In principle, Taiwan's sovereignty claims and territorial holdings in the South China Sea should 
be viewed by the U.S. as an asset. Of the seven claimants, Taiwan is the only stable democracy 
and  the only American ally that has advanced military capabilities and facilities that could be 
used to support freedom of navigation operations. Closer cooperation with Taiwan is worthwhile 
in its own right, and it could be used to impose costs on the PRC government.  In practice, 
however, the PRC has been able to exploit the fundamentally flawed bil ateral relationship 
between Washington and Taipei to convince many observers that Taiwan has no positive role to 

 
10 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 play in the dispute . Part of the problem is that the U.S. President and top advisors frequently 
meet with their C hinese counterparts and not  their Taiwanese  counterparts, and U.S. Navy 
ships regularly visit PRC ports and not Taiwanese ports. The low level of contacts between 
Washington, D.C. and Taipei contribute to a situation whereby misunderstandings are endemic 
and Taiwan is in a disadvantaged position. 31 As a result, a rift could grow between the U.S. and 
Taiwan governments at the very time they need each other the most.  
 
The policies and interactions of the U.S. and Taiwan in recent years leave much to be desired, 
but the existen ce of room for improvement, once recognized, can be a motivating force leading 
to great achievements. There is much more that can be done going forward. The following list 
offers a few ideas that are worthy of careful consideration.  
 
Track 1.5 Diplomacy  
 
The U.S. and Taiwan should establish an annual bilateral dialogue on developments in the 
Western Pacific ( including the South China Sea) in which official and non- official actors can 
exchange views and engage in activities aimed at building relationships and developing new 
ideas that can inform policymakers . This bilateral dialogue, once established, could be 
augmented with trilateral or multilateral dialogues in which nations such as Japan, South Korea, 
Australia, India, and selected ASEAN countries could be invited. To maintain the quality and 
integrity of the dialogues, all PRC nationals would have to be excluded from discussions.        
 
Senior-Level Visits  
 
The U.S. should remove all its travel restrictions on senior- level Taiwan government leaders, 
allowing them to visit Washington to exchange views with their American counterparts. The 
White House should send senior representatives to Taiwan on routine visits, starting with the 
deputy assistant secretaries of State and Defense for East Asia. The Paci fic Command should 
send two -star admirals and generals with significant joint experience to Taiwan on a regular 
basis. These visits could pave the way for higher-level visits over time.      
 
Joint Exercises  
 
The U.S. should begin conducting joint militar y exercises with Taiwan's military to improve 
interoperability and combat capabilities in preparation for known contingencies. Exercises 
should have modest initial objectives and aim to expand in size and scope over time in an 
incremental fashion. The ideal place to conduct joint naval exercises is off of Taiwan's East Coast 
in the Philippine Sea. Ground force and air force exercises could be held on U.S. territory. The 
limited training space available to Taiwanese forces makes it advisable to provide them access to 
U.S. ranges in Hawaii, Alaska, California, Nevada, Washington, and elsewhere. It is in the U.S. 
interest to make sure Taiwanese forces are "ready to fight tonight." Even more important than 
tactical proficiency, however, would be the positive strategic signal s that such exchanges will 
send.      
 
 

 
11 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Ship Visits  
 
The U.S. and Taiwan should begin sending naval ships to visit each other's ports as a gesture of 
goodwill and friendship. Ship visits have not been conducted since the break of diplomatic 
relations in 1979, but the world today is a very different place tha n it was at the height of Cold 
War Realpolitik. Taiwan is now a democracy and the PRC is now America's main strategic rival. 
The U.S. can no longer rely upon Hong Kong as a port of call that contributes to political, 
security, and military goals. Kaohsiung , Keelung,  Su'ao, and Makung , on the other hand, all 
offer reliable, welcoming ports of call in Taiwan that will serve U.S. strategic interests in the 
Asia-Pacific region.
32      
  
Arms Sales      
 
The U.S. should adhere to the spirit and the letter of the Taiwan Relations Act and th e Six 
Assurances by providing Taiwan with the defense articles and services i t needs to defend itself 
from Chinese aggression. In recent years it has become unthinkable to expect regular, 
predictable, and unbiased notifications o f arms sales based upon informed judgments of 
Taiwan's strategic and operational requirements. Taiwan's future letters of request should be 
accepted and responded to in a timely fashion. New arms sales should be announced, at a 
minimum, once or twice a yea r―not "bundled together" and released after multiyear delays in 
order to appease the PRC. High-end weapon systems, technologies, and support services should 
be provided to meet the legitimate requirements of all Taiwan's services and branches.
33 
  
Intelligence Sharing 
 
The U.S. and Taiwan should do more to share intelligence on PLA activities in the Western 
Pacific and beyond. Each side brings unique analytical strengths and collection capabilities to 
the table which could help fill outstanding gaps the othe r has. 34  In addition to ongoing 
exchanges at the classified level, both sides should do much more publically. Sharing open 
source intelligence on shared threats would have a positive effect on public education and 
increase policy support. A better informed media, Congress /Legislative Yuan, academic and 
think tank community translates into a better informed public , which is likely to be more 
supportive (or at least more understanding) of their government's policies. Taxpaying citizens 
and volunteer military p ersonnel in both the U.S. and Taiwan deserve to know more about the 
PRC threats facing their country and the region.     
 
Military Deployments 
 
The U.S. should encourage Taiwan to consider the deployment of military personnel to its two 
main island bases in the South China Sea. If Itu Aba and Pratas are not properly garrisoned in 
peacetime, they will be tempting, low -hanging fruit for the PRC during the next crisis― 
something which could contribute to the rapid escalation of hostilities. I f Taiwan does not 
respond to the PLA's deployments in the South China Sea, it will send the unhelpful (and untrue) 
signal that Taiwan is weak and not committed to defending its sovereign territory. The U.S., as 

 
12 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 part of its pivot to Asia, should continue to  increase its deployments of military forces to 
Okinawa, Guam, Saipan, Tinian, Singapore, and Australia.35   
 
Defense Spending Increases 
 
The U.S. and Taiwan should both increase their defense budgets in a small and incremental 
fashion to signal greater com mitment to countering the PLA's buildup. Modest, but ever larger, 
increases would have significant strategic and cumulative effects over time, helping both 
partners stay ahead of emerging threats in a sustainable way. If the economic and legislative 
realities in Washington and Taipei do not allow for immediate defense budget increases, then 
each side should allocate resources within their budgets, moving money from non -critical 
programs to those which are specifically aimed at deterring and defeating PRC ag gression. 
Public statements and defense policy documents released in the U.S. and Taiwan, such as their 
respective quadrennial defense reviews, should make it clear that the number one threat to 
peace in Asia is PRC expansionism, and the top priority is countering that threat.       
  
Conclusion 
 
Taiwan has an important stake in the future of the South China Sea. It maintains a sovere ignty 
claim dating back to 1947  and has control over two strategically positioned islands at the north 
and south ends of the Sea. The PRC is undermining Taiwan's sovereignty and destabilizing the 
South China Sea with its rapid buildup of artificial island bases. These massive facilities―and 
China's associated anti -Taiwan activities around the world―threaten Taiwan's strategic, 
operational, and tactical-level interests.  
 
Going forward, Taiwan will have to grapple with a large number of interlocking questions 
relating to the South China Sea, while at the same time retaining a sense of proportion and  
perspective to ensure that these  challenges do not distract time and attention away from even 
more important o nes. Focusing on  big problems is essential if limited resources are not to be 
frittered away on lesser threats which do not directly influence the survival of the nation and 
democracy. The most searching and rigorous analytical effort on the invasion threat facing 
Taiwan should be organized and executed, with nothing being neglected to make this the 
priority. The islands of Pratas and Itu Aba will have their roles in Taiwan's defense, but they are 
not the prime ones.     
 
The policies adopted by the governments of the United States and T aiwan, respectively, have 
failed to prevent Chinese expansionism. Washington and Taipei  will have to work in closer 
concert with each other in the future if they are to be more effective. This will not be easy given 
the lack of official diplomatic relations. However, opportunities do exist for the U.S. and Taiwan 
to impose costs on reckless C hinese behavior in the South and East China Seas  and beyond. 
These opportunities include track 1.5 diplomacy, senior -level visits, joint exercises, ship visits, 
arms sa les, intelligence sharing, military deployments, and defense spending increases. 
Individually, these will each have important and positive, but limited, effects. Taken collectively, 
they will help significantly reduce the rising risks and better ensure lon g-term peace, prosperity, 
and stability in the Western Pacific.     

 
13 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Appendix I: Chinese Order of Battle in South China Sea 
 
PLA ORDER OF BATTLE IN SOUTH CHINA SEA AREA 
 (Major Units) 
 
Organization Location Details 
Southern Theater Command HQ Guangzhou • Commander: General Wang 
Jiaocheng   
• Political Commissar: 
General Wei Liang 
   
PLA Ground Force HQ 
 
Nanning, Guangxi Current Army Composition  
 
2 Technical Reconnaissance 
Bureaus 
1 Electronic Countermeasures 
Brigade 
3 Group Armies  
1 Helicopter Brigade  
1 Helicopter Regiment 
1 Special Operations Brigade  
1 Reserve AAA division 
1 Reserve AAA brigade 
5 Army reserve divisions 
 
 
Totals (very rough estimate) 
 
10,000 Amphibious Infantry 
90,000-150,000 Regular Infantry 
2,000-3,000 Special Forces  
1,000-3,000 Tanks 
1,000-3,000 Artillery pieces 
40-160 Helicopters  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41st Group Army Liuzhou, Guangxi 
       121st Mountain  Infantry Brigade Guilin, Guangxi 
       122 Mechanized Infantry Brigade Unknown 
       Unidentified Armored Brigade  Guilin, Guangxi 
       123rd Mechanized Infantry Division Guigang, Guangxi 
       Unidentified Artillery Brigade  Liuzhou, Guangxi 
       19th Air Defense Brigade  Hengyang, Hunan 
Unidentified Army Aviation 
Regiment  
Unknown 
42nd Group Army Huizhou, Guangdong 
      124th Amphibious Mech. Inf. Div. Boluo, Guangdong 
      163rd Infantry Division Chaozhou, Guangdong 
      Unidentified Air Defense Brigade  Chaozhou, Guangdong 
      9th Armored Brigade  Guangzhou 
      Unidentified Long-range Artillery           
Brigade  
Dongguan, 
Guangdong 
      Chemical Defense Regiment  Shenzhen, Guangdong 
      6th Army Aviation Brigade  Foshan, Guangdong 
      Special Operations Brigade  Guangzhou 
      Pontoon Bridge Regiment  Hunan Province 
14th Group Army Kunming, Yunnan 
      40th Infantry Brigade Kaiyuan, Yunnan 
      Unidentified Infantry Brigade Lincang, Yunnan 
      Unidentified Mech. Inf. Brigade  Dali Bai, Yunnan 
      42nd Motorized Infantry Brigade  Unknown 
      Unidentified Artillery Brigade  Somewhere in Yunnan 
      Unidentified Air Defense Brigade  Kunming 
      Unidentified Armored Brigade  Kunming 
      29th Chemical Defense Regiment  Kunming 
Hong Kong Garrison Hong Kong 
Macau Garrison Macau 
Army Reserve AAA Division Guangzhou 
Reserve AAA Brigade  Zhanjiang 
Army Reserve Infantry Division Nanning, Guangxi  
Army Reserve Division Hainan 
Army Reserve Division Yunnan 
Army Reserve Infantry Division Hunnan 
Army Reserve infantry Division Guizhou 
   

 
14 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 PLA Navy South Sea Fleet HQ Zhanjiang Current Fleet Totals 
4 nuclear-powered ballistic missile  
subs,       
 2 nuclear-powered attack subs,  
 20 diesel-powered attack subs,  
 7 destroyers,  
 21 frigates,  
 8 corvettes,  
 3 amphibious transport docks,  
 11 tank landing ships,  
 7 medium landing ships,  
 38 missile patrol craft. 
  
8,000-10,000 Marines (approx.) 
1 Fighter-Bomber Division 
1 Mixed Air Division 
             2nd Destroyer Zhidui Zhanjiang 
             3rd Combat Support Ship Zhidui Zhanjiang 
             6th Landing Ship Zhidui Zhanjiang 
             1st Marine Brigade Zhanjiang 
             164th Marine Brigade Zhanjiang 
             8th Naval Air Division Haikou 
             3rd Radar Brigade Haikou 
             11th Fastboat Zhidui Haikou 
             2nd Frigate Dadui Shantou 
             9th Naval Air Division Lingshui 
             9th Destroyer Zhidui Sanya 
             2nd Submarine Base Sanya 
             Unidentified Units: Air Defense Brigade,  
             Observation and Communications 
Brigade, Special Operations Regiment, 
Electronic Countermeasures Regiment, 
Shore-to-Ship Missile Regiment 
Unknown 
   
            PLA Air Force HQ  Guangzhou Air Force Composition  
5 Fighter Divisions 
1 Bomber Division 
1-2 Fighter Brigade(s)  
1 Radar Brigade 
2 Radar Regiments 
1 SAM Brigade  
 
Air Force Totals (approx.) 
 250-400 fighters 
50 Bombers  
             10th SAM Brigade Guangzhou 
             2nd Fighter Division Zhanjiang 
             42nd Fighter Division Nanning, Guangxi 
             1st Radar Brigade Nanning 
             9th Fighter Division Shantou, Guangdong 
             19th Radar Regiment Shantou 
             20th Radar Regiment Foshan 
             44th Fighter Division Mengzi, Yunnan 
             18th Fighter Division Changsha, Hunan 
             8th Bomber Division Leiyang, Hunan 
             Unidentified Air Brigade  Guilin, Guangxi 
   
            PLA Rocket Force 
 (Under direct authority of CMC in Beijing, not the Southern Theater Command) 
Rocket Force Totals* 
 1,000-1,200 SRBMs  
 (250-300 launchers) 
 
200-300 MRBMs  
(100-125 launchers) 
 
200-300 GLCM 
(40-55 launchers) 
 
*Note that SRBMs and GLCMs are 
primarily targeted at Taiwan, and 
MRBMs at Japan. With the possible 
exception of ASBM units, they are most 
likely not intended for South China Sea 
contingencies. However, some of the 
above units perhaps could be redeployed 
and retargeted if it was needed.     
             Base 52 Huangshan, Anhui  
             807 Brigade (Nuclear MRBM) Chizhou, Anhui 
             811 Brigade (Nuclear MRBM) Jingdezhen, Jiangxi 
             815 Brigade (Conventional SRBM) Shangrao, Jiangxi 
             817 Brigade (Conventional SRBM) Yong'an, Fujian 
             818 Brigade (Conventional SRBM) Meizhou, Guangdong 
             819 Brigade (Conventional SRBM) Ganzhou, Jiangxi  
             820 Brigade (Conventional SRBM) Jinhua, Zhejiang 
             Unidentified Launch Brigade (SRBM) Shaoguan, Guangdong 
            Base 53 Kunming, Yunnan  
802 Brigade (Nuclear MRBMs) Jianshui, Yunnan 
808 Brigade (Unknown missile) Chuxiong, Yunnan 
821 Brigade (Conventional GLCM) Luizhou, Guangxi 
             Puning Brigade (Conventional SRBM) Puning, Guangdong 
Qingyuan Brigade (Possible ASBM) Qingyuan, Guangdong 
   
Sources: Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2016 
(Washington, D.C.: Department of Defense, 2016); Jamestown Foundation's China Brief; The Directory of PRC Military 
Personalities (2016 and 2014 editions); DGI., The PLA as an Organization, Volume 2.0., Ken Allen, Dennis Blasko, and Mark 
Stokes.   

 
15 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Appendix II: Map of the Taiwan Strait Area 
 
 
 
Source: Wikimedia and Project 2049 Institute. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
16 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Appendix III: Taiwan's Location in Western Pacific 
 
 
 
Source: The above map was prepared by the Project 2049 Institute using Google Maps. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
17 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Appendix IV: Suspected PLA Amphibious Training Areas  
 
 
 
Source: The above map was prepared by the Project 2049 Institute, based on Lin Zhe-Chun (林哲群), "Research on 
How ROC Military Can Respond to Communist Military's 'Multi-Directional, Double-Over' Taiwan Attack Strategy 
(國軍因應共軍‘多維雙超’攻台戰略之研究)," ROC Army Bimonthly Journal, Vol. 48, No. 526 (December 2012), p. 90. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
 Notes               
                                                           
1 David Sanger and Rick Gladstone, "New Photos Cast Doubt on China's Vow Not to Militarize Disputed 
Islands," New York Times, August 8, 2016, at http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/09/world/asia/china-
spratly-islands-south-china-sea.html?_r=0.   
 
2 Franz-Stephan Gady, "More Deadly Missiles: Upgraded Warship Rejoins China's South Sea Fleet," The 
Diplomat, August 10, 2016, at http://thediplomat.com/2016/08/more-deadly-missiles-upgraded-
warship-rejoins-chinas-south-sea-fleet/.   
 
3 For example, see Jeremy Page, "Beijing's South China Sea Moves Vex U .S. Pacific Fleet Chief," The Wall 
Street Journal, August 9, 2016, at http://www.wsj.com/articles/chinas-south-china-sea-moves-draw-ire-
of-u-s-pacific-fleet-chief-1470762489?mod=itp&mod=djemITP_h.  
 
4 The seven countries that claim territory in the South China Sea are Brunei, China (PRC), Indonesia,  
Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan (ROC), and Vietnam. 
 
5 For background on the dilemma facing Taiwan, see Lynn Kuok, "Tides of Change: Taiwan's evolving 
position in the South China Sea," Brookings East Asia Policy Paper 5, May 2015, at 
http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2015/05/taiwan -south-china-sea-
kuok/taiwan-south-china-sea-kuok-paper.pdf; Lynn Kuok, "Taiwan Must Tread Carefully on South China 
Sea Ruling," The Wall Street Journal, July 25, 2016, at http://www.wsj.com/articles/taiwan-must-tread-
carefully-on-south-china-sea-ruling-1469465725; Shannon Tiezzi, "Taiwan's South China Sea Headache," 
The Diplomat, November 4, 2015, at http://thediplomat.com/2015/11/taiwans-south-china-sea-
headache/; and "Ending Taiwan's Broad South China Sea Claims," STRATFOR , October 2, 2015, at  
https://www.stratfor.com/analysis/ending-taiwans-broad-south-china-sea-claims. 
 
6 For an excellent study on how U.S. policy evolved over time, see Mark Stokes and Sabrina Tsai, The 
United States and Future Policy Options in the Taiwan Strait: Driving Forces and Implications for U.S. 
Security Interests (Arlington, VA: Project 2049 Institute, February 2016), pp. 6-32, at 
http://www.project2049.net/documents/Future_US%20Policy%20Options%20in%20the%20Taiwan%2
0Strait_Project%202049.pdf.  
 
7 Phillip C. Saunders and Joel Wuthnow, "What Do China's Military Reforms Mean for Taiwan?" The 
National Bureau of Asian Research, May 19, 2016, at http://nbr.org/research/activity.aspx?id=692; and 
Wendell Minnick, "Analysis: China Builds Amphibious Capabilities for Taiwan Scenario," Defense News , 
May 14, 2016, at  http://www.defensenews.com/story/defense/international/asia-
pacific/2016/05/14/analysis-china-builds-amphibious-capabilities-taiwan-scenario/84372014/.   
 
8 Of various sources, see Sun Lihua, “Looking at Taiwan Spy Reporting Capabilities from  Case of Fallen 
Female Spy Net (从落网女谍看台湾谍报能力),” Dangdai Haijun (Modern Navy), October 2011, p. 55; Guo 
Nairi [郭乃日], The Unseen War in the Taiwan Strait [看不見的台海戰爭] (Xizhi, Taiwan: Gaoshou 
Publishing, 2005), p. 35; Ma Yuanshen, Chen Wenqing, and Zhang Wenjing, “Taiwan’s Naval C3I System 
Equipment Status Quo and Its Developmental Characteristics ( 台湾海军 C3I 系统装备现状和发展特点),” 
Huoli Yu Zhihui Kongzhi (Fire Control and Command Control), February, 2004, p. 107; and Ian Easton 
and Randall Schriver, Standing Watch: Taiwan and Maritime Domain Awareness in the Western Pacific, 
Project 2049 Institute Occasional Paper, December 2014, p. 4.     
 
9 See Dennis J. Blasko, "The PLA Army/Ground Forces," in Kevin Pollpeter and Kenneth W. Allen (eds.), 
The PLA as an Organization: Reference Volume v2.0 (Fairfax, VA: Defense Group Inc. 2015), p. 244; 
Dennis J. Blasko, The Chinese Army Today (New York: Routledge, 2012), pp. 97 -103; and Nan Li, "The 
People's Liberation Army Navy as an Evolving Organization," in Kevin Pollpeter and Kenneth W. Allen 
(eds.), The PLA as an Organization: Reference Volume v2.0 (Fairfax, VA: Defens Group Inc. 2015), pp. 
280-288.  

 
19 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
10 See Appendix IV for details. 
 
11 Wendell Minnick, "China Puts Guam Within Missile Range," Defense News , May 12, 2016, at 
http://www.defensenews.com/story/defense/international/asia-pacific/2016/05/12/china-guam-us-
missile-range/84279494/; and Li Jing, "Chinese air force conducts first drill in western Pacific," South 
China Morning Post, March 31, 2015, at http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1751967/chinese-air-
force-conducts-first-drill-western-pacific. See also, PLA Air Force flies over Bashi Channel, Taipei Times, 
September 13, 2016, at http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2016/09/13/2003655044 .   
 
12 Prashanth Parameswaran, "Vietnam a Growing Threat to Taiwan's South China Sea Claims: Report," 
The Diplomat, December 31, 2014, at http://thediplomat.com/2014/12/vietnam-a-growing-threat-to-
taiwans-south-china-sea-claims-report/; and "Press pick apart Taiwan-Filipino tensions," BBC news, May 
15, 2013, at  http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-22540089.     
 
13 See Richard Bush, "The Significance of the Republic of China for Cross -Strait Relations," Brookings 
Institution, May 20, 2011, at https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/0520_bush_remarks.pdf.   
 
14 Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of 
China 2016 (Washington, D.C., Department of Defense, 2016), p. 13.  
15 For an assessment of this problem, see Dean Cheng, "The Decades Long Dance Between China and 
Taiwan," War on the Rocks, August 4, 2016, at http://warontherocks.com/2016/08/the-decades-long-
dance-between-china-taiwan/.   
 
16 For an example of various arguments in Taipei, see "Editorial abstracts: US treats  Taiwan as pawn in 
the South China Sea," Focus Taiwan, July 14, 2016, 
http://focustaiwan.tw/news/afav/201607140021.aspx. For an American perspective, see George Koo, 
"Taiwan, a bystander victim in the South China Sea dispute," Asia Times, July 27, 2016, at 
http://atimes.com/2016/07/taiwan-a-bystander-victim-of-s-china-sea/. See also Ji Yixin, What Is In 
Store for Taiwan After the Arbitration?," Chin-US Focus, July 25, 2016, at 
http://www.chinausfocus.com/peace-security/what-is-in-store-for-taiwan-after-the-arbitration/. For 
excellent background on the PLA's role, see Mark Stokes and Russell Hsiao, The People's Liberation Army 
General Political Department: Political Warfare with Chinese Characteristics (Arlington, VA: Project 
2049 Institute, October 2013), at  
http://www.project2049.net/documents/PLA_General_Political_Department_Liaison_Stokes_Hsiao.p
df.   
 
17 Shannon Tiezzi, "Taiwan: South China Sea Ruling 'Completely Unacceptable,'" The Diplomat, July 13, 
2016, at http://thediplomat.com/2016/07/taiwan-south-china-sea-ruling-completely-unacceptable/.   
 
18 Bruce A. Elleman, High Seas Buffer: The Taiwan Patrol Force, 1950-1979 (Newport, Rhode Island: 
Naval War College Press, 2012), pp. 124-126. 
 
19 Thomas Shugart, "China's Artificial Islands Are Bigger (And A Bigger Deal) Than You Think," War on 
the Rocks, September 21, 2016, http://warontherocks.com/2016/09/chinas-artificial-islands-are-bigger-
and-a-bigger-deal-than-you-think/.  
 
20 Wendell Minnick, "Analysts: Taiwan Goals Drive China's Spratly Grab," Defense News, June 29, 2015, 
at http://www.defensenews.com/story/defense/policy-budget/warfare/2015/06/28/taiwan-china-
reclamation-island-invasion-spratly-south-china-sea-pla/29260999/.  
 
21 David Larter, "Navy deploys carrier strike group to the Pacific -- without the carrier," Navy Times, April 
20, 2016, at http://www.navytimes.com/story/military/2016/04/19/surface-action-group-deployment-
thomas-rowden-momsen-decatur-spruance/83243334/; and Sam LaGrone, "SNA: Navy Surface Leaders 

 
20 
 
 
 
                           
          |Challenges Facing Taiwan in the South China Sea| 
       
    
 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
Pitch More Lethal Ships, Surface Action Groups," USNI News, January 14, 2015, at 
https://news.usni.org/2015/01/14/sna-navy-surface-leaders-pitch-lethal-ships-surface-action-groups.   
 
22 Lo Tien-pin, "Official says Itu Aba at risk from nearby 'wolves,'" Taipei Times, July 11, 2016, at 
http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2016/07/11/2003650805 .   
 
23 See Jiang Yanyu (ed.). A Military History of Fifty Years in the Taiwan Area 1949-2006 (台湾地区五十
年军事史 1949-2006) [Beijing: Liberation Army Press, 2013], p. 115-116; and Wendell Minnick, “Taiwan 
Missile Base Identified Near China,” Defense News, February 22, 2010, accessible online at    
http://minnickarticles.blogspot.com/2010/02/taiwan-missile-base-identified-near.html.     
 
24 For more on PRC efforts to demoralize Taiwan, see J. Michael Cole, "Taiwan ese Military Reform and 
PLA Political Warfare," Thinking Taiwan, April 16, 2015, at http://thinking-taiwan.com/taiwanese-
military-reform-pla-political-warfare/.   
 
25 For example, see Cai Jianhua, et al., “Research on Foreign (and Taiwan) Artillery Force Precision 
Guided Weapons Development [外(台)军炮兵精确制导武器发展研究],” PLA 63961 Unit Intelligence 
Information Office, January 2004. 
 
26 Aaron Tu, et al., "Ministry talking to Google about island 'secret' leaks," Taipei Times, September 21, 
2016, at http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2016/09/21/2003655558 .  
 
27 J.R. Wu, "Taiwan to boost coast guard presence on island disputed with China," Reuters, October 14, 
2015, at http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinasea-taiwan-idUSKCN0S815T20151014.    
 
28 See the author's "Why the South China Sea is Not Beijing's Next Battlefield," The National Interest , 
September 19, 2015, at http://nationalinterest.org/feature/the-south-china-sea-not-beijings-next-
battlefield-13881.  
 
29 David Larter, "4-star admiral wants to confront China. White House says not so fast," Navy Times , 
April 6, 2016, at http://www.navytimes.com/story/military/2016/04/06/4-star-admiral-wants-confront-
china-white-house-says-not-so-fast/82472290/.  
 
30 See the author's "Strategic Standoff: The U.S.-China Rivalry and Taiwan," Project 2049 Institute 
Occasional Paper, March 2016, at 
http://www.project2049.net/documents/Strategic%20Standoff_US_China_Rivalry_Taiwan.pdf .    
 
31 For example, see J. Michael Cole, "Is Taiwan out of Vogue in Washington DC?" The Diplomat , March 19, 
2015, at http://thediplomat.com/2015/03/is-taiwan-out-of-vogue-in-washington-dc/.  
 
32 For more on this, see Randall Schriver, "The Case for US Ship Visits to Taiwan," The Diplomat, May 9, 
2016, at  http://thediplomat.com/2016/05/the-case-for-us-ship-visits-to-taiwan/.  
 
33 Shirley Kan, "Time for the US to Get Clear on Taiwan Arms Sales," The Diplomat, July 10, 2015, at 
http://thediplomat.com/2015/07/time-for-the-us-to-get-clear-on-taiwan-arms-sales/.   
 
34 For example, see Wendell Minnick, "Spook Mountain: How US spies on China," Asia Times , March 6, 
2003, at http://www.atimes.com/atimes/China/EC06Ad03.html.  
 
35 For more on this, see Michael Green, Kathleen Hicks, Mark Cancian, Zack Cooper, and John Schaus, 
Asia-Pacific Rebalance 2025: Capabilities, Presence, and Partnerships (Washington, D.C.: Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, January 2016), at https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/legacy_files/files/publication/160119_Green_AsiaPacificRebalance2025_Web_0.pdf .  